E.4. Can we be sure we are right?

E4.1. The Fragility of Theoretical Truth: The limits of the "Order of Primacy" (Knowledge). In the theoretical order, we can never be "sure"; we can only be "not yet refuted.”

E4.1.A. The Inadequacy of Sensory Knowledge

E4.1.A.1. The Constructive Machine – Affect, Bias, and the "Artistic" Mind.
Biological and psychological mechanisms distort reality. The mind does not record reality passively; instead, it actively constructs "stories" driven by emotion, seeks coherence over truth, and relies on heuristics that prioritize speed and comfort over accuracy.

E4.1.A.1_REF1_SCI

EL3.102. "FEELINGS ACCOMPANY THE UNFOLDING OF LIFE IN OUR ORGANISMS, whatever one perceives, learns, remembers, imagines, reasons, judges, decides, plans, or mentally creates. Regarding feelings as occasional visitors to the mind or as caused only by the typical emotions does not do justice to the ubiquity and functional importance of the phenomenon.
Most every image in the main procession we call mind, from the moment the item enters a mental spotlight of attention until it leaves, has a feeling by its side. Images are so desperate for affective company that even the images that constitute a prominent feeling can be accompanied by other feelings, a bit like the harmonics of a sound or the circles that form once a pebble hits the water surface. There is no being, in the proper sense of the term, without a spontaneous mental experience of life, a feeling of existence. The ground zero of being corresponds to a deceptively continuous and endless feeling state, a more or less intense mental choir underscoring everything else mental… The complete absence of feelings would spell a suspension of being, but even a less radical removal of feeling would compromise human nature. [...]
The conventional contrast between affect and reason comes from a narrow conception of emotions and feelings as largely negative and capable of undermining facts and reasoning. In reality, emotions and feelings come in multiple flavors, and only a few are disruptive. Most emotions and feelings are essential to power the intellectual and creative process… The neglect of affect impoverishes the description of human nature. No satisfactory account of the human cultural mind is possible without factoring in affect. [...]
The “provocation” of emotive responses to countless image components or to entire narratives is one of the most central and incessant aspects of our mental lives. [...]
Drives, motivations, and emotions often have something to add or subtract to decisions one would have expected to be purely rational. [...]
If there is no distance between body and brain, if body and brain interact and form an organismic single unit, then feeling is not a perception of the body state in the conventional sense of the term. Here the duality of subject-object, of perceiver-perceived, breaks down. Relative to this part of the process, there is unity instead. Feeling is the mental aspect of that unity. [...]
It is not possible to talk about thinking, intelligence, and creativity in any meaningful way without factoring in feelings."
(Antonio Damasio,  The Strange Order of Things: Life, Feeling, and the Making of Cultures)

E4.1.A.1_REF2_PSI

EL3.87.  SYSTEM 1 AND SYSTEM 2
Daniel Kahneman creates the metaphors of System 1 and System 2 to differentiate patterns of cognitive human behavior identified in his research in cognitive psychology. System 1 is fast, automatic, and intuitive, operating with little to no effort. This mode of thinking allows us to make quick decisions and judgments based on patterns and experiences. In contrast, System 2 is slow, deliberate, and conscious, requiring intentional effort.

Characterístics of System 1 :
- generates impressions, feelings, and inclinations; when endorsed by System 2 these become beliefs, attitudes, and intentions 
- operates automatically and quickly, with little or no effort, and no sense of voluntary control 
- can be programmed by System 2 to mobilize attention when a particular pattern is detected (search) 
- executes skilled responses and generates skilled intuitions, after adequate training 
- creates a coherent pattern of activated ideas in associative memory 
- links a sense of cognitive ease to illusions of truth, pleasant feelings, and reduced vigilance 
- distinguishes the surprising from the normal 
- infers and invents causes and intentions 
- neglects ambiguity and suppresses doubt 
- is biased to believe and confirm 
- exaggerates emotional consistency (halo effect)
- focuses on existing evidence and ignores absent evidence (WYSIATI) 
- generates a limited set of basic assessments 
- represents sets by norms and prototypes, does not integrate 
- matches intensities across scales (e.g., size to loudness) 
- computes more than intended (mental shotgun) 
- sometimes substitutes an easier question for a difficult one (heuristics) 
- is more sensitive to changes than to states (prospect theory)
- overweights low probabilities
- shows diminishing sensitivity to quantity (psychophysics)
- responds more strongly to losses than to gains (loss aversion)
- frames decision problems narrowly, in isolation from one another
(Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow, 2011)

EL3.87.A. WHAT YOU SEE IS ALL THERE IS (WYSIATI) 
An essential design feature of the associative machine is that it represents only activated ideas. Information that is not retrieved (even unconsciously) from memory might as well not exist. System 1 excels at constructing the best possible story that incorporates ideas currently activated, but it does not (cannot) allow for information it does not have. 
The measure of success for System 1 is the coherence of the story it manages to create. The amount and quality of the data on which the story is based are largely irrelevant. When information is scarce, which is a common occurrence, System 1 operates as a machine for jumping to conclusions. [...]

Participants who saw one-sided evidence were more confident of their judgments than those who saw both sides. This is just what you would expect if the confidence that people experience is determined by the coherence of the story they manage to construct from available information that matters for a good story, not its completeness. Indeed, you will often find that knowing little makes it easier to fit everything you know into a coherent pattern. [...]

You cannot help dealing with the limited information you have as if it were all there is to know. You build the best possible story from the information available to you, and if it is a good story, you believe it. Paradoxically, it is easier to construct a coherent story when you know little, when there are fewer pieces to fit into the puzzle. Our comforting conviction that the world makes sense rests on a secure foundation: our almost unlimited ability to ignore our ignorance. [...]

I will also invoke WYSIATI to help explain a long and diverse list of biases of judgment and choice, including the following among many others: 
Overconfidence
Framing effects
Base-rate neglect"  
(Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow, 2011)

EL3.87.A.1. CAN WE THINK OUTSIDE THE BOX ? "Your emotional attitude to such things as irradiated food, red meat, nuclear power, tattoos, or motorcycles drives your beliefs about their benefits and their risks. If you dislike any of these things, you probably believe that its risks are high and its benefits negligible. [...] In the context of attitudes, [...] System 2 is more of an apologist for the emotions of System 1 than a critic of those emotions—an endorser rather than an enforcer. Its search for information and arguments is mostly constrained to information that is consistent with existing beliefs, not with an intention to examine them. An active, coherence-seeking System 1 suggests solutions to an undemanding System 2."
(Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow, 2011)

EL3.87.A.1.1. SOMETIMES PEOPLE MAKE JUDGMENTS AND DECISIONS BY CONSULTING THEIR EMOTIONS "As mentioned earlier, Slovic eventually developed the notion of an affect heuristic, in which people make judgments and decisions by consulting their emotions: Do I like it? Do I hate it? How strongly do I feel about it? In many domains of life, Slovic said, people form opinions and make choices that directly express their feelings and their basic tendency to approach or avoid, often without knowing that they are doing so. The affect heuristic is an instance of substitution, in which the answer to an easy question (How do I feel about it?) serves as an answer to a much harder question (What do I think about it?). Slovic and his colleagues related their views to the work of the neuroscientist Antonio Damásio, who had proposed that people’s emotional evaluations of outcomes, and the bodily states and the approach and avoidance tendencies associated with them, all play a central role in guiding decision making. Damásio and his colleagues have observed that people who do not display the appropriate emotions before they decide, sometimes because of brain damage, also have an impaired ability to make good decisions."
(Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow, 2011)

EL3.87.A.1.2. "LE CHANGEMENT DU GOÛT UNIVERSEL EST PLUS IMPORTANT QUE CELUI DES OPINIONS: les opinions avec toutes leurs preuves, leurs réfutations et toute la mascarade intellectuelle ne sont que les symptômes du goût qui change et certainement pas les causes de ce changement, ainsi qu’on le suppose encore si souvent."
(Friedrich Nietzsche)

EL3.87.B. "NEGLECT OF AMBIGUITY AND SUPPRESSION OF DOUBT 
When uncertain, System 1 bets on an answer, and the bets are guided by experience. The rules of the betting are intelligent: recent events and the current context have the most weight in determining an interpretation. [...]
The most important aspect [...] is that a definite choice was made, but you did not know it. Only one interpretation came to mind, and you were never aware of the ambiguity. System 1 does not keep track of alternatives that it rejects, or even of the fact that there were alternatives. Conscious doubt is not in the repertoire of System 1; it requires maintaining incompatible interpretations in mind at the same time, which demands mental effort. Uncertainty and doubt are the domain of System 2."
(Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow, 2011)

EL3.87.C. "THE ILLUSION OF VALIDITY 
Subjective confidence in a judgment is not a reasoned evaluation of the probability that this judgment is correct. Confidence is a feeling, which reflects the coherence of the information and the cognitive ease of processing it. It is wise to take admissions of uncertainty seriously, but declarations of high confidence mainly tell you that an individual has constructed a coherent story in his mind, not necessarily that the story is true."
(Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow, 2011)

EL3.87.D. "ILLUSIONS OF TRUTH
Predictable illusions inevitably occur if a judgment is based on an impression of cognitive ease or strain. Anything that makes it easier for the associative machine to run smoothly will also bias beliefs. A reliable way to make people believe in falsehoods is frequent repetition, because familiarity is not easily distinguished from truth. Authoritarian institutions and marketers have always known this fact. But it was psychologists who discovered that you do not have to repeat the entire statement of a fact or idea to make it appear true. People who were repeatedly exposed to the phrase “the body temperature of a chicken” were more likely to accept as true the statement that “the body temperature of a chicken is 144°F” (or any other arbitrary number). The familiarity of one phrase in the statement sufficed to make the whole statement feel familiar, and therefore true. If you cannot remember the source of a statement, and have no way to relate it to other things you know, you have no option but to go with the sense of cognitive ease."
(Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow, 2011)

EL3.87.E "UNDERSTANDING REGRESSION 
« Highly intelligent women tend to marry men who are less intelligent than they are. »
You can get a good conversation started at a party by asking for an explanation, and your friends will readily oblige. Even people who have had some exposure to statistics will spontaneously interpret the statement in causal terms. Some may think of highly intelligent women wanting to avoid the competition of equally intelligent men, or being forced to compromise in their choice of spouse because intelligent men do not want to compete with intelligent women. More far-fetched explanations will come up at a good party. Now consider this statement: 
« The correlation between the intelligence scores of spouses is less than perfect. » 
This statement is obviously true and not interesting at all. Who would expect the correlation to be perfect? There is nothing to explain. But the statement you found interesting and the statement you found trivial are algebraically equivalent. If the correlation between the intelligence of spouses is less than perfect (and if men and women on average do not differ in intelligence), then it is a mathematical inevitability that highly intelligent women will be married to husbands who are on average less intelligent than they are (and vice versa, of course). The observed regression to the mean cannot be more interesting or more explainable than the imperfect correlation. [...] When our attention is called to an event, associative memory will look for its cause—more precisely, activation will automatically spread to any cause that is already stored in memory. Causal explanations will be evoked when regression is detected, but they will be wrong because the truth is that regression to the mean has an explanation but does not have a cause."
(Daniel Kahneman, Thinking Fast and Slow, 2011)

EL3.87.G. AVANT LA PSYCHOLOGIE COGNITIVE, NIETZSCHE AVAIT DÉJÀ LA COMPRÉHENSION DE CERTAINS DES MÉCANISMES mis à jour par cette dernière: "Qui a suivi attentivement l’histoire d’une science particulière trouve dans son développement un fil conducteur permettant de comprendre les processus les plus anciens et les plus communs de tout « savoir et connaître » : dans un cas comme dans l’autre, ce sont les hypothèses précipitées, les affabulations, la stupide disposition à « croire », le manque de méfiance et de patience qui se développent les premiers, — c’est tardivement que nos sens apprennent, et ils ne I’apprennent jamais complètement, à être des organes de connaissance subtils, fidèles, prudents. Notre oeil trouve bien plus commode, à une occasion donnée, de recréer une image déjà créée à plusieurs reprises auparavant plutôt que de fixer en lui ce qu’une impression comporte de divergent et de nouveau : cette dernière tâche requiert plus de force, plus de « moralité ». L’oreille trouve pénible et difficile d’entendre quelque chose de nouveau ; on est mauvais auditeur pour une musique nouvelle. En entendant une autre langue, nous tentons involontairement de transformer les sons perçus en mots qui nous soient plus familiers, plus « de chez nous » : c’est ainsi que par exemple l’Allemand réarrangea autrefois l’arcubalista qu’il entendait pour en faire le mot Armbrust. Le nouveau se heurte aussi à l’hostilité et à la réticence de nos sens; et de manière générale, dès les « plus simples » des processus sensibles règnent les affects, tels la peur, l’amour, la haine, y compris les affects passifs de paresse. — Pas plus qu’un lecteur, aujourd’hui, ne lit intégralement les mots particuliers (encore moins les syllabes) d’une page — il en extrait plutôt au hasard quelque chose comme cinq mots sur vingt et « devine » le sens qu’ont probablement ces cinq mots —, nous ne voyons un arbre de manière précise et exhaustive, pour ce qui est de ses feuilles, ses branches, sa couleur, sa forme ; il nous est tellement plus facile de créer par l’imagination une approximation d’arbre. Même au beau milieu de nos expériences vécues les plus singulières, nous continuons à agir de même : nous inventons à coups d’affabulation la plus grande part de l’expérience vécue et l’on ne pourra guère nous contraindre à ne pas regarder une action, quelle qu’elle soit, en « inventeurs ». Tout cela revient à dire : nous sommes fondamentalement, depuis des temps immémoriaux — habitués à mentir. Ou bien, pour exprimer la chose sous une forme plus vertueuse et plus hypocrite, bref plus agréable : on est bien plus artiste qu’on ne le sait. — Au cours d’une conversation animée, je vois fréquemment le visage de la personne avec laquelle je parle en conformité avec la pensée qu’elle exprime ou dont je crois qu’elle a été suscitée en elle, et ce avec une telle netteté et une telle finesse de caractérisation que ce degré de netteté dépasse largement la force de ma capacité visuelle : — il faut donc que ce soit moi qui ai ajouté de manière affabulée la subtilité de ce jeu des muscles et de cette expression du regard. Probablement cette personne faisait-elle un tout autre visage, ou aucun en particulier."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Par-delà bien et mal, aphorisme 192, 1886 - Traduction , introduction et notes par Patrick Wotling)

E4.1.A.2. The Epistemological Wall – Risky Hypotheses and Confused Knowledge.
Certainty is structurally impossible. Sensory knowledge is inherently "confused", induction is a myth, and  what we call knowledge is merely a history of rectified errors or subjective structures.

E4.1.A.2_REF1_SCI  KARL POPPER DENIES THE EXISTENCE OF INDUCTION, ARGUING INSTEAD THAT KNOWLEDGE IS GENERATED THROUGH "RISKY HYPOTHESES" AND THAT "EXPERIENCE" IS NOTHING MORE THAN THE HISTORY OF RECTIFIED ERRORS.
"Kreuzer : Poursuivant ce raisonnement jusqu’au bout on peut en arriver à la conclusion à laquelle aboutit Karl Popper, à savoir que l’induction — l’apprentissage par éléments isolés — n’existe pas. 
Lorenz : Je dirais qu’elle n’existe que dans l’inconscient. C’est en rapport, comme nous venons de le voir, avec la perception des formes. Le cerveau réunit des informations et accumule un incroyable nombre de données sur un fond de bruit indifférencié. Jusqu’à ce que la structure se dégage brusquement du fond; et cela se produit tout à fait inconsciemment. [...]
Popper : [...] Seul l’invraisemblable est intéressant. La nouveauté est toujours totalement invraisemblable. L’hypothèse que nous créons de toutes pièces se situe en quelque sorte au degré zero de vraisemblance. Il n’y a donc pas la moindre induction, mais uniquement des découvertes risquée. Les hypothèses hasardeuses peuvent être réfutées par sélection. [...]
Lorenz : J’ose affirmer qu’il est très rare que j’invente une hypothèse de toutes pièces, et je crois que ce processus de stockage d’informations est indispensable pour mettre sur pied une hypothèse. 
Popper : Comme tu dis, il faut avoir une énorme quantité d’informations sur le sujet, autrement dit, il faut avoir fait un nombre incroyable d’erreurs et les avoir corrigées — par exemple celle que tu viens de dénoncer à l’instant, qui avait consisté à prendre d’abord ce petit poisson pour autre chose — pour te rendre compte après coup que c’était quand même une perche! II faut avoir ce que l’on appelle de l’expérience. Et l’expérience consiste essentiellement à faire beaucoup d’erreurs et à les rectifier; il faut être passé par ces erreurs. En d’autres termes, les essais et les erreurs font l’expérience. [...]
Popper : Le fondement de la théorie de l’induction est le suivant : nous apprenons par une activité qui nous est innée, par une foule de structures qui nous sont innées et que nous avons la faculté de développer ; nous apprenons activement. C’est l’essentiel. L’induction nous rend passifs, la répétition transfère les choses de notre esprit en éveil dans notre subconscient. Le véritable apprentissage n’est pas inductif, c’est toujours une démarche d’essai et d’erreur entreprise avec la plus grande activité dont nous soyons capables. 
(Karl Popper & Konrad Lorenz, L’avenir est ouvert, 1983)

E4.1.A.2_REF2_LIT   "Les sciences pures, physiques, mathématiques sont aussi subjectives dans la mesure où elles correspondent à la structure de notre esprit."
(Eugène Ionesco, Journal en miettes)

E1.6.G.1.5.wE4.1.A.2. THE MASTERY OF THE BODY CAN ENHANCE OUR PERCEPTION OF REALITY, BUT ONLY THROUGH FRAGMENTED AND CONFUSED KNOWLEDGE. SPINOZA EXPLAIN WHY SENSORY PERCEPTION IS CONFUSED (IT DEPENDS ON EXTERNAL ENCOUNTERS) AND HOW CLARITY IS ACHIEVED (THROUGH COMMON NOTIONS AND INTERNAL DETERMINATION).

E4.1.A.2_REF3_PH SPINOZA EXPLIQUE QUE PERCEVOIR LES CORPS EXTERIEURS A TRAVERS LES SENS ET L'IMAGINATION NE DONNE QU'UNE CONNAISSANCE CONFUSE. L'esprit n'accède pas à l'essence des choses mais seulement à la manière dont elles nous affectent.
"Lorsque l’esprit humain considère les corps extérieurs par les idées des affections de son propre corps, nous disons alors qu’il imagine (voir le scolie de la proposition 17) ; et l’esprit ne peut par d’autre raison (suivant la proposition précédente) imaginer les corps extérieurs comme existant en acte. Par conséquent (selon la proposidon 25), dans la mesure où l’esprit imagine les corps extérieurs, il n’en a pas une connaissance adéquate. C.Q.F.D. [...] 
L’esprit n’a ni de lui-même, ni de son corps, ni des corps extérieurs une connaissance adéquate, mais seulement une connaissance confuse, toutes les fois qu’il perçoit les choses suivant l’ordre commun de la Nature.
(Baruch Spinoza, Éthique II, Démonstration de la proposition 26)

E4.1.A.2_REF4_SCI LES VERITES A PRIORI (COMME LA GEOMETRIE OU LES CATEGORIES DE L'ENTENDEMENT) NE SONT PAS DES VERITES ABSOLUES ET NECESSAIRES (COMME LE CROYAIT KANT), mais des hypothèses risquées produites par notre appareil cognitif et sujettes à l'erreur.
"Je dirais pour ma part que toutes les hypothèses, toutes les théories, sont a priori par leur formation, qu’elles soient émises intégrante de l’histoire de l’espèce ou de notre vie individuelle. Il faut simplement établir clairement que Kant s’est trompé en prétendant que tout ce qui était a priori était nécessairement vrai. Les a priori sont des hypothèses : ils peuvent donc être faux."
(Karl Popper dans Karl Popper & Konrad Lorenz, L’avenir est ouvert, 1983)

"En ce qui concerne Kant, je crois que Kant s’est trompé en pensant que les vérités a priori, autrement dit les vérités que nous ne tenons pas de notre expérience, étaient sûres et données. Bien sûr, nous essayons de parler de vérités a priori, seulement nous ignorons si elles sont vraies. Il a cru que nous en savions plus que nous n’en savons réellement. Il a eu tout à fait raison de considérer la géométrie euclidienne comme un a priori, c’est-à-dire comme quelque chose qui ne découlait pas de l’expérience et que nous avions construit, mais il a eu tort, nous le savons aujourd’hui, de croire qu’il y avait là une frontière insurmontable. En d’autres termes, bien que grand admirateur de Socrate, Kant n’était pas assez socratique. Il n’avait pas assez appris que nous ne savons rien. C’est là le point principal qui me sépare de Kant. Nous en savons bien moins que Kant ne l’a cru"
(Symposium organisé à l’occasion du quatre-vingtième anniversaire de Karl R. Popper (Vienne, 24-26 mai 1983) )

E4.1.A.2_REF5_LIT HUMANS CANNOT "GET BEHIND THE SHIFTING FLOWING STREAM OF SENSE IMPRESSIONS."
"MONTAIGNE

[...] What is this new tone, this new temper, this new temperamental atmosphere which, in the intervals of his cautious public work and his lazy compiling of scrap-books from the classics, he managed to fling abroad upon the air?

It is a spiritual ingredient, composed, when one comes to analyse it, of two chemical elements; of what might be called aesthetic egoism and of what we know as philosophic scepticism. Let us deal with the former of these two elements first. [...]

"The second element in the compound chemistry of the "modern temper" introduced into the world by Montaigne may be found in his famous scepticism. The formidable levity of that notorious "que sais-je?" "What do I know?" writes itself nowadays across our whole sky. [...]

The mention of the situation, in which in spite of Shakespeare and the rest poor modern sceptics still find themselves, is an indication of how hopelessly illusive all talk of "progress" is. [...]

But the scepticism of Montaigne throws doubt upon every human attempt to get behind the shifting flowing stream of sense impressions. [...]

What the scepticism of Montaigne does is to clear out of the path all the individual claims to extraordinary insight of the philosophic great men of the world, by means of showing how, under the pressure of obstinate and malicious reality, such explanations of the universe break down and such great men collapse and become as blind, helpless, groping and uncertain as all the rest of us. Prophets and rationalists alike, logicians and soothsayers together, so collapse and fall away; while in their place the long slow patient wisdom of the centuries, the old shrewd superstitious wisdom of anonymous humanity rises up out of the pagan earth, and offers us our only solution. [...]

He loved a world that hides its treasures from the "wise and prudent" and reveals them - or at any rate all that will ever be revealed of them - to "babes and sucklings." [...]

They will be encouraged - the people who read Montaigne - to sink once more into their own souls and enjoy the rare sensations permitted to their own physical and psychological susceptibility, as the great world sweeps by them. [...]"
(John Cowper Powys, Suspended Judgments, 1916)

Beyond the "Earthly" View – Imagination, Relativity, and the Cosmic Perspective.

EL3.30. "‘ HE OBSERVED, A PRINCIPAL SOURCE OF ERRONEOUS JUDGEMENT WAS, viewing things partially and only on one side : as for instance, fortune-hunters when they contemplated the fortunes singly and separately, it was a dazzling and tempting object ; but when they came to possess the wives and their fortunes together, they began to suspect that they had not made quite so good a bargain."
(Boswell’s Life of Johnson, revised third edition 1799, first published in 1791)

EL3.31. "A MEMORABLE FANCY

  The Prophets Isaiah and Ezekiel dined with me, and I asked them how they dared so roundly to assert that God spoke to them; and whether they did not think at the time that they would be misunderstood, and so be the cause of imposition.

  Isaiah answer’d: ‘I saw no God, nor heard any, in a finite organical perception; but my senses discover’d the infinite in everything, and as I was then persuaded, and remain confirm’d, that the voice of honest indignation is the voice of God, I cared not for consequences, but wrote.’

  Then I asked: ‘Does a firm persuasion that a thing is so, make it so?’

  He replied: ‘All Poets believe that it does, and in ages of imagination this firm persuasion removed mountains; but many are not capable of a firm persuasion of anything.’"
(William Blake, The marriage of heaven and hell, engraved circa 1790)

EL3.55. CARL SAGAN CRITIQUES EARTH-CENTERED THEOLOGY FOR ITS LIMITED PERSPECTIVE AND ARGUES FOR A BROADER COSMIC VIEW. "From whence, then, could arise the solitary and strange conceit that the Almighty, who had millions of worlds equally dependent on his protection, should quit the care of all the rest, and come to die in our world because, they say, one man and one woman ate an apple? And, on the other hand, are we to suppose that every world in the boundless creation had an Eve, an apple, a serpent, and a redeemer?”
(Thomas Paine, The age of reason, cited by Carl Sagan) 

Paine is saying that we have a theology that is Earth-centered and involves a tiny piece of space, and when we step back, when we attain a broader cosmic perspective, some of it seems very small in scale. And in fact a general problem with much of Western theology in my view is that the God portrayed is too small. It is a god of a tiny world and not a god of a galaxy, much less of a universe. [...]

Does trying to understand the universe at all betray a lack of humility? I believe it is true that humility is the only just response in a confrontation with the universe, but not a humility that prevents us from seeking the nature of the universe we are admiring. If we seek that nature, then love can be informed by truth instead of being based on ignorance or self-deception. If a Creator God exists, would He or She or It or whatever the appropriate pronoun is, prefer a kind of sodden blockhead who worships while understanding nothing? Or would He prefer His votaries to admire the real universe in all its intricacy? I would suggest that science is, at least in part, informed worship. [...]

I think if we ever reach the point where we think we thoroughly understand who we are and where we came from, we will have failed. I think this search does not lead to a complacent satisfaction that we know the answer, not an arrogant sense that the answer is before us and we need do only one more experiment to find it out. It goes with a courageous intent to greet the universe as it really is, not to foist our emotional predispositions on it but to courageously accept what our explorations tell us."
(Carl Sagan, The Varieties of Scientific Experience: A Personal View of the Search for God, 1985)

E4.1.1.C. IN THE MODERN ERA, THE CONCEPTS OF "UNIVERSAL" AND "ABSOLUTE" WERE REDEFINED TO EXCLUDE THE HUMAN/EARTHLY SCALE, MAKING OUR DIRECT EXPERIENCE "RELATIVE."
"Déjà chez Galilée et certainement depuis Newton, le mot « universel » a pris un sens extrêmement spécifique : il signifie « valable en dehors de notre système solaire ». Et il est arrivé quelque chose de très semblable à un autre mot d’origine philosophique, le mot « absolu » qui, appliqué au « temps absolu », à « l’espace absolu », au « mouvement absolu », à la « vitesse absolue », désigne chaque fois un temps, un espace, un mouvement, une vélocité présents dans l’univers et comparés auxquels le temps, l’espace, les mouvements, les vitesses terrestres ne sont que « relatifs ». Tout ce qui arrive sur terre est devenu relatif depuis que la relation de la Terre à l’univers sert de référence à toutes les mesures."
(Hannah Arendt, Condition de l’homme moderne, 1958)

E4.1.A.3. Beyond the "Earthly" View – Imagination, Relativity, and the Cosmic Perspective.

E4.1.A.3_REF1_LIT

EL3.30. "‘ HE OBSERVED, A PRINCIPAL SOURCE OF ERRONEOUS JUDGEMENT WAS, viewing things partially and only on one side : as for instance, fortune-hunters when they contemplated the fortunes singly and separately, it was a dazzling and tempting object ; but when they came to possess the wives and their fortunes together, they began to suspect that they had not made quite so good a bargain."
(Boswell’s Life of Johnson, revised third edition 1799, first published in 1791)

E4.1.A.3_REF2_PO

EL3.31. "A MEMORABLE FANCY

  The Prophets Isaiah and Ezekiel dined with me, and I asked them how they dared so roundly to assert that God spoke to them; and whether they did not think at the time that they would be misunderstood, and so be the cause of imposition.

  Isaiah answer’d: ‘I saw no God, nor heard any, in a finite organical perception; but my senses discover’d the infinite in everything, and as I was then persuaded, and remain confirm’d, that the voice of honest indignation is the voice of God, I cared not for consequences, but wrote.’

  Then I asked: ‘Does a firm persuasion that a thing is so, make it so?’

  He replied: ‘All Poets believe that it does, and in ages of imagination this firm persuasion removed mountains; but many are not capable of a firm persuasion of anything.’"
(William Blake, The marriage of heaven and hell, engraved circa 1790)

E4.1.A.3_REF3_SCI

EL3.55. CARL SAGAN CRITIQUES EARTH-CENTERED THEOLOGY FOR ITS LIMITED PERSPECTIVE AND ARGUES FOR A BROADER COSMIC VIEW. "From whence, then, could arise the solitary and strange conceit that the Almighty, who had millions of worlds equally dependent on his protection, should quit the care of all the rest, and come to die in our world because, they say, one man and one woman ate an apple? And, on the other hand, are we to suppose that every world in the boundless creation had an Eve, an apple, a serpent, and a redeemer?”
(Thomas Paine, The age of reason, cited by Carl Sagan) 

Paine is saying that we have a theology that is Earth-centered and involves a tiny piece of space, and when we step back, when we attain a broader cosmic perspective, some of it seems very small in scale. And in fact a general problem with much of Western theology in my view is that the God portrayed is too small. It is a god of a tiny world and not a god of a galaxy, much less of a universe. [...]

Does trying to understand the universe at all betray a lack of humility? I believe it is true that humility is the only just response in a confrontation with the universe, but not a humility that prevents us from seeking the nature of the universe we are admiring. If we seek that nature, then love can be informed by truth instead of being based on ignorance or self-deception. If a Creator God exists, would He or She or It or whatever the appropriate pronoun is, prefer a kind of sodden blockhead who worships while understanding nothing? Or would He prefer His votaries to admire the real universe in all its intricacy? I would suggest that science is, at least in part, informed worship. [...]

I think if we ever reach the point where we think we thoroughly understand who we are and where we came from, we will have failed. I think this search does not lead to a complacent satisfaction that we know the answer, not an arrogant sense that the answer is before us and we need do only one more experiment to find it out. It goes with a courageous intent to greet the universe as it really is, not to foist our emotional predispositions on it but to courageously accept what our explorations tell us."
(Carl Sagan, The Varieties of Scientific Experience: A Personal View of the Search for God, 1985)

E4.1.A.3_REF4_PH IN THE MODERN ERA, THE CONCEPTS OF "UNIVERSAL" AND "ABSOLUTE" WERE REDEFINED TO EXCLUDE THE HUMAN/EARTHLY SCALE, MAKING OUR DIRECT EXPERIENCE "RELATIVE."
"Déjà chez Galilée et certainement depuis Newton, le mot « universel » a pris un sens extrêmement spécifique : il signifie « valable en dehors de notre système solaire ». Et il est arrivé quelque chose de très semblable à un autre mot d’origine philosophique, le mot « absolu » qui, appliqué au « temps absolu », à « l’espace absolu », au « mouvement absolu », à la « vitesse absolue », désigne chaque fois un temps, un espace, un mouvement, une vélocité présents dans l’univers et comparés auxquels le temps, l’espace, les mouvements, les vitesses terrestres ne sont que « relatifs ». Tout ce qui arrive sur terre est devenu relatif depuis que la relation de la Terre à l’univers sert de référence à toutes les mesures."
(Hannah Arendt, Condition de l’homme moderne, 1958)

E4.1.B. Causality as Habit, Not Necessity

E4.1.B.1. The Projection of Order.
Causality and Law are not inherent properties of the universe (which is indifferent or chaotic), but structures imposed by the human mind (time, space, number) to make existence comprehensible. We do not discover laws; we impress them upon things.

E4.1.B.1_REF1_PH  "CAUSALITÉ 
C'est une relation entre deux êtres ou deux événements, telle que l’existence de l'un entraîne celle de l’autre et l’explique. 
La causalité se déduit ordinairement de la succession: si, à chaque fois qu’un phénomène a apparaît, le phénomène b le suit, on en conclura que a est la cause de b, qui serait son effet. C'est passer du constat empirique d’une conjonction constante notre échelle) à l'idée d’une connexion nécessaire. Hume n’aura pas de mal à montrer que ce passage reste intellectuellement mal fondé. Car une succession, aussi répétée qu’elle puisse être, ne saurait en toute rigueur prouver quoi que ce soit. L’idée d’une connexion nécessaire, entre la cause et l’effet, n’est que le résultat en nous d’une accoutumance très forte, qui nous pousse passer, presque inévitablement, de l’idée d’un objet à celle d'un autre qui le précède ou le suit. La causalité n’apparaît pas dans le monde (entre les choses) mais dans l’esprit (entre les idées). [...]
Force est de reconnaître que la causalité en tant que telle n’est jamais perçue - on ne perçoit que des successions ou des simultanéités - ni démontrée. C’est peut-être ce qui explique que les sciences modernes, comme l’avait remarqué Auguste Comte, s’intéressent moins aux causes qu’aux lois. C’est renoncer au pourquoi pour ne plus dire que le comment, et préférer la prévision à l'explication. L’action y trouve son compte; mais l'esprit, non. Car quelle est la cause des lois ?"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.1.B.1_REF2_PH

EL3.1. IT IS NUMBERS WHICH ARE MOST ASTONISHING IN THINGS "After all, what is a law of nature as such for us? We are not acquainted with it in itself, but only with its effects, which means in its relation to other laws of nature — which, in turn, are known to us only as sums of relations. Therefore all these relations always refer again to others and are thoroughly incomprehensible to us in their essence. All that we actually know about these laws of nature is what we ourselves bring to them — time and space, and therefore relationships of succession and number. But everything marvelous about the laws of nature, everything that quite astonishes us therein and seems to demand explanation, everything that might lead us to distrust idealism: all this is completely and solely contained within the mathematical strictness and inviolability of our representations of time and space. But we produce these representations in and from ourselves with the same necessity with which the spider spins. If we are forced to comprehend all things only under these forms, then it ceases to be amazing that in all things we actually comprehend nothing but these forms. For they must all bear within themselves the laws of number, and it is precisely number which is most astonishing in things. All that conformity to law, which impresses us so much in the movement of the stars and in chemical processes, coincides at bottom with those properties which we bring to things. Thus it is we who impress ourselves in this way."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, On Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral Sense, 1873)

E4.1.B.1_REF3_PH

EL3.27.  WHAT ARE THE LAWS OF THOUGHT? "Some at least of these principles must be granted before any argument or proof becomes possible. When some of them have been granted, others can be proved, though these others, so long as they are simple, are just as obvious as the principles taken for granted. For no very good reason, three of these principles have been singled out by tradition under the name of ‘Laws of Thought’.
They are as follows :
1) The law of identity : ‘Whatever is, is.’
2) The law of contradiction : ‘Nothing can both be and not be.’
3) The law of excluded middle : ‘Everything must either be or not be.’
 
These three laws are samples of self-evident logical principles, but are not really more fundamental or more self-evident than various other similar principles : for instance, the one we considered just now, which states that what follows from a true premiss is true. The name ‘laws of thought’ is also misleading, for what is important is not the fact that we think in accordance with these laws, but the fact that things behave in accordance with them ; in other words, the fact that when we think in accordance with them we think truly."
(Bertrand Russell, The Problems of Philosophy, 1912)

E4.1.B.1_REF4_SCI

EL3.15. "A third, modern way of testing and establishing scientific truth—in addition to theory and experiment—is via simulations, the use of (often large) computers to mimic nature. It is a synthetic universe in a computer. One states an equation (or several) describing the physical system being studied, programs it into a computer, and marches the system forward in space and time. If all of the relevant physical laws are faithfully captured, then one ends up with an emulation—a perfect, The Matrix–like replication of the physical world in virtual reality. [...]
Simulations as a third way of establishing scientific truth are here to stay. The challenge is for the astrophysical community to wield them as transparent, reproducible tools, thereby placing them on an equally credible footing with theory and experiment."
(Kevin Heng, American Scientist, May-June 2014)

E4.1.B.1_REF4.1_SCI "QUESTIONS FOR METACOMPUTATIONAL ASTROPHYSICS include: Is scientific truth more robustly represented by the simplest or the most complex model? (Many would say simplest, but this view is not universally accepted.) How may we judge when a simulation has successfully approximated reality in some way? (The visual inspection of a simulated image of, say, a galaxy versus one obtained with a telescope is sentimentally satisfying, but objectively unsatisfactory.) When is “bigger, better, faster” enough? Does one obtain an ever-better physical answer by simply ramping up the computational complexity? [...]
With increasingly complex simulations, there are also questions surrounding the practice of science. It is not unheard of to encounter published papers in astrophysics where insufficient information is provided for the reproduction of simulated results. Frequently, the computer codes used to perform these simulations are proprietary and complex enough that it would take years and the dedicated efforts of a research team to completely re-create one of them. Scientific truth is monopolized by a few and dictated to the rest. Is it still science if the results are not readily reproducible?"
(Kevin Heng, American Scientist, May-June 2014)

E4.1.B.1_REF5_PH SPINOZA AFFIRME QUE LA CONTINGENCE (LE FAIT QU'UNE CHOSE PUISSE ETRE OU NE PAS ETRE) N'EST PAS UNE PROPRIETE DU REEL, MAIS LE RESULTAT D'UN "DEFAUT DE NOTRE CONNAISSANCE", A NOTRE IGNORANCE DES CAUSES.
"Une chose est dite nécessaire, soit en raison de son essence, soit en raison de sa cause. Car l’existence d’une chose suit nécessairement ou de son essence et de sa définition, ou d’une cause efficiente donnée. 
D’autre part, c’est pour les mêmes raisons aussi qu’une chose est dite impossible : car c’est ou bien parce que son essence ou définition enveloppe contradiction, ou bien parce que son essence ou définition enveloppe contradiction, ou bien parce que nulle cause extérieure n’est donnée qui soit déterminée á produire cette chose.
Mais une chose n’est dite contingente pour nulle autre raison que par rapport à un défaut de notre connaissance. Car une chose dont nous ignorons que l’essence enveloppe contradiction, ou de laquelle nous savons parfaitement qu’elle n’enveloppe aucune contradiction sans que nous puissions cependant affirmer rien de certain au sujet de son existence, parce que l’ordre des choses nous est caché, cette chose ne peut jamais nous apparaître ni comme nécessaire ni comme impossible, et c’est pourquoi nous l’appelons ou contingente ou possible."
(Baruch Spinosa, Éthique I, Scolie I de la Proposition 33)

E4.1.B.2. The Anatomy of Habit.
If causality isn't real, what is it? It is Habit. The imagination transforms repetition into a belief in necessary connection.

E4.1.B.2_REF1_PH POUR DAVID HUME, IL N'Y A PAS DE CONNEXION NECESSAIRE DANS LES CHOSES, SEULEMENT UNE HABITUDE DANS L'ESPRIT QUI TRANSFORME LA REPETITION EN "NATURE". Il abolit la frontière entre raison et croyance, affirmant que la "vérité" est simplement une idée rendue vivace par l'habitude.
"La répétition créée une tendance qui fait que je vais attendre que le futur soit égal au passé, de façon totalement irrationnelle.

D’oú l’idée de nécessité naturelle peut-elle bien nous venir puisque nous n’en faisons pas l’expérience? En proposant sa réponse à ce paradoxe, David Hume fait bouger la frontière de la nature et de l’esprit: Ce que nous appelons nature, à savoir la régularité de phénomènes qui se suivent de façon constante, est un produit de l’habitude de l’esprit. Il n’y-a plus opposition entre nature et esprit, mais une seule donnée: L‘habitude qui construit notre représentation de la nature.

Il n’y-a pas d’un côté la raison et de l’autre la croyance: Toutes les inférences causales sont des croyances. C’est parce qu’une idée me frappe plus fortement qu’une autre que j’en affirme la vérité: Un principe, c’est une idée qui me frappe plus que les autres. Il n’y a pas de différence de nature entre la croyance et l’imagination : L’habitude fait que je ne peux pas douter d’une idée quand elle est trop forte. Ce que j’appelle vérité c’est une idée qui a quasiment la force d’une impression sensible à cause de l’habitude. Cette idée a toute autorité sur moi.

Pascal et Hume partagent la conviction que c'est l’uniformité de la nature humaine qui explique que par la force de l’habitude, les hommes dérivent des idées identiques."
(Pierre Schindler)

E4.1.B.2_REF2_PH WHAT IS THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN BELIEF AND KNOWLEDGE?: THE MECHANISMS OF CAUSALITY (RESEMBLANCE, CONTIGUITY, REPETITION) REPLACE "TRUTH" WITH "PROBABILITY".
"L’habitude a tendance à fixer les choses, on croit que les choses sont stables, établies, qu’il y a des relations de nécessité. À partir du moment où on dit qu’il n’y a plus de nécessité et que le savoir est  fondé sur une habitude qui malgré la répétition reste provisoire et pourrait changer, ça a un côté déstabilisant. Le but de Hume n’est pas de déstabiliser mais plutôt de nous faire prendre conscience  que ce qu’on croit être un savoir et en fait fondé sur une habitude et est plutôt une croyance. Cette démarche permet d’envisager avec plus de plasticité notre rapport à nos savoirs."
(Guillaume Lejeune)

Pour Hume on doit avoir un doute sur notre doute et nous en remettre au sens commun pour vivre, si bien que son scepticisme ne mène pas à l'angoisse - il était lui-même un bon vivant et appréciait la compagnie.
Hume revisite la causalité en la basant sur trois lois: 1. la ressemblance, 2. la contiguïté dans le temps et l'espace, 3. la répétition de phénomènes similaires (Aristote écrivait: "le souvent se rapproche du toujours"). Sur ces bases on peu ne pas en rester à l'impression mais lié les expériences pour poser la causalité, qui n'est jamais nécessaire car il n'y a pas de savoir assuré pour les "relation de fait". On peut voir chez Hume une anticipation des savoirs empiriques falsifiables chez Karl Popper. 
Pour Hume, l'habitude est le guide de la vie: "L'habitude est un puissant moyen de réformer l'esprit et d'y implanter des dispositions et inclinations qui soient bonnes. L'homme qui mène une vie sobre et tempérante haïra les excès et les désordres; celui qui se consacre aux affaires ou à l'étude regardera l'oisiveté comme une punition; celui qui s’astreint à la bienfaisance et à la courtoisie ne tardera pas à arborer toutes les manifestations d'orgueil et de violence. Quand un homme est entièrement convaincu qu'une vie vertueuse est préférable à toute autre, il ne faut point désespérer de son amendement, pourvu qu'il ait assez de résolution pour se faire violence à lui-même pendant quelques temps, le malheur est que cette conviction et cette résolution ne pourront jamais se manifester chez qui n'est pas déjà passablement vertueux. Voilà donc le triomphe majeur de l'art et de la philosophie: c'est d'affiner insensiblement le tempérament et d'indiquer les dispositions que nous devrions essayer d'acquérir par une tension constante de l'esprit et par une habitude répétée."
L'habitude active donne une accréditation à une idée, c'est le cas du rituel religieux, exemple donné par Hume - très critique envers la religion. Il distingue les habitudes passives et les habitudes actives. Les habitudes passives ont un effet inverse sur l’accréditation: si on voit tout les jours une belle chose, on cessera de la voir. Dans l'habitude active, on est attentif et participatif.
Sur le plan politique, ce qui paraît juste est ce qui c'est instauré comme habitude."
(Guillaume Lejeune dans l'émission Les Chemins de la Philosophie, diffusée sur France Culture le  16 octobre 2019)

E4.1.B.2_REF3_PH L'HABITUDE COMME UNE DECANTATION DU DESIR. Ravaisson elevates Habit to a "necessity of attraction and desire."
"Ce n’est donc pas une nécessité externe et de contrainte que celle de l’habitude, mais une nécessité d’attrait et de désir. C’est bien une loi, que cette loi des membres, qui succède à la liberté de l’esprit. Mais cette loi est une loi de grâce. C’est la cause finale qui prédomine de plus en plus sur la cause efficiente et qui l’absorbe en soi. Et alors, en effet, la fin et le principe, le fait et la loi, se confondent dans la nécessité."
(Félix Ravaisson, De l’habitude, 1838)

E4.1.B.2_REF4_PH  CHEZ HUME, "L'ESPRIT N'EST PAS RAISON, C'EST LA RAISON QUI EST UNE AFFECTION DE L'ESPRIT". ELLE EST REDEFINIE COMME "INSTINCT, HABITUDE, NATURE".
"Toute idée dérive d'une impression correspondante et, par conséquent, toute impression donnée se reproduit dans une idée qui la représente exactement [...]
Le propre des impressions de réflexion, effets des principes, c'est de qualifier diversement l'esprit comme un sujet. Ce qui se dévoile donc à partir des affections, c'est l'idée de cette subjectivité. Le mot idée ne peut plus avoir le même sens. La psychologie des affections sera la philosophie d'un sujet constitué.
C'est cette philosophie que le rationalisme a perdue. La philosophie de Hume est une critique aiguë de la représentation. Hume ne fait pas une critique des relations, mais une critique des représentations, justement parce qu'elles ne peuvent pas présenter les relations. En faisant de la représentation un critère, en mettant l'idée dans la raison, le rationalisme a mis dans l'idée ce qui ne se laisse pas constituer dans le premier sens de l'expérience, ce qui ne se laisse pas donner sans contradiction dans une idée, la généralité de l'idée même et l'existence de l'objet, le contenu des mots « toujours, universel, nécessaire ou vrai »; il a transféré la détermination de l'esprit aux objets extérieurs, supprimant pour la philosophie le sens et la compréhension de la pratique et du sujet. En fait, l'esprit n'est pas raison, c'est la raison qui est une affection de l'esprit. Elle sera dite en ce sens instinct, habitude, nature.

        La raison n'est rien qu'une détermination générale et calme des passions fondée sur une vue distante ou sur la réflexion.

La raison est une espèce de sentiment. Ainsi, de même que la méthode de la philosophie va de l'absence d'une idée à la présence d'une impression, la théorie de la raison va d'un scepticisme à un positivisme, d'un scepticisme de la raison à un positivisme du sentiment, lequel inclut enfin la raison comme une réflexion du sentiment dans l'esprit qualifié. [...]"
(Gilles Deleuze, Empirisme et subjectivité, 1977)

E4.1.B.2_REF4.1_PH CHEZ HUME, LA SEULE THEORIE POSSIBLE EST UNE "THEORIE DE LA PRATIQUE" (CALCUL DES PROBABILITES POUR L'ENTENDEMENT, JUSTICE POUR LA MORALE): nous n'avons pas accès à une vérité absolue (nécessité), mais nous naviguons grâce à des probabilités et des habitudes.
"Le véritable objet de la science est la nature humaine. Mais, la philosophie de Hume nous présente deux modalités de cette nature, deux espèces du genre affection : d'une part, les effets de l'association, d'autre part, les effets de la passion. Chacune est la détermination d'un système, celui de l'entendement, celui des passions et de la morale. Quel est leur rapport? [...] de même que l'association fixe à l'esprit une généralité nécessaire, une règle indispensable à son effort de connaissance théorique, de même la passion lui fournit le contenu d'une constance, rend possible une activité pratique et morale, et donne à l'histoire sa signification. Sans ce double mouvement, il n'y aurait pas même une nature humaine, l'imagination resterait fantaisie. [...]

Sous le nom de croyance, il y a une pratique de l'entendement, et sous forme d'organisation sociale et de justice, une théorie de la morale. Bien plus, dans tous les cas chez Hume, la seule théorie possible est une théorie de la pratique pour l'entendement, calcul des probabilités et règles générales, pour la morale et les passions, règles générales et justice. [...]"
(Gilles Deleuze, Empirisme et subjectivité, 1977)

E4.1.B.2_REF4.2_PH RAISON = IMAGINATION DEVENUE NATURE : HUME DEFINIT LA RAISON NON COMME UNE FACULTE TRANSCENDANTE, MAIS COMME "L'IMAGINATION FIXEE" PAR L'HABITUDE (ASSOCIATION).
"Le rôle des principes d'association est de fixer l'imagination. Mais l'association n'a pas besoin, comme la passion, de se réfléchir pour se calmer, pour constituer la raison : elle est immédiatement calme,

        elle opère secrètement et calmement dans l'esprit.

La raison est donc l'imagination devenue nature, l'ensemble des effets simples de l'association, idées générales, substances, relations. Seulement, en ce sens, il y a deux sortes de raisons, puisqu'il y a deux sortes de relations. On doit distinguer les relations d'idées, « celles qui dépendent entièrement des idées que nous comparons les unes aux autres » (ressemblance, rapports de quantités, degrés de qualité, contrariété) et les relations d'objets, « celles qui peuvent varier sans aucune variation des idées » (relations de temps et de lieu, identité, causalité). Parallèlement, deux raisons se distinguent, celle qui procède par certitude (intuition ou démonstration), et celle qui procède en fonction de probabilités (raison expérimentale, entendement). Sans doute, ces deux raisons sont seulement deux usages en fonction des espèces de relations, elles ont donc une racine commune, la comparaison, si bien que leurs convictions respectives ne sont pas sans rapport (certitude et croyance). [...]"
(Gilles Deleuze, Empirisme et subjectivité, 1977)"

E4.1.B.2_REF4.3_PH POUR HUME, L'ENTENDEMENT NE PEUT PAS, PAR LUI-MEME, TIRER DES CONCLUSIONS DE L'EXPERIENCE. IL LUI FAUT UN PRINCIPE EXTERIEUR : L'HABITUDE. La croyance (ce que nous tenons pour vrai) n'est qu'une "vivacité" d'idée transmise par l'habitude. La raison n'est pas maîtresse chez elle ; elle dépend de l'imagination.
"L'expérience est un principe qui m'instruit sur les diverses conjonctions des objets dans le passé. L'habitude est un autre principe qui me détermine à attendre le même dans l'avenir : les deux s'unissent pour agir sur l'imagination.

[...] Ce n'est pas un raisonnement qui rend le raisonnement possible; le raisonnement n'est pas immédiatement donné dans l'entendement. Il faut que l'entendement tienne d'un autre principe que l'expérience la faculté de tirer des conclusions de l'expérience elle-même, de dépasser l'expérience et d'inférer. Une répétition n'est pas par elle-même une progression, elle ne forme rien. La répétition des cas semblables ne nous avance pas, puisque le second cas n'a pas d'autre différence avec le premier que celle de venir après, sans découvrir une idée nouvelle. L'habitude n'est pas une mécanique de la quantité.

Si les idées n'avaient pas été plus unies dans l'imagination que les objets, semble-t-il, le sont pour l'entendement, nous n'aurions jamais pu tirer une inférence des causes aux effets, ni accorder créance à aucune donnée des sens.

Voilà pourquoi l'habitude apparaît comme autre principe, ou la causalité comme relation naturelle, comme association des idées. L'effet de cet autre principe est celui-ci: l'imagination devient une croyance, parce qu'une transition se fait de l'impression d'un objet à l'idée d'un autre. Ainsi, se dessine une double implication.
D'une part, l'habitude permet à l'entendement de raisonner sur l'expérience, elle fait de la croyance un acte possible de l'entendement;

        l'entendement, dit Hume, comme la mémoire et les sens, est fondé sur l'imagination, sur la vivacité de nos idées.

D'autre part, l'habitude suppose l'expérience : les objets s'unissent dans l'imagination, mais une fois découverte la conjonction des objets. Si l'on veut, l'habitude est l'expérience elle-même, en tant qu'elle produit l'idée d'un objet au moyen de l'imagination, non pas au moyen de l'entendement. La répétition devient une progression et même une production, quand on cesse de l'envisager relativement aux objets qu'elle répète, dans lesquels elle ne change rien, ne découvre rien et ne produit rien, pour l'envisager au contraire dans l'esprit qui la contemple et dans lequel elle produit une nouvelle impression,

        une détermination à porter nos pensées d'un objet à l'autre, à transférer le passé à l'avenir,

une attente, une tendance. Reste que l'expérience et l'habitude sont deux principes différents, comme la présentation des cas de conjonction constante à l'observation de l'esprit, et l'union de ces mêmes cas dans l'esprit qui les observe. En ce sens, Hume donne toujours de la causalité deux définitions jointes: union d'objets semblables, inférence de l'esprit d'un objet à un autre. [...]

Maintenir la croyance dans les limites de l'entendement, assurer la conformité de l'habitude avec l'expérience, tel est donc l'objet de la probabilité philosophique ou du calcul des probabilités, tel est le moyen de dissiper les fictions et les préjugés. En d'autres termes, le raisonnement pour être absolument légitime doit naître de l'habitude « non pas directement, mais obliquement ». Sans doute, le propre de la croyance, de l'inférence et du raisonnement, c'est de dépasser l'expérience, de transférer le passé au futur; encore faut-il que l'objet de la croyance soit déterminé en accord avec une expérience passée. [...]

(Gilles Deleuze, Empirisme et subjectivité, 1977)"

E4.1.B.3. The Reign of Exception.
Since laws are mental constructs based on limited data (induction), we can never achieve absolute certainty. Reality remains a "reign of exception" or probabilistic gradients rather than binary truth.

E4.1.B.3_REF1_PH

EL3.8. "IT MIGHT BE URGED, AS AGAINST THE VIEW WE ARE ADVOCATING, THAT WE KNOW ALL NATURAL PHENOMENA TO BE SUBJECT TO THE REIGN OF LAW, and that sometimes, on the basis of observation, we can see that only one law can possibly fit the facts of the case. Now to this view there are two answers. The first is that, even if some law which has no exceptions applies to our case, we can never, in practice, be sure that we have discovered that law and not one to which there are exceptions. The second is that the reign of law would seem to be itself only probable, and that our belief that it will hold in the future, or in unexamined cases in the past, is itself based upon the very principle we are examining."
(Bertrand Russell, The Problems of Philosophy, 1912)

E4.1.B.3_REF2_PHTHEORETICAL KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORLD IS PROBABILISTIC (BASED ON HABIT/INSTANCES), NOT NECESSARY.
"The difference between an a priori general proposition and an empirical generalization does not come in the meaning of the proposition ; it comes in the nature of the evidence for it. In the empirical case, the evidence consists in the particular instances. [...] The progress of science is constantly producing such subsumptions, and therefore giving a constantly wider inductive basis or scientific generalizations. But although this gives a greater degree of certainty, it does not give a different kind : the ultimate ground remains inductive, i.e. derived from instances, and not an a priori connexion of universals such as we have in logic and arithmetic."
(Bertarnd Russel, The Problems of Philosophy, 1912)

E4.1.B.3_REF3_PH IT IS IMPOSSIBLE TO BASE A GENERAL TRUTH ON THE ACCUMULATION OF FACTS.
« Pour le dire généralement, ce ne serait assez de l’avoir vu constamment en cent rencontres, ni en mille, ni en tout autre nombre, quelque grand qu’il soit ; puisque, s’il restait un seul cas à examiner, ce seul suffirait pour empêcher la définition générale, et si un seul était contraire, ce seul. »  [...]  Se trouve ainsi défini le champ ouvert à la science comme à la philosophie, c’est-à-dire la nature de tout savoir humain : la connaissance, infiniment extensible, de généralités qui ne se différencieront jamais de l’agrégat indifférencié des faits. Connaissance qui peut être très utile et très enrichissante ; mais qui n’aboutira jamais à la mise en évidence d’une connaissance, si l’on entend et recherche par là un principe échappant par nature à l’anarchie et la précarité des faits. [...]

Cela étant, la critique pascalienne du rationalisme ne signifie pas précisément une critique de la raison, comme il a été constamment et très légèrement affirmé. La critique du rationalisme (le « désaveu de la raison ») a une signification plutôt exactement inverse : elle ne met pas en doute les capacités propres de la raison, mais la nature de ce qui s’offre à son investigation. En d’autres termes : l’ « impuissance » du rationalisme ne provient pas, selon Pascal, d’une impuissance inhérente à la raison elle-même, mais du fait que ce qui s’offre à la raison est irrémédiablement indifférent."
(Clément Rosset, Logique du pire, 1971)

E4.1.B.3_REF4_PH MONTAIGNE PUSHES THE CRITIQUE OF CAUSALITY TO ITS EXTREME.
"La pensée de Montaigne se déroule selon un schéma simple et intraitable : 1) Une loi, si loi il y a, ne doit connaître aucune exception : faute de quoi elle serait loi imaginaire ; 2) Or, toutes les lois recensées jusqu’à ce jour présentent des exceptions : toutes, sans aucune exception ; 3) II s’ensuit qu’aucune loi n’existe ; 4) Donc, tout ce qui existe, n’étant soumis à aucune loi sinon d’ordre imaginaire, est d’ordre exceptionnel : le règne de ce qui existe est règne d’exception."
(Clément Rosset, Logique du pire, 1971)

E4.1.B.3_REF5_PH

EL3.2. ON POSSIBLE WORLDS "Possible worlds are useful in philosophy to account for modality: we can imagine possible worlds that make do without contingent and counterfactual events, making each event in a different possible world a fact which escapes the discussion about causality and necessity. For exemple, to prove that a counterfactual event si true such as "should I have woken up 1 hour later I would have arrived late", you run the scenario of the world where the only variance is my getting up one hour later and show that running the laws of physics and all other things being equal prove that the assertion that I would be late is true (as presented by David Louis)
The only limiting factors for a possible world to exist would be:
1. To obey the laws of physics, some fact like 2+2=4 is true in all possible worlds;
2. To be consistent: a person could not be born in a given year in one world and in another year in another world."
(Helen Beebee on Possible Worlds, Phylosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: https://philosophybites.com/2019/01/helen-beebee-on-possible-worlds.html

E4.1.B.3_REF6_PH

EL3.12. IS THERE ANY KNOWLEDGE THAT WASN'T FIRST TAUGHT TO US AND THAT WE FIRST BELIEVED IN ? WE NEED TO BEGIN BY BELIEVING AND THEN TRANSFORM BELIEF INTO KNOWLEDGE. “Some like to understand what they believe in. Others like to believe in what they understand.” (Stanislaus Lec)
"Falsification, as commented by Karl Popper, has had a tremendous influence on how we interpret outcomes vs. our beliefs since the last century (if the experience contradicts the outcome predicted by theory, we refute the theory). But we have a choice about what component of our system of belief we should refute : this gives the opportunity for people to defend any belief they want" (Jonathan Glover) - and furthermore to claim that they applied  the scientific method !
(Pierre Schindler)

E4.1.B.3_REF7_PH

EL3.21. "VERY FEW IDEAS IN LIFE ARE ABSOLUTELY TRUE. What you want is to get as close to the truth as you can with the information available:
“I would like to mention a somewhat technical idea, but it’s the way, you see, we have to understand how to handle uncertainty. How does something move from being almost certainly false to being almost certainly true? How does experience change? How do you handle the changes of your certainty with experience? And it’s rather complicated, technically, but I’ll give a rather simple, idealized example.

You have, we suppose, two theories about the way something is going to happen, which I will call “Theory A” and “Theory B.” Now it gets complicated. Theory A and Theory B. Before you make any observations, for some reason or other, that is, your past experiences and other observations and intuition and so on, suppose that you are very much more certain of Theory A than of Theory B—much more sure. But suppose that the thing that you are going to observe is a test. According to Theory A, nothing should happen. According to Theory B, it should turn blue. Well, you make the observation, and it turns sort of a greenish. Then you look at Theory A, and you say, “It’s very unlikely,” and you turn to Theory B, and you say, “Well, it should have turned sort of blue, but it wasn’t impossible that it should turn sort of greenish color.”

So the result of this observation, then, is that Theory A is getting weaker, and Theory B is getting stronger. And if you continue to make more tests, then the odds on Theory B increase. Incidentally, it is not right to simply repeat the same test over and over and over and over, no matter how many times you look and it still looks greenish, you haven’t made up your mind yet. But if you find a whole lot of other things that distinguish Theory A from Theory B that are different, then by accumulating a large number of these, the odds on Theory B increase.”
(Laurette Richard Feynman)

Feynman is talking about grey thinking here, the ability to put things on a gradient from “probably true” to “probably false,” and how we deal with that uncertainty. He isn’t proposing a method of figuring out absolute, doctrinaire truth."
(FS Brain Food)

E4.1.B.3_REF8_PH LE REGNE DE CE QUI EXISTE EST REGNE D’EXCEPTION QUI NE REPOND A AUCUN SYSTEME.
"En l’absence de critère permettant de juger d’une norme — on dira que tout ce qui existe est d’ordre également exceptionnel.
Telle est bien l’une des pensées majeures des Essais de Montaigne : le refus de l’idée d’une quelconque « normalité » dans la nature, l’affirmation du caractère exceptionnel de toute existence quelle qu’elle soit. Le point de départ de cette affirmation étrange est le refus de l’idée selon laquelle une règle pourrait souffrir des exceptions, et la découverte que l’adage « l’exception confirme la règle » n’est qu’un principe d’accommodation destiné, non à confirmer, mais à sauver in extremis le rationalisme d’une objection préalable et fondamentale. Un des plus faibles chaînons de toute forme de rationalisme est en effet ce principe bien connu selon lequel l’exception confirme la règle ; et c’est ce principe que Montaigne, plutôt par rigueur philosophique que par disposition sceptique ou pessimiste, a fait sauter, brisant ainsi le rationalisme à l’un de ses points névralgiques et entraînant dans cette destruction tout le corps de la métaphysique classique. Car ce principe n’est jamais une confirmation, mais toujours un pis-aller : puisqu’il n’y a rien à faire de l’exception, autant l’intégrer à un système compliqué d’interprétation aboutissant à faire de celle-ci une manifestation particulière de l’ordre qu’elle récuse ; sous certaines conditions, on dira donc que l’ordre ne peut apparaître que sous une forme inversée, et on fera la construction forcée de ce système de conditions rendant possible et nécessaire l’écart apparemment imprévu. […]
A partir de cette dénégation de la compossibilité de la règle et de l’exception, la pensée de Montaigne se déroule selon un schéma simple et intraitable : 1) Une loi, si loi il y a, ne doit connaître aucune exception : faute de quoi elle serait loi imaginaire ; 2) Or, toutes les lois recensées jusqu’à ce jour présentent des exceptions : toutes, sans aucune exception ; 3) II s’ensuit qu’aucune loi n’existe ; 4) Donc, tout ce qui existe, n’étant soumis à aucune loi sinon d’ordre imaginaire, est d’ordre exceptionnel : le règne de ce qui existe est règne d’exception.
(Clément Rosset, Logique du pire,  1971)

E4.1.B.4. The Probabilistic Mind.
Since we rely on habit, comparison, and "mental shortcuts" rather than objective calculation, we are prone to error. We judge value and probability based on past experience rather than mathematical necessity.

E4.1.B.4_REF1_PSI

EL3.11. THE ERRORS OF A THEORY HIDE IN WHAT IT IGNORES OR TACITLY ASSUMES "Bernoulli proposed that the diminishing marginal value of wealth (in the modern jargon) is what explains risk aversion—the common preference that people generally show for a sure thing over a favorable gamble of equal or slightly higher expected value. [...]
The longevity of the theory is all the more remarkable because it is seriously flawed. The errors of a theory are rarely found in what it asserts explicitly; they hide in what it ignores or tacitly assumes. For an example, take the following scenarios: 
Today Jack and Jill each have a wealth of 5 million. 
Yesterday, Jack had 1 million and Jill had 9 million. 
Are they equally happy? (Do they have the same utility?) 
Bernoulli’s theory assumes that the utility of their wealth is what makes people more or less happy. Jack and Jill have the same wealth, and the theory therefore asserts that they should be equally happy, but you do not need a degree in psychology to know that today Jack is elated and Jill despondent. Indeed, we know that Jack would be a great deal happier than Jill even if he had only 2 million today while she has 5. So Bernoulli’s theory must be wrong."
(Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow, 2011)

E4.1.B.4_REF3_PH

EL3.89. "HAS THE UNIVERSE ANY UNITY OF PLAN OR PURPOSE, OR IS IT A FORTUITOUS CONCOURSE OF ATOMS ? Is consciousness a permanent part of the universe, giving hope of indefinite growth in wisdom, or is it a transitory accident on a small planet on which life must ultimately become impossible ? Are good and evil of importance to the universe or only to man ? Such questions are asked by philosophy, and variously answered by various philosophers. But it would seem that, whether answers be otherwise discoverable or not, the answers suggested by philosophy are none of them demonstrably true. Yet, however slight may be the hope of discovering an answer, it is part of the business of philosophy to continue the consideration of such questions, to make us aware of their importance, to examine all the approaches to them, and to keep alive that speculative interest in the universe which is apt to be killed by confining ourselves to definitely ascertainable knowledge."
(Bertrand Russell, The Problems of Philosophy, 1912)

E4.1.B.4_REF4_PH

EL3.154. “WORMS.—The fact that an intellect contains a few worms does not detract from its ripeness.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 353, 1878) 

E4.1.B.4_REF2_PSI DANIEL GILBERT´S TED TALK ON WHY WE MAKE BAD DECISIONS. GILBERT EXPLAINS THAT WE JUDGE VALUE BASED ON PAST COMPARISONS (HABIT) RATHER THAN OBJECTIVE CALCULATION.
00:03
We all make decisions every day; we want to know what the right thing is to do -- in domains from the financial to the gastronomic to the professional to the romantic. And surely, if somebody could really tell us how to do exactly the right thing at all possible times, that would be a tremendous gift.

00:21
It turns out that, in fact, the world was given this gift in 1738 by a Dutch polymath named Daniel Bernoulli. And what I want to talk to you about today is what that gift is, and I also want to explain to you why it is that it hasn't made a damn bit of difference.

00:38
Now, this is Bernoulli's gift. This is a direct quote. And if it looks like Greek to you, it's because, well, it's Greek. But the simple English translation -- much less precise, but it captures the gist of what Bernoulli had to say -- was this: The expected value of any of our actions -- that is, the goodness that we can count on getting -- is the product of two simple things: the odds that this action will allow us to gain something, and the value of that gain to us.

01:10
In a sense, what Bernoulli was saying is, if we can estimate and multiply these two things, we will always know precisely how we should behave.

01:18
Now, this simple equation, even for those of you who don't like equations, is something that you're quite used to. Here's an example: if I were to tell you, let's play a little coin toss game, and I'm going to flip a coin, and if it comes up heads, I'm going to pay you 10 dollars, but you have to pay four dollars for the privilege of playing with me, most of you would say, sure, I'll take that bet. Because you know that the odds of you winning are one half, the gain if you do is 10 dollars, that multiplies to five, and that's more than I'm charging you to play. So, the answer is, yes. This is what statisticians technically call a damn fine bet.

01:55
Now, the idea is simple when we're applying it to coin tosses, but in fact, it's not very simple in everyday life. People are horrible at estimating both of these things, and that's what I want to talk to you about today.

02:08
There are two kinds of errors people make when trying to decide what the right thing is to do, and those are errors in estimating the odds that they're going to succeed, and errors in estimating the value of their own success. Now, let me talk about the first one first. Calculating odds would seem to be something rather easy: there are six sides to a die, two sides to a coin, 52 cards in a deck. You all know what the likelihood is of pulling the ace of spades or of flipping a heads. But as it turns out, this is not a very easy idea to apply in everyday life. That's why Americans spend more -- I should say, lose more -- gambling than on all other forms of entertainment combined. The reason is, this isn't how people do odds.

02:54
The way people figure odds requires that we first talk a bit about pigs. Now, the question I'm going to put to you is whether you think there are more dogs or pigs on leashes observed in any particular day in Oxford. And of course, you all know that the answer is dogs. And the way that you know that the answer is dogs is you quickly reviewed in memory the times you've seen dogs and pigs on leashes. It was very easy to remember seeing dogs, not so easy to remember pigs. And each one of you assumed that if dogs on leashes came more quickly to your mind, then dogs on leashes are more probable. That's not a bad rule of thumb, except when it is.

03:32
So, for example, here's a word puzzle. Are there more four-letter English words with R in the third place or R in the first place? Well, you check memory very briefly, make a quick scan, and it's awfully easy to say to yourself, Ring, Rang, Rung, and very hard to say to yourself, Pare, Park: they come more slowly. But in fact, there are many more words in the English language with R in the third than the first place. The reason words with R in the third place come slowly to your mind isn't because they're improbable, unlikely or infrequent. It's because the mind recalls words by their first letter. You kind of shout out the sound, S -- and the word comes. It's like the dictionary; it's hard to look things up by the third letter. So, this is an example of how this idea that the quickness with which things come to mind can give you a sense of their probability --

04:22
how this idea could lead you astray. It's not just puzzles, though. For example, when Americans are asked to estimate the odds that they will die in a variety of interesting ways -- these are estimates of number of deaths per year per 200 million U.S. citizens. And these are just ordinary people like yourselves who are asked to guess how many people die from tornado, fireworks, asthma, drowning, etc. Compare these to the actual numbers.

04:46
Now, you see a very interesting pattern here, which is first of all, two things are vastly over-estimated, namely tornadoes and fireworks. Two things are vastly underestimated: dying by drowning and dying by asthma. Why? When was the last time that you picked up a newspaper and the headline was, "Boy dies of Asthma?" It's not interesting because it's so common. It's very easy for all of us to bring to mind instances of news stories or newsreels where we've seen tornadoes devastating cities, or some poor schmuck who's blown his hands off with a firework on the Fourth of July. Drownings and asthma deaths don't get much coverage. They don't come quickly to mind, and as a result, we vastly underestimate them.

05:28
Indeed, this is kind of like the Sesame Street game of "Which thing doesn't belong?" And you're right to say it's the swimming pool that doesn't belong, because the swimming pool is the only thing on this slide that's actually very dangerous. The way that more of you are likely to die than the combination of all three of the others that you see on the slide.

05:47
The lottery is an excellent example, of course -- an excellent test-case of people's ability to compute probabilities. And economists -- forgive me, for those of you who play the lottery -- but economists, at least among themselves, refer to the lottery as a stupidity tax, because the odds of getting any payoff by investing your money in a lottery ticket are approximately equivalent to flushing the money directly down the toilet -- which, by the way, doesn't require that you actually go to the store and buy anything.

06:15
Why in the world would anybody ever play the lottery? Well, there are many answers, but one answer surely is, we see a lot of winners. Right? When this couple wins the lottery, or Ed McMahon shows up at your door with this giant check -- how the hell do you cash things that size, I don't know. We see this on TV; we read about it in the paper. When was the last time that you saw extensive interviews with everybody who lost? Indeed, if we required that television stations run a 30-second interview with each loser every time they interview a winner, the 100 million losers in the last lottery would require nine-and-a-half years of your undivided attention just to watch them say, "Me? I lost." "Me? I lost." Now, if you watch nine-and-a-half years of television -- no sleep, no potty breaks -- and you saw loss after loss after loss, and then at the end there's 30 seconds of, "and I won," the likelihood that you would play the lottery is very small.

07:09
Look, I can prove this to you: here's a little lottery. There's 10 tickets in this lottery. Nine of them have been sold to these individuals. It costs you a dollar to buy the ticket and, if you win, you get 20 bucks. Is this a good bet? Well, Bernoulli tells us it is. The expected value of this lottery is two dollars; this is a lottery in which you should invest your money. And most people say, "OK, I'll play."

07:31
Now, a slightly different version of this lottery: imagine that the nine tickets are all owned by one fat guy named Leroy. Leroy has nine tickets; there's one left. Do you want it? Most people won't play this lottery. Now, you can see the odds of winning haven't changed, but it's now fantastically easy to imagine who's going to win. It's easy to see Leroy getting the check, right? You can't say to yourself, "I'm as likely to win as anybody," because you're not as likely to win as Leroy. The fact that all those tickets are owned by one guy changes your decision to play, even though it does nothing whatsoever to the odds.

08:05
Now, estimating odds, as difficult as it may seem, is a piece of cake compared to trying to estimate value: trying to say what something is worth, how much we'll enjoy it, how much pleasure it will give us. I want to talk now about errors in value. How much is this Big Mac worth? Is it worth 25 dollars? Most of you have the intuition that it's not -- you wouldn't pay that for it.

08:29
But in fact, to decide whether a Big Mac is worth 25 dollars requires that you ask one, and only one question, which is: What else can I do with 25 dollars? If you've ever gotten on one of those long-haul flights to Australia and realized that they're not going to serve you any food, but somebody in the row in front of you has just opened the McDonald's bag, and the smell of golden arches is wafting over the seat, you think, I can't do anything else with this 25 dollars for 16 hours. I can't even set it on fire -- they took my cigarette lighter! Suddenly, 25 dollars for a Big Mac might be a good deal.

09:02
On the other hand, if you're visiting an underdeveloped country, and 25 dollars buys you a gourmet meal, it's exorbitant for a Big Mac. Why were you all sure that the answer to the question was no, before I'd even told you anything about the context? Because most of you compared the price of this Big Mac to the price you're used to paying. Rather than asking, "What else can I do with my money," comparing this investment to other possible investments, you compared to the past. And this is a systematic error people make. What you knew is, you paid three dollars in the past; 25 is outrageous.

09:35
This is an error, and I can prove it to you by showing the kinds of irrationalities to which it leads. For example, this is, of course, one of the most delicious tricks in marketing, is to say something used to be higher, and suddenly it seems like a very good deal. When people are asked about these two different jobs: a job where you make 60K, then 50K, then 40K, a job where you're getting a salary cut each year, and one in which you're getting a salary increase, people like the second job better than the first, despite the fact they're all told they make much less money. Why? Because they had the sense that declining wages are worse than rising wages, even when the total amount of wages is higher in the declining period. Here's another nice example.

10:18
Here's a $2,000 Hawaiian vacation package; it's now on sale for 1,600. Assuming you wanted to go to Hawaii, would you buy this package? Most people say they would. Here's a slightly different story: $2,000 Hawaiian vacation package is now on sale for 700 dollars, so you decide to mull it over for a week. By the time you get to the ticket agency, the best fares are gone -- the package now costs 1,500. Would you buy it? Most people say, no. Why? Because it used to cost 700, and there's no way I'm paying 1,500 for something that was 700 last week.

10:50
This tendency to compare to the past is causing people to pass up the better deal. In other words, a good deal that used to be a great deal is not nearly as good as an awful deal that was once a horrible deal.

11:03
Here's another example of how comparing to the past can befuddle our decisions. Imagine that you're going to the theater. You're on your way to the theater. In your wallet you have a ticket, for which you paid 20 dollars. You also have a 20-dollar bill. When you arrive at the theater, you discover that somewhere along the way you've lost the ticket. Would you spend your remaining money on replacing it? Most people answer, no. Now, let's just change one thing in this scenario. You're on your way to the theater, and in your wallet you have two 20-dollar bills. When you arrive you discover you've lost one of them. Would you spend your remaining 20 dollars on a ticket? Well, of course, I went to the theater to see the play. What does the loss of 20 dollars along the way have to do?

11:43
Now, just in case you're not getting it, here's a schematic of what happened, OK? (Laughter) Along the way, you lost something. In both cases, it was a piece of paper. In one case, it had a U.S. president on it; in the other case it didn't. What the hell difference should it make? The difference is that when you lost the ticket you say to yourself, I'm not paying twice for the same thing. You compare the cost of the play now -- 40 dollars -- to the cost that it used to have -- 20 dollars -- and you say it's a bad deal. Comparing with the past causes many of the problems that behavioral economists and psychologists identify in people's attempts to assign value. But even when we compare with the possible, instead of the past, we still make certain kinds of mistakes. And I'm going to show you one or two of them.

12:30
One of the things we know about comparison: that when we compare one thing to the other, it changes its value. So in 1992, this fellow, George Bush, for those of us who were kind of on the liberal side of the political spectrum, didn't seem like such a great guy. Suddenly, we're almost longing for him to return. (Laughter) The comparison changes how we evaluate him.

12:55
Now, retailers knew this long before anybody else did, of course, and they use this wisdom to help you -- spare you the undue burden of money. And so a retailer, if you were to go into a wine shop and you had to buy a bottle of wine, and you see them here for eight, 27 and 33 dollars, what would you do? Most people don't want the most expensive, they don't want the least expensive. So, they will opt for the item in the middle. If you're a smart retailer, then, you will put a very expensive item that nobody will ever buy on the shelf, because suddenly the $33 wine doesn't look as expensive in comparison.

13:28
So I'm telling you something you already knew: namely, that comparison changes the value of things. Here's why that's a problem: the problem is that when you get that $33 bottle of wine home, it won't matter what it used to be sitting on the shelf next to. The comparisons we make when we are appraising value, where we're trying to estimate how much we'll like things, are not the same comparisons we'll be making when we consume them. This problem of shifting comparisons can bedevil our attempts to make rational decisions.

14:03
Let me just give you an example. I have to show you something from my own lab, so let me sneak this in. These are subjects coming to an experiment to be asked the simplest of all questions: How much will you enjoy eating potato chips one minute from now? They're sitting in a room with potato chips in front of them. For some of the subjects, sitting in the far corner of a room is a box of Godiva chocolates, and for others is a can of Spam. In fact, these items that are sitting in the room change how much the subjects think they're going to enjoy the potato chips. Namely, those who are looking at Spam think potato chips are going to be quite tasty; those who are looking at Godiva chocolate think they won't be nearly so tasty. Of course, what happens when they eat the potato chips? Well, look, you didn't need a psychologist to tell you that when you have a mouthful of greasy, salty, crispy, delicious snacks, what's sitting in the corner of the room makes not a damn bit of difference to your gustatory experience. Nonetheless, their predictions are perverted by a comparison that then does not carry through and change their experience.

15:05
You've all experienced this yourself, even if you've never come into our lab to eat potato chips. So here's a question: You want to buy a car stereo. The dealer near your house sells this particular stereo for 200 dollars, but if you drive across town, you can get it for 100 bucks. So would you drive to get 50 percent off, saving 100 dollars? Most people say they would. They can't imagine buying it for twice the price when, with one trip across town, they can get it for half off.

15:31
Now, let's imagine instead you wanted to buy a car that had a stereo, and the dealer near your house had it for 31,000. But if you drove across town, you could get it for 30,900. Would you drive to get it? At this point, 0.003 savings -- the 100 dollars. Most people say, no, I'm going to schlep across town to save 100 bucks on the purchase of a car?

15:51
This kind of thinking drives economists crazy, and it should. Because this 100 dollars that you save -- hello! -- doesn't know where it came from. It doesn't know what you saved it on. When you go to buy groceries with it, it doesn't go, I'm the money saved on the car stereo, or, I'm the dumb money saved on the car. It's money. And if a drive across town is worth 100 bucks, it's worth 100 bucks no matter what you're saving it on. People don't think that way. That's why they don't know whether their mutual fund manager is taking 0.1 percent or 0.15 percent of their investment, but they clip coupons to save one dollar off of toothpaste.

16:28
Now, you can see, this is the problem of shifting comparisons, because what you're doing is, you're comparing the 100 bucks to the purchase that you're making, but when you go to spend that money you won't be making that comparison. You've all had this experience.

16:42
If you're an American, for example, you've probably traveled in France. And at some point you may have met a couple from your own hometown, and you thought, "Oh, my God, these people are so warm. They're so nice to me. I mean, compared to all these people who hate me when I try to speak their language and hate me more when I don't, these people are just wonderful." And so you tour France with them, and then you get home and you invite them over for dinner, and what do you find? Compared to your regular friends, they are boring and dull, right? Because in this new context, the comparison is very, very different. In fact, you find yourself disliking them enough almost to qualify for French citizenship.

17:19
Now, you have exactly the same problem when you shop for a stereo. You go to the stereo store, you see two sets of speakers -- these big, boxy, monoliths, and these little, sleek speakers, and you play them, and you go, you know, I do hear a difference: the big ones sound a little better. And so you buy them, and you bring them home, and you entirely violate the décor of your house. And the problem, of course, is that this comparison you made in the store is a comparison you'll never make again. What are the odds that years later you'll turn on the stereo and go, "Sounds so much better than those little ones," which you can't even remember hearing.

17:51
The problem of shifting comparisons is even more difficult when these choices are arrayed over time. People have a lot of trouble making decisions about things that will happen at different points in time. And what psychologists and behavioral economists have discovered is that by and large people use two simple rules. So let me give you one very easy problem, a second very easy problem and then a third, hard, problem.

18:13
Here's the first easy problem: You can have 60 dollars now or 50 dollars now. Which would you prefer? This is what we call a one-item IQ test, OK? All of us, I hope, prefer more money, and the reason is, we believe more is better than less.

18:28
Here's the second problem: You can have 60 dollars today or 60 dollars in a month. Which would you prefer? Again, an easy decision, because we all know that now is better than later. What's hard in our decision-making is when these two rules conflict. For example, when you're offered 50 dollars now or 60 dollars in a month. This typifies a lot of situations in life in which you will gain by waiting, but you have to be patient. What do we know? What do people do in these kinds of situations? Well, by and large people are enormously impatient. That is, they require interest rates in the hundred or thousands of percents in order to delay gratification and wait until next month for the extra 10 dollars. Maybe that isn't so remarkable, but what is remarkable is how easy it is to make this impatience go away by simply changing when the delivery of these monetary units will happen. Imagine that you can have 50 dollars in a year -- that's 12 months -- or 60 dollars in 13 months. What do we find now? People are gladly willing to wait: as long as they're waiting 12, they might as well wait 13.

19:33
What makes this dynamic inconsistency happen? Comparison. Troubling comparison. Let me show you.

19:40
This is just a graph showing the results that I just suggested you would show if I gave you time to respond, which is, people find that the subjective value of 50 is higher than the subjective value of 60 when they'll be delivered in now or one month, respectively -- a 30-day delay -- but they show the reverse pattern when you push the entire decision off into the future a year. Now, why in the world do you get this pattern of results?

20:05
These guys can tell us. What you see here are two lads, one of them larger than the other: the fireman and the fiddler. They are going to recede towards the vanishing point in the horizon, and I want you to notice two things. At no point will the fireman look taller than the fiddler. No point. However, the difference between them seems to be getting smaller. First it's an inch in your view, then it's a quarter-inch, then a half-inch, and then finally they go off the edge of the earth.

20:33
Here are the results of what I just showed you. This is the subjective height -- the height you saw of these guys at various points. And I want you to see that two things are true. One, the farther away they are, the smaller they look; and two, the fireman is always bigger than the fiddler. But watch what happens when we make some of them disappear. Right. At a very close distance, the fiddler looks taller than the fireman, but at a far distance their normal, their true, relations are preserved. As Plato said, what space is to size, time is to value. These are the results of the hard problem I gave you: 60 now or 50 in a month? And these are subjective values, and what you can see is, our two rules are preserved.

21:17
People always think more is better than less: 60 is always better than 50, and they always think now is better than later: the bars on this side are higher than the bars on this side. Watch what happens when we drop some out. Suddenly we have the dynamic inconsistency that puzzled us. We have the tendency for people to go for 50 dollars now over waiting a month, but not if that decision is far in the future. Notice something interesting that this implies -- namely, that when people get to the future, they will change their minds. That is, as that month 12 approaches, you will say, what was I thinking, waiting an extra month for 60 dollars? I'll take the 50 dollars now.

21:56
Well, the question with which I'd like to end is this: If we're so damn stupid, how did we get to the moon? Because I could go on for about two hours with evidence of people's inability to estimate odds and inability to estimate value.

22:11
The answer to this question, I think, is an answer you've already heard in some of the talks, and I dare say you will hear again: namely, that our brains were evolved for a very different world than the one in which we are living. They were evolved for a world in which people lived in very small groups, rarely met anybody who was terribly different from themselves, had rather short lives in which there were few choices and the highest priority was to eat and mate today.

22:36
Bernoulli's gift, Bernoulli's little formula, allows us, it tells us how we should think in a world for which nature never designed us. That explains why we are so bad at using it, but it also explains why it is so terribly important that we become good, fast. We are the only species on this planet that has ever held its own fate in its hands. We have no significant predators, we're the masters of our physical environment; the things that normally cause species to become extinct are no longer any threat to us. The only thing -- the only thing -- that can destroy us and doom us are our own decisions. If we're not here in 10,000 years, it's going to be because we could not take advantage of the gift given to us by a young Dutch fellow in 1738, because we underestimated the odds of our future pains and overestimated the value of our present pleasures.

23:37
Thank you. (Applause)

23:48
Chris Anderson: That was remarkable. We have time for some questions for Dan Gilbert. One and two.

23:56
Bill Lyell: Would you say that this mechanism is in part how terrorism actually works to frighten us, and is there some way that we could counteract that?

24:07
Dan Gilbert: I actually was consulting recently with the Department of Homeland Security, which generally believes that American security dollars should go to making borders safer. I tried to point out to them that terrorism was a name based on people's psychological reaction to a set of events, and that if they were concerned about terrorism they might ask what causes terror and how can we stop people from being terrified, rather than -- not rather than, but in addition to stopping the atrocities that we're all concerned about. Surely the kinds of play that at least American media give to -- and forgive me, but in raw numbers these are very tiny accidents. We already know, for example, in the United States, more people have died as a result of not taking airplanes -- because they were scared -- and driving on highways, than were killed in 9/11. OK? If I told you that there was a plague that was going to kill 15,000 Americans next year, you might be alarmed if you didn't find out it was the flu. These are small-scale accidents, and we should be wondering whether they should get the kind of play, the kind of coverage, that they do. Surely that causes people to overestimate the likelihood that they'll be hurt in these various ways, and gives power to the very people who want to frighten us.

25:16
CA: Dan, I'd like to hear more on this. So, you're saying that our response to terror is, I mean, it's a form of mental bug? Talk more about it.

25:23
DG: It's out-sized. I mean, look. If Australia disappears tomorrow, terror is probably the right response. That's an awful large lot of very nice people. On the other hand, when a bus blows up and 30 people are killed, more people than that were killed by not using their seatbelts in the same country. Is terror the right response?

25:44
CA: What causes the bug? Is it the drama of the event -- that it's so spectacular? Is it the fact that it's an intentional attack by, quote, outsiders? What is it?

25:53
DG: Yes. It's a number of things, and you hit on several of them. First, it's a human agent trying to kill us -- it's not a tree falling on us by accident. Second, these are enemies who may want to strike and hurt us again. People are being killed for no reason instead of good reason -- as if there's good reason, but sometimes people think there are. So there are a number of things that together make this seem like a fantastic event, but let's not play down the fact that newspapers sell when people see something in it they want to read. So there's a large role here played by the media, who want these things to be as spectacular as they possibly can.

26:28
CA: I mean, what would it take to persuade our culture to downplay it?

26:34
DG: Well, go to Israel. You know, go to Israel. And a mall blows up, and then everybody's unhappy about it, and an hour-and-a-half later -- at least when I was there, and I was 150 feet from the mall when it blew up -- I went back to my hotel and the wedding that was planned was still going on. And as the Israeli mother said, she said, "We never let them win by stopping weddings." I mean, this is a society that has learned -- and there are others too -- that has learned to live with a certain amount of terrorism and not be quite as upset by it, shall I say, as those of us who have not had many terror attacks.

27:04
CA: But is there a rational fear that actually, the reason we're frightened about this is because we think that the Big One is to come?

27:11
DG: Yes, of course. So, if we knew that this was the worst attack there would ever be, there might be more and more buses of 30 people -- we would probably not be nearly so frightened. I don't want to say -- please, I'm going to get quoted somewhere as saying, "Terrorism is fine and we shouldn't be so distressed." That's not my point at all. What I'm saying is that, surely, rationally, our distress about things that happen, about threats, should be roughly proportional to the size of those threats and threats to come. I think in the case of terrorism, it isn't. And many of the things we've heard about from our speakers today -- how many people do you know got up and said, Poverty! I can't believe what poverty is doing to us. People get up in the morning; they don't care about poverty. It's not making headlines, it's not making news, it's not flashy. There are no guns going off. I mean, if you had to solve one of these problems, Chris, which would you solve? Terrorism or poverty? (Laughter) (Applause) That's a tough one.

28:09
CA: There's no question. Poverty, by an order of magnitude, a huge order of magnitude, unless someone can show that there's, you know, terrorists with a nuke are really likely to come. The latest I've read, seen, thought is that it's incredibly hard for them to do that. If that turns out to be wrong, we all look silly, but with poverty it's a bit --

28:31
DG: Even if that were true, still more people die from poverty.

28:38
CA: We've evolved to get all excited about these dramatic attacks. Is that because in the past, in the ancient past, we just didn't understand things like disease and systems that cause poverty and so forth, and so it made no sense for us as a species to put any energy into worrying about those things? People died; so be it. But if you got attacked, that was something you could do something about. And so we evolved these responses. Is that what happened?

29:00
DG: Well, you know, the people who are most skeptical about leaping to evolutionary explanations for everything are the evolutionary psychologists themselves. My guess is that there's nothing quite that specific in our evolutionary past. But rather, if you're looking for an evolutionary explanation, you might say that most organisms are neo-phobic -- that is, they're a little scared of stuff that's new and different. And there's a good reason to be, because old stuff didn't eat you. Right? Any animal you see that you've seen before is less likely to be a predator than one that you've never seen before. So, you know, when a school bus is blown up and we've never seen this before, our general tendency is to orient towards that which is new and novel is activated. I don't think it's quite as specific a mechanism as the one you alluded to, but maybe a more fundamental one underlying it.

29:46
Jay Walker: You know, economists love to talk about the stupidity of people who buy lottery tickets. But I suspect you're making the exact same error you're accusing those people of, which is the error of value. I know, because I've interviewed about 1,000 lottery buyers over the years. It turns out that the value of buying a lottery ticket is not winning. That's what you think it is. All right? The average lottery buyer buys about 150 tickets a year, so the buyer knows full well that he or she is going to lose, and yet she buys 150 tickets a year. Why is that? It's not because she is stupid or he is stupid. It's because the anticipation of possibly winning releases serotonin in the brain, and actually provides a good feeling until the drawing indicates you've lost. Or, to put it another way, for the dollar investment, you can have a much better feeling than flushing the money down the toilet, which you cannot have a good feeling from. Now, economists tend to -- (Applause) -- economists tend to view the world through their own lenses, which is: this is just a bunch of stupid people. And as a result, many people look at economists as stupid people. And so fundamentally, the reason we got to the moon is, we didn't listen to the economists. Thank you very much. (Applause)

31:05
DG: Well, no, it's a great point. It remains to be seen whether the joy of anticipation is exactly equaled by the amount of disappointment after the lottery. Because remember, people who didn't buy tickets don't feel awful the next day either, even though they don't feel great during the drawing. I would disagree that people know they're not going to win. I think they think it's unlikely, but it could happen, which is why they prefer that to the flushing. But certainly I see your point: that there can be some utility to buying a lottery ticket other than winning. Now, I think there's many good reasons not to listen to economists. That isn't one of them, for me, but there's many others.

31:41
CA: Last question.

31:43
Aubrey de Grey: My name's Aubrey de Grey, from Cambridge. I work on the thing that kills more people than anything else kills -- I work on aging -- and I'm interested in doing something about it, as we'll all hear tomorrow. I very much resonate with what you're saying, because it seems to me that the problem with getting people interested in doing anything about aging is that by the time aging is about to kill you it looks like cancer or heart disease or whatever. Do you have any advice? (Laughter)

32:10
DG: For you or for them?

32:11
AdG: In persuading them.

32:12
DG: Ah, for you in persuading them. Well, it's notoriously difficult to get people to be farsighted. But one thing that psychologists have tried that seems to work is to get people to imagine the future more vividly. One of the problems with making decisions about the far future and the near future is that we imagine the near future much more vividly than the far future. To the extent that you can equalize the amount of detail that people put into the mental representations of near and far future, people begin to make decisions about the two in the same way. So, would you like to have an extra 100,000 dollars when you're 65 is a question that's very different than, imagine who you'll be when you're 65: will you be living, what will you look like, how much hair will you have, who will you be living with. Once we have all the details of that imaginary scenario, suddenly we feel like it might be important to save so that that guy has a little retirement money. But these are tricks around the margins. I think in general you're battling a very fundamental human tendency, which is to say, "I'm here today, and so now is more important than later."

33:13
CA: Dan, thank you. Members of the audience, that was a fantastic session. Thank you. (Applause)"

Watch Daniel Gilbert´s Ted talk on Why we make bad decisions:
https://www.ted.com/talks/dan_gilbert_why_we_make_bad_decisions?utm_campaign=tedspread&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=tedcomshare

E4.1.B.4_REF5_SCI A_Waltercio caldas_sem titulo_1997

PERCEIVED FORMS ARE HYPOTHESES THAT CORRESPOND TO EXPECTATIONS—THE LATTER REDUCE OUR ABILITY TO PERCEIVE REALITY. By defining forms (Gestalt) as hypotheses, they subject perception to Falsifiability. Our senses inform us in a way that is "always more random." We are never "sure," we are just not yet disappointed by our expectations. 
Lorenz adds the concept of Fulguration—the sudden interlocking of two independent systems to create a new one. This challenges the linear view of causality and reasoning, suggesting that truth often arrives as a structural realization (a sudden connection) rather than a logical deduction.
"Les hypothèses sont des formes; les formes sont des hypothèses [...]
Popper : Et cela nous amène à un nouveau problème, le problème de la forme. A mes yeux, la perception d’une forme est pour l’essentiel la même chose qu’une hypothèse. Lorsque je te vois et que je me dis : c’est Konrad qui est assis devant moi, cela correspond à une attente. Et la notion d’attente est de la plus haute importance pour moi. Je vois dans l’attente, l’attitude de l’animal qui anticipe sur ce qui va arriver, le début d’une hypothèse, l’amorce de la théorie. Par exemple, lorsque je vois là un siège, je m’attends à ce que l’on puisse s’y asseoir. C’est en quelque sorte la raison pour laquelle j’interprète une forme, la forme du siège, comme une hypothèse. [...]
II est bien plus significatif de dire que les formes sont des hypotèses. Elles le sont dans la mesure où elles représentent des attentes qui nous informent sur le monde extérieur, nous informent de façon toujours plus aléatoire et très souvent mal. 
La démarche n’est pas forcément claire dès le départ, il s’en faut de beaucoup. Ne t’est-il jamais arrivé ce qui m’arrive constamment ?: tu formules deux idées, que tu n’avais pas du tout reliées entre elles, et tu t’aperçois brusquement qu’elles sont liées de la façon la plus essentielle. On vit aussi cela parfois comme un Aha-Erlebnis, une révélation, la perception d’une forme : une forme restée cachée pendant des années. 
Lorenz : C’est tout à fait juste. Et c’est à mes yeux l’exemple type de la fulguration: que deux systèmes qui se sont développés jusqu’alors indépendamment l’un de l’autre s’imbriquent tout à coup l’un dans l’autre pour former un nouveau système doté de propriétés qui n’avaient jamais existé. Cela se produit naturellement dans la conception d’hypothèses intellectuelles et, en fait, il ne s’agit pas là d’une forme. C’est un type de fulguration on pourrait dire qu’il s’agit de deux formes dont la corrélation me devient brusquement évidente. 
Popper : Ensuite, on y voit une forme, mais ce n’en était pas une. 
Lorenz : Ce n’en était pas une auparavant. Là je suis entièrement d’accord."
(Karl Popper & Konrad Lorenz, L’avenir est ouvert, 1983)

Illustration: Waltercio caldas_sem titulo, 1997_resized

E4.1.C. Scientific Objectivity as Self-Psychoanalysis

E4.1.C.1. The Pre-Scientific Mind: The natural, intuitive human mind. 
Our initial relationship with knowledge is based on instinct, social bias, emotional conviction.

E4.1.C.1_REF1_PH

EL3.64. ON THE ENIGMA OF REASON "Why have we evolved with a capacity for reason? One answer might be because reason is a good way of getting at the truth, and truth is valuable for self-preservation. But reason is often fallible. It isn't on its own a reliable route to truth. Dan Sperber, who with Hugo Mercier, has researched this issue extensively, explores the question of why we have reason.
Many time we use reason for confirming our biases; rationalizing our intuitions and beliefs rather than seeking the truth. Is this because 1. We are just bad at reasoning, 2. intuition most of the time serves us well, so that overall our built-in biases have been an evolutionary advantage in the state of nature (c.f. Daniel Kanheman), 3. or reason has evolved as a capacity which is not directly for getting at the truth, but as a mechanism to engage in social interaction - as a gateway and a condition for getting collectively at the truth.
The function of reasoning is not essentially to enhance individual capacity, but to play a role in social interaction. We need the pieces of information that others have but they have their own agenda and use this information to influence us - so one has to use reason in social interactions. Reasoning allows us to go beyond the bottleneck of unjustified trust in communication. Reason will eliminate some errors but reason is not for getting at the truth - reasoning is for eliminating communication bottlenecks. Groups tend to perform much better than individuals at solving intellectual problems - if they challenge each others' views. But a group sharing the same views will not necessarily discover the truth: they may polarize towards an erroneous conclusion."
(Dan Sperber on the Enigma of Reason, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: https://philosophybites.com/podcast/dan-sperber-on-the-enigma-of-reasonhthttp-www-dan-sperber-fr/

E4.1.C.1_REF2_PH

EL3.75. "WHAT IS A CONSPIRACY THEORY? WHY DOES ANYBODY BELIEVE A CONSPIRACY THEORY?
A lack of access to information is only part of the explanation and would explain the belief of some very isolated people. But what about the information-rich people that still believe? The problem is what they do with the information that they have. Conspiracy theories also have an emotional content that gives a sense to one that you have discovered a secret.
Propensity to believe in conspiracy theory might be a reflection of our character and thinking style and would advocate in favor of localists (who say a genuine character trait might only manifest itself in some situations) vs. globalists (who think that a genuine character trait has to manifest itself in all situations). There might be a conspiracy mentality that psychologists are starting to identify.
In all cases, you cannot reason someone who believes in a conspiracy theory out of their belief."
(Cassim Quassam on Conspiracy Theories, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: https://philosophybites.com/podcast/cassim-quassam-on-conspiracy-theories/

See the 3D maze of Pizzagate on Vimeo: https://vimeo.com/356196090

E4.1.C.1_REF3_PH

EL3.81. ON INTUITIONS ABOUT KNOWLEDGE "When we interact with each other we appreciate that other people know many things, and believe many things. But what's the difference and why does it matter?
We make intuitively continuous distinctions between knowing and thinking in natural conversation and those 2 verbs are among the 10 most used in most languages. Differently from a belief, knowledge has to latch you to a truth and you need to have good evidence for what you believe. However knowledge seems to be something distinct from having a true justified belief (which is traditionally the historical definition of truth). Bertrand Russell's example of a man deriving what time it is from looking at a clock which has stopped for 48h but that happens to show at this exact moment the exact time: does the man know what time it is form looking at the evidence of the clock? Most people would say no. So what is the inner check-list for determining knowledge? Knowledge could be based on a true justified belief that has not been arrived at without relying on any false belief? Still you can think of examples that invalidate that definition: a traveler dying of thirst in the desert sees water shimmering on the horizon. He is hallucinating at the time but runs to the mirage and by chance finds water under a rock there. Did he know there was water in the first place or did he only believe it?
Today some philosophers argue that the project of deriving knowledge from true beliefs + other factors is just bound to fail. Maybe it is knowledge which is the primitive factor and belief the derivative notion and you cannot define knowledge in terms of beliefs?
We can discover contradiction in our intuition about knowledge by changing scenarios: In the case of the Russell's clock example, by remembering that sometimes clocks are broken and the man has not looked long enough at the clock to be sure this one to tell wether or not this might be the case - we would induce the answer that the man did not know the time for sure, whereas if we omit that caveat and just say he looked up the time on the clock, most people will say he knows what time it is. Maybe we will be able to always discover a scientific explanation to categorize variations still as truth. In he theory of contextualism, the relationship that is picked up by the verb to know changes  in different conversational context. If the possibility of error is mentioned for example, the verb to know would mean something much stronger than when no doubt is raised. Alternatively, you could stick to the definition of invariant definition of knowledge where it does pick up always the same relationship, but say that our perception of that relationship got skewed when mention is made of the possibility of error. This is reflected in the egocentric bias, when evaluating what someone else thinks : if you have a more elaborate way of thinking than they do, you will be inclined to misread their way of thinking about the problem. Our natural mind reading equipment might be starting to misfire as soon as we mention the possibility of error."
(Jennifer Nagel on Intuitions about Knowledge, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: https://philosophybites.com/podcast/jennifer-nagel-on-intuitions-about-knoweldge/

E4.1.C.1_REF4_LIT

EL3.3. WE MOVE FROM DATA TO INFORMATION TO KNOWLEDGE TO WISDOM "In all of our education, whether it’s in institutions or not, in homes or streets or wherever, whether it’s scholarly or whether it’s experiential, there is a kind of a progression. We move from data to information to knowledge to wisdom. And separating one from the other, being able to distinguish among and between them, that is, knowing the limitations and the danger of exercising one without the others, while respecting each category of intelligence, is generally what serious education is about. And if we agree that purposeful progression exists, then you will see… that it’s easy, and it’s seductive, to assume that data is really knowledge. Or that information is, indeed, wisdom. Or that knowledge can exist without data. And how easy, and how effortlessly, one can parade and disguise itself as another. And how quickly we can forget that wisdom without knowledge, wisdom without any data, is just a hunch."
(Toni Morrison, The Source of Self-Regard: Selected Essays, Speeches, and Meditations, 1992)

E4.1.C.1_REF5_LIT

EL3.117. "MISTAKES ARE AT THE VERY BASE OF HUMAN THOUGHT, embedded there, feeding the structure like root nodules. If we were not provided with the knack of being wrong, we could never get anything useful done. We think our way along by choosing between right and wrong alternatives, and the wrong choices have to be made as frequently as the right ones. We get along in life this way. We are built to make mistakes, coded for error.

We learn, as we say, by “trial and error.” Why do we always say that? Why not “trial and rightness” or “trial and triumph”? The old phrase puts it that way because that is, in real life, the way it is done. [...]

Whenever new kinds of thinking are about to be accomplished, or new varieties of music, there has to be an argument beforehand. With two sides debating in the same mind, haranguing, there is an amiable understanding that one is right and the other wrong. Sooner or later the thing is settled, but there can be no action at all if there are not the two sides, and the argument. The hope is in the faculty of wrongness, the tendency toward error. The capacity to leap across mountains of information to land lightly on the wrong side represents the highest of human endowments. [...]

We are at our human finest, dancing with our minds, when there are more choices than two. Sometimes there are ten, even twenty different ways to go, all but one bound to be wrong, and the richness of selection in such situations can lift us onto totally new ground. This process is called exploration and is based on human fallibility. If we had only a single center in our brains, capable of responding only when a correct decision was to be made, instead of the jumble of different, credulous, easily conned clusters of neurons that provide for being flung off into blind alleys, up trees, down dead ends, out into blue sky, along wrong turnings, around bends, we could only stay the way we are today, stuck fast. [...]

What we need, then, for moving ahead, is a set of wrong alternatives much longer and more interesting than the short list of mistaken courses that any of us can think up right now… If it is a big enough mistake, we could find ourselves on a new level, stunned, out in the clear, ready to move again."
(Lewis Thomas, The Medusa and the Snail, 1979)

E4.1.C.1_REF6_PH

EL3.67.A.1.1. NIHILISM
"Is truth the goal of all inquiry? Must you always aim your inquiry at something? 
Nietzsche undermines the concept of truth by seing behind it the will to power. He tells us "on truth and lie in an extra-moral sense" a fable: Human beings are clever animals who invented knowledge, which is not about how things really are, but a way of understanding the universe to support the continuing life of Humans. Knowledge is a form of adaptation to insure biological survival. Can we say Nietzsche's attack on truth is somehow incoherent because he offers us a model that we are expected to accept as objectively true? 
Is Nietzsche and the subsequent post-modernists enemies of hope? Because they undermine the two planks of the enlightenment: commitment to reason and the commitment to objective knowledge arising from disinterested inquiry - without those two things we are left with no model of any kind of progress? But isn't it a good thing not to have any model of progress? It does not prevent us to ask "Do we want things to be different?", and if so "What change we want to bring about, and how?" - isn't it healthy to have to work it out? Nietzsche wanted to live without illusions, which is no a barrier for change."
(Nihilism, In our times, BBC 4, 2000)

Listen to the program: https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00546yh

E4.1.C.1_REF6.1_PH

EL3.67.A.1.2. LA CONSCIENCE  NE S'OPPOSE PAS À L'INSTINCTIF "On doit encore ranger la plus grande partie de la pensée consciente parmi les activités instinctives, et ce jusque dans le cas de la pensée philosophique ; on doit ici refaire son éducation, ainsi qu’on l’a fait en ce qui concerne l’hérédité et l’« inné ». De même que l’acte de la naissance n’entre pas en considération dans l’ensemble du processus et du progrès de l’hérédité, la « conscience » ne s’oppose pas davantage de manière décisive à l’instinctif, — la plus grande part de la pensée consciente d’un philosophe est clandestinement guidée et poussée dans des voies déterminées par ses instincts. Derrière toute logique aussi et son apparente souveraineté de mouvement se trouvent des évaluations, pour parler plus clairement, des exigences physiologiques liées à la conservation d’une espèce déterminée de vie."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Par-delà bien et mal, 1886)

E4.1.C.1_REF7_PH BACHELARD USES THE ALCHEMIST TO ILLUSTRATE THE PRE-SCIENTIFIC MIND, WHERE TRUTH IS NOT OBJECTIVE BUT A PROJECTION OF "INTIMATE CONVICTION" AND "MORAL PURITY."
"Examinée au foyer de la conviction personnelle, la culture de l’alchimiste se révèle [...] comme une pensée clairement achevée qui reçoit, tout le long du cycle expérimental, des confirmations psychologiques bien révélatrices de l’intimité et de la solidité de ses symboles. En vérité, l’amour d’une Chimère est le plus fidèle des amours. Pour bien juger du caractère complet de la conviction de l’alchimiste, nous ne devons pas perdre de vue que la doctrine philosophique qui affirme la science comme essentiellement inachevée est d’inspiration moderne. Il est moderne aussi, ce type de pensée en attente, de pensée se développant en partant d’hypothèses longtemps tenues en suspicion et qui restent toujours révocables. Au contraire, dans les âges préscientifiques, une hypothèse s’appuie sur une conviction profonde : elle illustre un état d’âme. Ainsi, avec son échelle de symboles, l’alchimie est un memento pour un ordre de méditations intimes. Ce ne sont pas les choses et les substances qui sont mises à l’essai, ce sont des symboles psychologiques correspondant aux choses, ou mieux encore, les différents degrés de la symbolisation intime dont on veut éprouver la hiérarchie. Il semble en effet que l’alchimiste « symbolise » de tout son être, de toute son âme, avec son expérience du monde des objets. [...]
C’est plus que les biens terrestres que poursuivent ces rêveurs, c’est le bien de l’âme. Sans cette inversion de l'intérêt, on juge mal le sens et la profondeur de la mentalité alchimique. 
Dès lors, si l’action matérielle attendue venait à manquer, cet accident opératoire ne ruinerait pas la valeur psychologique de la tension qu’est cette attente. On n’hésiterait guère à négliger cette expérience matérielle malheureuse : les forces de l’espérance resteraient intactes car la vive conscience de l’espérance est déjà une réussite. Il n’en va naturellement plus de même pour l’esprit scientifique : pour lui, un échec matériel est aussitôt un échec intellectuel puisque l’empirisme scientifîque, même le plus modeste, se présente comme impliqué dans une contexture d’hypothèses rationnelles. L’expérience de Physique de la science moderne est un cas particulier d’une pensée générale, le moment particulier d’une méthode générale. Elle est libérée du besoin de la réussite personnelle dans la mesure, précisément, où elle a été vérifiée par la cité savante. Toute la science dans son intégralité n’a pas besoin d’être éprouvée par le savant. Mais qu’arrive-t-il quand l’expérience dément la théorie? On peut alors s’acharner à refaire l’expérience négative, on peut croire qu’elle n’est qu’une expérience manquée. Ce fut le cas pour Michelson qui reprit si souvent l’expérience qui devait, selon lui, montrer l’immobilité de l’éther. Mais enfin quand l’échec de Michelson est devenu indéniable, la science a dû modifier ses principes fondamentaux. Ainsi prit naissance la science relativiste. 
Qu’une expérience d’Alchimie ne réussisse pas, on en conclut tout simplement qu’on n’a pas mis en expérience la juste matière, les germes requis, ou même que les temps de la production ne sont pas encore arrivés. [...]
Mais il y a une façon encore plus intime d’interpréter l’échec matériel d’une expérience alchimique. C’est de mettre en doute la pureté morale de l’expérimentateur. Manquer à produire le phénomène attendu en s’appuyant sur les justes symboles, ce n’est pas un simple échec, c’est un déficit psychologique, c’est une faute morale. C’est le signe d’une méditation moins profonde, d’une lâche détente psychologique, d’une prière moins attentive et moins fervente. [...]
Comment l’alchimiste purifierait-il la matière sans purifier d’abord sa propre âme ! [...]
un cœur honnête, une âme blanche, animée de forces saines, réconciliant sa nature particulière et la nature universelle, trouvera naturellement la vérité. Il la trouvera dans la nature parce qu’il la sent en lui-même. La vérité du cœur est la vérité du Monde. Jamais les qualités d’abnégation, de probité, de patience, de méthode scrupuleuse, de travail acharné, n’ont été si intimement intégrées au métier que dans l’ère alchimique. Il semble que, de nos jours, l’homme de laboratoire puisse plus facilement se détacher de sa fonction. Il ne mêle plus sa vie sentimentale à sa vie scientifique. Son laboratoire n’est plus dans sa maison, dans son grenier, dans sa cave. [...]
Il est frappant que toutes les expériences alchimiques se laissent interpréter de deux manières, chimiquement et moralement. Mais alors une question surgit : Où est l’or? Dans la matière ou dans le cœur? Aussitôt, comment hésiter sur la valeur dominante de la culture alchimique? L’interprétation des écrivains qui dépeignent l’alchimiste à la recherche de la fortune est un non-sens psychologique. L’Alchimie est une culture intime. C’est dans l’intimité du sujet, dans l’expérience psychologiquement concrète qu’elle trouve la première leçon magique. Comprendre ensuite que la nature opère magiquement, c’est appliquer au monde l’expérience intime. Il faut passer par l’intermédiaire de la magie spirituelle ou l'être intime éprouvé sa propre ascension pour comprendre la valorisation active des substances primitivement impures et souillées. [...]
Par la suite, nous aurons bien des occasions de montrer que toute valorisation dans l’ordre de la connaissance objective doit donner lieu à une psychanalyse. Ce sera un des thèmes principaux de cet ouvrage. Pour l’instant, nous n’avons à retenir que le caractère direct et immédiat de cette valorisation. Elle est faite de l’adhésion passionnée à des idées premières qui ne trouvent dans le monde objectif que des prétextes. [...]"
(Gaston Bachelard, La Formation de l’esprit scientifique, 1938)


E4.1.C.2. The Epistemological Rupture.
Scientific objectivity is not a natural extension of experience but a traumatic break from it. It requires "intellectual repentance," the rejection of pragmatism/utility, and the discipline to think against one's own brain and sensations.

E4.1.C.2_REF1_PH KNOWLEDGE IS CONSTRUCTED “AGAINST” PRIOR KNOWLEDGE THROUGH “INTELLECTUAL REPENTANCE”.
"Quand on cherche les conditions psychologiques des progrès de la science, on arrive bientôt à cette conviction que c'est en termes d'obstacles qu'il faut poser le problème de la connaissance scientifique. Et il ne s'agit pas de considérer des obstacles externes, comme la complexité et la fugacité des phénomènes, ni d'incriminer la faiblesse des sens et de l'esprit humain : c'est dans l'acte même de connaître, intimement, qu'apparaissent, par une sorte de nécessité fonctionnelle, des lenteurs et des troubles. C'est là que nous montrerons des causes de stagnation et même de régression, c'est là que nous décèlerons des causes d'inertie que nous appellerons des obstacles épistémologiques. La connaissance du réel est une lumière qui projette toujours quelque part des ombres. Elle n'est jamais immédiate et pleine. Les révélations du réel sont toujours récurrentes. Le réel n'est jamais « ce qu'on pourrait croire » mais il est toujours ce qu'on aurait dû penser. La pensée empirique est claire, après coup, quand l'appareil des raisons a été mis au point. En revenant sur un passé d'erreurs, on trouve la vérité en un véritable repentir intellectuel. En fait, on connaît contre une connaissance antérieure, en détruisant des connaissances mal faites, en surmontant ce qui, dans l'esprit même, fait obstacle à la spiritualisation."
(Gaston Bachelard, La Formation de l’esprit scientifique, 1938)

E4.1.C.2_REF1.1_PH GASTON BACHELARD CONTRASTS “DISCURSIVE RATIONALIZATION” WITH THE “NEED FOR IMMEDIATE CERTAINTY” AND THE “DESIRE TO BE RIGHT” (CHARACTERISTIC OF THE PRE-SCIENTIFIC MIND).
"Sans la mise en forme rationnelle de l’expérience que détermine la position d’un problème, sans ce recours constant à une construction rationnelle bien explicite, on laissera se constituer une sorte d’inconscient de l’esprit scientifique qui demandera ensuite une lente et pénible psychanalyse pour être exorcisé. Comme le note Édouard Le Roy en une belle et dense formule: « La connaissance commune est inconscience de soi ». Mais cette inconscience peut saisir aussi des pensées scientifiques. Il faut alors réanimer la critique et ramener la connaissance au contact des conditions qui lui ont donné naissance, revenir sans cesse à cet « état naissant » qui est l’état de vigueur psychique, au moment même où la réponse est sortie du problème. Pour qu’on puisse vraiment parler de rationalisation de l’expérience, il ne suffit pas qu’on trouve une raison pour un fait. La raison est une activité psychologique essentiellement polytrope : elle veut retourner les problèmes, les varier, les greffer les uns sur les autres, les faire proliférer. Une expérience, pour être vraiment rationalisée, doit donc être insérée dans un jeu de raisons multiples. 
Une telle théorie de la rationalisation discursive et complexe a, contre elle, les convictions premières, le besoin d’immédiate certitude, le besoin de partir du certain et la douce croyance en la réciproque que la connaissance d’où l’on est parti était certaine. Aussi, quelle n’est pas notre mauvaise humeur quand on vient contredire nos connaissances élémentaires, quand on vient toucher ce trésor puéril gagné par nos efforts scolaires ! [...]
Il faut examiner ces « rationalisations » prématurées qui jouent, dans la formation de l’esprit préscientifique, le rôle joué par les sublimations de la libido dans la formation artistique. Elles sont la marque d’une volonté d’avoir raison en dehors de toute preuve explicite, d’échapper à la discussion en se référant à un fait qu’on croit ne pas interpréter alors même qu’on lui donne une valeur déclarative primordiale. [...]"
(Gaston Bachelard, La Formation de l’esprit scientifique, 1938)

E4.1.C.2_REF1.2_PH LA CONNAISSANCE GÉNÉRALE COMME OBSTACLE À LA CONNAISSANCE SCIENTIFIQUE [...]
Il y a [...] une jouissance intellectuelle dangereuse dans une généralisation hâtive et facile. Une psychanalyse de la connaissance objective doit examiner soigneusement toutes les séductions de la facilité. C’est à cette condition qu’on aboutira à une théorie de l’abstraction scientifique vraiment saine, vraiment dynamique. [...]
La pédagogie est là pour prouver l’inertie de la pensée qui vient d’avoir une satisfaction dans l’accord verbal des définitions. [...]
(Gaston Bachelard, La Formation de l’esprit scientifique, 1938)

E4.1.C.2_REF1.3_PH GASTON BACHELARD DENOUNCES UTILITARIAN INDUCTION (THE IDEA THAT EVERYTHING IN NATURE MUST SERVE A PURPOSE, AS IN THE THINKING OF VOLTAIRE OR NEWTON) AS AN “ABERRATION” AND AN OBSTACLE TO OBJECTIVITY.
"L’utilité donne elle-même une sorte d’induction très spéciale qu’on pourrait appeler l’induction utilitaire. Elle conduit à des généralisations exagérées. On peut partir alors d’un fait avéré, on peut même en trouver une extension heureuse. Mais la poussée utilitaire conduira presque infailliblement trop loin. Tout pragmatisme, par le seul fait qu’il est une pensée mutilée, s’exagère fatalement. L’homme ne sait pas limiter l’utile. L’utile, par sa valorisation, se capitalise sans mesure. [...]
Dans tous les phénomènes, on cherche l’utilité tout humaine, non seulement pour l’avantage positif qu’elle peut procurer, mais comme principe d’explication. Trouver une utilité, c’est trouver une raison. [...]
C’est à tous les détails d’un phénomène qu’on cherche à attribuer une utilité caractéristique. Si une utilité ne caractérise pas un trait particulier, il semble que ce caractère ne soit pas expliqué. Pour le rationalisme pragmatique, un caractère sans utilité est un irrationnel. Ainsi Voltaire voit bien clairement l’utilité du mouvement annuel de la Terre et de son mouvement diurne. Il n’y a que la période « de 25.920 années » correspondant au phénomène de la précession des équinoxes à laquelle il ne « découvre aucun usage sensible ». Il s’efforce de faire admettre cette inutilité, preuve que, pour l’esprit de son siècle, la justification par l’utile était la justification la plus naturelle. Malgré un léger scepticisme, on sent que pour Voltaire, le Ciel est utile à la Terre. « Loin que les comètes soient dangereuses, elles sont, selon [Newton] de nouveaux bienfaits du Créateur.,. [Newton] soupçonne que les vapeurs qui sortent d’elles sont attirées dans les orbites des planètes, et servent à renouveler l’humidité de ces globes terrestres qui diminue toujours. Il pense encore que la partie la plus élastique et la plus subtile de l’air que nous respirons nous vient des comètes… Il me semble que c’est deviner en sage, et que si c’est se tromper, c’est se tromper en grand homme » (1). [...]
Une psychanalyse de la connaissance objective doit rompre avec les considérations pragmatiques. 
Des systèmes entiers sont fondés sur les considérations utilitaires. Seule l’utilité est claire. Seule l’utilité explique. Les oeuvres de Robinet sont très caractéristiques à cet égard. « Je ne crains point d’avancer ici que, s’il y avait une seule inutilité réelle dans la Nature, il serait plus probable que le hasard eût présidé à sa formation, qu’il ne le serait qu’elle eût pour auteur une intelligence. Car il est plus singulier qu’une intelligence infinie agisse sans dessein, qu’il ne serait étonnant qu’un principe aveugle se conformât à l’ordre par pur accident ». Ainsi le vrai doit se doubler de l’utile. Le vrai sans fonction est un vrai mutilé. Et lorsqu’on a décelé l’utilité, on a trouvé la fonction réelle du vrai. Ces vues utilitaires sont cependant des aberrations. On a si souvent montré les dangers des explications finalistes que nous n’avons pas à souligner davantage l’importance de cet obstacle à une culture vraiment objective. Nous avons cru simplement devoir faire remarquer que cet obstacle était, au XIIIe siècle, particulièrement dangereux, car l’exploitation littéraire et philosophique de la science était encore à cette époque très facile ». [...]
Note:
(1) Voltaire, Physique, dans Œuvres complètes, Paris, 1828, t. 41, p. 381."
(Gaston Bachelard, La Formation de l’esprit scientifique, 1938)

E4.1.C.2_REF1.4_PH "PSYCHANALYSE DU RÉALISTE [...]
D’abord il est frappant de voir que « les matières précieuses » gardent longtemps dans les recherches préscientifiques une place privilégiée. Même au moment ou l’esprit critique se fait jour, il respecte la valeur qu’il attaque. Il suffit de parcourir les nombreuses pages consacrées aux pierres précieuses dans les traités de Matière médicale du XVIIIe siècle pour se convaincre de cette induration [durcissement des tissus organiques] des croyances anciennes. Nos démonstrations seraient plus faciles, mais elles auraient moins de sens, si nous remontions à des époques plus anciennes. Voyons donc la gêne de l’esprit préscientifique devant des préjugés grossiers. Même lorsque les croyances sont taxées de superstition, il faut y regarder à deux fois pour être sûr que l’auteur en est débarrassé. D’abord il éprouve le besoin de les noter; les passer sous silence serait sans doute décevoir le public, manquer à la continuité de la culture. Mais ensuite, ce qui est plus grave, l’auteur se donne très souvent pour tâche de les rectifier partiellement, effectuant ainsi la rationalisation sur une base absurde, comme nous l’avons déjà signalé en nous inspirant du psychanalyste Jones. Cette rationalisation partielle est à la connaissance empirique ce qu’est la sublimation des instincts à la production esthétique. Mais ici, la rationalisation nuit à la recherche purement rationnelle. Le mélange de pensée érudite et de pensée expérimentale est en effet un des plus grands obstacles à l’esprit scientifique. On ne peut pas compléter une expérience qu’on n’a pas soi-même recommencée dans son intégrité. On ne posséde pas un bien spirituel qu’on n’a pas acquis entièrement par un effort personnel. Le signe premier de la certitude scientifique, c’est qu’elle peut être revécue aussi bien dans son analyse que dans sa synthèse. [...]"
(Gaston Bachelard, La Formation de l’esprit scientifique, 1938)

E4.1.C.2_REF2_PH "OBJECTIVITÉ SCIENTIFIQUE ET PSYCHANALYSE  [...]
C’est encore par une polémique que nous ouvrirons notre exposé. A notre avis, il faut accepter, pour l’épistémologie, le postulat suivant: l’objet ne saurait être désigné comme un « objectif » immédiat; autrement dit, une marche vers l’objet n’est pas initialement objective. Il faut donc accepter une véritable rupture entre la connaissance sensible et la connaissance scientifique. Nous croyons en effet avoir montré, au cours de nos critiques, que les tendances normales de la naissance sensible, tout animées qu’elles sont de pragmatisme et de réalisme immédiats, ne déterminaient qu’un faux départ, qu’une fausse direction. En particulier, l’adhésion immédiate à un objet concret, saisi comme un bien, utilisé comme une valeur, engage trop fortement l’être sensible; c’est la satisfaction intime; ce n’est pas l’évidence rationnelle. Comme le dit  Baldwin en une formule d’une admirable densité : « C’est la stimulation, non la réponse qui reste le facteur de contrôle dans la construction des objets des sens ». Même sous la forme en apparence générale, même lorsque l’être repu et comblé croit voir venir l’heure de penser gratuitement, c’est encore sous forme de stimulation qu’il pose la première objectivité. Ce besoin de sentir l’objet, cet appétit des objets, cette curiosité indéterminée, ne correspondent encore - à aucun titre - à un état d’esprit scientifique. Si un paysage est un état d’âme romantique, un morceau d’or est un état d’âme avare, une lumière un état d’âme extatique. Un esprit préscientifique, au moment où vous tentez de l’embarrasser par des objections sur son réalisme initial, sur sa prétention à saisir, du premier geste, son objet, développe toujours la psychologie de cette stimulation qui est la vraie valeur de conviction, sans jamais en venir systématiquement à la psychologie du contrôle objectif. En fait, comme l’entrevoit Baldwin, ce contrôle résulte de prime abord d’une résistance. Par contrôle on entend en général « the checking, limiting, regulation of the constructive processes ». Mais avant le frein et la réprimande qui correspondent curieusement au concept anglais intraduisible de check, nous expliciterons la notion d’échec, impliquée elle aussi dans le même mot. C’est parce qu’il y a échec qu’il y freinage de la stimulation. Sans cet échec, la stimulation serait valeur pure. Elle serait ivresse; et par cet énorme succès subjectif qu’est une ivresse, elle serait la plus irrectifiable des erreurs objectives. Ainsi, d’après nous, l’homme qui aurait l’impression de ne se tromper jamais se tromperait toujours. [...]"
(Gaston Bachelard, La Formation de l’esprit scientifique, 1938)

E4.1.C.2_REF2.1_PH "Pour connaître toute cette affectivité de l’usage de la raison, il faut vivre une culture scientifique, il faut l’enseigner, il faut la défendre contre les ironies et les incompréhensions, il faut enfin, fort de son appui, venir provoquer les philosophes, les psychologues du sentiment intime, les pragmatistes et le réaliste! Alors, on peut juger de l’échelle des valeurs du sentiment rationnel: avoir raison des hommes par les hommes, doux succès ou se complait la volonté de puissance des hommes politiques! Mais avoir raison des hommes par les choses, voilà l’énorme succès où triomphe, non plus la volonté de puissance, mais la lumineuse volonté de raison, der Wille zur Vemunft.
Mais les choses ne donnent jamais raison à l’esprit en bloc et définitivement. II est d’ailleurs bien certain que cette satisfaction rationnelle doit être renouvelée pour donner un véritable dynamisme psychique. Par une curieuse accoutumance, l’apodictique vieilli prend goût d’assertorique, le fait de raison demeure sans l’appareil de raisons. De toute la mécanique de Newton, les hommes ont retenu qu’elle était l’étude d’une attraction, alors que, chez Newton même, l’attraction est une métaphore et non un fait. Ils ont oublié que la mécanique newtonienne assimilait apodictiquement la parabole du mouvement des projectiles sur la terre et l’ellipse des orbites planétaires, grâce à un appareil de raisons. II faut donc défendre contre l’usure les vérités rationnelles qui tendent toujours à perdre leur apodicticité et à tomber au rang des habitudes intellectuelles. Balzac disait que les célibataires remplacent les sentiments par les habitudes. De même, les professeurs remplacent les découvertes par des leçons. Contre cette indolence intellectuelle qui nous prive peu à peu de notre sens des nouveautés spirituelles, renseignement des découvertes le long de l’histoire scientifique est d’un grand secours. Pour apprendre aux élèves à inventer, il est bon de leur donner le sentiment qu’ils auraient pu découvrir. [...]
Au point d'évolution où se trouve la science contemporaine, le savant est placé devant la nécessité, toujours renaissante, du renoncement à sa propre intellectualité. Sans ce renoncement explicite, sans ce dépouillement de l’intuition, sans cet abandon des images favorites, la recherche objective ne tarde pas à perdre non seulement sa fécondité, mais le vecteur même de la découverte, I’élan inductif. Vivre et revivre l’instant d’objectivité, être sans cesse à l’état naissant de l’objectivation, cela réclame un effort constant de désubjectivation. [...]"
(Gaston Bachelard, La Formation de l’esprit scientifique, 1938)

E4.1.C.2_REF3_PH LA PENSEE SCIENTIFIQUE DOIT SE CONSTRUIRE "CONTRE" LE CERVEAU ET LES SENSATIONS, ET NECESSITE UNE "PSYCHANALYSE" POUR DEMONETISER LES VALEURS SENSIBLES ET SURVEILLER LE DYNAMISME PSYCHIQUE.

"Sans doute, aux heures mêmes où la science réclame les mutations psychologiques les plus décisives, les intérêts et les instincts manifestent une étrange stabilité. Les psychologues classiques triomphent alors facilement de nos vues aventureuses; ils nous rappellent, pleins d’amère sagesse, qu’il faut plus qu’une équation pour changer le coeur de l’homme et que ce n’est pas en quelques heures d’adorables extases intellectuelles qu’on réduit des instincts et qu’on suscite des fonctions organiques nouvelles. Malgré ces critiques, nous persistons à croire que la pensée scientifíque, sous la forme exclusive où la vivent certaines âmes, est psychologiquement formative. Comme le fait observer M. Julien Pacotte en des pages pénétrantes, « dans l’évolution biologique, la subite orientation du vivant vers le milieu pour l’organiser indépendamment de son corps est un événement incomparable… La technique prolonge la biologie ». Mais voici que la pensée abstraite et mathématique prolonge la technique. Voici que la pensée scientifique réforme la pensée phénoménologique. La science contemporaine est de plus en plus une réflexion sur la réflexion. Pour montrer le caractère révolutionnaire de l’évolution biologique en les étudiant sous le seul point de vue des relations de l’interne à l’externe: on verrait qu’au fur et à mesure de l’évolution, comme l’a fort bien montré M. Bergson, le réflexe immédiat et local se complique peu à peu, il s’étend dans l’espace, il se suspend dans le temps. L’être vivant se perfectionne dans la mesure où il peut relier son point de vie, fait d’un instant et d’un centre, à des durées et à des espaces plus grands. L’homme est homme parce que son comportement objectif n’est ni immédiat ni local. La prévoyance est une première forme de la prévision scientifique. Mais enfin, jusqu’à la science contemporaine, il s’agissait de prévoir le loin en fonction du près, la sensation précise en fonction de la sensation grossière; la pensée objective se développait quand même au contact du monde des sensations. Or, il semble bien qu’avec le vingtième siècle commence une pensée scientifique contre les sensations et qu’on doive construire une théorie de l’objectif contre l’objet. Jadis, la réflexion résistait au premier réflexe. La pensée scientifique moderne réclame qu’on résiste à la première réflexion. C’est donc tout l’usage du cerveau qui est mis en question. Désormais le cerveau n’est plus absolument l’instrument adéquat de la pensée scientifique, autant dire que le cerveau est l’obstacle à la pensée scientifique. II est un obstacle en ce sens qu’il est un coordonnateur de gestes et d’appétits. II faut penser contre le cerveau. 
Dès lors une psychanalyse de l’esprit scientifique prend tout son sens: le passé intellectuel, comme le passé affectif, doit être connu comme tel, comme un passé. Les lignes d’inférence qui conduisent à des idées scientifiques doivent être dessinées en partant de leur origine effective; le dynamisme psychique qui les parcourt doit être surveillé; toutes les valeurs sensibles doivent être démonétisées."
(Gaston Bachelard, La Formation de l’esprit scientifique, 1938)

E4.1.C.2_REF4_PH

EL3.151. "INVERSION - A LOT OF ADVANTAGES CAN BE GAINED SIMPLY BY AVOIDING THE STANDARD PATHS TO FAILURE.

Inversion is not the way we are taught to think. We are taught to identify what we want and explore things that will move us closer to our objective. However, by identifying and avoiding things that will ensure we don’t get what we want, we dramatically increase our odds of success.

Often, we get so fixated on solving a problem in a particular way that we miss simpler, more elegant solutions. Inversion forces us to consider the opposite side of the equation. Instead of asking, “How do I solve this problem?” inversion asks, “What would guarantee failure?”

Instead of asking, “How can I achieve this goal?” it asks, “What is preventing me from achieving it?” By inverting the question, we can gain insights that our normal thought patterns might miss.

The next time you find yourself struggling, try inverting your thinking. Ask yourself how you could guarantee failure. The answers may surprise you and open up new avenues for possible solutions."
(Shane Parrish, The Great Mental Models v1: General Thinking Tools)

E4.1.C.2_REF5_PH DANS UN MANIFESTE POUR LA DISCIPLINE MENTALE REQUISE PAR LA SCIENCE, BACHELARD PRONE UNE RUPTURE ACTIVE AVEC L'ORGUEIL DE LA CERTITUDE ET LES INTUITIONS.
"Rompons, ensemble, avec l’orgueil des certitudes générales, avec la cupidité des certitudes particulières. Préparons-nous mutuellement à cet ascétisme intellectuel qui éteint toutes les intuitions, qui ralentit tous les préludes, qui se défend contre les pressentiments intellectuels. Et murmurons à notre tour, tout entier à la vie intellectuelle: erreur, tu n’es pas un mal. Comme le dit fort bien M. Enriques: « Réduire l’erreur à une distraction de l’esprit fatigué, c’est ne considérer que le cas du comptable qui aligne des chiffres. Le champ à explorer est bien plus vaste, lorsqu’il s’agit d’un véritable travail intellectuel ». C’est alors qu’on accède à l’erreur positive, à l’erreur normale, à l’erreur utile; guidé par une doctrine des erreurs normales, on apprendra à distinguer, comme le dit encore M. Enriques, « les fautes auxquelles il convient de chercher une raison de celles qui, à proprement parler, ne sont aucun effort de pensée, par des bluffeurs qui comptent sur la chance pour deviner du coup, dans ce dernier cas l’entendement n’y est pour rien ». Le long d’une ligne d’objectivité, il faut donc disposer la série des erreurs communes et normales. [...]"
(Gaston Bachelard, La Formation de l’esprit scientifique, 1938)

E4.1.C.2_REF6_PH “TRUTH WILL HAVE NO GODS BEFORE IT.—The belief in truth begins with the doubt of all truths in which one has previously believed.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 20, 1878)

E4.1.C.3. The Constructed Truth: Social, Instrumental, and Mathematical.
Objectivity is a social and instrumental construction. It relies on "harmonizing precisions," mathematical proofs, simulations, and the collective control of the "city of scientists."

E4.1.C.3_REF1_PH SCIENTIFIC OBJECTIVITY IS NOT AN IMMEDIATE PERCEPTION BUT A SOCIAL AND INSTRUMENTAL ACHIEVEMENT THAT REQUIRES A BREAK WITH INITIAL INTUITION.
"Pour être bien sûr que la stimulation n’est plus à la base de notre objectivation, pour être bien sûr que le contrôle objectif est une réforme plutôt qu’un écho, il faut en venir au contrôle social. Dès lors, dût-on nous accuser de cercle vicieux, nous proposons de fonder l’objectivité sur le comportement d’autrui, ou encore, pour avouer tout de suite le tour paradoxal de notre pensée, nous prétendons choisir l’œil d’autrui toujours l’œil d’autrui - pour voir la forme - la forme heureusement abstraite - du phénomène objectif : Dis-moi ce que tu vois et je te dirai ce que c’est. Seul ce circuit, en apparence insensé, peut nous donner quelque sécurité que nous avons fait complètement abstraction de nos visions premières. Ah ! Sans doute nous savons bien tout ce que nous allons perdre! D’un seul coup, c’est tout un univers qui est décoloré, c’est tout notre repas qui est désodorisé, tout notre élan psychique naturel qui est rompu, retourné, méconnu, découragé. Nous avions tant besoin d’être tout entiers dans notre vision du monde! Mais c’est précisément ce besoin qu’il faut vaincre. Allons! Ce n’est pas en pleine lumière, c’est au bord de l’ombre que le rayon, en se diffractant, nous confie ses secrets. Il faut d’ailleurs remarquer que toute doctrine de l’objectivité en vient toujours à soumettre la connaissance de l’objet au contrôle d’autrui. Mais d’habitude, on attend que la construction objective réalisée par un esprit solitaire soit achevée, pour la juger dans son aspect final. On laisse donc l’esprit solitaire à son travail, sans surveiller ni la cohésion de 	ses matériaux ni la cohérence de ses devis. Nous proposons au contraire un doute préalable qui touche à la fois les faits et leurs liaisons, l’expérience et la logique. Si notre thèse paraît artificielle et inutile, c’est que l’on ne se rend pas compte que la science moderne travaille sur des matériaux expérimentaux et avec des cadres logiques socialisés de longue date, par conséquent déjà contrôlés. Mais pour nous qui voulons déterminer les conditions primitives de la connaissance objective, il faut bien que nous étudions l’esprit dans le moment où, de lui-même, dans la solitude, devant la nature massive, il prétend désigner son objet. En retraçant les débuts de la science électrique, nous croyons avoir fait la preuve que cette désignation première était fausse. Il suffit aussi d’observer un jeune expérimentateur, dans son effort pour préciser sans guide une expérience, pour reconnaître que la première expérience exigeante est une expérience qui « rate ». Toute mesure précise est une mesure préparée. L’ordre de précision croissante est un ordre d’instrumentalisation croissante, donc de socialisation croissante. Landry disait: « Déplacer d’un centimètre un objet posé sur une table est chose simple; le déplacer d’un millimètre exige une mise en jeu complexe de muscles antagonistes et entraîne une fatigue plus grande ». Précisément cette dernière mesure fine réclame le freinage de la stimulation, on la conquiert après des échecs, dans cette objectivité discursive dont nous essayons de dégager les principes. Mais ce déplacement d’un millimètre d’un objet sur une table n’est pas encore une opération scientifique. L’opération scientifique commence à la décimale suivante. Pour déplacer un objet d’un dixième de millimètre, il faut un appareil, donc un corps de métiers. Si l’on accède enfin aux décimales suivantes, si l’on prétend par exemple trouver la largeur d’une frange d’interférence et déterminer, par les mesures connexes, la longueur d’onde d’une radiation, alors il faut non seulement des appareils et des corps de métiers, mais encore une théorie et par conséquent toute une Académie des Sciences. L’instrument de mesure fournit toujours par être une théorie et il faut comprendre que le microscope est un prolongement de l’esprit plutôt que de l’oeil. Ainsi la précision discursive et sociale fait éclater les insuffisances intuitives et personnelles. Plus une mesure est fine, plus elle est indirecte. La science du solitaire est qualitative. La science socialisée est quantitative. La dualité Univers et Esprit, quand on l’examine au niveau d’un effort de connaissance personnelle, apparaît comme la dualité du phénomène mal préparé et de la sensation non rectifiée. La même dualité fondamentale, quand on l’examine au niveau d’un effort de connaissance scientifique, apparaît comme la dualité de l’appareil et de la théorie, dualité non plus en opposition mais en réciproques."
(Gaston Bachelard, La Formation de l’esprit scientifique, 1938)

E4.1.C.3_REF2_PH. GASTON BACHELARD MONTRE QUE L'OBJECTIVITE NE S'OBTIENT PAS PAR UNE APPLICATION AVEUGLE DE CALCULS, MAIS PAR UNE CONSCIENCE CRITIQUE DES MARGES D'ERREUR ET UNE "HARMONISATION DES PRECISIONS".
"Mais voyons l’esprit préscientifique se précipiter au réel et s’affirmer dans des précisions exceptionnelles. On peut faire ces observations soit dans l’expérience pédagogique quotidienne, soit dans l’histoire scientifique, soit dans la pratique de certaines sciences naissantes. 
Les problèmes de physique au baccalauréat donneraient une mine inépuisable d’exemples de cette précision mal fondée. La plupart des applications numériques sont conduites sans souci du problème d’erreurs. Il suffit d’une division qui se « fait mal », de calculs où l’on « ne trouve pas juste », pour affoler le candidat. Il s’acharne à des divisions interminables, dans l’espérance d’un résultat exact. S’il s’arrête, il croit que le mérite de la solution se mesure au nombre des décimales indiquées. Il ne réfléchit pas qu’une précision sur un résultat, quand elle dépasse la précision sur les données expérimentales, est très exactement la détermination du néant. Les décimales du calcul n’appartiennent pas à l’objet. Dès qu’interferent deux disciplines, comme la discipline des mathématiques et la discipline de la physique, on peut être à peu près sûr que les élèves n’harmoniseront pas les deux « précisions ». Ainsi, j’ai souvent donné, en vue de l’éducation des saines approximations, le simple problème suivant: calculer centimètre près le rayon moyen d’un chêne de 150 centimètres de circonférence. La grande majorité de la classe utilisait pour le calcul la valeur stéréotypée du nombre π= 3,1416, ce qui s’éloigne manifestement de la précision possible. Dans le même ordre d’idées, j’ai montré ailleurs, en commentant une page lumineuse de Borel, la désharmonie des précisions qui veut qu’on paie à Paris un terrain à bâtir au centime près, alors qu’on le mesure, tout au plus, au décimètre carré près et que le prix d’un décimètre carré affecte le chiffre des francs. Cette pratique rappelle la plaisanterie de Dulong qui disait d’un expérimentateur: il est sûr du troisième chiffre après la virgule, c’est sur le premier qu’il hésite. [...]"
(Gaston Bachelard, La Formation de l’esprit scientifique, 1938)

E4.1.C.3_REF3_PH A MATHEMATICAL TRUTH IS ONE THAT IS (I) COMPLETELY GENERAL (WITHOUT EXCEPTION) AND (II) NECESSARILY TRUE (RAMSEY). Contrairement aux maths, la physique est une lutte contre l'erreur et les obstacles internes.
"La croissance de l’esprit mathématique est bien différente de la croissance de l’esprit scientifique dans son effort pour comprendre les phénomènes physiques. En fait, l’histoire des mathématiques est une merveille de régularité. Elle connaît des périodes d’arrêt. Elle ne connaît pas des périodes d’erreurs. [...]"
(Gaston Bachelard, La Formation de l’esprit scientifique, 1938)

E4.1.C.3_REF4_PH THE RESISTANCE TO NEWTON'S MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS BY HIS CONTEMPORARIES ILLUSTRATES THE "EPISTEMOLOGICAL OBSTACLE" OF REFUSING ABSTRACTION.
"Le simple thème de la facilité ou de la difficulté des études est beaucoup plus important qu’on ne croit. Ce n’est pas là en particulier un caractère secondaire. Au contraire, du point de vue le psychologique, où nous nous plaçons dans cet ouvrage, la difficulté d’une pensée est un caractère primordial. C’est cette difficulté qui se traduit en de véritables oppressions physiologiques et qui charge d’affectivité la culture scientifique. C’est elle qui peut pousser Marat, dans sa période de douceur, alors qu’il fait profession de sensibilité et de courtoisie, à accuser Newton de courir après des chimères et de s’épuiser en fictions ridicules. Par contre, c’est cette même difficulté qui, par une ambivalence caractéristique, attire les esprits vigoureux. Enfin, sur le seul thème de la facilité relative, on peut montrer que la connaissance objective a subi une inversion en passant de l’ère préscientifique à l’ère scientifique. [...]
C’est précisément sous le rapport de la simplicité essentielle que le Père Castel juge et condamne la science newtonienne. Il constate qu’avec Newton, l’ordre des difficultés pédagogiques des sciences mathématiques et physiques vient d’être inversé, puisqu’il faut savoir le calcul intégral pour comprendre le mouvement des astres et les phénomènes de la lumière. Il voit dans cette inversion une anomalie à rectifier. [...]
Contre le premier effort d’information mathématique de la Physique, tel que l’effectue Newton, on présente donc, comme une objection préalable, le reproche d’abstraction. On donnera des compliments au Newton mathématicien pour mieux accabler Newton physicien : « Le système que [Newton] donne dans son troisième livre [des Principes] pour un système de Physique est réellement tout mathématique. Ce qui lui assure incontestablement le nom le Physico-mathématique : restant à savoir si un système vraiment Physico-mathématique peut être regardé comme un vrai système de Physique ». 
Ce n’est naturellement pas une critique isolée. Elle est plutôt un leitmotiv au XVIIIe siècle. Il y a alors une réelle volonté d'écarter les mathématiques de la Physique. Pour bien des auteurs, les mathématiques n’expliquent en rien les phénomènes. De Marivetz écrit tranquillement, sans plus de commentaires : « Cette phrase, calculer un phénomène, est très impropre; elle a été introduite en Physique par ceux qui savent mieux calculer qu’expliquer ». [...]"
(Gaston Bachelard, La Formation de l’esprit scientifique, 1938)

E4.1.C.3_REF5_PH

EL3.9. ON THE DEMARCATION PROBLEM "How do you tell science from non-science? Karl Popper thought that the falsifiability of a hypothesis was the best indicator. Massimo Pigliucci is not so sure about this. Science is one of those fields that has no necessary and sufficient conditions to define it. We have to proceed in approximation forming clusters of family resemblance to classify what is science and what is pseudo-science. Even when a science is subject to the test of falsifiability, the experiment might go wrong because of ancillary hypotheses went wrong. That is why scientist may keep alive a theory for a while even after the first falsifiability tests proved it wrong. We could think of classifying science vs. pseudo-sciences as mapping them on a three dimensional graph against: 
1. the sophistication of the theory;
2. the amount of empirical evidence and 
3. timing - is the theory holding out in view of better theories that may have come to replace it (what was science yesterday may not be anymore. Ex: alchemy)."
(Massimo Pigliucci on the Demarcation Problem, Phylosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: http://philosophybites.com/2015/09/massimo-pigliucci-on-the-demarcation-problem.html

E4.1.C.3_REF6_SCI

EL3.15. SIMULATIONS AS A THIRD WAY OF ESTABLISHING SCIENTIFIC TRUTH ARE HERE TO STAY "A third, modern way of testing and establishing scientific truth—in addition to theory and experiment—is via simulations, the use of (often large) computers to mimic nature. It is a synthetic universe in a computer. One states an equation (or several) describing the physical system being studied, programs it into a computer, and marches the system forward in space and time. If all of the relevant physical laws are faithfully captured, then one ends up with an emulation—a perfect, The Matrix–like replication of the physical world in virtual reality. [...]
Simulations as a third way of establishing scientific truth are here to stay. The challenge is for the astrophysical community to wield them as transparent, reproducible tools, thereby placing them on an equally credible footing with theory and experiment."
(Kevin Heng, American Scientist, May-June 2014)

E4.1.C.3_REF7_SCI

EL3.161. “THE POINT OF PROVING SOMETHING AGAIN AND AGAIN
Mathematicians aim to expand what we know. As such, they spend most of their time thinking about how to prove new statements. So once they turn a conjecture into a theorem, you’d expect them to move on to a new problem. Their job, after all, is to keep adding new truths to the list.

But the value of a proof isn’t just in moving a new statement to the “known” column. Mathematicians want to understand the “why” as deeply as they can. It’s possible to convince a reader that each step in a proof follows logically from the previous one, even if the reader doesn’t fully understand the deep mathematical connections at play. Reviewing such a proof, you’d miss out on the intangible wash of sudden understanding that gets mathematicians to the chalkboard each morning. When they talk about a “beautiful” proof, they mean one that sates their peculiar thirst for genuine comprehension.

And so, even after something’s been proved, mathematicians will often seek alternative routes to the same truth, especially if they find the existing path unsatisfying or inelegant. Often a re-proof will illuminate its conclusion in ways that mathematicians previously missed. And sometimes in the course of constructing a second or third or fourth proof, a mathematician will invent new tricks that lead to unrelated and surprising discoveries. The history of math is full of examples where new proofs of already-proved statements can be credited with finally moving something into the “understood” column.

The virtues that make one proof better than another are deeply subjective and human. It’s because of these aesthetic values that the field is as often compared to the arts as it is to the sciences. To a mathematician, a proof is a symphony, a work of art concerned not only with the final note, but with the revealing journey one must take to arrive there.

What’s New and Noteworthy

Unsurprisingly, the most re-proved theorems in math are often the most famous, and the oldest. And few mathematical obsessions are older or more famous than prime numbers. The primes are especially concentrated toward the low end of the number line — there are 15 primes between zero and 50, but only four between 10,000 and 10,050. The prime number theorem is an equation that describes this distribution. Two mathematicians independently proved it in 1896. But over a century later, new proofs continue to appear. There are many reasons that’s the case: It’s a fundamental theorem; many other theorems rely on it; and it’s a nice way to keep a number theorist’s proof chops honed.

A common source of discomfort mathematicians feel about proofs is the involvement of computers. Modern machines can carry out tedious computational tasks at a scale beyond any mathematician’s ability, but the proofs they produce often lack whatever ineffable qualities their human counterparts prize. Thomas Hales’ 1998

computer-based proof

of the Kepler conjecture (a question about how many spheres you can cram into a box) was so controversial that he had to spend six years coding every step and feeding it into a formal verification program to convince everyone it was valid. And mathematicians continue to eagerly await

a pencil-and-paper proof of the four-color theorem (about whether it’s possible to color countries on a map with four or fewer colors, so that no adjacent countries have the same color) — even though Wolfgang Haken proved it half a century ago with the help of 1,000 hours of computer time.”
(Joseph Howlett, Quanta Magazine, October 6, 2025)

E4.1.C.3_REF8_SCI

EL3.9.A. "« KNOWLEDGE » MERELY DENOTES A PARTICULAR KIND OF INFORMATION, WHICH HAS THE CAPACITY TO PERPETUATE ITSELF AND STAY EMBODIED IN PHYSICAL SYSTEMS — in this case by encoding some facts about the environment… Knowledge is the key to resilience… In fact, knowledge is the most resilient stuff that can exist in our universe. [...]
There are no absolute sources of certain truth: any good solution to a problem may also contain some errors. This principle is based on fallibilism, a pillar of Popper’s explanation of rational thinking. Fallibilism makes progress feasible because it allows for further criticism to occur in the future, even when at present we seem to be content with whatever solution we have found. It leaves space for creating ever-improving theories, stories, works of art, and music; it also tells us that errors are extremely interesting things to look for. Whenever we try to make progress, we should hope to find more of them, as fast as possible. [...]
[Drawing on the example of Neptune and the neutrino — both discovered not by direct observation of the previously unseen planet or particle but by observing curious contradictions in the surrounding system and deducing from them that something in the set of assumptions about what the system is and how it works must be revised. She writes (Maria Popova):]
As always happens with contradictions, something in the assumptions has to give. […]
Declaring something impossible leads to more things being possible."
(Chiara Marletto, The Science of Can and Can’t: A Physicist’s Journey through the Land of Counterfactuals)  

E4.1.C.3_REF9_PH

EL3.4.C. "WHAT WE FIRMLY BELIEVE, IF IT IS TRUE, IS CALLED KNOWLEDGE, provided it is either intuitive or inferred (logically or psychologically) from intuitive knowledge from which it follows logically. What we firmly believe, if it is not true, is called error. What we firmly believe, if it is neither knowledge nor error, and also what we believe hesitatingly, because it is, or is derived from, something which has not the highest degree of self-evidence, may be called probable opinion. Thus the greater part of what would commonly pass as knowledge is more or less probable opinion.
         In regard to probable opinion, we can derive great assistance from coherence, which we rejected as the definition of truth, but may often use as a criterion. A body of individually probable opinions, if they are mutually coherent, become more probable than any one of them would be individually. It is in this way that many scientific hypotheses acquire their probability. They fit into a coherent system of probable opinions, and thus become more probable than they would be in isolation."
(Bertrand Russell, The Problems of Philosophy, 1912)

E4.1.C.3_REF10_SCI

EL3.159. “OPPONENTS OF EVOLUTION WANT TO MAKE A PLACE FOR CREATIONISM BY TEARING DOWN REAL SCIENCE, BUT THEIR ARGUMENTS DON'T HOLD UP. THEY SAY THAT EVOLUTION IS ONLY A THEORY. IT IS NOT A FACT OR A SCIENTIFIC LAW.
Many people learned in elementary school that a theory falls in the middle of a hierarchy of certainty--above a mere hypothesis but below a law. Scientists do not use the terms that way, however. According to the National Academy of Sciences (NAS), a scientific theory is "a well-substantiated explanation of some aspect of the
natural world that can incorporate facts, laws, inferences, and tested hypotheses." No amount of validation changes a theory into a law, which is a descriptive generalization about nature. So when scientists talk about the theory of evolution--or the atomic theory or the theory of relativity, for that matter--they are not expressing reservations about its truth.
In addition to the theory of evolution, meaning the idea of descent with modification, one may also speak of the fact of evolution. The NAS defines a fact as "an observation that has been repeatedly confirmed and for all practical purposes is accepted as 'true.'" The fossil record and abundant other evidence testify that organisms have evolved through time. Although no one observed those transformations, the indirect evidence is clear, unambiguous and compelling.
All sciences frequently rely on indirect evidence. Physicists cannot see subatomic particles directly, for instance, so they verify their existence by watching for telltale tracks that the particles leave in cloud chambers. The absence of direct observation does not make physicists' conclusions less certain.”
(Scientific American, 15 Answers to Creationist Nonsense, June 18, 2002)

E4.1.C.3_REF11_PH LA RECHERCHE DE RESULTATS SANS L’AIDE DU CALCUL LAISSE L'ESPRIT RETOURNER A SES ERREURS FAMILIERES.
"Pour rompre avec cette séduction des formes simples et achevées sur lesquelles peuvent s’amasser tant d'interprétations fautives, le mieux est d’en expliciter la production algébrique. Par exemple, un enseignement scientifique des mouvements planétaires ne doit pas se contenter de répéter que les planètes décrivent des ellipses autour du Soleil placé à l’un des foyers; cet enseignement doit relier, par un calcul discursif, la réalité algébrique de l’attraction avec le phénomène du mouvement képlérien. Sans doute, il serait plus simple de n’enseigner que le résultat. Mais l’enseignement des résultats de la science n’est jamais un enseignement scientifique. Si l’on n’explicite pas la ligne de production spirituelle qui a conduit au résultat, on peut être sûr que l’élève combinera le résultat avec ses images les plus familières. Il faut bien « qu’il comprenne ». On ne peut retenir qu’en comprenant. L’élève comprend à sa manière. Puisqu’on ne lui a pas donné des raisons, il adjoint au résultat des raisons personnelles. Assez facilement un professeur de physique qui serait psychologue pourrait voir, sur le problème qui nous occupe, comment « mûrit » une intuition non expliquée. Ainsi, assez communément, au bout de quelques semaines, quand le souvenir verbal de la leçon a fait place, comme le dit si bien Pierre Janet, au souvenir travaillé, le Soleil s’est déplacé : il n’est plus au foyer de l’ellipse, il est au centre. En effet, dans l’enseignement des résultats, qu’est-ce que le foyer d’une ellipse? Pourquoi un foyer et pas l’autre? Si un foyer est réifié par le Soleil, pourquoi l’autre est il désert ? Quand le résultat correct est maintenu dans la mémoire, c’est souvent grâce à la construction de tout un échafaudage d’erreurs. D’abord c’est le mot foyer qui sauve tout. Que le Soleil soit un Foyer c’est trop clair! Ainsi il donne sa chaleur et sa lumière à tout l’Univers. Si le « foyer » d’une ellipse avait reçu un autre nom, un nom mathématique et neutre, l’énoncé correct des lois de Kepler eût été une question plus difficile pour un bachelier et les fautes formelles se fussent multipliées. [...]
Aussi, j’ai peu d’hésitation à présenter la rigueur comme une psychanalyse de l’intuition, et la pensée algébrique comme une psychanalyse de la pensée géométrique. Jusque dans le règne des sciences exactes, notre imagination est une sublimation. Elle est utile, mais elle peut tromper tant que l’on ne sait pas ce que l’on sublime et comment l’on sublime. Elle n’est valable qu’autant qu’on en a psychanalysé le principe. L’intuition ne doit jamais être une donnée. Elle doit toujours être une illustration."
(Gaston Bachelard, La Formation de l’esprit scientifique, 1938)

E4.1.C.3_REF12_PH

EL3.5. TRUTH IN 20TH CENTURY PHILOSOPHY "Most people are interested in the truth of a particular, the philosopher is interested in understanding the notion of truth.
There is a question wether it is the same notion of truth we use across topics, such as in the example: "it is true that I had bacon for breakfast this morning and that Rembrandt is a great artist". There is a reason for trying to keep the notion of truth single across fields in order to be able to mingle judgements about truth (as in the example above empirical truth & truth about esthetics).
An introductional theory of truth is the correspondence theory starting with Aristotle. "What is what it is and what is not is not". It is a theory of truth corresponding to the facts. The theory puts a lot of burden on facts: it does not account for negative facts ("I did not have bacon for breakfast this morning"), general facts ("It is usually cold in the winter"), counterfactual facts ("if you had stuck your finger in the outlet you would get an electric shock").
The Correspondence platitude should survive and seems robust for empirical truths (the presentation of physically present circumstances), but we gain in probing what being true really consist of in other areas: Can we articulate the notion of facts before presupposing the notion of truth, in order to escape entering into an intellectual loop? What it is for a truth to correspond to a fact? Is the robustness of the notion of truth identical for empirical, aesthetical, scientific, mathematical, ethical matters? For example in mathematics we use proofs (something we construct = an artefact) and not facts because of the different nature of numbers.
The Coherence theory postulates that a coherent idea is true. It is not so much a theory of truth that the repudiation of realism. In a sense it switches the terms with the Correspondence theory, where truth is correspondence between thought and something that isn't a thought, in the Coherence view it is systems that are true. Russell showed that it is easy to construct a coherent idea that is not true: "Bishop Stubs was hung for murder", although everybody knew he died in his bed.
Another theory of truth is Pragmatism, promoted by Charles Sanders Peirce. Truth is the opinion that is ultimately agreed to by all that investigate the issue. Truth is reached, by convergence of beliefs when investigation ends - in this sense we can only arrive at an incomplete truth , which is an ideal limit. He is a precursor to Popper´s falsification theory.
The linguistic turn moves the inquiry about truth that has been so far seen as a relationship between words and the world (Correspondance), between words and theories (Coherence) or between theories and processes of inquiry (Pragmatism) and starts to look at the world itself. It moves away from trying to answer "what truth consists in?" and addresses the question "what do we use truth to do?" Frege was the first to note the transparency property about truth. Truth does not add content to reality. Saying "there is a glass on the table" and "it is true that there is a glass on the table" is the same. Ramsey calls this property of truth "Redundancy": truth is not a substantial notion, we should not be problematizing truth. To who asks "What is truth", Ramsey would ask tell me what you want to know. if it is whether this man is guilty of a crime, then investigate if he is - you don't need the notion of truth for that. But an objection to the Redundancy theory is - also you can recognize redundancy in some contexts - it does not mean the notion of truth is idle in others. Ramsey himself realized this. For example in the sentence "Every thing you said is true", true is not redundant because it cannot be suppressed without changing the meaning of the sentence. 
Deflation theory offers a counter argument suggesting that you can actually put together a list of everything you said that would substitute the sentence "Every thing you said is true" stating if each one is or is not, and thus making do without the semantic notion of truth, which survives as a device of generalisation. The push back against Deflation theory is that the very notion of inquiry presupposes the notion of truth. If we are engaged in an inquiry, what we are trying to do is to find out... what is true. Does Deflationism capture all the cognitive structure behind inquiry?"
(Truth in 20th century philosophy, In our time, BBC4)

Listen to the podcast: https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b04v59gz

E4.1.C.4. The Cost of Purity.
The resulting "objective man" is a hollow mirror or a slave. Furthermore, the drive for objectivity can become a form of violence (extorting confessions from nature).

E4.1.C.4_REF1_PH NIETZSCHE INSISTE SUR L'ASPECT GYMNASTIQUE DE LA SCIENCE : C'EST UN ENTRAINEMENT QUI ACCROIT "L'ENERGIE" ET LA "CAPACITE DE RAISONNER". Il renforce l'idée que la vérité scientifique n'est pas une fin en soi (les résultats sont "insignifiants" en quantité), mais un moyen pour sculpter un certain type d'esprit (rigoureux, constant).
"LE POUVOIR, NON LE SAVOIR, EXERCÉ PAR LA SCIENCE. — La valeur d’avoir passé, quelque temps, à pratiquer exactement une science exacte ne réside pas dans ses résultats ; car, en proportion de la mer des objets de science, ceux-ci ne sont qu’une quantité insignifiante. Mais on en retire un accroissement d’énergie, de capacité de raisonner, de constance à persévérer ; on a appris à atteindre une fin par des moyens appropriés à la fin. C’est en ce sens qu’il est très précieux, en vue de tout ce que l’on fera plus tard, d’avoir été une fois homme de science. [...]"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain, Aphorism 256, 1878)

E4.1.C.4_REF2_PH LA VERITE SCIENTIFIQUE EST UNE DYNAMIQUE ("IMPULSION POUR UNE DEMARCHE INVENTIVE") QUI MEURT SI ELLE SE FIGE EN DOGMATISME.
"C’est une grande méprise de l’instruction commune que d’instaurer, sans réciproque, la relation inflexible de maître à élève. Voici, d’après nous, le principe fondamental de la pédagogie de l’attitude objective: Qui est enseigné doit enseigner. Une instruction qu’on reçoit sans la transmettre forme des esprits sans dynamisme, sans autocritique. Dans les disciplines scientifiques surtout, une telle instruction fige en dogmatisme une connaissance qui devrait être une impulsion pour une démarche inventive. Et surtout, elle manque à donner l'expérience psychologique de l’erreur humaine. [...]
Nous croyons en effet qu’il court toujours un jeu de nuances philosophiques sur un enseignement vivant; un enseignement reçu est psychologiquement un empirisme; un enseignement donné est psychologiquement un rationalisme. Je vous écoute: je suis tout ouïe. Je vous parle: je suis tout esprit. Même si nous disons la même chose, ce que vous dites est toujours un peu irrationnel; ce que je dis est toujours un peu rationnel. Vous avez toujours un peu tort, et j’ai toujours un peu raison. La matière enseignée importe peu. L’attitude psychologique faite, d’une part, de résistance et d’incompréhension, d’autre part, d’impulsion et d’autorité, devient l’élément décisif dans l’enseignement réel, quand on quitte le livre pour parler aux hommes. [...]"
(Gaston Bachelard, La Formation de l’esprit scientifique, 1938)

E4.1.C.4_REF3_PH  A_Gabriel de la Mora_24,796 fragments of glass and aluminium on board_2025_(1) ; A_Gabriel de la Mora_24,796 fragments of glass and aluminium on board_2025_(2) ; A_Gabriel de la Mora_24,796 fragments of glass and aluminium on board_2025_(3) /Gabriel de la Mora/

NIETZSCHE DESCRIBES THE "IDEAL SCHOLAR" (THE RESULT OF INTELLECTUAL ASCETICISM) AS A "MIRROR" OR A "SLAVE"—A BEING WHO HAS SUCCESSFULLY DEPERSONALIZED HIMSELF BUT, IN DOING SO, HAS BECOME HOLLOW, UNABLE TO LOVE, HATE, OR AFFIRM. He defines the objective man as a "masterpiece of mirrors" who waits for content from the outside because he has no substance of his own.

L'HOMME PUREMENT OBJECTIF QUI MANQUE D'AMOUR EST ENCORE UN ESCLAVE.
"Quelque reconnaissance que l’on puisse montrer envers l’esprit objectif— et y a-t-il quelqu’un qui n’ait été une fois déjà écœuré à en mourir de tout le subjectif et de sa maudite ipsissimosité ! — il faut toutefois finir aussi par apprendre à être un peu prudent envers sa reconnaissance, et mettre un terme à l’exagération avec laquelle on célèbre depuis peu la dépossession de soi et la dépersonnalisation de l’esprit comme s’ils étaient un but en soi, une rédemption et une transfiguration : comme cela a coutume de se produire notamment au sein de l’école pessimiste, qui a aussi de bonnes raisons de son côté de décerner à la « connaissance désintéressée » les plus grands honneurs. L’homme objectif, qui ne maudit plus et ne peste plus, tels les pessimistes, le savant idéal, en qui l’instinct scientifique, après des milliers d’échecs complets et de demi-échecs, parvient pour une fois à éclore et à s’épanouir, est à coup sûr l’un des instruments les plus précieux qui soient : mais c’est à un plus puissant de le manier. Il n’est qu’un instrument, disons-nous : il est un miroir, il n’est pas un « but en soi ». L’homme objectif est effectivement un miroir : accoutumé à s’incliner devant tout ce qui veut être connu, sans autre plaisir que celui que procure le connaître, le « refléter », — il attend que vienne quelque chose, et s’étend alors avec délicatesse de peur que même de légères empreintes et le glissement d’êtres fantomatiques n’échappent à sa surface et sa peau. Ce qui lui reste encore de « personne », lui semble fortuit, souvent arbitraire, plus souvent encore gênant : tant il est devenu lui-même le passage et le reflet de figures et d’événements étrangers. Il ne fait retour à « lui-même » qu’avec effort, se trompant ; il se prend facilement pour ce qu’il n’est pas, il se méprend à propos de ses propres besoins et est ici seulement, dénué de finesse et négligent. Peut-être sa santé le tourmente-t-elle, ou la petitesse et l’atmosphère renfermée qu’il éprouve auprès de sa femme et de ses amis, ou le manque de compagnons et de société, — il se force même à réfléchir à son tourment : en vain! Sa pensée vagabonde déjà, en route vers un cas plus général, et demain, il saura tout aussi peu qu’hier ce qu’on peut faire pour l’aider. Il n’a plus de sérieux de reste pour lui-même, ni non plus de temps : il est serein non pas pour être épargné par la détresse, mais pour ne pas savoir toucher du doigt ni manier sa détresse. Sa prévenance accoutumée envers toute chose et toute expérience vécue, l’hospitalité ensoleillée et sans prévention avec laquelle il accueille ce qui vient à sa rencontre, son genre de bienveillance sans égards, d’un détachement dangereux à propos du oui et du non : hélas, il ne manque pas de cas où il doit expier ces vertus qui sont les siennes ! — et en tant qu’homme, il ne devient que trop aisément le caput mortuum de ces vertus. Si l’on attend de lui de l’amour et de la haine, je veux dire de l'amour et de la haine comme les comprennent Dieu, la femme et la bête — : il fera son possible et donnera ce qu’il pourra. Mais il ne faut pas s’étonner si le résultat est modeste, — sur ce point précis, il se montre inauthentique, fragile, problématique et vermoulu. Son amour est contraint, sa haine artificielle, et elle est plutôt un tour de force, une petite vanité et exagération. Il n’est vraiment authentique que pour autant qu’il peut être objectif: c’est uniquement dans son totalisme serein (1) qu’il est encore « nature » et « naturel ». Son âme de miroir éternellement occupée à se polir elle-même ne sait plus acquiescer, ne sait plus nier; il ne commande pas; il ne détruit pas non plus. « Je ne méprise presque rien » — dit-il avec Leibniz : qu’on ne laisse pas passer et ne sous-estime pas le presque ! Il n’est pas non plus un modèle ; il ne précède personne, et ne suit personne non plus; il se place de manière générale trop loin pour avoir des raisons de prendre parti entre le bien et le mal. Si on l’a si longtemps confondu avec le philosophe, avec l’éleveur césarien et le tyran de la culture : on lui a fait bien trop d’honneur et l’on a laissé passer ce qui est essentiel en lui, — Il est un instrument, une manière d’esclave, bien qu’il s’agisse à coup sûr de l’espèce d’esclave la plus sublime, mais en soi rien, — presque rien ! L’homme objectif est un instrument, un instrument de mesure et un chef-d’œuvre de miroiterie, précieux, qui se brise et se brouille facilement, et que l’on doit ménager et respecter ; mais il n’est pas un but, un aboutissement et un apogée, ni un homme complémentaire dans lequel se justifie le reste de l’existence, ni une conclusion — et moins encore un commencement, un engendrement et une cause première, quelque chose de ferme, de puissant, qui prenne appui sur soi-même, qui veuille être maître et seigneur : bien plutôt un moule à formes, délicat, évidé, fin, malléable qui doit commencer par attendre quelque contenu et quelque substance pour « prendre forme » en se modelant sur lui, — ordinairement un homme sans contenu ni substance, un homme « désintéressé ». Et donc un néant aussi pour les femmes, in parenthesi."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Par-delà bien et mal, Aphorisme 207, 1886)

Note (1): "Totalismus : ou sa passion pour la totalité, qui lui fait dédaigner tout ce qui relève du particulier ou du singulier. Le terme, qui parodie la conceptualité propre au travail théorique, est volontairement surprenant autant en allemand qu’en français."
(Patrick Wotling)

E4.1.C.4_REF4_PH BAUDRILLARD ARGUES THAT SCIENCE IS SECRETLY "DESPERATE" ABOUT ITS OWN OBJECTIVITY. It uses experimentation not just to learn, but to extort a confession from nature (animals) that causality exists.

"Les bêtes

Territoire et métamorphoses

Que voulaient les bourreaux de l'Inquisition? L'aveu du Mal, du principe du Mal. Il fallait faire dire aux accusés qu'ils n'étaient coupables que par accident, par l'incidence du principe du Mal dans l'ordre divin. Ainsi l'aveu restituait une causalité rassurante, et le supplice, l'extermination du mal dans le supplice, n'était que le couronnement triomphal (ni sadique ni expiatoire) du fait d'avoir produit le Mal comme cause. Sinon la moindre hérésie eût rendu suspecte toute la création divine. De la même façon, quand nous usons et abusons des bêtes dans les laboratoires, dans les fusées, avec cette férocité expérimentale, au nom de la science, quel aveu cherchons-nous à leur extorquer sous le scalpel et les électrodes ?

Justement l'aveu d'un principe d'objectivité dont la science n'est jamais sûre, dont elle désespère secrètement. Il faut faire dire aux bêtes qu'elles n'en sont pas, que la bestialité, la sauvagerie, avec ce qu'elles impliquent d'inintelligibilité, d'étrangeté radicale pour la raison, n'existent pas, mais qu'au contraire les comportements les plus bestiaux, les plus singuliers, les plus anormaux se résolvent dans la science, en mécanismes physiologiques, en connexions cérébrales, etc. Il faut tuer dans les bêtes la bestialité, et son principe d'incertitude.

L'expérimentation n'est donc pas un moyen vers une fin, elle est un défi et un supplice actuels. Elle ne fonde pas une intelligibilité, elle extorque un aveu de science comme on extorquait jadis une profession de foi. Aveu que les écarts de la maladie, de la folie, de la bestialité, ne sont qu'une fêlure provisoire dans la transparence de la causalité. Cette preuve, comme jadis celle de la raison divine, il faut la refaire continuellement et partout - dans ce sens nous sommes tous des bêtes, et des bêtes de laboratoire, qu'on teste continuellement pour leur extorquer des comportements réflexes, qui sont autant d'aveux de rationalité en dernière instance. Partout la bestialité doit céder le pas à l'animalité réflexe, exorcisant un ordre de l'indéchiffrable, du sauvage, dont précisément pour nous les bêtes, par leur silence, sont restées l'incarnation.

Les bêtes nous ont donc précédés sur la voie de l'extermination libérale. Tous les aspects du traitement moderne des animaux retracent les péripéties de la manipulation humaine, de l'expérimentation au forcing industriel dans les élevages. [...]"
(Jean Baudrillard, Simulacres et simulation, 1981)

E4.1.C.4_REF4.1_PH BAUDRILLARD ARGUES THAT "HUMANISM" AND "QUALITY OF LIFE" (FOR ANIMALS OR WORKERS) ARE MERELY "PERIPETIES OF PROFITABILITY." We only care about the mental health of pigs (or workers) because their sickness hurts production.
"Réunis en congrès à Lyon, les vétérinaires européens se sont inquiétés des maladies et troubles psychiques qui se développent dans les élevages industriels.
(Science et Avenir, juillet 1973) [...]

En conclusion, dit l'auteur, il semble bien que le seul remède soit l'espace « un peu plus d'espace, et beaucoup des troubles observés disparaîtraient ». De toute façon, « le sort de ces animaux deviendrait moins misérable ». Il est donc satisfait de ce congrès : « Les préoccupations actuelles concernant le sort des animaux d'élevage voient donc s'allier, une fois de plus, la morale et le sens d'un intérêt bien compris.»  « On ne peut pas faire n'importe quoi avec la nature. » Les troubles étant devenus assez graves pour nuire à la rentabilité de l'entreprise, cette baisse de rendement peut conduire les éleveurs à rendre aux animaux des conditions de vie plus normales. « Pour avoir un élevage sain, il faudra désormais s'occuper aussi de l'équilibre mental des animaux. » Et il entrevoit le temps où on enverra les animaux, comme les hommes, à la campagne, pour restaurer cet équilibre mental.

On n'a jamais mieux dit combien l'« humanisme », la « normalité », la « qualité de la vie » n'étaient qu'une péripétie de la rentabilité. Le parallèle est lumineux entre ces animaux malades de la plus-value et l'homme de la concentration industrielle, de l'organisation scientifique du travail et des usines à la chaîne. Là aussi, les « éleveurs » capitalistes ont été conduits à une révision déchirante du mode d'exploitation, innovant et réinventant la « qualité du travail », l' « enrichissement des tâches », découvrant les sciences « humaines » et la dimension « psycho-sociologique » de l'usine. Seule la mort sans appel rend l'exemple des animaux plus éblouissant encore que celui des hommes à la chaîne. [...]

Bêtes de somme, elles ont dû travailler pour l'homme. Bêtes de sommation, elles sont sommées de répondre à l'interrogatoire de la science. Bêtes de consommation, elles sont devenues de la viande industrielle. Bêtes de somatisation, elles sont tenues de parler aujourd'hui la langue « psy », de répondre de leur psychisme et des méfaits de leur inconscient. Tout leur est arrivé de ce qui nous arrive. Notre destin n'a jamais été séparé du leur, et ceci est une sorte d'amère revanche sur la Raison Humaine, qui s'est usée à édifier le privilège absolu de l'Humain sur le Bestial.

Les bêtes ne sont d'ailleurs passées au statut d'inhumanité qu'au fil des progrès de la raison et de l'humanisme. Logique parallèle à celle du racisme. Il n'y a de « règne » animal objectif que depuis qu'il y a l'Homme. [...]

Jadis les bêtes eurent un caractère plus sacré, plus divin que les hommes. [...]

Particulièrement notre sentimentalité envers les bêtes est le signe sûr du mépris où nous les tenons. Elle est proportionnelle à ce mépris. C'est à mesure de sa relégation dans l'irresponsabilité, dans l'inhumain, que l'animal devient digne du rituel humain d'affection et de protection, tout comme l'enfant à mesure de sa relégation dans un statut d'innocence et d'infantilité. La sentimentalité n'est que la forme infiniment dégradée de la bestialité. Commisération raciste, nous en affublons les bêtes jusqu'à les rendre elles-mêmes sentimentales.

Ceux qui sacrifiaient les animaux jadis ne les prenaient pas pour des bêtes. Et même le Moyen  ge qui les condamnait et les châtiait dans les formes était par là bien plus proche d'eux que nous, à qui cette pratique fait horreur. Ils les tenaient pour coupables : c'était leur faire honneur. Nous les tenons pour rien, c'est sur cette base que nous sommes « humains » avec eux. Nous ne les sacrifions plus, nous ne les punissons plus, et nous en sommes fiers, mais c'est simplement que nous les avons domestiquées, pire: que nous en avons fait un monde racialement inférieur, même plus digne de notre justice, tout juste de notre affection et de la charité sociale, même plus digne du châtiment et de la mort, mais tout juste de l'expérimentation et de l'extermination comme viande de boucherie.

C'est la résorption de toute violence à leur égard qui fait aujourd'hui la monstruosité des bêtes. A la violence du sacrifice, qui est celle de l'« intimité » (Bataille), a succédé la violence sentimentale ou expérimentale, qui est celle de la distance. [...]"
(Jean Baudrillard, Simulacres et simulation, 1981)

E4.1.C.4_REF5_PH L'OBJECTIVITE SE CONSTRUIT CONTRE L'INTUITION ET L'AFFECT.
"UNE ARME PEUT VALOIR LE DOUBLE DE DEUX ARMES. — Il y a lutte inégale lorsque l’un défend une cause avec la tête et le cœur, et que l’autre ne la défend qu’avec la tête : en quelque sorte, le premier a contre lui le soleil et le vent et ses deux armes se gênent réciproquement ; il perd son prix — aux yeux de la vérité. Il est vrai que, par contre, la victoire du second, avec sa seule arme, est rarement une victoire selon le cœur de tous les autres spectateurs et elle le rend impopulaire. [...]"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain II, Aphorisme 261, 1878)

E4.1.C.4_REF6_PH Lais Myrrha_Mitos de origem_2012

LA VERITE N'EST PAS DONNEE MAIS CONQUISE PAR UN "COURAGE INTELLECTUEL" QUI CONVERTIT LA "PASSION" ET "L'ECHEC" (L'IRRATIONNEL) EN UNE REUSSITE DE LA PENSEE.
"Qu’elle vienne de la souffrance ou qu’elle vienne de la joie, tout homme a dans sa vie cette heure de lumière, l’heure où il comprend soudain son propre message, l’heure où la connaissance en éclairant la passion décèle à la fois les règles et la monotonie du Destin, le moment vraiment synthétique où l’échec décisif, en donnant la conscience de l’irrationnel, devient tout de même la réussite de la pensée. C’est là qu’est placée la différentielle de la connaissance, la fluxion newtonienne qui nous permet d’apprécier comment l’esprit surgit de l’ignorance, l’inflexion du génie humain sur la courbe décrite par le progrès de la vie. Le courage intellectuel, c’est de garder actif et vivant cet instant de la connaissance naissante, d’en faire la source sans cesse jaillissante de notre intuition, et de dessiner, avec l’histoire subjective de nos erreurs et de nos fautes, le modèle objectif d’une vie meilleure et plus claire. [...]"
(Gaston Bachelard, L’intuition de l’instant, 1931)

E4.1.C.4_REF7_PH "CONFIRMATION 
[...] II est souvent facile d’infirmer une hypothèse, voire de réfuter une théorie: un contre-exemple y suffit. Mais combien d’exemples faudrait-il pour la confirmer absolument ? Des milliers n’y suffiront pas. C’est le problème de Hume, le problème de l'induction (voire ce mot) dont on ne sort montre Popper, qu’en renonçant à toute confirmation directe et prétendument absolue. On ne peut prouver que la fausseté d’une théorie (voire l'article « Falsifiabilité »).  Cela confirme certes la vérité de sa contradictoire (s'il est faux que tous les cygnes soient blancs, il est vrai qu’ils ne le sont pas tous; s’il est faux que la Terre soit immobile, il est vrai qu’elle ne l’est pas), mais sans suffire à constituer une théorie alternative ni augmenter positivement notre savoir (cela ne nous dit rien sur la couleur des cygnes qui ne sont pas blancs, ni sur leur nombre, ni sur le mouvement de la Terre, ni sur ses causes). Bref, toute confirmation, dans les sciences expérimentales, reste relative, indirecte, provisoire: une hypothèse qu’on a testée, c’est-à-dire soumise à l'expérimentation, est considérée comme possiblement vraie tant qu’aucun test n’a prouvé qu’elle est nécessairement fausse. C’est bien sur différent en mathématiques. Aussi y parle-t-on moins de confirmation que de démonstration. C’est que la cohérence, ici, suffit à la solidité, ou en tient lieu."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.1.C.4_REF8_PH "AXIOME 
Proposition indémontrable, qui sert à en démontrer d’autres. Les axiomes sont-ils vrais ? C’est ce qu’on crut pendant longtemps: un axiome, pour Spinoza ou Kant, est une vérité évidente par elle-même, qui n'a donc pas besoin d'être démontré. Les mathématiciens ou logiciens d’aujourd’hui y voient plutôt de pures conventions ou hypothèses, qui ne peuvent l’être. La vérité, dès lors, n’est plus dans les propositions (si les axiomes ne sont pas vrais, aucun théorème ne l’est), mais dans les rapports d’implication ou de déduction qui les unissent. C’est dire qu’il n’y a pas d’axiomes, au sens traditionnel du terme, mais seulement des postulats [...]"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.1.C.4_REF9_PH

EL3.56. "IN FACT, A PROVEN TRUTH,
TO BE PRECISE, IS NOT A TRUTH AT ALL —
it’s just the sum of proofs. But now
what’s said is “I agree,” not “I believe.”
(Joseph Brodsky, Collected poems in English, Homage to Yalta, 1969)

E4.1.D. The Challenge of Paradox and Vagueness

E4.1.D.1. The Cracks in the Edifice: The Limits of Formal Logic and Computation.
Strict logical systems (Math, Set Theory, Computer Science) attempt to create closed, perfect systems of truth, only to discover fundamental limits such as "undecidability," "incompleteness," and "complexity" that cannot be conquered.

E4.1.D.1_REF1_SCI

EL3.22. "P VS. NP - THE GREATEST UNSOLVED PROBLEM IN COMPUTER SCIENCE. Is it possible to invent a computer that computes anything in a flash? Or could some problems stump even the most powerful of computers? How complex is too complex for computation? The question of how hard a problem is to solve lies at the heart of an important field of computer science called computational complexity. Computational complexity theorists want to know which problems are practically solvable using clever algorithms and which problems are truly difficult, maybe even virtually impossible, for computers to crack. This hardness is central to what’s called the P versus NP problem, one of the most difficult and important questions in all of math and science. 

This video covers a wide range of topics including: the history of computer science, how transistor-based electronic computers solve problems using Boolean logical operations and algorithms, what is a Turing Machine, the different classes of problems, circuit complexity, and the emerging field of meta-complexity, where researchers study the self-referential nature of complexity questions."
(Quantum Magazine, December 2023)

Watch the video on YouTube: https://youtu.be/pQsdygaYcE4?feature=shared

Read the article about meta-complexity at Quanta Magazine: https://www.quantamagazine.org/complexity-theorys-50-year-journey-to-the-limits-of-knowledge-20230817/

E4.1.D.1_REF2_SCI WHY MATH WILL NEVER BE COMPLETE. EVEN WITHIN MATHEMATICS—THE MOST RIGOROUS FORM OF "THEORETICAL TRUTH"—THERE ARE FUNDAMENTAL LIMITS: TRUTHS THAT ARE "PROVABLY UNPROVABLE" AND PROBLEMS THAT ARE "UNDECIDABLE".

“At the turn of the 20th century, mathematics seemed to be on a perfect path. After reckoning for decades with imprecise definitions and disturbing paradoxes (in a period now known as the foundational crisis of mathematics), mathematicians had finally started to establish a sturdy foundation for the field. Their goal was to develop a minimal list of basic truths, or axioms, upon which all of mathematics could rest. If they succeeded, it would be possible to derive even the most esoteric results from these simple, natural assumptions. First, mathematicians could use the axioms to prove straightforward statements; then they could use those statements to prove even more complicated theorems; and so on. Future mathematicians could continue to add to this edifice. With enough time and creativity, no truth would be out of reach.

Or so everyone thought.

It turned out that the dream of a “complete” mathematics, championed most prominently by the mathematician David Hilbert, represented an optimistic, Enlightenment-era view of the matter. In 1931, Kurt Gödel crushed Hilbert’s dream with proofs of his two “incompleteness theorems.” The first showed that, for any sufficiently powerful set of axioms (including those that underlie modern mathematics), there are some mathematical truths that cannot be proved true or false. They’re provably unprovable. Gödel’s second proof built on this idea, demonstrating that such a set of axioms can never be used to prove its own consistency. The axioms might lead to contradictory statements, and mathematicians would be none the wiser if they were limited to using just those axioms.

You might expect such results to stifle progress in a discipline so committed to the pursuit of absolute truth. But most mathematicians are still able to prove the statements they want to prove. Meanwhile, Gödel’s incompleteness theorems opened a whole new realm of inquiry within math. Mathematicians could now focus not just on finding out what was true, but on finding out what was knowable. Grappling with this idea remains a central practice within mathematics today.

What’s New and Noteworthy
Thanks to Gödel’s work, mathematicians know that if they start with the usual axioms that underlie modern mathematics, there will be statements they can’t prove true or false. To prove such statements, they need to introduce new axioms to their foundation. These new axioms often deal with a counterintuitive and fascinating mathematical concept: infinity.

Infinity comes in many different sizes. The set of natural numbers (0, 1, 2, 3, 4 …) is equal in size to the set of all even numbers, and to the set of all fractions. But the set of all real numbers (all the numbers on the number line) is larger than these sets, even though they’re all infinite. Mathematicians have come up with axioms to define far larger, and more exotic, types of infinity. Recently, Quanta covered work in which three mathematicians claimed to have discovered two new kinds of infinity that don’t behave as mathematicians expect. The finding might mean that the mathematical universe is far more chaotic than anticipated.

In general, the best way to define new axioms — that is, the best way to inch toward a more complete (though never entirely complete) understanding of the world of mathematics — is hotly debated.

A few years after Gödel published his incompleteness theorems, Alan Turing and others built on his ideas, showing that there are mathematical statements that are “undecidable.” They can’t be solved by any computer algorithm.

Just as Hilbert’s dream wasn’t safe from the notion of incompleteness, it wasn’t safe from the notion of undecidability, either. In 1970, mathematicians proved that another major pillar of Hilbert’s program — his “10th problem,” one of a list of 23 questions he’d proposed to help reinforce mathematics — was undecidable. The problem had challenged mathematicians to find an algorithm that could determine whether any “Diophantine” equation (a class of simple polynomials, such as y = x2 – 1) has whole-number solutions. This year I reported on work that significantly extended the scope of this result — a demonstration that yet another part of the mathematical world is unknowable.

My favorite (potentially) unanswerable question from Quanta’s coverage: Can a set of shapes be duplicated to cover all of space? The hunt for such arrangements, called “tilings,” is a major topic in mathematics. And it turns out that some tiling problems are undecidable: Given some sets of shapes, it’s not possible to figure out whether they’ll tile a space. But what about when you consider just one shape? Could a statement about a single tile be undecidable? In 2022, Rachel Greenfeld and Terence Tao shocked the tiling part of the math world when they found a single shape that can tile all of space in a non-repeating, or aperiodic, pattern. But just because an aperiodic tile exists doesn’t mean that an undecidable one does. The two mathematicians hope that the techniques they developed might help them eventually find a single undecidable tile, too.

Far from the death knell it may have initially seemed, incompleteness thus has become a boon to mathematics. The only thing more intriguing than pure, incontrovertible truth, it turns out, is the knowledge that such truth is often unattainable. Future mathematicians won’t just have the job of perpetually adding layers to the edifice of knowledge, as Hilbert envisioned. Their task will be much more difficult: to decide for us what things can and cannot be decided.”
(Joseph Howlett, Quanta Magazine, July 2025)

E4.1.D.1_REF3_PH THE FORMAL STRUCTURES OF LOGIC (ARISTOTLE, BOOLE, FREGE) THAT CREATE THE "CLOSED SYSTEM" OF DEDUCTION.
"Logic
In a deduction there is no novel information in the conclusion, which is a rearrangement of the terms of the premises. There might be psychological novelty because the conclusion makes you realize what is already in the premises.
In an induction, you go beyond the information given in the premises, going from samples to a generalization.
Logic has focused on the validity of the forms that a deductive argument has to take in order to guaranty the conclusion is true. Validity in this sense is concerned only with form and not with content. A sound argument is composed of true premises put in a valid form, from which you can derive a true conclusion.
Informal logic is concerned with other kinds of good and bad reasoning such as vagueness, ambiguity, appeals to authority, circular arguments, the kinds of fallacies we can make in informal argument.
You have 4 different kinds of categorical propositions:
1. Every F is G
2. No F is G
3. Some F is G
4. Some F is not G
What Aristotle did in Syllogism is to look into arguments that connect two of those propositions to a third one. He found 19 (which is debatable) valid combinations out of 256. The Stoics were interested in the or/and logic.
Hobbes noticed that thinking is basically calculation and Leibniz was looking for a language that could be computed. George Bull in the 19th century noticed the similarity between operations in algebra and the logic of language (ex: similarity between "or" and "+", "and" and "x"). He built an algebraic system of logic using 0 for "false" and 1 for "true". Fregge expends Aristotle's system by putting quantifiers and variables between brackets ("all cows eat grass" is interpreted by Freege as "for all x, if x is a cow, then x eats grass"). Russell found a contradiction in one of Fregge's proposition in the use of classes such as in the phrase:"what I am saying is false" which is true and false at the same time. Russel's suggested that the only way to resolve this paradox was by creating a hierarchy of classes: was is true is, independently of what I say about it. Turing proved, on the basis of logical operators what could be calculated by a computer and how it should operate setting the basis for modern computers. Aristotle's logic was criticized from the get go, and later logical systems too, as trivial and simplistic, however computers make something interesting from billions of trivial operations when stringed together. Computers have brought logic to fruition."
(In our Time, BBC 4)

E4.1.D.1_REF4_PH "PARADOXE 
[...] Le mot paradoxe a aussi un autre sens, purement logique: c ’est une pensée qui va contre la pensée, disais-je, autrement dit une contradiction ou une antinomie. Par exemple, le paradoxe de Russell: l’ensemble de tous les ensembles qui ne se contiennent pas eux-mêmes fait un paradoxe, dans la théorie classique des ensembles (puisque cet ensemble se contient lui-même s’il ne se contient pas lui-même). On considère ordinairement qu’un paradoxe, décelé dans une théorie donnée, vaut comme réfutation ou suppose, à tout le moins, quelque aménagement. C’est ce qui s’est passé, après le paradoxe de Russell, pour la théorie des ensembles (dont l’axiomatique exclut désormais qu’un ensemble puisse se définir par la propriété de ne pas se contenir lui-même comme élément). Les paradoxes, quand ce ne sont pas des sottises, aident la pensée à avancer."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.1.D.2. The Glitch in Rationality: How paradoxes undermine our understanding of the physical world and human decision-making.

E4.1.D.2_REF1_PH

EL3.13. ZENO'S PARADOXES 
"- Zeno claimed that Achilles could never catch up to a tortoise that had been given a head start. His reasoning was that every time Achilles was about to catch the tortoise, the tortoise was already moving away from that point. This paradox baffled the Greeks. Today, we see this paradox as a solvable problem of limits.

Elements of solutions of the paradoxes:
- The atomists refuted that you could cut a distant in half for ever, because the atom was the minimum particle you could not divide. Modern science validates the concept of the indivisible distance with the Planck constant. 
- Aristotle argued that reality of time was not made of a sum of instants (scientists are arguing today if time is made of bits), nor a line made up of points without length. 
- Mathematicians in the 17th and  18th century proved that the sum of and infinite regression of half of 1 is equal to 1 - so it is finite. 
- Mathematics of limits built a model of the diminishing distance between Achilles and the tortoise.

Paradoxes provide us with an opportunity to either 1) consider if our theory is faulty, or 2) consider that some phenomena in the world must be approached differently (ex: vague phenomenons)."
(Zeno's Paradoxes, In our time, BBC 4)

Listen to the podcast: https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b07vs3v1

E4.1.D.2_REF2_PH

EL3.14. ON PARADOXES "Philosophers have always been fascinated by paradoxes. A paradox is a situation when you start with a belief you think is obviously true and somehow you come across something that absolutely contradicts that belief - and yet both the belief and the contradiction seem to be true. To solve most paradoxes, we have to identify the erroneous assumption that creates the deadlock: c.f. Russell's barber paradox that assumes that there exist a barber that only shaves people who don't want to shave themselves - the way out is that such a barber does not exist. However some paradoxes still challenge to be resolved: c.f. the lier paradox. Paradoxes challenge the value of reason. In Lady Boundful's paradox, it challenges the value of reflection. The paradox only exists for whom is reflective about the offer: it shows that to have a real intention you need to be ready to act upon that intention after it has been formed. The surprise examination paradox is another unsolved one that shows how the process of reason itself undermines our capacity to solve the question. It seems that there are times when the rational thing is to be irrational - as illustrated by Buridan's donkey paradox that starves to death because he can't find a reason to choose between 2 equal piles of hay that are equidistant. In order to be rational you might not need to have a reason for every facet of what you do."
(Peter Cave on Paradoxes, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: http://philosophybites.com/2008/09/peter-cave-on-p.html

E4.1.D.2_REF3_PH

EL3.82. ON TRANSITIVITY "If A is a better course of action than B, and B is better than C, it  seems to follow that A must be a better course of action than C. This is what is known as the axiom of transitivity. Larry Temkin questions the assumption that transitivity is a feature of our moral judgements - his challenge has come to be known as 'Temkin's Paradox'.  If he's right, then many assumptions that philosophers and others make about rationality need revising, with far-reaching consequences for practical ethics.
If transitivity doesn't hold, the pairwise comparaison-elimination that we use widely for decision making is flowed. When we compare items "all things being equal" they are rarely equal in weight and importance. Sometime a single factor of comparaison only applies to some items and not to others. Because of this, items compared on the basis of their internal features will be ranked depending on the alternative with which you are comparing it to. This challenges the basis of utility theory."
(Larry Temkin on Transitivity, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: https://philosophybites.com/podcast/larry-temkin-on-transitivity/

E4.1.D.2_REF4_LIT "THE HUMAN MIND IS SO LIMITED, THAT IT CANNOT TAKE IN ALL THE PARTS OF A SUBJECT, so that there may be objections raised against any thing. There are objections against a plenum, and objections against a vacuum ; yet one of them must certainly be true."
(Boswell’s Life of Johnson, 1791)

E4.1.D.3. The Wisdom of Uncertainty: Accepting "vagueness" and "aporia." and viewing paradox as a creative space rather than an error.

E4.1.D.3_REF1_PH

EL3.155. “REPETITION.—It is an excellent thing to express a thing consecutively in two ways, and thus provide it with a right and a left foot. Truth can stand indeed on one leg, but with two she will walk and complete her journey.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human III, Aphorism 13, 1878)

E4.1.D.3_REF2_PH BARTHES ARGUES FOR THE "RIGHT NOT TO KNOW" AND THE "RIGHT TO UNCERTAIN DESIRE," CHALLENGING THE ASSUMPTION THAT A PRECISE, THEORETICAL ANSWER IS ALWAYS POSSIBLE OR DESIRABLE.
"LA RÉPONSE

[...] 1) La réponse: partie de discours contrainte par la forme « question ». Or ce que je veux pointer, c'est qu'il y a toujours un terrorisme de la question; dans toute question est impliqué un pouvoir. La question dénie le droit de ne pas savoir, ou le droit au désir incertain → Chez certains sujets - dont je suis - toute question met en branle un certain affolement; à plus forte raison si la question est, se veut précise (la précision comme pouvoir, intimidation: c'est le grand truc de pouvoir de la science) → toujours envie de répondre sans précision à des questions précises: cette imprécision de la réponse, même si elle passe pour une faiblesse, est une manière indirecte de démystifier la question: car toute question part d'un sujet qui veut dire autre chose qu'une réponse au premier degré → toute question peut être lue comme une situation de question, de pouvoir, d'inquisition (l'État, la bureaucratie: des personnages très questionneurs). → Même situation de pouvoir dans les interviews: a) présuppose qu'on sait répondre à de grandes questions-dissertations (qu'est-ce que l'écriture? la nature? la santé? etc.), qu'on doit prendre intérêt à la question, qu'on doit accepter la façon dont la question est posée [...]

b) Sur un propos de l'autre, ma réplique est contrainte par une conformité (un conformisme), des règles, règles de conversation [...]
Quatre règles ou maximes:
1. Maxime de quantité: « Ne soyez ni trop ni trop peu informatif. »
2. Maxime de qualité: « Ne dites pas ce que vous pensez être faux ou ce pour quoi vous manquez de preuve. »
3. Maxime de relation: « Soyez pertinent. »
4. Maxime de modalité ou de manière: « Soyez clair. » 
= → Conformité des répliques (des enchaînements) à ces règles: satisfaction complète du conformisme de conversation. Il suffit d'en prendre le contre-pied pour produire un texte (une réplique) subversif, provocant, déroutant: l'inattendu énigmatique: être maniaquement, ironiquement informatif, être obscur, exagérément elliptique, se situer en dehors du vrai-faux, prononcer du non-pertinent (par rapport à ce qui vient d'être dit), du farfelu. → Nous allons regarder maintenant du côté de ces réponses à côté, région du Neutre puisque s'y déjoue l'arrogance de la demande de bonne réplique. [...]"
(Roland Barthes, Le neutre, Cours au Collège de France, 1977-1978)

E4.1.D.3_REF2.1_PH BARTHES EXPLICITLY OBSERVES THAT THE ZEN LESSON "JOYFULLY SUBVERTS" ALL THE RULES OF CONFORMISM/LOGIC (NO CLARITY, NO RELEVANCE), PLACING THE DISCOURSE "OUTSIDE OF TRUE AND FALSE".
"RÉPONSE À CÔTE [...]

c) Incongruités

Déviation: dérives douces non provocantes: épuisement, ne traumatisent pas dans le Zen, technique d'ébranlement en vue du Satori (cf. infra): à chaque question-proposition, réponse-réplique de l'incongruité maximale: histoire de Kao- fêng et de son vieux maître: Suzuki, I, 322.

Une leçon de Zen
(rapport maître / disciple) Kao-feng et son vieux maître

Le maître: "Qui donc porte pour vous ce corps dénué de vie?" Kao-fêng lui lance un "ho!". Le maître prend son bâton pour le frapper.
Le disciple l'arrête: "Vous ne pouvez pas me frapper aujourd'hui.”
- Pourquoi pas ?"
Au lieu de lui répondre, Kao-fêng sort brusquement. Le lendemain, le maître: "Toutes choses retournent à l'Un, et où l'Un retourne-t-il?
- Le chien lape l'eau bouillante dans le chaudron.
- Où avez-vous pris cette stupidité?
- Vous feriez mieux de vous le demander à vous-même.” “Le maître fut entièrement satisfait.” 

Observations sur cette leçon de Zen: on peut dire que toutes les règles du conformisme selon Grice y sont subverties allègrement, avec une sorte de désinvolture emportée, radicale (aucune information, aucune clarté, aucune pertinence, hors du vrai et du faux) et que tous les types de réponse à côté y sont mis en scène: silence, départ, déviation, la plus forte incongruité étant la satisfaction finale du maître: c'est du Marx Brothers. [...]"
(Roland Barthes, Le neutre, Cours au Collège de France, 1977-1978)

E4.1.D.3_REF2.2_PH BY DEFINING THE WORLD ITSELF AS A "REPRESENTATION... WOVEN OF APORIAS", BARTHES ESTABLISHES PARADOX NOT AS A MISTAKE TO BE CORRECTED, BUT AS THE FUNDAMENTAL, VAGUE ARCHITECTURE OF EXISTENCE THAT MUST BE NAVIGATED RATHER THAN CONQUERED.
"Ou je parle du Neutre et j'en fais une loi; ou je n'en fais pas une loi, mais alors je n'en parle pas (et tout le cours s'écroule). Cette aporie est réelle: l'intervention de l'auditeur permet de l'affiner, de la rendre aiguë. Mais en même temps, elle permet de renverser le cours: peut-être que ce dont je parle indirectement et obstinément, c'est de l'aporie; on pourrait noter (si je me faisais mon propre commentateur) que presque toutes les figures (jusqu'ici) mettent en scène une aporie: la Bienveillance: humide ou sèche, non juste; la Fatigue: processus du fini sans fin; le Silence: devenant, quoi qu'il veuille, son propre signe; le Sommeil: impuissant à se sentir vide lui-même; l'Affirmation: la langue m'oblige à asserter, même si je ne le veux pas; la Couleur: le Neutre est coloré (et il tache!); l'Adjectif: créateur d'images, on ne peut le supprimer de la langue. A ces apories, on pourrait ajouter (je parle vite) une rhétorique de la chose sans cesse posée, demandée, et sans cesse éludée. Par exemple les dossiers, les types de discours: jamais exploités, jamais recensés.

Alors peut-être, l'actif apparaîtrait à côté du réactif: le cours: pas à pas: comment reconnaître le monde comme un tissu d'apories, comment vivre jusqu'à la mort en traversant (douloureusement, jouissivement) les apories, sans les défaire par un coup de force logique, dogmatique ? C'est-à-dire: comment vivre les apories comme une création, c'est-à-dire par la pratique d'un texte-discours, qui ne rompt pas l'aporie, mais la dérive dans une parole qui s'enchevêtre à l'autre (public) amoureusement (pour reprendre encore un mot de Nietzsche)? Je l'ai dit (leçon inaugurale), d'une autre façon: la littérature ou l'écriture (dans laquelle je me place, sans aucune prétention de valeur) la représentation du monde comme aporétique, tissé d'apories + la pratique qui opère une catharsis de l'aporie, sans la dénouer, c'est-à-dire sans arrogance."
(Roland Barthes, Le neutre, Cours au Collège de France, 1977-1978)

E4.2. The Relativity of Values and the Trap of Dogmatism: The "Order of Preeminence" (Values/Desire). Since objective truth is elusive, we retreat to values. But are these values "true," or just expressions of desire?

E4.2.A. Primat (Explanation) vs. Primauté (Evaluation)

E4.2.A.1. Order of Causes vs. Order of Values.
The difference between what is objectively the explanatory order of causes and what is subjectively most valuable, the normative order of ends. The first explains the second, but the second judges the first.

E4.2.A.1_REF1_PH

EL3.63. "PRIMAT/PRIMAUTÉ 
[...] J’entends par primat ce qui est objectivement le plus important, dans un enchaînement descendant de déterminations; par primauté, ce qui vaut le plus, subjectivement, dans une hiérarchie ascendante d’évaluations. Le concept de primat est ontologique ou explicatif: c’est l’ordre des causes et de la connaissance, qui tend au plus profond ou au plus fondamental; celui de primauté est normatif ou pratique: c’est l’ordre des valeurs et des fins, qui tend au meilleur ou au plus élevé. Le premier sert à comprendre; le second, à juger et à agir. 
La différence, entre ces deux points de vue, est essentielle au matérialisme philosophique. Être matérialiste, Comte a raison sur ce point, c’est expliquer le supérieur par l’inférieur. Mais ce n’est pas pour autant renoncer à la supériorité de celui-là, ni se mettre à adorer celui-ci. Que la pensée, par exemple, s’explique par le cerveau, cela ne saurait justifier qu’on renonce à penser, ni qu’on soumette toute vérité à la neurobiologie [...]
II faut donc distinguer ce qui relève de la connaissance ou des causes, d’une part, et ce qui relève d’un jugement de valeur ou de l’action, d’autre part. Cela définit deux points de vue différents: l’un théorique, qui tend à l’objectivité; l'autre pratique, qui doit s’assumer comme subjectif. Ce qui est le plus important dans le premier (la matière, l’enchaînement des causes ou des déterminations) n’est jamais ce qui vaut le plus dans le second (l’esprit, la hiérarchie des finalités ou des valeurs), et inversement. [...]
Si l'on renonce au primat, on n’est plus matérialiste; si l’on renonce à la primauté, on n’est plus philosophe. [...]"
(André Comte-Sponville, Dictionnaire philosophique, 2001)

E4.2.A.1_REF1.1_PH

EL3.63.A. ANDRÉ COMTE-SPONVILLE DISCUTE DE LA PRIMAUTÉ DES VALEURS SUPÉRIEURES FIXÉES PAR L'ESPRIT, L'IDÉOLOGIE OU LA CIVILISATION, en contraste avec les primats de la physique, de l'économie et de l'inconscient. 
"Tout part du corps, de l’économie ou du ça; mais c’est l'esprit, l’idéologie ou la civilisation qui fixent les valeurs supérieures, vers lesquelles nous tendons, au moins consciemment, et qui peuvent seules donner un sens, fût-il relatif et provisoire, à notre vie. Primat de la physique, primauté de l'éthique (Épicure). Primat de l'économie primauté de la politique (Marx). Primat de 1’inconscient, primauté de la conscience (Freud). C’est cette ascension que le mythe d’Icare, dans mon premier livre, m’a paru pouvoir symboliser: Icare, prisonnier d’un labyrinthe horizontal (objectivement, tout se vaut et ne vaut rien), mais créant lui-même (primat de l'action, primauté de l'oeuvre), guidé par son père (tout désir est biographiquement déterminé: primat de 1’histoire, primauté de la fidélité), les ailes de son désir et de son vol. « À l’encontre de la philosophie idéaliste allemande, qui descend du ciel sur la terre, disaient Marx et Engels, c’est de la terre au ciel que l'on monte ici » (L'Idéologie allemande, I). Encore faut-il monter, en effet: passer de la terre au ciel, disons du primat à la primauté du désir (comme puissance) au désirable (comme valeur). 
Ce désir est un effort (conatus), une tension, un acte. On ne passe du primat à la primauté qu’à la condition de le vouloir. Qu’un instant l’effort se relâche, que le désir se fatigue ou s’oublie, on n’a plus qu’un matérialisme plat ou veule - qu’un matérialisme qui redescend, et qui ne saurait par conséquent (la sagesse est un idéal) rester philosophique. [...]"
(André Comte-Sponville, Dictionnaire philosophique, 2001)

E4.2.A.1_REF1.2_PH

EL3.63.C. PRIMAT DU CORPS ET DU DÉSIR, PRIMAUTÉ (THÉORIQUE) DE LA RAISON ET (PRATIQUE) DE L’AMOUR ET DE LA LIBERTÉ. 
 "L’essentiel, pour résumer, tient donc bien dans la formule que j’utilisais en commençant: primat de la matière, primauté de l'esprit. Mais cela, s’agissant de l'être humain, doit être précisé en une autre, plus lourde mais plus explicite: primat du corps et du désir, primauté (théorique) de la raison et (pratique) de l’amour et de la liberté. C’est le désir, disait Spinoza, non la raison ou l’amour, qui est l'essence de l'homme (Éth., III). Mais c’est la raison qui libère, et l'amour qui sauve (Éth., IV et V). Les Sciences de la nature et de l'homme, pour le dire avec nos mots d’aujourd’hui, nous en apprennent davantage sur nous-mêmes que la morale, qu’elles expliquent et qui ne les explique pas. Mais connaître la vie ou l’humanité n’a jamais suffi à les aimer, ni même à aimer la connaissance. À la gloire du spinozisme. Ce n’est pas parce qu’une chose est bonne que nous l'aimons ou la désirons, c’est inversement parce que nous l'aimons ou la désirons que nous la jugeons bonne (Éth., III, 9, scolie; voir aussi, chez Freud, les deux dernières pages de Malaise dans la civilisation). Si vous n’aimez pas l'amour et la vérité, n’en dégoûtez pas les autres. Mais si vous aimez les deux, comme il convient, ne vous croyez pas autorisé à les confondre."
(André Comte-Sponville, Dictionnaire philosophique, 2001)

E4.2.A.1_REF1.3_PH

EL3.63.F. "I MEAN BY PRIMACY THAT WHICH IS OBJECTIVELY THE MOST IMPORTANT, IN A DESCENDING CHAIN OF DETERMINATIONS; BY PREEMINENCE, WHAT IS WORTH THE MOST, SUBJECTIVELY, IN AN ASCENDING HIERARCHY OF EVALUATIONS. The concept of primacy is ontological or explanatory: it is the order of causes and knowledge, which tends to the underlying structure or the most fundamental; that of preeminence is normative or practical: it is the order of values ​​and ends, which tends to the best or to the highest. The first one is for understanding, the second one for judging and acting. [...]
We must therefore distinguish between what is to in the sphere of knowledge or causes, on the one hand, and what is in the realm of value judgments or action, on the other. This defines two different points of view: a theoretical one, which tends towards objectivity; and a practical one, which must be understood as subjective. What is most important in the first (matter, the chain of causes or determinations) is never what is most important in the second (the spirit, the hierarchy of purposes or values), and vice versa. [...]
If one gives up primacy, one is no longer a materialist; if one renounces  preeminence, one is no longer a philosopher. [...]
This dialectic etween the two, which is valid on a world scale, also applies to that of society. I have been knomn to distinguish four different orders: the techno-scientific order (which includes the economy), the legal-political order, the order of morality, and finally the order of ethics or love. Each of these orders has its own logic and coherence; but remains conditioned by the order that precedes it, and limited and gauged, from the outside, only by the order that follows it."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.2.A.1_REF2_PH "SCIENTISME 
[...] Les sciences ne sont soumises ni à la volonté individuelle ni au suffrage universel. Que resterait-il de nos choix ? Que resterait-il de nos démocraties ? Le mathématicien Henri Poincaré, contre cette niaiserie dangereuse, a dit ce qu’il fallait: « Une science parle toujours à l'indicatif, jamais à l’impératif. » Elle dit ce qui est, dans le meilleur des cas, plus souvent ce qui peut être, parfois ce qui sera, jamais ce qui doit être. C’est pourquoi elle ne tient pas lieu de morale, ni de politique, ni de philosophie. C’est ce que le scientisme méconnaît, et qui le condamne. Le positivisme, à tout prendre, vaudrait mieux."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.2.A.2. The Engine of Action.
Reason is "cold" and insufficient for action. Action requires a "Sense" or a "Goal," which is provided by Passion, Taste, or Affect.

E4.2.A_REF1_MU THE CLASH OF ORDERS: RODRIGUE IS TORN BETWEEN TWO ETHICAL ORDERS: THE ORDER OF TRADITION/LAW ") AND THE ORDER OF THE HEART/LOVE. THE TRAGEDY ARISES BECAUSE HE CANNOT HIERARCHIZE THEM; THEY ARE EXPERIENCED AS EQUALLY BINDING. The phrase "aimable tyrannie" (lovable tyranny) illustrates that when a Value (Honor) becomes absolute, it tyrannizes the individual and demands the sacrifice of happiness.
"I. Pierced to the depths of my heart (H. 457)
(Corresponds to the first stanza of Rodrigue's monologue)

Pierced to the depths of my heart By a blow as unexpected as it is deadly, Miserable avenger of a just quarrel, And unfortunate object of unjust severity, I remain motionless, and my broken spirit Yields to the blow that kills me. So close to seeing my passion rewarded, O God, what strange pain! In this affront, my father is the offended party, And the offender is Chimène's father!

II. What fierce struggles I feel (H. 459)
(Corresponds to the second stanza)

What harsh struggles I feel! My love conflicts with my own honor: I must avenge a father and lose a mistress: One animates my heart, the other restrains my arm. Reduced to the sad choice of either betraying my love or living in infamy, My pain is infinite on both sides. O God, what strange pain! Must an affront go unpunished? Must Chimène's father be punished?

III. Father, mistress, honor, love (H. 458)
(Corresponds to the third stanza)

Father, mistress, honor, love, Noble and harsh constraint, amiable tyranny, All my pleasures are dead, or my glory tarnished. One makes me unhappy, the other unworthy of the day. Dear and cruel hope of a generous soul, But at the same time loving, Worthy enemy of my greatest happiness, Iron that causes my pain, Were you given to me to avenge my honor? Were you given to me to lose my Chimène?"
(Marc-Antoine Charpentier, Airs on stanzas from Le Cid)


"I. Percé jusques au fond du cœur (H. 457)

Percé jusques au fond du cœur D'une atteinte imprévue aussi bien que mortelle, Misérable vengeur d'une juste querelle, Et malheureux objet d'une injuste rigueur, Je demeure immobile, et mon âme abattue Cède au coup qui me tue. Si près de voir mon feu récompensé, O Dieu, l'étrange peine ! En cet affront mon père est l'offensé, Et l'offenseur le père de Chimène !

II. Que je sens de rudes combats (H. 459)

Que je sens de rudes combats ! Contre mon propre honneur mon amour s'intéresse : Il faut venger un père, et perdre une maîtresse : L'un m'anime le cœur, l'autre retient mon bras. Réduit au triste choix ou de trahir ma flamme, Ou de vivre en infâme, Des deux côtés mon mal est infini. O Dieu, l'étrange peine ! Faut-il laisser un affront impuni ? Faut-il punir le père de Chimène ?

III. Père, maîtresse, honneur, amour (H. 458)

Père, maîtresse, honneur, amour, Noble et dure contrainte, aimable tyrannie, Tous mes plaisirs sont morts, ou ma gloire ternie. L'un me rend malheureux, l'autre indigne du jour. Cher et cruel espoir d'une âme généreuse, Mais ensemble amoureuse, Digne ennemi de mon plus grand bonheur, Fer qui causes ma peine, M'es-tu donné pour venger mon honneur ? M'es-tu donné pour perdre ma Chimène ?"
(Marc-Antoine Charpentier, Airs sur des stances du Cid)

Listen to it on YouTube :
https://youtu.be/bDiDGt_crIQ

E4.2.A_REF2_PH LA RAISON EXPLIQUE COMMENT LES CHOSES SONT LIEES (PRIMAT), MAIS SEUL LE SENS PERMET L'ACTION (PRIMAUTE). Deleuze distingue la Raison (principes d'association) qui établit des réseaux de "relations" réversibles (le va-et-vient des idées), de la Passion qui donne un "Sens" (une direction, une fin).
"LA FINALITÉ

Selon leur nature, les principes fixent l'esprit de deux façons très différentes. Les principes d'association établissent entre les idées des relations naturelles. Dans l'esprit ils forment tout un réseau, comme une canalisation : ce n'est plus par hasard qu'on passe d'une idée à une autre, une idée en introduit naturellement une autre suivant un principe, elle s'accompagne d'une autre naturellement. Bref, l'imagination sous cette influence est devenue raison, la fantaisie a trouvé une constance. Nous avons vu tout cela. Mais Hume fait une remarque importante: si l'esprit n'était fixé que de cette façon, il n'y aurait pas, il n'y aurait jamais eu de morale. Tel est le premier argument qui nous montrera que la morale ne dérive pas de la raison. Il ne faut pas confondre en effet la relation et le sens. Les relations établissent entre les idées un mouvement, mais de va-et-vient, tel qu'une idée ne conduit pas à une autre sans que l'autre, en droit, ne conduise à la première : le mouvement se fait dans les deux sens. Étant extérieures à leurs termes, comment les relations pourraient-elles déterminer la priorité d'un terme sur l'autre, la subordination de l'un à l'autre ? Il est évident que l'action ne supporte pas une telle équivoque : elle demande un point de départ, une origine, quelque chose qui soit aussi pour elle une fin, quelque chose au-delà de quoi l'on n'ait pas à remonter. Par elles-mêmes les relations se contenteraient de rendre éternellement l'action possible, mais sans qu'une action soit jamais faite. Il n'y a d'action que par le sens. Et la morale est comme l'action: ce par quoi elle échappe aux relations. Est-ce la même chose, moralement, d'être méchant envers celui qui m'a fait du bien et bon vis-à-vis de celui qui m'a fait du mal ?. Reconnaître que ce n'est pas la même chose, alors que c'est la même relation de contrariété, c'est déjà reconnaître une différence radicale de la morale avec la raison. On dira que parmi toutes les relations la causalité contient déjà un principe d'irréversibilité, dans une synthèse du temps. Sans doute, c'est exact: aussi est-elle privilégiée parmi toutes les relations; mais toute la question est de savoir quel est l'effet qui m'intéresse et dont je vais chercher la cause.

        Cela ne pourrait nous intéresser le moins du monde de savoir que tels objets sont des causes et tels autres des effets, si les causes et les effets nous étaient également indifférents.

Il faut donc que l'esprit soit fixé d'une autre façon. Cette fois, les principes de la passion désignent certaines impressions qu'il constitue comme les fins de notre activité. A la lettre, il ne s'agit plus d'entourer l'esprit de liens, d'attacher l'esprit, mais de le clouer. Il ne s'agit plus de relations fixes, mais de centres de fixations. Dans l'esprit lui-même, il y a des impressions qu'on appelle les plaisirs et les douleurs. Mais que le plaisir soit un bien et la douleur un mal, que nous tendions vers le plaisir et repoussions la douleur, voilà ce qui n'est pas contenu dans la douleur ou dans le plaisir eux-mêmes, voilà l'opération des principes. C'est le fait premier au-delà duquel il n'y a pas à remonter :

        Si vous poussez plus loin vos questions et désirez connaître la raison pour laquelle un homme hait la douleur, il est impossible qu'il puisse jamais en donner une. C'est une fin dernière qui ne se rapporte jamais à un autre objet.

En faisant du plaisir une fin, les principes de la passion donnent à l'action son principe, ils font de la perspective du plaisir un motif de notre action. Donc, on voit le lien de l'action et de la relation. L'essence de l'action est dans le rapport moyen-fin. Agir c'est agencer des moyens pour réaliser une fin. Et ce rapport est bien autre chose qu'une relation. Sans doute, il contient la relation causale : tout moyen est une cause, toute fin est un effet. La causalité jouit d'un privilège considérable sur les autres relations [...]."
(Gilles Deleuze, Empirisme et subjectivité, 1977)"

E4.2.A.6.i. "LE RAPPORT DU MOYEN A LA FIN N'EST PAS UNE SIMPLE CAUSALITE, MAIS UNE UTILITE". L'UTILE SE DEFINIT PAR L'APPROPRIATION PAR UN SUJET. La raison est "froide et désintéressée" ; elle montre les moyens mais ne motive pas l'action. C'est le "goût" (sentiment/passion) qui donne le plaisir/douleur et donc le motif.
"Mais pour qu'une cause puisse être considérée comme moyen, encore faut-il que l'effet qu'elle produit nous intéresse, c'est-à-dire que l'idée de l'effet soit d'abord posée comme fin de notre action. Le moyen déborde la cause : il faut que l'effet qu'elle produit soit considéré comme un bien, il faut que le sujet qui la met en œuvre ait une tendance à s'unir à lui. Le rapport du moyen à la fin n'est pas une simple causalité, mais une utilité, l'utile se définissant par son appropriation, par sa disposition « à promouvoir un bien ». Une cause n'est un moyen que pour un sujet qui tend à s'unir à l'effet.
Or, qu'est-ce que ces tendances subjectives à s'unir à des biens, à promouvoir des biens? Ce sont les effets des principes de l'affectivité, ce sont des impressions de réflexion, des passions. Aussi, ce qui est utile, ce n'est pas seulement telle ou telle cause envisagée par rapport à tel effet qu'on pose comme un bien, c'est aussi telle ou telle tendance à promouvoir ce bien, telle ou telle qualité maintenant envisagée par rapport aux circonstances qui s'accordent avec elle. Car il y a deux façons d'envisager les qualités humaines, colère, prudence, audace, discrétion, etc. : génériquement, comme réponses universelles possibles à des circonstances données; différentiellement, comme traits de caractère donnés, qui s'accordent ou non avec les circonstances possibles. C'est de ce dernier point de vue qu'un trait de caractère est utile ou nuisible.

        Le meilleur caractère, en vérité, s'il n'était pas trop parfait pour la nature humaine, est celui qui n'est gouverné par aucune sorte d'humeur, et qui use tour à tour de l'esprit d'entreprise et de prudence, selon que l'un ou l'autre est utile au dessein particulier qu'il poursuit... Fabius, dit Machiavel, était prudent; Scipion était entreprenant; l'un et l'autre réussirent parce que la situation des affaires romaines était particulièrement adaptée, sous le commandement de chacun d'eux, au génie propre de l'un et de l'autre. Mais ils auraient échoué tous les deux si les situations avaient été inversées. Heureux celui dont les circonstances s'accordent avec le caractère; mais plus excellent, celui qui peut accorder son caractère avec n'importe quelle circonstance.

L'utilité, en désignant le rapport du moyen à la fin, désigne aussi le rapport de l'individualité à la situation historique. L'utilitarisme est une évaluation de l'acte historique, autant qu'une théorie de l'action technique. Ce que nous appelons utile, ce ne sont pas seulement les choses, mais les passions, les sentiments, les caractères. Bien plus, notre jugement moral ne porte pas sur l'utilité des choses, mais d'une certaine façon qui reste à préciser, sur l'utilité des caractères. Et voilà le deuxième argument en vertu duquel la morale comme norme de l'action ne se ramène pas à la raison. La raison a bien un double rôle. Elle nous fait connaître les causes et les effets, elle nous dit si « nous choisissons des moyens pertinents pour obtenir la fin projetée »; mais encore faut-il qu'une fin soit projetée. D'autre part, c'est à la raison de nous faire connaître et de démêler toutes les circonstances; mais le sentiment qui se produit en fonction du tout des circonstances dépend d'une « constitution naturelle de l'esprit »,

        il faut nécessairement qu'un sentiment se manifeste ici pour nous faire préférer les tendances utiles aux tendances nuisibles.

Ce n'est pas un hasard si la morale a le droit de parler précisément sur ces sujets où la raison n'a rien à dire. Comment parle-t-elle ? Quel discours tient-elle sur les fins et sur les caractères ? Nous ne le savons pas encore, mais au moins nous savons que : « la raison qui est froide et désintéressée n'est pas un motif pour l'action; elle dirige seulement l'impulsion reçue de l'appétit ou de l'inclination, en nous montrant le moyen d'atteindre le bonheur ou d'éviter le malheur; le goût donne plaisir et douleur et par là il engendre le bonheur et le malheur; aussi devient-il un motif de l'action; il est le premier ressort, la première impulsion du désir et de la volonté »."
(Gilles Deleuze, Empirisme et subjectivité, 1977)"

E4.2.A.3. The Legislative Will.
Truth is deconstructed not as an abstract absolute, but as the realization of a specific value hierarchy (High/Low, Noble/Base).

E4.2.A.3_REF1_PH BY DEFINING "TRUTHS" AS MERELY "VALUES THAT HAVE COME TO DOMINATE", NIETZSCHE DECONSTRUCTS THE "ORDER OF PRIMACY." He argues that what we call theoretical truth is actually a fossilized valuation, subordinated to the creative capacity to create new values that are more adapted to our time.
"J’insiste pour que l’on cesse enfin de confondre les ouvriers de la philosophie et les hommes de science en général avec les philosophes, — pour que sur ce point précis, on donne avec rigueur « à chacun ce qui est à lui » et non pas trop aux uns et bien trop peu aux autres. Il est peut-être nécessaire à l’éducation du véritable philosophe qu’il ait lui-même parcouru une fois tous les degrés auxquels s’arrêtent, — doivent nécessairement s’arrêter ses serviteurs, les ouvriers scientifiques de la philosophie ; il lui faut peut-être avoir été lui-même critique, sceptique, dogmatique, historien et en outre poète, collectionneur, voyageur, devineur d’énigmes, moraliste, prophète, « esprit libre », et presque toute chose pour balayer le spectre des valeurs et des sentiments de valeur humains et pour pouvoir regarder avec toutes sortes d’yeux et de conscience, d’en haut en direction des horizons lointains, depuis les profondeurs en direction de toute hauteur, depuis son recoin en direction de toutes les étendues. Mais toutes ces choses ne sont que des conditions préparatoires à sa tâche : cette tâche elle-même veut quelque chose d’autre, — elle exige qu’il crée des valeurs. Ces ouvriers philosophiques répondant au noble modèle de Kant et de Hegel ont à établir et réduire en formules tous les grands faits relatifs aux évaluations — c’est-à-dire aux fixations de valeurs, aux créations de valeurs opérées autrefois, qui en sont venues à dominer et ont été appelées pour quelque temps « vérités (1) » —, que ce soit dans le domaine du logique, ou du politique (du moral), ou de l’artistique. Il incombe à ces chercheurs de permettre d’embrasser du regard, d’embrasser par la pensée, de saisir, de manipuler tout ce qui s’est produit et a été apprécié jusqu’à présent, d’abréger tout ce qui est long, jusqu’au « temps » lui-même, et de se rendre maîtres de tout le passé : tâche formidable et prodigieuse au service de laquelle tout orgueil subtil, toute volonté opiniâtre pourra à coup sûr trouver de quoi se satisfaire. Mais les philosophes véritables sont des hommes qui commandent et qui légifèrent : Ils disent « il en sera ainsi ! », ils déterminent en premier lieu le vers où ? et le pour quoi faire (2) ? de l’homme et disposent à cette occasion du travail préparatoire de tous les ouvriers philosophiques, de tous ceux qui se sont rendus maîtres du passé, — ils tendent une main créatrice pour s’emparer de l’avenir et tout ce qui est et fut devient pour eux, ce faisant, moyen, instrument, marteau . Leur « connaître » est un créer, leur créer est un légiférer, leur volonté de vérité est — volonté de puissance (3) . — Existe-t-il de tels philosophes, ne faut-il pas nécessairement qu’existent de tels philosophes?..."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Par-delà bien et mal, Aphorisme 211, 1886)

"Note (1): "Nouvel exemple du travail de traduction qu’implique la tâche généalogique. Nietzsche donne ici une caractérisation précise de la notion de vérité — valeur particulière parvenue à s’imposer et à dominer dans un cadre culturel déterminé (historiquement, géographiquement, etc.). Il est particulièrement éclairant de relire la première section, et spécialement le premier paragraphe à la lumière de cette élucidation qui explique en quoi les philosophes sont demeurés prisonniers de préjugés."
Note (2): "Wohin ? wozu ? : formule capitale que Nietzsche utilise à plusieurs reprises pour souligner le déplacement qu’implique en philosophie la mise en place de la problématique de la valeur. Il s’agit bien, pour déterminer la valeur de telles ou telles valeurs, d’examiner leurs conséquences quant à l’évolution du type humain."
Note (3): "On sera attentif au rapprochement suggéré par les deux termes que Nietzsche choisit d’écrire en italique : « créer » et « volonté de puissance »."
(Patrick Wotling)

E4.2.A.3_REF2_PH LE SAVANT EST UN SPECIALISTE ; LE PHILOSOPHE DOIT ETRE UN CREATEUR DE VALEURS. Nietzsche définit la tâche spécifique du philosophe non pas comme l'apprentissage de faits, mais comme l'exigence d'un "jugement, un oui ou un non... sur la vie et la valeur de la vie". C'est l'essence de la Primauté : évaluer ce qui vaut, et non seulement décrire ce qui est.
"Les dangers qui menacent le développement du philosophe sont aujourd’hui à vrai dire si multiples que l’on pourrait douter que ce fruit puisse encore parvenir simplement à maturation. L’ampleur et l’élévation vertigineuse des sciences a pris des proportions formidables, et également, de ce fait, la probabilité que le philosophe se fatigue déjà en apprenant ou se laisse fixer et « spécialiser » quelque part : de sorte qu’il ne parvient plus à son sommet, c’est-à-dire à son regard surplombant, englobant, descendant. Ou bien il y parvient trop tard, lorsque le meilleur de son temps et de sa force est déjà passé ; ou bien diminué, devenu grossier, dégénéré, de sorte que son regard, son jugement de valeur dans son ensemble ne signifie plus que peu de chose. C’est précisément la subtilité de sa conscience en matière intellectuelle qui le fait hésiter et le ralentit en chemin; il craint la séduction qui égare jusqu’à mener au dilettante, au mille-pattes, à l’insecte au mille antennes, il ne sait que trop que celui qui a perdu le respect de soi-même ne commande plus, ne guide plus comme homme de connaissance non plus : à moins de vouloir se transformer en grand comédien, en Cagliostro philosophique et en ensorceleur 1 d’esprits, bref en séducteur. C’est finalement une question de goût : quand bien même ce ne serait pas une question de conscience. À quoi s’ajoute, pour redoubler encore la difficulté du philosophe, qu’il exige de lui-même un jugement, un oui ou un non, non pas sur les sciences, mais sur la vie et la valeur de la vie, — qu’il n’en vient qu’avec difficulté à croire qu’il a le droit, ou même le devoir de porter ce jugement, et qu’il ne doit se frayer son chemin vers ce droit et cette croyance qu’à partir des expériences vécues les plus vastes — peut-être les plus troublantes et les plus destructrices —, et ce, souvent, en hésitant, en doutant, en gardant le silence. De fait, la foule a longtemps confondu et méconnu le philosophe, en le prenant soit pour le scientifique et le savant idéals, soit pour l’exalté plein d’élévation religieuse, désensualisé, « démondanisé 2 », l’ivrogne de Dieu ; et si l’on entend aujourd’hui louer quelqu’un de vivre « sagement » ou « en philosophe », cela ne signifie presque rien de plus que « prudemment et à l’écart ». La sagesse : pour le peuple, cela semble être une espèce de fuite, un moyen et une astuce pour se tirer à bon compte d’un jeu dangereux ; mais le véritable philosophe — à ce qu’il nous semble, mes amis ? — vit de manière « non philosophique » et « non sage », et surtout imprudente, et il ressent le fardeau et le devoir de cent tentatives et tentations de vie : — il se risque constamment, il joue le jeu dangereux …"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Par-delà bien et mal, Aphorisme 205, 1886)

Note (1): "Rattenfänger : c’est-à-dire, littéralement, « attrapeur de rats », image empruntée au conte du joueur de flûte de Hameln. Le qualificatif est appliqué à Socrate dans le paragraphe 340 du Gai savoir; il sera encore appliqué à Dionysos dans le paragraphe 295 de Par-delà bien et mal."
Note (2): "Littéralement : « d’un mauvais jeu », ou « d’un méchant jeu » — la formule faisant allusion à la problématique des valeurs morales : le philosophe est par nécessité du côté de ce que l’on juge mauvais, ou méchant."
(Patrick Wotling)

E4.2.A.3_REF3_PH GOLDSTEIN DEFINES PROGRESS NOT AS TECHNICAL ACCUMULATION (SCIENCE), BUT AS THE EXPANSION OF "TO WHOM WE HOLD OURSELVES ACCOUNTABLE."
"Has philosophy progressed at all since the time of Plato?
Maybe the gauge of progress in philosophy is to whom we hold ourselves accountable? Philosophers' role is to point out to a certain incoherence in the status quo that is working for the powerful and start a reflection that translates in groups denied of moral rights to be integrated to the public we hold ourselves accountable to. Yesterday those groups were slaves, women, children, today those groups are homosexuals, animals and maybe machines one day? 
Philosophers are bound to demean the stake others have in how they resolve core human issues and be somehow revolutionary and somewhat insulting to the status quo."
(Rebecca Newberger Goldstein on Progress in Philosophy, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the podcast: https://philosophybites.com/podcast/rebecca-newberger-goldstein-on-progress-in-philosophy/

E4.2.A.3_REF4_PH NIETZSCHE PROPOSE UNE PENSEE DETERMINEE PAR DES FORCES ET DES VALEURS (NOBLE/VIL, HAUT/BAS) PLUTOT QUE PAR LE VRAI/FAUX. 
"NOUVELLE IMAGE DE LA PENSÉE 
L’image dogmatique de la pensée apparaît dans trois thèses essentielles : 1° On nous dit que le penseur en tant que penseur veut et aime le vrai (véracité du penseur) ; que la pensée comme pensée possède ou contient formellement le vrai (innéité de l’idée, a priori des concepts) ; que penser est l’exercice naturel d’une faculté, qu’il suffit donc de penser « vraiment » pour penser avec vérité (nature droite de la pensée, bon sens universellement partagé) ; 2° On nous dit aussi que nous sommes détournés du vrai, mais par des forces étrangères à la pensée (corps, passions, intérêts sensibles). Parce que nous ne sommes pas seulement des êtres pensants, nous tombons dans l’erreur, nous prenons le faux pour le vrai. L’erreur : tel serait le seul effet, dans la pensée comme telle, des forces extérieures qui s’opposent à la pensée ; 3° On nous dit enfin qu’il suffit d’une méthode pour bien penser, pour penser vraiment. La méthode est un artifice, mais par lequel nous rejoignons la nature de la pensée, nous adhérons à cette nature et conjurons l’effet des forces étrangères qui l’altèrent et nous distraient. Par la méthode, nous conjurons l’erreur. Peu importent l’heure et le lieu, si nous appliquons la méthode : elle nous fait pénétrer dans le domaine de « ce qui vaut en tous temps, en tous lieux ». 

Le plus curieux dans cette image de la pensée, c’est la manière dont le vrai y est conçu comme un universel abstrait. Jamais on ne se rapporte à des forces réelles qui font la pensée, jamais on ne rapporte la pensée elle-même aux forces réelles qu’elle suppose en tant que pensée. Jamais on ne rapporte le vrai à ce qu’il présuppose. Or il n’y a pas de vérité qui, avant d’être une vérité, ne soit I’effectuation d’un sens ou la réalisation d’une valeur. La vérité comme concept est tout à fait indéterminée. Tout dépend de la valeur et du sens de ce que nous pensons. Les vérités, nous avons toujours celles que nous méritons en fonction du sens de ce que nous concevons, de la valeur de ce que nous croyons. Car un sens pensable ou pensé est toujours effectué, dans la mesure où les forces qui lui correspondent dans la pensée s’emparent aussi de quelque chose, s’approprient quelque chose hors de la pensée. Il est clair que jamais la pensée ne pense par elle-même, pas plus qu’elle ne trouve par elle-même le vrai. La vérité d’une pensée doit être interprétée et évaluée d’après les forces ou la puissance qui la déterminent à penser, et à penser ceci plutôt que cela. Quand on nous parle de la vérité « tout court », du vrai tel qu’il est en soi, pour soi ou même pour nous, nous devons demander quelles forces se cachent dans la pensée de cette vérité-là, donc quel est son sens et quelle est sa valeur. [...]

Une nouvelle image de la pensée signifie d’abord ceci : le vrai n’est pas l’élément de la pensée. L’élément de la pensée est le sens et la valeur. Les catégories de la pensée ne sont pas le vrai et le faux, mais le noble et le vil, le haut et le bas, d’après la nature des forces qui s’emparent de la pensée elle-même. Du vrai comme du faux, nous avons toujours la part que nous méritons : les vérités de la bassesse, des vérités qui sont celles de l’esclave. Inversement, nos plus hautes pensées font la part du faux ; bien plus, elles ne renoncent jamais à faire du faux une haute puissance, une puissance affirmative et artiste, qui trouve dans l’œuvre d’art son effectuation, sa vérification, son devenir-vrai. Il en découle une seconde conséquence : l’état négatif de la pensée n’est pas l’erreur. L’inflation du concept d’erreur en philosophie témoigne de la persistance de l’image dogmatique. D’après celle-ci, tout ce qui s’oppose en fait à la pensée n’a qu’un effet sur la pensée comme telle : l’induire en erreur."
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche et la philosophie, 1962)

E4.2.B. Values as Social Commodities

E4.2.B.1. The Architecture of Value: From Brute Facts to Institutional Rules.
Values and obligations are not arbitrary but created by constitutive rules, much like a game.

E4.2.B.1_REF1_LIT

EL3.110. "YOU CAN MAKE A THING SO PERFECT THAT IT’S RUINED
A finite game is played to win; there are clear victors and losers. An infinite game is played to keep playing; the goal is to maximize winning across all participants. Debate is a finite game. Marriage is an infinite game. The midterm elections are finite games. American democracy is an infinite game. A great deal of unnecessary suffering in the world comes from not knowing the difference. A bad fight can destroy a marriage. A challenged election can destabilize a democracy. In baseball, winning the World Series is a finite game, while growing the popularity of Major League Baseball is an infinite game."
(Derek Thompson, The Atlantic, 2022)

E4.2.B.1_REF2_PH

EL3.104. PHILIP PETTIT ON THE BIRTH OF ETHICS
"Ethics is more than altruistic behavior - we have now many explanations for altruistic behavior displayed by animals. Ethics only occurs when you have conscious concepts that are regulating the behavior. So ethics requires language in order to develop the concepts of the valuable, the responsible, etc.
Counterfactual stories are often very illuminating. One exemple is to account for the birth of money by the counterfactual story of a society without currency and how it would necessarily emerge in a sedentary agricultural society, where barter would not be enough to enable a fluid satisfaction of the diverse needs of each individual. Many historian argue now that there never was a pure barter society, but the "what if" counterfactual story about the birth of money is still illuminating about the nature and role of money.
Pettit suggest a counterfactual story about the genealogy or birth of ethics. He starts from differentiating value concepts "what you ought to do" and responsibility concepts "to what extent are you responsible for". the story begins in a society that uses language only to communicate information to one another. As the story develops, people will have an interest in developing their credibility. If an information I gave reveals itself to be wrong, I can get off the hook by either argue that I misunderstood the situation, or that the situation changed. To gain credibility when I speak I can make it expensive to communicate my  attitude by expressing my desire and not just a fact: Not only "I come in peace", but "I believe peace is the best state of society and I want to zeal in its favor". This makes it harder for me to get off the hook if I turn out to behave in an agressive manner because it would contradict my prior affirmation that I desire peace, I can't say "I must have gotten that desire wrong". We care for our reputation and defecting on an expressed desire has repercussions on my ability to cooperate with my peers. Ounce we make ourselves more credible by avowing our desires, we encounter situations when our desires contradict our original vow: we really want to cheat this time; or be violent. When the division within the self between what is valued and what is desired is consciously recognized, is the moment of the birth of ethics. Ethics would then be the result of social interaction and the result of an individual coming to a reasonable conclusion in isolation. This view contradicts the cartesian view of ethics.
In the counterfactual story, Pettit associates the responsibility concept to pledges (whereas the valuable is associated to desire). With the pledge, I not only forgo the excuse that "I had my desire wrong", but I also forgo the one that "I changed my mind". So a pledge is even more expensive in terms of reputation that an avowed desire.
From there on, if we all agree that we care for reputation, anyone of us can exhort the other to behave in accordance to his pledges - introducing the concept of responsibility."
(Philip Pettit on the Birth of Ethics, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: https://philosophybites.com/2019/02/philip-pettit-on-the-birth-of-ethics.html

E4.2.B.1_REF3_PH DANS L'UNIVERS DU JEU, IL N'Y A JAMAIS DE DOUTE SUR QUI A RAISON: IL SUFFIT DE SUIVRE LA REGLE DU JEU.
"Tout jeu a ses règles. Elles déterminent ce qui aura force de loi dans le cadre du monde temporaire tracé par le jeu. Les règles d’un jeu sont absolument impérieuses et indiscutables. Paul Valéry l’a dit un jour en passant, et c’est une idée d’une portée peu commune : au point de vue des règles d’un jeu, aucun scepticisme n’est possible. Car le principe qui les détermine est donné ici pour inébranlable. Aussitôt que les règles sont violées, l’univers du jeu s’écroule."
(Johan Huizinga, Homo ludens, Essai sur la fonction sociale du jeu, 1951)

E4.2.B.1_REF4_PH JOHN SEARLE ARGUES THAT OBLIGATIONS AND VALUES ("OUGHT") ARE DERIVED FROM FACTUAL PREMISES ("IS") THROUGH "INSTITUTIONAL FACTS" AND "CONSTITUTIVE RULES" (LIKE THE RULES OF A GAME).

“HOW TO DERIVE "OUGHT" FROM "IS"
I
IT IS often said that one cannot derive an "ought" from
an "is." This thesis, which comes from a famous passage in
Hume's Treatise, while not as clear as it might be, is at least
clear in broad outline: there is a class of statements of fact which
is logically distinct from a class of statements of value. No set of
statements of fact by themselves entails any statement of value.
Put in more contemporary terminology, no set of descriptive
statements can entail an evaluative statement without the addition
of at least one evaluative premise. To believe otherwise is to
commit what has been called the naturalistic fallacy.
I shall attempt to demonstrate a counterexample to this
thesis.2 It is not of course to be supposed that a single counterexample
can refute a philosophical thesis, but in the present
instance if we can present a plausible counterexample and can
in addition give some account or explanation of how and why
it is a counterexample, and if we can further offer a theory to
back up our counterexample-a theory which will generate an
indefinite number of counterexamples-we may at the very least
cast considerable light on the original thesis; and possibly, if we
can do all these things, we may even incline ourselves to the view
that the scope of that thesis was more restricted than we had
originally supposed. A counterexample must proceed by taking
a statement or statements which any proponent of the thesis
would grant were purely factual or "descriptive" (they need not
actually contain the word "is") and show how they are logically
related to a statement which a proponent of the thesis would
regard as clearly "evaluative." (In the present instance it will
contain an "ought".
Consider the following series of statements:
(1) Jones uttered the words "I hereby promise to pay you,
Smith, five dollars."
(2) Jones promised to pay Smith five dollars.
(3) Jones placed himself under (undertook) an obligation
to pay Smith five dollars.
(4) Jones is under an obligation to pay Smith five dollars.
(5) Jones ought to pay Smith five dollars.
I shall argue concerning this list that the relation between any
statement and its successor, while not in every case one of "entailment,"
is nonetheless not just a contingent relation; and the
additional statements necessary to make the relationship one of
entailment do not need to involve any evaluative statements,
moral principles, or anything of the sort.
Let us begin. How is (1) related to (2)? In certain circumstances,
uttering the words in quotation marks in (1) is the act
of making a promise. And it is a part of or a consequence of the
meaning of the words in (1) that in those circumstances uttering
them is promising. "I hereby promise" is a paradigm device
in English for performing the act described in (2), promising.
Let us state this fact about English usage in the form of an
extra premise:
(1a) Under certain conditions C anyone who utters the words
(sentence) "I hereby promise to pay you, Smith, five dollars"
promises to pay Smith five dollars.
What sorts of things are involved under the rubric "conditions
C?" What is involved will be all those conditions, those
states of affairs, which are necessary and sufficient conditions
for the utterance of the words (sentence) to constitute the successful
performance of the act of promising. The conditions will
include such things as that the speaker is in the presence of the
hearer Smith, they are both conscious, both speakers of English,
speaking seriously. The speaker knows what he is doing, is not
under the influence of drugs, not hypnotized or acting in a play,
not telling a joke or reporting an event, and so forth. This list
will no doubt be somewhat indefinite because the boundaries
of the concept of a promise, like the boundaries of most concepts
in a natural language, are a bit loose.4 But one thing is clear;
however loose the boundaries may be, and however difficult it
may be to decide marginal cases, the conditions under which
a man who utters "I hereby promise" can correctly be said to
have made a promise are straightforwardly empirical conditions.
So let us add as an extra premise the empirical assumption
that these conditions obtain.
(1b) Conditions C obtain.
From (1), (1a), and (1b) we derive (2). The argument is of the
form: If C then (if U then P): C for conditions, U for utterance,
P for promise. Adding the premises U and C to this hypothetical
we derive (2). And as far as I can see, no moral premises are
lurking in the logical woodpile. More needs to be said about the
relation of (1) to (2), but I reserve that for later.
What is the relation between (2) and (3) ? I take it that promising
is, by definition, an act of placing oneself under an obligation.
No analysis of the concept of promising will be complete
which does not include the feature of the promiser placing himself
under or undertaking or accepting or recognizing an obligation
to the promise, to perform some future course of action, normally
for the benefit of the promisee. One may be tempted to think
that promising can be analyzed in terms of creating expectations
in one's hearers, or some such, but a little reflection will show
that the crucial distinction between statements of intention on
the one hand and promises on the other lies in the nature and
degree of commitment or obligation undertaken in promising.
I am therefore inclined to say that (2) entails (3) straight
off, but I can have no objection if anyone wishes to add-for the
purpose of formal neatness- the tautological premise:
(2a) All promises are acts of placing oneself under (undertaking)
an obligation to do the thing promised.
How is (3) related to (4)? If one has placed oneself under
an obligation, then, other things being equal, one is under an
obligation. That I take it also is a tautology. Of course it is possible
for all sorts of things to happen which will release one from
obligations one has undertaken and hence the need for the
ceteris paribus rider. To get an entailment between (3) and (4)
we therefore need a qualifying statement to the effect that:
(3a) Other things are equal.
Formalists, as in the move from (2) to (3), may wish to add the
tautological premise:
(3b) All those who place themselves under an obligation are,
other things being equal, under an obligation.
The move from (3) to (4) is thus of the same form as the move
from (1) to (2): If E then (if PUO then UO): E for other things
are equal, PUO for place under obligation and UO for under
obligation. Adding the two premises E and PUO we derive UO.
Is (3a), the ceterisp aribus clause, a concealed evaluative premise?
It certainly looks as if it might be, especially in the formulation
I have given it, but I think we can show that, though questions
about whether other things are equal frequently involve evaluative
considerations, it is not logically necessary that they should in
every case. I shall postpone discussion of this until after the next
step.
What is the relation between (4) and (5) ? Analogous to the
tautology which explicates the relation of (3) and (4) there is
here the tautology that, other things being equal, one ought to
do what one is under an obligation to do. And here, just as in the
previous case, we need some premise of the form:
(4a) Other things are equal.
that something extraneous to the relation of "obligation" to
"ought" might interfere. Here, as in the previous two steps,
we eliminate the appearance of enthymeme by pointing out that
the apparently suppressed premise is tautological and hence,
though formally neat, it is redundant. If, however, we wish to
state it formally, this argument is of the same form as the move
from (3) to (4): If E then (if UO then 0); E for other things are
equal, UO for under obligation, 0 for ought. Adding the premises
E and UO we derive 0.
Now a word about the phrase "other things being equal" and
how it functions in my attempted derivation. This topic and the
closely related topic of defeasibility are extremely difficult and
I shall not try to do more than justify my claim that the satisfaction
of the condition does not necessarily involve anything
evaluative. The force of the expression "other things being
equal" in the present instance is roughly this. Unless we have
some reason (that is, unless we are actually prepared to give
some reason) for supposing the obligation is void (step 4) or the
agent ought not to keep the promise (step 5), then the obligation
holds and he ought to keep the promise. It is not part of the force
of the phrase "other things being equal" that in order to satisfy
it we need to establish a universal negative proposition to the
effect that no reason could ever be given by anyone for supposing
the agent is not under an obligation or ought not to keep the
promise. That would be impossible and would render the phrase
useless. It is sufficient to satisfy the condition that no reason to
the contrary can in fact be given.
If a reason is given for supposing the obligation is void or that
the promiser ought not to keep a promise, then characteristically
a situation calling for an evaluation arises. Suppose,
for example, we consider a promised act wrong, but we grant that
promise? There is no established procedure for objectively
deciding such cases in advance, and an evaluation (if that is
really the right word) is in order. But unless we have some reason
to the contrary, the ceteris paribus condition is satisfied, no evaluation
is necessary, and the question whether he ought to do it is
settled by saying "he promised." It is always an open possibility
that we may have to make an evaluation in order to derive "he
ought" from "he promised," for we may have to evaluate a
counterargument. But an evaluation is not logically necessary
in every case, for there may as a matter of fact be no counterarguments.
I am therefore inclined to think that there is nothing
necessarily evaluative about the ceteris paribus condition, even
though deciding whether it is satisfied will frequently involve
evaluations.
But suppose I am wrong about this: would that salvage the
belief in an unbridgeable logical gulf between "is" and "ought" ?
I think not, for we can always rewrite my steps (4) and (5) so that
they include the ceteris paribus clause as part of the conclusion.
Thus from our premises we would then have derived "Other
things being equal Jones ought to pay Smith five dollars," and
that would still be sufficient to refute the tradition, for we would
still have shown a relation of entailment between descriptive and
evaluative statements. It was not the fact that extenuating
circumstances can void obligations that drove philosophers to the
naturalistic fallacy fallacy; it was rather a theory of language, as
we shall see later on.
We have thus derived (in as strict a sense of "derive" as natural
languages will admit of) an "ought" from an "is." And the extra
premises which were needed to make the derivation work were
in no cause moral or evaluative in nature. They consisted of
empirical assumptions, tautologies, and descriptions of word
usage. It must be pointed out also that the "ought" is a "categorical"
not a "hypothetical" ought. (5) does not say that Jones
ought to pay up if he wants such and such. It says he ought to pay
up, period. Note also that the steps of the derivation are carried on
in the third person. We are not concluding "I ought" from "I
said 'I promise,' " but "he ought" from "he said 'I promise.'
The proof unfolds the connection between the utterance of
certain words and the speech act of promising and then in turn
unfolds promising into obligation and moves from obligation to
"ought." The step from 1i) to (2) is radically different from the
others and requires special comment. In (i) we construe "I
hereby promise .. ." as an English phrase having a certain
meaning. It is a consequence of that meaning that the utterance
of that phrase under certain conditions is the act of promising.
Thus by presenting the quoted expressions in (1) and by describing
their use in (1a) we have as it were already invoked the institution
of promising. We might have started with an even more groundfloor
premise than (1) by saying:
(1b) Jones uttered the phonetic sequence: /ai+hirbai+pramis+
topei+yu+smiO+faiv+dalbrz/
We would then have needed extra empirical premises stating
that this phonetic sequence was associated in certain ways with
certain meaningful units relative to certain dialects.
The moves from (2) to (5) are relatively easy. We rely on
definitional connections between "promise," "obligate," and
"ought," and the only problem which arises is that obligations
can be overridden or removed in a variety of ways and we need
to take account of that fact. We solve our difficulty by adding
further premises to the effect that there are no contrary considerations,
that other things are equal.”
(John R. Searle, How to Derive "Ought" from "Is", 1964)


E4.2.B.1_REF4.1_PH  JOHN SEARLE ARGUES THAT OBLIGATIONS AND VALUES ("OUGHT") ARE DERIVED FROM FACTUAL PREMISES ("IS") THROUGH "INSTITUTIONAL FACTS" AND "CONSTITUTIVE RULES" (LIKE THE RULES OF A GAME). (continued 1)

“HOW TO DERIVE "OUGHT" FROM "IS"
II
In this section I intend to discuss three possible objections to
the derivation.
First Objection
Since the first premise is descriptive and the conclusion evaluative,
there must be a concealed evaluative premise in the
description of the conditions in (1b).
So far, this argument merely begs the question by assuming
the logical gulf between descriptive and evaluative which the
stick, the defender of the distinction would have to show how
exactly (1b) must contain an evaluative premise and what sort
of premise it might be. Uttering certain words in certain conditions
just is promising and the description of these conditions needs no
evaluative element. The essential thing is that in the transition
from (1) to (2) we move from the specification of a certain
utterance of words to the specification of a certain speech act.
The move is achieved because the speech act is a conventional
act; and the utterance of the words, according to the conventions,
constitutes the performance of just that speech act.
A variant of this first objection is to say: all you have shown is
that "promise" is an evaluative, not a descriptive, concept.
But this objection again begs the question and in the end will
prove disastrous to the original distinction between descriptive
and evaluative. For that a man uttered certain words and that
these words have the meaning they do are surely objective facts.
And if the statement of these two objective facts plus a description
of the conditions of the utterance is sufficient to entail the statement
(2) which the objector alleges to be an evaluative statement
(Jones promised to pay Smith five dollars), then an evaluative
conclusion is derived from descriptive premises without even
going through steps (3), (4), and (5).
Second Objection
Ultimately the derivation rests on the principle that one ought to
keep one's promises and that is a moral principle, hence evaluative.
I don't know whether "one ought to keep one's promises"
is a "moral" principle, but whether or not it is, it is also tautological;
for it is nothing more than a derivation from the two
tautologies:
All promises are (create, are undertakings of, are acceptances
of) obligations,
and
One ought to keep (fulfill) one's obligations.
What needs to be explained is why so many philosophers have
failed to see the tautological character of this principle. Three
things I think have concealed its character from them.
institution of promising from internal questions asked within
the framework of the institution. The questions "Why do we have
such an institution as promising?" and "Ought we to have such
institutionalized forms of obligation as promising?" are external
questions asked about and not within the institution of promising.
And the question "Ought one to keep one's promises?" can be
confused with or can be taken as (and I think has often been
taken as) an external question roughly expressible as "Ought one
to accept the institution of promising?" But taken literally, as
an internal question, as a question about promises and not about
the institution of promising, the question "Ought one to keep
one's promises ?" is as empty as the question "Are triangles three-sided?"
To recognize something as a promise is to grant that,
other things being equal, it ought to be kept.
A second fact which has clouded the issue is this. There are
many situations, both real and imaginable, where one ought
not to keep a promise, where the obligation to keep a promise
is overridden by some further considerations, and it was for
this reason that we needed those clumsy ceteris Paribus clauses
in our derivation. But the fact that obligations can be overridden
does not show that there were no obligations in the first place.
On the contrary. And these original obligations are all that is
needed to make the proof work.
Yet a third factor is the following. Many philosophers still
fail to realize the full force of saying that "I hereby promise"
is a performative expression. In uttering it one performs but does
not describe the act of promising. Once promising is seen as a
speech act of a kind different from describing, then it is easier
to see that one of the features of the act is the undertaking of an
obligation. But if one thinks the utterance of "I promise" or
"I hereby promise" is a peculiar kind of description-for example,
of one's mental state-then the relation between promising
and obligation is going to seem very mysterious.
Third Objection
The derivation uses only a factual or inverted-commas sense
of the evaluative terms employed. For example, an. anthropologist 
observing the behavior and attitudes of the Anglo-
Saxons might well go through these derivations, but nothing
evaluative would be included. Thus step (2) is equivalent to
"He did what they call promising" and step (5) to "According
to them he ought to pay Smith five dollars." But since all of the
steps (2) to (5) are in oratioo bliqu and hence disguised statements
of fact, the fact-value distinction remains unaffected.
This objection fails to damage the derivation, for what it says
is only that the steps can be reconstrued as in oratio obliqua, that
we can construe them as a series of external statements, that we can
construct a parallel (or at any rate related) proof about reported
speech. But what I am arguing is that, taken quite literally,
without any oratio obliqua additions or interpretations, the derivation
is valid. That one can construct a similar argument which
would fail to refute the fact-value distinction does not show that
this proof fails to refute it. Indeed it is irrelevant.”
(John R. Searle, How to Derive "Ought" from "Is", 1964)


E4.2.B.1_REF4.2_PH JOHN SEARLE ARGUES THAT OBLIGATIONS AND VALUES ("OUGHT") ARE DERIVED FROM FACTUAL PREMISES ("IS") THROUGH "INSTITUTIONAL FACTS" AND "CONSTITUTIVE RULES" (LIKE THE RULES OF A GAME). (continued 2)
“HOW TO DERIVE "OUGHT" FROM "IS"
III
So far I have presented a counterexample to the thesis that one
cannot derive an "ought" from an "is" and considered three
possible objections to it. Even supposing what I have said so far
is true, still one feels a certain uneasiness. One feels there must
be some trick involved somewhere. We might state our uneasiness
thus: How can my granting a mere fact about a man, such as the
fact that he uttered certain words or that he made a promise,
commit me to the view that he ought to do something? I now want
briefly to discuss what broader philosophic significance my
attempted derivation may have, in such a way as to give us the
outlines of an answer to this question.
I shall begin by discussing the grounds for supposing that it
cannot be answered at all.
The inclination to accept a rigid distinction between "is"
and "ought," between descriptive and evaluative, rests on a
certain picture of the way words relate to the world. It is a very
attractive picture, so attractive (to me at least) that it is not
entirely clear to what extent the mere presentation of counterexamples
can challenge it. What is needed is an explanation of
how and why this classical empiricist picture fails to deal with such
counterexamples. Briefly, the picture is constructed something
like this: first we present examples of so-called descriptive statements
("my car goes eighty miles an hour," "Jones is six feet
tall," "Smith has brown hair"), and we contrast them with so-called
evaluative statements ("my car is a good car," "Jones
ought to pay Smith five dollars," "Smith is a nasty man").
Anyone can see that they are different. We articulate the difference
by pointing out that for the descriptive statements the question
of truth or falsity is objectively decidable, because to know the
meaning of the descriptive expressions is to know under what
objectively ascertainable conditions the statements which contain
them are true or false. But in the case of evaluative statements
the situation is quite different. To know the meaning of the
evaluative expressions is not by itself sufficient for knowing under
what conditions the statements containing them are true or false,
because the meaning of the expressions is such that the statements
are not capable of objective or factual truth or falsity at all. Any
justification a speaker can give of one of his evaluative statements
essentially involves some appeal to attitudes he holds, to criteria
of assessment he has adopted, or to moral principles by which
he has chosen to live and judge other people. Descriptive statements
are thus objective, evaluative statements subjective, and the
difference is a consequence of the different sorts of terms employed.
The underlying reason for these differences is that evaluative
statements perform a completely different job from descriptive
statements. Their job is not to describe any features of the world
but to express the speaker's emotions, to express his attitudes, to
praise or condemn, to laud or insult, to commend, to recommend,
to advise, and so forth. Once we see the different jobs the two
perform, we see that there must be a logical gulf between them.
Evaluative statements must be different from descriptive statements
in order to do their job, for if they were objective they
could no longer function to evaluate. Put metaphysically, values
cannot lie in the world, for if they did they would cease to be
values and would just be another part of the world. Put in the
formal mode, one cannot define an evaluative word in terms
of descriptive words, for if one did, one would no longer be able
to use the evaluative word to commend, but only to describe.
Put yet another way, any effort to derive an "ought" from an
"is" must be a waste of time, for all it could show even if it
succeeded would be that the "is" was not a real "is" but only
a disguised "ought" or, alternatively, that the "ought" was not
a real "ought" but only a disguised "is."
This summary of the traditional empirical view has been
very brief, but I hope it conveys something of the power of
this picture. In the hands of certain modern authors, especially
Hare and Nowell-Smith, the picture attains considerable subtlety
and sophistication.
What is wrong with this picture? No doubt many things
are wrong with it. In the end I am going to say that one of
the things wrong with it is that it fails to give us any coherent
account of such notions as commitment, responsibility, and
obligation.
In order to work toward this conclusion I can begin by saying
that the picture fails to account for the different types of "descriptive"
statements. Its paradigms of descriptive statements are
such utterances as "my car goes eighty miles an hour," "Jones
is six feet tall," "Smith has brown hair," and the like. But it
is forced by its own rigidity to construe "Jones got married,"
"Smith made a promise," "Jackson has five dollars," and "Brown
hit a home run" as descriptive statements as well. It is so forced,
because whether or not someone got married, made a promise,
has five dollars, or hit a home run is as much a matter of objective
fact as whether he has red hair or brown eyes. Yet the former
kind of statement (statements containing "married," "promise,"
and so forth) seem to be quite different from the simple empirical
paradigms of descriptive statements. How are they different?
Though both kinds of statements state matters of objective fact,
the statements containing words such as "married," "promise,"
"home run," and "five dollars" state facts whose existence
presupposes certain institutions: a man has five dollars, given the
institution of money. Take away the institution and all he has
is a rectangular bit of paper with green ink on it. A man hits a
home run only given the institution of baseball; without the
institution he only hits a sphere with a stick. Similarly, a man gets
married or makes a promise only within the institutions of
marriage and promising. Without them, all he does is utter words
or makes gestures. We might characterize such facts as institutional
facts, and contrast them with noninstitutional, or brute,
facts: that a man has a bit of paper with green ink on it is a brute
fact, that he has five dollars is an institutional fact.6 The classical
picture fails to account for the differences between statements of
brute fact and statements of institutional fact.
The word "institution" sounds artificial here, so let us ask:
what sorts of institutions are these? In order to answer that
question I need to distinguish between two different kinds of
rules or conventions. Some rules regulate antecedently existing
forms of behavior. For example, the rules of polite table behavior
regulate eating, but eating exists independently of these rules.
Some rules, on the other hand, do not merely regulate but
create or define new forms of behavior: the rules of chess, for
example, do not merely regulate an antecedently existing activity
called playing chess; they, as it were, create the possibility of or
define that activity. The activity of playing chess is constituted
by action in accordance with these rules. Chess has no existence
apart from these rules. The distinction I am trying to make was
foreshadowed by Kant's distinction between regulative and
constitutive principles, so let us adopt his terminology and
describe our distinction as a distinction between regulative and
constitutive rules. Regulative rules regulate activities whose
existence is independent of the rules; constitutive rules constitute
(and also regulate) forms of activity whose existence is
logically dependent on the rules.7
Now the institutions that I have been talking about are systems
of constitutive rules. The institutions of marriage, money, and
promising are like the institutions of baseball or chess in that they
are systems of such constitutive rules or conventions. What I have
called institutional facts are facts which presuppose such institutions.
nature of such institutional facts, it is but a short step to see that
many forms of obligations, commitments, rights, and responsibilities
are similarly institutionalized. It is often a matter of fact
that one has certain obligations, commitments, rights, and
responsibilities, but it is a matter of institutional, not brute, fact.
It is one such institutionalized form of obligation, promising,
which I invoked above to derive an "ought" from an "is."
I started with a brute fact, that a man uttered certain words,
and then invoked the institution in such a way as to generate
institutional facts by which we arrived at the institutional fact
that the man ought to pay another man five dollars. The whole
proof rests on an appeal to the constitutive rule that to make a
promise is to undertake an obligation.
We are now in a position to see how we can generate an indefinite
number of such proofs. Consider the following vastly
different example. We are in our half of the seventh inning
and I have a big lead off second base. The pitcher whirls, fires
to the shortstop covering, and I am tagged out a good ten feet
down the line. The umpire shouts, "Out!" I, however, being a
positivist, hold my ground. The umpire tells me to return to the
dugout. I point out to him that you can't derive an "ought"
from an "is." No set of descriptive statements describing matters
of fact, I say, will entail any evaluative statements to the effect
that I should or ought to leave the field. "You just can't get
orders or recommendations from facts alone." What is needed
is an evaluative major premise. I therefore return to and stay
on second base (until I am carried off the field). I think everyone
feels my claims here to be preposterous, and preposterous in the
sense of logically absurd. Of course you can derive an "ought'"
from an "is," and though to actually set out the derivation in
this case would be vastly more complicated than in the case of
promising, it is in principle no different. By undertaking to play
baseball I have committed myself to the observation of certain
constitutive rules.
We are now also in a position to see that the tautology that one
ought to keep one's promises is only one of a class of similar
tautologies concerning institutionalized forms of obligation.
For example, "one ought not to steal" can be taken as saying
that to recognize something as someone else's property necessarily
involves recognizing his right to dispose of it. This is a constitutive
rule of the institution of private property. "One ought not to
tell lies" can be taken as saying that to make an assertion
necessarily involves undertaking an obligation to speak
truthfully. Another constitutive rule. "One ought to pay one's
debts" can be construed as saying that to recognize something
as a debt is necessarily to recognize an obligation to pay it.
It is easy to see how all these principles will generate counterexamples
to the thesis that you cannot derive an "ought" from
an "is."
My tentative conclusions, then, are as follows:
1. The classical picture fails to account for institutional
facts.
2. Institutional facts exist within systems of constitutive
rules.
3. Some systems of constitutive rules involve obligations,
commitments, and responsibilities.
4. Within those systems we can derive "ought's" from "is's"
on the model of the first derivation.
With these conclusions we now return to the question with
which I began this section: How can my stating a fact about
a man, such as the fact that he made a promise, commit me to a
view about what he ought to do? One can begin to answer this
question by saying that for me to state such an institutional
fact is already to invoke the constitutive rules of the institution.
It is those rules that give the word "promise" its meaning. But
those rules are such that to commit myself to the view that Jones
made a promise involves committing myself to what he ought
to do (other things being equal).
If you like, then, we have shown that "promise" is an evaluative
word, but since it is also purely descriptive, we have really
shown that the whole distinction needs to be re-examined.
The alleged distinction between descriptive and evaluative
statements is really a conflation of at least two distinctions.
On the one hand there is a distinction between different kinds
of speech acts, one family of speech acts including evaluations,
another family including descriptions. This is a distinction between
different kinds of illocutionary force. On the other hand there is a
distinction between utterances which involve claims objectively
decidable as true or false and those which involve claims not
objectively decidable, but which are "matters of personal decision"
or "matters of opinion." It has been assumed that the former
distinction is (must be) a special case of the latter, that if something
has the illocutionary force of an evaluation, it cannot be entailed
by factual premises. Part of the point of my argument is to show
that this contention is false, that factual premises can entail
evaluative conclusions. If I am right, then the alleged distinction
between descriptive and evaluative utterances is useful only as a
distinction between two kinds of illocutionary force, describing
and evaluating, and it is not even very useful there, since if
we are to use these terms strictly, they are only two among
hundreds of kinds of illocutionary force; and utterances of
sentences of the form (5)-"Jones ought to pay Smith five dollars"
-would not characteristically fall in either class.
JOHN R. SEARLE
Universitoyf California »
(John R. Searle, How to Derive "Ought" from "Is", 1964)


E4.2.B.2. The Market of Values.
How modern society transforms absolute values (Truth, Good) into functional "social commodities" that are relative and exchangeable. Should we resist the reduction of values to economic utility and the loss of the "Absolute"?

E4.2.B.2_REF1_PH ARENDT EXPLIQUE COMMENT LA MODERNITE A DISSOUS LES NORMES ABSOLUES (LE BIEN, LE VRAI) POUR LES REMPLACER PAR DES "VALEURS" QUI NE SONT QUE DES "ENTITES D'ECHANGE" RELATIVES AU COMMERCE SOCIAL. Elle montre que la validité de ces valeurs ne dépend plus d'une vérité révélée, mais de leur fonctionnement social.
"La dévaluation nietzschéenne des valeurs, comme la théorie marxiste de la « valeur-travail », naît de l’incompatibilité entre les « idées » traditionnelles qui, en tant qu’unités transcendantes, avaient servi à reconnaître et à mesurer les pensées et actions humaines, et la société moderne qui avait dissous toutes les normes de ce genre dans les relations entre ses membres, les établissant comme « valeurs » fonctionnelles. Les valeurs sont des articles de société qui n’ont aucune signification en eux-mêmes mais qui, comme d’autres articles, n’existent que dans la relativité en perpétuel changement des relations et du commerce sociaux. Par cette relativisation, les choses que l’homme produit pour son usage et, tout à la fois, les normes conformément auxquelles il vit, subissent un changement décisif; elles deviennent des entités d’échange et le détenteur de leur «valeur» est la société et non pas l’homme qui produit, utilise et juge. Le «bien» perd son caractère d’idée, de norme par laquelle le bien et le mal peuvent être pesés et reconnus; il est devenu une valeur qui peut être échangée avec d’autres valeurs telles que celles de convenance ou de pouvoir. Le possesseur de valeurs peut refuser cet échange et devenir un «idéaliste» qui estime la valeur du « bien » plus grande que la valeur de la convenance; mais cela ne rend pas la «valeur» du bien si peu que ce soit moins relative. [...]
Depuis la naissance de la science moderne dont l’esprit s’exprime dans la philosophie cartésienne du doute et de la défiance, le cadre conceptuel de la tradition n’a plus été assuré. La dichotomie entre la contemplation et l’action, la hiérarchie traditionnelle qui voulait que la vérité fût en dernière instance perçue seulement en une vision sans parole et sans action, ne pouvait être maintenue dans des conditions telles que la science y devenait active et faisait afin de connaître. Quand la confiance en l’apparition des choses telles qu’elles sont réellement s’en était allée, le concept de vérité comme révélation était devenu douteux, et avec lui la foi aveugle en un Dieu révélé. La notion de « théorie » changea de sens. Elle ne désigna plus un système de vérités raisonnablement réunies, qui, en tant que telles, n’avaient pas été faites mais données à la raison et aux sens. Elle devint plutôt la théorie scientifique moderne qui est une hypothèse de travail changeant selon les résultats qu’elle produit et dépendant, quant à sa validité, non de ce qu’elle « révèle » mais de la question de savoir si elle «fonctionne». Par le même processus, les idées platoniciennes perdirent leur pouvoir autonome d’illuminer le monde et l’univers. Elles devinrent d’abord ce qu’elles n’avaient été pour Platon que dans leur relation au domaine politique, des normes et des unités de mesure ou bien les forces réglantes, limitantes de l’esprit rationnel propre à l’homme, telles qu’elles apparaissent chez Kant. Puis, après que la primauté de la raison sur le faire, de l’esprit prescrivant ses règles aux actions des hommes, eut été perdue dans la transformation du monde entier par la Révolution industrielle — transformation dont le succès sembla prouver que les faits et les fabrications de l’homme prescrivent leurs règles à la raison — ces idées devinrent finalement de simples valeurs dont la validité est déterminée non par un ou plusieurs hommes mais par la société comme totalité dans ses besoins fonctionnels en perpétuel changement. 
Ces valeurs dans leur é- et inter-changeabilité sont les seules «idées» laissées aux (et comprises par les) «hommes socialisés». Ceux-ci sont des hommes qui ont décidé de ne jamais quitter ce qui pour Platon était la «caverne» de affaires humaines quotidiennes, et de ne  jamais s’aventurer d’eux-mêmes dans un monde et une vie que, peut-être, la fonctionnalisation intégrale de la société moderne a privé de l’une de ses caractéristiques les plus élémentaires : saisir d’émerveillement en face de ce qui est tel qu’il est. "
(Hannah Arendt, La crise de la culture, 1954)

Il est bien aisé sur des fondemens avouez, de bastir ce qu'on veut 
(Montaigne, Les Essais, Apologie de Raimond de Sebonde, II, XII)

E4.2.B.2_REF2_PH WHEN WE VIEW VALUE MERELY AS A SUBJECTIVE PROJECTION ("VALORISATION" BASED ON MY CULTURE/TASTE), WE RENDER THE OBJECT "REPLACEABLE" AND "EXCHANGEABLE" (ECONOMIC VALUE). "true" is a discovery of an intensity within the object itself. This discovery creates irreplaceability (singularity), which opposes the logic of the commodity/exchange.
"En distinguant entre une part ou un mode d’univers recevant passivement les intensités variables qu’on lui donne, et une partie ou un mode d’univers qui les produit, qui les projette, on commet l’erreur de formaliser ce qui est objectif et d’objectiver ce qui est formel. N’est plat, sans intensité, égal, que le monde, c’est-à-dire ce qui comprend toute chose. L’univers des objets, qui se comprennent les uns les autres, n’est jamais plat : dès que les choses sont ensemble, rien n’est plat. Il est donc compact de vouloir déterminer un univers opposé à l’humain et à ses intérêts, qui recevrait les valeurs sans en posséder par lui-même. Dans l’univers tout possède déjà en un certain sens de la valeur avant qu’on la lui donne, parce que les choses n’y sont pas seules, mais entre elles. Ces choses sont donc sans cesse plus ou moins. D’autre part, formaliser l’univers objectif incline à produire une distinction, qui ne peut être formelle, entre ce qui donne de la valeur et ce qui la reçoit. Il n’y a pourtant pas de différence formelle entre l’actif et le passif, entre le naturant et le nature, entre l’humain et le non-humain, bref entre tout ce qui découpe l'univers en valorisant et en valorisé, en intensifiant et en intensifié. Formellement, il n’y a que des choses, égales, parce qu’également dans le monde - et échangeables. [...]

En revanche, si nous acceptons de considérer qu’il n’y a que des choses comparables entre elles, et pas de foyer privilégié de la valorisation de ces choses, nous comprenons que la valeur des objets et des événements appartient en quelque sens aux objets et aux événements eux-mêmes. Ce-qui est beau n’est pas que le miroir de mon intérêt ou de ma volonté de le trouver beau ; il faut bien, en quelque sorte, que ce qui est trouvé beau le soit. Si ce qu’on trouvait beau n’était pas beau, si cette valeur qu’on accorde à un visage ou à un paysage n’était jamais qu’une valorisation par celui qui trouve le visage ou le paysage à son goût, alors tout pourrait être également beau au sens où tout ce que je trouve beau pourrait être remplacé par une autre chose que je trouve belle : la valorisation permet assurément de penser la valeur de remplaçabilité de choses, c’est-à-dire qu’elle connecte entre eux les objets qui sont également valorisés. Or, trouver beau quelque chose, juger que quelque chose est vrai, c’est lui donner une valeur d’irremplaçabilité : la valeur singularise, alors que la valorisation économique génère du particulier. 
Si je considère qu’en trouvant beau un visage je le valorise, c’est-à-dire que je projette sur lui des critères, des qualités qui ne lui sont pas propres, mais qui appartiennent à mon histoire, à ma culture, à mes intérêts, à ma vision, à ma nature, je donne à ce visage une valeur de remplaçabilité : je le rends remplaçable par tout ce qui sera également jugé beau par moi, par ma culture, par ma classe, par mon goût, par mon espèce. 
Si je considère qu’en trouvant beau ce visage, au contraire, je ne fais que reconnaître quelque chose qui se trouve en lui, qui s’impose à moi, une beauté qu’il recèle, je donne à ce visage une  valeur d’irremplaçabilité : j’entends par sa beauté ce qui n’appartient qu’à lui. 
Toute valeur se trouve donc au carrefour du remplaçable et de l’irremplaçable : la valeur est l’intensité des objets et des événements qui à la fois permet leur comparaison (en termes de « plus » et de « moins »), leur échange, qui se réalise dans le circuit économique que nous avons étudié, et permet leur singularité, leur différenciation, la détermination de ce qui les rend irremplaçables. La valeur des choses est à la fois ce qui autorise d’échanger l’une contre l’autre et ce qui interdit d’échanger l’une par l’autre. 
Cette tension tient au fait que l’intensité des objets et des événements ne réside ni strictement dans une activité valorisante ni dans une objectivité (un en-soi des choses) : ce qui est beau ne doit sa beauté ni à celui qui trouve beau cet objet ni à l’objet qui serait beau par lui-même. Toute valeur tient dans ce paradoxe : ce que je trouve beau ou vrai ou bon, je le « trouve » beau, vrai ou bon ; je ne le « donne » pas (non plus que je le « reçois »), mais je le découvre dans l’objet - alors même qu’il n’est pas dans l’objet.
Le Beau, le Vrai, le Bien ne sont pas des qualités des objets, compris dans les objets : ce sont des intensités trouvées dans les objets sans qu’elles y soient. [...]"
(Tristan Garcia, Forme et Objet - un traité des choses, 2011)

E4.2.B.2.1_REF1_PH TRISTAN GRACIA ARGUES THAT THE MODERN ERA HAS ALLOWED "FORMAL VALUES" (UTILITY, ECONOMY, EXCHANGE) TO CANNIBALIZE "SUBSTANTIAL VALUES" (BEAUTY, TRUTH, GOOD).
"La valeur, c’est-à-dire l’intensité d’une chose, est conflictuelle : non extensive, elle correspond à la possibilité pour un objet, pour un événement d’être plus ou moins ce qu’il est, d’être beaucoup ou peu ce qu’il est. Or, cette intensification de la chose n’appartient ni à la chose ni à celui qui la valorise : c’est une intensité trouvée dans la chose sans qu’elle y soit. Qu’un visage soit beau signifie une sorte de redoublement du visage par lui-même, comme s’il était intensément ce qu’il est. Cette intensification trouve des règles, des canons qui sont évidemment pour part naturels et pour part culturels. Mais il demeure toujours, quelles que soient ses raisons, une intensification de l’identité de la chose : un visage qui, platement, est ce qu’il est, prend une valeur s’il devient plus ou moins lui-même. Ce faisant, il doit être activé par un regard, par quelque chose ou quelqu’un qui le trouve beau, de telle sorte que cette beauté devienne la transformation de ce qu’il est en intensité relative, en plus ou moins de soi : il s’agit de l’intensification de ce qui constitue ce visage (qui appartient au visage, pas à celui qui le regarde), mais suivant des degrés que ne maîtrise pas le visage, qui sont activés par le regard. La beauté du visage est donc trouvée par le regard, mais elle n’est rien d’autre que le visage lui-même. Ce qui est trouvé par le regard, qui est intensifié, c’est ce que le visage a d’irremplaçable. Mais ce que le visage acquiert, c’est une certaine intensité, une mesure, une gradation de beauté, un plus ou moins beau, qui est comme le chiffre de la comparaison possible de ce visage avec un autre visage. Le visage valorisé devient alors comparable avec un autre, donc échangeable (pour l’amoureux hésitant, qui doit choisir entre deux visages), jusqu’à une certaine économie, qui n’est jamais que le jeu des valeurs échangeables que nous avons discuté. 
Or, la crise des valeurs diagnostiquée en Occident depuis le XIXe siècle au moins correspond, comme nous l’avons vu dans le chapitre précédent, à un remplacement des valeurs substantielles par des valeurs formelles. Elle est l’expression de la victoire progressive de la valeur de remplaçabilité sur celle d’irremplaçabilité, du triomphe des valeurs formelles (l’utile, la valeur économique) sur des valeurs substantielles désuètes (le Beau, le Vrai, le Bien). Pourtant, les valeurs ne sont ni substantielles ni formelles : elles sont objectives. 
La « crise des valeurs » est donc un quiproquo qui consiste en la compacification progressive des deux sens de toute valeur, comme s’il s’agissait de valeurs adverses : d’une part les valeurs d’irremplaçabilité, qui seraient dans les choses mêmes ; d’autres part les valeurs économiques de remplaçabilité, qui seraient dans le rapport humain aux choses, dans leur échange. La solidification compacte de valeurs perdues - le Beau, le Vrai et le Bien - comme si c’étaient des valeurs en soi, a permis d’accompagner la solidification compacte de valeurs triomphantes - l’utile et la valeur économique. Chez ceux qui le regrettent comme chez ceux qui s’en réjouissent ce sens historique est en réalité un contresens. 
Le Beau, le Vrai, le Bien ne tiennent pas d’eux-mêmes en tant que valeurs substantielles ; mais ils ne sont pas non plus réductibles à des valeurs économiques de remplaçabilité qu’on voudrait leur imposer. Il s’agit de valeurs objectives, trouvées dans les objets sans qu’elles y soient. 
(Tristan Garcia, Forme et Objet - un traité des choses, 2011) 

E4.2.B.2_REF3_PH NIETZSCHE CRITIQUES THE MODERN DEFINITION OF MORALITY, WHICH HAS BEEN REDUCED TO SOCIAL UTILITY.
"Il n’existe peut-être pas aujourd’hui de préjugé plus répandu que celui de croire que l’on sait en quoi consiste véritablement ce qui est moral. Chacun semble maintenant entendre avec satisfaction que la société est en train d’adapter l’individu aux besoins universels, et que c’est en même temps le bonheur et le sacrifice de chacun de se considérer comme membre utile et comme instrument d’un tout [...] singulière et unanime est l’harmonie dans l’exigence que l’ego doit s’effacer jusqu’à ce qu’il reçoive de nouveau, sous forme d’adaptation au tout, son cycle immuable de droits et de devoirs, — jusqu’à ce qu’il soit devenu quelque chose de nouveau et de tout différent."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Aurore, 1881)

E4.2.B.2_REF2.2_PH TRISTAN  GARCIA DISTINGUISHES BETWEEN VALUE (AN OBJECTIVE "INTENSITY" INHERENT TO THE OBJECT) AND VALUATION (THE ECONOMIC PROJECTION OF HUMAN INTEREST ONTO A "FLAT" WORLD). THE CRISIS OF VALUES IS THE REPLACEMENT OF THE FORMER BY THE LATTER. He critiques the modern "economic conception" that treats the universe as "flat matter" (passive, interchangeable) that only gains worth through human desire. This explains the shift from "Absolute Ideas" to "Social Values."
"Le monde plat formel est la condition de possibilité des univers d’objets et d’événements qu’on obtient par l’accès au « n'importe quoi », et qui neutralise l’intensité relative des objets et des événements. Cette intensité n’a aucun sens formel. Rien n’est formellement plus beau, plus vrai ou meilleur qu’autre chose, puisque chaque chose est formellement seule et égale. Le sens des intensités est donc proprement objectif : c’est ce qu’on appelle des « valeurs ». Toutes les valeurs des objets et des événements, qu’elles soient esthétiques, économiques, logiques, éthiques, utilitaires, sont strictement objectives, puisqu’elles concernent les choses entre elles, c’est-à-dire les objets, et non les choses dans leur rapport au monde. 

Cette objectivité des valeurs est immédiatement rendue suspecte par le sentiment, renforcé par l’économie moderne, d’une relativité des valeurs, telle qu’il n’y aurait pas en réalité de valeurs, mais seulement des valorisations. Les valeurs des objets liées à une économie, à un système d’échange de ces objets que nous venons d’analyser, seraient ainsi dépendantes de la valeur qu’on leur donne. Et la source de toute valeur se situerait dans la projection par l’être humain, collectivement ou individuellement, de ses intérêts sur les choses du monde plat. Le remplacement des valeurs par des valorisations économiques consiste à mêler l’objectif au formel : l’univers des objets non humains est conçu comme le monde plat, formel, opposé à l’activité humaine qui produit du relief, un jeu d’intensité sur l’univers des objets environnants. De ce point de vue, rien n’a de valeur en soi : rien n’est beau, rien n’est vrai, rien n’est bon, sinon par rapport à l’activité humaine qui donne de la valeur aux autres objets. La beauté, dit-on alors, est dans l’œil qui la regarde, le bien dans l’intérêt de celui qui le définit, la vérité dans la bouche de celui qui l’énonce. C’est L’aboutissement d’une conception économique des objets. 

La confusion fondamentale de toute théorie de la valorisation consiste à faire comme si le monde plat non intensif, indifférent, n’était pas le monde (qui comprend chaque pierre comme chaque homme, chaque conscience) mais la part de l’univers qui comprend des objets non humains (c’est-à-dire tous les objets, sauf nous). Cet « univers plat » supposé, qui mêle le formel (la platitude, l’indifférence) et l’objectif (la différence objective entre humain et non humain), est le terrain de jeu économique par excellence sur lequel pourrait se produire la valorisation par l’activité humaine. C’est le plan économique du relatif. Le Beau dépendrait donc des époques, de l’évolution des canons, et on cite à loisir les chairs opulentes de Rubens, le beau imberbe du goût japonais ou la mode des mannequins anorexiques, comme on distingue les vérités révélées, le vrai scientifique, ou encore ce qui est bon pour le lion, qui ne l’est apparemment pas pour l’antilope. La relativité des valorisations tient au fait qu’on accorde toute l’intensité des valeurs à ceux qui les font, en ôtant toute intensité à ce qui reçoit la valeur donnée, qui est comme une matière plate, passive et indifférenciée. [...]"
(Tristan Garcia, Forme et Objet - un traité des choses, 2011)

E4.2.B.2_REF4_PSI

EL3.71. "THE ESCALATION OF COMMITMENT TO FAILING ENDEAVORS is a mistake from the perspective of the firm but not necessarily from the perspective of the executive who “owns” a floundering project. Canceling the project will leave a permanent stain on the executive’s record, and his personal interests are perhaps best served by gambling further with the organization's resources in the hope of recouping the original investment—or at least in an attempt to postpone the day of reckoning. In the presence of sunk costs, the managers incentives are misaligned with the objectives of the firm and its shareholders, a familiar type of what is known as the agency problem. Boards of directors are well aware of these conflicts and often replace a CEO who is encumbered by prior decisions and reluctant to cut losses. The members of the board do not necessarily believe that the new CEO is more competent than the one she replaces. They do know that she does not carry the same mental accounts and is therefore better able to ignore the sunk costs of past investments in evaluating current opportunities."
(Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow, 2011)

E4.2.B.2_REF5_PH

EL3.77. ON THE APPEAL OF RELATIVISM "Relativism has popular appeal. But why? Tim Williamson Wykeham Professor of Logic at Oxford University, (and also @tetralogue on Twitter),  discusses this question, and attempts to immunise us against sloppy thinking in this area.
The relativist is the one who thinks there is no absolute truth. 
Relativists tend to think that by avoiding talks of absolute truth and absolute falsity we escape the risk of the more powerful imposing their views to other people - however, you can believe there is absolute truth without imposing it on other people.
Moral relativism is appealing because moral values have clearly changed over time, advocating for the fact that there is no absolute moral truth. If one confines himself to morality, there is some ground to say relativism is absolutely true, however relativism doesn't imply you are tolerant because you still have your personal opinion.
Just by thinking things you are committed to an asymmetry between those who think that way and those who think the opposite. Even Nietzsche had a clear position on how things are and regarded people who disagreed as mistaken. Believing in absolute truth is a logical consequence of thinking. 
Isn't Relativism a confusion that undermines one's own thinking and puts one at peace with positions we profoundly disagree with?"
(Tim Williamson on the Appeal of Relativism, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: https://philosophybites.com/podcast/tim-williamson-on-the-appeal-of-relativism/

E4.2.B.2_REF6_PH

EL3.79. ON BERNARD WILLIAMS' ETHICS "Bernard Williams was one of the most brilliant philosophers of his generation. In this episode of the Philosophy Bites, Adrian Moore, who knew him well, discusses his views about ethics.
For Williams we cannot take for granted moral decisions as crudely as does utilitarism (ex: killing 1 person to give his organs to save another 5 people) or Kant´s moral obligations categorically eclipsing other obligations we have.
Williams believed the philosopher´s task is to combat over-simplification. For example there is nothing as a precise definition of what is right or wrong. Similarly, the divide between how the world is in reality and what is our perception of it has a thick and fizzy boundary. Williams investigated the concept of thick ethical concepts such as blasphemy or chastity which are both grounded on facts in reality (a certain behavior) and on evaluative concepts (it was a good thing in some cultures at some point in time). Because these concepts evolve in time, Williams' view comes with a dose of relativism, but not all the way to "everything goes". Williams believed we should oppose aspects of some culture we find pernicious. His relativism was restricted to historical considerations in cultures we have no more contact with."
(Adrian Moore on Bernard Williams' Ethics, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: https://philosophybites.com/podcast/adrian-moore-on-bernard-williams-on-ethics/

E4.2.B.3. Navigating Conflicting values.
The tragedy of the modern individual torn between the economic and moral order.

E4.2.B.3_REF1_PH ANDRÉ COMTE-SPONVILLE DISTINGUE QUATRE ORDRES DE LA SOCIÉTÉ : TECHNO-SCIENTIFIQUE, JURIDICO-POLITIQUE, MORALE ET ÉTHIQUE/AMOUR, CHACUN AYANT SA PROPRE LOGIQUE ET INFLUENÇANT LES AUTRES. Cette hiérarchie croisée montre que ce qui est subjectivement important pour l'individu n'est pas toujours ce qui est objectivement crucial pour les groupes, et vice versa. 
"Cette dialectique, qui vaut à l’échelle du monde, vaut aussi à celle de la société. On sait que j'y distingue quatre ordres différents: l'ordre techno-scientifique (qui inclut l’économie), l'ordre juridico-politique, l’ordre de la morale, enfin l’ordre de l’éthique ou de l’amour. Chacun de ces ordres a sa logique et sa cohérence propres; mais il reste conditionné par 1’ordre qui le précède, n’est limité et jugé, de l’extérieur, que par l’ordre qui le suit. Aussi peut-on les disposer, sous forme d’une topique, de bas en haut. On y retrouvera alors la dialectique du primat et de la primauté, non suivant une simple hiérarchie ascendante, ce serait trop simple, mais selon un double mouvement, montant et descendant, qui forme comme deux hiérarchies croisées: ce qui vaut le plus, subjectivement, pour l’individu, n’est jamais ce qui est le plus important, objectivement, pour les groupes; et inversement. La hiérarchie ascendante des primautés s’ajoute ainsi, mais sans l’annuler, à l'enchaînement descendant des primats. Chacun de ces ordres est en effet déterminant pour l'ordre immédiatement supérieur, dont il crée les conditions de possibilité, mais aussi régulateur pour l'ordre immédiatement inférieur, dont il fixe les limites et auquel il essaie de donner une orientation ou un sens. On est donc contraint, pour expliquer un ordre, de prendre en compte les ordres inférieurs; mais on ne peut le juger qu’en faisant référence aux aux ordres supérieurs. [...]
La distinction des ordres débouche ainsi, philosophiquement, sur ce que j’ai appelé le cynisme. De quoi s’agit-il ? D’une certaine façon de penser le rapport entre la valeur et la vérité, sans les confondre (la valeur est sans vérité objective, la vérité sans valeur intrinsèque), mais sans non plus renoncer à l’une ou à l’autre. Le cynique, au sens philosophique du terme, c’est celui qui refuse de prendre ses désirs pour la réalité - voyez Machiavel mais aussi de céder sur la réalité de ses désirs - voyez Diogène (et aussi Machiavel: c’est ce qu’il appelle la virtú). Reste à penser, entre ces deux versants du cynisme, une articulation: c’est ce que fait Spinoza, ou du moins ce qu’il autorise. Ce n’est pas parce que la vérité est bonne qu’elle est connaissable ou aimable; c’est parce qu’elle est vraie que nous pouvons la connaître et, si nous en sommes capables, l’aimer. À l’inverse, ce n’est pas parce que le bien est vrai qu’il faut l’aimer ou le faire, c’est parce que nous l'aimons ou le voulons qu’il devient, pour nous, une valeur (laquelle ne fonctionne comme vérité que pour et par un sujet). Par exemple, l'égoïsme est au moins aussi vrai que la générosité, et même, quant aux faits, il l’est bien davantage (il explique un plus grand nombre de comportements, et peut-être la générosité elle-même); aussi faut-il le connaître et le comprendre. Mais cela n’empêche pas que la générosité, moralement, lui soit supérieure. Distinction des ordres; la logique des primats explique celle des primautés, pour la connaissance, mais ne saurait l'annuler, pour 1’action, pas plus que celle-ci ne saurait, pour la pensée, tenir lieu de celle-là. II en résulte qu’on ne peut jamais tout à fait vivre ce qu’on sait, ni savoir ce qu’on vit. « Nous sommes, je ne sais comment, doubles en nous-mêmes », disait Montaigne (Essais, 11,16) [...]"
(André Comte-Sponville, Dictionnaire philosophique, 2001)

E1.7.D.6.5.c_REF1_LIT.wE4.2.B.3.

ARNHEIM IS TORN BETWEEN TWO INNER VOICES: ONE PRAISES THE IMPORTANCE OF MONEY, REASON, AND MORALITY, WHILE THE OTHER DEMANDS THAT THESE VALUES BE ABANDONED IN FAVOR OF A MORE SPIRITUAL AND AUTHENTIC EXISTENCE. This duality reflects the contradictions of his era, in which the worship of money and order coexisted with a desire for inner depth. Arnheim, like his contemporaries, is torn between his role as a technician and businessman and his spiritual aspirations, but this division fails at the crucial moment of decision.
"106. What is the object of modern man's faith? God or the Head of the Universe Corporation? Arnheim hesitated to answer. [...] 
Arnheim is said to have spoken in this way because a deep voice told him clearly that one could no more renounce money than one could renounce reason and morality. But another voice, equally deep, told him no less clearly that one should boldly renounce reason, morality, and all the rationalism of existence. It was precisely in those dizzying moments when he felt no other need than to rush, like a wandering satellite, into Diotima's lonely mass, that this voice almost prevailed. Then the growth of thought seemed as alien to him as that of nails and hair. A moral life seemed to him a dead life, and a hidden aversion to order and morality made him blush. Arnheim was like his own age. The latter worshiped money, order, knowledge, calculation, measurement and weighing, in short, the spirit of money and its family, and at the same time deplored them. While our contemporaries wield hammers and slide rules during working hours and behave outside of them like a horde of children driven from one extravagance to another under the pressure of the question, "And what shall we do now?" which is really nothing more than an expression of bitter disgust, they cannot free themselves from a persistent and secret voice urging them to convert. To this voice they apply the principle of the division of labor, maintaining intellectuals specialized in this kind of premonitions and inner lamentations: penitents and confessors of their time, professional absolvers, prophets and Lenten preachers in literature, who are always valuable to know about when one does not have the opportunity personally to live according to their principles; and it is more or less the same kind of moral ransom represented by the phrases and subsidies that the state swallows every year in bottomless cultural institutions. 
This division of labor could even be found in Arnheim himself. When he was sitting in his director's office checking a profit and loss account, he would have blushed to think otherwise than as a technician and businessman; but as soon as his company's money was no longer at stake, he would have blushed not to think otherwise and not to proclaim that it is necessary to give man the possibility of rising other than through the dead-end paths of regularity, prescriptions, standards, and other such things, the results of which are completely devoid of interiority and profoundly superficial. There is no doubt that this other way is what we call religion. Arnheim had written several books on the subject. In these books, he had also given this other way names: the myth, the return to simplicity, the kingdom of the soul, the spiritualization of the economy, the essence of the deed, and other similar formulas, because the problem had multiple aspects; in fact, it had exactly as many sides as Arnheim discovered when he examined himself with disinterestedness, as a man who has great duties before him must do. But it was obviously his destiny that this division of labor should lead to his downfall at the moment of decision. At the very moment when he felt the need to be as great, as whole as the figures of the earliest ages, as carefree as only true aristocrats can be, as integrally religious as the nature of love requires when it is deeply understood, at the very moment when he wanted to throw himself at Diotima's feet without regard for his trousers or his future, a voice held him back. It was the voice of reason, awakened at the wrong moment, or, as he said to himself with irritation, "the voice of calculation and greed, which today constantly opposes the edification of a noble life, the mystery of feeling".
(Robert Musil, The man without Qualities, Volume 2, 1930)

E4.2.B.3_REF2_PH CONNAITRE UNE VALEUR (COMME OBJET) NE DISPENSE PAS DE LA JUGER (COMME VALEUR).
"DÉMON DE CHANGEUX 
C’est une fiction que j’ai proposée, dans Une éducation philosophique, par analogie avec le démon de Laplace: celle d’un neurologue surdoué, dans dix mille ans, qui pourrait tout connaître du cerveau de ses contemporains, jusqu’à y lire à livre ouvert. [...]
Quelle différence y a-t-il, d’un point de vue neurobiologique, entre une idée vraie et une idée fausse ? Aucune, à ce que je crois, et c’est pourquoi la neurobiologie ne peut tenir lieu de pensée: la connaissance neurobiologique d’une idée vraie peut tout connaître d’elle, sauf sa vérité. Connaître une idée (comme objet) ne dispense pas de la penser (comme idée). 
Notre neurobiologiste pourrait aussi lire, dans les cerveaux de MM. X et Y, un certain nombre de vaíeurs, parfois communes, parfois opposées. Mais il n’aurait aucun moyen, en ne faisant que de la neurobiologie, de juger de la valeur de ces valeurs. M. Y est plus heureux ? Peut-être, mais qu’est-ce que cela prouve ? M. X est davantage attaché à la justice, à la compassion, au devoir de mémoire ? Cela ne prouve pas davantage ait raison. Bref, le démon de Changeux peut tout connaître de nos valeurs, sauf leur valeur. Connaître une valeur (comme objet) ne dispense pas de la juger (comme valeur)."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.2.C. The Dogmatism of "Being Right"

E4.2.C.1. The Fortress of the Ego: Fear, Pride, and Identity.
The need to be "right" is not a search for truth, but a defensive mechanism born of fear, pride, and the need for social survival. We construct a fortress of certainty to protect our identity and shield ourselves from the anxiety of the unknown or the "herd."

E4.2.C.1.a. The Social Construct.
Our beliefs often start not as intellectual discoveries, but as social signals required for survival. We construct certainty to avoid ostracization, maintain reputation, and align our actions with the "herd."

E4.2.C.1.a_REF1_LIT "ALL TRADITIONAL VIEWS ARE HELD WITH SUCH TENACITY, SUCH ALMOST FEROCITY, because they belong to the class of views induced, not by individual experience, still less by reason, but by collective, or, as it is sometimes called “herd,” suggestion. This used to be called “faith.” The belief so held may or may not be true; collective suggestion is not in the least necessarily collective hallucination. Mere collective suggestions — that is the interesting point — have the quality of obviousness; they do not issue from the individual, but seem imposed from outside, and ineluctable; they have all the inevitableness of instinctive opinion… Hence they are held with an intensity of emotion far beyond any reasoned conviction. To doubt them is felt to be at once idiocy and irreverence. Inquiry into their rational bases is naturally, and in a sense rightly, resented, because they are not rationally based, though they may be rationally supported. It is by convictions such as this that a society of the homogenous kind — a society based on and held together by uniformity — lives and thrives. To attack them is to cripple and endanger its inmost life."
(Jane Ellen Harrison, Heresy and Humanity, found in Alpha and Omega)

E4.2.C.1.a_REF1.1_LIT  OTHERS ARE SAFE FROM AND WITH US ONLY WHEN THEIR PAIN IS OUR PAIN, THEIR JOY OURS. "We decline to be ourselves part of an undifferentiated mass; we refuse to deal with others in classes and masses… We are dissatisfied now not only with the herd-sanctions of religion, but with many of those later sanctities of law to which some even emancipated thinkers ascribe a sort of divinity. We feel the inherent savagery of law in that it treats individuals as masses… Yet all the time we know that we can, with spiritual safety, rebel only in so far as we are personally sensitive to the claims of other individual lives that touch our own. The old herd-problem remains of how to live together; and as the union grows closer and more intricate the chances of mutual hurt are greater, and the sensitiveness must grow keener. Others are safe from and with us only when their pain is our pain, their joy ours."
(Jane Ellen Harrison, Heresy and Humanity, found in Alpha and Omega)

E4.2.C.1.a_REF2_PSI THE THINGS YOU DO OFTEN CREATE THE THINGS YOU BELIEVE "For many things, your attitudes came from actions that led to observations that led to explanations that led to beliefs. Your actions tend to chisel away at the raw marble of your persona, carving into being the self you experience from day to day. It doesn’t feel that way, though. To conscious experience, it feels as if you were the one holding the chisel, motivated by existing thoughts and beliefs. It feels as though the person wearing your pants performed actions consistent with your established character, yet there is plenty of research suggesting otherwise. The things you do often create the things you believe."
(David McRaney, You Are Now Less Dumb: How to Conquer Mob Mentality, How to Buy Happiness, and All the Other Ways to Outsmart Yourself)

E4.2.C.1.a_REF2.1_PSI YOU PRESENT TO YOUR PEERS THE PERSON YOU WISH TO BE "At the lowest level, behavior-into-attitude conversion begins with impression management theory, which says you present to your peers the person you wish to be. You engage in something economists call signaling by buying and displaying to your peers the sorts of things that give you social capital… Whatever are the easiest-to-obtain, loudest forms of the ideals you aspire to portray become the things you own, such as bumper stickers signaling to the world you are in one group and not another. These things then influence you to become the sort of person who owns them. […]
Anxiety over being ostracized, over being an outsider, has driven the behavior of billions for millions of years. Impression management theory says you are always thinking about how you appear to others, even when there are no others around. In the absence of onlookers, deep in your mind a mirror reflects back that which you have done, and when you see a person who has behaved in a way that could get you booted from your in-group, the anxiety drives you to seek a realignment."
(David McRaney, You Are Now Less Dumb: How to Conquer Mob Mentality, How to Buy Happiness, and All the Other Ways to Outsmart Yourself)

E4.2.C.1.a_REF2.2_PSI "THIS BRINGS US TO THE CHICKEN-OR-THE-EGG QUESTION of whether the belief or the display came first. According to self-perception theory, we are both observers and narrators of our own experience — we see ourselves do something and, unable to pin down our motive, we try to make sense of it by constructing a plausible story. We then form beliefs about ourselves based on observing our actions, as narrated by that story, which of course is based on our existing beliefs in the first place."
(Maria Popova, Brain pickings on David McRaney, You Are Now Less Dumb: How to Conquer Mob Mentality, How to Buy Happiness, and All the Other Ways to Outsmart Yourself)

EL3.26.B.1. REMIND YOURSELF PLEDGES AND PROMISES HAVE POWER "This is why volunteering feels good and unpaid interns work so hard. Without an obvious outside reward you create an internal one. That’s the cycle of cognitive dissonance [...]
When you feel anxiety over your actions, you will seek to lower the anxiety by creating a fantasy world in which your anxiety can’t exist, and then you come to believe the fantasy is reality [...]
Pay attention to when the cart is getting before the horse. Notice when a painful initiation leads to irrational devotion, or when unsatisfying jobs start to seem worthwhile. Remind yourself pledges and promises have power, as do uniforms and parades. Remember in the absence of extrinsic rewards you will seek out or create intrinsic ones. Take into account [that] the higher the price you pay for your decisions the more you value them. See that ambivalence becomes certainty with time. Realize that lukewarm feelings become stronger once you commit to a group, club, or product. Be wary of the roles you play and the acts you put on, because you tend to fulfill the labels you accept. Above all, remember the more harm you cause, the more hate you feel. The more kindness you express, the more you come to love those you help.
(David McRaney, You Are Now Less Dumb: How to Conquer Mob Mentality, How to Buy Happiness, and All the Other Ways to Outsmart Yourself)

E4.2.C.1.a_REF3_PH  PHILIP PETTIT ON THE BIRTH OF ETHICS
"Ethics is more than altruistic behavior - we have now many explanations for altruistic behavior displayed by animals. Ethics only occurs when you have conscious concepts that are regulating the behavior. So ethics requires language in order to develop the concepts of the valuable, the responsible, etc.
Counterfactual stories are often very illuminating. One exemple is to account for the birth of money by the counterfactual story of a society without currency and how it would necessarily emerge in a sedentary agricultural society, where barter would not be enough to enable a fluid satisfaction of the diverse needs of each individual. Many historian argue now that there never was a pure barter society, but the "what if" counterfactual story about the birth of money is still illuminating about the nature and role of money.
Pettit suggest a counterfactual story about the genealogy or birth of ethics. He starts from differentiating value concepts "what you ought to do" and responsibility concepts "to what extent are you responsible for". the story begins in a society that uses language only to communicate information to one another. As the story develops, people will have an interest in developing their credibility. If an information I gave reveals itself to be wrong, I can get off the hook by either argue that I misunderstood the situation, or that the situation changed. To gain credibility when I speak I can make it expensive to communicate my  attitude by expressing my desire and not just a fact: Not only "I come in peace", but "I believe peace is the best state of society and I want to zeal in its favor". This makes it harder for me to get off the hook if I turn out to behave in an agressive manner because it would contradict my prior affirmation that I desire peace, I can't say "I must have gotten that desire wrong". We care for our reputation and defecting on an expressed desire has repercussions on my ability to cooperate with my peers. Ounce we make ourselves more credible by avowing our desires, we encounter situations when our desires contradict our original vow: we really want to cheat this time; or be violent. When the division within the self between what is valued and what is desired is consciously recognized, is the moment of the birth of ethics. Ethics would then be the result of social interaction and the result of an individual coming to a reasonable conclusion in isolation. This view contradicts the cartesian view of ethics.
In the counterfactual story, Pettit associates the responsibility concept to pledges (whereas the valuable is associated to desire). With the pledge, I not only forgo the excuse that "I had my desire wrong", but I also forgo the one that "I changed my mind". So a pledge is even more expensive in terms of reputation that an avowed desire.
From there on, if we all agree that we care for reputation, anyone of us can exhort the other to behave in accordance to his pledges - introducing the concept of responsibility."
(Philip Pettit on the Birth of Ethics, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: https://philosophybites.com/podcast/philip-pettit-on-the-birth-of-ethics/

E4.2.C.1.a_REF4_LIT LE REJET DOGMATIQUE EST SOUVENT D'ORDRE SOCIAL ET MORAL PLUTOT QU'INTELLECTUEL.
"Celui qui chercherait le concept d'intelligence le plus général serait [...] amené [...] à adopter celui de “capacité” ; de sorte que tout homme incapable pourrait à l'occasion être qualifié de bête. En fait, il en va ainsi même quand la capacité relative à une certaine bêtise n'est pas expressément qualifié d'intelligence. [...]
Il est à peine exagéré d'affirmer que nous sommes enclins à qualifier tout ce qui ne nous convient pas - surtout quand nous prétendons, à part cela, l'estimer hautement “culturel” -  de “plus ou moins bête”. Et, pour définir ce “plus ou moins”, il est significatif que l'usage des termes de bêtise soit inséparable d'un autre, qui englobe les expressions non moins imparfaites du vulgaire et du moralement choquant ; ce qui reporte une seconde fois notre attention sur le destin commun des notions de “bêtise” et d'”inconvenance”. [...]
(Robert Musil, De la bêtise, 1937)

E4.2.C.1.b. Affective Logic and Self-Deception.
How we actively filter reality to protect our comfort: the emotional reaction to being contradicted (anger, fear) and how our character and desires dictate our logic, rather than the other way around.

E4.2.C.1.b_REF1_LIT LE MECANISME FONDAMENTAL DE LA CONVICTION DOGMATIQUE : L'INCAPACITE A DISTINGUER SON OPINION DE LA REALITE.
"Ce qui, probablement, fausse tout dans la vie, c'est qu'on est convaincu qu'on dit la vérité , Parce qu'on dit ce qu'on pense. »
(Sacha Guitry)

E4.2.C.1.b_REF2_PH L'AMBIVALENCE HUMAINE FACE A LA VERITE: ON L'AIME QUAND ELLE NOUS ECLAIRE, MAIS ON LA HAIT QUAND ELLE NOUS DEMASQUE.
"J’en ai vu plusieurs qui voulaient bien tromper les autres, mais je n’ai jamais vu personne qui voulût bien lui-même être trompé. Où est-ce donc qu’ils ont connu cette vie bienheureuse, sinon où ils ont connu la vérité, laquelle ils aiment aussi, puisqu’ils ne veulent pas être trompés ; et lorsqu’ils aiment la vie bienheureuse, qui n’est autre chose que la joie de la vérité, ils aiment aussi sans doute la vérité, et ils ne l’aimeraient pas s’il n’y en avait quelque idée dans leur mémoire. 
Pourquoi donc ne se réjouissent-ils pas de cette vérité, et ne sont-ils pas heureux ? C’est parce que ces autres choses qui remplissent davantage leur esprit, ont beaucoup plus de pouvoir de les rendre misérables. Que cette faible connaissance que leur mémoire conserve de la vérité n’en a de les rendre heureux. [...]
Mais si tous les hommes aiment la vie bienheureuse, qui n’est autre chose que la joie de la vérité, d’où vient que cette même vérité cause de la haine, et que lorsque vos serviteurs la leur annoncent ils deviennent leurs ennemis ? C’est que l’on aime tellement la vérité, que tous ceux qui aiment autre chose qu’elle, veulent que ce qu’ils aiment soit la vérité. Et d’autant qu’ils ne voudraient pas être trompés. Ils ne veulent pas aussi qu’on les puisse convaincre de l’être. Ils aiment la vérité lorsqu’elle leur montre sa lumière ; et ne voulant pas être trompés, et voulant bien tromper, ils l’aiment quand elle se découvre à eux ; et ils la haïssent quand elle les découvre eux-mêmes. Et Dieu permet au contraire par un juste châtiment, qu’elle les fait connaître pour ce qu’ils sont, quelques efforts qu’ils fassent pour l’empêcher, et qu’elle leur demeure inconnue, quoiqu’ils s’efforcent de la connaître."
(Saint-Augustin, Confessions, Livre X, Chapitre XXIII)

E4.2.C.1.b_REF3_PH OUR ATTACHMENT TO "BEING RIGHT" IS A DEFENSIVE REACTION TO THE FRAGILITY OF OUR OWN INTELLECTUAL CERTAINTY.
"D’où vient qu’un boiteux ne nous irrite pas, et un esprit boiteux nous irrite ? A cause qu’un boiteux reconnaît que nous allons droit, et qu’un esprit boiteux dit que c’est nous qui boitons; sans cela, nous en aurions pitié et non colère. 
Epictète demande bien plus fortement : “Pourquoi ne nous fâchons-nous pas si on dit que nous avons mal à la tête et que nous nous fâchons de ce qu’on dit que nous raisonnons mal, ou que nous choisissons mal.” Ce qui cause cela est que nous sommes bien certains que pas boiteux ; mais nous ne sommes pas si assurés que nous choisissons le vrai. De sorte que, n’en ayant d’assurance qu’à cause que nous le voyons de toute notre vue, quand un autre voit de toute sa vue le contraire, cela nous met en suspens et nous étonne, et encore plus quand mille autres se moquent de notre choix ; car il faut préférer nos lumières à celles de tant d’autres, et cela est hardi et difficile. Il n’y a jamais cette contradiction dans les sens touchant un boiteux. "
(Blaise Pascal, Les Pensées)

E4.2.C.1.b_REF4_PH PASCAL DEFINES DOGMATISM AS A STRUCTURAL BLINDNESS. Because the will "turns the mind away" from what it dislikes, the subject becomes "sure" they are right based on a rigged perception.
"II y a différence universelle et essentielle entre les actions de la volonté et toutes les autres. 
La volonté est un des principaux organes de la créance ; non qu’elle forme la créance, mais parce que les choses sont vraies ou fausses, selon la face par où on les regarde. La volonté, qui se plaît à l’une plus qu’à l’autre, détourne l’esprit de considérer les qualités de celles qu’elle n’aime pas à voir ; et ainsi l’esprit, marchant d’une pièce avec la volonté, s’arrête à regarder la face qu’elle aime; et ainsi il en juge par ce qu’il voit. "
(Blaise Pascal, Pensées, Fragment 99-539)

E4.2.C.1.b_REF5_PH WHEN WE ARE AFRAID TO BE RIGHT IF IT MEANS BEING ALONE.
"Non prédestiné à la connaissance 
Il est un genre stupide d’humilité, et il n’est pas si rare, dont il suffit qu’on soit affecté pour être définitivement inapte à faire un disciple de la connaissance. En effet : à l’instant où un homme de cette sorte perçoit quelque chose de frappant, il fait pour ainsi dire demi-tour, se disant : « Erreur ! Mais où donc avais-je mes esprits ? Ce ne saurait être la vérité !» — et dès lors, au lieu d’y regarder encore une fois de plus près et de prêter l’oreille avec plus d’attention, il prend la fuite, comme intimidé devant l’objet insolite, et cherche aussi vite que possible à le chasser de ses pensées. Car sa loi intérieure lui prescrit : « Tu ne chercheras pas à voir ce qui contredit l’opinion courante ! Es-tu fait, toi, pour découvrir de nouvelles vérités ? Il y en a déjà trop d’anciennes. » 
(Nietzsche, Le gai savoir, La Gaya Scienza, 1882)

E4.2.C.1.b_REF6_PH WE THINK OUR LOGIC DICTATES OUR CHARACTER, BUT IN REALITY, OUR CHARACTER DICTATES OUR LOGIC. We think our claim of "being right" is an expression of what is true, but it is in fact one of who we are.
"CAUSE ET EFFET CONFONDUS. — Nous cherchons inconsciemment les principes et les opinions théoriques qui sont appropriés à notre tempérament, si bien qu’à la fin il semble que ce soient les principes et les théories qui aient créé notre caractère. Notre pensée et notre jugement sont censés, après coup, d’après les apparences, être la cause de notre être : mais dans le fait c’est notre être qui est cause que nous pensons et jugeons de telle ou telle manière. —  Et qu est-ce qui nous détermine à cette comédie presque inconsciente ? L’indolence et le laisser-aller, et, non pour la moindre part, le désir de la vanité d’être trouvé logique d’un bout à l’autre, uniforme en être et en pensée ; car cela procure de la considération, donne de la confiance et de la puissance. [...]"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain, Aphorism 608, 1878)

E4.2.C.1.b_REF7_LIT  “PEOPLE HAVE A HARD TIME ACCEPTING ANYTHING THAT OVERWHELMS THEM.” 
(Bob Dylan)

E4.2.C.1.c. The Citadel of the Ego – Pride, Fear, and the Refusal of Reality.
Dogmatism is the ultimate ego defense—a way to stop time and create a sense of permanence in the face of a chaotic universe.

E4.2.C.1.c_REF1_PH I_My belly button

MONTAIGNE OBSERVES THAT WHILE WE MAY ADMIT OTHERS ARE STRONGER OR MORE HANDSOME, WE NEVER ADMIT THEY HAVE BETTER JUDGMENT. He identifies the core error of the dogmatist: believing that "the master form of human nature is in him" and using oneself as the standard to judge the world.
"Il me semble que la mere nourrice des plus fausses opinions, et publiques et particulieres, c'est la trop bonne opinion que l'homme a de soy [...]

Il y a une autre sorte de gloire, qui est une trop bonne opinion, que nous concevons de nostre valeur. C'est un'affection inconsiderée, dequoy nous nous cherissons, qui nous represente à nous mesmes, autres que nous ne sommes. Comme la passion amoureuse preste des beautez, et des graces, au subject qu'elle embrasse, et fait que ceux qui en sont espris, trouvent d'un jugement trouble et alteré, ce qu'ils ayment, autre et plus parfaict qu'il n'est.
Je ne veux pas, que de peur de faillir de ce costé là, un homme se mescognoisse pourtant, ny qu'il pense estre moins que ce qu'il est : le jugement doit tout par tout maintenir son droit : C'est raison qu'il voye en ce subject comme ailleurs, ce que la verité luy presente : Si c'est Cæsar, qu'il se treuve hardiment le plus grand Capitaine du monde. [...]
Nous recognoissons aysément és autres, l'advantage du courage, de la force corporelle, de l'experience, de la disposition, de la beauté : mais l'advantage du jugement ; nous ne le cedons à personne : Et les raisons qui partent du simple discours naturel en autruy, il nous semble qu'il n'a tenu qu'à regarder de ce costé là, que nous ne les ayons trouvees. La science, le stile, et telles parties, que nous voyons és ouvrages estrangers, nous touchons bien aysément si elles surpassent les nostres : mais les simples productions de l'entendement, chacun pense qu'il estoit en luy de les rencontrer toutes pareilles, et en apperçoit malaisement le poids et la difficulté, si ce n'est, et à peine, en une extreme et incomparable distance. Et qui verroit bien à clair la hauteur d'un jugement estranger, il y arriveroit et y porteroit le sien. [...]

"Il semble à chascun que la maistresse forme de l'humaine nature est en luy : selon elle, il faut regler tous les autres. Les allures qui ne se rapportent [qui ne peuvent être comparées] aux siennes, sont faintes et fauces. Luy propose t'on quelque chose des actions ou facultez d'un autre ? la premiere chose qu'il appelle à la consultation de son jugement, c'est son exemple : selon qu'il en va chez luy, selon cela va l'ordre du monde. O l'asnerie dangereuse et insupportable ! "
(Montaigne, Les Essais, De la presumption, II, XVII)

E4.2.C.1.c_REF1.1_LIT IT IS A CRIME TO ENCLOSE THE DIVERSITY OF THE WORLD IN DOCTRINES.
"Ce que dit l’homme le plus simple lui paraît [à Montaigne] important et l’on peut, en se montrant ouvert, apprendre plus des sots et des analphabètes que des érudits. Il apprécie « une âme à plusieurs étages, qui sache et se tendre et se démonter, qui soit bien partout où sa fortune la porte, qui puisse deviser avec son voisin de son bâtiment, de sa chasse et de sa querelle, entretenir avec plaisir un charpentier et un jardinier ». 
II n’est qu’une erreur et qu’un crime : vouloir enfermer la diversité du monde dans des doctrines et des systèmes."
(Stefan Zweig)

E4.2.C.1.c_REF2_TH "AVANT TOUT SOI LOYAL ENVERS TOI-MEME, SANS JAMAIS RENONCER. [...] Il n'existe qu'un seul point de vue valide : le tien propre!
"Il suffit d’en choisir un et un seul [de divers poteaux indicateurs frappés au coin de la prétendue sagesse des nations] et de s’y tenir mordicus, d’en faire sa règle de vie, l’expression de Soi-Même, de façon à parvenir à l’absolue conviction qu’il n’existe qu’un seul point de vue valide : le sien propre. Depuis un tel poste d’observation, il deviendra vite évident que le monde ne tourne pas rond. Et nous tenons là, de surcroît, le moyen de distinguer les véritables experts des dilettantes. Ces derniers s’arrangent, au moins par moments, pour hausser les épaules fatalisme et poursuivre la morne tâche de vivre d’un jour sur l’autre. Mais celui qui demeure loyal envers lui-même refuse d’entrer dans d’aussi mesquins compromis. S’il faut choisir entre le monde tel qu’il est et le monde tel qu’il devrait être (choix crucial qui figure déjà dans les Upanishad), notre expert opte sans balancer pour le second, rejetant avec horreur le premier. Seul maître à bord de son vaisseau que les rats ont déjà abandonné, il cingle héroïquement à travers la nuit et la tempête. On ne peut que déplorer que son répertoire de vieux adages sagaces ne renferme point celui-ci, déjà connu des Romains : Ducunt fata volentem, nolentem trahunt - le destin guide celui qui l’accepte et traîne celui qui le refuse. 
Car, pour refuser, notre spécialiste, il refuse. Chez lui, le refus le plus obstiné finit même par devenir une obsession qui englobe tout le reste. Dans son effort pour être loyal avec lui-même, il devient l’esprit qui toujours nie, car ne pas nier serait se trahir soi-même. Le simple fait qu’un tiers lui recommande quelque chose devient la raison même de le rejeter - alors même que, en toute objectivité, son adoption serait à son avantage. (La maturité, telle que l’a définie l’un de mes collègues, est la capacité de faire quelque chose malgré le fait que vos parents vous l’ont recommandé.)"
(Paul Watzlawick, Faites vous-même votre malheur)

E4.2.C.1.c_REF3_PH CE QUI NOUS EMPECHE D'ADMETTRE QUE NOUS AVONS TORT, C'EST LA "FIERTE".
"LE SABOT D’ENRAYURE. Souffrir moralement et apprendre, par la suite, que cette espèce de souffrance repose sur une erreur, c’est ce qui révolte. Car il y a une consolation si singulière à affirmer, par sa souffrance, « un monde de vérité plus profond » que ne l’est toute autre espèce de monde, et l’on préfère de beaucoup souffrir et se sentir ainsi transporté au-dessus de la réalité (par la conscience de s’approcher ainsi de ce « monde de vérité plus profond »), que de vivre sans souffrance et d’être privé de ce sentiment du sublime. Par conséquent, c’est la fierté et la façon habituelle de la satisfaire qui s’opposent à la nouvelle conception de la morale. Quelle force faudra-t-il donc employer pour supprimer ce sabot d’enrayure ? Plus de fierté ? Une nouvelle fierté ?  [...]"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Aurore, 1881)

E4.2.C.1.c_REF3.1_PH LE DOGMATISME (MORAL OU RELIGIEUX) EST UNE PREFERENCE POUR LE SENTIMENT D'ETRE "TRANSPORTE AU-DESSUS DE LA REALITE".
L’ERREUR COMME CORDIAL. On dira ce que l’on voudra, mais il est certain que le christianisme a voulu délivrer l’homme du poids des exigences morales en croyant montrer un raccourci vers la perfection : tout comme certains philosophes croyaient pouvoir se soustraire à la dialectique pénible et longue et à la récolte des faits sévèrement contrôlés pour renvoyer à « une voie royale de la vérité ». C’était une double erreur, — mais pourtant un grand cordial pour les désespérés mourant de fatigue dans le désert. "
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Aurore, 1881)

E4.2.C.1.c_REF4_PH ROSSET EXPLIQUE POURQUOI NOUS VOULONS "AVOIR RAISON" : POUR CONSTRUIRE UNE FORTERESSE CONTRE LE REEL (LE HASARD, LE SORT).
"C’est un des mystères attachés à la condition humaine, et la définition de sa folie essentielle, que le domaine de l’inexistant ait presque toujours la part la plus belle par rapport au domaine de l’existant.
(Clément Rosset, Principes de sagesse et de folie)

La sécurité où s’enferme la victime d’une prophétie est semblable à celle sur laquelle se repose la personne qui cherche dans l’autre un personnage de rechange et une échappatoire au sort qui la voue à elle-même : dans les deux cas, la sécurité est un piège qui achève de lier le héros tragique à son destin et d’enfermer l’homme en lui·même. [...] 
La fausse sécurité est plus que l’alliée de l’illusion ; elle en constitue la substance même. C´est au fond l’illusion en personne comme le dit Hécate dans Macbeth : «La sécurité est la plus grande ennemie des mortels.» [...]
Cette sécurité illusoire est également caractéristique d’un phénomène voisin mais distinct de l’illusion, la bêtise. Plus exactement, elle caractérise une certaine forme de bêtise dont elle éclaire à la fois le mécanisme et l’inattaquable vigueur.
De manière générale, la bêtise peut être considérée de deux points de vue : celui de son contenu, et celui de sa forme. [...] á contenu identique, la bêtise peut revêtir deux formes assez différentes, selon que l’adhésion au thème dérisoire est immédiate et spontanée, ou au contraire n’intervient que de manière différée et réfléchie. Dans le premier cas, le thème est admis d’emblée, par hérédité ou environnement culturels, sans que soit posé le problème général de la bêtise, c’est-à-dire la question de savoir si le thème est intelligent ou non : bêtise du premier degré, irréfléchie et spontanée. Dans le second cas, le thème n’est admis qu’après mûre réflexion, c’est-à-dire qu’ici le problème de la bêtise a été envisagé soigneusement, et apparemment résolu – du moins du point de vue de l’intéressé – puisque le thème retenu n’a été sélectionné qu’à l’issue d’un examen critique des plus sévères, en sorte que le thème auquel on s’attache paraît définitivement à l’abri de la critique : bêtise du second degré, intériorisée et réflexive. Dans cette seconde forme de bêtise, on a pris conscience du problème de la bêtise ; on sait qu’il faut éviter d’être bête, et, à la lumière de ce scrupule, on a choisi une attitude «intelligente». [...] 
Cette bêtise du second degré apanage des personnes généralement considérées – à juste titre d’ailleurs- comme intelligentes et cultivées, est évidemment incurable: en quoi elle constitue une forme de bêtise absolue, à la différence de la bêtise du premier degré. [...] 
Cette fatalité est également celle du snobisme et, de manière générale, celle de tous ceux qui, doutant d’eux-mêmes, entreprennent de chercher le salut dans un modèle: autre magique dont j’espère qu’il me fera échapper à mon sort, alors qu’il m’enferme inexorablement en moi-même."
(Clément Rosset, Le réel et son double)

E4.2.C.1.c_REF5_PH FOR NIETZSCHE THE "WILL TO TRUTH" IS BORN OF FEAR (OF NOT KNOWING, OF BEING PREY). KNOWLEDGE IS A "PROTECTION." THIS EXPLAINS THE NEED FOR CERTAINTY THAT LEADS TO DOGMATISM. F fanaticism is the "only strength of will" available to the weak and uncertain. 
"Ce n’est pas le doute, c’est la certitude qui rend fou" (Friedrich Nietzsche)
À première vue on pourrait penser que c'est plutôt le doute qui est insupportable: on attend un "oui" ou un "non" à une demande en mariage, pas un "peut-être"!

Comme tout les animaux, l'homme veut savoir par crainte s'il est une proie, ou par volonté de puissance, s'il est au sommet de la chaîne alimentaire (ce qui se rejoint) - il ne supporte pas le doute.
"Dans "Le Gai Savoir", Nietzsche parle des « dangereux peut-être » qui constituent le moteur de la recherche philosophique. Précisément parce que l’incertitude ou l’absence de réponse rend fou l’animal humain, il faut combler cette ignorance, et ce que dit Nietzsche, c’est que la connaissance est une conséquence de la protection : le premier moteur de la connaissance c’est la crainte (de ne pas savoir, du lendemain...). On veut connaître parce qu’on a peur. Nietzsche travaille beaucoup sur la notion de crainte. Il dit qu’elle est le premier moteur de la connaissance, et que le deuxième est celui de la volonté de maîtrise. Connaître c’est s’approprier le monde de telle sorte que ce soit un rapport viable au milieu qu’est le monde. Cette viabilité passe par des falsifications qui font que notre point de vue sur le monde est toujours utilitariste, jusqu’à la logique, jusqu’aux sciences. Il en va de la survie psychique, l’homme est un animal inquiet de son destin, et la religion est l’exemple même d’une vérité destinée à apaiser la crainte."
(Dorian Astor)
Alors comment comprendre l'aphorisme qui prend le contre-pied du sens commun?

Première interprétation de l'aphorisme du sujet:
"La philosophie est une affaire de désir de vérité, de besoin de vérité. Nietzsche aura toujours à cœur d’interroger ce qui n’est pas interrogé par les philosophes dans leur démarche. Il y a un soupçon fondamental qu’on appellerait aujourd’hui "l’impensé des philosophes". C’est la démarche critique de Nietzsche."
(Dorian Astor)
Il y a toujours des sauts y compris dans les raisonnements logiques qui ouvrent sur l'infondé, ce qui fait que tout est croyance. Le préjugé s'installe immédiatement dans tout rapport de connaissance car le philosophe bien souvent ne cherche qu'à confirmer ses opinions - douter c'est accepter de changer d'avis et de contrarier ses désirs. Il n'y a pas de vérité, mais il y a toujours place à l'erreur - nous n'avons pas le choix et N. ne condamne pas l'effort de connaissance - au contraire - mais il nous avertit sur ses limites. La certitude mène au dogmatisme ou pire au fanatisme, d'où le lien avec la folie. Défendre la vérité quitte à ce que le monde périsse! "Le fanatisme est l'unique force de volonté à laquelle peuvent être amenés les faibles et les incertains, en tant qu'il est une espèce d'hypnotisation de l'ensemble du système sensible-intellectuel au profit de l'alimentation surabondante d'une unique manière de voir et de sentir qui domine désormais. Le chrétien l'appelle sa foi. Là où un homme parvient à la conviction fondamentale qu'on doit lui commander. il devient croyant. À l'inverse, on pourrait penser un plaisir et une force de l'auto-détermination et une liberté de la volonté par lesquels un esprit congédie toute croyance, tout désir de certitude - entraîné qu'il est à se tenir sur des cordes et des possibilités légères, et même à danser jusque sur le bord des abîmes. Un tel esprit serait l'esprit libre par excellence."
Si les hommes toujours valorisent la vérité plutôt que l'ignorance qui a ses vertus aussi, c'est uniquement par volonté de puissance. Une vérité a une puissance à condition qu'elle devienne une condition de vie : au début, une vérité a une puissance très faible, mais elle se construit, elle a une histoire qui s'impose - elle devient une préférence que l'on appelle une valeur. La vérité n'est pas un contenu de savoir mais une condition d'existence. Ce n'est pas du relativisme car chacun n'a pas sa vérité dans cette vision généalogique, anthropologique (ce serait le propre de l'animal humain que sa condition de vie soit structurée par la volonté de vérité) et civilisationnelle de la vérité.
Si la vérité est une passion, elle doit nous conduire à d'autres possibilités de conditions d'existence qui élèverait le type animal homme au dessus des condition morbides de vérité qu'il a construit depuis l'avènement des religions. Nous avons quelque chose en nous de naturellement dogmatique - une pulsion d'obéir - à laquelle il nous faut résister. Le philosophe est le voyageur qui, se détachant d'une seule vérité, quitte la terre ferme et prend la mer. L'illusion c'est qu'il existe un voile qu'on pourrait soulever pour rencontrer le vrai, que les apparences sont trompeuses et qu'il est possible d'y voir clair. Il faut au contraire se couler  dans l'apparence, dans le flux, dans le multiple - la philosophie implique la multiplication des points de vues possibles. L'esprit libre se fragmente et prend le risque de devenir fou lui aussi...
Le point commun avec la psychanalyse est celui d'une lecture similaire des pulsions - car la multiplicité première est celle de nos pulsions intérieures. Est-ce que la psychanalyse peut se permettre de fragmenter et de démultiplié l'individu fragilisé?

Deuxième interprétation de l'aphorisme du sujet:
"Il y a une dimension plus mystérieuse à la philosophie, ce lien à la folie… Quand on regarde l’origine de la philosophie grecque et notamment à Delphes avec la Pythie, la dimension oraculaire du savoir : au temple de Delphes il y a ces deux préceptes, "Connais-toi toi-même" et "Rien de trop", les départs de la philosophie grecque, au fond la Pythie et le savoir oraculaire se donnent dans la transe, dans un accès de folie… Cette mantique [pratiques divinatoire], Nietzsche la travaillera dès sa première œuvre avec cette notion de dionysiaque : que fait à l’homme la contemplation de la vérité nue une fois le voile de l’illusion levé ? Nietzsche a remis en cause cette partition entre le fond des choses, et le monde des apparences."
(Dorian Astor)
Dans Ecce Homo N. interroge: "Comprend-on Hamlet ? Ce n'est pas le doute, c'est la certitude qui rend fou". Hamlet reçoit la révélation d'une vérité qui le paralyse - c'est une lucidité d'un poids immense à porter - quelle dose de vérité est-on capable de supporter? Dans la Naissance de la Tragédie, N. explique que les grecs ont inventé l'art pour mettre un voile d'illusion sur la réalité. Plus tard il dira, "pour ne pas mourir de la vérité". Ailleurs: "Si tu regardes l’abîme trop longtemps, l’abîme regarde en toi" - il y a chez le philosophe une révélation - non pas d'une vérité dernière - mais d'un non-sens dernier, avec laquelle il est difficile de vivre. Il n'y a que des expérimentations et des perspectives possibles que nous avons la chance de pouvoir goûter - qu'on utilise bien son temps, dans la perspective de l'expérience de pensée de l'éternel retour!
Mais N. lui-même vit difficilement cet idéal - il sera souvent paniqué devant ce qu'il est en train de découvrir. Il cherche sans arrêt à s'arracher à sa passion pour ne pas rester prisonnier des certitudes que pourraient élaborer son désir. Il appelle à aimer l'incertitude."
(Dorian Astor dans l'émission Les Chemins de la Philosophie, diffusée sur France Culture le 9 septembre 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/ce-n-est-pas-le-doute-c-est-la-certitude-qui-rend-fou-1461626

E4.2.C.1.c_REF6_PH L'ILLUSION ANTHROPOCENTRIQUE : PROJETER SA PROPRE INTERIORITE COMME LOI UNIVERSELLE.
"ASTROLOGIE ET ANALOGUES. — Il est vraisemblable que les objets du sentiment religieux, moral, esthétique (et logique) n’appartiennent également qu’à la surface des choses, tandis que l’homme croit volontiers que, là du moins, il touche au coeur du monde; il se fait illusion, parce que ces choses lui donnent une si profonde béatitude et une infortune si profonde, et il y montre ainsi le même orgueil qu’à propos de l’astrologie. Car celle-ci pense que le ciel étoilé tourne pour le sort des hommes; l’homme moral de son côté suppose que ce qui lui tient essentiellement au coeur doit aussi être l’essence et le coeur des choses."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain, Aphorisme 4, 1878)

E4.2.C.1.c_REF7_PH NIETZSCHE LIE LA VOLONTE DE VERITE A L'ORGUEIL ET A LA SURVIE DE L'EGO. "SON ŒUVRE EST DEVENUE POUR LUI SON EGO". La phrase latine "Pereat mundus, dum ego salvus sim" (que l’univers disparaisse, pourvu que je sois épargné) est la définition ultime du dogmatisme : préférer la cohérence de son système à la réalité du monde.
"DE LA PLUS INTIME EXPÉRIENCE DU PENSEUR. — Rien n’est plus difficile à l’homme que de saisir une chose impersonnellement : d’y voir précisément une chose et non pas une personne : on peut même se demander si, d’une façon générale, il lui est possible de suspendre, ne fût-ce que pendant un instant, le mécanisme de son instinct qui crée et imagine des personnes. Dans ses rapports avec les pensées même plus abstraites, il se comporte comme si elles étaient des individus avec lesquels on dût lutter, auxquels on dût se joindre, qu’on dût garder, soigner et élever. Guettons-nous nous-mêmes et surveillons-nous en ces minutes où nous entendons ou trouvons une proposition nouvelle pour nous. Peut-être nous déplaît-elle parce qu’elle se présente avec tant de hauteur et d’orgueil : inconsciemment nous nous demandons si nous ne devons pas lui opposer un ennemi ou bien lui adjoindre un « peut-être » ou un « parfois » ;  le petit mot « probable » nous donne même satisfaction, parce qu’il brise la tyrannie personnelle de l’absolu qui nous importune. Lorsque, au contraire, cette proposition nouvelle nous apparaît sous une forme plus atténuée, comme il convient, se jetant, en quelque sorte, dans les bras de la contradiction, nous avançons un autre essai de notre souveraineté ; car comment saurions-nous ne pas venir en aide à cet être faible, le caresser et le nourrir, lui donner de la force et de la plénitude et même une apparence de vérité et d’absolu ? Nous est-il possible de nous comporter à son égard en parents, d’une façon chevaleresque ou compatissante ? — Ailleurs encore nous voyons d’une part un jugement et d’autre part un autre jugement, éloignés l’un de l’autre, sans qu’ils soient liés et sans qu’ils tendent à se rapprocher : alors une idée nous chatouille, nous nous informons s’il n’y aurait pas mariage à faire, une conclusion à tirer, nous avons le sentiment vague qu’au cas où cette conclusion aurait une suite I’honneur en reviendrait non seulement aux deux jugements unis par le mariage, mais encore à l’auteur de ce mariage. Si on ne peut s’attaquer à cette idée ni par l’entêtement et le mauvais vouloir, ni par la bienveillance (si on la tient pour vraie), on s’y soumet, et on lui rend hommage comme à un guide et à un duc, on lui accorde une place d’honneur et on en parle non sans pompe et fierté ; car son éclat rejaillit sur nous. Malheur à celui qui voudrait l’obscurcir ! Mais il arrive aussi que cette autorité devienne un jour scabreuse pour nous : — alors, nous qui sommes des infatigables faiseurs de rois (kingmakers) dans le domaine de l’esprit, nous chassons du trône l’idée élue et y élevons en hâte son adversaire. Considérez cela et faites un pas de plus dans votre pensée : certes, personne ne parlera plus d’un « besoin de connaissance en et pour soi ». Pourquoi donc l’homme préfère-t-il le vrai au non-vrai, dans cette lutte secrète avec les idées-personnes, dans ce mariage des idées, mariage demeuré le plus souvent caché, dans cette fondation d'États sur le domaine de la pensée, dans cette éducation, cette assistance et les soins hospitaliers de la pensée? Pour la même raison qui lui fait rendre justice dans ses rapports avec des personnes véritables : maintenant par habitude, héritage et éducation, primitivement parce que le vrai — comme aussi l’équitable et le juste — est plus utile et rapporte plus d’honneurs que le non-vrai. Car, dans le royaume de la pensée, il est difficile de soutenir la puissance et la réputation lorsque celles-ci s’édifient sur l’erreur et le mensonge : le sentiment qu’un pareil édifice pourrait s’effondrer une fois est humiliant pour la conscience de son architecte ; l’architecte a honte de la fragilité de son matériel, et, parce qu’il se considère lui-même comme plus important que le reste du monde, il ne voudrait rien exécuter qui ne fût plus durable que le reste du monde. Dans son désir de la vérité, il embrasse la foi en l’immortalité personnelle, c’est-à-dire la pensée la plus orgueilleuse et la plus altière qu’il y ait, car elle est liée intimement à l’arrière-pensée « pereat mundus, dum ego salvus sim ! (1)». Son œuvre est devenue pour lui son ego, il se transforme lui-même en une chose impérissable, bravant l’univers ; c’est sa fierté incommensurable qui ne veut se servir, pour son œuvre, que des pierres les meilleures et les plus dures, donc de vérités, ou de ce qu’il tient pour telles. À juste raison, on a de tout temps appelé l’orgueil « le vice du savant », — mais la vérité et son prestige seraient en mauvaise posture, sur la terre, sans ce vice fécond. Dans le fait que nous redoutons nos propres idées, nos propres paroles, mais aussi que nous nous y vénérons nous-mêmes, leur attribuant involontairement la faculté de pouvoir nous récompenser, nous mépriser, nous louer et nous blâmer, donc dans le fait que nous sommes en relation avec elles comme avec des personnes libres et intellectuelles, des puissances indépendantes, d’égal à égal — dans ce fait, le singulier phénomène que j’ai appelé « conscience intellectuelle » a ses racines. C’est donc encore une chose morale, d’un ordre supérieur, qui est sortie d’une racine vulgaire. [...]
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain II, Aphorisme 26, 1878)
Note:
(1) Pereat mundus, dum ego salvus sim, expression latine signifiant « que l’univers disparaisse, pourvu que je sois épargné ! »

E4.2.C.2. The Labyrinth of Logic: Mechanisms of Error.
How "closed-mindedness" operates, how logic can become "paranoid" or circular, and how "intelligent stupidity" mimics reason to maintain its position against reality.

E4.2.C.2.a. The Masquerade of Reason: Anatomy of the Closed Mind.
How "intelligent stupidity" mimics reason, how competence creates blindness and how social conformity  obstruct the truth.

E4.2.C.2.a_REF1_PH "THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN OPEN-MINDED AND CLOSED-MINDED PEOPLE
Why do some people seem to make constant progress in their professional and personal lives while others repeat the same mistakes?

I think part of the answer is how they approach problems. It comes down to mindset.

Over time, the person who approaches life with an openness to being wrong and a willingness to learn outperforms the person who doesn’t.

How do you respond to anomalies?
How you respond to anomalies is a good indicator of your open-mindedness.

Anomalies are like a glitch in the matrix. You can identify these moments when you find something surprising, missing, or strange.

Anomalies indicate the world doesn’t work the way you thought it did. These moments can be worth their weight in gold if you pay attention.

Closed-minded people tend to ignore or gloss over anomalies. Open-minded people want to dive in and understand. Of course, diving in is hard as it may require you to discard your ideas and beliefs.

Anomalies are not the only way to figure out which mindset people are operating with. In his book Principles, Ray Dalio, self-made billionaire and founder of the largest hedge fund in the world, lays out seven other ways to tell the difference. [...]


***

If you recognize some closed-minded behavior patterns in yourself, you’re not alone. We’re all somewhere along the continuum between open- and closed-minded. Further complicating things, it varies by day and task.

Being open-minded requires a lot of work and it doesn’t happen by accident.

When you catch closed-minded tendencies, acknowledge what’s happening but don’t blame yourself. Instead, reflect on what’s going on at a deeper level. Maybe you feel the world should work differently than it does. Or maybe it’s something else. Either way, it’s an opportunity to learn more about yourself and the world.

Being open-minded does not mean spending an inordinate amount of time considering patently bad ideas or sloppy thinking. You must have what Garrett Hardin calls a “default status” on various issues in your head. If someone offers you the proverbial free lunch, it’s OK to default to skepticism. If someone offers to build you a perpetual motion machine, I suggest you ignore them, as they’re violating the laws of thermodynamics. If someone offers to help you defraud the government and suggests that “no one will know,” I suggest you walk away immediately. There is wisdom in closed-mindedness on certain issues.

Do you know anyone who doesn’t have any blind spots? I strongly doubt it. Then why would you be any different? As Dalio makes clear, you must be active in the process of open-mindedness: It won’t happen by accident."
(FS, Farnam Street)

E4.2.C.2.a_REF1.1_PH "1. CHALLENGING IDEAS
CLOSED-MINDED PEOPLE DON’T WANT THEIR IDEAS CHALLENGED. They are typically frustrated that they can’t get the other person to agree with them instead of curious as to why the other person disagrees.

Closed-minded people put their ego ahead of the outcome. They refrain from inquiring and instead focus on disproving others without attempting to comprehend their perspectives. They tend to become frustrated when questioned and perceive those who seek clarification as hindrances to progress. They tend to easily get angered with people who disagree.

In short, they’re on the wrong side of right.

Open-minded people are more curious about why there is disagreement. … They understand that there is always the possibility that they might be wrong and that it’s worth the little bit of time it takes to consider the other person’s views….

Open-minded people find learning in everything. They see disagreement as a thoughtful means to expand their knowledge. They don’t get angry or upset at questions; rather, they want to identify where the disagreement lies so they can correct their misperceptions. They realize that being right means changing their minds when someone else knows something they don’t.."
(FS, Farnam Street)

E4.2.C.2.a_REF1.2_PH "2. STATEMENTS VS. QUESTIONS
CLOSED-MINDED PEOPLE ARE MORE LIKELY TO MAKE STATEMENTS THAN ASK QUESTIONS.

Closed-minded people listen to win not to understand. They sit in meetings and are more than willing to offer their opinions but never ask other people to expand on, or explain, their ideas. Closed-minded people think of how they would refute the other person rather than trying to understand what they might be missing.

Open-minded people genuinely believe they could be wrong; the questions that they ask are genuine.

Open-minded people know that while they may have an opinion on a subject, it could count for less than someone else’s. Maybe they’re outside their circle of competence or maybe they’re experts. Regardless, they’re always curious as to how people see things differently and they weigh their opinions accordingly."
(FS, Farnam Street)

E4.2.C.2.a_REF1.3_PH "3. UNDERSTANDING
CLOSED-MINDED PEOPLE FOCUS MUCH MORE ON BEING UNDERSTOOD THAN ON UNDERSTANDING OTHERS.

People’s default behaviors offer a quick tell. When you disagree with someone, what’s their reaction? If they’re quick to rephrase what they just said or, even worse, repeat it, without asking any questions, then they are assuming that you don’t understand them rather than that you disagree with them.

Open-minded people feel compelled to see things through others’ eyes.

When you disagree with an open-minded person, they are quick to assume that they might not understand something and to ask you to tell them where their understanding is incomplete."
(FS, Farnam Street)

E4.2.C.2.a_REF1.4_PH "4. I MIGHT BE WRONG, BUT…
DALIO NAILS THIS ONE. I HAVE NOTHING TO ADD.

Closed-minded people say things like “I could be wrong … but here’s my opinion.” This is a classic cue I hear all the time. It’s often a perfunctory gesture that allows people to hold their own opinion while convincing themselves that they are being open-minded. If your statement starts with “I could be wrong”…, you should probably follow it with a question and not an assertion.

Open-minded people know when to make statements and when to ask questions."
(FS, Farnam Street)

E4.2.C.2.a_REF1.5_PH "5. JUST SHUT UP
“CLOSED-MINDED PEOPLE BLOCK OTHERS FROM SPEAKING.”

Closed-minded people don’t have time to rehash something already talked about. They don’t want to hear anyone’s voice but their own.

(Dalio offers a “two-minute rule” to get around this: Everyone has the right to speak for two minutes without being interrupted.)

Open-minded people are always more interested in listening than in speaking.

More than that, they say things like, “Sam, I notice you’ve been quiet. Would you like to offer your thoughts to the group?”

“The test of a first-rate intelligence is the ability to hold two opposed ideas in mind at the same time and still retain the ability to function.”

– F. Scott Fitzgerald"
(FS, Farnam Street)

E4.2.C.2.a_REF1.6_PH "6. ONLY ONE SPERM GETS IN
CLOSED-MINDED PEOPLE HAVE TROUBLE HOLDING TWO THOUGHTS SIMULTANEOUSLY IN THEIR MINDS.

This reminds me of the memorable quote by Charlie Munger: “The human mind is a lot like the human egg, and the human egg has a shut-off device. When one sperm gets in, it shuts down so the next one can’t get in.” It’s our nature to close our minds around our favorite ideas, but this is not the ideal way to think and learn.

Open-minded people can take in the thoughts of others without losing their ability to think well—they can hold two or more conflicting concepts in their mind and go back and forth between them to assess their relative merits."
(FS, Farnam Street)

E4.2.C.2.a_REF1.7_PH "7. HUMBLE PIE
CLOSED-MINDED PEOPLE LACK A DEEP SENSE OF HUMILITY.

Where does one get humility? Usually, from failure—a crash so terrible they don’t want to repeat it. I remember when a hedge fund I was on the board of made a terrible investment decision. We spent a lot of time rubbing our noses in it afterward in an attempt to make sure we wouldn’t repeat the same mistake. In the process, we learned a lot about what we didn’t know.

Open-minded people approach everything with a deep-seated fear that they may be wrong.."
(FS, Farnam Street)

E4.2.C.2.a_REF2_PSI WHY INCOMPETENT PEOPLE THINK THEY'RE AMAZING
"The Phenomenon: Psychological research shows that people are often poor at evaluating their own competence and frequently overestimate their abilities. This is known as the Dunning-Kruger effect.

Illusory Superiority: Many people rate themselves as "above average" to an impossible degree. For instance, in one study, 88% of American drivers described themselves as having above-average driving skills.

The "Double Curse": People with the least ability often suffer a double curse: they lack the knowledge to make good decisions, and that same lack of knowledge prevents them from recognizing their mistakes.

Expert Blindness: Highly competent people also struggle with self-perception but in a different way. They often assume that because something is easy for them, it must be easy for everyone else, failing to realize how unusual their abilities are.

How to improve: To get a more accurate view of your own skills, you should ask for feedback from others and keep learning, as gaining knowledge helps reveal the "invisible holes" in your competence."
(Summary of David Dunning's TED ED)

Watch it on YouTube: https://youtu.be/pOLmD_WVY-E?si=gAre9kcpf7sIk502

E4.2.C.2.a_REF3_LIT MUSIL DISTINGUE LA BETISE SIMPLE (MANQUE D'ESPRIT) DE LA "BETISE SUPERIEURE/INTELLIGENTE" (PRETENTION, DESEQUILIBRE AFFECTIF). "Elle peut prendre tous les costumes de la vérité", c’est pourquoi il est si difficile de débattre avec un dogmatique : il mime la raison. Alors que la Vérité est "handicapée" (elle a des limites, des nuances, un seul vêtement), la Bêtise dogmatique est mobile et sans scrupules.
"[Le concept de bêtise] englobe donc deux espèces au fond très différentes [de mots] ; une bêtise toute honnête, toute simple et une autre qui, assez paradoxalement, peut même être un signe d'intelligence. La première tient plutôt à une faiblesse générale de l'entendement, la seconde à une faiblesse de celui-ci par rapport à un objet particulier ; c'est de loin la plus dangereuse. [...]
Entre cette bêtise honnête et l'autre, la supérieure, la prétentieuse, le contraste n'est souvent que trop criant. Cette bêtise là et moins un manque d'intelligence qu'une abdication de celle-ci devant des tâches qu'elle prétend accomplir alors qu'elle ne lui conviennent pas ; elle peut comporter tous les caractères négatif d'un entendement faible, mais avec, en plus, tous ceux qu'implique une affectivité déséquilibrée, contrefaite, irrégulière, en un mot : maladive. Comme il n'y a pas d'affectivité “normalisée”, cette déviation maladive traduit plus précisément une dysharmonie entre les parties pris du sentiment et un entendement capable de les modérer. Cette bêtise supérieure est la vraie maladie de la formation - disons qu'en fait, pour éviter tout malentendu, elle et absence de formation, formation manquée, malvenue, déséquilibre entre sa substance et sa force ; et la décrire serait une tâche presque sans fin. Elle peut affecter jusqu'à la plus haute intellectualité ; car, si la bêtise authentique est une artiste paisible, la bêtise intelligente, qui contribue à la mobilité de la vie de l'esprit entraîne surtout son instabilité et sa stérilité. Il y a bien des années déjà, j'écrivais à son propos ceci : “Il n'est pas une seule pensée importante dont la bêtise ne sache aussitôt faire usage ; elle peut se mouvoir dans toutes les directions et prendre tous les costumes de la vérité. La vérité, elle, n'a jamais qu'un seul vêtement, un seul chemin : elle est toujours handicapée”. La bêtise dont il s'agit là n'est pas une maladie mentale ; ce n'en n'est pas moins la plus dangereuse des maladies de l'esprit, parce que c'est la vie même qu'elle menace. [...]"
(Robert Musil, De la bêtise, 1937)

E4.2.C.2.a_REF4_LIT  COMMONSENSE AT ITS WORST IS SENSE MADE COMMON, AND SO EVERYTHING IS COMFORTABLY CHEAPENED BY ITS TOUCH. "In the fall of 1811 Noah Webster, working steadily through the C’s, defined commonsense as “good sound ordinary sense . . . free from emotional bias or intellectual subtlety… horse sense.” This is rather a flattering view of the creature, for the biography of commonsense makes nasty reading. Commonsense has trampled down many a gentle genius whose eyes had delighted in a too early moonbeam of some too early truth; commonsense has back-kicked dirt at the loveliest of queer paintings because a blue tree seemed madness to its well-meaning hoof; commonsense has prompted ugly but strong nations to crush their fair but frail neighbors the moment a gap in history offered a chance that it would have been ridiculous not to exploit. Commonsense is fundamentally immoral, for the natural morals of mankind are as irrational as the magic rites that they evolved since the immemorial dimness of time. Commonsense at its worst is sense made common, and so everything is comfortably cheapened by its touch. Commonsense is square whereas all the most essential visions and values of life are beautifully round, as round as the universe or the eyes of a child at its first circus show."
(Vladimir Nabokov , The Art of Literature and Commonsense, Lectures on Literature, 1941)

E4.2.C.2.a_REF4.1_LIT "THIS “SENSE MADE COMMON” IS, OF COURSE, THE SEEDBED OF SO MANY OF OUR SOCIAL AND CIVILIZATIONAL BIASES — from the dogmatic geocentrism that nearly cost Galileo his life to the mindless majority rule against which James Baldwin so fervently admonished. It is the seedbed, therefore, of conformity and thus the enemy of a society’s progress, which presupposes that we rise above the common lot of beliefs and mores to imagine the uncommon, the alternative — an act so countercultural that, throughout history, those who have dared undertake it have been punished or ostracized. Kierkegaard knew this when he contemplated why we conform and asserted that “truth always rests with the minority, and the minority is always stronger than the majority, because the minority is generally formed by those who really have an opinion, while the strength of a majority is illusory, formed by the gangs who have no opinion.” Ben Shahn knew it when he observed in his fantastic Norton lectures at Harvard that “without the nonconformist, any society of whatever degree of perfection must fall into decay.”"
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings)

E4.2.C.2.a_REF5_PH

EL3.92. "EXCESSIVE SELF-ESTEEM IN FAITH IN ARTISTS AND PHILOSOPHERS. - We all think that the excellence of a work of art, of an artist, is proved, when they seize us, shake us. But it would be necessary first that our own excellence of judgment and impression was proved: which is not the case. Who has, in the field of plastic arts, seized and delighted more than Bernini, who has more powerfully acted than this rhetorician posterior to Demosthenes who introduced the Asian style and made it dominate for two centuries? This authority over whole centuries proves nothing for the excellence and lasting value of a style; that is why one should not be too confident in one's good opinion of any artist: this is not only faith in the truth of our impressions, but also in the infallibility of our judgment or impression, when judgment or impression or both may themselves be of too coarse or too fine a kind, overexcited or uncultured. In the same way, the beneficial and edifying effects of a philosophy, of a religion, prove nothing for their truth: just as the insane person's happiness based on his fixed idea does not prove anything in favor of the reasonableness of this idea."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, Too Human, aphorism 161, 1878)

E4.2.C.2.a_REF6_PH ÊTRE INCROYANT NE GARANTIT PAS L'ESPRIT CRITIQUE. LA BETISE PEUT-ETRE MASQUEE PAR LA NAÏVETE CONVAINCUE QU'ELLE EST INTELLIGENTE.
"A-t-on bien remarqué à quel point l’oisiveté ou la demi-oisiveté extérieure est nécessaire à une vie proprement religieuse (et ce tout autant pour son travail microscopique favori d’examen de soi que pour cette douce placidité qui se nomme « prière » et est une disponibilité continuelle à la « venue de Dieu »), je veux dire l’oisiveté à bonne conscience, immémoriale, qui fait partie du sang, à laquelle n’est pas totalement étranger le sentiment aristocratique que le travail déshonore, — à savoir qu’il rend l’âme et le corps communs ? Et aussi ce fait que, par conséquent, notre fureur de travail moderne, bruyante, qui accapare chacun de nos instants, fière d’elle-même, stupidement fière, éduque et prépare, plus que quoi que ce soit d'autre, précisément à l’« incroyance » ? Parmi ceux, par exemple, qui aujourd’hui en Allemagne, vivent à l’écart de la religion, je trouve des hommes dont la « libre pensée » est d’espèce et d’ascendance diverses, mais surtout une majorité d’individus chez qui la fureur de travail a, de génération en génération, dissout les instincts religieux : de sorte qu’ils ne savent absolument plus quelle est l’utilité des religions, et se contentent en quelque sorte d'enregistrer leur présence dans le monde avec une espèce de stupéfaction hébétée. Il ne se sentent déjà que bien trop absorbés, ces braves gens, que ce soit par leur affaires, par leurs plaisirs, pour ne rien dire de la « patrie », des journaux et des « devoirs de famille » : il semble qu’il ne leur reste vraiment pas de temps à consacrer à la religion, d’autant qu’ils n’arrivent pas à voir au juste s’il s’agit là d’une nouvelle affaire ou d’un nouveau plaisir [...]
— Toute époque a sa propre espèce divine de naïveté, pour l’invention de laquelle elle pourrait susciter l’envie d’autres époques : — et que de naïveté, de naïveté vénérable, puérile et infiniment balourde n’y a-t-il pas dans cette foi du savant en sa supériorité, dans la bonne conscience de sa tolérance, dans l’assurance dénuée de soupçon et simpliste avec laquelle son instinct traite l’homme religieux comme un type de moindre valeur et inférieur, qu’il a dépassé, de très loin, de très haut, lui, le petit nabot plébéien et présomptueux, le besogneux et zélé ouvrier intellectuel et manuel des « idées », des « idées modernes » !"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Par-delà bien et mal, Aphorissme 58, 1886)

Note (1): "Arbeitsamkeit : on pourrait presque parler de « culte du travail »."
Note (2): "Nietzsche vise dans ces lignes non pas simplement le fait de travailler, mais le travail posé comme valeur fondamentale. Voir notamment Le gai savoir, paragraphe 329 sur la critique de cette situation."
Note (3): "Freidenferei: à ne pas confondre avec la liberté d'esprit; voir sur ce point le paragraphe 44. Le fait d'être libre-penseurs désigne la distance à l'égard de la religion, ce qui n'est encore en rien le gage d'une libération à l'égard de la morale et de ses valeurs, bien plus profonde aux yeux de Nietzsche. Il y a loin du libre-penseurs à l'esprit libre. "
(Patrick Wotling)

MUSIL DISTINGUE LA BETISE SIMPLE (MANQUE D'ESPRIT) DE LA "BETISE SUPERIEURE/INTELLIGENTE" (PRETENTION, DESEQUILIBRE AFFECTIF). "Elle peut prendre tous les costumes de la vérité", c’est pourquoi il est si difficile de débattre avec un dogmatique : il mime la raison. Alors que la Vérité est "handicapée" (elle a des limites, des nuances, un seul vêtement), la Bêtise dogmatique est mobile et sans scrupules.
"[Le concept de bêtise] englobe donc deux espèces au fond très différentes [de mots] ; une bêtise toute honnête, toute simple et une autre qui, assez paradoxalement, peut même être un signe d'intelligence. La première tient plutôt à une faiblesse générale de l'entendement, la seconde à une faiblesse de celui-ci par rapport à un objet particulier ; c'est de loin la plus dangereuse. [...]
Entre cette bêtise honnête et l'autre, la supérieure, la prétentieuse, le contraste n'est souvent que trop criant. Cette bêtise là et moins un manque d'intelligence qu'une abdication de celle-ci devant des tâches qu'elle prétend accomplir alors qu'elle ne lui conviennent pas ; elle peut comporter tous les caractères négatif d'un entendement faible, mais avec, en plus, tous ceux qu'implique une affectivité déséquilibrée, contrefaite, irrégulière, en un mot : maladive. Comme il n'y a pas d'affectivité “normalisée”, cette déviation maladive traduit plus précisément une dysharmonie entre les parties pris du sentiment et un entendement capable de les modérer. Cette bêtise supérieure est la vraie maladie de la formation - disons qu'en fait, pour éviter tout malentendu, elle et absence de formation, formation manquée, malvenue, déséquilibre entre sa substance et sa force ; et la décrire serait une tâche presque sans fin. Elle peut affecter jusqu'à la plus haute intellectualité ; car, si la bêtise authentique est une artiste paisible, la bêtise intelligente, qui contribue à la mobilité de la vie de l'esprit entraîne surtout son instabilité et sa stérilité. Il y a bien des années déjà, j'écrivais à son propos ceci : “Il n'est pas une seule pensée importante dont la bêtise ne sache aussitôt faire usage ; elle peut se mouvoir dans toutes les directions et prendre tous les costumes de la vérité. La vérité, elle, n'a jamais qu'un seul vêtement, un seul chemin : elle est toujours handicapée”. La bêtise dont il s'agit là n'est pas une maladie mentale ; ce n'en n'est pas moins la plus dangereuse des maladies de l'esprit, parce que c'est la vie même qu'elle menace. [...]"
(Robert Musil, De la bêtise, 1937)

E4.2.C.2.a_REF7_LIT L'ERREUR NE SE PRESENTE JAMAIS COMME TELLE, ELLE PORTE "TOUS LES COSTUMES DE LA VERITE". Robert Musil oppose la bêtise (mobile, versatile, capable de tout utiliser) à la vérité (qui n'a qu'un seul habit et est "handicapée"), illustrant ainsi l'asymétrie de la lutte : il est plus facile d'avoir l'air d'avoir raison (bêtise) que d'être vrai. 
"J'ai écrit moi-même il y a quelques années déjà : “Si la bêtise ne ressemblait pas à s'y méprendre au progrès, au talent, à l'espoir ou au perfectionnement, personne ne voudrait être bête.” C'était en 1931 ; et nul ne s'avisera de contester que le monde, depuis, n'ait vu encore nombre de progrès et de perfectionnement, ainsi est-il devenu peu à peu impossible d'ajourner la question : “Qu’est-ce au juste que la bêtise ?” [...]

Celui qui chercherait le concept d'intelligence le plus général serait [...] amené [...] à adopter celui de “capacité” ; de sorte que tout homme incapable pourrait à l'occasion être qualifié de bête. En fait, il en va ainsi même quand la capacité relative à une certaine bêtise n'est pas expressément qualifié d'intelligence. L'espèce de capacité qui passe au premier plan et prête pour un temps son contenu au concept d'intelligence et de bêtise dépend des formes de vie. Aux époques d'insécurité personnelle, la ruse, la force, l'acuité des sens et l'adresse physique imprégneront le concept d'intelligence ; aux époques plus intellectuelles - et il faut ajouter, avec les réserves hélas nécessaires, bourgeoises -, c'est l'activité cérébrale qui s’y substitue. [...]

Une mystérieuse maladie d’époque. [...]
Si la bêtise, en effet, vue du dedans, ne ressemblait pas à s’y méprendre au talent, si, vue du dehors, elle n’avait pas toutes les apparences du progrès, du génie, de l’espoir et de l’amélioration, personne ne voudrait être bête et il n’y aurait pas de bêtise. Tout au moins serait-il aisé de la combattre. Le malheur est qu’elle ait quelque chose d’extraordinairement naturel et convaincant. Aussi, quand quelqu’un juge un chromo plus artistique qu’une peinture à huile, son jugement comporte une part de vérité beaucoup plus facile à démontrer que le génie de Van Gogh. De même est-il très facile, et très rentable, d’être un dramaturge plus puissant que Shakespeare, un romancier plus égal que Goethe ; un bon lieu commun est toujours plus humain qu’une découverte nouvelle. Il n’est pas une seule pensée importante dont la bêtise ne sache aussitôt faire usage, elle peut se mouvoir dans toutes les directions et prendre tous les costumes de la vérité. La vérité, elle, n’a jamais qu’un seul vêtement, un seul chemin : elle est toujours handidicapée."
(Robert Musil, De la bêtise, 1937)

E4.2.C.2.b. Circularity and Persistence: How error survives and grows. 
The refusal to change course, the transformation of quantity into quality, the "heat of narration" that embellishes lies, and the circular reasoning that prevents refutation.

E4.2.C.2.b_REF1_PH

EL3.100. THE MISGUIDED MIND PERSISTS IN ITS MAD RUSH FORWARD, WHICH IT WORSENS WHEN IT COMES TO NEW CROSSROADS "Disillusionment, desengaño as the Spaniards say, is a remedy worse than the disease it claims to cure and almost always results in a strengthening of the illusion. A stubborn supporter of any ideology will always be, not preoccupied as one might expect, but rather reassured and reinforced in his belief by the failure of this same ideology, as François Furet shows in his work on the communist ideal in the 20th century : the communist illusion is in no way defeated, but on the contrary emerges reinforced by the succession of its historical disappointments. Any man who admits to being wrong is more than ever entrenched into his own error, in the same way a madman who declares himself cured has only risen in rank in the hierarchy of his own madness. Everyone knows this. What we know less, and that I admit ignoring myself, is the secret of the psychological mechanism which explains why unveiled illusions tend to reaffirm their grip on the subject. [...] The misguided mind persists in its mad rush forward, which it worsens when it comes to new crossroads."
(Clément Rosset, The Demon of Tautology, 1997)

E4.2.C.2.b_REF2_PH MONTAIGNE DESCRIBE HOW THE DESIRE TO PERSUADE AND THE "HEAT OF NARRATION" LEAD US TO EMBELLISH, EXAGGERATE, AND CONSTRUCT "MIRACLES" (FALSE CERTAINTIES) OUT OF INSUFFICIENT DATA.
"J'ay veu la naissance de plusieurs miracles de mon temps. [...] Or les premiers qui sont abbreuvez de ce commencement d'estrangeté, venans à semer leur histoire, sentent par les oppositions qu'on leur fait, où loge la difficulté de la persuasion, et vont calfeutrant cet endroict de quelque piece fauce. Outre ce que, insita hominibus libidine alendi de industria rumores [par le penchant naturel des hommes á alimenter les rumeurs], nous faisons naturellement conscience, de rendre ce qu'on nous a presté, sans quelque usure, et accession de nostre creu [sans le rendre avec interêts et augmentation de notre cru]. L'erreur particulier, fait premierement l'erreur publique : et à son tour apres, l'erreur publique fait l'erreur particuliere. Ainsi va tout ce bastiment, s'estoffant et formant, de main en main : de maniere que le plus eslongné tesmoin, en est mieux instruict que le plus voisin : et le dernier informé, mieux persuadé que le premier. C'est un progrez [processus] naturel. Car quiconque croit quelque chose, estime que c'est ouvrage de charité, de la persuader à un autre : Et pour ce faire, ne craint point d'adjouster de son invention, autant qu'il voit estre necessaire en son compte, pour suppleer à la resistance et au deffaut qu'il pense estre en la conception d'autruy. [...]

Moy-mesme, qui fais singuliere conscience de mentir : et qui ne me soucie guere de donner creance et authorité à ce que je dis, m'apperçoy toutesfois, aux propos que j'ay en main, qu'estant eschauffé ou par la resistance d'un autre, ou par la propre chaleur de ma narration, je grossis et enfle mon subject, par voix, mouvemens, vigueur et force de parolles : et encore par extention et amplification : non sans interest de la verité nayfve [dommage pour la pure verité]: Mais je le fais en condition pourtant, qu'au premier qui me rameine, et qui me demande la verité nuë et cruë : je quitte soudain mon effort, et la luy donne, sans exaggeration, sans emphase, et remplissage. La parole vive et bruyante, comme est la mienne ordinaire, s'emporte volontiers à l'hyperbole."
(Montaigne, Les Essais, Des boyteux, III, XI)

E4.2.C.2.b_REF3_PH TOUTE PENSEE DOGMATIQUE EST CIRCULAIRE PARCE QU'ELLE POSTULE LA VALIDITE DE LA RAISON.
"Il est bien aisé sur des fondemens avouez, de bastir ce qu'on veut ; car selon la loy et ordonnance de ce commencement, le reste des pieces du bastiment se conduit aisément, sans se dementir. Par cette voye nous trouvons nostre raison bien fondée, et discourons à boule-veuë : Car nos maistres præoccupent et gaignent avant main, autant de lieu en nostre creance, qu'il leur en faut pour conclurre apres ce qu'ils veulent"
(Montaigne, Les essais, Apologie de Raimond de Sebonde, II, XII)

E4.2.C.2.b_REF4_TH L'ESSENCE DE L'AVEUGLEMENT DOGMATIQUE : APPLIQUER UNE SOLUTION "LOGIQUE" SANS VOIR QUE LA REALITE A CHANGE DE NATURE. Le dogmatisme échoue parce qu'il ignore qu'à un certain point, l'accumulation d'une "bonne" solution se transforme en un problème.
"Deux fois plus ce n'est pas nécessairement Deux fois mieux [...]
Quoi de plus logique, en apparence, que de penser qu'une solution, une fois qu'on l'a trouvée et constamment appliqué avec succès, doit pouvoir régler des problèmes de plus en plus vastes ? Mais cent fois plus n'est cent fois plus la même chose, que dans l'abstraction des mathématiques. Le truc qu'Hécate applique à ces situations et qui mène aux échecs les plus inattendus et “illogiques” consiste à faire rapidement passer les choses, au moment le plus crucial, de la quantité à la qualité. Et c'est ce saut qui surprend totalement la raison et le bon sens.
À manger du gâteau tous les jours, on finit par s’en dégoûter ; cela semble évident. Que, dans la construction des ponts, il y ait une limite à la portée de l'arche, cela ne surprend même pas le profane. À un certain point, trop c'est trop. [...]"
(Paul Watzlawick, Comment réussir à échouer, 1988 )

E4.2.C.2.b_REF5_PSI "« IL SUFFIT D’INSISTER », EST L’UNE DES RECETTES LES PLUS ASSUREMENT DESASTREUSES MISES AU POINT SUR NOTRE PLANETE SUR DES CENTAINES DE MILLIONS D’ANNEES. Elle a conduit des espèces entières à l’extinction. [...] ce [...] jeu repose entièrement sur la conservation forcenée d'ajustements et de solutions qui peuvent avoir été autrefois les meilleurs, voire les seuls possibles. Les difficultés sont inéluctables parce que toutes les situations changent avec le temps. [...]
L’importance de ce mécanisme pour le sujet qui nous occupe est évident. Son application est à la portée des débutants n’ayant bénéficié d’aucune formation particulière. Son usage est d’ailleurs si répandu que, depuis Freud, il assure l’existence confortable de générations de spécialistes qui ont toutefois préféré à notre « il suffit d’insister » un terme de consonance plus scientifique : névrose.
Mais qu’importe le terme, pourvu qu’on ait l’effet. Et l’effet est garanti aussi longtemps que l’étudiant s’en tient à deux règles simples. Premièrement, une seule solution est possible, raisonnable, autorisée, logique; si elle n’a pas encore produit l’effet désiré, c’est qu’il faut redoubler d’effort et de détermination dans son application. Deuxièmement, il ne faut en aucun cas remettre en question l’idée qu’il n’existe qu’une solution et une seule. C’est sa mise en pratique qui doit laisser à désirer et peut être encore améliorée."
(Paul Watzlawick, Faites vous-même votre malheur)

E4.2.C.2.b_REF6_PH EMERSON IDENTIFIES "FOOLISH CONSISTENCY" AS THE SOURCE OF DOGMATISM. We refuse to change our minds because we revere our "past acts" more than the "thousand-eyed present." 
"The other terror that scares us from self-trust is our consistency; a reverence for our past act or word because the eyes of others have no other data for computing our orbit than our past acts, and we are loth to disappoint them.

But why should you keep your head over your shoulder? Why drag about this corpse of your memory, lest you contradict some what you have stated in this or that public place? Suppose you should contradict yourself; what then? It seems to be a rule of wisdom never to rely on your memory alone, scarcely even in acts of pure memory, but to bring the past for judgment into the thousand-eyed present, and live ever in a new day. In your metaphysics you have denied personality to the Deity, yet when the devout motions of the soul come, yield to them heart and life, though they should clothe God with shape and color. Leave your theory, as Joseph his coat in the hand of the harlot, and flee.

A foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds, adored by little statesmen and philosophers and divines. With consistency a great soul has simply nothing to do. He may as well concern himself with his shadow on the wall. Speak what you think now in hard words and to-morrow speak what to-morrow thinks in hard words again, though it contradict every thing you said to-day. Ah, so you shall be sure to be misunderstood.'-Is it so bad then to be misunderstood? Pythagoras was misunderstood, and Socrates, and Jesus, and Luther, and Copernicus, and Galileo, and Newton, and every pure and wise spirit that ever took flesh. To be great is to be misunderstood.

I suppose no man can violate his nature. All the sallies of his will are rounded in by the law of his being, as the inequalities of Andes and Himmaleh are insignificant in the curve of the sphere. Nor does it matter how you gauge and try him. A character is like an acrostic or Alexandrian stanza; read it forward, back- ward, or across, it still spells the same thing. In this pleasing contrite wood-life which God allows me, let me record day by day my honest thought without prospect or retrospect, and, I cannot doubt, it will be found symmetrical, though I mean it not and see it not. My book should smell of pines and resound with the hum of insects. The swallow over my window should inter- weave that thread or straw he carries in his bill into my web also. We pass for what we are. Character teaches above our wills. Men imagine that they communicate their virtue or vice only by overt actions, and do not see that virtue or vice emit a breath every moment.

There will be an agreement in whatever variety of actions, so they be each honest and natural in their hour. For of one will, the actions will be harmonious, however unlike they seem. These varieties are lost sight of at a little distance, at a little height of thought. One tendency unites them all. The voyage of the best ship is a zigzag line of a hundred tacks. See the line from a sufficient distance, and it straightens itself to the average tendency. Your genuine action will explain itself and will explain your other genuine actions. Your conformity explains nothing. Act singly, and what you have already done singly will justify you now. Greatness appeals to the future. If I can be firm enough to-day to do right and scorn eyes, I must have done so much right before as to defend me now. Be it how it will, do right now. Always scorn appearances and you always may. The force of character is cumulative."
(Ralph Waldo Emerson, Self-reliance, 1841)

E4.2.C.2.b_REF7_PH TOUTE PENSEE DOGMATIQUE EST CIRCULAIRE, PUISQU’ELLE A BESOIN, POUR DEMONTRER QUOI QUE CE SOIT, DE SUPPOSER D’ABORD LA VALIDITE DE LA RAISON (AUTREMENT DIT, QU’IL Y A DE VRAIES DEMONSTRATIONS), CE QUI EST PAR NATURE INDEMONTRABLE.
"CERCLE 
La figure géométrique relève des mathématiques. Quand les philosophes parlent de cercle, c’est le plus souvent par métaphore, pour désigner non une figure mais une faute logique (c’est alors un synonyme de diallèle). Une pensée est circulaire lorsqu’elle suppose cela même qu’elle prétend démontrer. Un bon exemple en est ce qu’on appelle, depuis Arnauld, le cercle cartésien. Descartes, pour garantir la validité de nos idées claires et distinctes, a besoin d’un Dieu tout-puissant non trompeur, dont il entreprend de démontrer l’existence et la véracité. Mais ses démonstrations ne valent que si nos idées claires et distinctes sont fiables, autrement dit que si Dieu existe et n’est pas trompeur: elles supposent donc (pour être valides) cela même qu’elles prétendent démontrer (l'existence d’un Dieu vérace). C’est en quoi le système, dans son ensemble, reste indémontrable. 
Ce n’est qu’un exemple parmi cent autres. Toute pensée dogmatique est circulaire, puisqu’elle a besoin, pour démontrer quoi que ce soit, de supposer d’abord la validité de la raison (autrement dit, qu’il y a de vraies démonstrations), ce qui est par nature indémontrable. Ce n’est pas une raison pour renoncer à penser. Mais c’en est une pour renoncer au dogmatisme."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.2.C.2.c. Logic Against Reality: How to banish chance and uncertainty.
Paranoia as a form of logic, the "ideosphere" that has no external lever, conspiracy theories, and the substitution of deductive rules for genuine judgment.

E4.2.C.2.c_REF1_PH

EL3.74. ON SYSTEMS OF BELIEF "Beliefs are important. Wars are fought over them. How can and should we deal with conflicting belief systems?
Since Socrates Philosophy's purpose has been to think wether a belief or system of beliefs can be shown to be more reasonable or to be true as against other beliefs - but it has been political philosophy and ethics that have had the most influence - not epistemology or the theory of knowledge. Falsification, as commented by Karl Popper, has had a tremendous influence on how we interpret outcomes vs. our beliefs in the last century (if the experience contradicts the outcome predicted by theory, you refute the theory). But we have a choice about what component of our system of belief we should refute: this gives the opportunity for people to defend any belief they want: If my prescription for medicine does not work it might be because the Doctor failed, or the pharmacist failed, or the whole healthcare system is wrong... see Philip Goss interpreting fossils as implanted as is by God when he created the world 6 thousand years ago, to test our faith. If you take one core belief of your system as a fixed point you are not ready to reconsider, you then need to adapt/twist other beliefs of the system to keep it coherent in order to fit new evidence. Many people between the age of 12 and 15 start to realize they are in a contingent belief system - they are doing philosophy. Descartes suggested that you should rebuild your belief system on certain axioms - however philosophy showed thereafter there are no axioms of certainty on which to build an enduring system. An alternative put forward by Otto Neurath in the 1930s is that you cannot start from scratch. It is not like rebuilding a house, but rather a boat that you have to keep floating. Since then many philosophers argued we have to take into account the evidences of science. 
The dogmatism of many people is unbreakable - 1. the first move might be to try to understand each others beliefs, then 2. to understand the intellectual strategy that sustain each others' beliefs. Ex: The bible vs. scientific investigation, then 3. discussing the validity of each underlying strategy."
(Jonathan Glover on Systems of Belief, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: https://philosophybites.com/podcast/jonathan-glover-on-systems-of-belief/

E4.2.C.2.c_REF2_PH CLEMENT ROSSET MENE UNE ATTAQUE FRONTALE CONTRE LA PRETENTION DE LA LOGIQUE A DIRE LE VRAI. ROSSET Y DEFINIT LE LOGICIEN COMME UN "PARANOÏAQUE" QUI REFUSE LE HASARD (L'INDIFFERENCE DU REEL) EN LUI SUBSTITUANT UN ORDRE NECESSAIRE (L'"ÊTRE" OU LE "MALHEUR").
"Le paranoïaque se caractériserait par un usage morbide de la logique, le recours au « paralogisme ». Il y aurait, dit-on, une certaine logique « saine » et une certaine logique « délirante ». C’est là peut-être innocenter un peu vite la logique ; au reste, aucun psychologue n’a réussi jusqu’à présent à déterminer un critère permettant de reconnaître une frontière entre ces deux versants de la même logique. Aux yeux du penseur tragique, toute logique — dès lors qu’elle ne se limite pas à la non-affirmation — est toujours et déjà d’ordre paranoïaque : il n’y a pas de « délire d’interprètation » qui tienne, puisque toute interprétation est délire. Ce qui différencie, socialement parlant, le fou de l’homme normal est critère purement quantitatif et proportionnel : non un usage sain ou malsain de la logique, mais la quantité de temps, et l’ampleur du champ, qui sont attribués à l’interprètation. Tout homme, en tant qu’il est logicien, est paranoïaque. [...]

Autre chose est de constater qu’un parallélisme peut être mené entre tel ordre de pensées et tel ordre d’ « objets » s’offrant à sa préhension, autre chose de conclure à un ordre inhérent aux « choses » : à des objets dont on oublie qu’ils sont objets de pensée. Sitôt qu’elle tire de ses agencements une mise en cause du hasard objectif, la logique verse dans l’ordre paranoïaque ; elle constitue la paranoïa. La relative permanence d’un certain ordre assurera l’illusoire fixite d’un certain être, permettra donc de penser l’être. L’être : c’est-à-dire quelque chose qui n’existe pas là par hasard. L’affirmation de l’être est la négation du hasard. La ligne de démarcation entre la logique paranoïaque et la logique tragique n’est pas dans un usage sain ou perverti de la pensée, mais dans la problématique du hasard. L’intention terroriste, chez le philosophe tragique, est de nature exactement opposée à la logique paranoïaque : celle-ci se caractérisant par le refus, celle-là par l’affirmation du thème du hasard. Logique du pire en apparence, la logique paranoïaque est une logique du meilleur : la nécessité qu’elle assigne au malheur ayant précisément pour fonction d’évacuer ce qui serait pour elle la pire des pensées — le hasard. […]

Nietzsche déclare, en terminant la Généalogie de la morale, que « l’homme préfère encore avoir la volonté du néant que de ne point vouloir du tout ». C’est-à-dire : il vaut mieux affirmer le malheur que de n’affirmer rien. C’est dans l’hésitation entre ces deux modes de représentation (le premier se représentant, l’autre s’avérant incapable de se rien représenter), qu’oscillent pensée tragique et pensée pessimiste. Le pessimiste s’accorde un bénéfice : en affirmant le malheur, il affirme toujours quelque chose. Bénéfice que se refuse la pensée tragique : pour elle l’être est impensable, mieux, aucun être n’ « est ». En ce sens, on peut distinguer deux formes antithétiques de logique du pire : l’une (paranoïaque) dont la logique est d’affirmer (le pire), l’autre (tragique) dont le « pire » est de ne rien affirmer. 
(Clément Rosset, Logique du pire, 1971)

E4.2.C.2.c_REF3_PH ARENDT EXPLIQUE QU’APPLIQUER UNE REGLE PREETABLIE N'EST PAS UN VERITABLE JUGEMENT MAIS UNE PENSEE DEDUCTIVE QUI DISPENSE DE PENSER LE CAS SINGULIER. Elle affirme que ce processus cache un "préjugé" (le critère n'est plus remis en cause).
"Dans l’usage courant, le mot jugement a deux significations qu’il convient de distinguer l’une de l’autre, même si elles s’interpénètrent toujours quand nous parlons. Il désigne tout d’abord le fait de subsumer en l’ordonnant l’individuel et le particulier sous quelque chose de général et d’universel ; le fait de suivre une règle et d’appliquer des critères en fonction desquels le concret doit se légitimer, et en fonction desquels il sera possible d’en décider. Dans tous les jugements de ce genre se cache un préjugé; seul l’individuel sera jugé, mais ni le critère ni encore moins sa pertinence par rapport à ce qui est à mesurer. Certes, il a bien fallu qu’on décide une fois du critère en portant un jugement, mais à présent ce jugement a pour ainsi dire été adopté et il est même devenu un moyen permettant de formuler d’autres jugements. Mais juger peut aussi signifier tout autre chose et c’est nous estimons que tel ou tel a bien ou mal jugé de la situation. [...]
On ne peut démontrer le caractère contraignant que de la subordination, du fait d’appliquer à l’individuel et au concret une règle préalablement établie, laquelle présuppose la validité du critère par rapport à la nature de la chose en question. Or cette subordination et cette réglementation, où l’on ne décide de rien d’autre si ce n’est de la vérité ou de la fausseté de la manière dont on procède, comme on peut toujours le démontrer, sont beaucoup plus proches d’une pensée déductive que d’une pensée judicative."
(Hannah Arendt, Qu'est ce que la politique?, 1958)

E4.2.C.2.c_REF4_PH BARTHES DEFINES THE "IDEOSPHERE" AS A SYSTEM THAT HAS "NO EXTERNAL LEVER" TO DETACH FROM IT: THE SYSTEM IS DESIGNED TO "INCORPORATE OBJECTIONS" INTO ITS OWN LOGIC.
"LES IDÉOSPHÈRES

Idéosphère: mot que je crée à partir d'idéologie: système langagier d'une idéologie, en précisant tout de suite, ce qui rend déjà la définition inexacte: toute idéologie pour moi est et n'est que langage: c'est un discours, un type de discours. [...]

b) Le levier
J’ai dit (notamment Cerisy ): systèmes langagiers forts (idéosphères) ont des figures de système = des tours de raisonnement qui permettent de contrer une objection ou une distance en l'incorporant dans le système, en la codant dans les termes du système: vénalité de la cure analytique: ne fait pas partie d'un autre système (économie de marchandises) mais de l'idéosphère psychanalytique [...]

chaque idéosphère: un système de forces (de langage) sans levier extérieur pour s'en détacher.

c) Manie
En termes de « sujet » : le problème n'est pas d'être pour ou « contre les idées » véhiculées ou proposées ou « remuées » par une idéosphère, mais d'évaluer le degré de proximité ou de distance où l'on est par rapport à la colle (la cohésion) de ce système langagier → si l'on ne se constitue pas soi-même comme locuteur de ce système (mais seulement comme écouteur, même fasciné), voire comme utilisateur par bribes → l'idéosphère: vue, sentie (chez les autres qui sont entièrement dedans) comme un état (d'âme), un pathos."
(Roland Barthes, Le neutre, Cours au Collège de France, 1977-1978)

E4.2.C.2.c_REF5_PH KARINE SAFA DEFINIT LA THEORIE DU COMPLOT PAR SON INCAPACITE A ETRE REFUTEE. Taguieff explique la racine psychologique de ce dogmatisme : la peur de l'incertitude et la "perte de sens" depuis la fin des fondements théologiques. Le complot offre un "modèle explicatif sécurisant".
"Théories du complot : le grand retour

Une enquête récente de l’IFOP révèle qu’une majorité de Français croit aux théories du complot. C’est un fait, dans nos sociétés modernes, l’imaginaire conspirationniste semble n’avoir aucune borne, de la crise des gilets jaunes qui en ont été le terrain fertile jusqu’au crime du complotiste australien de Christchurch, adepte de la « théorie du grand remplacement ». L’implosion du doute et du soupçon, qui nous éloignent de l’optimisme des Lumières, est-elle devenue l’emblème de notre époque ?

Pour l’épistémologue Karl Popper, les théories du complot sont la reconduite d’une forme de pensée mythique en plein 20ème siècle (et a fortiori le nôtre). Elles sont « la sécularisation des superstitions religieuses. Les dieux d’Homère, dont les complots expliquent la guerre de Troie, y sont remplacés par les monopoles, les capitalistes, ou les impérialistes » (La société ouverte et ses ennemis). L’homme aurait tout temps mobilisé des constructions imaginaires et ésotériques pour expliquer le fonctionnement du monde. Popper défait toutefois le statut faussement scientifique des théories du complot car si elles en ont l’apparence (émettre une théorie de départ, remettre en cause des vérités établies, multiplier les arguments...), elles ne font en réalité que les singer. Pour l’épistémologue, c’est la réfutabilité qui garantit le caractère scientifique d’une hypothèse. Or les théories du complot sont par nature irréfutables. Il est impossible de les vérifier, de les soumettre à l’épreuve des faits. Sans compter que la méthodologie des complotistes, nous dit l’auteur, est problématique car ils mettent tout leur poids du côté des intentions d’une minorité obscure au détriment des institutions et de la réalité du pouvoir. Pour Karl Popper, les théories du complot sont donc dans la continuité des croyances mythiques et irrationnelles qui ont jalonné l’histoire.

Pourtant de nombreux auteurs pensent que l’imaginaire complotiste contemporain présente quelque chose d’inédit sur le plan anthropologique au point d’être un véritable marqueur de la mentalité postmoderne. La Révolution de 1789 en serait le déclencheur. Après la chute du régime monarchique et la sortie du théologico-politique, la société se trouve livrée à elle-même, privée de transcendance, confrontée à l’incertitude. Selon le philosophe Pierre-André Taguieff, les théories du complot remplissent dès lors la fonction d’offrir un modèle explicatif sécurisant auprès de sociétés caractérisées par « une crise continuée des fondements dans l’ordre de la connaissance comme dans celui des valeurs et des normes. » (L’imaginaire du complot mondial).  Fussent-elles extravagantes et antisémites comme la théorie du complot juif mondial ou celles du grand remplacement.  La perte de l’évidence du sens, initiée par la crise de l’Ancien Régime, loin de s’estomper aujourd’hui s’amplifie. Les manipulations de toutes sortes semblent même consubstantielles au système démocratique. Dans la mesure où celui-ci rend les hommes acteurs de l’histoire et du pouvoir, il favoriserait parallèlement les fantasmes et la suspicion.

Selon Paul Valéry, « le mélange de vrai et de faux est énormément plus toxique que le faux pur. » Les théories du complot, qui participent de ce mélange, sont un défi pour l’intelligence. Défi parce que nul n’est à l’abri de ces théories qui se veulent un rempart contre le hasard et l’incertitude. Défi aussi parce que les théories du complot ont parfois l’apparence de la rationalité. Accepter que nous ne puissions tout connaitre, n’est-ce pas commencer le difficile apprentissage de la liberté ?"
(Karine Safa, Time To Philo, 29/03/2019)

E4.2.C.2.c_REF6_PH LA RAISON DES FOUS NE SE LIMITE PAS AU RAISONNABLE ; elle s’adjuge aussi le domaine de ce qui n’est pas raisonnable et tient pour esprits étroits ceux qui limitent le domaine du raisonnable à ce qui est effectivement raisonable.
(Clément Rosset, Principes de sagesse et de folie)

E4.2.C.2.c_RE7_PH "DOGMATISME 
Au sens courant: un penchant pour les dogmes ou les affirmations péremptoires, une incapacité à douter de ce qu’on croit. C’est aimer la certitude plus que la vérité, au point de tenir pour certain tout ce qu’on juge être vrai. 
Au sens philosophique: toute doctrine qui affirme l’existence de connaissances certaines. C’est le contraire du scepticisme. Le mot, en ce sens technique, est sans valeur péjorative. La plupart des grands philosophes sont dogmatiques (le scepticisme est l’exception), et ils ont pour cela de bonnes raisons, à commencer par la raison elle-même. Qui peut douter de sa propre existence, de la vérité d’un théorème mathématique (s’il en comprend la démonstration), d’un fait empiriquement constaté ou, aujourd’hui, du mouvement de la Terre autour du Soleil ? On remarquera pourtant qu’une incapacité à douter ne prouve rien. Qui doutait, il y a dix siècles, de l’immobilité de la Terre ? Qui peut prouver qu’une expérience est autre chose qu’un rêve ? Que le monde est autre chose qu’une illusion ? C’est ce qui donne raison aux sceptiques, tout en leur interdisant de l’être dogmatiquement. Que rien ne soit certain, cela ne saurait être une certitude. 
Le dogmatisme relève principalement de la théorie de la connaissance; mais il arrive qu’il touche aussi à la morale. C’est ce qui m’a amené à distinguer deux dogmatismes différents: un dogmatisme théorique, qui porte sur les vérités; et un dogmatisme pratique, qui porte sur les valeurs. En quoi ce dernier est-il un dogmatisme ? En ceci qu’il considère que les valeurs sont des vérités, qui peuvent à ce titre être connues avec certitude. La vérité suffit alors à juger de la valeur d’une action, et le permet seule. Ainsi chez Platon ou Lénine. Si le bien est à connaître, le mal n’est qu’une erreur: nul n’est méchant ni réactionnaire volontairement. À quoi bon la démocratie ? Une vérité, cela ne se vote pas! À quoi bon les libertés individuelles ? Une vérité, cela ne se choisit pas ! Par quoi le dogmatisme pratique aboutit tout naturellement, chez Lénine (en pratique) comme déjà chez Platon (en théorie), à ce que nous appelons aujourd’hui le totalitarisme. Ce n’est pas vrai du dogmatisme théorique, considéré isolément, et suffit à les distinguer. Comment la connaissance de ce qui est suffirait-elle à décider de ce qui doit être ? Pourquoi de ce qui est suffirait-elle à décider de ce qui doit être ? Pourquoi la vérité devrait-elle commander? Comment pourrait-elle choisir ? La biologie ne dit rien sur la valeur de la vie, ni sur celle du suicide. Le marxisme, s’il était une science, ne dirait pas davantage sur la valeur respective du capitalisme et du communisme. C’est aux individus de savoir ce qu’ils veulent, non à la science de vouloir ce qu’elle sait, ou croit savoir."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.2.C.2.c_REF8_PH

EL3.86. PREJUDICES ARE NOT BASED ON PERSONAL EXPERIENCES OR EVIDENCE AND CAN EASILY GAIN ACCEPTANCE WITHOUT PERSUASION. They often contain hidden past judgments that were once legitimate but have become prejudices over time. To eliminate prejudices, it is essential to uncover and understand these underlying past judgments.
"Prejudices are not personal idiosyncrasies which, even if they are always indisputable, nevertheless refer to a personal experience which gives them the evidence of sensitive perceptions. Prejudices never have such evidence, not even for those who are subjected to them, because they are not based on any experience. This is the reason why they can, having no link with the person, very easily meet the adhesion of other persons without having to submit to the requirements of persuasion. Such is what distinguishes the prejudice from the judgment with which it has in common that people recognize themselves in it and feel their common belonging, so that the one who is slave of prejudices is basically always assured of an influence, while what belongs to the pure idiosyncrasy asserts itself only with great difficulty in the public-political space and is valid only in the intimate private sphere. Prejudice therefore plays a great role in the purely social sphere; there is hardly any social formation which is not more or less based on prejudice, according to which certain categories of people are accepted and others rejected. The freer someone is from prejudice, the less he will be adapted to purely social life. [...] One reason for the effectiveness and danger of prejudice is that a part of the past is always hidden in it. If we look closely, we can recognize a real prejudice by the fact that it also conceals a judgment that was formulated in the past, that originally had a legitimate and adequate basis of experience in it, and that has only become a prejudice because it has managed to creep in over the course of time without our noticing. [...] If we want to destroy prejudices, we must always first find the past judgments that they contain within them, that is to say, in fact, bring to light their truth content."
(Hannah Arendt, What is Politics?, 1958)

E4.2.C.3. The Violence of the Absolute: The consequences of the "Right to be Right." and the inherent violence of claiming absolute truth.

E4.2.C.3.a. The Narcissistic Trap and the Pleasure of the "Last Word."
How conversation often devolves into a performative "scene" where the goal is not truth, but the narcissistic triumph of dominating the other and the emotional satisfaction of condemnation.

E4.2.C.3.a_REF1_LIT

EL3.38. "FEW THINGS IN LIFE ARE MORE SEDUCTIVE THAN THE ARTIFICIAL SWEETNESS OF BEING CAPITAL-R RIGHT — of “winning the narrative,” as my friend Amanda likes to say. This delicious doom and glory of being Right — which is, of course, a matter of feeling rather than being it — tends to involve framing our emotional triggers as moral motives, then thundering them upon those we cast in the role of the Wrong, who may do the same in turn.
How, amid this ping-pong of righteousness grenades, do we maintain not only a clear-minded and pure-hearted relationship with reality, but also forgiveness and respect for others, which presuppose self-forgiveness and self-respect — the key to unlatching the essential capacity for joy that makes life worth living?"
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings)

E4.2.C.3.a_REF2_LIT

EL3.106. "I HAVE ALWAYS BEEN MYSTIFIED BY THE SPEED WITH WHICH PEOPLE CONDEMN ONE ANOTHER. Feeling as righteous as Christ chastising the money-changers in the temple, they cast their fellows into the outer darkness of their disapproval. This seems to give them intense pleasure. Whenever I am tempted by this pleasure, I remember some impulse in myself that could have led me, granted certain circumstances, into the condemned position. This has caused me to distrust the part of myself that would relish self-righteousness."
(Anne Truitt, Daybook: The Journal of an Artist)

E4.2.C.3.a_REF3_PH ROLAND BARTHES FOURNIT UNE ANATOMIE PRECISE DE LA DYNAMIQUE DU CONFLIT (LA "SCENE"). IL EXPLIQUE QUE DANS CE TYPE D'ECHANGE, IL NE S'AGIT PAS DE CONSTRUIRE UNE VERITE, MAIS D'OBTENIR UN TRIOMPHE NARCISSIQUE.
"Faire une scène [...]
Insignifiante, la scène lutte cependant avec l’insignifiance. Tout partenaire d’une scène rêve d’avoir le dernier mot. Parler en dernier, « conclure », c’est donner un destin à tout ce qui s’est dit, c’est maîtriser, posséder, dispenser, assener le sens; dans l’espace de la parole, celui qui vient en dernier occupe une place souveraine, tenue, selon un privilège réglé, par les professeurs, les présidents, les juges, les confesseurs : tout combat de langage (mâché des anciens Sophistes, disputatio des Scolastiques) vise à la possession de cette place; par le dernier mot, je vais désorganiser, « liquider » l’adversaire, lui infliger une blessure (narcissique) mortelle, je vais l’acculer au silence, le châtrer de toute parole. La scène se déroule en vue de ce triomphe : il ne s’agit nullement que chaque réplique concoure à la victoire d’une vérité et construise peu à peu cette vérité, mais seulement que la dernière réplique soit la bonne : c’est le dernier coup de dés qui compte. La scène ne ressemble en rien à un jeu d’échecs, mais plutôt au jeu du furet : toutefois, ce jeu est ici inversé, car le gain va à celui qui réussit à tenir l’anneau dans sa main au moment même où le jeu s’arrête : le furet court tout le long de la scène, la victoire est à qui capturera ce petit animal, dont la possession assurera la toute-puissance : la dernière réplique. [...]
Qu’est-ce qu’un héros ? Celui qui a la dernière réplique. Voit-on un héros qui ne parlerait pas avant de mourir? Renoncer à la dernière réplique (refuser la scène) relève donc d’une morale anti-héroïque : c’est celle d’Abraham : jusqu’au bout du sacrifice qui lui est demandé, il ne parle pas. Ou bien encore, riposte plus subversive, car moins drapée (le silence est toujours un beau drap), on remplace la dernière réplique par une pirouette incongrue : c’est ce que fit ce maître zen qui, pour toute réponse à la question solennelle : « Qu’est-ce que Bouddha ? », ôta sa sandale, la mit sur sa tête et s’en alla : dissolution impeccable de la dernière réplique, maîtrise de la non-maîtrise."
(Roland Barthes, Fragments d'un discours amoureux, 1977)

E4.2.C.3.a_REF4_LIT STEVENSON DECRIT LA CONVERSATION COMME UN JEU DE MIROIRS NARCISSIQUE OU CHACUN CHERCHE A "S'AFFIRMER ET SE JUSTIFIER".
"Un “sujet” n’a rien de sacré, rien qui nous obligerait à nous y tenir au-delà de notre désir. De fait, les sujets de conversation sont en nombre réduit, et plus le la moitié de ceux qui en valent la peine se réduisent à ces trois propositions : je suis moi, vous êtes vous, et il existe d’autres gens dont on sait vaguement qu’ils ne nous ressemblent pas tout à fait. Quelle que soit la teneur de la discussion, la moitié du temps elle reste consacrée à ces vérités éternelles. Le thème est donné, chacun joue de soi-même comme d’un instrument ; s’affirme et se justifie ; se creuse la tête pour trouver des exemples et opinions, et les exprime sitôt qu’ils lui viennent à l’esprit, à a propre surprise et pour la plus grande admiration de son adversaire. Toute conversation à bâtons rompus est un feu d’artifice d’ostentation ; et suivant les règles du jeu, chacun accepte et flatte la vanité de son interlocuteur. C’est pour cette raison que nous prenons le risque de nous dévoiler autant, que nous osons faire preuve d’une éloquence si chaleureuse, et que tous acquérons aux yeux les uns des autres une telle envergure. Car les causeurs, une fois lancés, dépassent les limites de leur être ordinaire, s’élèvent jusqu’à la hauteur de leurs prétentions secrètes et se font passer pour ces héros, courageux, pieux, charmeurs et sages que, dans leurs moments les plus glorieux, ils aimeraient tant être. [...]"
(Robert Louis Stevenson, Causerie et causeurs, 1882)

E4.2.C.3.a_REF5_PH "JE N’AI JAMAIS REMARQUE NON PLUS QUE PAR LE MOYEN DES DISPUTES QUI SE PRATIQUENT DANS LES ECOLES ON AIT DECOUVERT AUCUNE VERITE qu’on ignorât auparavant. Car pendant que chacun tâche de vaincre, on s’exerce bien plus à faire valoir la vraisemblance qu’à peser les raisons de part et d’autre : et ceux qui ont été longtemps bons avocats ne sont pas pour cela par après meilleurs juges."
(René Descartes, Discours de la méthode, sixième partie)

E4.2.C.3.b. Willful Blindness and the Refusal of Complexity.
How the mind compartmentalizes reality to maintain its position, replacing critical thinking with binary choices (for/against) and reacting with hostility when that fragile certainty is challenged.

E4.2.C.3.b_REF1_CUR

EL3.114. IN WOODY ALLEN'S FILM, "THE IRRATIONAL MAN" (2015),  IS ABE'S BEHAVIOR CREDIBLE IN THE REAL WORLD FOR A CHARACTER WITH HIS PROFILE? Not if you look at how thousands of people responded to the Trolley Problem thought experiment. Wrestling to throw Jill down the elevator pit does not seem coherent.

Whatch the trailer: https://www.imdb.com/title/tt3715320/?ref_=ext_shr_lnk

E4.2.C.3.b_REF2_PH "Nearly everywhere — often even when dealing with purely technical problems — instead of thinking, one merely takes sides: for or against. Such a choice replaces the activity of the mind. This is an intellectual leprosy; it originated in the political world and then spread through the land, contaminating all forms of thinking. This leprosy is killing us."
(Simone Weil, On the Abolition of All Political Parties)

E4.2.C.3.b_REF3_PH THOSE WHO ARE ATTACHED TO "BEING RIGHT" SELDOM WELCOME THE CORRECTION.
"Accordingly I went to one who had the reputation of wisdom, and observed him—his name I need not mention; he was a politician whom I selected for examination—and the result was as follows: When I began to talk with him, I could not help thinking that he was not really wise, although he was thought wise by many, and still wiser by himself; and thereupon I tried to explain to him that he thought himself wise, but was not really wise; and the consequence was that he hated me, and his enmity was shared by several who were present and heard me.

So I left him, saying to myself, as I went away: Well, although I do not suppose that either of us knows anything really beautiful and good, I am better off than he is—for he knows nothing, and thinks that he knows; I neither know nor think that I know. In this latter particular, then, I seem to have slightly the advantage of him. Then I went to another who had still higher pretensions to wisdom, and my conclusion was exactly the same. Whereupon I made another enemy of him, and of many others besides him."
(Plato, The Apolog, 21c–21d)

E4.2.C.17.i. PENELOPE REACTS WITH EMOTIONAL VIOLENCE WHEN ALAN EXPOSES THE FRAGILITY OF HER MORAL CERTAINTY.
"In this sequence of the movie Carnage from Roman Polansky - where the veneer of civility completely breaks down - Alan (Christoph Waltz) mocks Penelope (Jodie Foster)'s "crush" on Sudan/Darfur. Penelope retorts that he will one day be "ashamed" of his nihilistic attitude. Alan then proceeds to ridicule her "integrity" and the notion of her being a "heroic figure". Penelope becomes increasingly emotional about her "Western" moral obligations, specifically mentioning her book on the Darfur tragedy, while Alan cynically dismisses her altruism as fraudulent and hysterical."
(Pierre Schindler)

Watch it on YouTube: https://youtu.be/LyKBispNJZQ

E4.2.C.3.b_REF4_PH SIMONE WEIL DEFINES ERROR NOT AS A LACK OF INTELLIGENCE, BUT AS A "FURTIVE ACT OF WILL" THAT COMPARTMENTALIZES REALITY. "We hate people who would lead us to form connections we do not want to form" and "everything covered by the prestige of the social thing" (party, church, nation) allows for absolute license.
"L’ANNEAU DE GYGÈS

[...] Exemple privilégié, à contempler longtemps, du mécanisme de l’erreur. Mettre à part. En appréciant l’Inde ou la Grèce, on met le mal en relation avec le bien. En appréciant le christianisme, on met le mal à part. On met à part sans le savoir, là précisément est le danger. Ou, ce qui est pire encore, on met à part par un acte de volonté, mais par un acte de volonté furtif à l’égard de soi-même. Et ensuite on ne sait plus qu’on a mis à part. On ne veut pas le savoir et, à force de ne pas vouloir le savoir, on arrive à ne pas pouvoir le savoir. Cette faculté de mettre à part permet tous les crimes. Pour tout ce qui est hors du domaine où l’éducation, le dressage ont fabriqué des liaisons solides, elle constitue la clef de la licence absolue. C’est ce qui permet chez les hommes des comportements si incohérents, notamment toutes les fois qu’intervient le social, les sentiments collectifs (guerre, haines de nations et de classes, patriotisme d’un parti, d’une Église, etc.). Tout ce qui est couvert du prestige de la chose sociale est mis dans un autre lieu que le reste et soustrait à certains rapports.

[...] L’anneau de Gygès devenu invisible, c’est précisément l’acte de mettre à part. Mettre à part soi et le crime que l’on commet. Ne pas établir la relation entre les deux. 

L’acte de jeter la clef, de jeter l’anneau de Gygès, c’est l’effort propre de la volonté, c’est la marche douloureuse et aveugle hors de la caverne.

[...] Un patron d’usine. J’ai telles et telles jouissances coûteuses et mes ouvriers souffrent de la misère. Il peut avoir très sincèrement pitié de ses ouvriers et ne pas former le rapport. 

Car aucun rapport ne se forme si la pensée ne le produit pas. Deux et deux restent indéfiniment deux et deux si la pensée ne les ajoute pas pour en faire quatre. 

Nous haïssons les gens qui voudraient nous amener à former les rapports que nous ne voulons pas former. 

La justice consiste à établir dans les choses analogues des rapports identiques entre termes homothétiques, même lorsque certaines de ces choses nous concernent personnellement et sont pour nous l’objet d’un attachement."
(Simone Weil, La Pesanteur et la Grâce , 1947)

E4.2.C.3.c. From Dogma to Fanaticism.
How the pursuit of an absolute Good or Truth, when calcified into conviction, paradoxically generates evil, tyranny, and the destruction of life for the sake of an abstract ideal.

E4.2.C.3.c_REF1_PH

EL3.167. "A search for truth is necessarily violent since it may lead to some definite stance regarding what is true and what is false.”
(René Girard, All desire is a desire of being)

E4.2.C.3.c_REF2_LIT

EL3.109. "[...] AND WE KNOW THE FLAG OF LOVE IS FROM ABOVE
AND WE CAN FORCE YOU TO BE FREE
And we can force you to believe
And I closed my eyes and tightened up my brain

For I once read a book in which the lovers were slain
For they knew not the words of the free states' refrain
It said I believe in the power of good
I believe in the state of love

I will fight for the right to be right
I will kill for the good of the fight for the right to be right
And I open my eyes to look around
And I see a child laid slain on the ground

As a love machine lumbers through desolation rows
Plowing down man, woman, listening to its command 
But not hearing anymore, not hearing anymore
Just the shrieks from the old rich
 
And I want to believe in the madness that calls now
And I want to believe that a light's shining through somehow
And I want to believe and you want to believe
And we want to believe and we want to live

Oh, we want to live, we want to live
We want to live, we want to live
We want to live, we want to live
I want to live, I want to live

I want to live I want to live
I want to live, I want to live
Live, live
Live"
(David Bowie, Cygnet Committee, 1969)

Listen to Cygnet Committee from David Bowie: https://youtu.be/HumbVGPsj7k


E4.2.C.3.c_REF3_TH WATZLAWICK ARGUES THAT THE PURSUIT OF "ABSOLUTE GOOD" OR "PERFECTION" INEVITABLY GENERATES EVIL.
"Le mal du bien [...]
Berdiaev, un disciple de Dostoïevski, dis quelque chose de semblable sur l'idéal de la Liberté : “... On ne peut identifier la liberté au bien, à la vérité, ou à la perfection : elle est par nature autonome, c'est la liberté et pas le bien. [...] Toute identification ou confusion de la liberté avec le bien et la perfection entraîne la négation de la Liberté et un renforcement des méthodes de coercition ; le bien obligatoire cesse d'être le bien par le fait même qu'il est obligatoire”.
Dans un discours adressé à Napoléon 1er le sénat dit : ”Excellence, la recherche de la perfection est une des pires maladies qui puisse atteindre l'esprit humain.” Et, pour C.G. Jung, tout extrême psychologique renferme “secrètement son contraire, où se trouve d'une certaine manière en relation intime et essentiellement avec celui-ci”. Enfin, 2300 ans avant lui, Lao Tseu, avec son style d'une inimitable limpidité, décrivit l'émergence du mal de l'existence même du bien, et vice-versa :
“Quand le grand Tao fut délaissé, il y eut l'humanité, la justice. Puis la sagesse, la prudence parurent, et l'hypocrisie fut générale.
Dans la famille les membres se méconnurent; il y eût l'affection des parents, la piété filiale.
Les États souffrir de la corruption, du désordre, il y eut des fonctionnaires fidèles.”
Ce ne sont pas des explications, mais des descriptions d'un aspect de notre monde : celui qui pose le bien absolue pose aussi par la même le mal absolu. La poursuite du plus haut idéal, quel que soit le nom qu'on lui donne - sécurité, patriotisme, paix, liberté, bonheur, etc. -  est une ultrasolution, une force qui - pour parodier Goethe - cherche toujours le bien et crée toujours le mal. [...]"
(Paul Watzlawick, Comment réussir à échouer, 1988)

E4.2.C.3.c_REF4_PH THE SUNK COST FALLACY OF FANATISM.
"En une sorte de vertigineuse hyperbole, plus on a sacrifié d’existences ou d’intérêts à la Cause, plus on doit continuer de lui en sacrifier, pour que les autres n’aient pas été sacrifiées en vain. Il n’y a ni leçon ni expérience qui vaillent ; et pas plus de réforme que de repentir possibles. La logique du sacrifice est enfermée dans une logique de l’absurdité. Plus c’est absurde, plus il faut continuer pour avoir au moins une chance que ce ne l’ait pas été. Voilà comment il n’y a pas de démence plus ordinaire que de courir à l’abîme en croyant marcher vers l’absolu. [...]

 Pourquoi abandonne-t-on la réalité de ce qu’on sent pour la réalité qu’on joue, si ce n’est parce que nous trouvons dans le jeu une cohérence, un sens, ou une justification, dont nous sentons notre existence ordinairement dépourvue ? " 
(Nicolas Grimaldi, Une démence ordinaire, 2009)

E4.2.C.3.c_REF5_PH NIETZSCHE DEFINIT EXPLICITEMENT LES PHILOSOPHES GRECS (PLATON, PARMENIDE) COMME DES "TYRANS DE L'ESPRIT". Leur recherche de la vérité n'était pas une humble quête, mais une "robuste foi en eux-mêmes" destinée à "écraser leurs voisins".
"LES TYRANS DE L’ESPRIT. — La vie des Grecs n’a de l’éclat que là où rayonne le mythe ; ailleurs, elle est sombre. Or, les philosophes grecs se privent justement de ce mythe : n’est-ce pas comme s’ils voulaient se retirer du soleil pour se mettre à l’ombre dans l’obscurité ? Mais aucune plante ne se détourne de la lumière ; au fond, ces philosophes ne faisaient que chercher un soleil plus clair, le mythe n’étant pas à leurs yeux assez pur, assez éclatant. Ils trouvaient cette lumière dans leur connaissance, dans ce que chacun d’eux appelait sa « vérité ». Alors, la connaissance avait une splendeur plus grande, elle était jeune encore et connaissait peu les difficultés et les périls de sa route ; elle pouvait espérer arriver d’un seul bond au centre de tout l’être et de là résoudre l’énigme du monde. Ces philosophes avaient une robuste foi en eux-mêmes et en leur « vérité » dont ils écrasaient tous leurs voisins et leurs devanciers ; chacun d’eux était un tyran belliqueux et violent. Peut-être la félicité que procure la foi en la possession de la vérité ne fut-elle jamais plus grande dans le monde, mais jamais aussi la dureté, l’orgueil, le caractère tyrannique et malfaisant d’une pareille foi. Ils étaient des tyrans, c’est-à-dire ce que tout Grec voulait être et était, s’il le pouvait. Peut-être Solon fait-il exception ; il dit dans ses poésies comment il dédaigna la tyrannie personnelle. Mais il le faisait par amour pour son œuvre, pour sa législation ; et donner des lois est une forme plus raffinée de la tyrannie. Parménide aussi donna des lois, peut-être Pythagore encore et Empédocle ; Anaximandre fonda une ville. Platon était le désir incarné de devenir le plus grand législateur et fondateur d’Etat philosophe ; il semble avoir terriblement souffert de la non-réalisation de sa nature et, vers la fin de sa vie, son âme était remplie du fiel le plus noir. Plus la philosophie grecque perdit de puissance, plus elle souffrit intérieurement de cette humeur arbitraire et chagrine, quand, pour la première fois, les sectes diverses défendirent leurs vérités dans les rues, les âmes de tous ces prétendants de la Vérité étaient entièrement gorgées de jalousie et de bave, la tyrannie sévissait alors dans leur propre corps comme un poison. Tous ces petits tyrans auraient voulu se dévorer tout crus ; il ne restait plus en eux une étincelle d’amour et trop peu de plaisir de leur propre connaissance. [...]"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain, Aphorisme 261, 1878)

E4.2.C.3.c_REF5.1_PH "UNE CONVICTION EST LA CROYANCE D’ETRE, SUR UN POINT QUELCONQUE DE LA CONNAISSANCE, EN POSSESSION DE LA VERITE ABSOLUE. Cette croyance suppose donc qu’il y a des vérités absolues ; en même temps, que I’on a trouvé les méthodes parfaites pour y parvenir ; enfin que tout homme qui a des convictions applique ces méthodes parfaites. Ces trois conditions montrent tout de suite que l’homme des convictions n’est pas l’homme de la pensée scientifique ; il est devant nous à l’âge de l’innocence théorique, il est un enfant, quelle que soit sa taille. Mais des siècles entiers ont vécu dans ces idées puériles et c’est d’eux qu’ont jailli les plus puissantes sources d’énergie de l’humanité. Ces hommes innombrables qui se sacrifiaient pour leurs convictions croyaient le faire pour la vérité absolue. Tous avaient tort en cela : vraisemblablement, jamais un homme ne s’est encore sacrifié pour la vérité ; du moins, l’expression dogmatique de sa croyance a dû être antiscientifique et demi-scientifique. Mais on voulait proprement avoir raison parce qu’on pensait devoir avoir raison. Se laisser arracher sa croyance, cela voulait dire mettre peut-être en question son bonheur éternel. Dans une circonstance de cette extrême importance, la « volonté » était par trop clairement le souffleur de l’intelligence. Hypothèse préalable de tout croyant de cette tendance était de ne pouvoir être réfuté ; les raisons contraires se montraient-elles très fortes, il lui restait toujours ce recours de calomnier la raison en général et peut-être même d’arborer le « credo quia absurdum est », drapeau de l’extrême fanatisme. Ce n’est pas la lutte des opinions qui a rendu l’histoire si violente, mais bien la lutte de la foi dans les opinions, c’est-à-dire des convictions. Si pourtant tous ceux qui se faisaient de leur conviction une idée si grande, qui lui offraient des sacrifices de toute nature et n’épargnaient à son service ni leur honneur, ni leur vie, avaient consacré seulement la moitié de leur force à rechercher de quel droit ils s’attachaient à cette conviction plutôt qu’à cette autre, par quelle voie ils y étaient arrivés : quel aspect pacifique aurait pris I’histoire de l’humanité ! Combien eût été plus grand le nombre des connaissances ! Toutes ces scènes cruelles qu’offre la persécution des héritiers en tous genres nous eussent été épargnées pour deux raisons : d’abord, parce que les inquisiteurs auraient dirigé avant tout leur inquisition sur eux-mêmes, et en auraient fini avec la prétention de défendre la vérité absolue ; ensuite, parce que les partisans eux-mêmes de principes aussi mal fondés que le sont les principes de tous les sectaires et les « croyants au droit » auraient cessé de les partager après les avoir étudiés."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain, Aphorisme 630, 1878)

E4.2.C.3.c_REF5.2_PH "DES TEMPS OU LES HOMMES AVAIENT ACCOUTUME DE CROIRE A LA POSSESSION DES VERITES ABSOLUES dérive un profond malaise dans toutes les attitudes sceptiques et relatives prises à l’égard de n’importe quel problème de la connaissance ; on préfère le plus souvent se vouer pieds et poings liés à une conviction qui est celle de personnes ayant de l’autorité (pères, amis, maîtres, princes), et l’on éprouve, à ne point le faire, une espèce de remords. Ce penchant est fort compréhensible et ses conséquences n’autorisent pas de vifs reproches contre le développement de la raison humaine. Mais, peu à peu, l’esprit scientifique fait mûrir dans l’homme cette vertu de l’abstention prudente, cette sage modération qui est plus connue dans le domaine de la vie pratique que dans celui de la vie théorique [...] "
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain, Aphorisme 631, 1878)

E4.2.C.4. The Courage of Uncertainty: Skepticism as Wisdom.
The antidote to dogmatism is the embrace of doubt, the refusal of "final" answers, and the acceptance of the diversity of perspectives. It reframes doubt not as weakness, but as a strength and a form of maturity.

E4.2.C.4.a. The "real world" accepts its own subjectivity While the "unreal world" stands on rigid certainty.

E4.2.C.4.a_REF1_PH

EL3.65. IS TRUTH THE GOAL OF ALL INQUIRY? Must you always aim your inquiry at something? 
"Nietzsche undermines the concept of truth by seing behind it the will to power. He tells us "on truth and lie in an extra-moral sense" a fable: Human beings are clever animals who invented knowledge, which is not about how things really are, but a way of understanding the universe to support the continuing life of Humans. Knowledge is a form of adaptation to insure biological survival. Somehow Nietzsche's attack on truth is incoherent because he offers us a model that we are expected to accept as objectively true. 
Is Nietzsche and the subsequent post-modernists enemies of hope? Because they undermine the two planks of the enlightenment: commitment to reason and the commitment to objective knowledge arising from disinterested inquiry - without those two things we are left with no model of any kind of progress? But isn't it a good thing not to have any model of progress? It does not prevent us to ask "Do we want things to be different?", and if so "What change we want to bring about, and how?" - isn't it healthy to have to work it out? Nietzsche wanted to live without illusions, which is not a barrier for change."
(Is truth the goal of all inquiry? Must you always aim your inquiry at something? , In our time, BBC 4)

Listen to the podcast: https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00546yh

E4.2.C.4.a_REF2_LIT

EL3.108. THE REAL WORLD WILL DOUBT ITSELF, THE UNREAL ONE WILL NOT. 
"in what sense are there many worlds? I can only reply as a naive painter. There's the world as philosophical perspective and interpretation / the world as a reality surrounded by the worlds of the cosmos/ the world as a microcosm /the world in the mind of every single person / every single person is a world, perhaps every stone, every animal too. / The world of art, of the art critic, of the philistine / The world of commerce, or of religion / The multitude of worlds simply can't be counted. The world of hermits and of porn collectors, for example. What distinguishes real worlds from unreal ones? I've replied offhandedly to this, that it's the same as the difference between bad and good art. But, better put: the real world will doubt itself, the unreal one will not. Even better: the worn-out, unusable world is the unreal one. Even better: the evil world is the unreal one. No, as it keeps coming back it is real.
I think, namely, that one cannot separate art, science and ethics in this matter. So world here is synonymous with truth, there are many truths and many worlds. I realised that there are many truths during my research into how I see colours.
« Looking vertically » I saw how."
(Maria Lassnig, Letter to Hans Ulrich Obrist)

E4.2.C.4.a_REF3_PH NIETZSCHE ILLUSTRE LE DANGER DE CONFONDRE L'ORDRE DU DESIR (LE BESOIN, LA FAIM) AVEC L'ORDRE DE LA VERITE (L'INTELLIGENCE).
"SURVIVANCES RELIGIEUSES. — Si fort que l’on se croie déshabitué de la religion, ce n’en est pas au point qu’on n’eût pas de plaisir à éprouver des sentiments et des états d’âme religieux, sans contenu intelligible, par exemple dans la musique : et quand une philosophie nous présente la justification d’espérances métaphysiques, de la profonde paix de l’âme qu’on doit leur demander, et par exemple parle « de tout l’Evangile certain dans le regard de la Madone chez Raphaël », nous accueillons de telles expressions et démonstrations avec une disposition particulièrement chaleureuse : le philosophe a ici trop de facilité à prouver, il répond avec ce qu’il lui plaît de donner à un cœur qui se plaît à le prendre. À ce propos, on remarque combien les libres esprits trop peu circonspects ne sont choqués proprement que des dogmes, mais reconnaissent très bien le charme du sentiment religieux ; ils ont peine à laisser aller le dernier à cause des premiers. — En raison de ce besoin — besoin acquis et conséquemment aussi passager — la philosophie scientifique doit sérieusement se garder d’introduire des erreurs en contrebande : même des logiciens parlent de « pressentiments » de la vérité dans la morale et l’art (par exemple du pressentiment, « que l’essence des choses est une ») ; ce qui pourtant devrait leur être interdit. Entre les vérités diligemment  découvertes et de telles choses « pressenties », il reste cet abîme inhanchissable que celles-là sont dues à l’intelligence, celles-ci au besoin. La faim ne prouve pas qu’il y a un aliment pour la satisfaire, mais elle désire cet aliment. « Pressentir » ne signifie pas reconnaître à aucun degré l’existence d’une chose, mais la tenir pour possible dans la mesure où on la désire ou la craint ; le « pressentiment » ne fait pas avancer d’un pas dans le pays de la certitude. — On croit involontairement que les parties d’une philosophie nuancées de religion sont mieux prouvées que les autres ; mais c’est au fond le contraire, on a seulement l’intime désir qu’il puisse en être ainsi, partant que ce qui rend heureux soit aussi le vrai. Ce désir nous conduit à acheter de mauvaises raisons pour de bonnes."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain, Aphorisme 131, 1878)

"Pour la foi, la vérité, c’est ce qu’on attend de l’existence [...]
La logique prophétique consiste à déduire le réel du possible [...]
Tant qu’il n’aura pas cessé de croire, aucun croyant ne pourra convenir de s’être trompé [...]
Ils considérent leur foi comme s’il s’agissait d’une science  [...]
Toute science est ouverte sur l’avenir. Comme toute religion, toute idéologie est enclose dans son passé."
(Nicolas Grimaldi, Une démence ordinaire, 2009)

E4.2.C.4.a_REF4_PH L'IDEE DE PERFECTION NAITRAIT DU "DEPIT DE N'ETRE PAS PARFAIT"
"Dans la troisième méditation de Descartes, la démonstration de l’existence de Dieu repose sur le postulat que l’idée que nous avons de Dieu ne peut venir de nous-même bien qu’elle nous soit con-substantielle. Les idées qui viennent de l'extérieur sont trompeuses alors que celle qui viennent de l’intérieur sont celles auxquelles on peut se fier (selon la première et la deuxième méditation). Si l’idée de Dieu ne peut pas être innée, d’où vient-elle?
L’idée de Dieu ne peut pas venir de nous parce-que nous sommes imparfaits - donc l’idée de la perfection ne peut pas venir de nous. Pour Descartes, il y a autant, ou plus de réalité dans la cause que dans l’effet, donc la cause de l’idée de Dieu de perfection ne peut pas être moins parfaite que l’idée elle-même. 
C’est cet axiome que l’on peut contester. On peut argumenter qu’il existe à de petites causes, grands effets (comme la madeleine de Proust qui donne accès à un monde). Il peut donc y avoir moins de réalité dans la cause que dans l’effet.
On peut aussi contester que l’idée de perfection soit née du dépit de n’être pas parfait - du dépit de notre impuissance."
(Pierre Schindler)

E4.2.C.4.a_REF5_LIT "COMMENT FAIRE POUR SAVOIR QU’IL S’AGISSE LA D’UNE VERITE  « VRAIE », NON PAS DE CELLE QUE JE VEUX ?"
(Eugène Ionesco, Journal en miettes)

E4.2.C.4.a_REF6_PH  A_Bruno Pontiroli_La prise de bec [The spat]_2013

"ON SE PERSUADE MIEUX, POUR L’ORDINAIRE, PAR LES RAISONS QU’ON A SOI-MEME TROUVEES, QUE PAR CELLES QUI SONT VENUES DANS L’ESPRIT DES AUTRES. [...]
Pourquoi ne nous fâchons-nous pas si on dit que nous avons mal à la tête et que nous nous fâchons de ce qu’on dit que nous raisonnons mal, ou que nous choisissons mal.” Ce qui cause cela est que nous sommes bien certains [de ne pas être] boiteux ; mais nous ne sommes pas si assurés que nous choisissons le vrai. De sorte que, n’en ayant d’assurance qu’à cause que nous le voyons de toute notre vue, quand un autre voit de toute sa vue le contraire, cela nous met en suspens et nous étonne, et encore plus quand mille autres se moquent de notre choix."
(Blaise Pascal, Pensées)

E4.2.C.4.a_REF7_PH ON NE PEUT PRETENDRE A LA RECTITUDE D'UN JUGEMENT QUAND LA REGLE ELLE-MEME CHANGE TOUT LE TEMPS:  L'UNITE DE MESURE (NOTRE MOI) EST UNE "GRANDEUR VARIABLE" SOUMISE AUX HUMEURS.
"[...] Aucune expérience, par exemple, touchant un homme fût-il même le plus proche de nous, ne peut être complète en sorte que nous eussions un droit logique d’en faire une appréciation d’ensemble; toutes les appréciations sont hâtives et doivent l’être. Enfin, l’unité qui nous sert de mesure, notre être, n’est pas une grandeur invariable, nous avons des humeurs et des fluctuations, et cependant nous devrions nous connaître nous-mêmes en tant qu’unité fixe, pour faire du rapport de quelque chose à nous une appréciation juste. Peut-être suivra-t-il de tout cela que l’on ne devrait pas juger du tout; si seulement l’on pouvait vivre sans faire d’appréciations, sans avoir d’inclination et d’aversion ! — car toute aversion est liée à une appréciation, aussi bien que toute inclination. Une impulsion à s’approcher de quelque chose ou à se détourner de quelque chose, sans un sentiment de vouloir l’avantageux, d’éviter le nuisible, une impulsion, sans une sorte d’appréciation, de reconnaissance quant à la valeur du but, n’existe pas chez l’homme. Nous sommes, par destination, des êtres illogiques et, partant, injustes; et nous pouvons le reconnaître : c’est là une des plus grandes et des plus insolubles dysharmonies de l’existence. "
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain, Aphorisme 32, 1878)

E4.2.C.4.b. Skepticism as Active Inquiry.
Skepticism as a dynamic, open-ended method, sketches the "middle path" between dogmatism and total ignorance, emphasizing that the search for truth is more valuable than the static possession of it.

E4.2.C.4.b_REF1_LIT "TOUS CEUX QUI S’IMAGINENT QU’ILS Y COMPRENNENT QUELQUE CHOSE SONT BORNES."
(Eugène Ionesco, Journal en miettes)

E4.2.C.4.b_REF2_PH "L’ESPRIT LIBRE, NOTION RELATIVE. —  [...] Au reste, il n’est pas de l’essence de l’esprit libre d’avoir des vues plus justes, mais seulement de s’être affranchi des traditions, que ce soit avec bonheur ou avec insuccès. Mais d’ordinaire il aura la vérité, du moins l’esprit de la recherche de la vérité, de son côté : il cherche des raisons, les autres une croyance. [...]"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain, Aphorisme 225, 1878)

E4.2.C.4.b_REF3_PH THERE EXIST A MIDDLE PATH WHERE WE ACKNOWLEDGE THE LACK OF ABSOLUTE TRUTH WITHOUT LOSING THE ABILITY TO NAVIGATE THE WORLD MEANINGFULLY.
"INCERTITUDE 
[...] Aussi ne parlera-t-on d’incertitude, en un sens plus restreint, que pour ce qu'on reconnaît pouvoir être faux, quand bien même nos sens et notre raison seraient supposés à peu près fiables. L’incertain, c’est alors ce dont on peut ou doit douter, non en toute rigueur ou dans l'absolu, mais dans les conditions ordinaires de notre vie et de notre pensée - ce qui est particulièrement douteux. [...]
Cela ne prouve pas que les sceptiques aient tort, mais simplement qu’on n’a pas besoin d’être dogmatique pour faire une différence entre ce qui est positivement incertain, en ce sens restreint, et ce qui ne l’est que métaphysiquement ou au sens le plus large. Hume, quand il jouait au trictrac, ne doutait pas de son jeu."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.2.C.4.b_REF4_PH "SCEPTICISME 
[....] LES SCEPTIQUES CHERCHENT LA VERITE, COMME TOUT PHILOSOPHE (C’EST CE QUI LES DISTINGUE DES SOPHISTES), MAIS NE SONT JAMAIS CERTAINS DE L’AVOIR TROUVEE, NI MEME QU’ON PUISSE L'ATTEINDRE (c’est ce qui les distingue des dogmatiques). Cela ne les chagrine pas. Ce n’est pas la certitude qu’ils aiment, mais la pensée et la vérité. Aussi aiment-ils la pensée en acte, et la vérité en puissance: c’est la philosophie même, et c’est en quoi, disait Lagneau, « le scepticisme est le vrai ». II en découle que nul n’est tenu d’être sceptique, ni autorisé à l’être dogmatiquement."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.2.C.4.b_REF5_PH ZETETICISM IS THE METHOD OF "SEEKING THE TRUTH WITHOUT AFFIRMING ANYTHING."
"ZÉTÉTIQUE 
Du grec zêtêtikos, « qui cherche ou qui aime chercher ». C’est un autre nom pour désigner le scepticisme, ou plutôt sa méthode, qui consiste à chercher toujours la vérité, sans rien affirmer, même pas l’impossibilité de l’atteindre (voir Sextus Empiricus, Hypotyposes pyrrhoniennes, I et III). Se distingue du dogmatisme, qui croit avoir trouvé, mais aussi de la sophistique, qui renonce à chercher. 
À quoi bon chercher, demandera-t-on, si on ne peut trouver? C’est qu’on ne peut savoir autrement si on le peut, ni ce qu’on cherche. 
Et comment le dire, si on ne l’a point trouvé ? En disant au moins le mouvement de sa quête, sans l’arrêter et sans y croire tout à fait. Pyrrhon, qui est le maître de l’école zététique, était amené pour cela à ne parler qu’ironiquement, ou plutôt (puisqu’il s’agit, note Marcel Conche, d’une « ironie à l'égard de lui-même ») qu’avec humour. Les mots ne sont qu’un moment de l’apparence pure et universelle, comme dit encore Marcel Conche, qu’un moment du devenir, comme je préférerais dire, qu’ils ne sauraient ni contenir tout entier ni transformer - si ce n’est illusoirement - en essences fixes ou immuables. Aussi l'ataraxia (la sagesse, la paix de l’âme) n’allait-elle pas, pour Pyrrhon, sans aphasia (le non-discours, le silence). Non qu’on ne puisse parler (aphasia n’est pas aphasie), ni qu’on ne le doive, mais parce que « les mots jamais ne sauraient annuler le silence (M. Conche, Pyrrhon ou l'apparence, X, 1). [...]"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.2.C.4.c. The Strength to Stand Alone: Maturity and Courage.
Embracing doubt requires emotional strength, the ability to withstand the "herd" (imitation), and the maturity to accept that one might be wrong without losing one’s composure.

E4.2.C.4.c_REF1_PH

EL3.69. I DESIRE THAT THERE MAY BE AS MANY DIFFERENT PERSONS IN THE WORLD AS POSSIBLE
"One young man of my acquaintance, who has inherited some acres, told me that he thought he should live as I did, if he had the means. I would not have any one adopt my mode of living on any account; for, beside that before he has fairly learned it I may have found out another for myself. I desire that there may be as many different persons in the world as possible; but I would have each one be very careful to find out and pursue his own way, and not his father’s or his mother’s or his neighbor’s instead."
(Henry David Thoreau, Walden, 1854)

E4.2.C.4.c_REF2_PH

EL3.157.  “DYING FOR “TRUTH.”—We should not let ourselves be burnt for our opinions—we are not so certain of them as all that. But we might let ourselves be burnt for the right of possessing and changing our opinions.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human III, Aphorism 333, 1878)

E4.2.C.4.c_REF3_PH « D’UN COTE QUI EST PLUS FAIBLE QU’UN HOMME QUI DOUTE? DE L’AUTRE, IL FAUT ETRE FORT POUR OSER DOUTER: DE QUELLE FORCE TEMOIGNE LE DOUTE? Du courage de celui qui remet en question tout ce qu’il sait, qui refuse de savoir. Le doute est une révolte de l’esprit qui, par amour du réel, refuse de céder à l’illusion du savoir.
Le doute de Descartes n’est en fait qu’une transition vers une certitude plus certaine: en vérité Descartes redoute de douter.
Celui qui doute est un cauchemar pour ses congénères car il remet en question la béquille de leurs certitudes. C’est pourquoi le doute est un courage qu’il est rassurant de mépriser.
Mieux vaut vivre au bénéfice du doute qu’au détriment du doute. »
(Pierre Schindler)

E4.2.C.4.c_REF3.1_PH « TOUTES LES FOIS QUE LES CHOSES TE SEMBLENT TROP DIGNES DE CONFIANCE, METS-LES A NU. »
(Marc-Aurelle, Pensées pour moi-même)

E4.2.C.4.c_REF4_LIT A_William Kentridge_Monument_1990

JOHNSON REPRESENTS THE EMOTIONAL MATURITY OF ONE WHO DOES NOT NEED TO BE "RIGHT" TO MAINTAIN HIS COMPOSURE.
"When asked how he felt upon the ill success of his tragedy, he replied, ‘ Like the Monument ; ‘ meaning that he continued firm and unmoved as that column. And let it be remembered, as an admonition to the genus irritabile of dramatick writers, that this great man, instead of peevishly complaining of the bad taste of the town, submitted to its decision without a murmur. He had, indeed, upon all occasions, a great deference for the general opinion : ‘ A man (said he) who writes a book, thinks himself wiser or wittier than the rest of mankind ; he supposes that he can instruct or amuse them, and the publick to whom he appeals, must, after all, be the judges of his pretensions.’
(Boswell’s Life of Johnson, 1791)

E4.2.C.4.c_REF5_PH THE "CULTURED" MIND REACTS BY WITHHOLDING MOCKERY.
"GRAVITÉ CROISSANTE DU MONDE. — Plus s’élève la culture d’un homme, plus grand est le nombre de domaines soustraits à la moquerie, à la raillerie. [...]
Plus un homme comprend profondément la vie, moins il raillera, sauf peut-être qu’il finira par railler la « profondeur de sa compréhension ». [...]"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain, Aphorism 240, 1878)

E4.3. The Ethics of Uncertainty: Sincerity vs. Truth. If we can't be "sure," how do we act?

E4.3.A. Political Truth vs. Philosophical Truth

E4.3.A.1. The Solitary Absolute vs. The Plural Relative.
Philosophical Truth is absolute and solitary while Political Truth is relative, intersubjective, deliberative, and based on opinion/doxa. Politics is about navigating valid disagreements through prudence and rhetoric.

E4.3.A.1_REF1_PH OLIVIER RENAUT CONTRASTE LA VERITE PHILOSOPHIQUE (PLATON : OBJECTIVE, ABSOLUE, RESERVEE AUX EXPERTS) AVEC LA VERITE POLITIQUE (PROTAGORAS : "L'HOMME EST MESURE DE TOUTE CHOSE", RELATIVE, FONDEE SUR LA DELIBERATION ET LA CAPACITE PARTAGEE DE TOUS LES CITOYENS).
"Protagoras semble avoir été l'auteur de la phrase "l'homme est mesure de toute chose" et avec cette position relativiste est présenté comme ennemi de la cité par Socrates qui lui défendait l'existence d'une vérité objective.
Les sophistes proposent de former de bons citoyens avec l'argument que le savoir peut être transmis alors que pour Platon, le savoir ne se transmet pas. Les sophistes formaient leurs élèves à récuser et savoir argumenter contre toute position et pour cela furent accusés de nier l'existence de toute vérité - pourtant on peut argumenter que cette méthode est salutaire à la recherche de la vérité puisqu'elle place chacun, tour à tour, dans la position d'essayer d'écouter et de comprendre vraiment les arguments de la partie adverse. Si Protagoras dans le dialogue avec Socrates dit d'ailleurs que sont enseignement consiste à apprendre à ses élèves à bien délibérer. S'il est une figure repoussoir pour Platon, on ne sait pas si Protagoras défendait en fait une forme de démocratie - car nous n'avons que la version de Platon. Les deux s'opposent en fait sur la méthode: pour Platon le savoir ne s'enseigne pas mais se développe par le dialogue. Pour les sophistes, tous les hommes ont le droit de prendre meilleure part au débat démocratique en apprenant à mieux délibérer.

Pour Socrates, la vertu politique ne peut pas s'enseigner; pour preuve, il pointe les fils des grands hommes qui sont souvent ineptes à la vie politique. Il oppose aussi l'argument que l'architecte est celui qu'on sollicite pour construire un bâtiment - mais en matière de consultation politique, on demande leur avis à tous les citoyens: charpentiers, armateurs, riches, pauvres et roturiers - il n'y a donc là pas matière à enseignement. 
Protagoras fera appelle à la troisième répartition pour valider en effet que chacun à la capacité politique, mais cela ne veut pas dire que l'on ne peut pas l'améliorer jusqu'à gagner de l'expertise par l'enseignement. Il utilisera l'argument que chacun a l'intuition qu'il vaut mieux - au moins paraître - être juste dans sa propre cité. Pour Protagoras, vivre ensemble dans la cité c'est jouer les règles du jeux - il y a donc place pour l'enseignement. Il faut bien connaître les règles pour manier mieux que les autres l'art politique - puisque tous ont hérité de cette capacité - et convaincre."
(Olivier Renaut dans l'émission Les Chemins de la Philosophie, diffusée sur France Culture le 8 janvier 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/le-mythe-de-promethee-peut-on-apprendre-a-etre-un-bon-citoyen-4323404

E4.3.A.1_REF2_PH LA POSITION PHILOSOPHIQUE REFUSE LA RHETORIQUE (L'OUTIL DU POLITIQUE, DE LA COMMUNICATION AVEC "L'AUTRE") AU PROFIT DU "PARLER VRAI" (TOURNE VERS "L'ETRE" ET LA CHOSE).
"Les papyrus d’Herculanum, qui témoignent des faveurs de l’épicurisme dans l’économie du savoir vivre de la Rome impériale, mettent en évidence l’importance du « parler vrai », du franc-parler, dans la doctrine. Pour Philodème, que l’on y trouve en bonne place, la parrhésie –la libre parole – n’est pas seulement un mode de vie. Elle provoque chez celui qui l’écoute l’attention pour ce qui est plus important que la parole même : ce dont elle parle.
Elle forme l’oreille de l’auditeur en l’habituant à « recracher », comme il est d’usage de le dire alors, les éléments seulement mondains du discours. Elle privilégie la chose par rapport à la situation, ce pourquoi elle peut dire son fait au prince même. Le presupposé du dédain épicurien de la rhétorique se comprend alors : il ne consiste pas à refuser le beau-parler mais à oublier la présence de l’autre lorsque l’on parle. On ne parle pas d’abord à mais de : si le langage est le propre de l’homme, en tout cas il ne sert pas en premier lieu à communiquer avec l’autre (ce que les animaux font très bien – la rhétorique est initialement animale !), mais à tourner le regard vers l’être, qui est indifférent."
(Guillaume Badoual, Alain Chareyre-Méjan, Charles Floren, Elsa Grasso et Guillaume Pigeard de Gurbert (Collectif), Épicure ou le bonheur sans détour,  1993)

E4.3.A.1_REF3_PH LA REALITE "OBJECTIVE" DU MONDE NE SE REVELE PAS A LA CONSCIENCE SOLITAIRE MAIS EMERGE UNIQUEMENT DE LA PLURALITE DES PERSPECTIVES ET DE LA DISCUSSION. L'objectivité n'est pas une donnée extérieure (comme dans la science), mais une construction intersubjective.
"Personne ne peut saisir par lui-même et sans ses semblables de façon adéquate et dans toute sa réalité ce qui est objectivement, parce que cela ne se montre et ne se manifeste à lui que selon une perspective qui est relative à la position qu’il occupe dans le monde et qui lui est inhérente. S’il veut voir le monde, l’expérimenter tel qu’il est « réellement », il ne le peu que s’il le comprend comme quelque chose qui est commun à plusieurs, qui se tient entre eux, qui les sépare et les lie, qui se montre différemment à chacun et qui ne peut être compris que dans la mesure où plusieurs en parlent et échangent mutuellement leurs opinions et leurs perspectives. Ce n’est que dans la liberté de la discussion que le monde apparaît en général comme ce dont on parle, dans son objectivité, visible de toutes parts. Vivre-dans-un-monde-réel et discuter-de-lui-avec-d’autres, c’est au fond une seule et même chose, et si la vie privée paraissait « idiotique » aux Grecs, c’est précisément parce que cette multiplicité de la discussion à propos de quelque chose lui était refusée, et du même coup l’expérience de ce dont il s’agissait en vérité dans le monde."
(Hannah Arendt, Qu'est ce que la politique?, 1958)

E4.3.A.1_REF4_PH HANNAH ARENDT CONTRASTS THE "PHILOSOPHICAL FORM OF SPEECH" (aimed at knowledge/truth, functioning through constraint/proof) WITH THE "POLITICAL/AESTHETIC" MODE (aimed at judgment/decision, functioning through persuasion).
"[Kant dans la Critique du jugement]  En esthétique, non moins que dans les jugements politiques, une décision est prise, et, bien que cette décision soit toujours déterminée par une certaine subjectivité, du simple fait que chaque personne occupe une place à elle d’où elle regarde et juge le monde, elle tient aussi au fait que le monde lui-même est un datum objectif quelque chose de commun pour tous ses habitants. L’activité du goût décide comment voir et entendre ce monde, indépendamment de l’utilité et des intérêts vitaux qu’il a pour nous, décide de ce que les hommes y verront et y entendront. [...]
On tient d’ordinaire les jugements de goût pour arbitraires parce qu’ils ne contraignent jamais, au sens où des faits démontrables, ou une vérité qu’un raisonnement prouve, contraignent l’assentiment. Ils partagent avec les opinions politiques leur caractère de persuasion : la personne qui juge — comme dit Kant non sans beauté — peut seulement « courtiser le consentement de l’autre », dans l’espoir de parvenir à un accord éventuel avec lui. [...] La persuasion apparaît chez Aristote comme l’opposé [...] de la forme philosophique de la parole, justement parce que ce type de dialogue avait rapport avec le savoir et la recherche du vrai, et donc réclamait un processus de contrainte par la preuve. La culture et la politique s’entr’appartiennent alors, parce que ce n’est pas le savoir ou la vérité qui est en jeu, mais plutôt le jugement et la décision, l’échange judicieux d’opinions portant sur la sphère de la vie publique et le monde commun, et la décision sur la sorte d’action à y entreprendre, ainsi que la façon de voir le monde à l’avenir, et les choses qui y doivent apparaître."
(Hannah Arendt, La crise de la culture, 1954)

E4.3.A.1_REF5_PH THE PHILOSOPHER SEEKS THE ETERNAL/ABSOLUTE WHILE THE CITIZEN LIVES IN THE FLUX OF OPINION.
"VII VÉRITÉ ET POLITIQUE

L’objet de ces réflexions est un lieu commun. Il n’a jamais fait de doute pour personne que la vérité et la politique sont en assez mauvais termes, et nul, autant que je sache, n’a jamais compté la bonne foi au nombre des vertus politiques. Les mensonges ont toujours été considérés comme des outils nécessaires et légitimes, non seulement du métier de politicien ou de démagogue, mais aussi de celui d’homme d’État. Pourquoi en est-il ainsi ? Et qu’est-ce que cela signifie quant à Ia nature et à la dignité du domaine politique d’une part, quant à la nature et à la dignité de la vérité et de la bonne foi d’autre part? Est-il de l’essence même de la vérité d’être impuissante et de l’essence même du pouvoir d’être trompeur? Et quelle espèce de réalité la vérité possède-t-elle si elle est sans pouvoir dans le domaine public, lequel, plus qu’aucune autre sphère de la vie humaine, garantit la réalité de l’existence aux hommes qui naissent et meurent — c’est-à-dire, à des êtres qui savent qu’ils ont surgi du non-être et qu’ils y retourneront après un court moment? Finalement la vérité impuissante n’est-elle pas aussi méprisable que le pouvoir insoucieux de la vérité ? Ce sont là des questions embarrassantes, mais que nos convictions courantes à cet égard soulèvent nécessairement. [...]

Quoi qu’il en soit, historiquement le conflit entre la vérité et la politique surgit de deux modes de vie diamétralement opposés — la vie du philosophe telle qu’elle fut d’abord interprétée par Parménide et ensuite par Platon, et le mode de vie du citoyen. Aux opinions toujours changeantes du citoyen sur les affaires humaines, qui sont elles-mêmes dans un état de flux constant, le philosophe opposa la vérité sur les choses qui sont dans leur nature même éternelles et d’où par conséquent l’on peut dériver des principes pour stabiliser les affaires humaines. De là vint que le contraire de la vérité fut la simple opinion, donnée comme l’équivalent de l’illusion, et c’est cette dégradation de l’opinion qui donna au conflit son acuité politique ; car l’opinion, et non la vérité, est une des bases indispensables de tout pouvoir. «Tous les gouvernements reposent sur l’opinion», dit James Madison, et même le plus autocratique des souverains ou des tyrans ne pourrait jamais accéder au pouvoir — la question de la conservation du pouvoir mise à part — sans l’appui de ceux qui sont du même avis. De plus, toute prétention dans le domaine des affaires humaines à une vérité absolue, dont la validité ne nécessite aucun appui du côté de l’opinion, ébranle les fondements de toute politique et de tout régime. L’antagonisme entre la vérité et l’opinion fut prolongé par Platon (spécialement dans le Gorgias) d’un antagonisme entre la communication sous forme de «dialogue», discours approprié à la vérité philosophique, et sous forme de «rhétorique» par laquelle le démagogue, comme nous dirions aujourd’hui, persuade la multitude. [...]""
(Hannah Arendt, La crise de la culture, 1954)

E4.3.A.1_REF5.1_PH ARENDT CONTRASTS SPINOZA (FOR WHOM REASON IS A PRIVATE, SOLITARY MASTERY, AND COMMUNICATION IS A WEAKNESS) WITH KANT (FOR WHOM REASON IS FALLIBLE AND REQUIRES PUBLIC COMMUNICATION TO BE VALID).
"Ainsi Spinoza, qui croyait encore à l’infaillibilité de la raison humaine et qui est souvent prôné à tort comme un champion de la liberté de pensée et de parole, soutenait que « tout homme est, par droit naturel et imprescriptible, le maître de ses propres pensées », que « chacun abonde dans son propre sens et que la différence entre les têtes est aussi grande qu’entre les palais », d’où il concluait qu’« il vaut mieux accorder ce qui ne peut être aboli » et que les lois prohibant la libre pensée peuvent avoir pour seul résultat que « les hommes pensent une chose et en disent une autre », et en outre la « corruption de la bonne foi » et l’« encouragement à la perfidie ». Cependant Spinoza ne demande nulle part la liberté de parole ; l’argument selon lequel la raison humaine a besoin d’entrer en communication avec d’autres et par conséquent doit être rendue publique dans son propre intérêt brille par son absence. II compte même le besoin de communication de l’homme, son incapacité à cacher ses pensées et à rester silencieux, parmi les défauts communs que ne partage pas le philosophe. Kant, au contraire, affirmait que « le pouvoir extérieur qui prive l’homme de la liberté de communiquer ses pensées publiquement le prive en même temps de sa liberté de penser » (c’est nous qui soulignons), et que la seule garantie pour la « correction » de nos pensées tient à ce que « nous pensons, pour ainsi dire, en communauté avec les autres, à qui nous communiquons nos pensées comme ils nous communiquent les leurs ». La raison de l’homme étant faillible ne peut fonctionner que s’il peut en faire un « usage public », et c’est également vrai pour ceux qui, encore dans un état de « tutelle », sont incapables de se servir de leur pensée « sans la direction de quelqu’un d’autre », et aussi pour le « lettré » qui a besoin de « tous ceux qui lisent » afin d’examiner et de contrôler ses résultats. [...]
La vérité de fait, au contraire, est toujours relative à plusieurs elle concerne des événements et des circonstances dans lesquels beaucoup sont engagés; elle est établie par des témoins et repose sur des témoignages ; elle existe seulement dans la mesure où on en parle, même si cela se passe en privé. Elle est politique par nature. Les faits et les opinions, bien que l’on doive les distinguer, ne s’opposent pas les uns aux autres, ils appartiennent au même domaine. Les faits sont la matière des opinions, et les opinions, inspirées par différents intérêts et différentes passions, peuvent différer largement et demeurer légitimes aussi longtemps qu’elles respectent la vérité de fait. La liberté d’opinion est une farce si l’information sur les faits n’est pas garantie et si ce ne sont pas les faits eux-mêmes qui font l’objet du débat. En d’autres termes la vérité de fait fournit des informations à la pensée politique tout comme la vérité rationnelle fournit les siennes à la spéculation philosophique. [...]"
(Hannah Arendt, La crise de la culture, 1954)

E4.3.A.1_REF5.2_PH A VALID POLITICAL OPINION IS FORMED: THROUGH "REPRESENTATIVE THINKING". It is not as a logical derivation, but as the capacity to "be and think in my own identity where I am not actually."
"La pensée politique est représentative. Je forme une opinion en considérant une question donnée à différents points de vue, en me rendant présentes à l’esprit les positions de ceux qui sont absents ; c’est-à-dire que je les représente. Ce processus de représentation n’adopte pas aveuglément les vues réelles de ceux qui se tiennent quelque part ailleurs d’où ils regardent le monde dans une perspective différente ; il ne s’agit pas de sympathie comme si j’essayais d’être ou de sentir comme quelqu’un d’autre, ni de faire le compte des voix d’une majorité et de m’y joindre, mais d’être et de penser dans ma propre identité où je ne suis pas réellement. Plus les positions des gens que j’ai présentes à l’esprit sont nombreuses pendant que je réfléchis sur une question donnée, et mieux je puis imaginer comment je sentirais et penserais si j’étais à leur place, plus forte sera ma capacité de pensée représentative et plus valides seront mes conclusions finales, mon opinion. (C’est cette aptitude à une « mentalité élargie » qui rend les hommes capables de juger; comme telle, elle fut découverte par Kant dans la première partie de sa Critique du jugement, encore qu’il ne reconnût pas les implications politiques et morales de sa découverte.) Le véritable processus de formation de l’opinion est déterminé par ceux à la place de qui quelqu’un pense et use de son propre esprit, et la seule condition à cet emploi de l’imagination est d’être désintéressé, libéré de ses intérêts privés. De ce fait, même si je fuis toute compagnie et si je suis complètement isolé pendant que je forme une opinion, je ne suis pas simplement tout seul avec moi-même dans la solitude de la pensée philosophique, je reste dans ce monde d’universelle inter-dépendance où je peux me faire le représentant de qui que ce soit d’autre. Je peux, bien entendu, m’y refuser et former une opinion qui ne tienne compte que de mes propres intérêts, ou des intérêts du groupe auquel j’appartiens; rien n’est évidemment plus commun, même chez des gens hautement sophistiqués, que l’obstination aveugle qui se manifeste dans le manque d’imagination et l’incapacité à juger. Mais la qualité même d’une opinion, aussi bien que d’un jugement, dépend de son degré d’impartialité. [...]"
(Hannah Arendt, La crise de la culture, 1954)

E4.3.A.1_REF5.3_PH LES "VERITES" POLITIQUES (COMME L'EGALITE) NE SONT PAS DES AXIOMES MATHEMATIQUES OU DIVINS, MAIS DES CHOIX VOLONTAIRES DE LA COMMUNAUTE. Hannah Arendt met en garde contre la tentation (platonicienne) d'imposer la vérité philosophique au politique, ce qui aboutit nécessairement à la tyrannie.
"Puisque la vérité philosophique concerne l’homme dans sa singularité, elle est non politique par nature. Si néanmoins le philosophe souhaite voir prévaloir sa vérité sur les opinions de la multitude, il subira une défaite, et il est susceptible de conclure de cette défaite que la vérité est impuissante — truisme aussi plein de sens que celui du mathématicien, incapable de réaliser la quadrature du cercle, et déplorant le fait que le cercle n’est pas un carré. Il peut alors être tenté, comme Platon, de gagner l’oreille de quelque tyran à tendance philosophique, et dans le cas par bonheur hautement improbable d’un succès il pourrait instituer l’une de ces tyrannies de la « vérité » que nous connaissons principalement grâce aux différentes utopies politiques, et qui, bien sûr, politiquement parlant, sont aussi tyranniques que d’autres formes de despotisme. Dans le cas légèrement moins improbable où sa vérité devrait l’emporter sans recours à la violence, simplement parce qu’il s’est trouvé que des hommes se sont mis d’accord pour cela, il aurait remporté une victoire à la Pyrrhus. Car la vérité devrait alors son triomphe non à sa propre essence contraignante mais à l’accord du nombre, qui pourrait changer d’idée le lendemain et s’accorder sur quelque chose d’autre; ce qui avait été vérité philosophique serait devenu simple opinion. 
Mais, puisque la vérité philosophique porte en elle-même un élément de contrainte, elle peut tenter l’homme d’État dans certaines conditions, tout comme la puissance de l’opinion peut tenter le philosophe. Ainsi, dans la Déclaration d’Indépendance, Jefferson déclarait que « certaines vérités sont évidentes par elles-mêmes » parce qu’il souhaitait mettre hors litige et hors débat l’unanimité fondamentale des hommes de Révolution; comme des axiomes mathématiques, devaient exprimer des « croyances des hommes » qui « ne dépendent pas de leur volonté, mais suivent involontairement l’évidence proposée à leurs esprits ». Mais, en disant « Nous tenons ces vérités pour évidentes », il concédait, sans s’en rendre compte, que l’affirmation « Tous les hommes sont créés égaux » n’est pas évidente mais exige l’accord et l’assentiment — que l’égalité, si elle doit avoir une signification politique, est une affaire d’opinion, et non la « vérité ». Il existe, par ailleurs, des thèses philosophiques ou religieuses qui correspondent à cette opinion — par exemple que tous les hommes sont égaux devant Dieu, ou devant la mort, ou dans la mesure où ils appartiennent tous à la même espèce d’animal rationale — mais aucune d’elles ne fut jamais d’importance politique ou pratique, parce que l’égalisateur, qu’il fût Dieu, la mort ou la nature, transcendait le domaine où prennent place les relations humaines et restait à l’extérieur. De telles « vérités » n’ont pas lieu entre les hommes mais au-dessus d’eux, et on ne trouve rien de cette sorte derrière l’acquiescement moderne ou antique — en particulier grec — à l’égalité. Que tous les hommes soient créés égaux n’est ni évident en soi ni démontrable. Nous faisons nôtre cette opinion parce que la liberté est possible seulement parmi les égaux, et nous croyons que les joies et les satisfactions de la libre compagnie doivent être préférées aux plaisirs douteux de l’existence de la domination. De telles préférences sont politiquement de la plus grande importance, et il y a peu de choses par lesquelles les hommes se distinguent aussi profondément les uns des autres. Leur qualité humaine, est-on enclin à dire, et certainement la qualité de toute espèce de relation avec eux, dépend de tels choix. Cependant, il s’agit ici d’opinions et non de vérité — comme Jefferson, bien malgré lui, l’a admis, leur validité dépend du libre accord et du libre consentement, elles sont le résultat d’une pensée discursive, représentative ; et elles sont communiquées au moyen de la persuasion et de la dissuasion. [...]"
(Hannah Arendt, La crise de la culture, 1954)

E4.3.A.1_REF5.4_PH THE TRUTH IS WEAK IN POLITICS: THE "TRUTH-TELLER" CANNOT BE A MAN OF ACTION WITHOUT COMPROMISING THEIR "IMPARTIALITY" AND "INTEGRITY".
"La marque de la vérité de fait est que son contraire n’est ni l’erreur ni l’illusion, ni l’opinion, dont aucune ne rejaillit sur la bonne foi personnelle, mais la fausseté délibérée ou le mensonge. L’erreur, bien sûr, est possible, et même courante, à l’égard de la vérité de fait, et dans ce cas ce type de vérité n’est en aucune manière différent de la vérité scientifique ou rationnelle. Mais l’important c’est qu’en ce qui concerne les faits il n’existe une autre possibilité, et que cette possibilité, la fausseté délibérée, n’appartient pas à la même espèce que les propositions qui, justes ou erronées, prétendent seulement dire ce qui est, ou comment quelque chose qui est m’apparaît.
Une affirmation factuelle — l’Allemagne envahi la Belgique au mois d’août 1914 — acquiert des implications politiques seulement si elle est placée dans un contexte interprétatif. Mais la proposition contraire, que Clemenceau, encore ignorant dans l’art de récrire l’histoire, jugeait absurde, ne nécessite aucun contexte pour avoir une incidence politique. Elle est clairement une tentative de changer le récit de I’histoire, et, en tant que telle, elle est une forme d’action. 
Il en va de même lorsqu’un menteur, ne disposant pas du devoir nécessaire pour imposer ses mensonges, ne s’appesantit pas sur le caractère évangélique de son affirmation, mais prétend qu’il s’agit de son « opinion » pour laquelle il invoque son droit constitutionnel. Cela est fréquemment pratiqué par des groupes subversifs, et dans un public politiquement immature la contusion qui en résulte peut être considérable. L’estompement de la ligne de démarcation qui sépare la vérité de fait et l’opinion appartient aux nombreuses formes que le mensonge peut prendre, et dont toutes sont des formes d’action. 
Alors que le menteur est un homme d’action, le diseur de vérité, qu’il dise la vérité rationnelle ou la vérité de fait, n’en est jamais un. Si le diseur de vérité de fait veut jouer un rôle politique, et donc être persuasif, il ira, presque toujours, à de considérables détours pour expliquer pourquoi sa vérité à lui sert au mieux les intérêts de quelque groupe. Et, de même que le philosophe remporte une victoire à la Pyrrhus quand sa vérité devient une opinion dominante chez les porteurs d’opinion, le diseur de vérité de fait, quand il pénètre dans le domaine politique et s’identifie à quelque intérêt particulier et à quelque groupe de pouvoir, compromet la seule qualité qui aurait rendu sa vérité plausible, à savoir sa bonne foi personnelle, dont la garantie est l’impartialité, l’intégrité et l’indépendance. Il n’y a guère de figure politique plus susceptible d’éveiller un soupçon justifié que le diseur professionnel de vérité qui a découvert quelque heureuse coïncidence entre la vérité et l’intérêt. Le menteur, au contraire, n’a pas besoin de ces accommodements douteux pour apparaître sur la scène politique ; il a le grand avantage d’être toujours, pour ainsi dire, déjà en plein milieu. Il est acteur par nature ; il dit ce qui n’est pas parce qu’il veut que les choses soient différentes de ce qu’elles sont — c’est-à-dire qu’il veut changer le monde. Il tire parti de l’indéniable affinité de notre capacité d’agir, de changer la réalité, avec cette mystérieuse faculté que nous avons, qui nous permet de dire « Le soleil brille» quand il pleut des hallebardes. Si notre comportement était aussi profondément conditionné que certaines philosophies ont désiré qu’il le fût, nous ne serions jamais en mesure d’accomplir ce petit miracle. En d’autres termes notre capacité à mentir — mais pas nécessairement notre capacité à dire la vérité — fait partie des quelques données manifestes et démontrables qui confirment l’existence de la liberté humaine. Que nous puissions changer les circonstances dans lesquelles nous vivons est dû au fait que nous sommes relativement libres par rapport à elles, et c’est cette liberté qui est mésutilisée et dénaturée par le mensonge. Si c’est la tentation presque irrésistible de l’historien professionnel que de tomber dans le piège de la nécessité et de nier implicitement la liberté d’action, c’est la tentation presque autant irrésistible du politicien professionnel que de surestimer les possibilités de cette liberté et de trouver implicitement des excuses à la dénégation mensongère ou au travestissement de faits. [...]"
(Hannah Arendt, La crise de la culture, 1954)

E4.3.A.1_REF6_PH ARISTOTLE’S DEFINITION OF PHRONESIS (PRUDENCE) EXPLICITLY SEPARATES THE DOMAIN OF ACTION/POLITICS FROM THE DOMAIN OF SCIENCE/THEORY. Science deals with "things that cannot be otherwise" (Philosophical Truth/Necessity), whereas Politics/Prudence deals with "things that can be otherwise" (Contingency/Opinion).
"On peut se demander s'il y aurait de la démesure sans notion religieuse: la notion d'hubris semble avoir son origine dans la transgression de quelque chose de sacré et magique. Même rationalisé dans le droit, le terme d'hubris garde quelque chose d'indéfinissable. Il sera traduit par "outrage" - dans l'outrage, il-y-a plus qu'une atteinte au corps de la personne, mais bien la volonté d'humilier pour le pur plaisir de la supériorité. 
C'est l'hubris qui possède Achille quand il dégrade le corps d'Hector et refuse de le rendre pour qu'il soit inhumé. 
La réserve qu’émet Platon, en tant qu'éducateur politique, sur l'oeuvre d'Homère porte sur l'influence néfaste que les épisodes de transgression de l'épopée peuvent avoir sur les hommes.
L'imposition de la supériorité par la force qui caractérise l'hubris chez Homère est antinomique avec l'aristocratie du savoir et de l'éthique que prône Platon pour gouverner la citée. Tout homme pour Platon est apte à accéder au cercle de pouvoir de cette aristocratie épistémique - tous n'y arriverons pas, mais aucun n'y est empêché par le sang. Cette recherche d'harmonie essaye d’éliminer l’excès et l'hubris. Pour Platon c'est Eros qui porte l'hubris à son plus haut degré car le désir sexuel est le plus fort. Le désir sexuel sans frein, au-delà des limites fixées par la loi, est à l'origine du tyran - car Eros a la capacité de tout réorganiser autour de lui. Si, chez Homère, Achille était le figure exemplaire de l'hubris, chez Platon c'est le tyran. Face à la démesure du barbare incarné dans la pièce d’Eschyle par le roi Perse par exemple, le grec représente la mesure. 
La prudence (phrónisis) chez Aristote, est à distinguer de la modération (sophrosúnê) - les deux notions ont en commun la racine phro, qui correspond dans le corps au diaphragme, siège des émotions dans la tradition poétique grec. 
La prudence est intellectuelle et pratique: elle oriente l'action politique - c'est bien délibérer pour viser la meilleur des fins éthiques, à savoir, le bonheur des hommes. C'est une sagesse pratique. 
La modération est une vertu éthique beaucoup plus proche du corps, là où la prudence est une vertu intellectuelle. La modération est une qualité de la faculté de désirer. Comme elle ne peut que difficilement être raisonnée, celle-ci se calibre par l'éducation dès l'enfance et par l'habitude et la répétition: on apprend à désirer la bonne mesure.
"Une façon dont nous pourrions appréhender la nature de la prudence, c'est de considérer quelles sont les personnes que nous appelons prudentes. De l'avis général, le propre d'un homme prudent c'est d'être capable de délibérer correctement sur ce qui est bon et avantageux pour lui-même, non pas sur un point partiel, mais d'une façon générale; quelles sortes de choses par exemple conduisent à la vie heureuse. Une preuve, c'est que nous appelons aussi prudents ceux qui le sont dans un domaine déterminé quand ils calculent avec justesse en vue d'atteindre une fin particulière, digne de ce prix, dans des espèces ou il n'est pas question d'art. Il en résulte que, en un sens général aussi, sera un homme prudent celui qui est capable de délibération.  Mais on ne délibère jamais sur les choses qui ne peuvent être autrement qu'elles ne sont, ni sur celles qu'il nous est impossible d'accomplir. Par conséquent, la prudence ne saurait être ni une science, ni un art. Ni une science, parce que l'objet de l'action ne peut être autrement qu'il n'est; ni un art, parce que le genre de l'action est autre que celui de la production. Reste donc que la prudence est une disposition, accompagnée de règles vraies, capable d'agir dans la sphère de ce qui est bon ou mauvais pour un être humain."
(Aristote)"
(Anne Merker dans l'émission Les Chemins de la Philosophie, diffusée sur France Culture le 10 octobre 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/aristote-et-platon-faut-il-etre-prudent-4910100

E4.3.A.1_REF7_PH

EL3.35. "WHY IS ARGUMENT SO IMPORTANT IN POLITICS? In a democracy we have to reason together and convince each other. One thing which is different in politics is that parties to a debate in politics are arguing in the name of an onlooking third party (the constituents): the objective is often to be perceived as overcoming the opponent. In a political debate, sides are not concerned in helping each other to discover an epistemologic truth. On top of wanting to hold their grounds to win votes, people in politics do it because they believe their positions are based on the correct set of values (that is why they entered politics) - and values are very difficult to change - however, if you have a set of values it is because there are a set of arguments to justify them and debate should focus on reasons. Although it is easier to make an incredulous restatement of your opponents' arguments that will discredit them without even trying to understand them, something can be done to show that the difference in underlying values between sides are not incommensurable. A lot of what goes wrong is that people tend to get their conception of what the opponents think not form them but form other people they agree with - it is a failure to go the source. Social networks have amplified that phenomenon: most of the political arguments one is exposed to can be tailored from the beginning."
(Robert Talisse on the Importance of Argument in Politics, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: https://philosophybites.com/podcast/robert-talisse-on-the-importance-of-arguments-in-politics/

E4.3.A.1_REF8_PH

EL3.156. “COUNTING AND MEASURING.—The art of seeing many things, of weighing one with another, of reckoning one thing with another and constructing from them a rapid conclusion, a fairly correct sum—that goes to make a great politician or general or merchant. This quality is, in fact, a power of speedy mental calculation. The art of seeing one thing alone, of finding therein the sole motive for action, the guiding principle of all other action, goes to make the hero and also the fanatic. This quality means a dexterity in measuring with one scale.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human III, Aphorism 296, 1878)

E4.3.A.1_REF9_PH

EL3.40. "NOR HAVE I EVER NOTICED THAT BY MEANS OF THE DISPUTES WHICH ARE FOUGHT IN THE SCHOOLS ANY TRUTH HAS BEEN DISCOVERED WHICH WAS PREVIOUSLY UNKNOWN. For as each one tries to win, one puts much more effort in making his argument convincing than in weighing reason on both sides: and those who have long been good lawyers are not for that matter better judges."
(René Descartes, Discourse on Method)

E4.3.A.1_REF10_PH

EL3.111. RHETORIC
"Rhetoric, the art of speaking which is an expression of inner virtue and also fundamental to ideas about democracy.
Protagoras was very keen that one should argue both sides of a question to try to reach a resolution of the conflict at issue. He believed there is no objective truth and the best way to guide our actions is good belief based on the understanding of all opinions. Opponents of Protagoras charged him of teaching his students  to maker the weaker argument the stronger. For Plato rhetoric was deceptive and manipulative. In the Gorgias, Plato attacks how rhetoric used language as a kind of drug to persuade an audience to adopt certain beliefs and emotional states, although Gorgias himself argued the power of speaking was a neutral art that could be put to good or bad ends.
Aristotle puts rhetoric at the heart of public life. He puts language at the center of how we reach the idea of what is best. He defines the 3 elements of what rhetoric consists of: 1. The Ethos: the character of the speaker - his public persona , 2. the Logos:  the intrinsic argument and  3. the Telos: the means of persuasion. In a debate where you have the 3 elements in the right proportion and characters representing all the Ethos in society, he believes truth will emerge.
Cicero will develop the teachings of rhetoric so that you can learn to be a good speaker (over 5.000 different figures).
Augustin uses rhetoric as a method to rouse the knowledge of God which is already inside you (in accord to his neo-platonistic style). 
Renaissance, because of religion, reinterprets rhetoric as a way to make you a good person - how you work to regain the perfection of the lost language of Adam. 
With Hobbes, philosophers start to be suspicious of rhetoric as having a potential to create civil disorder and strife against the King. Descartes' geometric method puts a wedge in rhetoric as being just a style with no content. Science will continue to challenge rhetoric through the following centuries. The 20th century is deeply interested again in the way the message is impacted by the medium - we are still very interested in systematized methods of persuasion, although we do not call it rhetoric anymore. The vigor of a democracy can be gauged  by the vigor of its rhetoric - and if you know how speeches are made, you know how not to be deceived."
(Rhetoric, In our time, BBC 4)

Listen to the podcast: https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p004y263

E4.3.A.1_REF11_PH

EL3.148. “I’M VERY PLEASED TO THINK THAT THERE ARE PEOPLE WITH WHOM I AGREE ON SOME ISSUES AND NOT OTHERS. I don’t want a world in which we all agree. I want a world in which people feel that they have the standing and confidence to feel that they can disagree. I’m interested in why people think as they do.”
(Mary Beard)

E1.6.F.3.5_REF1_PH.wE4.3.A.1.

HUMAN BEINGS OFTEN MISTAKE THEIR PERSPECTIVES FOR REALITY AND FORGET THE DIVERSITY OF BEAUTIFUL LIVES. Overcoming self-righteousness is a rare but important existential maturity. 
"To be human is to continually mistake our frames of reference for reality itself. We so readily forget that our vantage point is but a speck on the immense plane of possible perspectives. We so readily forget that there are infinitely many kinds of beautiful lives.

The discipline of countering our reflex for self-righteousness is a triumph of existential maturity — one increasingly rare in a culture where most people would rather armor themselves with judgment than tremble with uncertainty, would rather be right than understand.

The pioneering psychologist and philosopher William James (January 11, 1842–August 26, 1910), who coined the term “stream of consciousness,” explores the making of that triumph in a pair of wonderful lectures — “On a Certain Blindness in Human Beings” and “What Makes Life Significant” — posthumously collected in the 1911 volume Talks to Teachers on Psychology: And to Students on Some of Life’s Ideals"
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

"Only in some pitiful dreamer, some philosopher, poet, or romancer, or when the common practical man becomes a lover, does the hard externality give way, and a gleam of insight into the ejective world… the vast world of inner life beyond us, so different from that of outer seeming, illuminate our mind. Then the whole scheme of our customary values gets confounded, then our self is riven and its narrow interests fly to pieces, then a new centre and a new perspective must be found. [...]

It absolutely forbids us to be forward in pronouncing on the meaninglessness of forms of existence other than our own; and it commands us to tolerate, respect, and indulge those whom we see harmlessly interested and happy in their own ways, however unintelligible these may be to us. Hands off: neither the whole of truth nor the whole of good is revealed to any single observer, although each observer gains a partial superiority of insight from the peculiar position in which he stands. [...]
The first thing to learn in intercourse with others is non-interference with their own peculiar ways of being happy, provided those ways do not assume to interfere by violence with ours. No one has insight into all the ideals. No one should presume to judge them off-hand. The pretension to dogmatize about them in each other is the root of most human injustices and cruelties, and the trait in human character most likely to make the angels weep."
(William James, “On a Certain Blindness in Human Beings” and “What Makes Life Significant”, Talks to Teachers on Psychology: And to Students on Some of Life’s Ideals, 1911)


E4.3.A.1_REF12_PH ARISTOTE DISTINGUE LA SCIENCE (EPISTEME), QUI PORTE SUR CE QUI NE CHANGE PAS ET QU'ON SAIT DEJA, DE LA DELIBERATION (BOULEUSIS), QUI EST UNE RECHERCHE PORTANT SUR LE CONTINGENT (CE QUI PEUT ETRE AUTREMENT). Il définit la "bonne délibération" comme l'essence de la prudence. C'est l'art de calculer les bons moyens pour une fin bonne dans un temps donné.
"Les vertus intellectuelles mineures. La bonne délibération

La recherche et la délibération diffèrent, car la délibération est une recherche s’appliquant à une certaine chose. - Nous devons aussi appréhender quelle est la nature de la bonne délibération, si elle est une forme de science, ou opinion, ou justesse de coup d’oeil, ou quelque autre genre différent. 

Or elle n’est pas science (on ne cherche pas les choses qu’on sait, alors que la bonne délibération est une forme de délibération, et que celui qui délibère cherche et calcule). - Mais elle n’est pas davantage justesse de coup d’oeil, car la justesse de coup d’oeil a lieu indépendamment de tout calcul conscient, et d’une manière rapide, tandis que la délibération exige beaucoup de temps, et on dit que s’il faut exécuter avec rapidité ce qu’on a délibéré de faire, la délibération elle-même doit être lente. Autre raison : la vivacité d’esprit est une chose différente de la bonne délibération; or la vivacité d’esprit est une sorte de justesse de coup d’œil. - La bonne délibération n’est pas non plus une forme quelconque d’opinion. Mais puisque celui qui délibère mal se trompe et que celui qui délibère bien délibère correctement, il est clair que la bonne délibération est une certaine rectitude. Mais on ne peut affirmer la rectitude ni de la science, ni de l’opinion : pour la science, en effet, on ne peut pas parler de rectitude (pas plus que d’erreur), et pour l’opinion sa rectitude est vérité ; et en même temps, tout ce qui est objet d’opinion est déjà déterminé. Mais la bonne délibération ne va pas non plus sans calcul conscient. Il reste donc qu’elle est rectitude de pensée, car ce n’est pas encore une assertion, puisque l’opinion n’est pas une recherche mais est déjà une certaine assertion, tandis que l’homme qui délibère bien ou mal, recherche quelque chose et calcule. 

Mais la bonne délibération étant une certaine rectitude de délibération, nous devons donc d’abord rechercher ce qu’est la délibération en général et sur quel objet elle porte. Et rectitude étant un terme à sens multiples, il est clair qu’il ne s’agit pas ici le toute rectitude quelle qu’elle soit. En effet, l’homme intempérant ou pervers, s’il est habile, atteindra ce qu’il se propose à l’aide du calcul, de sorte qu’il aura délibéré correctement, alors que c’est un mal considérable qu’il s’est procuré : or on admet couramment qu’avoir bien délibéré est en soi-même un bien, car c’est cette sorte de rectitude de délibération qui est bonne délibération, à savoir celle qui tend à atteindre un bien. - Mais il est possible d’atteindre même le bien par un faux syllogisme, et d’atteindre ce qu’il est de notre devoir de faire, mais en se servant non pas du moyen qui convient, mais à l’aide d’un moyen terme erroné. Par conséquent, cet état, en vertu duquel on atteint ce que le devoir prescrit mais non cependant par la voie requise, n’est toujours pas bonne délibération. - On peut aussi arriver au but par une délibération de longue durée, alors qu’un autre l’atteindra rapidement : dans le premier cas, ce n’est donc pas encore une bonne délibération, laquelle est rectitude eu égard à ce qui est utile, portant à la fois sur la fin à atteindre, la manière et le temps. - En outre, on peut avoir bien délibéré soit au sens absolu, soit par rapport à une fin déterminée. La bonne délibération au sens absolu est dès lors celle qui mène à un résultat correct par rapport à la fin prise absolument, alors que la bonne délibération en un sens déterminé est celle qui n’aboutit à un résultat correct que par rapport une fin elle-même déterminée. Si donc les hommes prudents ont pour caractère propre le fait d’avoir bien délibéré, la bonne délibération sera une rectitude en ce qui concerne ce qui est utile à la réalisation d’une fin, utilité dont la véritable conception est prudence elle-même. [...]"
(Aristote, L’Éthique à Nicomaque, LIVRE VI, 10)

E4.3.A.2. The Tyranny of the Absolute (whether religious, historical, or ideological).
When the "Absolute"  tries to rule, it leads to tyranny, the suppression of plurality, and the fabrication of "truth" through violence and lies.

E4.3.A.2_REF1_PH HANNAH ARENDT MONTRE QUE LA VERITE PHILOSOPHIQUE (RATIONNELLE, ABSOLUE), LORSQU'ELLE CHERCHE A GOUVERNER, DEVIENT UNE TYRANNIE ("INSTRUMENT DE COERCITION") QUI CORROMPT LE LIBRE JUGEMENT.
"La pensée grecque n’a nulle part approché d’aussi près le concept d’autorité que dans La République de Platon, où celui-ci confrontait la réalité de la polis au gouvernement utopique de la raison, dans la personne du philosophe-roi. Le motif pour établir la raison comme dirigeante dans le domaine de la politique était exclusivement politique, bien que l’espoir de voir la raison devenir peu à peu un instrument de coercition n’ait peut-être pas eu des conséquences moins décisives pour la tradition de la philosophie occidentale que pour la tradition de la politique occidentale. La ressemblance fatale entre le roi-philosophe de Platon et le tyran grec, comme le danger que ce gouvernement pouvait impliquer pour le domaine politique, ont été, semble-t-il, reconnus par Aristote; mais que cette combinaison de la raison et du pouvoir ait aussi impliqué un danger pour la philosophie, cela n’a été indiqué, pour autant que je sache, que dans la réplique de Kant à Platon : « Il ne faut pas s’attendre que les rois philosophent ou que les philosophes deviennent rois, et il ne faut pas non plus le désirer parce que la possession du pouvoir corrompt inévitablement le libre jugement de la raison » — bien que cette réplique même n’aille pas au fond de la question. 
La raison pour laquelle Platon voulait que les philosophes devinssent les maîtres de la cité se trouve dans le conflit entre les philosophes et la polis, ou dans l’hostilité de la polis à l’égard de la philosophie, hostilité qui probablement était restée en sommeil un certain temps avant de montrer, avec le procès et la mort de Socrate, qu’elle menaçait directement la vie du philosophe. Politiquement, la philosophie de Platon montre la rébellion du philosophe contre la polis. Le philosophe proclame sa volonté de gouverner, mais non pas tant dans l’intérêt de la politique et de la polis (bien qu’on ne puisse nier la motivation patriotique de Platon qui distingue sa philosophie de celle de ses successeurs dans l’antiquité) que dans l’intérêt de la philosophie et de la sécurité du philosophe."
(Hannah Arendt, La crise de la culture, 1954)

E4.3.A.2_REF1.2_PH LA VERITE PHILOSOPHIQUE (ABSOLUE, CONTRAIGNANTE) EST INADAPTEE A LA NATURE PLURIELLE DE LA POLITIQUE.
"Ce fut après la mort de Socrate que Platon commença à négliger la persuasion parce qu’elle était insuffisante pour diriger les hommes et à chercher quelque chose susceptible de les contraindre sans user de moyens externes de violence. Très tôt dans sa recherche, il a dû découvrir que la vérité, en tout cas les vérités que l’on nomme évidentes, contraignent l’esprit, et que cette contrainte, bien qu’elle n’ait pas besoin de violence pour être effective, est plus forte que la persuasion et l’argumentation. L’ennuyeux dans la coercition par la raison, cependant, c’est que seulement un petit nombre y est soumis, si bien que surgit le problème de savoir comment s’assurer que le grand nombre, les gens qui dans leur multitude même constituent le corps politique peuvent être soumis à la même vérité. Ici, assurément, il faut trouver d’autres moyens de coercition, et ici encore il faut éviter la contrainte par la violence si l’on ne veut pas détruire la vie politique telle que les Grecs la comprenaient. C’est la difficulté centrale de la philosophie politique de Platon, et c’est resté une aporie de toutes les tentatives pour établir une tyrannie de la raison. Dans La République, le problème est résolu par le mythe final des récompenses et des châtiments dans l’au-delà, mythe auquel Platon lui-même manifestement ne croyait pas et qu’il ne voulait pas non plus faire croire aux philosophes. Ce que l’allégorie de la caverne, au milieu de La République est pour le petit nombre ou pour le philosophe, le mythe de l’enfer à la fin l’est pour la multitude qui n’est pas capable d’accéder à la vérité philosophique. Dans Les Lois, Platon se débat avec le même problème, mais de la manière contraire ; cette fois, il propose un substitut à la persuasion : une introduction aux lois, dans laquelle leur intention et leur but doivent être expliqués aux citoyens. [..]

II est important d’avoir ces exemples présents à l’esprit pour comprendre quelle sorte de contrainte la raison, selon Platon, devait exercer dans les mains du roi-philosophe. Ici, il est vrai, le pouvoir contraignant ne réside pas dans la personne ou dans l’inégalité une telle, mais dans les idées qui sont perçues par le philosophe. Ces idées peuvent être utilisées comme des mesures de la conduite humaine parce qu’elles transcendent la sphère des affaires humaines de la même manière qu’un mètre, étant à l’extérieur et au-delà de toutes les choses dont il peut mesurer la longueur, les transcende."
(Hannah Arendt, La crise de la culture, 1954)

E4.3.A.2_REF2_LIT WHAT ESTABLISHES A "TRUTH" OR A "REASON" IN THE COLLECTIVE SPHERE IS NOT LOGIC, BUT FORCE.
"La raison c’est la folie du plus fort. La raison du moins fort c’est de la folie."
(Eugène Ionesco, Journal en miettes)

E4.3.A.2_REF3_TH WATZLAWICK CRITIQUES THE PLATONIC SHIFT FROM THE "SEEKER" (SOCRATES) TO THE "POSSESSOR" (PLATO) OF ABSOLUTE TRUTH. He outlines the "ineluctable pseudo-logic" that leads from "Divinity" (knowing the absolute good) to "Bestiality" (Inquisition, camps).
"Humanité, divinité, bestialité
Il faut peut-être faire remonter à Platon la plus classique des ultra solution pour résoudre les problèmes qui se présentent sur la voie du bien absolu. Pour lui, le philosophe n'est plus le chercheur (socratique) en quête de la vérité, il la possède. En d'autres termes, il contemple l'ordre divin du monde qui reste incompréhensible au faible intellect des masses. De ce fait, qui est mieux à même de guider la destinée des hommes et de faire régner l'ordre dans la cité ? Karl Popper a montré de façon convaincante que Platon ne doutait pas qu'il fût en possession de la vérité absolue. Les conséquences d'une telle conviction relève d'une inéluctable pseudo-logique que Platon expose dans La République, et ailleurs, en détail et sans scrupules. Par exemple, la sagesse du plus sage en elle-même et par elle-même ne suffit pas, elle doit être communiqué aux ignorant - si nécessaire contre leur volonté, ce qui autorise, non, contraint le philosophe-roi à recourir parfois à des contrevérités pour servir la vérité. Toute interprétation individuelle de la vérité doit être supprimée, et à cette fin Platon prône l'établissement d'institutions comparable à celle de l'Inquisition ou aux camps de concentration. Il faut former une race d'hommes qui suivent sans condition le chef le philosophe-roi. Pour une large part, le plus sage est sage parce qu'il a conscience du fait que le bonheur de l'humanité exige et en fait justifie d'avoir recours à certaines solution finales. Le poète autrichien Franz Grillparzer a déjà décrit les trois étapes principales d'une telle escalade par la formule extraordinairement laconique : humanité, divinité, bestialité. [...]"
(Paul Watzlawick, Comment réussir à échouer, 1988)

E4.3.A.2_REF4_TH WATZLAWICK ASSOCIE LE TOTALITARISME AU "JEU A SOMME NULLE" (JE GAGNE TOUT, TU PERDS TOUT) CAR IL REPOSE SUR UNE "DEFINITION ABSOLUE ET OBLIGATOIRE DES REALITES". À l'inverse, la démocratie est définie par la volonté de "négocier" et de trouver des "compromis".
"Les jeux à somme nulle [...]
À cet égard, je pense immédiatement à l'écrivain et historien Jean-François Revel, même s'il ne s'exprime pas dans les termes de la théorie des jeux. Dans la conférence qu'il a donnée à l'ONU le 25 octobre 1984, et surtout dans son livre Comment les démocraties finissent, il affirme que la différence fondamentale entre les gouvernement démocratique et les gouvernements totalitaires réside, d'une part, dans la volonté des premiers de négocier et, d'autre part, dans ce que je viens d'appeler la philosophie à sommes nulles des derniers. La politique extérieure de notre démocratie est déterminé par leur politique intérieure, dont le souci principal est la sécurité et la prospérité des citoyens. De ce fait, elles s'efforcent, dans leur politique extérieure, d'atteindre “Un état d'équilibre qui correspondent à leur équilibre intérieur”, pour reprendre la formule de Revel. D'autre part, le totalitarisme se fonde sur une idéologie, sur une définition absolue et donc obligatoire des réalités humaines, sociales et scientifiques de notre monde. Pour les gouvernements totalitaires donc - je citerai ici de nouveau Revel -, ”la seule existence de système différents est incompatible avec leur sécurité”. On peut ajouter que pour cette raison, la politique extérieure des états totalitaires n'a qu'un seul et unique objectif : la victoire mondiale, absolue et intransigeante ; car seul cet ultra solution peut mettre fin à leurs jeux à somme nulle et instaurer le Paradis sur terre. Évidemment, cette stratégie n'exclut pas les discours de paix tactique et verbeux qui convainquent généralement les citoyens occidentaux et leurs gouvernements que le camp adverse a désormais adopté le jeu à somme nulle. [...]
Les partisans des jeux à somme non nulle n'ont aucune ferveur messianique ; même s'ils sont motivés par les considérations les plus égoïstes, il croit cependant toujours que le principe du “vivre et laisser vivre” est la meilleure stratégie possible. Ainsi, quand elle traitent entre elle, les puissances occidentales - je cite une fois de plus Revel -, “s'efforce d'arriver à des compromis toujours nouveau, dont la valeur moyenne est pour elles le plus avantageux dénominateur commun. [...] Toute diplomatie démocratique suppose qu'elle a intérêt à faire des concessions parce que l'adversaire, dont on présume qu'il est raisonnable et modéré, sera par là motivé à prendre en compte ces concession et à y répondre par des concessions propres, contribuant ainsi à atteindre un compromis durable”. [...]"
(Paul Watzlawick, Comment réussir à échouer, 1988)

E4.3.A.2_REF5_PH  P_Donald Trump le 20 janvier 2017, new president of the USA

“POST-TRUTH” IS DEFINED AS A "CYNICAL DISCOURSE" THAT DENIES THE LINK BETWEEN WORDS AND REALITY. When the "attack on truth" succeeds, we don't just get skepticism; we get the "populist" who demands blind faith ("believe only in me").
"Sommes-nous entré dans l'ère de la post-vérité? 
Selon Aristote, la vérité est une propriété du discours: c'est l'accord du discours humain avec  la réalité. Mais dans cette définition, la vérité passe par le discours: la crise de la vérité suppose que l'on croit que le discours humain ne peut plus rejoindre le réel. La vérité comporte 1) un aspect logique, basé sur les faits qui doivent être cohérents et puis 2)  la confiance dans l'énonciateur. Le discours cynique qui nie la possibilité d'une adéquation possible entre notre discours et le monde invalide alors l'effort même de recherche de la vérité. On passe rapidement au soupçon politique sur les savants. [...]
Il est difficile de se demander comment respecter au mieux les droits de chacun quand dans le débat certains ont des idées toutes faites de ce qui convient que chacun fasse. Ne faut-il pas alors renoncer au concept de vérité qui serait trop dogmatique? Cette difficulté est vraie de tous les idéaux qui sont des horizons nécessaires pour guider notre recherche.  Il existe une constellation d'enjeux autour de la vérité (la justice politique, la connaissance, la confiance entre les hommes, la relation au monde etc.). L'attaque contre la vérité ébranle toutes les valeurs de la vie humaine qui l'impliquent dans leur propre définition. Le jour où l'on doute de tout sauf du populiste qui nous dit de ne croire qu'en lui, on a pas seulement le doute, on a la guerre."
(Jean-Claude Ameisen & Frédéric Worms dans l'émission Les Chemins de la Philosophie, diffusée sur France Culture le 12 octobre 2018)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/faut-il-renoncer-a-la-verite-3086679

E4.3.A.2_REF6_PH WHEN THE ABSOLUTE (PHILOSOPHICAL TRUTH) IS BROUGHT DOWN TO EARTH, THE STATE BECOMES THE "TRUE GOD," LEADING TO TYRANNY.
"«A la fin Feuerbach (que Marx tenait pour un grand esprit et dont il se reconnaîtra le disciple critique), dans L’Essence du christianisme, remplacera toute  théologie par une religion de l’homme et de l’espèce, qui a converti une grande partie de l’intelligence contemporaine. Sa tâche sera de montrer que la distinction entre l’humain et le divin est illusoire, qu’elle n’est pas autre chose que la distinction entre l’essence de l’humanité, c’est-à-dire la nature humaine, et l’individu. « le mystère de Dieu n’est que le mystère de l’amour de l’homme pour lui-même.» Les accents d’une nouvelle et étrange prophétie retentissent alors : « L’individualité a pris la place de la foi, la raison celle de la Bible, la politique celle de la religion et de l’Eglise, la terre celle du ciel, le travail celle de la prière, la misère celle de l’enfer, l’homme celle du Christ.» Il n’y a donc plus qu’un enfer et il est de ce monde : c’est contre lui qu’il faut lutter. La politique est religion, le christianisme transcendant, celui de l’au-delà, affermit les maîtres de la terre par le renoncement de l’esclave et suscite un maître de plus au fond des cieux. C’est pourquoi l’athéisme et l’esprit révolutionnaire ne sont que les deux faces d’un même mouvement de libération. Telle est la réponse à la question toujours posée : pourquoi le mouvement révolutionnaire s’est-il identifié avec le matérialisme plutôt qu’avec l’idéalisme? Parce qu’asservir Dieu, le faire servir, revient à tuer la transcendance qui maintient les anciens maîtres et à préparer, avec l’ascension des nouveaux, les temps de l’homme-roi. Quand la misère aura vécu quand les contradictions historiques seront résolues, « le vrai dieu, le dieu humain sera l’Etat». [...]
Le cynisme, la divinisation de l’histoire et de la matière, la terreur individuelle ou le crime d’Etat, ces conséquences démesurées vont alors naître, toutes armées, d’une équivoque conception du monde qui remet à la seule histoire le soin de produire les valeurs et la vérité. Si rien ne peut se concevoir clairement avant que la vérité, à la fin des temps, ait été mise au jour, toute action est arbitraire, la force finit par régner. « Si la réalité est inconcevable, s’écriait Hegel, il nous faut forger des concepts inconcevables. » Un concept qu´on ne peut concevoir a besoin, en effet, comme l’erreur, d’être vérité, qui nous paraît pourtant l’erreur, mais qui est vraie, justement parce qu’il lui arrive d’être l’erreur. Quant à la preuve, ce n’est pas moi, mais l’histoire, à son achèvement, qui l’administrera. » Une pareille prétention ne peut entraîner que deux attitudes : ou la suspension de toute affirmation jusqu’à l’administration de la preuve, ou l’affirmation de tout ce qui, dans l’histoire, semble voué au succès, la force en premier lieu. Dans les deux cas, un nihilisme. On ne comprend pas en tout cas la pensée révolutionnaire du XXe siècle si on néglige le fait que, par une fortune malheureuse, elle a puisé une grande partie de son inspiration dans une philosophie du conformisme et de l’opportunisme. La vraie révolte n’est pas mise en cause par les perversions de cette pensée. [...]
Le ciel est vide, la terre livrée à la puissance sans principes. Ceux qui ont choisi de tuer et ceux qui ont choisi d’asservir vont successivement occuper le devant de la scène, au nom d’une révolte détournée de sa vérité.»"
(Albert Camus, L´Homme révolté, La révolte historique, p. 188)

E4.3.A.2_REF7_PH IN A HIERARCHY WHERE THE CRIME DESCENDS FROM THE "SUPERHUMAN MICROPHONES" TO THE SLAVE, THE EXECUTIONER CAN CLAIM "I ONLY FOLLOWED ORDERS." The  system absolves the individual of the burden of being right or wrong.
"Les commandements du chef, dressé dans le buisson enflammé des projecteurs, sur un Sinaï de planches et de drapeaux, font alors la loi et la vertu. Si les micros surhumains commandent une fois seulement le crime, alors, de chefs en sous-chefs, le crime descend , jusqu’à l’esclave qui, lui, reçoit les ordres sans en donner à personne. Un exécuteur de Dachau pleure ensuite dans sa prison : «Je n’ai fait qu’exécuter les ordres. Le Führer et le Reichsftihrer, seuls, ont amené tout cela et puis ils sont partis. Gluecks a reçu des ordres de Kaltenbrunner et, finalement, j’ai reçu l’ordre de fusiller. Ils m’ont passé tout le paquet parce que je n’étais qu’un petit Haupt-scharführer et que je ne pouvais pas le transmettre plus bas dans la file. Maintenant, ils disent que c’est moi l’assassin.» Goering protestait au procès de sa fidélité au Führer et « qu’il existait encore une question d’honneur, dans cette vie maudite». L’honneur était dans l’obéissance qui se confondait parfois avec le crime. La loi militaire punit de mort la désobéissance et son honneur est servitude. Quand tout le monde est militaire, le crime est de ne pas tuer si l’ordre l’exige."
(Albert Camus, L´homme révolté, La révolte historique, Le terrorisme d´état et la terreur irrationnelle, p. 229-238)

E4.3.A.2_REF8_PH HANNAH ARENDT EXPLIQUE QUE LE TOTALITARISME NE SE CONTENTE PAS DE MENTIR, IL REND SES MENSONGES VRAIS PAR L'ACTION. L'axiome fou, s'il est suivi avec une cohérence impitoyable, finit par produire des faits qui le valident.
"Dans mes travaux sur le totalitarisme, j’ai tenté de montrer que le phénomène totalitaire, avec ses traits anti-utilitaires frappants et son étrange dédain pour les faits, est basé en dernière analyse sur la conviction que tout est possible - et non seulement permis, d’un point de vue moral ou d’un autre point de vue, comme c’était le cas avec le premier nihilisme. Les systèmes totalitaires tendent à démontrer que l’action peut être basée sur n’importe quelle hypothèse et que, dans le cours d’une action conduite de manière cohérente, l’hypothèse particulière deviendra vraie, deviendra réelle, d’une réalité de fait. Le postulat sous-jacent à l’action, cohérente peut être aussi fou qu’on voudra; il finira toujours par produire des faits qui sont alors « objectivement » vrais. Ce qui originellement n’était rien de plus qu’une hypothèse que devaient prouver ou réfuter des faits réels se transformera toujours dans le cours de l’action cohérente en un fait toujours irréfutable. En d’autres termes, l’axiome à partir duquel est engagée la déduction n’a pas besoin d’être une vérité évidente par soi-même, comme le supposaient la métaphysique et la logique traditionnelles ; il n’a aucunement à correspondre avec les faits en tant que donnés dans le monde objectif au moment où l’action commence ; le processus de l’action, s’il est cohérent, procédera à la création d’un monde où le postulat deviendra un axiome au sens de ce qui va de soi."
(Hannah Arendt, La crise de la culture, 1954)

E4.3.A.2_REF9_PH LA SCIENCE S'OPPOSE A L'ERREUR ; LA POLITIQUE (LES FAITS) S'OPPOSE AU MENSONGE.
"La marque de la vérité de fait est que son contraire n’est ni l’erreur ni l’illusion, ni l’opinion, dont aucune ne rejaillit sur la bonne foi personnelle, mais la fausseté délibérée ou le mensonge. L’erreur, bien sûr, est possible, et même courante, à l’égard de la vérité de fait, et dans ce cas ce type de vérité n’est en aucune manière différent de la vérité scientifique ou rationnelle. Mais l’important c’est qu’en ce qui concerne les faits il n’existe une autre possibilité, et que cette possibilité, la fausseté délibérée, n’appartient pas à la même espèce que les propositions qui, justes ou erronées, prétendent seulement dire ce qui est, ou comment quelque chose qui est m’apparaît."
(Hannah Arendt, La crise de la culture, 1954)

E4.3.A.3. Democratic Humility, Ethics, and Limits.
A "True Political Spirit" is characterized by "Abject Honesty," the acceptance of ambiguity/fallibility, the protection of the private sphere, and "Revolt" (as a force of life and moderation) rather than "Revolution" (as a force of abstract calculation).

E4.3.A.3_REF1_PH NO POLICY, EVEN IF IT IS THE EXPRESSION OF A MAJORITY IN A DEMOCRACY, IS INFALLIBLE "Karl Popper's concept of the Open Society is a derivation of his principle of falsification: No policy, even if it is the expression of a majority in a democracy, is infallible. With the best of intents, it might have undesired effects for some constituents and those that are negatively affected must have the right and the channels to express their discontent and give their feedback. The government or legislator must then try to implement some modifications to suppress or alleviate the undesired effects of the policy. This methodology advocates for piecemeal policies whose affects you closely monitor, not in "large scale canvas cleaning". The open society is characterized by the ability of individuals to criticize policy and of rulers to hear and act on the criticism. 
The enemies of the open society are those who think in the line of Plato, Aristotle, Hegel and Marx: They had in common the thought that intellectuals could have the personal knowledge of how to best run a society and impose this blueprint on everyone.
The idea that rulers can be gotten rid off peacefully is more important to Popper even than democratic institutions because you could have a democratic dictatorship. In the book, Popper held the view that political systems could hold together just by the shared agreement to take seriously into account criticism, but later he convinced himself that was to thin a guarantee and that you also needed the rule of law, institutions, the respect of human rights such as free speech guaranteed by a tradition."
(Popper, In our time, BBC 4)

Listen to the podcast: https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00773y4

E4.3.A.3_REF2_PH EINSTEIN PROPOSES FORMING AN INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF ACCOMPLISHED AND ETHICAL INDIVIDUALS TO EXERT MORAL INFLUENCE ON POLITICAL PROBLEMS THROUGH PUBLIC STATEMENTS. "Political leaders or governments owe their power either to the use of force or to their election by the masses. They cannot be regarded as representative of the superior moral or intellectual elements in a nation. In our time, the intellectual elite does not exercise any direct influence on the history of the world; the very fact of its division into many factions makes it impossible for its members to co-operate in the solution of today’s problems. [...]
[The only positive way forward is through the establishment of] a free association of men whose previous work and achievements offer a guarantee of their ability and integrity [...]
Such a group of international scope, whose members would have to keep contact with each other through constant interchange of opinions, might gain a significant and wholesome moral influence on the solution of political problems if its own attitudes, backed by the signatures of its concurring members, were made public through the press. Such an association would, of course, suffer from all the defects that have so often led to degeneration in learned societies; the danger that such a degeneration may develop is, unfortunately, ever present in view of the imperfections of human nature. However, and despite those dangers, should we not make at least an attempt to form such an association in spite of all dangers? It seems to me nothing less than an imperative duty!"
(Albert Einstein's letter to Sigmund Freud, 1931 - found in Einstein on Peace, 1960)

Watch the video of Francis Alÿs' Patriotic tales (1997) on YouTube:
https://youtu.be/UtWUqBR1Eww

E4.3.A.3_REF3_PH "LE COURAGE OU LA CONSCIENCE DE LA NON-RÉCIPROCITÉ ENTRE LE DROIT ET LA LOI . 
Cela pourrait être aussi l'autre nom de la conscience morale, celle qu'aime à invoquer si souvent Hugo; celle qui, fébrile, ne faiblit jamais. La démocratie ou l’histoire de la « confrontation permanente et perpétuelle de la loi que les hommes font avec le droit qui fait les hommes (27) ». La démocratie ou le régime qui fait de cette confrontation la conduite de sa politique. Et le destin littéraire de Hugo se joue dans un même mouvement : « Ne perds pas courage, ô pitié! Quant à moi, je ne me lasserai pas, et ce que j’ai écrit dans tous mes livres, ce que j’ai attesté par tous mes actes, [...] à l’Assemblée nationale de France comme à la fenêtre lapidée de la place des Barricades de Bruxelles, je l’attesterai, je l’écrirai et je le dirai sans cesse : il faut s’aimer, s’aimer, s’aimer ! Les heureux doivent avoir pour malheur les malheureux; l’égoïsme social est un commencement de sépulcre; voulons-nous vivre, mêlons nos cœurs, et soyons l’immense genre humain. Marchons en avant, remorquons en arrière. [...] Aidons, protégeons, secourons, avouons la faute publique et réparons-la. [...] C’est du droit de tous les faibles que se compose le devoir de tous les forts (28). » Ne voyons dans cette déclaration hugolienne ni lyrisme romantique ni optimisme naïf. Au contraire, elle fait office de profession de foi. Hugo y affirme d’abord l’adéquation — impérative moralement — de son dire et de son faire, de son ethos et de son logos. Il a écrit ce qu’il a commis concrètement, et l’a confirmé par un dire à l’adresse de tous. Il n’a pas scindé les territoires du courage, ne s’est pas comporté de telle manière à tel endroit et autrement à tel autre. Sans cesse, il a fait de ce faire et de ce dire la matière même de sa littérature. Enfin, il en appelle à l’amour. Non au sens d’une passion pour une femme, mais au sens de l’agapè, de ce qui fait le ferment de la communauté des hommes. En somme, l’autre nom du souci de soi et des autres, du souci public. « Voulons-nous vivre, mêlons nos cœurs », ou l’injonction au courage partagé. Enfin, dernier acte de la profession de foi, faisons de la rédemption de la faute publique, de la faute démocratique elle-même, le terrain de notre entente. Ou encore faisons de la confrontation, de la querelle du droit et de la loi, le chemin politique de la communauté des hommes ; et c’est ainsi que le droit ne sera pas un simulacre, mais au contraire la matière même le la consolation des vulnérables. Victor Hugo sait à quel point nous ne sommes pas assez hors de danger jour manquer de courage. [...]
II est l’en deçà de l’œuvre politique et morale, une sorte de surmoi incarné, non sévère, et si peu fantasmatique. La stylisation d’une conscience morale. [...]
Au sein de la démocratie, la littérature scelle un pacte privilégié avec la politique : un pacte de conscience. Elle sera la vigie de la stratégie publique. [...]
Et conscient de ce pacte souterrain, parfois oublié, parfois clandestin, entre la littérature et la politique, le courageux construit alors son agir, retrouve les quelques forces qui lui manquent et bâtit une espérance pour tous. Car le souci public est sans doute l’expérience profane de l’espérance. Certes, un versant concret, déjà une lueur, mais déjà en fait une providence. Le souci public est la preuve même que l’espérance n’est pas qu’une passion inappropriée, dont il faut se dessaisir à l’instar de la crainte. Il y a dans l’espérance comme l’en deçà d’un paradigme moral de la raison. Hugo prêche pour l’efficace de l’espérance, son caractère éthique et non proprement utopique. Son caractère volontaire, car l’espérance est un signe sûr d’une volonté en marche, et c’est pour cette raison qu’elle est éthique. Car il n’y a pas de raison d’espérer. Les faits ne sont jamais cléments. Tout conspire contre l’espérance. [...]
Notes:
(27) Cité par Jean-Claude Zylberstein in Victor Hugo, Le Droit et la loi et autres textes citoyens, op. cit., p. 19
(28) Ibid, p. 44-45"
(Cynthia Fleury, La fin du courage, 2010)

E4.3.A.3_REF4_LIT FREE SPEECH VALIDATES INDIVIDUAL DISTINCTIVENESS AND SERVES AS A BAROMETER OF SOCIETAL HEALTH
"What are your thoughts on free speech? Do you think it is a right?
LORRAINE, BERLIN, GERMANY

For fuck's sake, enough of the God and Jesus bullshit!
JASON, LONDON, UK

Dear Lorraine and Jason,

We humans are subtle and chaotic creatures, full of ambiguities and contradictions, and it is this that makes up our distinctiveness. We are fully and necessarily different from each other, and even though we have the entirely human tendency to reduce each other to generalisations based on arbitrary categorisations of identity, such as race or religion or gender, we must resist as best we can, for it is uncharitable at best to deny any human their rightful individual sovereignty, their specialness. It is our distinctiveness that is the very thing that should be prized.

Each of us is an amalgam of all we have loved and lost and learned, our personal successes and failures, our particular regrets, and our singular joys – and part of that uniqueness is that we think in different ways. Not all of our thinking is right or fully formed, far from it, but there it is, regardless – that flawed and terrifying uniqueness of thought. So, it is little wonder that people adopt and signal a kind of protective groupthink, because our own true thoughts, at their most interesting, can be terrifying. In fact, humans are mostly distinct individuals thinking terrifying things.

I’m not so sure free speech is a right, but it is certainly a societal or cultural attainment, something we, as a community, can use to enliven, embolden and liberate the soul of our world, provided we are fortunate enough to live in a society that allows such a thing. To be able to speak freely is not only a benefit to oneself, by making us feel less alone, it is also a barometer of the health of our society, just as intolerance to opposing ideas indicates a feebleness or lack of confidence in one’s own thoughts and the ideas of our society. I support free speech, not so much because I think it is a right, but rather because it goes some way to validate our specialness. I am genuinely concerned by its alternative, the fearful flattening of ideas through the suppression of our individual natures, something that has become all too evident in almost every institution I can think of.

As so to Jesus, dear Jason. Jesus roamed the land expressing what were, at the time, considered dangerous and heretical ideas. He was literally the embodiment of the terrifying idea. He was followed around by a nervous coterie of muttering scribes and Pharisees whose purpose was to catch him out – expose not just His dangerous ideas, but to lay bare and persecute his uniqueness. They, of course, succeeded and Christ was cancelled upon the Cross. These impossible, dangerous ideas – to love your enemy, to love the poor, to forgive others – were terrifying and unconscionable and forbidden in His day, but became, in time, the better ideas that underpin the society in which many of us are lucky enough to live today. It is worth remembering that. I think we must be careful around our assumptions of what ideas we think are right and what ideas we think are wrong, and what we do with those ideas, because it is the terrifying idea – the shocking, offending, unique idea – that may just save the world.  

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave,  The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #197 / JUNE 2022)

E4.3.A.3_REF5_SCI WHAT I AM ASKING FOR IN MANY DIRECTIONS IS AN ABJECT HONESTY "The things like marriage questions, “How are you getting along with your husband,” and so on, that appear in magazines are all nonsense. They go something like this: “This has been tested on a thousand couples.”  and then you can tell how they answered and how you answered and tell if you are happily married. What you do is the following. You make up a bunch of questions, like “Do you give him breakfast in bed ?” and so on and so on. And then you give this questionnaire to a thousand people. And you have an independent way of telling whether they are happily married, like asking them, or something. But never mind. It doesn't matter any difference what it is, even if the test is perfect. That's not the part where the trouble is. Then you do the following. You see about all the ones who are happy -  how did the answer about the breakfast in bed, how did the answer about this, how did the answer about that? [...]  They have decided on the odds of the thing in terms of the one sample. What they ought to do to be honest is to take the same test that has now being designed, in which they know how to make the score. They have decided this gets five points, that gets ten points, in such a way that the thousand that they tried it's on get marvelous scores  if they are happy and lousy scores they're not. But now is the test of the test. They cannot use the sample which determines the scoring for them. That's going backwards. They must take the test to another thousand people, independently, and run it out to see whether the happy ones are the ones that score high, or not. They do not do that, because it's too much trouble, A, and the few times that they tried it, B, it showed that the test was no good [...]
What I am asking for in many directions is an abject honesty. I think that we should have a more abject honesty in political matters. I would like to point out that people are not honest. Scientists are not honest at home, either. It's useless. Nobody's honest. Scientists are not honest. And people usually believe that they are. That makes it worse. By honest I don't mean that you only tell what's true. But you make clear the entire situation. You make clear all the information that is required for somebody else who is intelligent to make up their mind."
(Richard Feynman, The meaning of it all, 1998)

E4.3.A.3_REF6_PH KARL POPPER TRANSPOSE L'EXIGENCE SCIENTIFIQUE DE LA "FALSIFIABILITE" DANS L'ARENE PUBLIQUE DU JOURNALISME. Il définit l'éthique du journaliste comme l'exposition honnête d'une hypothèse soumise à la critique du lecteur.
"Tout journaliste sérieux travaille selon les principes de réfutation de Popper. L’article idéal devrait être conçu de telle sorte que figure même au-dessus la thèse qu’il veut prouver et que le journaliste expose ensuite successivement toutes ses tentatives de réfuter sa propre hypothèse. Qu’il les présente de telle sorte que le lecteur puisse quasiment refaire avec lui toute sa démarche, suivre l’enchaînement des déductions, et le cas échéant détecter les points faibles ou les contradictions. Le journaliste ne dit donc pas non plus la vérité, il exprime une hypothèse sur la vérité, hypothèse qu’il a testée au mieux de ses connaissances et en toute conscience."
(Karl Popper, Symposium organisé à l’occasion du quatre-vingtième anniversaire de Karl R. Popper, 1983)

E4.3.A.3_REF7_PH LE DISCERNEMENT POLITIQUE EST  LA CAPACITE A PRENDRE EN COMPTE LA PLURALITE DES PERSPECTIVES. La tyrannie n'est pas seulement une oppression physique, mais une erreur épistémologique : en supprimant les "autres", le tyran se rend lui-même "incapable de discernement" car il perd l'accès à la réalité.
"Faire preuve de discernement en matière politique ne signifie rien d’autre qu’acquérir et avoir bien présente à l’esprit la perspective dominante par rapport aux points de vue et aux positions possibles, à partir desquels on peut considérer la situation et la juger.  [...] Mais il est important de se rendre compte qu’une telle liberté du politique dépendait complètement de la présence et de l’égalité du plus grand nombre. Une chose ne peut se montrer sous plusieurs aspects que lorsqu’il y a plusieurs personnes auxquelles elle apparaît à chaque fois sous différentes perspectives. Là où ces autres qui sont égaux, et leurs opinions particulières, sont abolis, comme c’est le cas dans la tyrannie, où tous et tout est sacrifié au point de vue du tyran, personne n’est libre et personne n’est capable de discernement, pas même le tyran."
(Hannah Arendt, Qu'est ce que la politique?, 1958)

E4.3.A.3_REF8_PH MERLEAU-PONTY CONTRASTS "OPERATIVE/ACTIVE REASON" (WHICH ACCEPTS THE AMBIGUITY OF THE POLITICAL WORLD) WITH A "PHANTOM OF REASON” THAT SEEKS THE "ETERNAL" AND THE "CLEAREST CONCEPT.
"Ni notre examen du socialisme ni notre examen du libéralisme ne peut donc être sans réserves ni restriction et nous demeurerons dans cette assiette instable tant que le cours des choses et la conscience des hommes n’auront pas rendu possible le dépassement de ces deux systèmes ambigus. Trancher de haut, opter pour l’un d’eux, sous prétexte que la raison y voit clair en tout cas, c’est montrer qu’on a moins de souci de la raison opérante et active que d’un fantôme de raison qui cache ses confusions sous des airs péremptoires. Aimer la raison comme le fait Julien Benda - vouloir l’éternel quand le savoir découvre toujours mieux la réalité du temps, vouloir le concept le plus clair quand la chose même est ambiguë, c’est la forme la plus insidieuse du romantisme, c’est préférer le mot de raison à l’exercice de la raison. Restaurer n’est jamais rétablir, c’est masquer."
(Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Causeries, 1948)

E4.3.A.3_REF10_PH THE FUNCTION OF THE POLITICAL ORGANIZATION IS TO PROTECT THE PRIVATE SPACE.
"La societe doit laisser a chacun la liberte de chercher son absolu."
(Albert Camus, L´homme révolté, La pensée de midi, Au-delà du nÏhilisme)

E4.3.A.3_REF10.1_PH AMBIGUITY IS NOT A "SICKNESS OF CONSCIOUSNESS" (A FAILURE OF THE SUBJECT) BUT IS "IN THINGS".
"Pour Merleau-Ponty,  la complication est dans les choses et dans le monde. Le vrai intérieur n’est pas le vrai de la politique: C’est impossible de ramener toutes les choses à une seule vérité. D'un autre côté, c’est le propre même de sa démarche d’être forcément politique car toute subjectivité est d’emblée prise dans un tissu social. J'adhère à ce qui est vrai intérieurement mais en même temps je suis pris dans les rapports avec autrui: c’est la difficulté de la philosophie politique qui est confrontée à “l'équivoque dans les choses”."
(Pierre Schindler)

"We generally assume that ambiguity is a characteristic of thought, a sickness of consciousness which tries to escape from things... We are unwilling to admit that ambiguity is in things, that history is a fetish, that it requires of us that we join it, but does not present us with an absolute purpose to be attained... [...]

For as long as there are men, a society, and an open history, such conflicts [between the inner and the outer] will exist. [...] There is no refuge for the 'beautiful soul' who wishes to preserve his inner purity; he is already compromised by his very silence. The curse of politics is precisely that it obliges us to treat men as things, as obstacles or as means, whereas the moral law requires us to treat them as ends. [...]

Language, however, lives only by silence; we do not say everything ... because we are present to one another and because there is a silent communication between us. ... Our political life is the tragic confrontation of this inner certainty with the ambiguity of external history."
(Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Humanism and Terror, Preface, translated by John O'Neill, 1969)

E4.3.A.3_REF10.2_PH L'INCERTITUDE ET L'INACHEVEMENT NE SONT PAS DES SIGNES DE "DECADENCE" OU D'ECHEC PAR RAPPORT A UN SUPPOSE "ORDRE CLASSIQUE", MAIS LA CONSCIENCE AIGUË DE CE QUI A TOUJOURS ETE VRAI.
"Nous avons des raisons de nous demander si l’image qu’on nous donne souvent du monde classique est autre chose qu’une légende, s’il n’a pas connu lui aussi l’inachèvement et l'ambiguïté où nous vivons, s’il ne s’est pas contenté de leur refuser l’existence officielle, et si, en conséquence, loin d’être un fait de décadence, l’incertitude de notre culture n’est pas plutôt la conscience plus aiguë et plus franche de ce qui a toujours été vrai, acquisition donc et non pas déclin. [...]
Si cela est vrai, la conscience « moderne » n’aurait pas découvert une vérité moderne, mais une vérité de tous les temps, seulement plus visible aujourd'hui et portée à sa plus haute gravité.  Et cette plus grande clairvoyance, cette expérience plus entière de la contestation n’est pas le fait d’une humanité qui se dégrade : c’est le fait d’une humanité qui ne vit plus, comme elle l’a longtemps fait, par quelques archipels ou quelques promontoires, mais se confronte à elle-même d’un bout à l’autre du monde, s’adresse elle-même à elle-même tout entière par la culture ou les livres…"
(Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Causeries, 1948)

E4.3.A.3_REF11_PH CAMUS DISTINGUISHES BETWEEN REVOLUTION (which relies on "calculation" and the "abstract man"—i.e., Philosophical/Absolute Truth imposed on history) AND REVOLT (which relies on "life," "love," and "measure"—i.e., the limited, human reality).
"La révolte prouve par là qu’elle est le mouvement même de la vie et qu’on ne peut la nier sans renoncer à vivre. Son cri le plus pur, à chaque fois, fait se lever un être. Elle est donc amour et fécondité, ou elle n’est rien.  La révolution sans honneur, la révolution du calcul qui, préférant un homme abstrait à l’homme de chair, nie l’être autant de fois qu’il est nécessaire, met justement le ressentiment à la place de l’amour. Aussitôt que la révolte, oublieuse de ses généreuses origines, se laisse contaminer par le ressentiment, elle nie la vie, court à la destruction et fait se lever la cohorte ricanante de ces petits rebelles, graine d’esclaves, qui finissent par s’offrir, aujourd’hui, sur tous les marchés d’Europe, à n’importe quelle servitude. Elle n’est plus révolte ni révolution, mais rancune et tyrannie. Alors, quand la revolution, au nom de la puissance et de l’histoire, devient cette mécanique meurtrière et démesurée, une nouvelle révolte devient sacrée, au nom de la mesure et de la vie. "
(Albert Camus, L´homme révolté, La pensée de midi, Au-delà du nÏhilisme)

E4.3.A.3_REF12_PH FOR THE HUMANIST (THE POLITICAL BEING), THE DECISIVE QUESTION IS LIBERTY (NOT BEING COERCED), EVEN BY TRUTH OR BEAUTY. Hannah Arendt contrasts the "specialist" (scientist/philosopher bound by their specific truths) with the "humanist" who exercises Judgment and Taste.
"C’est une affaire de goût que de préférer la compagnie de Platon et la compagnie de sa pensée, même s’il doit nous égarer loin de la vérité. À coup sûr, une affirmation très téméraire, outrageusement téméraire même, surtout parce qu’elle concerne la vérité. Manifestement on pourrait dire et décider la même chose à propos de la beauté, qui, pour ceux qui ont formé leurs sens comme la plupart d’entre nous ont formé leur esprit, n’est pas moins contraignante que la vérité. Ce que dit Cicéron en fait, c’est que pour le véritable humaniste ni les vérités du scientifique, ni la vérité du philosophe, ni la beauté de l’artiste ne peuvent être absolues. L’humaniste, parce qu’il n’est pas un spécialiste, exerce une faculté de jugement et de goût qui est au-delà de la contrainte que chaque spécialité fait peser sur nous. Cette humanitas romaine s’appliquait à des hommes qui étaient libres à tous points de vue, pour qui la question de la liberté — ne pas subir de contrainte — était la question décisive, même en philosophie, même en science, même en art. Cicéron dit : en ce qui concerne mes liens avec les hommes et les choses, je refuse d’être contraint même par la vérité, même par la beauté."
(Hannah Arendt, La crise de la culture, 1954)

E4.3.A.3_REF13_LIT FREEDOM (THE CAPACITY TO THINK FOR ONESELF) TAKES PRECEDENCE OVER THE IMPOSITION OF A SINGLE, ABSOLUTE TRUTH.
"Même aux temps fanatiques, à l’époque de la chasse aux sorcières, de la « Chambre Ardente » et de l’Inquisition, les hommes humains ont toujours pu vivre; pas un seul instant cela n’a pu troubler la clarté d’esprit et l’humanité d’un Erasme, d’un Montaigne, d’un Castellion. Et tandis que les autres, les professeurs en Sorbonne, les conseillers, les légats, les Zwingli, les Calvin, proclament : « Nous connaissons la vérité », la réponse de Montaigne est : « Que sais-je? »; tandis que, par la roue et l’exil, ils veulent imposer « C’est ainsi que vous devez vivre! », son conseil à lui est : pensez vos propres pensées et non pas les miennes! Vivez votre vie! Ne me suivez pas aveuglément, restez libres!
Celui qui pense librement pour lui-même honore toute liberté sur terre."
(Stefan Zweig, Montaigne, 1942)

E4.3.A.3_REF14_PH PLUTARCH’S METAPHOR OF THE MAN WHO "WARMS HIMSELF AT THE NEIGHBOR’S FIRE" WITHOUT LIGHTING HIS OWN LANTERN ILLUSTRATES THE ABDICATION OF JUDGMENT.
"Imagine : un homme venu demander du feu à ses voisins, trouve dans leur âtre une flambée splendide et reste éternellement à se chauffer chez eux ! C'est exactement ce que fait celui qui, venu recevoir d'un autre la raison ne se dit pas qu'il lui faut suspendre sa propre lanterne, sa propre intelligence, mais se délecte de ce qu'il entend et s'assied, là, sous le charme. Ce qu'il retire des raisonnement, c'est l'éclat rougeoyant - une idée simplement - pas la chaleur du feu philosophique qui extirpe et détruit les moisissures et les ténèbres intérieur de l'esprit.
Donc, s'il faut encore un conseil sur l'écoute, n'oublions pas ce dernier. En même temps que nous étudions, exerçons nous à trouver par nous-même. Ainsi notre état d'esprit ne sera ni sophistique ni historique, mais vraiment issu de ce que nous sommes, philosophique. Bien écouter sera notre premier pas pour bien vivre."
(Plutarque, L’ami véritable)

E1.6.E.1.2_REF1_PH.wE4.3.A.3.

ALBERT CAMUS EXPLORES HUMAN REVOLT AGAINST INJUSTICE AND SUFFERING, AFFIRMING THAT REVOLT IS AN ACT OF LOVE AND GENEROSITY TOWARD PRESENT AND FUTURE LIFE. He criticizes revolutions that become tyrannical and destructive when they forget their generous origins.
"Beyond Nihilism. There does exist for man, therefore, a way of acting and of thinking which is possible on the level of moderation to which he belongs. Every undertaking that is more ambitious than this proves to be contradictory. The absolute is not attained nor, above all, created through history. Politics is not religion, or if it is, then it is nothing but the Inquisition. How would society define an absolute? Perhaps everyone is looking for this absolute on behalf of all. But society and politics only have the responsibility of arranging everyone's affairs so that each will have the leisure and the freedom to pursue this common search. History can then no longer be presented as an object of worship. It is only an opportunity that must be rendered fruitful by a vigilant rebellion.

"Obsession with the harvest and indifference to history," writes Rene Char admirably, "are the two extremities of my bow." If the duration of history is not synonymous with the duration of the harvest, then history, in effect, is no more than a fleeting and cruel shadow in which man has no more part. He who dedicates himself to this history dedicates himself to nothing and, in his turn, is nothing. But he who dedicates himself to the duration of his life, to the house he builds, to the dignity of mankind, dedicates himself to the earth and reaps from it the harvest that sows its seed and sustains the world again and again. Finally, it is those who know how to rebel, at the appropriate moment, against history who really advance its interests. To rebel against it supposes an interminable tension and the agonized serenity of which Rene Char also speaks. But the true life is present in the heart of this dichotomy. Life is this dichotomy itself, the mind soaring over volcanoes of light, the madness of justice, the extenuating intransigence of moderation. The words that reverberate for us at the confines of this long adventure of rebellion are not formulas for optimism, for which we have no possible use in the extremities of our unhappiness, but words of courage and intelligence which, on the shores of the eternal seas, even have the qualities of virtue.

No possible form of wisdom today can claim to give more. Rebellion indefatigably confronts evil, from which it can only derive a new impetus. Man can master in himself everything that should be mastered. He should rectify in creation everything that can be rectified. And after he has done so, children will still die unjustly even in a perfect society. Even by his greatest effort man can only propose to diminish arithmetically the sufferings of the world. But the injustice and the suffering of the world will remain and, no matter how limited they are, they will not cease to be an outrage. Dimitri Karamazov's cry of "Why?" will continue to resound; art and rebellion will die only with the last man. [...]

This insane generosity is the generosity of rebellion, which unhesitatingly gives the strength of its love and without a moment's delay refuses injustice. Its merit lies
in making no calculations, distributing everything it possesses to life and to living men. It is thus that it is prodigal in its gifts to men to come. Real generosity toward the future lies in giving all to the present. Rebellion proves in this way that it is the very movement of life and that it cannot be denied without renouncing life. Its purest outburst, on each occasion, gives birth to existence. Thus it is love and fecundity or it is nothing at all. Revolution without honor, calculated revolution which, in preferring an abstract concept of man to a man of flesh and blood, denies existence as many times as is necessary, puts resentment in the place of love. Immediately rebellion, forgetful of its generous origins, allows itself to be contaminated by resentment; it denies life, dashes toward destruction, and raises up the grimacing cohorts of petty rebels, embryo slaves all of them, who end by offering themselves for sale, today, in all the marketplaces of Europe, to no matter what form of servitude. It is no longer either revolution or rebellion but rancor, malice, and tyranny. Then, when revolution in the name of power and of history becomes a murderous and immoderate mechanism, a new rebellion is consecrated in the name of moderation and of life. We are at that extremity now. At the end of this tunnel of darkness, however, there is inevitably a light, which we already divine and for which we only have to fight to ensure its coming. All of us, among the ruins, are preparing a renaissance beyond the limits of nihilism. But few of us know it. [...]

They choose, and give us as an example the only original rule of life today: to learn to live and to die, and, in order to be a man, to refuse to be a god.

At this meridian of thought, the rebel thus rejects divinity in order to share in the struggles and destiny of all men. We shall choose Ithaca, the faithful land, frugal and audacious thought, lucid action, and the generosity of the man who understands. In the light, the earth remains our first and our last love. Our brothers are breathing under the same sky as we; justice is a living thing. Now is born that strange joy which helps one live and die, and which we shall never again postpone to a later time. On the sorrowing earth it is the unresting thorn, the bitter brew, the harsh wind off the sea, the old and the new dawn."
(Albert Camus, L´homme révolté, La pensée de midi, Au-delà du nÏhilisme)

E4.3.B. The "Virtuous Lie" and the Limits of Transparency

E4.3.B.1. The Necessity of the Lie: Freedom, Time, and Survival.
The capacity to lie is intrinsic to human freedom, essential for psychological survival, and inevitable due to the fluid nature of the self over time.

E4.3.B.1_REF1_LIT A_Erika Verzutti, Beijo [Kiss]_2011

LOVE AS A "TERRIFYING" PROCESS OF "REFINING THE TRUTHS" TWO PEOPLE CAN TELL EACH OTHER.
"An honorable human relationship — that is, one in which two people have the right to use the word « love » — is a process, delicate, violent, often terrifying to both persons involved, a process of refining the truths they can tell each other.
It is important to do this because it breaks down human self-delusion and isolation.
It is important to do this because in doing so we do justice to our own complexity.
It is important to do this because we can count on so few people to go that hard way with us."
(Adrienne Rich, On Lies, Secrets, and Silence)

E4.3.B.1_REF2_PH A_Misha Bies Golas_A modo de conclusión [As a conclusion]

ARENDT POSITS THAT TORTURE WAS USED ON SLAVES NOT BECAUSE THEY WERE DECEITFUL, BUT BECAUSE THEY WERE SUBJECT TO NECESSITY. TORTURE FORCES THE "VOICE OF NATURE" (TRUTH OF THE FLESH/PAIN) TO SPEAK, DESTROYING THE CAPACITY FOR FREEDOM (AND THUS THE CAPACITY TO LIE). The "Citizen" (the political being) is defined by the right to be free from the compulsion of absolute truth/nature, effectively having the right to the ambiguity of speech (and invention/lying) that torture destroys.
"Dans toute l’antiquité occidentale la torture, « nécessité à laquelle nul ne résiste », n’était appliquée qu’aux esclaves soumis à la nécessité de toute façon [...] L’explication courante aujourd’hui de cette coutume caractéristique de toute l’antiquité grecque et romaine qu’il faut en chercher l’origine dans « la croyance que l’esclave était incapable de dire la vérité si ce n’est sous la torture » (Barrow, op. cit., p. 31) est une erreur complète. La croyance était au contraire que nul ne peut inventer un mensonge sous la torture :« On croyait recueillir la voix même de la nature dans les cris de la douleur. Plus la douleur pénétrait avant, plus intime et plus vrai sembla être ce témoignage de la chair et du sang » (Wallon, op. cit., I, 325). La psychologie des Anciens voyait mieux que nous l’élément de liberté, de libre invention dans le mensonge. Les « nécessités » de Ia torture passaient pour détruire cette liberté, elles ne pouvaient par conséquent pas être appliquées aux citoyens libres."
(Hannah Arendt, Condition de l’homme moderne, 1958)

E4.3.B.1_REF3_PH I_David Ha_Does one become someone else when one lies

JANKÉLÉVITCH’S ARGUMENT THAT "TIME MAKES US LIE" BECAUSE WE ARE IN A STATE OF BECOMING EXPLAINS WHY ABSOLUTE TRANSPARENCY IS IMPOSSIBLE. Bernard Williams introduces a crucial distinction: Truth is not a monolith but a compound of Sincerity (intention/social bond) and Accuracy (measurement/epistemology).
"Devient-on quelqu’un d’autre quand on ment ?
J'ai cherché à comprendre ce que voulait dire le mensonge pour nous, pour les humains, dans une démarche d'anthropologie philosophique. La question de la vérité ne peut pas être complètement effacée de nos existences. Je ne cherche pas à justifier le mensonge, ni à le condamner comme pouvait le faire Kant ou Constant. Je ne tente pas, comme Augustin, de savoir si l'intention trompeuse est mauvaise. Je tente de faire une phénoménologie du mensonge, j'essaie de comprendre ce qu'est une existence qui est baignée dans le secret et le mensonge, qui sont contiguës, et qui fait qu'à un certain moment, l'exigence de vérité qui se trouve logée au cœur de nos existences n'est plus rencontrée."
(Nathalie Frogneux)

Pour Bernard Williams l'être humain ne peut pas faire fi de la vérité. Harry Frankfurt, dans On bullshit [De l'art de dire des conneries], explique que l'on peut tolérer une certaine prise de liberté à l'égard du réel - on peut plaisanter, baratiner, augmenter la réalité par une emphase  mais il-y-a un seuil au delà duquel cette liberté est jugée excessive - on dira "arrêtes tes conneries!". Pour Frankfurt, le baratin est une parole qui se considère comme libre à l'égard du vrai et du faux. Le baratineur s'éloigne de l'opposition vrai-faux et choisit de raconter ce qu'il veut. On peut élargir l'analyse du langage à la vie: qu'est ce qu'une vie de mensonge? Une vie en porte-à-faux avec soi et dans le rapport au monde?
Le temps qui passe est lui-même propice au mensonge:"
“Le temps tout d'abord fait mentir en ceci qu’il est l'organe du démenti. Le même, par la chronologie,devient un autre, et puis un autre encore. Car c’est cela devenir: être un autre que soi-même; être ce que l'on n’est pas - tantôt moins et tantôt plus. Par une sorte de continuation d'altérité, le devenir fabrique des personnes inégales à elles-même, dissemblables d'elles-même, en même temps qu'il rend toute prédication synthétique. Mais comme nos moyens d'expression ne représentent - au regard de ces innombrables vérités intérieures dont la succession compose notre histoire - qu’une certaine fidélité instantanée, la véracité ponctuelle d'une seconde, il faudrait multiplier les traductions à l'infini pour serrer au plus près la vérité totale. Quelle patience plus qu'humaine y suffirait, quel instrument dynamique, quel infatigable sincérité et à chaque moment compromise ? Fatalement, le fossé va s'élargir entre le système des signes stationnaires et la continuité des présents successifs, tous authentiques, tous absolus, qui forment notre durée. Tandis que nous prenons conscience de cette fissure béante, germe la tentation d'en profiter en y puisant des alibis, car cette vérité en caoutchouc favorise grandement la malhonnêteté et l'approximation; et nous voilà pris dans le dilemme d'une fidélité intemporelle qui, divergent de plus en plus d'avec notre vérité intérieure, devient plus menteuse que l'hypocrisie; ou d'une sincérité toujours contemporaine de son présent, mais dont la rançon est le reniement, le parjure et l'apostasie perpétuelle. À toute minute s'offre ainsi à nous la possibilité du mensonge véridique, celui qui donne pour un sentiment éternel, pour une vérité en soi, le message d’un instant.”
(Wladimir Jankélévitch, Philosophie morale, cours de 1962-1963)

“C'est que Jankévévich met en évidence et que je trouve particulièrement intéressant, c'est le fait que nous n'avons pas d'authenticité comme état. Nous n'avons pas à décrire qui nous sommes comme nous aurions à décrire un objet extérieur qui reste stable. Notre devenir est forcément mensongé puisque nous sommes dans un processus constant d'auto-altération; nous changeons constamment, et donc il y a une écriture de soi progressive et chronologique qui fait que notre conscience est toujours une conscience dédoublée. Alors la conscience et le temps inscrivent dans dans nos vies la possibilité du mensonge. C’est avec cette possibilité du mensonge que nous devons tenter d'arriver à la question de la sincérité.”
(Nathalie Frogneux)

Jean-Claude Roman, cet homme qui s’est fait passer pour médecin pendant des années - histoire relatée dans le film L'Adversaire, de Nicole Garcia, 2002 - illustre comment parfois une hypocrisie tient tellement bien qu'elle va devenir une existence d'un autre type. Un mensonge qui a du succès va avoir une durée dans le temps et va avoir aussi un effet cumulatif, c’est à dire que puisqu'il il est reçu comme médecin par les autres, il se s’éprouve comme médecin toujours davantage et finalement quand il est en prison, c'est le “doc”. C'est très compliqué parce que, de fait, il ment à tout le monde mais tout se passe comme si son mensonge était sincère. Finalement, c’est une vie entièrement fausse, vécue avec la sincérité de celui qui aurait voulu être médecin. On  peut mentir en étant sincère: Il a réellement l'intention de devenir médecin, il a réellement l'intention de devenir celui qu’il prétend être.
Un autre exemple dans cette veine est celui de Mischa Defonseca qui a inventé qu'elle était juive et avait survécu avec les loups pendant la seconde guerre mondiale pour oublier le passé de collaboration avec le nazisme de sa famille. Elle faisait des présentations de son histoire dans les écoles jusqu'au moment où elle a été obligé d'avouer publiquement son mensonge. Pour sa défense, elle argumentait qu'elle avait souvent du mal à faire la différence entre la réalité et son univers intérieur.
Nous ne condamnons pas ces mensonges pour des raisons morales, mais pour défendre la cohérence du monde et de notre "être-ensemble". 
C'est la consistance de notre vie commune qui suppose que nous ayons une articulation entre l'exactitude est la sincérité. Si notre monde est commun, nous devons pouvoir partager un certain fait. Bernard Williams dit que nous avons un rapport à la vérité et à la véracité qui fait notre humanité et renoncer à ce rapport ce serait être en rupture à l'égard de ce que nous devons être. Il considère que la vérité repose sur la vertu de sincérité et la vertu l'exactitude parce que ce sont des processus qui se cultivent l'un-l'autre, c'est-à-dire que je ne peux pas être sincère si je n'ai pas sincèrement le souci constant que mon propos soit exacte, adéquat avec le monde extérieur, préoccupé de ne pas être démenti. L'exactitude évidemment nécessite des instruments de mesure; je ne suis pas toujours dans l'exactitude - il s'agit d'une vertu. L’exactitude doit se gagner peu à peu, grâce à des épistémologies qui sont de plus en plus précises, grâce à des des instruments de mesure, des perspectives qui qui se multiplient. On voit bien par exemple que dans des questions aussi complexes que la question du réchauffement climatique, l'exactitude se gagne haute lutte avec des points de vue qui s'additionnent. Il suffit pas de regarder d'observer - c'est une vertu de s'engager à être toujours au plus proche des méthodes les plus précises, les plus exactes, trouver les épistémologies qui nous permettent de mesurer au mieux le monde, tout en étant sincère. On peut avoir des choses sous les yeux et ne pas les voir. Il faut avoir la capacité de remettre en question ses préjugés et sa conception du monde, parce que peut-être que les nouvelles mesures nous demande justement un travail sur sur la sincérité que nous avions jusque-là. 
On peut distinguer la sincérité de la franchise. La franchise est au-delà de la sincérité, au moment d’exprimer un point de vue qui peut heurter notre relation aux autres, au monde, à nous même. Il y a peut-être une illusion dans la paresia (le parler-vrai), qui consiste à penser que être sincère c’est être toujours transparent. Il est important de prendre conscience que l’on est rarement totalement transparent à soi-même, la sincérité serait donc un processus.
Ce qui intéresse Nathalie Frogneux, c'est le point de bascule lorsque la liberté que nous pouvons avoir à l'égard du monde et à l'égard des autres, et même à l'égard de nous-même  - dans la façon dont nous interprétons et nous rapportons à nous-mêmes - lorsque ce qui était une liberté s’inverse et devient en fait une prison ou une rupture dans la confiance des relations aux autres ou bien une difficulté à l'égard de nous-même.  On pourrait être fasciné par la force créative de tous ces grands menteurs mais à un certain moment, cette liberté semble s’inverser en son contraire.
Nous avons une difficulté à accepter, comme nous y incite Jankélévitch, que le mensonge fait partie de notre vie. Est-ce que l’exigence de transparence ne serait pas une mauvaise compréhension de qui nous sommes, puisque nous sommes en perpétuel devenir? On s’accommode très bien des “mensonges joyeux”, comme les appelait St Augustin, ceux qui nous permettent d’exagérer pour rendre plus intéressants nos discours, de ne pas être tout à fait exact pour ne pas être ennuyeux en société. La louange permet aussi d’augmenter le bien-être des gens, la louange augmente ce qui est par la force performative du langage; une fleur est plus belle si j’en parle que si je l’ignore. Le langage n'est pas le doublon de la réalité. Ce qui est un intéressant, c'est le point où nous sentons la nécessité de réunification - à quel moment on dit "arrêtes-tes conneries!". Le moment où l'on a envie d'avouer est peut-être le signe de cette limite (Voir Jérôme Porée, Phénoménologie de l'aveu, 2018). On a souvent parler des aveux arrachés alors que l'aveu est aussi un moment de réunification avec le monde et avec soi-même.
Voir l'aphorisme 54 dans Humain, trop humain de Nietzsche. Si on supprime la possibilité de mentir, on enlève sa force à l'imagination et la liberté que l'on peut avoir à l'égard de soi-même. Nous sommes dans une dialectique entre la liberté d'invention et le soucis de cohérence du monde. La vérité subjective s'établit - s'atteste en dialogue - dans un triangle entre moi, les autres et le monde. Il y a des limites au décalage entre ce que je me raconte et ce que le monde ou les autres confirment."
(Nathalie Frogneux dans l'émission Les Chemins de la Philosophie, diffusée sur France Culture le 14 novembre 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/devient-on-quelqu-un-d-autre-quand-on-ment-2644695

E4.3.B.1_REF3.1_PH "LE MENSONGE. —  Pourquoi, la plupart du temps, dans la vie de tous les jours, les hommes disent-ils la vérité ? — Assurément ce n’est pas parce qu’un Dieu a défendu le mensonge. Mais premièrement, c’est parce que c’est plus aisé, le mensonge exigeant invention, dissimulation et mémoire. (Voilà pourquoi Swift dit : Celui qui énonce un mensonge se rend rarement compte du lourd fardeau qu’il s’impose. Il lui faut, en effet, pour soutenir un mensonge, en inventer vingt autres.) C’est, ensuite, parce qu’en des circonstances simples, il est avantageux de parler franc : je veux ceci, j’ai fait ceci, et ainsi de suite ; donc parce que la voie de la contrainte et de l’autorité est plus sûre que celle de la ruse. — Mais pour peu qu’un enfant ait été élevé dans des circonstances domestiques compliquées, il se sert tout aussi naturellement du mensonge et dit involontairement toujours ce qui répond à son intérêt : un sens de la vérité, une répugnance au mensonge en soi, lui sont tout à fait étrangers et inaccessibles, et il ment en toute innocence. [...]"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain, Aphorisme 54, 1878)

E4.3.B.1_REF4_ NOAH ZANDAN EXPLORES THE "LANGUAGE OF LYING," PROPOSING THAT WHILE PHYSIOLOGICAL LIE DETECTORS ARE UNRELIABLE, DECEPTION CAN BE IDENTIFIED THROUGH LINGUISTIC TEXT ANALYSIS WHICH REVEALS FOUR SUBCONSCIOUS PATTERNS: liars tend to 
1. distance themselves by using fewer first-person pronouns, 
2. employ negative language due to subconscious guilt, 
3. provide simplified explanations of events to manage cognitive load and 
4. use convoluted sentence structures to pad their stories with factual-sounding details.
(Noah Zandan, The language of lying)

Watch the Ted Ed on YouTube: https://youtu.be/H0-WkpmTPrM

E4.3.B.1_REF5_ EDMUND DOES NOT JUST FALSIFY FACTS, BUT PERFORMS AN ALTERNATIVE REALITY TO CHANGE HIS DESTINY. HE EMBODIES FREEDOM OF ACTION THROUGH LIES.
In William Shakespeare’s King Lear, fter skillfully convincing his father, the Duke of Gloucester, that his brother Edgar is plotting against him, Edmund sets a trap for Edgar. Edmund boasts that it is easy for him to manipulate the truth with a gullible father who is easily led and a noble brother who cannot fathom that someone could be evil by nature:
"A credulous father! and a brother noble, Whose nature is so far from doing harms, That he suspects none; on whose foolish honesty My practices ride easy!"

Watch the scene from From Alexander Barnett's film of King Lear: https://youtu.be/4udgR8Z8Z14

E4.3.B.1_REF6_ "CE QU’IL ME FAUT ENCORE DE FAUSSETE, POUR QUE JE PUISSE TOUJOURS ET TOUJOURS ME PERMETTRE LE LUXE DE MA VERACITE": la transparence totale est impossible ou mortelle ; il faut une dose de masque (de fausseté) pour supporter la vérité.
"PRÉFACE 
1 [...]
qui sait deviner quelque chose des conséquences qu’entraîne tout soupçon profond, quelque chose des frissons et des angoisses de la solitude, auxquels toute absolue différence de vue condamne celui qui en est affligé, comprendra aussi combien souvent j’ai, pour me reposer de moi-même, et quasi pour m’oublier moi-même momentanément, cherché à me mettre à couvert quelque part — dans quelque respect, ou hostilité, ou science, ou frivolité, ou sottise; pourquoi aussi, lorsque je ne trouvais pas ce qu’il me fallait, j’ai dû me le procurer par ingéniosité, falsification, ou invention (— et qu’ont jamais fait d’autre les poètes ? et pourquoi serait donc fait tout l’art du monde ?). [...]
que pourriez-vous savoir de ce qu’il y a de ruses pour la conservation de raisonnement et de précaution supérieure dans de pareilles tromperies de soi-même, — et ce qu’il me faut encore de fausseté, pour que je puisse toujours et toujours me permettre le luxe de ma véracité ?... II suffit, je vis encore : et la vie n’est pas après tout une invention de la morale elle veut de la tromperie, elle vit de la tromperie.. [...]
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain, 1878)

E4.3.B.2. The Social Fiction: Roles, Ruses, and the Pact of Trust.
Society and justice are not natural truths but "invented schemes" or games. In this context, "acting" (the lawyer, the politician) or "rusing" are not immoral lies but necessary functions of the social pact, provided the rules are understood. Conversely, those who claim "Absolute Truth" in politics are the most dangerous deceivers.

E4.3.B.2_REF1_LIT

EL3.37. "I ASKED HIM WHETHER, AS A MORALIST, HE DID NOT THINK THAT THE PRACTICE OF THE LAW, IN SOME DEGREE, HURT THE NICE FEELING OF HONESTY. JOHNSON. ‘ Why no, Sir, if you act properly. You are not to deceive your clients with false representations of your opinion : you are not to tell lies to a judge.’ BOSWELL. ‘ But what do you think of supporting a cause which you know to be bad ? ‘ JOHNSON. ‘ Sir, you do not know it to be good or bad till the Judge determines it. I have said that you are to state facts fairly ; so that your thinking, or what you call knowing, a cause to be bad, must be from reasoning, must be from your supposing your arguments to be weak and inconclusive. But, Sir, that is not enough. An argument which does not convince yourself, may convince the Judge to whom you urge it : and if it does convince him, why, then, Sir, you are wrong, and he is right. It is his business to judge ; and you are not to be confident in your own opinion that a cause is bad, but to say all you can for your client, and then hear the Judge’s opinion.’ BOSWELL. ‘ But, Sir, does not affecting a warmth when you have no warmth, and appearing to be clearly of one opinion when you are in reality of another opinion, does not such dissimulation impair one’s honesty ? Is there not some danger that a lawyer may put on the same mask in common life, in the intercourse with his friends ? ‘ JOHNSON. ‘ Why no, Sir. Everybody knows you are paid for affecting warmth for your client ; and it is, therefore, properly no dissimulation : the moment you come from the bar you resume your usual behaviour. Sir, a man will no more carry the artifice of the bar into the common intercourse of society, than a man who is paid for tumbling upon his hands will continue to tumble upon his hands when he should walk on his feet.’ "
(Boswell’s Life of Johnson, revised third edition 1799, first published in 1791)


E4.3.B.2_REF2_TH

EL3.39. "IF WE HAD NOT BEEN SO CONVINCED FOR SOME TIME, AND I WILL TELL YOU WHY, THAT CHRISTIANITY IS NOT THE TRUTH, we could have remembered that, for a certain time, which wasn't short, it gave proof that envolving any truth that claims to speak as such, thrives a clergy that is necessarily a liar. So, I really wonder why one falls from so high regarding the functioning of socialist governments. Might I go as far as saying that the pearl of all lies is the formulation of truth? That would clear up the atmosphere a bit, an atmosphere that exists only because of a certain type of cretinization whose name I have to say right away, I'll have to pin it [on the wall behing me] - it's what we call progressivism."
(Jacques Lacan, February 12, 1969, Seminar XVI, From Another to Another, 1968-69)

E4.3.B.2_REF3_LIT AD_Porsche Advertising_Just barely not illegal

JOHNSON ARGUES THAT "AFFECTING WARMTH" (FAKING EMOTION) IN COURT IS NOT DISHONESTY BECAUSE "EVERYBODY KNOWS YOU ARE PAID FOR IT." Within the rules of the legal game, the "lie" is not a lie, but a move. 
"I asked him whether, as a moralist, he did not think that the practice of the law, in some degree, hurt the nice feeling of honesty. JOHNSON. ‘ Why no, Sir, if you act properly. You are not to deceive your clients with false representations of your opinion : you are not to tell lies to a judge.’ BOSWELL. ‘ But what do you think of supporting a cause which you know to be bad ? ‘ JOHNSON. ‘ Sir, you do not know it to be good or bad till the Judge determines it. I have said that you are to state facts fairly ; so that your thinking, or what you call knowing, a cause to be bad, must be from reasoning, must be from your supposing your arguments to be weak and inconclusive. But, Sir, that is not enough. An argument which does not convince yourself, may convince the Judge to whom you urge it : and if it does convince him, why, then, Sir, you are wrong, and he is right. It is his business to judge ; and you are not to be confident in your own opinion that a cause is bad, but to say all you can for your client, and then hear the Judge’s opinion.’ BOSWELL. ‘ But, Sir, does not affecting a warmth when you have no warmth, and appearing to be clearly of one opinion when you are in reality of another opinion, does not such dissimulation impair one’s honesty ? Is there not some danger that a lawyer may put on the same mask in common life, in the intercourse with his friends ? ‘ JOHNSON. ‘ Why no, Sir. Everybody knows you are paid for affecting warmth for your client ; and it is, therefore, properly no dissimulation : the moment you come from the bar you resume your usual behaviour. Sir, a man will no more carry the artifice of the bar into the common intercourse of society, than a man who is paid for tumbling upon his hands will continue to tumble upon his hands when he should walk on his feet.’ "
(Boswell’s Life of Johnson, revised third edition 1799, first published in 1791)

E4.3.B.2_REF4_PH HUME DEFINIT LA JUSTICE NON COMME UNE DONNEE NATURELLE, MAIS COMME UNE INVENTION. C'EST UNE "VERTU ARTIFICIELLE" OU UN "SCHEME". Dans ce contexte, le "mensonge vertueux" peut être nécessaire pour préserver le "schème" général de la société.
"Il y a donc deux sortes de pratiques, qui doivent immédiatement présenter des caractères très distincts. La pratique de l'entendement détermine le détail de la Nature, elle procède en extension. La Nature, objet de la physique, est partes extra partes. C'est là son essence. Si nous considérons les objets dans leur idée, il est possible à tous ces objets « de devenir causes ou effets les uns des autres ». [...]

La Nature est bien une grandeur extensive; elle se prêtera donc à l'expérience physique et au calcul. L'essentiel est d'en déterminer les parties : c'est la fonction des règles générales dans le domaine de la connaissance. Il n'y a pas de tout de la Nature, pas plus à découvrir qu'à inventer. La totalité n'est qu'une collection; « L'union de ces parties en un tout... est accomplie simplement par un acte arbitraire de l'esprit, et n'a nulle influence sur la nature des choses. » Les règles générales de la connaissance, en tant que leur généralité concerne un tout, ne sont pas différentes des principes naturels de notre entendement; le difficile, dit Hume, n'est pas de les inventer, mais de les appliquer.
Il n'en n'est pas de même pour la pratique de la morale, au contraire. Là, les parties sont immédiatement données, sans inférence à faire, sans application nécessaire. [...] L'important est d'inventer: la justice est une vertu artificielle, « l'homme est une espèce inventive ». L'essentiel est de constituer un tout de la moralité; la justice est un schème. Le schème est le principe même de la société.

        Un acte isolé de justice considéré en lui-même, peut être souvent contraire au bien public; c'est seulement le concours de tous les hommes en un schème, ou en un système général d'actions, qui est avantageux.

Il ne s'agit plus de dépassement, mais d'intégration. Contrairement à la raison qui procède toujours de parties à parties, le sentiment réagit à des touts. De là, dans le domaine de la morale, un autre sens des règles générales."
(Gilles Deleuze, Empirisme et subjectivité, 1977)

E4.3.B.2_REF5_PH LACAN DEFINIT LA VERITE NON COMME UNE ADEQUATION AU REEL, MAIS COMME UNE "FOI EN LA PAROLE DONNEE". "RIEN D'HUMAIN NE SERAIT POSSIBLE SANS CE PACTE DE CONFIANCE". Si l'on refuse le pacte tacite de non-agression/confiance, on tombe dans la "nuit universelle" où tout est menace.
"C’est seulement sur la fondation que nous offre la parole de l’Autre qu’il nous est possible à notre tour d’entrer dans l’univers du signifiant. Ce n’est qu’en me risquant à croire que l’Autre n’est pas trompeur que je peux m’aventurer à prendre à mon tour la parole. Rien d’humain ne serait possible sans ce pacte de confiance, sans qu’il soit fait foi en la parole donnée : « C’est pour autant que l’Autre est un sujet comme tel que le sujet s’instaure, et qu’il ne peut s’instituer lui-même comme sujet dans un nouveau rapport à l’Autre, à savoir qu’il a, dans cet Autre, à se faire reconnaître comme sujet – non plus comme demande, non plus comme amour, mais comme sujet […] Quelle garantie toute espèce de fonctionnement de l’Autre dans le réel, comme répondant à la demande, peut-il trouver ? Le comportement, quel qu’il soit, de l’Autre, qu’est-ce qui peut attester de sa vérité ? Qu’est-ce qui est au fond concret de la notion de vérité comme de celle d’intersubjectivité ? Qu’est-ce qui donne son sens plein au terme de truth en anglais, qui exprime simplement la Vérité avec un grand V ? Tout est suspendu à ce que nous appelons en français, dans une décomposition du langage qui se trouve être le fait d’un système langagier, la foi en la parole. En d’autres termes, en quoi peut-on compter sur l’Autre ? C’est de cela qu’il s’agit quand je vous dis qu’il n’y a pas d’Autre de l’Autre ». Cette prise de conscience entraîne la déchéance de l’Autre et oriente la quête d’un Maître dont nous ne pourrions plus mettre en doute la véracité. Le problème est ici semblable à celui de Descartes, quand il émet l’hypothèse d’un Malin Génie qui emploierait toute son industrie à me tromper. Si Dieu même est trompeur, où est le chemin du salut ? Le cogito – qui n’a certes rien à voir avec l’aliénation désirante dont Lacan fait le socle de l’entrée dans le monde du langage – m’assure de mon existence ponctuelle, mais dès que je m’aventure au-delà de cet îlot d’évidence, je me perds aussitôt dans la nuit universelle et rien ne peut me convaincre que je ne tombe pas à nouveau sous l’empire du Grand Trompeur. L’hypothèse du Malin Génie n’est autre que le postulat du délire paranoïaque, que je suis la proie d’un complot universel, et qu’il n’y a pas moyen de m’arracher à cette suspicion puisque, si un homme de bonne volonté entreprenait par aventure de m’en dissuader, je le compterais aussitôt parmi les membres du complot : s’il cherche ainsi à me mettre en confiance, c’est qu’il compte par cette ruse faire plus aisément de moi sa victime. Les victimes d’une agression ont un temps de convalescence pendant lequel toute proximité est menace de mort : le passant qui me frôle ne va-t-il pas soudain sortir un poignard, celui qui entre avec moi dans l’ascenseur ne va-t-il pas m’étrangler entre deux étages, celui qui prétend m’instruire ne vise-t-il pas à m’égarer ? Nous comprenons par là que toute vie sociale suppose à son fondement un pacte tacite de confiance mutuelle, une garantie mutuelle de non-agression. [...]"
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Ecouter la folie, IV – La vérité, 2019)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Lacan/Ecouterlafolie/Ecouterlafolie4.html

E4.3.B.2_REF6_PH "RUSE 
« Ulysse aux mille ruses », lit-on dans l'Iliade, et cela certes ne le condamne pas. Presque tous, pourtant, admirent davantage le courage sans artifice d’Achille, « le meilleur des Achéens». Ruser, c’est se servir de son intelligence pour tromper ou vaincre un adversaire. Procédé légitime, si l'on se bat pour une juste cause, mais qui n’en reste pas moins entaché de duplicité. On préférerait un combat « à la loyale ». La ruse se distingue toutefois de la trahison (qui ne peut exister qu’entre alliés) et de la tricherie (qui suppose qu’on viole des règles qu’on avait acceptées). La ruse, entre ennemis, n’est pas contraire aux lois de la guerre. Elle est parfois indispensable. Sans le cheval inventé par Ulysse, les Grecs auraient-ils vaincu les Troyens ? Je soupçonne pourtant que le ténébreux Achille, depuis l'Hadès, jugea le procédé peu glorieux."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.3.B.3. When Lying is Virtuous.
The Good (benevolence, fidelity) takes precedence over the True (factual accuracy).

E4.3.B.3_REF1_PH 

EL3.59. "THERE IS IN BETRAYAL SOMETHING DESPAIRING AND WHICH MAKES US DOUBT OF  EVERYTHING, - because it manifests the inconsistency or better the negation of existence of the perfidious, it reveals its fleeing, melting and truly elusive nature: we will never know  the truth! Loyalty, on the contrary, strengthens the existence and consistency of humanity. Nothing is ever settled when it is dependent on instinct; whereas the characteristic of reason is to no longer question  an option that has been taken, not to perpetually question a problem once it has been solved. Fidelity is right in that sense: it liquidates the past and removes its commitment away from questioning; it establishes a definitive order and it grounds it once and for all: the reasonable man will no longer be at the mercy of the the gusts of the wind."
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, Love and Virtue, 1970)

E4.3.B.3_REF2_PH 

EL3.113. VLADIMIR JANKÉLÉVITCH DISCUSSES THE CONCEPT OF "BAD FAITH," WHERE INDIVIDUALS EXHIBIT A FORM OF HYPOCRITICAL SINCERITY THAT, WHILE APPEARING TRUTHFUL AND DISINTERESTED, IS ACTUALLY MALICIOUS AND UNJUST. He contrasts this with the moral preference for the "impurity of courage and passionate goodwill" over the sterile purity of those who rigidly adhere to correctness without genuine moral action.
"Hypocritical hypocrisy among all is professional sincerity, sincerist sincerity, cut off from love : such is the diabolical sincerity, the Machiavellian veracity of one who reveals to the police the presence of a resistant hidden in the attic simply because it's true. [...]
This miserable veracity which one never is able to be caught in the act of inaccuracy is called bad faith. One can confuse a liar and tear off the mask of a hypocrite; but how do you prove that the intention of bad faith is bad? How do you thwart the malevolence of ill will? Who will denounce the scrupulous and invulnerable truthfulness of the malicious? The man in bad faith manages to be in his right, his reasoning is flawless, his logic is impeccable ... Does he not defend values? And can we blame him for being apparently truthful, courageous, disinterested? Do we have this right? And yet his veracity is poisoned; and his impeccably legal and grammatical justice is the apex of injustice, summa injuria; and his selflessness is a redoubled hypocrisy ! [...]
Here is the first of all the conflicts of duties : do we prefer to be smeared leaning with professional purists or pure with those who accept impurity and approximation ? The answer is in the question, if we are indeed talking about moral and action, we prefer the impurity of courage and passionate goodwill, and we leave the Machiavellian purity to the Pharisees and grammarians who parse the shortcomings, solecisms and misspellings. If one wanted to keep oneself pure and aseptic, swaddled in the role of beautiful intransigence, draped in the beauty of an attitude or in the exemplary correction of a behavior, no action would be possible : because action is messy !"
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, Somewhere in the unfinished, 1978)

E4.3.B.3_REF3_PH 

EL3.63.D. POUR UNE DÉCIMALE SACRIFIÉE NOUS N’ALLONS TOUT DE MÊME PAS LAISSER CREVER LE GENRE HUMAIN!
 "La vérité sert donc à réveiller de leur narcose les consciences engourdies par l’opium des malentendus. La vérité est le pain des forts. — Et pourtant la vérité n’est pas au-dessus de tout : car la vérité par dessus tout, c’est aussi la vérité au-dessus d’elle-même, le vrai n’ayant pas de pire ennemi que le vrai. Le Bien, au contraire, parce qu’il est l’effectivité quodditative et catégorique par excellence, le Bien est toujours vrai et plus-que-vrai et vrai « a fortiori »; la survérité « anhypothétique », conditionnant toute hypothèse, est plus vraie que le vrai et plus belle même que le beau; ce qui est bon ne peut être, stricto sensu, ni faux ni laid : car le commencement inconditionnel garantit et fonde à plus forte raison la continuation quidditative dans un premier événement hyperlogique et hyperesthétique. Et vice versa le vrai qui n’est pas bon ni secourable est faux non seulement en esprit, mais à la lettre. Nous avons montré que toute vérité n’est pas bonne à dire; qu’on ne répond pas à toutes les questions ; qu’il faut souvent plaider le faux en vue du vrai… Pour une décimale sacrifiée nous n’allons tout de même pas laisser crever le genre humain!"
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, Les Vertus et l’amour, 1970)

E4.3.B.4_REF1_PH 

EL3.63.G. "L’homme peut aspirer à la vertu; il ne peut raisonnablement prétendre de trouver la vérité."
(Chamfort, Maximes et pensées, Caractères et anecdotes, maxime 342, 1857)

E4.3.B.3_REF5_PH  ROUSSEAU ARGUES THAT A LIE IS DEFINED SOLELY BY THE INTENTION TO DECEIVE/HARM, NOT BY THE FACTUAL FALSITY. He distinguishes between Imposture (lying for self-advantage), Fraud (lying for another's advantage), and Calumny (lying to harm)—showing that not all falsehoods are morally equal.
« Juger des discours des hommes par les effets qu’ils produisent c’est souvent mal les apprécier. Outre que ces effets ne sont pas toujours sensibles et faciles à connaître, ils varient à l’infini comme les circonstances dans lesquelles ces discours sont tenus. Mais c’est uniquement l’intention de celui qui les tient qui les apprécie et détermine leur degré de malice ou de bonté. Dire faux n’est mentir que par l’intention de tromper et l’intention même de tromper loin d’être toujours jointe avec celle de nuire a quelquefois un but tout contraire. Mais pour rendre un mensonge innocent il ne suffit pas que l’intention de nuire ne soit pas expresse, il faut de plus la certitude que l’erreur dans laquelle on jette ceux à qui l’on parle ne peut nuire à eux ni à personne en quelque façon que ce soit. Il est rare et difficile qu’on puisse avoir cette certitude ; aussi est-il difficile et rare qu’un mensonge soit parfaitement innocent. Mentir pour son avantage à soi-même est imposture, mentir pour l’avantage d’autrui est fraude, mentir pour nuire est calomnie ; c’est la pire espèce de mensonge. Mentir sans profit ni préjudice de soi ni d’autrui n’est pas mentir : ce n’est pas mensonge, c’est fiction.»
(Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Rêveries du promeneur solitaire, Quatrième promenade)

E4.3.B.3_REF6_CUR In this famous scene from Scent of a Woman (1992) where Lieutenant Colonel Frank Slade (Al Pacino) defends Charlie Simms at the disciplinary hearing.
Slade admonishes the administration for their lack of integrity and praises Charlie's refusal to "sell anybody out to buy his future." argues that telling the factual truth (“snitching”) would kill the ‘spirit’ that the school claims to instill.

Watch the scene on YouTube:
https://youtu.be/ZKd2jEARcAM

E4.3.C. Civility as a Condition for Shared Truth

E4.3.C.1. Why Truth Cannot Be Solitary.
Individual reason is inherently limited, biased, and insufficient for grasping the whole truth. Truth is structurally "divided," necessitating a collective approach rather than a solitary imposition of will.

E4.3.C.1_REF1_LIT

EL3.47. "HUMAN EXPERIENCE, WHICH IS CONSTANTLY CONTRADICTING THEORY, IS THE GREAT TEST OF TRUTH. A system, built upon the discoveries of a great many minds, is always of more strength, than what is produced by the mere workings of any one mind, which, of itself, can do little. There is not so poor a book in the world that would not be a prodigious effort were it wrought out entirely by a single mind, without the aid of prior investigators. The French writers are superficial ; because they are not scholars, and so proceed upon the mere power of their own minds ; and we see how very little power they have."
(Boswell’s Life of Johnson, revised third edition 1799, first published in 1791)

E4.3.C.1_REF2_SCI FEYNMAN ARGUES THAT THE EXISTENCE OF AN INDEPENDENT, OBJECTIVE STANDARD OF TRUTH (ACCUMULATED OBSERVATIONS) IS WHAT CREATES "UNARGUMENTATIVE" AND GOOD RELATIONSHIPS. He highlights that "argument" dominates when observations are scarce (early science/other fields), but verification pacifies conflict.
"The relations among scientists were at first very argumentative, as they are among the most people. This was true in the early days of physics, for example. But in physics today the relations are extremely good. The scientific argument is likely to involve a great deal of laughter and uncertainty on both sides with both sides thinking up experiments and offering to bet on the outcome. In physics there are so many accumulated observations that it is almost impossible to think of a new idea which is different from all the ideas that have been thought of before and yet that agrees with all the observations that have already been made. And so is you get anything new from anyone, anywhere, you welcome it, and you do not argue about why the other person says it is so.
Many sciences have not developed this far,  and the situation is the way it was in the early days of physics, when there was a lot of arguing because there were not so many observations. I bring this up because it is interesting that human relationships, if there is an independent way of judging truth, can become unargumentative. [...]"
(Richard Feynman, The meaning of it all, 1998)

E4.3.C.1_REF3_PH INDIVIDUAL REASON IS FLAWED (CONFIRMATION BIAS) AND THAT TRUTH IS BEST ACHIEVED IN GROUPS WITH DIVERGING IDEAS (TO AVOID POLARIZATION).
"In a group, using reason & communication of conflicting ideas, humans are much better at getting to the truth Only in a group with diverging ideas, because otherwise, in a group with homogeneous beliefs, for example in a religious group, thinking and communicating together tends to polarization and justification of extremism.

When you start questioning your system of beliefs you are doing philosophy. Philosophy might not be efficient at making people change their set of beliefs but at least help them identify the underlying structure of their set of beliefs and that of others.

We tend to reason with confirmation bias: when you are given a contradictory information you tend to make it fit in your set of beliefs making the least adjustments possible instead of revising your framework. Reason in that sense is not that efficient to get to the truth individually."
(Pierre Schindler)

E4.3.C.1_REF4_PH JANKELEVITCH Y AFFIRME QUE "PERSONNE N'A LE MONOPOLE" DE LA VERITE CAR CELLE-CI EST STRUCTURELLEMENT "DIVISEE CONTRE ELLE-MEME" DANS LA CONDITION HUMAINE FINIE. La tolérance est  la reconnaissance lucide que "l'adversaire est porteur d'une parcelle de vérité".
"Par rapport à nous, [...] comme dirait Aristote, la vérité semble divisée contre elle-même, et c’est pourquoi aucun homme, même s’il est parfaitement sincère, ne peut se targuer de la représenter à lui tout seul, personne n’en a le monopole, ni ne peut prétendre en être le seul, l’exclusif détenteur : car il n’y a pas de certitude humaine absolue dans les choses morales ! Cet éclatement de la vérité n’est pas un fait divers accidentel et ne tient pas à un malentendu! Non! il est inhérent à la condition finie de l’homme. La personne est elle-même une vérité indépendante de toutes les autres. Chaque monade est porteuse d’une vérité, mais ces vérités forment un pluriel décousu [...]
C’est en vertu de ce paradoxe que la valeur se distribue, comme la vérité elle-même, entre tous les partis, entre toutes les sectes : voilà pourquoi personne ne peut revendiquer pour soi la vérité totale en refusant de reconnaître la petite parcelle de vérité dont l’adversaire est porteur. Nous-mêmes, dans nos options simplificatrices, nous gardons la conscience, la mauvaise conscience de la vérité adverse qu’il nous a fallu injustement méconnaître pour prendre parti; ce scrupule nous laisse souvent désemparés et perplexes; dans notre désemparement nous en venons à penser que personne n’a raison. Il nous est impossible de concentrer tout ce que nous aimons et respectons sur la même tête, dans le même camp, autour du même drapeau. En fait les valeurs que nous révérons se répartissent entre plusieurs doctrines, et leur réunion dans une seule doctrine ou sur une même personne n’est qu’un vœu. [...]
Voici deux thèses dont la réunion est susceptible de fonder une philosophie de la tolérance : la première, c’est que l’homme doit renoncer à connaître la chose en soi, que le noumène lui est à jamais inaccessible; et la deuxième, c’est que chaque personne doit être considérée comme une fin en soi et comme un empire dans un empire."
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, Les vertus et l’amour, 1970)

E4.3.C.1_REF5_PH NIETZSCHE EXPLAINS THE MECHANISM OF "UNIVERSAL TASTE" NOT AS A SHARED TRUTH (HUME/KANT), BUT AS THE TYRANNICAL IMPOSITION OF A SINGULAR, POWERFUL INDIVIDUAL'S PHYSIOLOGICAL PREFERENCE UPON THE MANY.
"Changement de goût 
Le changement du goût universel est plus important que celui des opinions : les opinions avec toutes leurs preuves, leurs réfutations et toute la mascarade intellectuelle ne sont que les symptômes du goût qui change et certainement pas les causes de ce changement, ainsi qu’on le suppose encore si souvent. Comment se modifie le goût universel ? Du fait que des individus isolés, puissants, influents expriment sans vergogne leur hoc est ridiculum, hoc est absurdum, donc le jugement de leurs goûts et dégoûts, et les imposent de façon tyrannique : ils font de la sorte subir une contrainte à plusieurs, qui donnent peu à peu l’habitude d’un plus grand nombre et finalement le besoin de tous. Mais que ces individus isolés ressentent et savourent différemment, voilà qui habituellement est dû à une singularité de leur manière de vivre, de se nourrir, de digérer, peut-être à un « plus ou moins » des sels inorganiques dans leur sang et dans leur cerveau, bref dans leur physis 1 : cependant ils ont le courage de se réclamer de leur physis et de prêter une oreille attentive à ses exigences les plus subtiles : leurs jugements esthétiques et moraux répondent à pareilles « exigences subtiles ».
(Nietzsche, Le gai savoir, La Gaya Scienza, 1882)

Note: 1 la totalité des phénomènes qui les définit"

E4.3.C.2. Psychological and Societal Barriers to Dialogue.
Why is civility is difficult: haste, ego, the "virus-like" nature of assumptions, the desire to "win" rather than understand, and the polarization fueled by cynicism and media.

E4.3.C.2_REF1_PH

EL3.44. "THE WORLD IS SUFFERING FROM INTOLERANCE AND BIGOTRY, and from the belief that vigorous action is admirable even when misguided; whereas what is needed in our very complex modern society is calm consideration, with readiness to call dogmas in question and freedom of mind to do justice to the most diverse points of view. [...]"
(Bertrand Russell, Preface to In Praise of Idleness, 1935)

E4.3.C.2_REF2_PH RECOGNIZING THE “VIRUS-LIKE” NATURE OF ASSUMPTIONS "Experience has shown that if [...] a group continues to meet regularly, social conventions begin to wear thin, and the content of sub-cultural differences begins to assert itself, regardless of the topic du jour. This emergent friction between contrasting values is at the heart of dialogue, in that it allows the participants to notice the assumptions that are active in the group, including one's own personal assumptions. Recognizing the power of these assumptions and attending to their “virus-like” nature may lead to a new understanding of the fragmentary and self-destructive nature of many of our thought processes."
(Lee Nichol Jemez Springs, Foreword  to David Bohm's On dialogue, 1996)

E4.3.C.2_REF2.1_PH "ON COMMUNICATION
It may be useful to begin to discuss this question by considering the meaning of the word “communication.” This is based on the Latin commun and the suffix “ie” which is similar to “fie,” in that it means “to make or to do.” So one meaning of “to communicate” is “to make something common,” i.e., to convey information or knowledge from one person to another in as accurate a way as possible. [...]
Nevertheless, this meaning does not cover all that is signified by communication. For example, consider a dialogue. In such a dialogue, when one person says something, the other person does not in general respond with exactly the same meaning as that seen by the first person. Rather, the meanings are only similar and not identical. Thus, when the second person replies, the first person sees a difference between what he meant to say and what the other person understood. On considering this difference, he may then be able to see something new, which is relevant both to his own views and to those of the other person. And so it can go back and forth, with the continual emergence of a new content that is common to both participants. Thus, in a dialogue, each person does not attempt to make common certain ideas or items of information that are already known to him. Rather, it may be said that the two people are making something in common, i.e., creating something new together."
(David Bohm, On dialogue, 1996)

E4.3.C.2_REF2.2_PH "IT IS EASY FOR EACH ONE OF US TO SEE THAT OTHER PEOPLE ARE “BLOCKED” ABOUT CERTAIN QUESTIONS, so that without being aware of it, they are avoiding the confrontation of contradictions in certain ideas that may be extremely dear to them. The very nature of such a “block” is, however, that it is a kind of insensitivity or “anesthesia” about one's own contradictions. Evidently then, what is crucial is to be aware of the nature of one's own “blocks.” If one is alert and attentive, he can see for example that whenever certain questions arise, there are fleeting sensations of fear, which push him away from consideration of these questions, and of pleasure, which attract his thoughts and cause them to be occupied with other questions. So one is able to keep away from whatever it is that he thinks may disturb him. And as a result, he can be subtly defending his own ideas, when he supposes that he is really listening to what other people have to say. When we come together to talk, or otherwise to act in common, can each one of us be aware of the subtle fear and pleasure sensations that “block” his ability to listen freely? Without this awareness, the injunction to listen to the whole of what is said will have little meaning. But if each one of us can give full attention to what is actually “blocking” communication while he is also attending properly to the content of what is communicated, then we may be able to create something new between us, something of very great significance for bringing to an end the at present insoluble problems of the individual and of society."
(David Bohm, On dialogue, 1996)

E4.3.C.2_REF2.3_PH "DIALOGUE AND THOUGHT
It is important to see that the different opinions that you have are the result of past thought: all your experiences, what other people have said, and what not. That is all programmed into your memory. You may then identify with those opinions and react to defend them. But it doesn't make sense to do this. If the opinion is right, it doesn't need such a reaction. And if it is wrong, why should you defend it? [...]

Dialogue is really aimed at going into the whole thought process and changing the way the thought process occurs collectively. We haven't really paid much attention to thought as a process. We have engaged in thoughts, but we have only paid attention to the content, not to the process. [...]

I'll try to give some examples of the difficulty in thinking, in thought. One of these difficulties is fragmentation, which originates in thought — it is thought which divides everything up. Every division we make is a result of how we think. In actuality, the whole world is shades merging into one. But we select certain things and separate them from others — for convenience, at first. Later we give this separation great importance. [...]

You cannot defend something without first thinking the defense. There are those thoughts which might question the thing you want to defend, and you've got to push them aside. That may readily involve self-deception — you will simply push aside a lot of things you would rather not accept by saying they are wrong, by distorting the issue, and so on. Thought defends its basic assumptions against evidence that they may be wrong. In order to deal with this, we have got to look at thought, because the problem is originating in thought. Usually when you have a problem, you say, “I must think about it to solve it.” But what I'm trying to say is that thought is the problem. What, therefore, are we going to do? We could consider two kinds of thought — individual and collective. Individually I can think of various things, but a great deal of thought is what we do together. In fact, most of it comes from the collective background. Language is collective. Most of our basic assumptions come from our society, including all our assumptions about how society works, about what sort of person we are supposed to be, and about relationships, institutions, and so on. Therefore we need to pay attention to thought both individually and collectively. In a dialogue, people coming from different backgrounds typically have different basic assumptions and opinions. [...]

And they may not realize it, but they have some tendency to defend their assumptions and opinions reactively against evidence that they are not right [...]
If we defend opinions in this way, we are not going to be able to have a dialogue. And we are often unconsciously defending our opinions. We don't usually do it on purpose. At times we may be conscious that we are defending them, but mostly we are not. We just feel that something is so true that we can't avoid trying to convince this stupid person how wrong he is to disagree with us. Now, that seems the most natural thing in the world — it seems that that's inevitable. Yet if you think of it, we can't really organize a good society if we go on that basis. That's the way democracy is supposed to work, but it hasn't. If everybody has a different opinion, it will be merely a struggle of opinions. And the one who is the strongest will win. It may not necessarily be the right one; it may be that none of them are right. Therefore, we won't be doing the right thing when we try to get together. [...]

[A]ssumptions or opinions are like computer programs in people's minds. Those programs take over against the best of intentions — they produce their own intentions. We could say, then, that a group of about twenty to forty people is almost a microcosm of the whole society — like the groups we have just looked at, it has a lot of different opinions and assumptions. It is possible to have a dialogue with one person or with two, three, or four, or you can have the attitude of the dialogue by yourself, as you weigh all the opinions without deciding. But a group that is too small doesn't work very well. If five or six people get together, they can usually adjust to each other so that they don't say the things that upset each other — they get a “cozy adjustment.” People can easily be very polite to each other and avoid the issues that may cause trouble. And if there is a confrontation between two or more people in such a small group, it seems very hard to stop it; it gets stuck. In a larger group, we may well start out politely. After a while, though, people can seldom continue to avoid all the issues that would be troublesome. The politeness falls away pretty soon. [...]

The collective thought is more powerful than the individual thought. As we said, the individual thought is mostly the result of collective thought and of interaction with other people. The language is entirely collective, and most of the thoughts in it are. Everybody does his own thing to those thoughts — he makes a contribution. But very few change them very much. [...]
[I]f people were to think together in a coherent way, it would have tremendous power. [...]
It would be coherent not only at the level we recognize, but at the tacit level, at the level for which we have only a vague feeling. That would be more important. “Tacit” means that which is unspoken, which cannot be described — like the knowledge required to ride a bicycle. It is the actual knowledge, and it may be coherent or not. I am proposing that thought is actually a subtle tacit process. The concrete process of thinking is very tacit. The meaning is basically tacit. And what we can say explicitly is only a very small part of it. I think we all realize that we do almost everything by this sort of tacit knowledge. Thought is emerging from the tacit ground, and any fundamental change in thought will come from the tacit ground. So if we are communicating at the tacit level, then maybe thought is changing. [...]

If we begin to confront what's going on in a dialogue group, we sort of have the nucleus of what's going on in all society. When you are by yourself you miss quite a bit of that; even one-on-one you don't really get it."
(David Bohm, On dialogue, 1996)

E4.3.C.2_REF3_PH

EL3.112. "TO LIVE WITH SINCERITY IN OUR CULTURE OF CYNICISM IS A DIFFICULT DANCE — one that comes easily only to the very young and the very old. The rest of us are left to tussle with two polarizing forces ripping the psyche asunder by beckoning to it from opposite directions — critical thinking and hope.

Critical thinking without hope is cynicism. Hope without critical thinking is naïveté.

Finding fault and feeling hopeless about improving the situation produces resignation — cynicism is both resignation’s symptom and a futile self-protection mechanism against it. Blindly believing that everything will work out just fine also produces resignation, for we have no motive to apply ourselves toward making things better. But in order to survive — both as individuals and as a civilization — and especially in order to thrive, we need the right balance of critical thinking and hope.

A plant needs water in order to survive, and needs the right amount of water in order to thrive. Overwater it and it rots with excess. Underwater it and it dries up inside. [...]

Yes, people sometimes do horrible things, and we can speculate about why they do them until we run out of words and sanity. But evil only prevails when we mistake it for the norm. There is so much goodness in the world — all we have to do is remind one another of it, show up for it, and refuse to leave.
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings, Hope, Cynicism, and the Stories We Tell Ourselves)

E4.3.C.2_REF3.1_PH

EL3.112.A. THE MEDIA'S FOCUS ON NEGATIVE NEWS AND CENTURY-LONG BIAS TOWARDS HARROWING NEWS HAS DISTORTED OUR WORLDVIEW. Writers in journalism could shape and uplift society fostering a more balanced narrative between critical thinking and hope. "I thought about this recently in observing my unease — my seething cauldron of deep disappointment — with an opinion piece commenting on Arianna Huffington’s decision to continue publishing necessary reporting on “what’s not working — political dysfunction, corruption, wrongdoing, etc.” but to begin giving more light to stories that embody the “perseverance, creativity, and grace” of which we humans are capable. The writer criticizing Huffington’s decision asserted, with ample indignation, that “to privilege happy stories over ‘unhappy’ ones is to present a false view of the world.”

Let’s consider for a moment the notion of an un-false view of the world — the journalistic ideal of capital-T truth. Let’s, too, put aside for now Hunter S. Thompson’s rather accurate assertion that the possibility of objectivity is a myth to begin with. Since the golden age of newspapers in the early 1900s, we’ve endured a century of rampant distortion toward the other extreme — a consistent and systematic privileging of harrowing and heartbreaking “news” as the raw material of the media establishment. The complaint which a newspaper editor issued in 1923, lamenting the fact that commercial interest rather than journalistic integrity determines what is published as the “news,” could well have been issued today — if anything, the internet has only exacerbated the problem.

The twentieth century was both the golden age of mass media and a century marked by two world wars, the Great Depression, the AIDS crisis, and a litany of genocides. Viewed through that lens, it is the worst century humanity has endured — even worse than the bubonic plague of the Middle Ages, for those deaths were caused by bacteria indifferent to human ideals and immune to human morality. This view of the twentieth century, then, is frightening enough if true, but doubly frightening if untrue — and Steven Pinker has made a convincing case that it is, indeed, untrue. Then, in a grotesque embodiment of Mark Twain’s wry remark that the worst things in his life never happened to him, we have spent a century believing the worst about ourselves as a species and a civilization.

Carl Sagan saw in books “proof that humans are capable of working magic.” The magic of humanity’s most enduring books — the great works of literature and philosophy — lies in the simple fact that they are full of hope for the human spirit. News has become the sorcerous counterpoint to this magic, mongering not proof of our goodness and brilliance but evidence of our basest capabilities.

A related point of cynicism bears consideration: Coupled with the assertion that giving positive stories more voice distorts our worldview was the accusation that Huffington’s motives were purely mercantile — a ploy to prey on Facebook’s algorithms, which incentivize heartening stories over disheartening ones. Could it be, just maybe, not that people are dumb and shallow, and algorithms dumber and shallower, but that we’ve endured a century of fear-mongering from the news industrial complex and we finally have a way of knowing we’re not alone in craving an antidote? That we finally have a cultural commons onto which we can rally for an uprising?

We don’t get to decry the alleged distortion of our worldview until we’ve lived through at least a century of good news to even the playing field so ravaged by the previous century’s extreme negativity bias.

As for Huffington, while we can only ever speculate about another person’s motives — for who can peer into the psyche of another and truly see into that person’s private truth? — this I continue to believe: The assumptions people make about the motives of others always reveal a great deal more about the assumers than the assumed-about. [...]

Let’s return, then, to the question of what is true and what is false, and what bearing this question has — if any — on what we call reality.

The stories that we tell ourselves, whether they be false or true, are always real. We act out of those stories, reacting to their realness. William James knew this when he observed: “My experience is what I agree to attend to. Only those items which I notice shape my mind.”

What storytellers do [...] is help shape our stories of how the world works; at their very best, they can empower our moral imagination to envision how the world could work better. In other words, they help us mediate between the ideal and the real by cultivating the right balance of critical thinking and hope. Truth and falsehood belong to this mediation, but it is guided primarily by what we are made to believe is real.

What we need, then, are writers like William Faulkner, who came of age in a brothel, saw humanity at its most depraved, and yet managed to maintain his faith in the human spirit. In his Nobel Prize acceptance speech, he asserted that the writer’s duty is “to help man endure by lifting his heart.” In contemporary commercial media, driven by private interest, this responsibility to work in the public interest and for the public good recedes into the background. And yet I continue to stand with E.B. White, who so memorably asserted that “writers do not merely reflect and interpret life, they inform and shape life”; that the role of the writer is “to lift people up, not lower them down.”
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings, Hope, Cynicism, and the Stories We Tell Ourselves)

E4.3.C.2_REF4_PH NIETZSCHE EXPLIQUE QUE LA HAINE DES OPINIONS DIVERGENTES N'EST PAS (SEULEMENT) UNE FAUTE MORALE, MAIS UNE CONSEQUENCE DU MANQUE DE TEMPS ET DE LA "PRECIPITATION" DE LA VIE MODERNE. Il pose la vita contemplativa (le calme, l'étude prudente) comme la condition préalable nécessaire pour ne pas avoir un "jugement incomplet et faux".
"LAMENTO. — Ce sont peut-être les avantages de notre époque qui amènent avec eux un recul et, à l’occasion, une dépréciation de la vita contemplativa. Mais il faut bien s’avouer que notre temps est pauvre en grands moralistes, que Pascal, Epictète, Sénéque, Plutarque, sont à présent peu lus, que le travail et le zèle — autrefois escorte de la grande déesse Santé — semblent parfois sévir comme une maladie. Comme le temps manque pour penser et garder le calme dans la pensée, on n’étudie plus les opinions divergentes ; on se contente de les haïr. Dans l’énorme précipitation de la vie, l’esprit et l’oeil sont accoutumés à une vision et à un jugement incomplets et faux, et chacun ressemble aux voyageurs qui font connaissance avec le pays et la population sans quitter le chemin de fer. Une attitude, indépendante et prudente, de la connaissance est jugée presque comme une sorte de manie ; la liberté d’esprit est déconsidérée spécialement par les savants qui voudraient trouver, dans son art de considérer les choses, leur solidité et leur labeur d’abeilles, et qui l’exileraient volontiers dans un seul coin de la science : au lieu qu’elle a le devoir tout autre, et bien supérieur, d’étendre d’une position isolée son commandement sur tout le ban et l’arrière-ban des hommes de science et d’érudition, et de leur faire voir les voies et les buts de la culture. — Une plainte comme celle qui vient d’être entonnée aura sans doute son moment et résonnera un jour d’elle-même, dans un retour offensif du génie de la méditation. "
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain, Aphorism 282, 1878)

E4.3.C.2_REF5_PH "POLÉMIQUE 
UN COMBAT AVEC DES MOTS: un discours en état de guerre. Ce n’est pas toujours condamnable, puisque le conflit est essentiel à la Cité, puisqu’il y a de justes combats, et puisque les mots, quand ils peuvent suffire, valent mieux que les armes ou les coups. Toutefois le niveau intellectuel, presque inévitablement, s’en ressent. Le débat, dans la polémique, vise plus à la victoire qu’à la vérité ou à la justice. De là, même pour celui qui finit par triompher, un peu de mauvaise conscience, et comme un goût de sang dans la bouche."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.3.C.3. Virtues and Techniques for Engagement.
The praxis of civility required to engage with contradiction without hostility.

E4.3.C.3_REF1_LIT

EL3.94. NICK CAVE SHARES HIS FAVORITE PHRASES—‘HAVING SAID THAT’, ‘ON THE OTHER HAND’, AND ‘HOWEVER’—BECAUSE THEY INTRODUCE COUNTERARGUMENTS AND PROMOTE OPEN-MINDEDNESS, which he finds increasingly important in a polarized world. He resolves to practice more empathy and understanding of other viewpoints in the coming year.
"Could you point out three single words that you like the most and explain why?
SAVERIO, LECCE, ITALY

A New Year's resolution?
ELLEN, INNSBRUCK, AUSTRIA

Dear Saverio and Ellen,

Three of my favourite words, and ones I find myself using more and more these days, are ‘Having said that’. I am also fond of saying ‘On the other hand’, and Seán O’Hagan tells me that the word I use most in our book, Faith, Hope and Carnage, is ‘However’.

I like all of these phrases because they acknowledge one point of view but also tender another, they preface the presentation of a stabilising counterargument. This is something not much liked in our contemporary culture, it is unpopular on social media that trades primarily in a currency of performative moral outrage. ‘Having said that’ is the bothersome and deflating enemy of polarisation, self-righteousness, intolerance and hubris.

But as the world divides into its various factions, these are words that are increasingly important. Difficult as it can be, I try my best to apply them by questioning my own thoughts - what actually is the argument from the other side? In doing so I have found that there are very few disputes, conflicts, disagreements and ideas that these three unassuming words can’t help to mediate by broadening and strengthening the conversation. Some may feel they are the undermining opponent of conviction, hostile to progress and action, but they are not. These three small words give conviction its sense of humanity and prevent it hardening into a blinkered and uncharitable stringency. ‘Having said that’ is the precondition of empathy, it is the capacity to see and understand the other side, to show that we have the necessary willingness to hold two contrasting ideas in our hand at the same time.

And so, Ellen, my resolution for the coming year is to practice, as best as I can, more open-mindedness and understanding of other viewpoints. I wish both of you, and all readers of The Red Hand Files, the very best for 2024 and may happiness and good things come your way.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #267 / DECEMBER 2023)

Read it in the Red Hand Files: https://www.theredhandfiles.com/three-single-words-that-you-like/

E4.3.C.3_REF2_LIT

EL3.115. HUMILITY HELPS US UNDERSTAND THAT EVERYONE IS FLAWED AND FOSTERS TOLERANCE, WHILE CURIOSITY MAKES DIFFERING VALUES INTERESTING RATHER THAN THREATENING. These qualities can soften rigid value systems and enhance engagement with the ever-changing world.
"I am 20, high school graduant, in my gap-year and I find it pointless to pursue anything in this bizarre and temporary world that is so much against my values in every way possible. I believe I am speaking for a generation here. I am asking with the biggest admiration, what would you do in my/our situation?
EL, FRANKFURT, GERMANY

Dear El,

You are right in describing the world as ‘bizarre and temporary’ – it is indeed a strange and deeply mysterious place, forever changing and remaking itself anew. But this is not a novel condition, our world hasn’t only recently become bizarre and temporary, it has been so ever since its inception, and it will continue to be such until its end – mystifying and forever in a state of flux.

The same can be said for our values, they too can be temporary and exist in a state of flux. If my experience is anything to go by, the values that you hold sacred now may change and be considerably different to those you hold dear in ten years’ time – and be almost unrecognisable when compared to those you possess when you reach your later years. You may also find that some of the values that you perceive now as incontestable truths will be looked at with suspicion, even contempt, by the generations that come after you – a humbling realisation if ever there was one. In the past, for example, an older person giving advice to someone younger was a trusted value for all, but in the present age it is sometimes viewed in a different light altogether.

Still, El, you did ask and so to the question! – what you and your generation can do in order to live fulfilling lives in a bizarre and temporary world that does not share your values. Well, I would not suggest for a moment that you change those values, because even though values evolve and grow, they are at any given time a crucial part of our nature and critical to the development of the world. My suggestion would be to instead look to two qualities that will improve your life immeasurably.

The first is humility. Humility amounts to an understanding that the world is not divided into good and bad people, but rather it is made up of all manner of individuals, each broken in their own way, each caught up in the common human struggle and each having the capacity to do both terrible and beautiful things. If we truly comprehend and acknowledge that we are all imperfect creatures, we find that we become more tolerant and accepting of others’ shortcomings and the world appears less dissonant, less isolating, less threatening.

The other quality is curiosity. If we look with curiosity at people who do not share our values, they become interesting rather than threatening. As I’ve grown older I’ve learnt that the world and the people in it are surprisingly interesting, and that the more you look and listen, the more interesting they become. Cultivating a questioning mind, of which conversation is the chief instrument, enriches our relationship with the world. Having a conversation with someone I may disagree with is, I have come to find, a great, life embracing pleasure.

El, my advice, then, is to try to make more use of humility and curiosity – these attributes have a softening effect on our sometimes inflexible and isolating value systems. They allow us to remain true to our temporary selves but fluid and playful in our dealings with this strange and ever-changing world.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand File, ISSUE #252 / SEPTEMBER 2023)

E4.3.C.3_REF3_PSI

EL3.87.F.1. START BY CONFIDENTIALLY COLLECTING EACH PERSON’S JUDGMENT "One day, as we were discussing procedures for estimating uncertain quantities, the idea of conducting an exercise occurred to me. I asked everyone to write down an estimate of how long it would take us to submit a finished draft of the textbook to the Ministry of Education. I was following a procedure that we already planned to incorporate into our curriculum: the proper way to elicit information from a group is not by starting with a public discussion but by confidentially collecting each person’s judgment. This procedure makes better use of the knowledge available to members of the group than the common practice of open discussion."
(Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow, 2011)

E4.3.C.3_REF4_PH

E4.3.C.3. L'ON DOIT UTILISER LA CRITIQUE DE L'ENNEMI (MEME INFONDEE OU HOSTILE) COMME UN OUTIL DE CORRECTION DE SOI, PLUTOT QUE DE LA REJETER PAR ORGUEIL.
"Celui qui a entendu des propos cinglant de son ennemi doit éliminer chez lui le vice dont il s'agit plus prestement que la tâche qu'on lui aurait montré sur son manteau. Même si on lui a fait un reproche non fondé, il doit chercher ce qui a bien pu provoquer cette diffamation, s’en garder, veiller à ne pas commettre à son insu quelques fautes apparentée ou similaire à celle dont on l'accuse. [...] 
Chaque fois qu'on dit à ton sujet quelque chose qui n'est pas vrai, ce n'est pas parce que c'est un mensonge qu'il faut regarder ça de haut et t’en moquer. Vois ce qu'il y a dans ta façon de parler ou d'agir, dans tes activités, dans tes fréquentations, qui puisse donner une certaine vraisemblance à l'accusation, et garde-t-en avec soin, évite le. [...]"
(Plutarque, L’ami véritable)

E4.3.C.3_REF5_PH “I GO FORWARD TO THOSE WHO CONTRADICT ME, WHO TEACH ME.”
(Montaigne, Essays, art III, Of the art of conference, Chapter VIII)

“It is foolish presumption to disdain and condemn as false that which does not seem plausible to us.”
(Montaigne, Essays, It is folly to relate the true and the false to our sufficiency [knowledge], I, XXVI)

"JE M'AVANCE VERS CELUY QUI ME CONTREDIT, QUI M'INSTRUIT."
(Montaigne, Les Essais, De l´art de conferer, III, VIII)

"C'est une sotte presomption, d'aller desdeignant et condamnant pour faux, ce qui ne nous semble pas vray-semblable."
(Montaigne, Les Essais, C'est folie de rapporter le vray et le faux à nostre suffisance [connaissance], I, XXVI)

E4.3.C.3_REF5.1_PH  “I GO FORWARD TO THOSE WHO CONTRADICT ME, WHO TEACH ME.”
«The contradictions of judgments, then, neither offend nor alter, they only rouse and exercise, me. We evade correction, whereas we ought to offer and present ourselves to it, especially when it appears in the form of conference, and not of authority. At every opposition, we do not consider whether or no it be dust, but, right or wrong, how to disengage ourselves: instead of extending the arms, we thrust out our claws. I could suffer myself to be rudely handled by my friend, so much as to tell me that I am a fool, and talk I know not of what. I love stout expressions amongst gentle men, and to have them speak as they think; we must fortify and harden our hearing against this tenderness of the ceremonious sound of words. I love a strong and manly familiarity and conversation: a friendship that pleases itself in the sharpness and vigour of its communication, like love in biting and scratching: it is not vigorous and generous enough, if it be not quarrelsome, if it be civilised and artificial, if it treads nicely and fears the shock:

Neque enim disputari sine reprehensione potest ["Neither can a man dispute, but he must contradict." (Or:) "Nor can people dispute without reprehension." —Cicero, De Finib., i. 8.].

When any one contradicts me, he raises my attention, not my anger: I advance towards him who controverts, who instructs me; the cause of truth ought to be the common cause both of the one and the other. What will the angry man answer? Passion has already confounded his judgment; agitation has usurped the place of reason. It were not amiss that the decision of our disputes should pass by wager: that there might be a material mark of our losses, to the end we might the better remember them; and that my man might tell me: "Your ignorance and obstinacy cost you last year, at several times, a hundred crowns." I hail and caress truth in what quarter soever I find it, and cheerfully surrender myself, and open my conquered arms as far off as I can discover it; and, provided it be not too imperiously, take a pleasure in being reproved, and accommodate myself to my accusers, very often more by reason of civility than amendment, loving to gratify and nourish the liberty of admonition by my facility of submitting to it, and this even at my own expense. 

Nevertheless, it is hard to bring the men of my time to it: they have not the courage to correct, because they have not the courage to suffer themselves to be corrected; and speak always with dissimulation in the presence of one another: I take so great a pleasure in being judged and known, that it is almost indifferent to me in which of the two forms I am so: my imagination so often contradicts and condemns itself, that 'tis all one to me if another do it, especially considering that I give his reprehension no greater authority than I choose; but I break with him, who carries himself so high, as I know of one who repents his advice, if not believed, and takes it for an affront if it be not immediately followed. [...]

I find I am much prouder of the victory I obtain over myself, when, in the very ardour of dispute, I make myself submit to my adversary's force of reason, than I am pleased with the victory I obtain over him through his weakness. In fine, I receive and admit of all manner of attacks that are direct, how weak soever; but I am too impatient of those that are made out of form. I care not what the subject is, the opinions are to me all one, and I am almost indifferent whether I get the better or the worse. I can peaceably argue a whole day together, if the argument be carried on with method; I do not so much require force and subtlety as order; I mean the order which we every day observe in the wranglings of shepherds and shop-boys, but never amongst us: if they start from their subject, 'tis out of incivility, and so 'tis with us; but their tumult and impatience never put them out of their theme; their argument still continues its course; if they interrupt, and do not stay for one another, they at least understand one another. Any one answers too well for me, if he answers what I say: when the dispute is irregular and disordered, I leave the thing itself, and insist upon the form with anger and indiscretion; falling into wilful, malicious, and imperious way of disputation, of which I am afterwards ashamed. 'Tis impossible to deal fairly with a fool: my judgment is not only corrupted under the hand of so impetuous a master, but my conscience also.»
(Montaigne, Essays, art III, Of the art of conference, Chapter VIII)

E4.3.C.3_REF6_PH "POUR MESURER COMBIEN SE MONTRENT NATURELLEMENT SUBTILS OU FAIBLES LES CERVEAUX même les plus intelligents, il faut regarder à la façon dont ils conçoivent et rendent les opinions de leurs adversaires: la mesure naturelle de tout intellect s’y révèle. — Le sage parfait élève, sans le vouloir, son adversaire dans l’idéal et libère la contradiction de celui-ci de toute tache et de toute contingence ; ce n’est que lorsque son adversaire est devenu un dieu aux armes lumineuses qu’il lutte contre lui."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Aurore, 1881)

E4.3.C.3_REF7_PH DESAMORCER LE CONFLIT PAR LA COMPREHENSION: EN EXIGEANT QUE A PUISSE DIRE LA VERITE DE B, ON CREE UN TERRAIN COMMUN AVANT MEME DE DEBATTRE DU PROBLEME.
"“Je sais exactement ce que tu es en train de penser” [...]
On trouve une suggestion fascinante dans le livre Fights, Games and Debates du logicien canadien Anatole Rapoport. [...] Plutôt que de demander à chaque partie d'exposer ses propres définition en présence de l'adversaire (ce qui amène en un rien de temps les deux parties à s'étriper), Rapoport suggère d'inviter la partie A à exposé le plus complètement possible le point de vue de la partie B, jusqu'à ce que B soit satisfait de la définition de A. Puis c'est le tour de B d'exposer le point de vue de A sur le problème, jusqu'à ce que A trouve que son point de vue a été correctement présenté. Rapoport supposait que cette technique désamorcerait probablement en partie le conflit avant même que le problème soit discuté. Les applications pratiques de cette stratégie, à la fois en thérapie et dans les organisations plus vastes que le couple ou la famille, prouve que la supposition de Rapoport était juste. [...]"
(Paul Watzlawick, Comment réussir à échouer, 1988)

E4.3.C.3_REF8_CUR A_Jesse Darling_March of the Valedictorians_2016

"In issue #14 of the Red Hand Files, Nick Cave relates the advice his mother gave him as he was about to confront the establishment: "I was feeling a little intimidated by the whole thing because I was stepping out of my rock ‘n’ roll comfort zone, in-to the academic sphere and the whole affair had me feeling quite uncomfortable. I mentioned this to my mother, and as we stepped out of the car into the university grounds, she said: « Head high and fuck ‘em all. » ” 
When we feel oppressed by mainstream collective thought, although we honestly think our diverging position has value, we can find confidence remembering this advice before we stand tall and plow through the thin-legged arrogance of people who refuse to give a chance to debate our ideas in an open-minded and sincere dialogue."

E4.3.C.3_REF9_PH "IF YOU WANT TO UNDERSTAND SOMEONE DOING SOMETHING THAT DOESN’T MAKE SENSE TO YOU, ask yourself what the world would have to look like for those actions to make sense. Change your perspective to change what you see."
(Farnam Sreet, Brain Food)

E4.3.C.3_REF10_LIT A_Hieronymus Bosch_The Garden of Earthly Delights_1490-1500_(1) ; A_Hieronymus Bosch_The Garden of Earthly Delights_1490-1500_(2) ; A_Hieronymus Bosch_The Garden of Earthly Delights_1490-1500_(3) ; A_Hieronymus Bosch_The Garden of Earthly Delights_1490-1500_(4) /Hieronymus Bosch/

CAVE DEFINES HUMILITY AS THE UNDERSTANDING THAT THE WORLD IS NOT DIVIDED INTO "GOOD AND BAD PEOPLE" BUT COMPOSED OF BROKEN INDIVIDUALS CAPABLE OF BOTH TERRIBLE AND BEAUTIFUL THINGS. 
"I am 20, high school graduant, in my gap-year and I find it pointless to pursue anything in this bizarre and temporary world that is so much against my values in every way possible. I believe I am speaking for a generation here. I am asking with the biggest admiration, what would you do in my/our situation?
EL, FRANKFURT, GERMANY

Dear El,

You are right in describing the world as ‘bizarre and temporary’ – it is indeed a strange and deeply mysterious place, forever changing and remaking itself anew. But this is not a novel condition, our world hasn’t only recently become bizarre and temporary, it has been so ever since its inception, and it will continue to be such until its end – mystifying and forever in a state of flux.

The same can be said for our values, they too can be temporary and exist in a state of flux. If my experience is anything to go by, the values that you hold sacred now may change and be considerably different to those you hold dear in ten years’ time – and be almost unrecognisable when compared to those you possess when you reach your later years. You may also find that some of the values that you perceive now as incontestable truths will be looked at with suspicion, even contempt, by the generations that come after you – a humbling realisation if ever there was one. In the past, for example, an older person giving advice to someone younger was a trusted value for all, but in the present age it is sometimes viewed in a different light altogether.

Still, El, you did ask and so to the question! – what you and your generation can do in order to live fulfilling lives in a bizarre and temporary world that does not share your values. Well, I would not suggest for a moment that you change those values, because even though values evolve and grow, they are at any given time a crucial part of our nature and critical to the development of the world. My suggestion would be to instead look to two qualities that will improve your life immeasurably.

The first is humility. Humility amounts to an understanding that the world is not divided into good and bad people, but rather it is made up of all manner of individuals, each broken in their own way, each caught up in the common human struggle and each having the capacity to do both terrible and beautiful things. If we truly comprehend and acknowledge that we are all imperfect creatures, we find that we become more tolerant and accepting of others’ shortcomings and the world appears less dissonant, less isolating, less threatening.

The other quality is curiosity. If we look with curiosity at people who do not share our values, they become interesting rather than threatening. As I’ve grown older I’ve learnt that the world and the people in it are surprisingly interesting, and that the more you look and listen, the more interesting they become. Cultivating a questioning mind, of which conversation is the chief instrument, enriches our relationship with the world. Having a conversation with someone I may disagree with is, I have come to find, a great, life embracing pleasure.

El, my advice, then, is to try to make more use of humility and curiosity – these attributes have a softening effect on our sometimes inflexible and isolating value systems. They allow us to remain true to our temporary selves but fluid and playful in our dealings with this strange and ever-changing world.

Love, Nick"

E4.3.C.3_REF11_PH "SUSPENDING ASSUMPTIONS 
We have been saying that people in any group will bring to it their assumptions, and as the group continues meeting, those assumptions will come up. Then what is called for is to suspend those assumptions, so that you neither carry them out nor suppress them. You don't believe them, nor do you disbelieve them; you don't judge them as good or bad. [...]

I hold it back, I reflect it back. You may also think of it as suspended in front of you so that you can look at it — sort of reflected back as if you were in front of a mirror. In this way I can see things that I wouldn't have seen if I had simply carried out that anger, or if I had suppressed it and said, “I'm not angry” or “I shouldn't be angry.” [...]

What's required then is that we notice the connection between the thoughts going on in the dialogue, the feelings in the body, and the emotions. [...]

Therefore, you simply see what the assumptions and reactions mean — not only your own, but the other people's as well. We are not trying to change anybody's opinion. When this meeting is over, somebody may or may not change his opinion. This is part of what I consider dialogue — for people to realize what is on each other's minds without coming to any conclusions or judgments. Assumptions will come up. And if you hear somebody else who has an assumption that seems outrageous to you, the natural response might be to get angry, or get excited, or to react in some other way. But suppose you suspend that activity. You may not even have known that you had an assumption. It was only because he came up with the opposite one that you find out that you have one. You may uncover other assumptions, but we are all suspending them and looking at them all, seeing what they mean." 
(David Bohm, On dialogue, 1996)

E.4.3.C.4. Constructing Truth through Collective Intelligence.
Dialogue is a creative act that produces a shared meaning and integrates partial truths into a larger system or "Universal" horizon.

E4.3.C.4_REF1_PH

EL3.28. ON WHAT CAN YOU DO WITH PHILOSOPHY? Philosophy may not effectively alter people's beliefs, but it can help them identify the underlying structure of their own beliefs and those of others.
"What can you do with Philosophy? John Armstrong thinks you can do quite a lot with it.
When you ask in a business environment What is success? What is a good business? people realize they use concepts which they do not grasp completely in order to conduct their lives in all spheres (work, relationships, etc). 
Philosophy helps to capture in concepts the things people already care about, put into light the potential conflicts between what they care about and how they live and eventually motivate them to change their lives to live a more fulfilling one.
In the sphere of the arts, havn't they gone of the rails because they went very enthusiastic about intellectual content but not very ambitious about understanding that intellectual content? Philosophy can illuminate our understanding of the arts.
When there are no disagreements and everyone is having a great time (as in a game), there is no point for philosophy. But as soon as there is intellectual discussion about how to do or think about something, philosophy can help clarifying the concepts used in the debate. But all problems aren't intellectual. Philosophy can't make you fall in love for example!"
(John Armstrong on What Can You Do With Philosophy?, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: https://philosophybites.com/podcast/john-armstrong-on-what-you-can-do-with-philosophy/

E4.3.C.4_REF2_PH

EL3.43. ON SOCRATIC METHOD "What is the Socratic Method and does it have any present day applications?
Socrates' questioning is not only about uncovering the truth by conversation with his interlocutor, but also always about what it means to know something: What are the claims you make when you know something? He tries to understand how everything fits together and he believes it is genuinely possible to find things out through collaborative, mutually illuminating discussion. "The unexamined life is not worth living": Maybe not examining the life but rather the life of examining  - making sure that your processes of reasoning are honest,  fit together and that you are ready to be responsible for them - is the center of a meaningful life. It does not follow from what he says that the examined life, even if it is central, is the sole component of a good life. He values love, friendship and all sorts of more frivolous things. It does follow either that the examined life is necessary a happy one.
Instead of the classical injunction to know thyself, Socrates sees the examined life as a social activity and not as introspection. Being reflective for Socrates is to look at the things that you think as if from outside. Conversation is what does this best by providing you with different perspectives."
(MM McCabe on Socratic Method, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: https://philosophybites.com/podcast/m-m-mccabe-on-socratic-method/

E4.3.C.4_REF3_PH

EL3.48. "WHEN WE SAY THAT OUR SOCIETY IS PLURALIST, IT IS BECAUSE IT SHELTERS GROUPS THAT THINK IN DIFFERENT WAYS WITHOUT BEING INTERESTED IN THE OTHERS' MODE OF EXISTENCE or that want to impose their own mode by force. Are men capable of building a pluralist society in the sense that each one would be able to think having several modes of existence present in mind at the same time?
We would then replace the question of the Universal, central in western culture, with the question « What do you really care about? » The purpose of this questioning would be to be able to present one's values with dignity to another collective that adheres to different values in order to have a chance of convincing them (or of being convinced). Living together is a question of diplomacy: the Universal must still remain as a common horizon, but interesting « candidates » for the Universal are those under construction, under negotiation."
(from the interview with Bruno Latour on Les Chemins de la philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 03/23/2022)

E4.3.C.4_REF4_PH LA REFUTATION SOCRATIQUE N'EST PAS HUMILIANTE CAR ELLE RELEVE D'UN RAPPORT A LA VERITE ET NON D'UN RAPPORT DE FORCE. Ce n’est pas une humiliation (blessure narcissique) mais un appel à la modestie (soumission à un ordre impersonnel/objectif) qui accepte que "le réel a toujours raison".
"La vérité n’est jamais « humiliante ». Humiliante, l’injuste volonté d’abaissement qui atteint ma personne dans sa racine même ! Mais la soumission à un ordre impersonnel et abstrait, objectif et impartial ne peut blesser l’honneur de la personne; et la modestie est cette soumission. Tel qui répugne à demander pardon ou à servir quelqu’un s’inclinera bien volontiers devant une légalité administrative, devant une supériorité hiérarchique ou une compétence technique. Tel qui s’humilie en confessant un mensonge délivre en avouant une erreur. Pour faciliter l’humble confession, il faut convenir d’un rapport impersonnel où le modeste aveu suffirait. C’est ainsi qu’on dit la vérité à son médecin, même si elle est peu reluisante. Il n’y a pas de honte à s’incliner devant la vérité puisque, la vérité étant simplement ce qui est, notre soumission est le contraire d’une défaite; la reconnaissance de la vérité est tout uniment l’aveu d’un état de fait qui serait donné même sans cet aveu et dont notre existence elle aussi fait partie; le réel a toujours raison, que je l’avoue ou non, car mon être est déjà cet aveu. [...]
La vérité n’a donc ni temples ni icônes, et elle n’exige pas qu’on se prosterne devant elle ou qu’on lui rende un culte. Socrate ne veut pas être idolâtré. Aussi la réfutation socratique n’est-elle nullement humiliante pour le réfuté! La simple continuation de notre vie, dans la mesure où elle est viable, est un hommage perpétuel aux lois de la nature, et une toujours nouvelle vérification du vrai, et un consentement tacite. [...]"
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, Les Vertus et l’amour, 1970)

E4.3.C.4_REF5_PH A_Siân McNabney_Dialogue_2017

IN ORDER TO REACH A SHARED TRUTH, ONE MUST FIRST VALIDATE THE "PARTIAL TRUTH" OF THE OTHER PERSON'S PERSPECTIVE.
"Puisqu’il veut convertir les hommes, il lui faut d’abord les écouter, accepter le dialogue : considérer, pour ainsi dire, les discours des autres comme des faits d’expérience. Or, constate Pascal, on ne peut se tromper par le côté où l’on envisage les choses ; chacun a raison du point de vue où il se place et ne manque qu’à accepter le point de vue opposé; il n’y a donc pas de discours absolument illégitime; et tout discours, même « naïf », même populaire, a sa raison d’être et sa valeur propre, du moment qu’il existe. Il mérite donc d’être analysé et interprété."
(Dominique Descotes, Introduction aux Pensées de Pascal)

"Quand on veut reprendre avec utilité, et quel côté il envisage la chose, car elle est vraie ordinairement de ce côté-là, et lui avouer cette vérité, mais lui découvrir le côté par où elle est fausse. Il se contente de cela, car il voit qu’il ne se trompait pas, et qu’il manquait seulement à voir tous les côtés ; or on ne se fâche pas de ne pas tout voir, mais on ne veut pas [s’]être trompé; et peut-être que cela vient de ce que naturellement l’homme ne peut tout voir, et de ce que naturellement il ne se peut tromper dans le côté qu’il envisage ; comme les appréhensions des sens sont toujours vraies."
(Blaise Pascal, Pensées)

E4.3.C.4_REF6_PH "IL FAUT ACCUEILLIR TOUTES LES OPINIONS , MAIS LES COMPOSER VERTICALEMENT ET LES LOGER A DES NIVEAUX CONVENABLES."
(Simone Weil, La pesanteur et la grâce, 1947)

E4.3.C.4_REF7_PH NIETZSCHE WARNS AGAINST THE "CULT OF GENIUS," NOTING THAT GREAT MINDS OFTEN POSSESS "HIDEOUS" FLAWS (BLINDNESS, INJUSTICE). True civility ("The Cult of Civilization") serves as a remedy by acknowledging that the "system" requires diverse, often contradictory forces.
"CULTE DE LA CIVILISATION. — Aux grands esprits s’adjoint ce qu’il y a dans la nature de hideusement trop humain — leurs aveuglements, leurs injustices, leur manque de mesure — pour que chez eux l’influence puissante, facilement trop puissante, soit contrebalancée sans cesse par la méfiance qu’inspirent ces particularités. Car le système de tout ce dont la nature a besoin pour subsister est si vaste et absorbe des forces si diverses et si nombreuses que, pour chaque avantage accordé unilatéralement, soit à la science, soit à l’Etat, soit à l’art, soit au commerce, où tendent ces individus, l’humanité est obligée de pâtir. Ce fut toujours la plus grande fatalité de la civilisation qu’on se mît à adorer des hommes et, dans ce sens, on peut être d’accord avec l’axiome de la loi mosaïque qui défend d’avoir d’autres dieux à côté de Dieu. — Au culte du génie et de la force, il faut toujours opposer, comme complément et comme remède, le culte de la civilisation ; médiocre, bas, méconnu, faible, imparfait,  incomplet, boiteux, faux, hypocrite, et même à ce qui est méchant et terrible, de l’estime et de la compréhension, et faire l’aveu que tout cela est nécessaire. Car l’harmonie et le développement de ce qui est humain, auxquels on est parvenu par d’étonnants travaux et coups de hasard qui sont autant l’œuvre de cyclopes et de fourmis que de génies, ne doivent plus être perdus : comment pourrions-nous donc nous passer de la basse fondamentale, profonde et souvent inquiétante, sans laquelle la mélodie ne saurait être mélodie ?"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain II, Aphorisme 186, 1878)

E4.3.C.4_REF8_PH "DISCUSSION" IS TRYING TO CONVINCE OTHERS THAT ONE POSSESSES THE TRUTH, WHILE "DIALOGUE" IS SEEKING THE TRUTH TOGETHER.
DISCUSSION 
"Discuter ou dialoguer, cela n’a de sens qu’à supposer la capacité des locuteurs à penser sous l'horizon d’une vérité au moins possible, donc leur égalité, au moins en droit, devant le vrai. Mais ce n’est pas la même chose que de chercher l'universel ensemble (dans le dialogue) ou les uns contre les autres (dans la discussion). Discuter, en ce sens strict, c’est moins chercher l’universel avec d’autres, qu’essayer de les convaincre qu’on le possède, c’est tout le paradoxe de la discussion, en particulier."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.3.C.4_REF9_PH "ON DIALOGUE
The way we start a dialogue group is usually by talking about dialogue — talking it over, discussing why we're doing it, what it means, and so forth. I don't think it is wise to start a group before people have gone into all that, at least somewhat. [...]

I give a meaning to the word “dialogue” that is somewhat different from what is commonly used. The derivations of words often help to suggest a deeper meaning. “Dialogue” comes from the Greek word dialogos. Logos means “the word,” or in our case we would think of the “meaning of the word.” And dia means “through” [...] 
The picture or image that this derivation suggests is of a stream of meaning flowing among and through us and between us. This will make possible a flow of meaning in the whole group, out of which may emerge some new understanding. It's something new, which may not have been in the starting point at all. It's something creative. And this shared meaning is the “glue” or “cement” that holds people and societies together. Contrast this with the word “discussion,” which has the same root as “percussion” and “concussion.” It really means to break things up. It emphasizes the idea of analysis, where there may be many points of view, and where everybody is presenting a different one — analyzing and breaking up. That obviously has its value, but it is limited, and it will not get us very far beyond our various points of view. [...]
the basic point is to win the game. That's very frequently the case in a discussion. In a dialogue, however, nobody is trying to win. [...]

People have difficulty communicating even in small groups. [...]
Why is that? For one thing, everybody has different assumptions and opinions. They are basic assumptions — not merely superficial assumptions — such as assumptions about the meaning of life; about your own self-interest, your country's interest, or your religious interest; about what you really think is important.
And these assumptions are defended when they are challenged. People frequently can't resist defending them, and they tend to defend them with an emotional charge. [...]

The word “opinion” is used in several senses. When a doctor has an opinion, that's the best assumption that he can make based on the evidence. He may then say, “Okay, I'm not quite sure, so let's get a second opinion.” In that case, if he is a good doctor he does not react to defend his assumption. If the second opinion turns out to be different from his, he doesn't jump up with an emotional charge [...]
and say, “How can you say such things?” That doctor's opinion would be an example of a rational sort of opinion."
(David Bohm, On dialogue, 1996)

E4.3.C.4_REF9.1_PH "ENGAGING IN DIALOGUE
Some time ago there was an anthropologist who lived for a long while with a North American tribe. It was a small group of about this size. The hunter-gatherers have typically lived in groups of twenty to forty. Agricultural group units are much larger. Now, from time to time that tribe met like this in a circle. They just talked and talked and talked, apparently to no purpose. They made no decisions. There was no leader. And everybody could participate. There may have been wise men or wise women who were listened to a bit more — the older ones — but everybody could talk. The meeting went on, until it finally seemed to stop for no reason at all and the group dispersed. Yet after that, everybody seemed to know what to do, because they understood each other so well. Then they could get together in smaller groups and do something or decide things. In the dialogue group we are not going to decide what to do about anything. This is crucial. Otherwise we are not free. [...]
As Krishnamurti used to say, “The cup has to be empty to hold something.” [...]
Our purpose is really to communicate coherently in truth, if you want to call that a purpose. [...]
As soon as we try to accomplish a useful purpose or goal, we will have an assumption behind it as to what is useful, and that assumption is going to limit us. Different people will think different things are useful. And that's going to cause trouble. [...]

A great deal of what nowadays is typically considered to be dialogue tends to focus on negotiation; but as we said, that is a preliminary stage. People are generally not ready to go into the deeper issues when they first have what they consider to be a dialogue. They negotiate, and that's about as far as they get. Negotiation is trading off, adjusting to each other and saying, “Okay, I see your point. I see that that is important to you. Let's find a way that would satisfy both of us. I will give in a little on this, and you give in a little on that. And then we will work something out.” Now, that's not really a close relationship, but it begins to make it possible to get going."
(David Bohm, On dialogue, 1996)

E4.3.C.4_REF9.2_PH "THE IMPULSE OF NECESSITY
The question is what to do if there is a clash of two absolute necessities. The first thing that happens is that we get this emotional charge and we can build up powerful feelings of anger, hate, frustration, as I described before. As long as that absolute necessity remains, nothing can change it, because in a way each person says that they have a valid reason to stick to what they've got, and they have a valid reason to hate the other person for getting in the way of what is absolutely necessary [...]

So in the dialogue we are expecting the notions of absolute necessity to come up, to clash with each other. [...]

At a certain moment we may have the insight that each one of us is doing the same thing — sticking to the absolute necessity of his idea — and that nothing can happen if we do that. If so, it may raise the question “Is it absolutely necessary? So much is being destroyed just because we have this notion of it being absolutely necessary.” Now if you can question it and say, “Is it absolutely necessary?” then at some point it may loosen up. People may say, “Well, maybe [...]

If an artist just puts on his paint in arbitrary places, you would say there wasn't anything to it; if he just follows somebody else's order of necessity, he's mediocre. He's got to create his own order of necessity. Different parts of the form he is making must have an inner necessity or else the thing has not really much of a value. This artistic necessity is creative. The artist has his freedom in this creative act. Therefore, freedom makes possible a creative perception of new orders of necessity. If you can't do that, you're not really free. You may say you're doing whatever you like and that's your impulse, but I think we've seen that your impulses can come from your thoughts. [...]

[D]oing what you like is seldom freedom, because what you like is determined by what you think and that is often a pattern which is fixed. Therefore we have a creative
necessity which we discover, you can discover individually or we can do so collectively in the group of how to operate in a group in a new way. Any group which has problems really hasgot to solve them creatively if they're serious problems. It can't just be by trade-offs and
negotiations of the old ways. [...]
I think this is one of the key points, then — to realize when you come to an assumption, that there is an assumption of absolute necessity which you're getting into, and that's why
everything is sticking.

PROPRIOCEPTION OF THOUGHT [...]
If we can see what all of our opinions mean, then we are sharing a common content, even if we don't agree entirely. It may turn out that the opinions are not really very important — 
they are all assumptions. And if we can see them all, we may then move more creatively in a different direction. We can just simply share the appreciation of the meanings; and out of this whole thing, truth emerges unannounced not that we have chosen it. If each of us in this room is suspending, then we are all doing the same thing. We are all looking at everything together. The content of our consciousness is essentially the same. Accordingly, a different kind of consciousness is possible among us, a participatory consciousness - as indeed consciousness always is, but one that is frankly acknowledged to be participatory and can go that way freely. Everything can move between us. Each person is participating, is partaking of the whole meaning of the group and also taking part in it. We can call that a true dialogue." 
(David Bohm, On dialogue, 1996)

E4.3.C.4_REF9.3_PH "THE VISION OF DIALOGUE
If we can all listen to each other's opinions, and suspend them without judging them, and your opinion is on the same basis as anyone else's, then we all have "one mind" because we have the same content - all the opinions, all the assumptions. At that moment the difference is secondary. Then you have in some sense one body, one mind. It does not overwhelm the individual. There is no conflict in the fact that the individual does not agree. It's not all that important whether you agree or not. There is no pressure to
agree or disagree. [...]

People tend to think of common consciousness as "shared bliss." That may come; but if it does, I'm saying that the road to it is through this. We have to share the consciousness that we actually have. We can't just impose another one. But if people can share the frustration and share their different contradictory assumptions and share their mutual anger and stay with it — if everybody is angry together, and looking at it together — then you have a common consciousness. If people could stay with power, violence, hate, or whatever it is, all the way to the end, then it would sort of collapse because ultimately they would see that we are all the same. And consequently they would have participation and fellowship. People who have gone through that can become good friends. The whole thing goes differently. They become more open and trusting to each other. They have already gone through the thing that they are afraid of, so the intelligence can then work. [...]

When you have anger, it has a reason, or a cause. You say that you are angry because of this, this, or that. It builds up to rage and hate, at which point it no longer has a particular reason anymore — it just sustains itself. That energy of hate is sort of locked up, and then it's looking for an occasion to discharge. The same holds with panic. You are usually aware of a reason for your fear, but by the time you get to panic it goes on by itself. [...]

But there is a great deal of violence in the opinions that we are defending. They are not merely opinions, they are not merely assumptions; they are assumptions with which we
are identified — which we are therefore defending, because it is as if we are defending ourselves. The natural self-defense impulse, which we got in the jungle, has been transferred from the jungle animals to these opinions. In other words, we say that there are some dangerous opinions out there — just as there might be dangerous tigers. And there are some very precious animals inside us that have to be defended. So an impulse that made sense physically in the jungle has been transferred to our opinions in our modern life. And in a dialogue, we get to be aware of that in a collective way.

As long as we have this defensive attitude-blocking and holding assumptions, sticking to them and saying, "I've got to be right," and that sort of thing — then intelligence is very
limited, because intelligence requires that you don't defend an assumption. There is no reason to hold to an assumption if there is evidence that it is not right. The proper structure of an assumption or of an opinion is that it is open to evidence that it may not be right. [...]

As we ourselves stay with the frustrations of dialogue, the meaning of what we are doing may be much more than will appear at first sight. In fact, we could say that instead of being part of the problem, we become part of the solution. In other words, our very movement has the quality of the solution; it is part of it. However small it is, it has the quality of the solution and not the quality of the problem. However big the larger movement is, it has the quality of the problem, not of the solution. Accordingly, the major point is to start something which has the quality of the solution. As I have said, we don't know how fast or slowly it would spread. We don't know how fast a movement in the mind in the thought process and beyond the thought process, this sharing together will spread. [...]

[Y]ou have to watch out for the notion of truth. Dialogue may not be concerned directly with truth — it may arrive at truth, but it is concerned with meaning. If the meaning is incoherent you will never arrive at truth. You may think, "My meaning is coherent and somebody else's isn't," but then we'll never have meaning shared. You will have the "truth" for yourself or for your own group, whatever consolation that is. But we will continue to have conflict. [...]

Science is predicated on the concept that science is arriving at truth — at a unique truth. The idea of dialogue is thereby in some way foreign to the current structure of science,
as it is with religion. In a way, science has become the religion of the modern age. It plays the role which religion used to play of giving us truth; hence different scientists cannot
come together any more than different religions can, once they have different notions of truth. As one scientist, Max Planck, said, "New ideas don't win, really. What happens is
that the old scientists die and new ones come along with new ideas." [...]

If you see other people's thought, it becomes your own thought, and you treat it as your own thought. And when an emotional charge comes up, you share all the emotional charges, too, if they affect you; you hold them together with all the thoughts. Often, when there is an emotional charge somebody can come in to defuse the issue a bit so that it doesn't run away — as the child psychiatrist defused it with his asking, "How long will you hate me forever?" Or some other sort of humor may defuse the issue, or something else — some appropriate remark which you can't foresee." 
(David Bohm, On dialogue, 1996)

E4.3.C.4_REF9.3.a_PH "SENSITIVITY IN DIALOGUE
On the whole, you could say that if you are defending your opinions, you are not serious. Likewise, if you are trying to avoid something unpleasant inside of yourself, that is also not being serious. A great deal of our whole life is not serious. And society teaches you that. It teaches you not to be very serious, that there are all sorts of incoherent things, and there is nothing that can be done about it, and that you will only stir yourself up uselessly by being serious. But in a dialogue you have to be serious. It is not a dialogue if you are not — not in the way I'm using the word." 
(David Bohm, On dialogue, 1996)

E4.3.C.4_REF9.3.b_PH

EL3.45.A.1.1.e.ii. "AS LONG AS WE HAVE THIS DEFENSIVE ATTITUDE-BLOCKING AND HOLDING ASSUMPTIONS, sticking to them and saying, "I've got to be right," and that sort of thing — then intelligence is very limited, because intelligence requires that you don't defend an assumption. There is no reason to hold to an assumption if there is evidence that it is not right. The proper structure of an assumption or of an opinion is that it is open to evidence that it may not be right."
(David Bohm, On dialogue, 1996)

E4.3.C.4_REF10_PH

EL3.7. "WHEN ONE WISHES TO REDIRECT USEFULLY SOMEONE AND SHOW THAT HE IS MISTAKEN, ONE MUST OBSERVE FROM WHICH SIDE HE CONSIDERS THE PROBLEM, for it is usually true from that side, and agree with him on this truth, but reveal to him the side from which it is false. He will be satisfied with this, for he will see that he wasn't mistaken and that he was only missing out viewing the problem from  all sides. For one doesn't get angry at not seeing the all thing, but one does not want to be wrong, and perhaps this comes from the fact that naturally man cannot see everything, and from the fact that naturally he cannot be mistaken from the side that he approaches the object, since the apprehensions of the senses are always valid."
(Blaise Pascal)

E4.4. The Illusion of the Subject: Who Claims to be Right? Deconstructing the "We" in "Can We be sure?”

E4.4.A. The Grammatical Fiction of the Ego

E4.4.A.1. The Citadel of Certainty – The Cartesian Ego.
The "I" as a metaphysical reality: The only certainty in a world of doubt.

E4.4.A.1_REF1_PH EN DEHORS DU COGITO CARTESIEN, TOUTES NOS CERTITUDES NE SERAIENT QUE DES CROYANCES.
"Il ne peut pas y avoir de vérité autre, au point de départ, que celle-ci : je pense donc je suis, c’est là la vérité absolue de la conscience s’atteignant elle-même. Toute théorie qui prend l’homme en dehors de ce moment où il s’atteint lui-même est d’abord une théorie qui supprime la vérité, car, en dehors de ce cogito cartésien, tous les objets sont seulement probables, et une doctrine de probabilités, qui n’est pas suspendue à une vérité, s’effondre dans le néant ; pour définir le probable il faut posséder le vrai. Donc, pour qu’il y ait une vérité quelconque, il faut une vérité absolue ; et celle-ci est simple, facile à atteindre, elle est à la portée de tout le monde ; elle consiste à se saisir sans intermédiaire."
(Jean-Paul Sartre, L’existencialisme est un humanisme, 1945)

E4.4.A.1_REF2_PH JE PENSE, DONC JE SUIS.
" [...] je pris garde que, pendant que je voulais ainsi penser que tout était faux, il fallait nécessairement que moi, qui le pensais, fusse quelque chose : et remarquant que cette vérité, je pense, donc je suis, était si ferme et si assurée que toutes les plus extravagantes suppositions des sceptiques n’étaient pas capables de l’ébranler, je jugeai que je pouvais la recevoir sans scrupule pour le premier principe de la philosophie que je cherchais."
(René Descartes, Discours de la méthode)

E4.4.A.1_REF2.1_PH JE PENSE DONC JE SUIS?  L’EGO COMME SUBSTANCE NE REPRESENTE PAS LA PENSEE MATURE DE DESCARTES. 
Même si dans le discours de la méthode il écrit que le “Je” est une substance, il réservera le terme de substances à Dieu dans les méditations. L’ego comme substance ne représente pas la pensée mature de Descartes. “Je suis” aussi longtemps que ”je pense”. L’ego disparaît avec la fin de l'acte de pensée. Je ne suis donc pas dans la durée. L’ego n'est pas l'esprit. Il y a l’ego empirique : le “sujet” de l'acte (dont on ne peut pas dire grand-chose); et - quand cet ego prend conscience qu'il pense -  il prend un autre rôle que Kant appellera l’ego transcendantal, un ego abstrait, universel, au-delà de toute substance. On existe quand on est conscient - présent à soi-même -  c'est l'inverse de l'intelligence artificielle. L'existence, c'est la singularité: c'est se mettre entièrement dans ce qu'on dit. À la différence, Montaigne aurait tout ”ce qu'il faut” pour prononcer le cogito, mais pense que s'engager en tant que ”je” dans l’ego n'est pas possible."
(Jean-Luc Marion dans l'émission Les Chemins de la Philosophie, diffusée sur France Culture le 30 janvier 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French:  https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/je-pense-donc-je-suis-2544027

E4.4.A.1_REF2.2_PH A_Rembrandt_Philosopher in meditation_1632

DARRIULAT EXPLIQUE QUE LE COGITO N'EST PAS L'AFFIRMATION DE L'INDIVIDU EMPIRIQUE ("MOI, RENE DESCARTES"), MAIS UNE "AUTO-ILLUMINATION" OU LA PENSEE EST LE SUJET D'ELLE-MEME. CE N’EST PAS LA DISSOLUTION DU SUJET, MAIS LA FONDATION D'UNE SUBSTANCE PENSANTE (RES COGITANS) UNIVERSELLE ET NECESSAIRE. Hic Invenio, Cogitatio Est : La reformulation "Il y a de la pensée" (cogitatio est) montre que le "Je" cartésien, dans sa pureté métaphysique, cherche à échapper à la critique de l'illusion grammaticale en devenant "pure essence", dépouillée de toute histoire personnelle.
"Chacun connaît le Philosophe méditant du Louvre (1632), que nous évoquions dans la leçon précédente : la chambre du philosophe est un appartement de l’âme, au cœur le plus secret du labyrinthe cérébral (ce qu’exprime l’escalier en spirale qui suggère qu’on ne parvient à la cellule de méditation qu’après une longue descente au centre de l’intériorité), le philosophe, tassé sur lui-même, attentif à la seule vie intérieure de l’esprit, est au foyer du halo spirituel qui rayonne dans l’habitacle : il médite la lumière qui le fait pensant. Il intuitionne en lui l’incompréhensible évidence de l’être.
Qu’intuitionne-t-il en vérité ? Quand je réussis, par un grand effort d’introspection, à ne me rendre ainsi attentif qu’à l’esprit vivant qui rayonne en mon intérieur, quand je suis assez concentré en moi-même pour ne penser que le fait nu, pur et simple, de ma propre pensée, quel est donc cet être qui se fait jour sous les yeux de l’âme attentive ? Ce ne saurait être le sujet empirique, l’individu que singularisent les traits de son caractère ou les expériences dont il a fait, au cours de son voyage, « l’essai ». « Je pense » ne signifie pas : « moi, René Descartes, je pense ». On pourrait même dire, par paradoxe, que dans le « « je pense », le moi n’a pas lieu d’être et que le « je » n’y est pas : c'est la pensée elle-même qui se considère selon son essence, le sujet individualisé de la méditation n’étant ici que le théâtre sur la scène duquel s’accomplit ce mystère métaphysique. N’ai-je pas répudié par le doute le monde, donc aussi ma vie individuelle qui m’a fait dans le monde, et avec elle tout mon passé, en tant qu’il n’appartient qu’à moi seul, et qui pourrait bien n’être qu’un rêve (car la juridiction du Malin Génie continue de peser sur tout, à l’exception toutefois de la pensée se saisissant elle-même). Dans le « je pense », c’est la pensée qui est le sujet d’elle-même, et non le philosophe qui est le sujet de l’acte de penser. Le penseur métaphysique est le témoin de l’auto-illumination qui s’accomplit en lui par l’expérience du cogito, il n’en est nullement le sujet, ni moins encore l’auteur : je ne me donne pas la pensée, je la reçois comme une révélation qui me rend sensible le sens de l’être. [...]
C’est la substance pensante – res cogitans – qui prend conscience d’elle-même, ou plutôt qui prend conscience de son essence comme conscience de soi, et nullement la personne morale de cet individu responsable de ses actes. Et c'est précisément parce qu’il est dépouillé de toute détermination individuelle que le cogito a valeur universelle : toute idée ne peut paraître que sur la scène intérieure de ce théâtre mental. Aussi la formule du cogito, dans les Méditations, devient-elle : hic invenio, cogitatio est, c'est-à-dire que je découvre qu’ici, dans le sanctuaire de l’intériorité devenue attentive à elle-même, il y a de la pensée, à la façon d’un propriétaire qui découvrirait un trésor dans la cave la plus secrète de sa propre maison (la cinquième Méditation recourra à cette image, en évoquant le « trésor de mon esprit », duquel je « tire » mes idées). Et c’est bien pourquoi, parce qu’il est pure essence, aperçue en son universalité et en sa nécessité, que le cogito est parfaitement clair et distinct : mon être singulier, qui soutient le poids de tout un passé, qui est soutenu par l’espérance d'un avenir, est un être infiniment complexe que je ne connaîtrai jamais avec une parfaite clarté"
(Jacques Darriulat, Initiation à la philosophie cartésienne, III. Du Cogito à Dieu)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Descartes/DescartesInitiation/DescartesInitiation3.html

E4.4.A.1_REF2.3_PH L'ÊTRE COMME CONSCIENCE DE SOI : DESCARTES AFFIRME QUE "SEUL EST EN VERITE CELA QUE JE PEUX CONCEVOIR AVEC CLARTE". Il réduit l'Être à la Conscience réflexive, excluant le monde sensible et l'animal.
"Je refuse maintenant aux choses du monde extérieur la dignité de l’existence, puisque rien ne s’oppose au soupçon du rêve, et que le monde n’a peut-être pas d’existence au-delà de la représentation que j’en ai. En revanche, le cogito a délivré aux yeux de mon esprit l’unique et véritable sens du verbe « être » : ce qui est en effet, ce ne sont pas les choses que je perçois par l’entremise de mes sens, mais mon esprit qui se perçoit lui-même immédiatement, sans s’entremettre avec un quelconque auxiliaire qui ne serait pas lui-même. Seul est en vérité cela que je peux concevoir avec la même clarté et évidence qui me sont apparues par la révélation du cogito. L’évidence métaphysique est l’unique test de l’être. Ce n’est pas par les sens que j’ai l’idée du verbe « être » – cet auxiliaire de toutes les langues, sans lequel je ne pourrais pas parler, ce qui est le propre de l’homme, sujet de la pensée – mais seulement par l’évidence que ma pensée a d’elle-même dans l’acte de la réflexion. C’est pourquoi les animaux, qui pensent sans penser qu’ils pensent, vivent comme en rêve, dans l’ignorance de l’être, soumis aux métamorphoses perpétuelles d’une apparence toujours mouvante, où rien ne tient. Je sais désormais que je ne peux être assuré de l’existence que de ce que je peux penser avec autant de clarté et de distinction que je pense ma pensée elle-même. Et comme il n’est, en ce point de ma méditation, que la pensée qui s’apparaît ainsi à elle-même dans le jour de la clarté et de la distinction, je dois conclure que je suis, en tant que je pense, et que tout autre existence qui n’est pas moi est douteuse, peut-être une simple illusion sans consistance. [...]
Dès que j’entreprends de faire un pas au-delà de l’île métaphysique de l’évidence, je tombe sous les coups du Malin Génie, et je me trouve à nouveau exposé aux machineries de la tromperie universelle. "
(Jacques Darriulat, Initiation à la philosophie cartésienne, III. Du Cogito à Dieu)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Descartes/DescartesInitiation/DescartesInitiation3.html

E4.4.A.1_REF2.4_PH DESCARTES ANALYSE LE COGITO COMME L'INTUITION INSTANTANEE D'UN INFINI ACTUEL QUI, DEPASSANT NOS PROPRES LIMITES, SE REVELE ETRE LE SIGNE MANIFESTE D'UNE PUISSANCE DIVINE ANTERIEURE NOUS COMMUNIQUANT SA LUMIERE.
"Le cogito ne saurait être véritablement une idée innée, puisqu’il est la lumière au sein de laquelle toute idée innée, telle l’étendue ou le temps, apparaît sur le théâtre de la conscience. Le cogito n’est en ce sens pas seulement la plus innée des idées innées, il est l’innéité même qui rend toutes les autres idées innées possibles. Ce que l’expérience spirituelle confirme en effet : je peux à volonté convoquer sous le rayon de lumière de l’attention, comme sous le faisceau d’un projecteur, telle ou telle idée, comme le temps et l’étendue, que la seule spontanéité de mon esprit peut sans doute produire. Mais je ne convoque nullement la clarté de la conscience de soi sous les yeux de mon âme, puisqu’elle est mon âme même, et que je dois toujours la supposer présente alors même que mon attention ne l’a pas fait paraître. La clarté que le cogito me découvre précède l’activité de mon esprit comme l’attention de ma pensée ; cette lumière naturelle, toute spirituelle, qui illumine mon intérieur, elle est toujours déjà là, alors même que je n’en ai pas pris conscience. Comme Descartes l’écrit magnifiquement au Père Gibieuf le 19 janvier 1642 : « La raison pour laquelle je crois que l’âme pense toujours, est la même qui me fait croire que la lumière luit toujours, bien qu’il n’y ait point d’yeux qui la regardent » (Pléiade 1142). Je comprends ainsi que le cogito ne saurait être issu de mon esprit, inné donc, puisqu’il est mon esprit même. Mais si elle n’est pas issue de mon esprit, d’où me vient donc cette lumière ? En quelle clarté plus grande que ma pensée m’est-il donc donné d’apercevoir ma pensée même ? Nous avons vu que toute pensée est pensée d’elle-même, et que tout « je pense » est un « je pense que je pense ». Mais cela ne suffit pas : il faut dire que toute pensée consciente d’elle-même est un « je pense que je pense que je pense », et ainsi à l’infini. Imaginons une machine, un « ordinateur » puisque c’est ainsi que la nomment nos contemporains (ceux de Descartes connaissaient la « Pascaline », machine à calculer inventée par Pascal), et demandons-nous s’il nous serait possible de lui insuffler la conscience d’elle-même. Soit, dans le cas d’une « Pascaline » perfectionnée, le logiciel qui lui permettrait d’effectuer les opérations arithmétiques. Il se peut cependant qu’elle fasse des erreurs, et pour s’assurer qu’elle n’en fasse pas, il faudra un second logiciel pour corriger le premier, puis un troisième pour corriger le second, et ainsi de suite à l’infini. Pour que la machine puisse d’elle-même apercevoir son erreur, il faudrait une infinité de logiciels capables d’être déchiffrés dans l’instantanéité d’une intuition, qui pourrait alors être considérée comme une authentique conscience d’elle-même. Mais cela est impossible, car les corrections ne seront jamais qu’en nombre indéfini, aussi grand qu’on voudra sans doute, mais toutefois incapables d’être totalisées en une unique aperception, qui les rassemblerait en un acte de conscience. Le programme ne viendra donc jamais à bout de son autocorrection. Telle est pourtant l’opération que réussit le cogito : le « je pense que je pense que je pense… » se trouve ramassé dans l’intuition instantanée de la pensée s’apercevant elle-même, un infini actuel, condensé dans la perfection d’une intuition toute spirituelle, est réalisé par l’acte de la conscience, qui se retrouve en elle-même, et ne se perd pas dans la série indéfinie des réflexions successives. Je commence de comprendre par là que l’infini est inclus en quelque sorte dans le cogito, et que cette évidence première, absolument indubitable, est aussi profondément incompréhensible pour mon entendement nécessairement limité. En effet, je fais l’expérience douloureuse, depuis la méditation seconde qui a vu la lumière intérieure du cogito, de l’impossibilité où je me trouve d’accroître plus avant mon savoir. Je fais donc l’expérience de mes limites, et de ce fait indépassable qu’il ne m’appartient pas de me donner à moi-même l’or de l’évidence, que je dois recevoir cette richesse d’un Autre, seul en mesure de totaliser l’infini. Cet Autre m’apparaît alors comme secrètement inclus dans l’évidence du cogito, dont je n’avais jusqu’à présent qu’une conscience grossière. En scrutant davantage l’énigme de cette clarté, en prenant mieux conscience de ce qu’il y a d’incompréhensible dans le fait de l’évidence elle-même, je comprends que le cogito est second, et non premier, qu’il est l’effet communiqué à mon esprit par une cause créatrice et toute puissante, qui m’insuffle ainsi la puissance infinie de l’être. Je comprends ainsi que l’infini est premièrement en moi plutôt que le fini, que c’est en lui, c'est-à-dire en son infinie lumière et toute  puissance, que je perçois ce que je suis, que c’est en cet infini de clarté et d’évidence que je perçois l’idée que je présente à mon esprit, en lui que je compte, en lui que je pense : « Je vois manifestement qu’il se rencontre plus de réalité dans la substance infinie que dans la substance finie, et partant que j’aie, en quelque façon premièrement en moi la notion de l’infini que du fini, c'est-à-dire de Dieu que de moi-même » (III). C’est ainsi que je sais, avec une évidence incompréhensible, dès que je commence à compter, que je compte dans l’infini et qu’il n’y a pas de dernier nombre. D’où le sais-je, sinon de la puissance de l’infini au sein de laquelle je discerne les nombres, un par un ? Il faut alors concevoir le cogito, non comme une simple aperception de l’âme par elle-même, mais comme le signe, le premier signe que me fait une puissance spirituelle infinie qui me communique l’être et l’existence en illuminant ainsi en mon esprit la venue de l’évidence. Parce qu’il implique un infini actuel, et non seulement en puissance qui n’est qu’un indéfini, le cogito est le symptôme qu’il y a, de l’autre côté de la porte de l’appartement, un Autre dont la puissance est infinie, qui frappe à cette porte par l’évidence ponctuelle de l’esprit s’apercevant lui-même, un Autre qui m’appelle à penser davantage, et à progresser sur le chemin de la vérité, à enrichir le trésor intérieur de mon esprit, et ainsi à accroître par degrés mon être, la plénitude de mon savoir, et l’extrême contentement et béatitude que m’inspire cet enrichissement tout spirituel."
(Jacques Darriulat, Initiation à la philosophie cartésienne, III. Du Cogito à Dieu)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Descartes/DescartesInitiation/DescartesInitiation3.html

E4.4.A.2. The Grammatical Fiction – Deconstructing the "Subject."
The "I" as a byproduct of language (grammar): A social construct or a linguistic necessity rather than an ontological truth.

E4.4.A.2_REF1_PH

EL3.144. HANNAH ARENDT OBSERVED THAT POST-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHIES ARE LIMITED BY THEIR FOCUS ON STRENGTHENING THE "I". By contrast, pre-Socratic and Buddhist philosophies offer a model of liberation that harmonizes happiness with the awareness of life's finitude.
"As Hannah Arendt reminds us in The Human Condition (1958), all post-Socratic philosophies from ancient Greece suffer perhaps from the same limitation - to serve as philosophies of liberation - of being trapped in a model that strives to strengthen the "I": "If the experience of pain is the ultimate foundation of hedonism in its ancient varieties as in its modern ones, it is very different and much stronger in the modern age. It is no longer a generality, as in antiquity, that everyone tries to correct in himself the one who can't take life sufferings, in a vision where pain and pleasure still retain much meaning in the world. In Antiquity, liberation from life's alienation, in all schools - stoicism, epicureanism, hedonism, cynicism -, was based on a deep distrust of the world; all obeyed a burning desire to retrieve from the world, from the worries and the sufferings it inflicted, to take refuge in the security of an interior domain where the ego would be exposed only to itself."
It may be necessary to turn to the intuitions shared by pre-Socratic philosophies in the West and by Buddhism at the same time in East, to encounter a model of liberation of thought that makes it easier (nothing is easy in terms of wisdom!) for a disillusioned and happy human life to coexist with the full awareness of its finitude."
(Pierre Schindler)

E4.4.A.2_REF2_PH NIETZSCHE ARGUES THAT CONSCIOUSNESS DOES NOT BELONG TO THE INDIVIDUAL EXISTENCE BUT IS THE ORGAN OF THE COMMUNITY/HERD. He asserts that self-knowledge is impossible in the absolute sense because to know oneself is to "vulgarize" oneself into a social sign. The "I" that speaks is always the "Genius of the Species," not the singular entity.
"Du « génie de l’espèce » [...]
Ma pensée, comme on le voit, est que la conscience n’appartient pas au fond à l’existence individuelle de l’homme, bien plutôt à tout ce qui fait de lui une nature communautaire et grégaire ; que la conscience, par conséquent, ne s’est subtilement développée que sous le rapport de l’utilité communautaire et grégaire, et que chacun de nous, nécessairement, en dépit de la meilleure volonté pour se comprendre aussi individuellement que possible, pour « se connaître soi-même », ne fera pourtant jamais autre chose que d’amener du non-individuel à sa conscience, ce qu’il a de plus « moyen » ; — que notre pensée même, constamment, se voit pour ainsi dire majorée par le caractère de la conscience — par le « génie de l’espèce », qui règne en elle — et retraduite dans la perspective du troupeau. Nos actes, dans le fond, sont intégralement et incomparablement personnels, uniques, individuels en un sens illimité, cela est hors de doute ; mais sitôt que nous les retraduisons dans la conscience, ils cessent de le paraître… Tel est, à mon sens, le phénoménalisme, le perspectivisme proprement dit : la nature de la conscience animale implique que le monde dont nous pouvons devenir conscients n’est qu’un monde superficiel, un monde de signes, un monde généralisé, vulgarisé ; que tout ce qui devient conscient du même coup s’en trouve plat, amenuisé, réduit, jusqu’à la stupidité du Stéréotype grégaire ; que toute prise de conscience revient à une opération de généralisation, de superficialisation, de falsification, donc à une opération foncièrement ruineuse."
(Nietzsche, Le gai savoir, La Gaya Scienza, 1882)

E4.4.A.2_REF3_PH LE COGITO SUR PAROLE : MERLEAU-PONTY DEMASQUE LE "JE PENSE" DE DESCARTES COMME N'ETANT PAS UNE SAISIE IMMEDIATE DE SOI, MAIS UNE CONSTRUCTION MEDIATISEE PAR LE LANGAGE. Le "Je" n'est pas le mien, mais une généralité ("On pense"). Le langage "se fait oublier », si bien que cela crée l'illusion d'une transparence du sujet à lui-même, alors qu'il est structuré par l'expression.
"Je lis la Deuxième Méditation (de Descartes). C’est bien de moi qu’il y est question, mais d’un moi en idée qui n’est proprement ni le mien, ni d’ailleurs celui de Descartes, mais celui de tout homme réfléchissant. En suivant le sens des mots et le lien des idées, j’arrive à cette conclusion qu’en effet, puisque je pense, je suis, mais c’est là un Cogito sur parole. Je n’ai saisi ma pensée et mon existence qu’à travers le medium du langage et la vraie formule de ce Cogito serait : « On pense, on est ». La merveille du langage, c’est qu’il se fait oublier; je suis des yeux les lignes sur le papier, à partir du moment où je suis pris par ce qu’elles signifient, je ne les vois plus. L’expression s’efface devant l’exprimé et c’est pourquoi son rôle médiateur peut passer inaperçu, c’est pourquoi Descartes ne le mentionne nulle part."
(Merleau-Ponty, cité par Pierre Haddot dans Wittgenstein et les limites du langage, 2004-2014)

E4.4.A.2_REF3.1_PH "ÇA PENSE" VS "JE PENSE" : NIETZSCHE REMPLACE LE "JE" ACTIF PAR UN "ÇA" (ES) NEUTRE ET IMPERSONNEL. LA PENSEE EST UN EVENEMENT QUI SURGIT ("QUAND ELLE VEUT"), PAS "QUAND JE VEUX." Il identifie la source de l'erreur dans la grammaire : nous croyons qu'à toute action ("penser") il faut un agent ("je"). C'est une projection linguistique, pas une vérité ontologique.
"Pour ce qui est de la superstition des logiciens : je ne me lasserai pas de souligner sans relâche un tout petit fait que ces superstitieux rechignent à admettre, — à savoir qu’une pensée vient quand « elle » veut, et non pas quand « je » veux ; de sorte que c’est une falsification de l’état de fait que de dire : le sujet « je » est la condition du prédicat « pense ». Ça pense (1) : mais que ce « ça » soit précisément le fameux vieux « je », c’est, pour parler avec modération, simplement une supposition, une affirmation, surtout pas une « certitude immédiate ». En fin de compte, il y a déjà trop dans ce « ça pense » : ce « ça » enferme déjà une interprétation (2) du processus et ne fait pas partie du processus lui-même. On raisonne ici en fonction de l'habitude grammaticale : « penser est une action, toute action implique quelqu’un qui agit, par conséquent— ». C’est à peu près en fonction du même schéma que l’atomisme antique chercha, pour l’adjoindre à la « force » qui exerce des effets, ce caillot de matière qui en est le siège, à parti duquel elle exerce des effets, l’atome ; des têtes plus rigoureuses enseignèrent finalement à se passer de ce « résidu de terre », et peut-être un jour s’habituera-t-on encore, chez les logicien aussi, à se passer de ce petit « ça » (forme sous laquelle s’est sublimé l'honnête et antique je)."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Par-delà bien et mal, Aphorisme 17, 1886)

Note (1): " Es : cette utilisation du pronom neutre permet à Nietzsche de dépersonnaliser, de déshumaniser, en quelque sorte, le processus considéré, spontanément interprété de manière anthropomorphique par les philosophes."
Note (2):  Auslegung : pour désigner l’« interprétation », qui constitue la notion centrale de la réflexion nietzschéenne, autrement désignée du nom de volonté de puissance, Nietzsche utilise concurremment deux termes. Nous avons déjà fait allusion à celui qui intervient ici. Bien qu’il ne soit pas possible d’effectuer un partage absolument strict, l’étude de l’usage nietzschéen montre que le terme Auslegung est plutôt utilisé lorsqu’il s’agit d’insister sur l’effort d’explicitation, voire la glose, d’un « texte » (au sens métaphorique large que Nietzsche donne à cette notion : tout phénomène, tout processus pouvant être considéré comme un texte à déchiffrer), tandis que le terme Interpretation désigne parfois le caractère déviant, inconsciemment falsificateur (voire franchement malhonnête dans certains cas) d’une lecture ou d’une traduction."
(Patrick Wotling)

E4.4.A.2_REF3.2_PH NIETZSCHE MONTRE QUE LE COGITO N'EST PAS UNE VERITE SIMPLE, MAIS UNE "SERIE D'AFFIRMATIONS TEMERAIRES" (qu'il y a un "Je", que penser est une activité, qu'il y a une cause). Le "Je" n'est pas une donnée, c'est une hypothèse métaphysique complexe.
"Il reste toujours d’inoffensifs observateurs de soi pour croire qu’il y a des « certitudes immédiates », par exemple « je pense » ou, conformément à la superstition de Schopenhauer, « je veux » : comme si, en quelque sorte, il était donné au connaître de saisir ici son objet pur et nu, comme « chose en soi », et sans qu’intervienne de falsification ni du côté du sujet, ni du côté de l’objet. Mais que « certitude immédiate », tout comme « connaissance absolue » et « chose en soi », enferme une contradictio in adjecto, c’est une chose que je répéterai cent fois : il faudrait tout de même en finir un jour avec la séduction des mots ! Le peuple peut bien croire que connaître, c’est savoir à fond (1), le philosophe doit se dire : « si je décompose le processus exprimé par la proposition « je pense », je trouve une série d’affirmations téméraires qu’il est difficile, peut-être impossible de fonder, — par exemple que c’est moi qui pense, qu’il doit y avoir de manière générale un quelque chose qui pense, que penser est une activité et un effet exercé par un être que l’on pense comme cause, qu’il y a un « je », et enfin que ce que désigne penser est déjà fermement établi, — que je sais ce que c’est que penser. Car si je n’avais pas déjà tranché ces questions par moi-même, en fonction de quel critère devrais-je déterminer si ce qui se produit exactement ne serait pas du « vouloir » ou du « sentir » ? Bref, ce « je pense » présuppose que je compare mon état du moment à d’autres états que je connais en moi pour établir ainsi ce qu’il est : du fait de ce renvoi à un « savoir » autre, il n’offre en tout cas pas pour moi de « certitude » immédiate. — À la place de cette « certitude immédiate » à laquelle le peuple peut bien croire dans le cas présent, le philosophe trouve une série de questions de métaphysique, authentiques cas de conscience de l’intellect, qui sont les suivantes : « D’où est-ce que je tire le concept de penser ? Pourquoi est-ce que je crois à la cause et à l’effet ? Qu’est-ce qui me donne le droit de parler d’un je, plus encore d’un je cause, et finalement encore d’un je cause des pensées ? » Quiconque se fait fort, en invoquant une espèce d’intuition de la connaissance, de répondre immédiatement à ces questions métaphysiques, comme le fait celui qui dit « je pense, et je sais que ceci à tout le moins est vrai, réel, certain » — celui-là trouverait aujourd’hui tout prêts, chez un philosophe, un sourire et deux points d’interrogation. « Monsieur, lui ferait peut-être comprendre le philosophe, il est improbable que vous ne vous trompiez pas : mais pourquoi vous faut-il la vérité à tout prix? »"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Par-delà bien et mal, Aphorisme 16, 1886)

Note (1): "Ein zu Ende-Kennen : un savoir en entier, de manière parachevée, poussée à son terme. On notera surtout cette nouvelle association des philosophes (tels qu’ils ont existé jusqu’à présent) et du peuple, auxquels Nietzsche oppose le philosophe au sens strict, caractérisé une fois de plus par sa rigueur dans l’art d’interroger et son refus des préjugés. Une fois encore, on voit se dessiner l’idée que la philosophie n’a fait que spiritualiser, que réélaborer de manière plus subtile, des préjugés populaires. Voir déjà la préface de Par-delà bien et mal sur ce point."
(Patrick Wotling)

E4.4.A.2_REF4_PH THE "ILLUSION OF THE SUBJECT" IS NOT AS A PSYCHOLOGICAL ERROR, BUT AS A STRUCTURAL INEVITABILITY OF GRAMMAR.
« Solution fondamentale : nous croyons à la raison : mais celle-ci est la philosophie des concepts en grisaille, la langue est construite sur les préjugés les plus naïfs. Notre lecture projette alors des dysharmonies et des problèmes dans les choses, parce que nous ne pensons que sous la forme du langage – et croyons ainsi à la «vérité éternelle» de la « raison » (par ex. sujet prédicat, etc.).
Nous cessons de penser si nous refusons de le faire dans la contrainte du langage, nous aboutissons tout juste au doute, percevant là une frontière comme frontière.
La pensée rationnelle est interprétation selon un schéma que nous ne pouvons pas rejeter.»
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Fragments posthumes 5-22)

"Nous pensons avec le langage, donc la pensee est embrouillee." 
(John Ferguson)

E4.4.A.3. The Constructed World – Knowledge Without an Absolute "I."
The Constructivist alternative. Reality is not "discovered" by a subject, but "constructed" by an organism to create order. Truth is replaced by viability and pragmatism.

E4.4.A.3_REF1_PH LA CONNAISSANCE SELON LE CONSTRUCTIVISME "Comment se fait-il que dans la réalité les objets apparaissent « là », devant mes yeux ? De quelle manière ma subjectivité entre-t-elle en relation avec eux ? Comment se construit le processus mental qui les met en relation ? 
La réponse constructiviste à ces questions est une thèse qui défie la connaissance scientifique autant que la connaissance de sens commun. Elle soutient que la réalité, où nous vivons et où se développe la science, est un résultat construit par un organisme autorégulé et n’entretient aucune relation particulière avec une quelconque réalité ontologique « là-bas » [...]
Vers la fin des années 70, cette approche produisit une nouvelle conception de la connaissance (ou épistémologie)  selon laquelle notre expérience est considérée comme la cause dont le monde est la conséquence. Cette nouvelle conception implique qu’avant de définir un problème ou de chercher une solution, on doit explorer les prémisses sous-jacentes tant du problème que de la solution. De plus, ce qui est à présent pertinent, c’est le système qui contient l’information plus que l’information elle-même ; l’accent est également porté sur les contextes biologique, linguistique et culturel qui lui donnent sens."
(Martin Wainstein)

E4.4.A.3_REF1.1_PH IL N’Y A QUE LES QUESTIONS QUI SONT PAR ESSENCE INDÉCIDABLES QUE NOUS POUVONS TRANCHER
 "Vers la fin des années 70, [l'approche constructiviste] produisit une nouvelle conception de la connaissance (ou épistémologie)  selon laquelle notre expérience est considérée comme la cause dont le monde est la conséquence. Cette nouvelle conception implique qu’avant de définir un problème ou de chercher une solution, on doit explorer les prémisses sous-jacentes tant du problème que de la solution. De plus, ce qui est à présent pertinent, c’est le système qui contient l’information plus que l’information elle-même ; l’accent est également porté sur les contextes biologique, linguistique et culturel qui lui donnent sens. [...]
La définition que propose Bateson de l’épistémologie - un ensemble d’opérations par lesquelles un organisme perçoit, pense, décide et se comporte dans son monde - révèle un chevauchement conceptuel qui nous oblige à placer la psychologie et le comportement au cœur de la réflexion philosophique sur la connaissance. [...]
On pourrait dire que nous sommes plus intéressés par la version de l’événement que par l’événement lui-même, nous nous intéressons plus à faciliter le décodage par nos clients de la perception de la réalité d’une façon différente qu’à changer la valeur sémantique de ce qui est perçu. [...]
« Il n’y a que les questions qui sont par essence indécidables que nous pouvons trancher. » 
Pourquoi ? Simplement parce que les questions décidables sont déjà tranchées par le choix du cadre dans lequel elles sont posées, et par le choix des règles qui régissent ce que nous appelons la « question » et ce que nous pouvons prendre pour une « réponse ». Dans certains cas, ça peut aller très vite, dans d’autres cela peut prendre un temps très, très long, mais, en fin de compte, nous arriverons après une séquence d’étapes logiques contraignantes à un résultat irréfutable : un Oui déterminé, ou un Non déterminé."
(Paul Watzlawick, Giorgio Nardone, Stratégie de la thérapie brève, 1997)

E4.4.A.3_REF2_PH LA CONNAISSANCE EST UNE CARTE DE CE QUI PEUT ÊTRE FAIT DANS L’ENVIRONNEMENT TEL QU’IL EST EXPÉRIMENTÉ "Pour moi, comme pour certains penseurs du tournant du siècle, l’idée importante est la notion d’« adaptation » plutôt que celle de « vérité ».  [...] En ce qui concerne la connaissance, les circonstances sont souvent purement logiques. Elles ne constituent pas un environnement physique mais conceptuel. Pour être viable, une pensée nouvelle doit s’adapter au schéma de structures conceptuelles existant sans produire de contradictions. S’il y a des contradictions, on doit alors changer soit la nouvelle pensée soit les vieilles structures. [...]
Dans cette perspective modifiée, donc, la connaissance ne fournit pas la représentation d’un monde indépendant mais plutôt une carte de ce qui peut être fait dans l’environnement tel qu’il est expérimenté."
(Ernst von Glasersfeld)

E4.4.A.3_REF3_PH ERNST VON GLASERSFELD DEFINIT LA CONNAISSANCE COMME "QUELQUE CHOSE QUE L’ORGANISME CONSTRUIT DANS LE BUT DE CREER UN ORDRE DANS LE FLUX DE L’EXPERIENCE.
"Nous pouvons au mieux connaitre ce qu’elle n’est pas. En d’autres termes, ce n’est que lorsque notre construction de la réalité s’écroule que nous réalisons que la réalité n’est pas ce que nous pensions. Dans son « Introduction au constructivisme radical », Ernst von Glasersfeld définit la connaissance comme "quelque chose que l’organisme construit dans le but de créer un ordre dans le flux de l’expérience - en tant que tel informe - en établissant des expériences renouvelables, ainsi que des relations relativement fiables entre elles. Les possibilités de construire un tel ordre sont toujours déterminées et sans cesse limitées par les précédentes étapes de la construction. Cela signifie que le monde « réel » se manifeste lui-même uniquement là où nous ne pouvons décrire et expliquer ces échecs que par les concepts mêmes dont nous nous sommes servis pour construire des structures défaillantes, ce processus ne fournit jamais l’image d’un monde que nous pourrions tenir pour responsable de leur échec.""
(Paul Watzlawick, Giorgio Nardone, Stratégie de la thérapie brève, 1997)

E4.4.A.3_REF4_PH MARTIN WAINSTEIN REMET EN CAUSE L'EXISTENCE D'UNE REALITE OBJECTIVE INDEPENDANTE DU SUJET. Il affirme que "notre expérience est la cause dont le monde est la conséquence".
"Comment se fait-il que dans la réalité les objets apparaissent « là », devant mes yeux ? De quelle manière ma subjectivité entre-t-elle en relation avec eux ? Comment se construit le processus mental qui les met en relation ? 
La réponse constructiviste à ces questions est une thèse qui défie la connaissance scientifique autant que la connaissance de sens commun. Elle soutient que la réalité, où nous vivons et où se développe la science, est un résultat construit par un organisme autorégulé et n’entretient aucune relation particulière avec une quelconque réalité ontologique « là-bas » [...]
Vers la fin des années 70, cette approche produisit une nouvelle conception de la connaissance (ou épistémologie)  selon laquelle notre expérience est considérée comme la cause dont le monde est la conséquence. Cette nouvelle conception implique qu’avant de définir un problème ou de chercher une solution, on doit explorer les prémisses sous-jacentes tant du problème que de la solution. De plus, ce qui est à présent pertinent, c’est le système qui contient l’information plus que l’information elle-même ; l’accent est également porté sur les contextes biologique, linguistique et culturel qui lui donnent sens."
(Martin Wainstein)

E4.4.A.3_REF5_PH ERNST VON GLASERSFELD AFFIRME QUE LE MONDE N'EST QU'UNE "CARTE DE CE QUI PEUT ETRE FAIT" PAR L'ORGANISME.
"Pour moi, comme pour certains penseurs du tournant du siècle, l’idée importante est la notion d’« adaptation » plutôt que celle de « vérité ».  [...] En ce qui concerne la connaissance, les circonstances sont souvent purement logiques. Elles ne constituent pas un environnement physique mais conceptuel. Pour être viable, une pensée nouvelle doit s’adapter au schéma de structures conceptuelles existant sans produire de contradictions. S’il y a des contradictions, on doit alors changer soit la nouvelle pensée soit les vieilles structures. [...]
Dans cette perspective modifiée, donc, la connaissance ne fournit pas la représentation d’un monde indépendant mais plutôt une carte de ce qui peut être fait dans l’environnement tel qu’il est expérimenté."
(Ernst von Glasersfeld)

E4.4.A.3_REF6_PH PAUL WATZLAWICK & GIORGIO NARDONE LIENT LA "DECISION" NON PAS A LA DECOUVERTE D'UNE VERITE LOGIQUE (QUESTIONS DECIDABLES), MAIS A UN ACTE CREATEUR SUR L'INDECIDABLE.
"Vers la fin des années 70, [l'approche constructiviste] produisit une nouvelle conception de la connaissance (ou épistémologie)  selon laquelle notre expérience est considérée comme la cause dont le monde est la conséquence. Cette nouvelle conception implique qu’avant de définir un problème ou de chercher une solution, on doit explorer les prémisses sous-jacentes tant du problème que de la solution. De plus, ce qui est à présent pertinent, c’est le système qui contient l’information plus que l’information elle-même ; l’accent est également porté sur les contextes biologique, linguistique et culturel qui lui donnent sens. [...]
La définition que propose Bateson de l’épistémologie - un ensemble d’opérations par lesquelles un organisme perçoit, pense, décide et se comporte dans son monde - révèle un chevauchement conceptuel qui nous oblige à placer la psychologie et le comportement au cœur de la réflexion philosophique sur la connaissance. [...]
On pourrait dire que nous sommes plus intéressés par la version de l’événement que par l’événement lui-même, nous nous intéressons plus à faciliter le décodage par nos clients de la perception de la réalité d’une façon différente qu’à changer la valeur sémantique de ce qui est perçu. [...]
« Il n’y a que les questions qui sont par essence indécidables que nous pouvons trancher. » 
Pourquoi ? Simplement parce que les questions décidables sont déjà tranchées par le choix du cadre dans lequel elles sont posées, et par le choix des règles qui régissent ce que nous appelons la « question » et ce que nous pouvons prendre pour une « réponse ». Dans certains cas, ça peut aller très vite, dans d’autres cela peut prendre un temps très, très long, mais, en fin de compte, nous arriverons après une séquence d’étapes logiques contraignantes à un résultat irréfutable : un Oui déterminé, ou un Non déterminé."
(Paul Watzlawick, Giorgio Nardone, Stratégie de la thérapie brève, 1997)

E4.4.A.3_REF6.1_PH HEINZ VON FOERSTER SUGGERE QUE LES QUESTIONS "DECIDABLES" SONT DEJA RESOLUES PAR LE CADRE LOGIQUE CHOISI, ET QUE LA VERITABLE DECISION (L'ACTE DU SUJET) NE S'EXERCE QUE SUR L'INDECIDABLE.
« Il n’y a que les questions qui sont par essence indécidables que nous pouvons trancher. » 
Pourquoi ? Simplement parce que les questions décidables sont déjà tranchées par le choix du cadre dans lequel elles sont posées, et par le choix des règles qui régissent ce que nous appelons la « question » et ce que nous pouvons prendre pour une « réponse ». Dans certains cas, ça peut aller très vite, dans d’autres cela peut prendre un temps très, très long, mais, en fin de compte, nous arriverons après une séquence d’étapes logiques contraignantes à un résultat irréfutable : un Oui déterminé, ou un Non déterminé.
(Heinz von Foerster)

E4.4.A.3_REF7_PH THE ONLY POSSIBLE DEFINITION OF TRUTH IS PRAGMATIC.
“METAPHYSICAL PROVERBS

1. Things are or not in relation to the motion of
consciousness through time.
2. Imagination constructs experience from the
spindrift of a vast and violent sea.
3. This process evolved through natural selection.
4. Therefore the only possible definition of truth is
pragmatic.
5. Whatever is, is as it is in relation to an observer. To
a different kind of observer, with different senses and
imaginative processes, it would be an entirely different
sort of thing.
6. To no observer, in itself, an object is potentially as
many different kinds of things as there are different
kinds of possible observers; that is, both infinite and
nothing.
7. Most of what lies outside our consciousness is to us
unimaginable.
8. The further we wander from the realms we evolved
to experience, the more dumbfounded we become.
9. Since we continue to wander further and further, we
continue to be dumbfounded in increasingly
sophisticated ways.
10. Death is our experience of the end of individual
consciousness.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E4.4.2. The Self as a "Bundle of Perceptions"

E4.4.2.A.The Fluid Ontology: "I Contain Multitudes."
The "Self" is not a fixed, unified essence, but a fluctuating "bundle," a statistical average, or a passage in constant motion.

E4.4.2.A_REF1_LIT

EL3.93. “I AM IN TRANSIT. I LIVE BETWEEN WORLDS.
 
All my life, I've had the impression of being in a minority, of not sharing a common destiny with other people. I have never respected traditions or rites. I am horrified by collective euphoria. In Morocco, I am too Western, too Francophone, too atheist. In France, I can never escape the question of origins: 'In a foreign country in my country itself (Louis Aragon). For a long time, I hated myself for being so nervous and unstable. My contradictions were unbearable. I wanted people to accept me, and then I didn't want to be one of them. When you have several countries, several cultures, it can lead to a certain confusion. You are from here and also from elsewhere. You always consider yourself a foreigner, but at the same time you hate it when others see you that way. You're a hypocrite. Confronted with a Frenchman who tells me that Muslims are, by their nature, violent misogynists, I will fight tooth and claw to defend the open-mindedness of my Moroccan brethren, providing a thousand examples to prove him wrong. On the other hand, confronted with a Moroccan man who tries to convince me that our country is a gentle, tolerant place, I will argue the exact opposite, emphasising its violence and misogyny.
 
For a long time, I was preoccupied by the idea of writing without any solid anchorage, unsupported by any foundations. Is it possible to write without a land? What can you write about if you feel like you don't come from anywhere?
 
In The Sun Also Rises, one of Hemingway's characters says: 'You know what's the trouble with you? You're an expatriate. [...] Haven't you heard that? Nobody that ever left their own country ever wrote anything worth printing.'
 
Torn between two communities, writing in an unstable equilibrium, I lacked a territorial matrix. In that regard, Salman Rushdie has an important place in my life. I was eight years old and living in a Muslim country when that man became the subject of a fatwa. He was a traitor, an apostate, the lowest of the low. He had sold his soul to the West; he was an infidel who had renounced the religion of his ancestors to make himself look interesting to white people. Later, I read his books, his interviews, his autobiography, and my admiration for him just kept growing. It was Salman Rushdie who taught me that we are not obliged to write on behalf of our families or our compatriots. That this bastardy, this miscegenation, must be explored to its very end, drunk down to the dregs. Writing isn't the expression of a culture, but the tearing of yourself away from a culture when it closed itself up inside orders and diktats. We are like men and women after the fall. We are Hindus who have crossed the black waters; we are Muslims who eat pork. And the result is that we belong partly to the West. Our identity is both plural and partial. Sometimes we feel as if we are astride two cultures, and sometimes as if we are falling between two stools.' To my mind, neither arguments glorifying the richness of miscegenation nor those worrying about its consequences truly grasp the complexity of having a dual identity. It is simultaneously a discomfort and a freedom, a source of sorrow and of exaltation. I was torn between legacies and histories so different that I felt doomed to anxiety. I wanted to join a herd, to feel the joys of belonging, being part of a group, a tribe, a community. I wanted to see the world in black and white, to be free of nuances and doubts. I felt like “those orchids in tropical forests whose roots, descended from the high branches of acoma crape myrtles, remain suspended between sky and earth. They float, they seek, never knowing the stability of soil." (Michèle Lacrosil, Cajou.)”
(Leila Slimani, The scent of Flowers at Night, 2023)


E4.4.2.A_REF2_PO THE "POLYPHONOUS," "INCONSTANT" NATURE OF THE SELF
" [Walt Whitman's] verses continue to stir the hearts and minds of readers two centuries hence. Their sublimest, most enduring gift springs from Whitman’s resolute insistence on embracing our variegated, inconstant, polyphonous selves — on harmonizing the individualistic and the egalitarian, nature and culture, the body and the soul. “Do I contradict myself?” he asked unselfconsciously. “Very well then I contradict myself, (I am large, I contain multitudes.)” His poems bellow the bold, countercultural assurance that in acknowledging the contradictions within us, we collapse the contradictions between us; that only by exploring the myriad facets of selfhood, from its brightest summits to its darkest recesses, can we begin to dissolve the illusion of separateness and the antagonisms of otherness that divide us from one another."
(Maria Popova, on Walt Whitman, Brain Pickings)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2019/05/31/helen-fagin-walt-whitman/?mc_cid=d201a1e393&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E4.4.2.A_REF3_PH LA SAGESSE NE RESIDE PAS DANS UN SUJET UNIFIE QUI AURAIT "RAISON", MAIS DANS LA MOYENNE STATISTIQUE D'UNE "FOULE" DE SOI SUCCESSIFS ET FAILLIBLES.
"Supposez qu’on vous pose une devinette dont la réponse est numérique – par exemple, "combien de candidats passaient le bac en 1968 ?" Vous répondez du mieux que vous pouvez (sans Google, quand même). Et là, surprise : on vous repose la même question, mais vous devez fournir une réponse différente. Laquelle des deux réponses est la meilleure ?
La première, bien sûr : comme dit l’adage, la première impression est souvent la bonne. Mais ce n’est pas là l’enseignement principal de cette étude célèbre. Ce qui est intéressant, c’est que la moyenne des deux réponses est meilleure que la première. Tout se passe comme si vos deux estimations provenaient de deux personnes différentes, dont la sagesse collective – révélée par le calcul de la moyenne – était supérieure à celle d’une seule. D’où le nom poétique que les auteurs donnent à ce phénomène : "la foule intérieure". 
Si, comme tous les décideurs le savent, "la nuit porte conseil", c’est peut-être pour ça : non pas parce que nous acquérons, en dormant, une sagesse supplémentaire… mais parce que nos erreurs de la veille sont partiellement corrigées par celles du lendemain. Quelle leçon d’humilité."
TTSO, 19/06/2018

E4.4.2.A_REF4_PH JE NE PEINDS PAS L'ESTRE, JE PEINDS LE PASSAGE.
"Le monde n'est qu'une branloire [balançoire] perenne : Toutes choses y branlent sans cesse, la terre, les rochers du Caucase, les pyramides d'Ægypte : et du branle public, et du leur. La constance mesme n'est autre chose qu'un branle plus languissant. Je ne puis asseurer mon object : il va trouble et chancelant, d'une yvresse naturelle. Je le prens en ce poinct, comme il est, en l'instant que je m'amuse à [que je m´occupe de] luy. Je ne peinds pas l'estre, je peinds le passage : non un passage d'aage en autre, ou comme dict le peuple, de sept en sept ans, mais de jour en jour, de minute en minute. Il faut accommoder mon histoire à l'heure."
(Montaigne, Les Essais, Du repentir, III, II)

E4.4.2.A_REF5_PH POUR MONTAIGNE, « UN HONNETE HOMME EST UN HOMME MELE » - MELANGE DU CORPS ET DE L´ESPRIT, MAIS AUSSI MELANGE DE TOUS LES ESPRITS.
"Ceste capacité de trier le vray, quelle qu'elle soit en moy, et cett'humeur libre de n'assubjectir aysément ma creance, je la dois principalement à moy : car les plus fermes imaginations que j'aye, et generalles, sont celles qui par maniere de dire, nasquirent avec moy : elles sont naturelles, et toutes miennes. Je les produisis crues et simples, d'une production hardie et forte, mais un peu trouble et imparfaicte : depuis je les ay establies et fortifiées par l'authorité d'autruy [par ce que d´autres auteurs ont écrit], et par les sains exemples des anciens, ausquels je me suis rencontré conforme en jugement : Ceux-là m'en ont asseuré de la prinse, et m'en ont donné la jouyssance et possession plus claire."
(Montaigne, Les Essais, De la presumption, II, XVII)

E1.4.D.5.2.wE4.4.2.A.

NIETZSCHE CRITICIZES THE IDEA OF LIMITING OURSELVES TO A SINGLE, STABLE ESSENCE, POINTING OUT THAT WE ARE A MULTIPLICITY OF IMPULSES AND THAT OUR EXISTENCE IS SHAPED BY THE ACCIDENTS OF LIFE. The organizing idea of our life, according to Nietzsche, grows in depth and gradually leads us to our true potential.
"The phrase 'become what you are' sounds like a slogan, as pithy as it is mysterious and seductive, conjuring up two seemingly incompatible notions: being and becoming.
Isn't becoming first and foremost a matter of knowing yourself? And no quest is more difficult than that of knowing what we are not yet. This formula confronts us with the problem of personal identity and immediately assumes a certain duality of the self: an apparent self and a deep, authentic self...
A philosophy of becoming vs. a philosophy of being - what is Nietzsche's position?

Nietzsche is probably one of the philosophers who most criticized self-knowledge, and today we read this formula as a recipe for personal development!

But for Nietzsche, to set a goal - to try to achieve a supposedly unique and stable essence - is to limit oneself excessively, to exclude from one's field of vision other possibilities, other tasks for achieving greater fulfillment. The two presuppositions of the formula 'must succeed' and 'that one can be someone' are at odds with Nietzsche's thinking. We 'are' a multiplicity of impulses - we are not a single substance.
It is the accidents of existence, to which we are largely subjected without understanding them - or at least without choosing them - that construct our existence.
In the third of his Untimely Meditations, 1873, Nietzsche invites us to turn to an "I" that is not within us, but above us. Laziness leads us to adopt the desires and values of the masses because 'it gives us the indifferent allure of mass-produced goods unworthy of trade and teaching' - by having the courage to rediscover the desire we once had for the world - as examples of the multiplicity of possibilities - we can grow the sphere of the self. It's the prism of love that must guide us. Whatever happens, I am always becoming, and in this becoming I must become more.
When Nietzsche speaks of singularity, he doesn't mean an essence, but rather the result of an experiment of impulses that only we can carry out. I am not a singular entity, but the seat of a construction, a free crystallization. I'm not even aware of the multiplicities I could bring into play. Nietzsche says 'I' because language offers no other possibility.
Our educators must be our liberators - they must teach us not to adhere to what is inculcated in the masses.
‘there would be no greater danger than facing oneself with this task [of self-construction]. Becoming what you are presupposes that you have absolutely no idea what you are. From this point of view, even life's mistakes have squandered their own meaning and value, the temporary byways and wrong turns, the delays, the "modesty", the seriousness, on tasks that lie beyond the task. Great wisdom, even supreme wisdom, can be expressed in it […] forgetting oneself, misunderstanding oneself, diminishing, narrowing, and mediating oneself becomes reason itself. Expressed morally: charity, life for others and other things can be the protective measure for maintaining the hardest self-reliance. This is the exceptional case in which, against my rule and conviction, I take the side of the "selfless" instincts: they work here in the service of selfishness, self-discipline. — One must keep the whole surface of consciousness — consciousness is a surface — clean of any of the great imperatives. Beware of every big word, every big attitude! Nothing but dangers that instinct “understands itself” too early — — Meanwhile the organizing “idea” that is called to rule grows and grows in depth — it begins to command, it slowly leads back from byways and wrong paths, it prepares individuals Qualities and abilities that will one day prove to be indispensable as a means to the whole - she develops all serving faculties one after the other before she lets anything of the dominant task, of "aim", "purpose", "meaning" be heard. — Looked at from this side, my life is simply wonderful’ (Ecce Homo, Aphorism 9, 1888).
Note how Nietzsche refers to the “I” as “the organizing idea”.
(Céline Denat on Les Chemins de la Philosophie, France Culture, 09/12/2024)

Listen to the podcast: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/deviens-ce-que-tu-es-7689651

E4.4.2.A_REF6_LIT FERNANDO PESSOA DEFINES “SUBSTANTIAL REALITY” AS A “SERIES OF SENSATIONS.”
"A vida prática sempre me pareceu o menos cómodo dos suicídios. Agir foi sempre para mim a condenação violenta do sonho injustamente condenado. Ter influência no mundo exterior, alterar coisas, transpor entes, influir em gente — tudo isto pareceu-me sempre de uma substância mais nebulosa que a dos meus devaneios. A futilidade imanente de todas as formas da acção foi, desde a minha infância, uma das medidas mais queridas do meu desapego até de mim. 
Agir é reagir contra si próprio. Influenciar é sair de casa. 
Sempre meditei como era absurdo que, onde a realidade substancial é uma série de sensações, houvesse coisas tão complicadamente simples como comércios, indústrias, relações sociais e familiares, tão desoladoramente incompreensíveis perante a atitude interior da alma para com a ideia de verdade."
(Fernando Pessoa, Livro do Desassossego, 1914)

E4.4.2.B. The Projective Mind: Emotion as Architect.
How we construct our reality through self-generated stories, emotional labor, and the gap between expectation and experience.

E4.4.2.B_REF1_LIT

EL3.88. MARIA POPOVA EMPHASIZES THAT OUR INTERPRETATIONS OF HURT IN RELATIONSHIPS OFTEN STEM FROM OUR OWN FEARS AND VULNERABILITIES RATHER THAN THE ACTUAL SITUATION. These self-generated stories can lead to misunderstandings and erode trust and connection. 
"One fact I have learned about life through the empiricism of living: When we are hurt in a relationship, when we are spinning in the blooming buzzing confusion of sensemaking, the explanation we elect as correct usually has more to do with our own fears and vulnerabilities than it does with the reality of the situation; almost always, that explanation is wrong; almost always, the true explanation has more to do with the fears and vulnerabilities roiling in the other person invisibly to us.
And so, sensemaking and storytelling creatures that we are, we move through the real world in a self-generated dream, responding not to reality but to the stories we tell ourselves about what is true — stories at best incomplete and at worst injuriously incorrect, stories about what we do and don’t deserve, stories the cost of which is connection, trust, love. This is why without charity of interpretation and without candor — the vulnerability of it, the courage of it, the kindness of it — all relationships become a ricochet of unspoken resentments based mostly on misapprehended motives, and crumble."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings)

E4.4.2.B_REF2_LIT

EL3.98. "I KNOW NOT ANYTHING MORE PLEASANT, OR MORE INSTRUCTIVE, THAN TO COMPARE EXPERIENCE WITH EXPECTATION, OR TO REGISTER FROM TIME TO TIME THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN IDEA AND REALITY. It is by this kind of observation that we grow daily less liable to be disappointed. You, who are very capable of anticipating futurity, and raising phantoms before your own eyes, must often have imagined to yourself an academical life, and have conceived what would be the manners, the views, and the conversation, of men devoted to letters ; how they would choose their companions, how they would direct their studies, and how they would regulate their lives. Let me know what you expected, and what you have found. At least record it to yourself before custom has reconciled you to the scenes before you, and the disparity of your discoveries to your hopes has vanished from your mind. It is a rule never to be forgotten, that whatever strikes strongly, should be described while the first impression remains fresh upon the mind."
(James Boswell, Boswell’s Life of Johnson, 1791)

E4.4.2.B_REF3_PSI

EL3.150. “’EMOTION FUNCTIONS AS A MESSENGER FROM THE SELF, AN AGENT THAT GIVES US AN INSTANT REPORT ON THE CONNECTION BETWEEN WHAT WE ARE SEEING AND WHAT WE HAD EXPECTED TO SEE, and tells us what we feel ready to do about it… Emotions signal the secret hopes, fears, and expectations with which we actively greet any news, any occurrence. […]

Emotional labor… requires one to induce or suppress feeling in order to sustain the outward countenance that produces the proper state of mind in others… This kind of labor calls for a coordination of mind and feeling, and it sometimes draws on a source of self that we honor as deep and integral to our individuality.’
There is emotional labor involved each time we put someone else’s needs before our own, each time we force a binary conclusion to resolve our ambivalence about a nuanced matter of the heart. This “subterranean work of placing an acceptable inner face on ambivalence” is painfully exhausting because it makes us less ourselves. […]

Owning what we feel — which involves both allowing it and expressing it — is fundamentally a way of claiming ourselves. But because permission and expression are so intricately entwined, the very act of suppressing what we express changes what we feel, alters the very self.
‘If we conceive of feeling not as a periodic abdication to biology but as something we do by attending to inner sensation in a given way, by defining situations in a given way, by managing in given ways, then it becomes plainer just how plastic and susceptible to reshaping techniques a feeling can be. The very act of managing emotion can be seen as part of what the emotion becomes.’

This matters because attention is the lens that renders reality and attention is a function of feeling — by changing our feelings, we change our lens, ultimately changing what we experience as reality:
‘Feeling… filters out evidence about the self-relevance of what we see, recall, or fantasize… Every emotion does signal the “me” I put into seeing “you.” It signals the often unconscious perspective we apply when we go about seeing. Feeling signals that inner perspective.’
In this sense, feeling is an orienteering tool, a clue about where we stand in relation to something or someone. And yet it is prey to one great complication: the interpretation of the clue. Often unconscious, our interpretation of feeling is regularly garbled by what was and by what we think should be — the ghosts of the past and the fantasies of the future haunting the present, warping the present, warping reality itself, effecting what George Eliot called a “double consciousness.” Because to know what is real is the measure of self-trust, confusion and ambivalence about our feelings erode our self-trust.

Unable to bear the internal dissonance, or entirely unaware of it, we cope by feigning to feel something other than what we are actually feeling. Whether performed for others or for the audience of our own confused conscience, this is acting work. Hochschild, who grew up as the child of diplomats, classifies two key varieties — surface acting and deep acting. She writes:
‘Feelings do not erupt spontaneously or automatically in either deep acting or surface acting. In both cases the actor has learned to intervene — either in creating the inner shape of a feeling or in shaping the outward appearance of one. […]
In surface acting we deceive others about what we really feel, but we do not deceive ourselves. Diplomats and actors do this best, and very small children do it worst (it is part of their charm). In deep acting we make feigning easy by making it unnecessary.’

We make it unnecessary by replacing our actual feeling with the feeling we wish to project, wish to feel, so that in a sense we no longer need to feign it — we have induced ourselves to feel it. Hochschild, whose study of emotional labor began with hundreds of flight attendants in training, offers an illustrative example:
‘Can a flight attendant suppress her anger at a passenger who insults her?… She may have lost for awhile the sense of what she would have felt had she not been trying so hard to feel something else. By taking over the levers of feeling production, by pretending deeply, she alters herself.’

This alteration of the real self requires tremendous emotional labor, which comes at a great psychological cost — we lose sense of who we are and where we stand. (Those of us who have had to take care of a parent’s emotional needs and feelings from a young age at the expense of feeling our own, at the expense of knowing our own, are particularly vulnerable to such self-abandonment in adult life.)

This notion of deep acting originates in Russian theater pioneer Konstantin Stanislavski’s influential century-old system for training actors in what he called “the art of experiencing” — a practice of tapping into the actor’s conscious thought, will, and memory in order to trigger the unconscious into experiencing, rather than just representing, the emotion the actor must perform in their part.

In one of the many case studies substantiating the book, Hochschild gives the example of a man trying to stop feeling deep love for a woman with whom he is no longer able to have a reciprocal relationship. Applying Stanislavski’s method, the man would draw on his emotional memory to make a list of all the times the woman disappointed him or hurt him, prompting himself to feel the pain and disappointment as an antidote to his love. “He would not, then, fall naturally out of love,” she writes. “He would actively conduct himself out of love through deep acting.”

We are conducting ourselves into and out of feeling all the time as we play the parts of the lives we think we ought to live. Most of the time, we are not even aware we are doing this. We do it especially deftly in love. “I was afraid of being hurt, so I attempted to change my feelings,” an exceptionally self-aware woman tells Hochschild in one of the interviews, naming plainly the commonest contortion of the heart we perform in the pit of fear — after all, falling in love is always and invariably a surrender to the fear of loss. In love, Hochschild observes, one always “wavers between belief and doubt” — and it is precisely when afflicted with ambivalence, when unable to tolereate doubt and reconcile conflicting feelings, that we exert the most toilsome emotional labor.

One of Hochschild’s interview subjects is a woman riven by a common ambivalence — a marriage she has outgrown, yet one in which she continues to stay out of a misplaced feeling of responsibility for her child’s future, forgetting somehow that the greatest gift a parent can give a child is to model the courage of living one’s truth. She tells Hochschild:
‘I am desperately trying to change my feelings of being trapped [in marriage] into feelings of wanting to remain with my husband voluntarily. Sometimes I think I’m succeeding — sometimes I know I haven’t. It means I have to lie to myself and know I am lying. It means I don’t like myself very much. It also makes me wonder whether or not I’m a bit of a masochist.’

Lying to ourselves, Hochschild admonishes, erodes our trust in knowing what is real, what is true. In acting, the actor is aware of the illusion; in life, deluding ourselves is a form of bad faith and self-betrayal, the price of which — paid upon the reluctant but inevitable admission of our inner truth — is a loss of self-respect. She writes:
‘It is far more unsettling to discover that we have fooled ourselves than to discover that we have been fooling others… When in private life we recognize an illusion we have held, we form a different relation to what we have thought of as our self. We come to distrust our sense of what is true, as we know it through feeling. And if our feelings have lied to us, they cannot be part of our good, trustworthy, “true” self… We may recognize that we distort reality, that we deny or suppress truths, but we rely on an observing ego to comment on these unconscious processes in us and to try to find out what is going on despite them.’

Hochschild offers a single, merciless antidote to this all too human tendency toward self-delusion: “constant attention, continual questioning and testing” of what we believe about ourselves, what we trust in ourselves. Then and only then can we begin to treat our hearts not as something to be managed but as something to be met, discovering in that meeting the truth of who we are.”
(Maria Popova’s review on Arlie Russell Hochschild’s The Managed Heart, 1983 - in The Marginalian)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2024/11/14/emotional-labor-managed-heart/?mc_cid=beb6cffc53&mc_eid=0b6483decb


E4.4.2.B_REF4_PO

EL3.163. I ONLY KNOW WHAT I'VE EXPERIENCED.

“WEAN YOURSELF
Little by little, wean yourself.
This is the gist of what I have to say.

From an embryo, whose nourishment comes in the blood,
move to an infant drinking milk,
to a child on solid food,
to a searcher after wisdom,
to a hunter of more invisible game.

Think how it is to have a conversation with an embryo.
You might say, "The world outside is vast and intricate.
There are wheatfields and mountain passes,
and orchards in bloom.

At night there are millions of galaxies, and in sunlight
the beauty of friends dancing at a wedding."

You ask the embryo why he, or she, stays cooped up
in the dark with eyes closed.
                                                     Listen to the answer.
There is no "other world."
I only know what I've experienced.
You must be hallucinating.”
(Rumi, The essential, translated by Coleman Barks, 1207-1273)

E4.4.2.C. The Existential Task.
How to navigate life without false closure, acknowledging the "situation" (external forces), and choosing complex truth over easy sincerity or security.

E4.4.2.C_REF1_LIT

EL3.99. "WE ARE SUCH INWARD SECRET CREATURES, THAT INWARDNESS THE MOST AMAZING THING ABOUT US, EVEN MORE AMAZING THAN OUR REASON. BUT WE CANNOT JUST WALK INTO THE CAVERN AND LOOK AROUND. Most of what we think we know about our minds is pseudo-knowledge. We are all such shocking poseurs, so good at inflating the importance of what we think we value. The heroes at Troy fought for a phantom Helen… Vain wars for phantom goods… People lie so… though in a way, if there is art enough it doesn’t matter, since there is another kind of truth in the art."
(Iris Murdoch, The sea, The sea, 1978)

A subset of the illusion of choice is the illusion of closure — the alluring but ultimately vain idea that, as life lives itself through us in ways far beyond our control, in a complex and by definition ever-fraying tapestry of story-lines, we can tease out any one narrative thread neatly enough to tie it into a complete and permanently valid conclusion. Murdoch dispels the vanity"
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

"Loose ends can never be properly tied, one is always producing new ones. Time, like the sea, unties all knots. Judgements on people are never final, they emerge from summings up which at once suggest the need of a reconsideration. Human arrangements are nothing but loose ends and hazy reckoning, whatever art may otherwise pretend in order to console us."
(Iris Murdoch, The sea, The sea, 1978)

"But here is where we do have choice: In accepting a hazy and uncertain reality beyond our control, we can also refuse to resign ourselves to being victims of it — the sort of adaptation Octavia Butler held up as the highest measure of intelligence and integrity. We can recognize that life is much more interesting as a process of continual presence than as an acted drama; that the world is much more interesting as a shoreline than as a stage — for it is at the living shore that we witness, as Richard Feynman did, “ages upon ages” unfolding into the wonder of life; at the shore that we are humbled, as Rachel Carson was, by “our place in the stream of time and in the long rhythms of the sea… in which there is no finality, no ultimate and fixed reality”; at the shore that we finally accept the most elemental fact of our lives: There is no final act — only shoreless seeds and stardust."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E4.4.2.C_REF2_TH

EL3.71. "ADOLESCENCE … RECAPITULATES SOMETHING OF INFANCY BUT IN DRAMATICALLY MODIFIED FORM. From adolescence onward the link between risk and solitude becomes a vivid and traumatic issue. But the pressing question of risk is clearly bound up with something that certain psychoanalysts after Freud have seen as central to early development: a capacity for concern. We create risk when we endanger something we value, whenever we test the relationship between thrills and virtues. So to understand, or make conscious, what constitutes a risk for us — our own personal repertoire of risks — is an important clue about what it is that we do value."
(Adam Phillips , On Risk and Solitude, found in On Kissing, Tickling, and Being Bored: Psychoanalytic Essays on the Unexamined Life, 1933)

E4.4.2.C_REF3_LIT

EL3.72. YOU WERE AFRAID OF BEING DESERTED AND ABANDONED. YOU THOUGHT OF SECURITY INSTEAD OF NEW LIFE, NEW FIELDS OF ADVENTURE AND EXPLORATION. "One of the reasons why so few of us ever act, instead of reacting, is because we are continually stifling our deepest impulses. I can illustrate this thought by choosing, for example, the way in which most of us read. If it is a book which excites and stimulates us to thought, we race through it. We cannot wait to know what it is leading to; we want to grasp, to possess, the hidden passage. Time and again, in such books, we stumble on a phrase, a passage, sometimes a whole chapter, so stimulating and provocative that we scarcely understand what we are reading, so charged is our mind with thoughts and associations of our own. How seldom do we interrupt the reading in order to surrender ourselves to the luxury of our own thoughts! No, we stifle and suppress our thoughts, pretending that we will return to them when we have finished the book. We never do, of course. How much better and wiser it would be, how much more instructive and enriching, if we proceeded at a snail’s pace! What matter if it took a year, instead of a few days, to finish the book? 
“But I haven’t time to read books that way!” it will be objected. “I have other things to do. I have duties and responsibilities.” Precisely. Whoever speaks thus is the very one for whom these words are intended. Whoever fears to neglect his duties by reading leisurely and thoughtfully, by cultivating his own thoughts, will neglect his duties anyway, and for worse reasons. Perhaps it was intended that you lose your job, your wife, your home. If the reading of a book can stir you so deeply as to make you forget your responsibilities, then those responsibilities could not have had much meaning for you. Then you had higher responsibilities. 
If you had trusted your own inner promptings you would have followed through to firmer ground, to vantage ground. But you were afraid a voice might whisper: “Turn here! Knock there! Enter by this door!” You were afraid of being deserted and abandoned. You thought of security instead of new life, new fields of adventure and exploration."
(Henry Miller, The books in my life)

E1.6.C.2.12.b_REF1_LIT.wE4.4.2.C.

IRIS MURDOCH ARGUES THAT MODERN SOCIETY HAS LOST A RICH MORAL AND POLITICAL VOCABULARY, REPLACING IT WITH A SIMPLISTIC IDEA OF SINCERITY OVER TRUTH. She calls for a return to a complex moral life and a renewed sense of the opacity of persons. Murdoch believes literature can help rediscover the density of life, combat the ailments of Romanticism, and provide a new vocabulary of experience.
"We have suffered a general loss of concepts, the loss of a moral and political vocabulary. We no longer use a spread-out substantial picture of the manifold virtues of man and society. We no longer see man against a background of values, of realities, which transcend him. We picture man as a brave naked will surrounded by an easily comprehended empirical world. For the hard idea of truth we have substituted a facile idea of sincerity. What we have never had, of course, is a satisfactory Liberal theory of personality, a theory of man as free and separate and related to a rich and complicated world from which, as a moral being, he has much to learn. We have bought the Liberal theory as it stands, because we have wished to encourage people to think of themselves as free, at the cost of surrendering the background.

We have never solved the problems about human personality posed by the Enlightenment. Between the various concepts available to us the real question has escaped: and now, in a curious way, our present situation is analogous to an eighteenth-century one. We retain a rationalistic optimism about the beneficent results of education, or rather, technology. We combine this with a romantic conception of “the human condition,” a picture of the individual as stripped and solitary: a conception which has, since Hitler, gained a peculiar intensity. [...]

The temptation of art, a temptation to which every work of art yields except the greatest ones, is to console. The modern writer, frightened of technology and (in England) abandoned by philosophy and (in France) presented with simplified dramatic theories, attempts to console us by myths or by stories. [...]

A simple-minded faith in science, together with the assumption that we are all rational and totally free, engenders a dangerous lack of curiosity about the real world, a failure to appreciate the difficulties of knowing it. We need to return from the self-centred concept of sincerity to the other-centred concept of truth. We are not isolated free choosers, monarchs of all we survey, but benighted creatures sunk in a reality whose nature we are constantly and overwhelmingly tempted to deform by fantasy. Our current picture of freedom encourages a dream-like facility; whereas what we require is a renewed sense of the difficulty and complexity of the moral life and the opacity of persons. We need more concepts in terms of which to picture the substance of our being; it is through an enriching and deepening of concepts that moral progress takes place. Simone Weil said that morality was a matter of attention, not of will. We need a new vocabulary of attention. [...]

Through literature we can re-discover a sense of the density of our lives. Literature can arm us against consolation and fantasy and can help us to recover from the ailments of Romanticism. If it can be said to have a task, that surely is its task. But if it is to perform it, prose must recover its former glory, eloquence and discourse must return. [...]

I would connect eloquence with the attempt to speak the truth. […]

Form itself can be a temptation, making the work of art into a small myth which is a self-contained and indeed self-satisfied individual… Real people are destructive of myth, contingency is destructive of fantasy and opens the way for imagination… Too much contingency of course may turn art into journalism. But since reality is incomplete, art must not be too much afraid of incompleteness. Literature must always represent a battle between real people and images; and what it requires now is a much stronger and more complex conception of the former.

In morals and politics we have stripped ourselves of concepts. Literature, in curing its own ills, can give us a new vocabulary of experience, and a truer picture of freedom. With this, renewing our sense of distance, we may remind ourselves that art too lives in a region where all human endeavour is failure. Perhaps only Shakespeare manages to create at the highest level both images and people; and even Hamlet looks second-rate compared with Lear. Only the very greatest art invigorates without consoling, and defeats our attempts, in W. H. Auden’s words, to use it as magic."
(Iris Murdoch,  Existentialists and Mystics: Writings on Philosophy and Literature, 1997)

E4.4.2.C_REF4_PH BY DEFINING BAD FAITH AS "IGNORING ONE'S SITUATION," MANON GARCIA ARGUES THAT "BEING RIGHT" ABOUT ONESELF REQUIRES ACKNOWLEDGING THE EXTERNAL FORCES (THE "BUNDLE") THAT SHAPE US.
"Dans les années 30, Sartre et Beauvoir profitent de la vie. Dans La force de l'âge écrit à la libération, elle abandonne l'idée d'un bonheur solipsiste, sensibilisée par la guerre qu'elle partage le destin de tous. À partir de là elle se pose la question de ce que c'est d'être moi et pour cela, il faut comprendre qu'est-ce que c'est d'être une femme, pour moi, pour les autres femmes et pour les hommes. La mauvaise foi c'est d'ignorer sa situation. C'est à partir de sa situation de femme qu'elle propose de réinventer une liberté.
Pour Manon Garcia, être une femme, indépendamment (de son sexe, genre, trans, etc.), c'est faire partie des gens qui sont discriminés sur des bases sexistes dans une société patriarcale. Ensuite il y a une liberté dans l'assignation à laquelle elle sont soumises: certaines l’acceptent, d'autre la conteste, c'est une question personnelle; la réalisation à partir de laquelle il faut penser c'est que la soumission est proposée comme un destin pour les femmes."
(Manon Garcia dans l'émission Les Chemins de la Philosophie, diffusée sur Grance Culture le 5 octobre 2018)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/manon-garcia-philosophe-feministe-1446941

E4.4.3. The Mirror and Alienation

E4.4.3.A. The Illusion of Reason and the Narcissistic Echo.
The human struggle to see beyond the self. How we claim to be rational but live irrationally, and how our relationships with the world and others are often merely projections of our own interiority—a "hall of mirrors" where we only see ourselves.

E4.4.3.A_REF1_PH

EL3.152. OUR RESISTANCE TO REASON ARISES FROM OUR FEAR OF LOSING COMFORTING ILLUSIONS—FOR TRUE RATIONALITY REQUIRES US TO SHIFT OUR EMOTIONAL FOCUS AWAY FROM SELF-CENTERED DESIRES TOWARD AN OBJECTIVE UNDERSTANDING OF THE WORLD AND OUR ROLE IN HUMANITY'S DEVELOPMENT.
"The strength of our opposition to the development of reason is measured by the strength of our dislike of being disillusioned. We should all admit, if it were put to us directly, that it is good to get rid of illusions, but in practice the process of disillusionment is painful and disheartening. We all confess to the desire to get at the truth, but in practice the desire for truth is the desire to be disillusioned. The real struggle centres in the emotional field, because reason is the impulse to overcome bias and prejudice in our own favour, and to allow our feelings and desires to be fashioned by things outside us, often by things over which we have no control. The effort to achieve this can rarely be pleasant or flattering to our self-esteem. Our natural tendency is to feel and to believe in the way that satisfies our impulses. We all like to feel that we are the central figure in the picture, and that our own fate ought to be different from that of everybody else. We feel that life should make an exception in our favour. The development of reason in us means overcoming all this. Our real nature as persons is to be reasonable and to extend and develop our capacity for reason. It is to acquire greater and greater capacity to act objectively and not in terms of our subjective constitution. […]

The real problem of the development of emotional reason is to shift the centre of feeling from the self to the world outside. We can only begin to grow up into rationality when we begin to see our own emotional life not as the centre of things but as part of the development of humanity."
(John Macmurray, Reason and Emotion, 1935)

E4.4.3.A_REF2_PSI

EL3.153. “THE COUNTERCULTURAL SANITY OF THE IRRATIONAL: ON THE BLIND SPOTS OF REASON.
In one crucial respect at least, the human animal does not pass the mirror test of self-knowledge: We move through the world by impulse and emotion, then look back and rationalize our choices, declaring ourselves creatures of reason. Western civilization, with its structural bias favoring the left brain, has been especially culpable in this dangerous dissociation from ourselves, our full and feeling selves. Despite everything our analytical tools have revealed about how the mind constructs the world, about how our entire experience of reality is a function of that great sieve of emotional relevance — attention — we continue casting ourselves in the theater of rationality, only to find ourselves bewildered again and again by our own nature, by the constant revelation of illusion we mistake for reality.”
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

“Our present general bewilderment… lays bare the irrational roots of human behavior which psychology tries to explain rationally in order to make it intelligible, that is, acceptable… People, though they may think and talk rationally — and even behave so — yet live irrationally. […]

Bound by the ideas of a better past gone by and a brighter future to come, we feel helpless in the present because we cannot even for a moment stop its movement so as to direct it more intelligently. We still have to learn, it seems, that life, in order to maintain itself, must revolt every so often against man’s ceaseless attempts to master its irrational forces with his mind. […]
In their extremely conscious effort to reproduce what they call the “unconscious” modern painters and writers have followed modern psychology in attempting the impossible, namely to rationalize the irrational. This paradoxical state of affairs betrays itself in the basic axiom of psychoanalysis, a mechanistic theory of life according to which all mental processes and emotional reactions are determined by the Unconscious, that is, by something which in itself is unknown and undeterminable. Modern art has adopted this rational psychology of the irrational legitimately, because art itself, like psychology, has been from the beginning an attempt to master life rationally by interpreting it in terms of the current ideologies, that is, it has striven to re-create life in order to control it. The socio-political events of our day amply justify the need for something “beyond” our psychology which has proved inadequate to account for such strange happenings. […]

Because of the inherent nature of the human being, man has always lived beyond psychology, in other words, irrationally. If we can grasp this paradoxical fact and accept it as the basis of our own living, then we shall be able to discover new values in place of the old ones which seem to be crumbling before our very eyes — vital human values, not mere psychological interpretations predetermined by our preferred ideologies. These new values which have to be discovered and rediscovered every so often are in reality old values, the natural human values which in the course of time are lost in rationalizations of one kind or another.”
(Otto Rank,  Beyond Psychology, 1941)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2025/01/14/otto-rank-irrational/?mc_cid=5bed3a174b&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E4.4.3.A_REF3_PH JUST AS THE EYE CANNOT SEE ITSELF, THE SAGE CANNOT "BE" AND "WATCH HIMSELF BEING" SIMULTANEOUSLY.
"OMBRE DANS LA FLAMME. — La flamme n’est pas aussi lumineuse pour elle-même que pour les autres qu’elle éclaire : de même aussi le sage. [...]"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain, Aphorisme 570,  1878)

JUST AS THE EYE CANNOT SEE ITSELF, THE SAGE CANNOT "BE" AND "WATCH HIMSELF BEING" SIMULTANEOUSLY.
"OMBRE DANS LA FLAMME. — La flamme n’est pas aussi lumineuse pour elle-même que pour les autres qu’elle éclaire : de même aussi le sage. [...]"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain, Aphorisme 570,  1878)

E4.4.3.A_REF4_PH  OTHERS ARE OFTEN MERELY "USEFUL SHOWCASES FOR THE CONTENTS OF OUR OWN MINDS" AND LOVE IS "LESS A LOVE FOR HER THAN A LOVE IN ME." We think we are looking at the world, but we are only seeing our own projections.
     "What Marcel feels is a gap or lack in himself, an open wound, a blow to the heart, a hell inside himself. Is all of this really love of Albertine? […]

The heart and mind of another are unknowable, even unapproachable, except in fantasies and projections that are really elements of the knower’s own life, not the other’s.

Proust’s protagonist arrives at this conclusion himself:

       I understood that my love was less a love for her than a love in me… It is the misfortune of beings to be for us nothing else but useful showcases for the contents of our own minds.

And yet this conclusion, Nussbaum argues, is but a form of self-protection — in denying one’s porousness to the other and instead painting love as a curious relationship with oneself, it bolsters the illusion of self-sufficiency as a hedge against the suffering which love entails. Such a conception is ultimately a form of self-delusion masking the true nature of love and what Nussbaum calls its “dangerous openness.” Reflecting on Proust’s ultimate revelation, she writes:

      Love … is a permanent structural feature of our soul. […]

The alternations between love and its denial, suffering and denial of suffering … constitute the most essential and ubiquitous structural feature of the human heart. In suffering we know only suffering. We call our rationalizations false and delusive, and we do not see to what extent they express a mechanism that is regular and deep in our lives. But this means that in love itself we do not yet have full knowledge of love — for we do not grasp its limits and boundaries. Sea creatures cannot be said to know the sea in the way that a creature does who can survey and dwell in both sea and land, noticing how they bound and limit one another."
(Maria Popova's review on Martha Nussbaum, Love’s Knowledge: Essays on Philosophy and Literature, 1990)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2017/01/16/martha-nussbaum-loves-knowledge/?mc_cid=2ca48a6616&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E4.4.3.B. The Constitutive Void: The Mirror and the Imaginary Master.
The specific mechanism of alienation as defined by Lacan. He posits that the subject is not a whole entity that becomes alienated, but is born of alienation in the Mirror Stage.This internal void leads to the projection of a "Master" (the Big Other).

E4.4.3.B_REF1_TH JACQUES DARRIULAT EXPLAINS THAT LACAN REJECTS THE ENLIGHTENMENT'S OPTIMISTIC VIEW OF AN AUTONOMOUS, RATIONAL SELF, ARGUING INSTEAD FOR A "TRAGIC PHILOSOPHY" where the subject is fundamentally defined by a "radical insufficiency" and an inescapable, constitutive alienation, making any return to wholeness impossible.
"La théorie lacanienne de la relation analytique se trouve ainsi reposer sur la structure de cet inconnu, de cet être fort problématique qu’on nomme « le sujet ». Car il ne faudrait pas croire que la résolution de ce qu’on pourrait nommer le « drame analytique » – Lacan lui-même n’a-t-il pas démontré l’analogie entre le parcours de l’analyse et le développement de la tragédie antique dans sa forme la plus pure, soit l’Antigone de Sophocle ? – conduise le sujet à une réconciliation heureuse de lui-même avec lui-même, retrouvant une plénitude que l’aliénation spéculaire lui avait un moment dérobé. L’aliénation du sujet à son maître n’est nullement aux yeux de Lacan une mésaventure dans laquelle choit la conscience dans le roman de son apprentissage, elle est à l’inverse à la racine même de la subjectivité, et comme l’acte de naissance du sujet. Il serait totalement vain d’imaginer un moi autonome qui succomberait, par l’effet d’une fascination adventice, à l’autorité aliénante d’un maître, épreuve qu’il lui serait possible de surmonter dans la suite de son développement. Il n’y a de sujet qu’aliéné, puisque c’est nécessairement de son aliénation au Double qu’il procède. [...] Comment le sujet pourrait-il se rendre autonome, lui qui est tout entier la créature du Maître sous le regard duquel il se construit, lui qui doit l’acte de sa naissance à la capture imaginaire qui l’assujettit à l’image spéculaire du Grand Autre ? Contre la philosophie, qui se fonde sur la circularité de la chose pensante, soit le pouvoir de la pensée de trouver en elle-même, au prix d’une conversion en son intérieur, le point d’appui qui assure le vrai, Lacan pose en principe – il s’agit bien chez lui d’une pétition, et non d’une démonstration – l’insuffisance radicale du sujet, le manque qui le travaille et qui creuse en lui l’indépassable malheur de sa condition. Contre l’optimisme des Lumières, qui postule un sujet rationnel en état de fonder par lui-même le discours de la science, Lacan parie pour une philosophie tragique, selon laquelle toute subjectivité est marquée d’une indépassable incomplétude, creusée d’un manque constitutif qui destine le sujet à la quête d’un désir insatiable plutôt qu’à la marche triomphale du progrès et de la science. Lacan plus proche de Kierkegaard que de Descartes, même s’il ne manque pas de souligner la pertinence du passage cartésien de la première à la seconde méditation, passage précisément qui aliène la chose pensante au point d’Archimède du dieu vérace, sans le soutien duquel il serait absolument vain de bien conduire sa raison ni de chercher la vérité dans les sciences."
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Ecouter la folie, V - Le Maître, 2019)

Read the full article in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Lacan/Ecouterlafolie/Ecouterlafolie5.html

E4.4.3.B_REF1.1_TH LACAN ARGUES THAT THE SUBJECT IS CONSTITUTIONALLY DEFINED BY AN IRREDUCIBLE ALIENATION FROM THE IMAGINARY "MASTER" (THE BIG OTHER)—a split originating in the mirror stage that renders the self a fragmented "debris" endlessly seeking to fill a void that desire can never close.
"Cette antiphilosophie de principe conduit Lacan à répudier la théorie hégélienne de la maîtrise, non seulement en raison du savoir absolu qui couronne le mouvement de la phénoménologie de l’esprit – savoir absolu que Lacan interprète à tort comme l’achèvement du savoir (c’est à Kogève qu’il doit cette erreur notable, alors qu’il s’agit dans la pensée de Hegel de la forme pure et vide encore de la rationalité qui se trouve au principe de la constitution de toute science), savoir absolu en lequel toutes les contradictions seraient dépassées, toutes les aliénations résolues dans la forme plénière de la totalité – mais encore dans son rapport à la dialectique des consciences, dialectique dite « du maître et de l’esclave » – encore un faux-sens dû à Kogève, qui aimait à dramatiser les oppositions, alors qu’il s’agit du maître et de son valet (Herr und Knecht, et non Meister und Sklave), sur le modèle du couple Don Juan-Sganarelle, bien plutôt que du lien qui réunit le maître antique – Athénien ou Romain – à son indispensable complément : le travailleur servile. Certes, Lacan se reconnaît en Hegel quand celui-ci fait du désir, vecteur de toute négativité, l’essence même de la conscience, et aliène toute conscience à une autre conscience, par la médiation de laquelle il lui est seulement possible de s’élever à la reconnaissance de son essence, soit la négativité du désir. Mais cette aliénation qui conduit nécessairement à la toute-puissance du maître comme à la soumission de l’esclave, est selon Hegel féconde, en ce sens qu’elle condamne le maître à l’oisiveté ou à la futilité du jeu, tandis que l’esclave, par le travail forcé auquel il est soumis, apprend et se construit un savoir, il s’enrichit d’une expérience grâce à laquelle il finira par prendre le dessus et s’affranchira du lien qui le retient à son maître. Le chemin de la liberté passe, selon Hegel, par la servitude laborieuse, non par la maîtrise désœuvrée. Lacan regimbe. Au nom d’une affirmation individualiste et aristocratique du désir, de sa valeur suprême et inconditionnée, Lacan se refuse à accorder la moindre vertu au travail, à ses yeux servile par essence et dont la finalité n’est aucunement – comme on se plaît à le déclarer – la production d’une richesse matérielle ni l’enrichissement spirituel de l’expérience, mais bien la répression du désir dont l’invincible insolence ne peut que mettre en péril les inerties de l’ordre établi. Le message de tous les maîtres, de tous les tyrans – quelque soit l’aspiration à la liberté qui a inspiré le soulèvement révolutionnaire qui les a portés au pouvoir – se résume à ceci, une fois la crise passée et le temps venu du rétablissement de l’ordre : « Retournez au travail et renoncez au désir ». La subjectivité selon Lacan naît de l’aliénation, elle ne rencontre pas cette épreuve, elle en est issue. Il ne saurait donc y avoir quelque dépassement que ce soit du lien de dépendance qui soumet le sujet à l’autorité du maître, figure tout imaginaire, spectre qui n’a d’existence que dans le monde virtuel de l’au-delà du miroir, et en présence duquel le sujet est anéanti comme il est anéanti en présence de l’objet du fantasme ($◇a). Nullement accidentelle, la sujétion du sujet est la suite nécessaire de la castration qu’il a subie lors de sa constitution élaborée au moment du stade du miroir, du fait que le sujet n’a pu se connaître et s’affirmer qu’au prix d’une dissociation d’avec lui-même, d’une mutilation ou d’une division – Spaltung – qui transporte sa vérité la plus intime, la plus « personnelle », dans l’image de ce grand Autre qui toujours le regarde quand il tourne vers lui les yeux. Face à l’hallucination du Double, le sujet, semblable au narrateur du Horla de Maupassant, s’éprouve intimement lui-même comme un déchet, comme le débris inutile d’une amputation de son être, le reste insignifiant de la métamorphose prodigieuse dont le maître resplendissant qui lui fait face au miroir est le fruit accompli (12). Ce manque originel est constitutif de toute subjectivité, et il n’est pas à la portée de l’humain de tenter de s’en affranchir. Cette part de lui-même, cette « livre de chair » que l’hallucination spéculaire arrache au sujet pour la transposer dans l’espace virtuel du miroir (13), ouvre en lui une béance que le désir, toujours, s’efforcera de combler sans parvenir jamais à colmater la brèche. "
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Ecouter la folie, V - Le Maître, 2019)

Read the full article in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Lacan/Ecouterlafolie/Ecouterlafolie5.html

E4.4.3.B_REF1.2_TH JACQUES LACAN CRITIQUES HEGEL'S CONCEPT OF THE "CUNNING OF REASON" AS A REPRESSIVE DELUSION, arguing that the idea of the slave achieving freedom through labor is a political and psychological trap.
"« Sans faire tort à la dialectique hégélienne d'un constat de carence, dès longtemps soulevé sur la question du lien de la société des maitres, nous ne voulons ici qu'y souligner ce qui, à partir de notre expérience, saute aux yeux comme symptomatique, c'est-à­-dire comme installation dans le refoulement. C'est proprement le thème de la Ruse de la raison dont l'erreur plus haut désignée n'amoindrit pas la portée de séduction. Le travail, nous dit-il, auquel s'est soumis l'esclave en renonçant à la jouissance par crainte de la mort, sera justement la voie par où il réalisera la liberté. Il n'y a pas de leurre plus manifeste politiquement, et du même coup psychologiquement. La jouissance est facile à l'esclave et elle laissera le travail serf »  
(Ecrits II, Seuil, 1999, « Subversion du sujet et dialectique du désir », 1960, p. 291)

E4.4.3.B_REF2_TH LACAN DEFINIT LE "MAITRE" (OU LA FIGURE DU PERE) COMME UNE "IMAGE VIRTUELLE DU MIROIR", UN "SPECTRE" PROJETE PAR L'ANALYSANT. LE MAITRE EST UNE PRODUCTION IMAGINAIRE DU SUJET. Nous créons cette hallucination parce que la "logique de l'échange" (la relation horizontale, le relatif) ne suffit pas à fonder la "Vérité" (l'absolu). Le sujet a besoin d'un absolu, donc il invente un Maître qui "détient la vérité". 
"C’est trop peu dire qu’elle met en jeu la figure du Père – en tant qu’il tient lieu du Maître primordial, archétypal – il faut dire qu’elle se fonde tout entière sur cette figure, image virtuelle du miroir, spectre qui hante la mémoire de l’analysant. Dans la relation analytique, telle du moins que l’analysant l’imagine – la figure du Père n’a d’existence que dans l’imaginaire – l’analyste n’a de réalité qu’en tant qu’il incarne, et cela par l’image que l’analysant projette sur lui, la figure d’un Maître qui seul détient la vérité. Il y a à cette hallucination une nécessité de structure : nous avons vu en effet que la seule logique de l’échange est incapable de fonder la vérité, l’échange lui-même étant nécessairement de l’ordre de la relation tandis que la vérité exige l’absolu, c'est-à-dire ce qui ne dépend pas d’un autre."
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Ecouter la folie, V - Le Maître, 2019)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Lacan/Ecouterlafolie/Ecouterlafolie5.html

E4.4.4. The Collective/Systemic Mind

E4.4.4.A. The Emergent Whole: A Quality Superior to the Sum of Parts.
Can the "collective mind" be defined as a functional, living reality?

E4.4.4.A_REF1_TH

EL3.26.G. "ORDRE ET DÉSORDRE
Quand un type de relation particulier s'établit entre deux atomes d'hydrogène et un atome d'oxygène, ils forment une substance, H2O, dont les propriétés ne sont pas réductibles à celle des atomes particuliers qui la composent. L'eau est quelque chose de différent et non pas seulement la somme des caractéristiques particulières de l'hydrogène et de l'oxygène ; et toute tentative pour saisir son essence en la réduisant à ses composants séparés aboutirait à un non-sens. Mais c'est précisément dans ce non-sens que nous sommes tous enclins à tomber. Prenons le simple cas d'une relation dyadique, cette fois non pas entre deux atomes, mais entre deux êtres humains. Nous avons vu comment, en cas de conflit, chaque partenaire a tendance à blâmer l'autre. lls sont tous les deux convaincus qu'ils font tout pour résoudre le conflit, et pourtant, il persiste, et s'aggrave même parfois. Cela doit être la faute de l'autre, car où la faute pourrait-elle bien-être ? Il ne peut y avoir de troisième source de conflit entre seulement deux personnes. Et pourtant il y en a une. Toute relation (que ce soit entre deux atomes, deux cellules, deux organes, deux personnes, deux nations, etc.) et plus que, et différent de, la somme de tous les ingrédients que les entités impliquées apportent dans la relation. Les biologistes appelle cela une qualité émergente, les psychologues parlent de Gestalt. Mais il est pratiquement impossible de la discerner quand on se trouve à l'intérieur de la relation. [...]
(Paul Watzlawick, Comment réussir à échouer, 1988)

E4.4.4.A_REF1.1_TH

EL3.26.G.1. CES NOUVELLES FORMES D'ORDRE NE PEUVENT ÉMERGER QUE LÀ OÙ EXISTE UN CERTAIN DÉSORDRE "Mais c'est aussi là que tout cela devient inacceptable pour les perfectionnistes et les manichéens. Car il devient évident que ces nouvelles formes d'ordre ne peuvent émerger que là où existe un certain désordre. W Ross Ashby, un des fondateurs de la cybernétique, illustrait ce processus à l'aide de l'exemple suivant : un funambule peut garder son équilibre grâce aux mouvements qu'il ne cesse de faire au hasard avec son balancier. (Il en est de même pour les mouvements qu'un cycliste fait avec le guidon de sa bicyclette). Si on voulait “perfectionner” le style du funambule, on pourrait être tenté de saisir sa perche et de l'empêcher de bouger mais le résultat immédiat serait de faire perdre l'équilibre au funambule, et de le faire tomber. Évident non ? Oui, mais seulement dans le cas des funambules et des cyclistes. Pour tout autre cas, nous sommes généralement loin de comprendre que l'ordre sans un certain degré de désordre devient hostile à la vie, dans la mesure où il anéantit toute possibilité du développement de la néguentropie [nommée aussi entropie négative, facteur d'organisation croissante des systèmes physiques, humains et sociaux qui s'oppose à la tendance naturelle à la désorganisation d'un système]. L'ordre absolu est une ultrasolution : c'est ce que plus d'un innovateur dans le domaine social et plus d'un consultant dans celui du management découvrit à ses dépens en essayant de parvenir à l'ordre parfait. Il va sans dire que le désordre en lui-même et par lui-même et aussi destructif quand seul l'entropie le caractérise. Il faut une interaction des deux : le changement est synonyme de l'émergence d'une nouvelle qualité ; cette qualité émergente présuppose, et à son tour crée, un certain degré de désordre. Voilà une pilule difficile à avaler pour beaucoup, car il est bien plus facile de dénigrer les méfaits du désordre que ceux de l'ordre."
(Paul Watzlawick, Comment réussir à échouer, 1988)

E4.4.4.A_REF2_LIT

EL3.145.A.1.1. IT IS NOT ENOUGH TO SAY THAT WE CANNOT KNOW OR JUDGE BECAUSE ALL THE INFORMATION IS NOT IN. "There are colonies of pelagic tunicates [Pyrosoma giganteum] which have taken a shape like the finger of a glove. Each member of the colony is an individual animal, but the colony is another individual animal, not at all like the sum of its individuals. Some of the colonists, girdling the open end, have developed the ability, one against the other, of making a pulsing movement very like muscular action. Others of the colonists collect the food and distribute it, and the outside of the glove is hardened and protected against contact. Here are two animals, and yet the same thing—something the early Church would have been forced to call a mystery. When the early Church called some matter “a mystery” it accepted that thing fully and deeply as so, but simply not accessible to reason because reason had no business with it. So a man of individualistic reason, if he must ask, “Which is the animal, the colony or the individual?”’ must abandon his particular kind of reason and say, “Why, it’s two animals and they aren’t alike any more than the cells of my body are like me. I am much more than the sum of my cells and, for all I know, they are much more than the division of me.” There is no quietism in such acceptance, but rather the basis for a far deeper understanding of us and our world. And now this is ready for the taboo-box. [...] 
It is not enough to say that we cannot know or judge because all the information is not in. The process of gathering knowledge does not lead to knowing. A child’s world spreads only a little beyond his understanding while that of a great scientist thrusts outward immeasurably. An answer is invariably the parent of a great family of new questions. So we draw worlds and fit them like tracings against the world about us, and crumple them when they do not fit and draw new ones. The tree-frog in the high pool in the mountain cleft, had he been endowed with human reason, on finding a cigarette butt in the water might have said, “Here is an impossibility. There is no tobacco hereabouts nor any paper. Here is evidence of fire and there has been no fire. This thing cannot fly nor crawl nor blow in the wind. In fact, this thing cannot be and I will deny it, for if I admit that this thing is here the whole world of frogs is in danger, and from there it is only one step to anti-frogicentricism.” And so that frog will for the rest of his life try to forget that something that is, is."
(John Steinbeck,  The Log from the Sea of Cortez, 1940)

E4.4.4.A_REF3_PH "TRUTHS THAT NO SINGLE INDIVIDUAL NOTICED."
"Towards the end of the film 12 angry men from Sidney Lumet (1957), the jurors collaborate to solve the puzzle of the woman across the street. By noticing the indentations on Juror 4's nose, they deduce that the eyewitness wore glasses but likely wasn't wearing them in bed when she allegedly saw the murder. This scene is powerful because it shows how observation and collective reasoning can uncover truths that no single individual noticed."
(Pierre Schinder)

Watch the scene on You Tube: https://youtu.be/RGF6Qyvz2no?si=F11TQs4t1d1CX1OQ

E4.4.4.B. The Shadow of the Collective: Herd Instinct and Regression.
The dangers inherent in the systemic mind. How collective thought colonizes the individual, often resulting in a loss of autonomy, a reduction to the "average," or a descent into mob stupidity.

E4.4.4.B_REF1_LIT MUSIL DIAGNOSTIQUE LA « MEGALOMANIE » ET LA « BETISE » INHERENTES AU GROUPE. Il montre que le passage du "Je" au "Nous" (peuples, partis) ne crée pas toujours de la sagesse, mais souvent une "décivilisation" et un "trouble de l'équilibre affectif".
"Et après avoir parlé de la vanité dont les peuples et les partis font étalage aujourd'hui à force de se croire éclairés, il faut maintenant ajouter que la majorité épicurienne - exactement comme l'individu mégalomane dans ses rêves éveillés - a monopolisé non seulement la sagesse, mais encore la vertu, et se trouve brave, noble, invincible, pieuse et belle ; d'autant  que les hommes, dans le monde actuel, ont tendance dès lors qu'ils sont en nombre, à se permettre tout ce qui leur est interdit en tant qu'individus. Du coup, à voir ces privilèges du “nous” devenu grand, on a l'impression que le travail de civilisation et de domestication croissante de l'individu doit être compensé par une décivilisation proportionnelle des nations, des États et des confréries politiques ; ce qui se manifeste là publiquement n'est rien d'autre qu'un trouble de l'équilibre affectif antérieur, au fond, à l'opposition du moi et du nous, de même qu'à toute évaluation morale. Mais est-ce encore - nous demandera t-on - de la bêtise, cela a-t-il encore le moindre rapport avec elle ? Chers auditeurs, personne n'en doute. [...]"
(Robert Musil, De la bêtise, 1937)

E4.4.4.B_REF2_PH A_Cybèle Varela_De tudo aquilo que pode ser I_1967 ; A_Cybèle Varela_De tudo aquilo que pode ser II_1967 ; A_Cybèle Varela_De tudo aquilo que pode ser III_1967 /Cybèle Varela/

BOHM RADICALLY DECENTERS THE SUBJECT BY PROPOSING THAT THOUGHT IS A "POOL OF KNOWLEDGE" THAT MOVES LIKE A VIRUS, INDEPENDENT OF THE INDIVIDUAL. We do not have thoughts; thought has us. 
"In “The Nature of Collective Thought,” Bohm proposes that a “pool of knowledge” — both tacit and overt — has accumulated throughout human evolution. It is this pool of knowledge, says Bohm, that gives rise to much of our perception of the world, the meanings we assign to events, and indeed our very sense of individuality. Such knowledge, or thought, moves independent of any individual, or even any particular culture — very much like a virus. From this perspective, our attempts to solve our problems through highly personalized analysis, or by attributing malignant qualities to “other” groups or individuals, are of limited validity. [...]"
(Lee Nichol Jemez Springs, Foreword  to David Bohm's On dialogue, 1996)

"THE NATURE OF COLLECTIVE THOUGHT [...]
The real crisis is not in these events which are confronting us, like wars and crime and drugs and economic chaos and pollution; it's really in the thought which is making it — all the time. [...]
The kind of thought that's going on all around us begins to take over in every one of us, without our even noticing it. It's spreading like a virus and each one of us is nourishing that virus. Do we have a kind of immune system that stops it ? The only way to stop it is to recognize it, to acknowledge it, to see what it is. [...]
We may imagine that the source of the problem is that somebody "over there" is thinking these wrong thoughts or that a lot of people are. But the source of the problem is much deeper. It is that something is going wrong in the whole process of thought, which is collective, which belongs to all of us. [...]

Further, in our language we have a distinction between "thinking" and "thought." "Thinking" implies the present tense — some activity going on which may include critical sensitivity to what can go wrong. Also there may be new ideas, and perhaps occasionally perception of some kind inside. "Thought" is the past participle of that. We have the idea that after we have been thinking something, it just evaporates. But thinking doesn't disappear. It goes somehow into the brain and leaves something — a trace — which becomes thought. And thought then acts automatically. So thought is the response from memory from the past, from what has been done. Thus we have thinking and thought. We also have the word "feeling." Its present tense suggests the active present, that the feeling is directly in contact with reality. But it might be useful to introduce the word "felt," to say there are "feelings" and "felts." That is, "felts" are feelings which have been recorded. A traumatic experience in the past can make you feel very uncomfortable when remembered. Nostalgic feelings are also from the past. A lot of the feelings that come up are really from the past, they're "felts." But if they are just a recording being replayed, they don't have as much significance as if they were a response to the present immediate situation.
It's really very important to see that our culture gives us a wrong lead about thoughts and felts. It constantly tends to imply that they could be separated and that one could control the other. But thoughts and felts are one process; they are not two. They both come from the memory; in the memory they are probably all mixed. Memory also affects the physical body. It affects the sensations. You can produce states of stress in the body from memory of states of stress. Therefore, when memory acts you cannot separate the intellectual function, the emotional function, the chemical function, the muscular function-because this tacit knowledge is also a kind of memory — they're all there." 
(David Bohm, On dialogue, 1996)

E4.4.4.B_REF3_PH NIETZSCHE ARGUES THAT WHAT WE EXPERIENCE AS "MY" THOUGHT IS ACTUALLY A TRANSLATION INTO THE "PERSPECTIVE OF THE HERD."
"Le développement du langage et le développement de la conscience ( ... ) vont la main dans la main. ( ... ) L’homme inventeur de signes est à la fois l’homme qui prend une conscience de plus en plus aiguë de lui-même ; ce ne fut qu’en tant qu’animal social qu’il apprit à le faire - il le fait encore et de plus en plus. – Ma pensée, comme on le voit, est que la conscience n’appartient pas au fond à l’existence individuelle de l’homme, bien plutôt à tout ce qui fait de lui une nature communautaire et grégaire ; que  la conscience, par conséquent, ne s’est subtilement développée que sous le rapport de l’utilité communautaire et grégaire, et que chacun de nous, nécessairement, en dépit de la meilleure volonté pour se comprendre aussi individuellement que possible, pour « se connaître soi-même », ne fera pourtant jamais autre chose que d’amener à sa conscience du non-individuel, ce qui est « moyen» ; - que notre pensée même, constamment, se voit pour ainsi dire majorée par le caractère de la conscience – par le « génie de l’espèce », qui règne en elle – et retraduite dans la perspective du troupeau. Nos actes, dans le fond, sont intégralement et incomparablement personnels, uniques, individuels en un sens illimité, cela est hors de doute ; mais sitôt que nous les retraduisons dans la conscience, ils cessent de le paraître ... Tel est, à mon sens, le phénoménalisme, le perspectivisme proprement dit : la nature de la conscience animale implique que le monde dont nous pouvons devenir conscients n’est qu’un monde superficiel, un monde de signes, un monde généralisé, vulgarisé – que tout ce qui devient conscient s’en trouve du même coup plat, amenuisé, réduit, jusqu’à la stupidité du stéréotype grégaire ; que toute prise de conscience revient à une opération de généralisation de superficialisation, de falsification, donc à une opération foncièrement corruptrice."
(Nietzsche, Le Gai Savoir, 1882)

E4.5. Beyond Reason: Intuition and the "Spirit of Finesse". Accessing reality through non-rational channels. When the "I" and "Reason" fail, other faculties take over.

E4.5.1. The Spirit of Geometry vs. The Spirit of Finesse

E4.5.1.A. The fundamental distinction between the Spirit of Geometry (principles, deduction, force) and the Spirit of Finesse (intuition, "single glance," heart).

E4.5.1.A_REF1_LIT 

EL3.67.A.1.3.  “YOUR INTUITION AND YOUR INTELLECT SHOULD BE WORKING TOGETHER… MAKING LOVE” 
(Madeleine L’Engle)

E4.5.1.A_REF2_PH

EL3.120. ALL MATHEMATICIANS WOULD BE INTUITIVE IF THEY HAD CLEAR SIGHT "In the intuitive mind the principles are found in common use, and are before the eyes of everybody. One has only to look, and no effort is necessary; it is only a question of good eyesight, but it must be good, for the principles are so subtle and so numerous, that it is almost impossible but that some escape notice. Now the omission of one principle leads to error; thus one must have very clear sight to see all the principles, and in the next place an accurate mind not to draw false deductions from known principles. [...]
All mathematicians would then be intuitive if they had clear sight, for they do not reason incorrectly from principles known to them; and intuitive minds would be mathematical if they could turn their eyes to the principles of mathematics to which they are unused. [...]
The reason, therefore, that some intuitive minds are not mathematical is that they cannot at all turn their attention to the principles of mathematics. But the reason that mathematicians are not intuitive is that they do not see what is before them, and that, accustomed to the exact and plain principles of mathematics, and not reasoning till they have well inspected and arranged their principles, they are lost in matters of intuition where the principles do not allow of such arrangement. They are scarcely seen; they are felt rather than seen; there is the greatest difficulty in making them felt by those who do not of themselves perceive them. These principles are so fine and so numerous that a very delicate and very clear sense is needed to perceive them, and to judge rightly and justly when they are perceived, without for the most part being able to demonstrate them in order as in mathematics; because the principles are not known to us in the same way, and because it would be an endless matter to undertake it… Mathematicians wish to treat matters of intuition mathematically, and make themselves ridiculous. [...]
There are then two kinds of intellect: the one able to penetrate acutely and deeply into the conclusions of given premises, and this is the precise intellect; the other able to comprehend a great number of premises without confusing them, and this is the mathematical intellect. The one has force and exactness, the other comprehension. Now the one quality can exist without the other; the intellect can be strong and narrow, and can also be comprehensive and weak. [...]
Those who are accustomed to judge by feeling do not understand the process of reasoning, for they would understand at first sight, and are not used to seek for principles. And others, on the contrary, who are accustomed to reason from principles, do not at all understand matters of feeling, seeking principles, and being unable to see at a glance. [...]
The understanding and the feelings are moulded by intercourse; the understanding and feelings are corrupted by intercourse. Thus good or bad society improves or corrupts them. It is, then, all-important to know how to choose in order to improve and not to corrupt them; and we cannot make this choice, if they be not already improved and not corrupted. Thus a circle is formed, and those are fortunate who escape it. [...]
The heart has its reasons, which reason does not know… We know truth, not only by the reason, but also by the heart."
(Pascal, Les pensées)

E4.5.1.A_REF3_LIT

EL3.125. THE DUALISTIC APPROACH IN WESTERN THOUGHT (SEPARATION OF SPIRIT AND MATTER), FROM THE GREEKS TO MODERN RATIONALISM, HAS LED TO SIGNIFICANT ACHIEVEMENTS: the development of logic and scientific thought, and the establishment of rights that ensure individual freedom.
"Concerning the dominant current of thought that has prevailed in the West, from the Greeks to the rationalism of the modern age, via Descartes, one could say very schematically that what has singled it out and what, in many respects, has made its greatness - even if, for the last century, it has come under attack on the philosophical level - is its dualistic approach: a dualism based on the separation of spirit and matter, of subject and object.  All of humanity has benefited from this separation as a necessary step that allowed positive achievements: the affirmation of the object to be observed and analyzed led to the advent of logic and scientific thought; the affirmation of the subject, on the other hand, led to the elaboration of rights that protect its status, and foment effective freedom."
(François Cheng, Five Meditations on Beauty, 2006)

E4.5.1.A_REF4_PH THE EXAMPLE OF MATHEMATICS:
"While admitting that all knowledge is elicited and caused by experience, we shall nevertheless hold that some knowledge is a priority in the sense that the experience which makes us think of it does not suffice to prove it, merely so directs our attention that we see its truth without requiring any proof from experience."
(Bertrand Russel, The Problems of Philosophy, 1912)

E4.5.1.A_REF4.1_PH INDUCTIVE VS. A PRIORI PROPOSITION "The difference between an a priori general proposition and an empirical generalization does not come in the meaning of the proposition ; it comes in the nature of the evidence for it. In the empirical case, the evidence consists in the particular instances. [...] The progress of science is constantly producing such subsumptions, and therefore giving a constantly wider inductive basis or scientific generalizations. But although this gives a greater degree of certainty, it does not give a different kind : the ultimate ground remains inductive, i.e. derived from instances, and not an a priori connection of universals such as we have in logic and arithmetic."
(Bertarnd Russel, The Problems of Philosophy, 1912)

E4.5.1.A_REF5_PH FELIX RAVAISSON DEFINIT EXPLICITEMENT LE "CŒUR" COMME LE SIEGE DE L'INSTINCT ET DE L'ESPRIT DE FINESSE, CAPABLE DE SAISIR LES PREMIERS PRINCIPES (ESPACE, NOMBRES) LA OU LA RAISON EST IMPUISSANTE.
Le modèle où se trouve la règle qu’applique le jugement, ce modèle si réel, tout autre qu’un nombre ou qu’une idée, quelle en est maintenant, selon Pascal, la nature ? C’est ce qu’indique un autre nom encore qu’il substitue plus d’une fois, en l’associant à celui d’instinct, au nom d’esprit de finesse et de souplesse, à savoir le nom de « cœur ». 
« Nous connaissons la vérité, non seulement par la raison, mais encore par le cœur ; c’est de cette dernière sorte que nous connaissons les premiers principes, et c’est en vain que le raisonnement, qui n’y a point de part, essaie de les combattre. Les Pyrrhoniens… y travaillent inutilement… Et c’est sur ces connaissances du cœur et de l’instinct qu’il faut que la raison s’appuie, et qu’elle y fonde tout son discours. Le cœur sent qu’il y a trois dimensions dans l’espace et que les nombres sont infinis, et la raison démontre ensuite qu’il n’y a point deux nombres carrés dont l’un soit double de l’autre. Les principes se sentent, les propositions se concluent, et le tout avec certitude, quoique par différentes voies. Et il est aussi inutile et aussi ridicule que la raison demande au cœur des preuves de ses premiers principes pour vouloir y consentir, qu’il serait ridicule que le cœur demandât à la raison un sentiment de toutes les propositions qu’elle démontre pour vouloir les recevoir. Cette impuissance ne doit donc servir qu’à humilier la raison, qui voudrait juger de tout, mais non pas à combattre notre certitude, comme si il n’y avait que la raison capable de nous instruire. Plût à Dieu que nous n’en eussions au contraire jamais besoin, et que nous connussions toutes choses par instinct et par sentiment. Mais la nature nous a refusé ce bien… » [...]

Sans doute il a pu croire, et avec lui Descartes et Leibniz, que souvent, dans l’exercice de nos facultés, ce qui paraît être instantanéité n’est que mouvement, ce qui semble être intuition n’est que promptitude de raisonnement. Il n’en est pas moins vrai que, suivant lui, dans notre perception de choses d’ordre intellectuel et moral principalement, l’union de parties en touts, de détails en ensembles, ne peut être que l’application au multiple d’une simplicité primordiale. 

Enfin, ce centre auquel le cœur nous enseigne à tout rapporter, extrémité où tend de près ou de loin tout ce qui appartient à l’esprit de finesse, au sentiment, au jugement, qu’est-ce en soi ? Une haute volonté à laquelle il est de notre destinée de nous réunir.
Présentement, nous sommes mêlés « d’esprit et de boue ». Immatérielle et, par suite, immortelle, l’âme est liée à la matière et ainsi distraite d’elle-même. « L’âme est jetée dans le corps, où elle trouve nombre, temps, dimension. Elle raisonne là-dessus et ne peut croire qu’il y ait autre chose ». L’homme occupe ainsi une place moyenne entre le néant, vers lequel l’inclinent l’étendue et le nombre, et l’existence absolue, qui est la divine, et vers laquelle il serait de son essence de se porter. Aussi notre condition en cette vie est-elle, d’une manière générale, la médiocrité."
(Felix Ravaisson, La philosophie de Pascal, 1887)

E4.5.1.A_REF6_PH ESSENTIAL "SUPPLENESS" IS REQUIRED TO GRASP THE MORAL AND AESTHETIC WORLD, WHERE EVERY DETAIL IS INSEPARABLY IMPREGNATED WITH THE TOTALITY.
"Il y a, dit Pascal, deux classes de choses très différentes. Les premières sont les figures et les nombres, objets très simples, mais hors de l’usage commun, en sorte qu’il est aisé de les comprendre, difficile seulement « de se tourner de leur côté pour les considérer. » Par ce caractère, Pascal les désigne comme des objets abstraits de la réalité, qui seule est dans le commun usage. Leurs propriétés, ajoute-t-il, dépendantes de peu de principes, sont liées entre elles d’une manière évidente, et il n’y a, pour les connaître, qu’à aller de l’une à l’autre par une déduction non interrompue. [...]
Si dans le monde moral en général les choses ne sont pas grossièrement séparées comme dans le physique, mais se tiennent de tout près et même se pénètrent (point d’idée, disait Plotin, en laquelle ne se voient toutes les idées), si chaque détail y est comme imprégné de la totalité, c’est surtout dans les beaux objets, où il n’est point de partie qui ne conspire au reste, que tout vaut par l’accord et la conformité. Là principalement, pour entendre le tout, il faut aller et venir sans arrêt d’une extrémité à l’autre, et surtout des effets sensibles à leur principe intelligible, ce qui exige un perpétuel va-et-vient, des retours et rebroussements rapides, et, par conséquent, une parfaite souplesse. C’est ce que Pascal indique dans cette phrase du Discours sur les passions de l’amour : « Il y a deux sortes d’esprit : l’un géométrique et l’autre que l’on peut appeler de finesse. Le premier a des vues lentes, dures et inflexibles, mais le dernier a une souplesse de pensée qu’il applique en même temps aux diverses parties aimables de ce qu’il aime. Des yeux il va jusqu’au cœur, et par le mouvement du dehors il connaît ce qui se passe au dedans."
(Félix Ravaisson, La philosophie de Pascal, 1887)

E4.5.1.A_REF6.1_PH THE PERFECTION OF PASCAL'S "SPIRIT OF FINESSE" LIES IN ITS ABILITY TO GRASP REALITY "AT A SINGLE GLANCE."
"C’est encore une perfection que Pascal attribue à son « esprit de finesse » que de voir les choses « d’une seule vue. » Rien de plus opposé à la marche déductive de l’esprit géométrique. Mais c’est si bien une perfection que le géomètre lui-même doit toujours chercher à s’en rapprocher. Pour Descartes, c’était une imperfection de notre esprit, conséquence de son commerce avec le temps, d’avoir besoin, pour saisir les rapports, après en avoir parcouru successivement les éléments, de la mémoire. L’enchaînement des déductions n’avait pour objet que de joindre les principes avec les conséquences. Pour amener l’entendement à la perception claire de leur union, il fallait s’exercer à parcourir la série des conséquences de plus en plus rapidement, jusqu’à ce qu’on en vînt à réunir dans une appréhension d’un instant le commencement et la fin."
(Félix Ravaisson, La philosophie de Pascal, 1887)

E4.5.1.A_REF6.2_PH FÉLIX RAVAISSON ALIGNS LEIBNIZ’S VIEW OF SENSORY PLEASURE AS AN UNCONSCIOUS MATHEMATICAL CALCULATION WITH PASCAL’S "SPIRIT OF FINESSE," arguing that both represent a tacit, instantaneous intellectual operation where the mind grasps complex relations in a single, unified glance.
"Leibniz a dit : « Les plaisirs des sens se réduisent à des plaisirs intellectuels confusément connus. La musique nous charme, quoique sa beauté ne consiste que dans les convenances des nombres et dans le compte, dont nous ne nous apercevons pas et que l’âme ne laisse pas de faire, des battements ou vibrations des corps sonnants qui se rencontrent par certains intervalles. Les plaisirs que la vue trouve dans les proportions sont de la même nature, et ceux que causent les autres sens reviendront à quelque chose de semblable, quoique nous ne puissions pas l’expliquer si distinctement. » 
Et Pascal semblablement, après avoir remarqué que, par l’esprit de finesse, on voit les choses tout d’un coup, d’un seul regard, et non par progrès de raisonnement : « Ce n’est pas que l’esprit ne le fasse, mais il le fait tacitement, naturellement et sans art. »"
(Félix Ravaisson, La philosophie de Pascal, 1887)

E4.5.1.B. The Empire of Geometry: Method, Will, and Certainty.
Analyzing the Cartesian "Geometrical" approach: the reliance on Method, the role of the Will in establishing certainty, and the nature of logical demonstration.

E4.5.1.B_REF1_PH RENE DESCARTES INTRODUIT LA CHARTE FONDATRICE DE L'ESPRIT DE GEOMETRIE EN QUATRE PRECEPTES.
"Au lieu de ce grand nombre de préceptes dont la logique est composée, je crus que j’aurais assez des quatre suivants, pourvu que je prisse ferme et constante résolution de ne manquer pas une seule fois à les observer. 
Le premier était de ne recevoir jamais aucune chose pour vraie que je ne la connusse évidemment être telle : est-à-dire d’éviter soigneusement la précipitation et la prévention et de ne comprendre rien de plus en mes jugements que ce qui se présenterait si clairement et si distinctement à mon esprit que je n’eusse aucune occasion de le mettre en doute. 
Le second, de diviser chacune des difficultés que j’examinerais en autant de parcelles qu’il se pourrait, et qu’il serait requis pour les mieux résoudre. 
Le troisième, de conduire par ordre mes pensées, en commençant par les objets les plus simples et les plus aisés à connaître, pour monter peu à peu comme par degrés jusques à la connaissance des plus composés : et supposant même de l’ordre entre ceux qui ne se précèdent point naturellement les uns les autres. 
Et le dernier, de faire partout des dénombrements si entiers et des revues si générales que je fusse assuré de ne rien omettre."
(René Descartes, Discours de la méthode, deuxième partie)

E4.5.1.B_REF1.1_PH "LA CONFIANCE DE L'ESPRIT GEOMETRIQUE DANS LA CAPACITE DE LA RAISON A ENCHAINER LES VERITES.
Que si quelques-unes de celles dont j’ai parlé au commencement de la Dioptrique et des Météores choquent d’abord, à cause que je les nomme des suppositions, et que je ne semble pas avoir envie de les prouver, qu’on ait la patience de lire le tout avec attention, et j’espère qu’on s’en trouvera satisfait : car il me semble que les raisons s’y entresuivent en telle sorte que, comme les dernières sont démontrées par les premières qui sont leurs causes, ces premières le sont réciproquement par les dernières qui sont leurs effets. Et on ne doit pas imaginer que je commette en ceci la faute que les logiciens nomment un cercle ; car, l’expérience rendant la plupart de ces effets très certains, les causes dont je les déduis ne servent pas tant à les prouver qu’à les expliquer ; mais tout au contraire ce sont elles qui sont prouvées par eux."
(René Descartes, Discours de la méthode, sixième partie)

E4.5.1.B_REF2_PH ALAIN REINTERPRETS THE "GEOMETRIC SPIRIT" NOT AS PASSIVE DEDUCTION, BUT AS AN ACT OF WILL ("RESOLUTION"). He argues that theoretical certainty (geometry) is a decision to view the world in a certain way, rather than a passive "constatation" of facts.
"« Descartes dit que l’irrésolution est le plus grand des maux. Il le dit plus d’une fois, il ne l’explique jamais. Je ne connais point de plus grande lumière sur la nature de l’homme. [...]
Descartes en ses pensées est tout de même.  Hardi en ses pensées et toujous se mouvant par son décret ; toujours décidant. L’irrésolution d’un géomètre serait profondément comique, car elle serait sans fin. Combien de points dans une ligne ? Et sait-on ce que l’on pense lorsque l’on pense deux parallèles ? Mais le génie du géomètre décide qu’on le sait et jure seulement de ne  point changer ni revenir. On ne verra rien d’autre en une théorie, si l’on regarde bien, que des erreurs définies et jurées. Toute la force de l’esprit dans ce jeu est de ne jamais croire qu’il constate, alors qu’il a seulement décidé. Là se trouve le secret d’être toujours assuré sans jamais rien croire. Il a résolu, voilà un beau mot, et deux sens en un. »
(Alain, Propos sur le bonheur, 12 aout 1924)

E4.5.1.B_REF2.1_PH EN REJETANT LE SCEPTICISME DES "IRRESOLUS" POUR CHERCHER "LE ROC OU L'ARGILE", POUR DESCARTES LE GENIE GEOMETRIQUE EST UNE DECISION DE NE PAS RESTER DANS LE DOUTE, UNE VOLONTE D'ARRETER LE MOUVEMENT DE LA PENSEE SUR UNE CERTITUDE STABLE.
"Troisème partie [...]
Après m’être ainsi assuré de ces maximes, et les avoir mises à part, avec les vérités de la foi, qui ont toujours été les premières en ma créance, je jugeai que, pour tout le reste de mes opinions, je pouvais librement entreprendre de m’en défaire. Et d’autant que j’espérais en pouvoir mieux venir à bout en conversant avec les hommes qu’en demeurant plus longtemps renfermé dans le poêle où j’avais eu toutes ces pensées, l’hiver n’était pas encore bien achevé que je me remis à voyager. Et en toutes les neuf années suivantes je ne fis autre chose que rouler çà et là dans le monde, tâchant d’y être spectateur plutôt qu’acteur en toutes les comédies qui s’y jouent ; et faisant particulièrement réflexion en chaque matière sur ce qui la pouvait rendre suspecte, et nous donner occasion de nous méprendre, je déracinais cependant de mon esprit toutes les erreurs qui s’y étaient pu glisser auparavant. Non que j’imitasse pour cela les sceptiques, qui ne doutent que pour douter, et affectent d’être toujours irrésolus : car au contraire tout mon dessein ne tendait qu’à m’assurer et à rejeter la terre mouvante et le sable pour trouver le roc ou l’argile."
(René Descartes, Discours de la méthode)

E4.5.1.B_REF3_PH DARRIULAT EXPLIQUE ICI QUE C'EST LA VOLONTE INFINIE QUI EST LE MOTEUR DE LA RECHERCHE DE VERITE CARTESIENNE, PAR OPPOSITION A L'INTUITION OU AU "CŒUR" PASCALIEN. Descartes pose la Volonté/Entendement comme accès au vrai, tandis que Pascal pose le Cœur/Intuition comme supérieurs à la raison discursive.
"La pensée n’est pas seulement regard, elle est encore désir, et se porte toujours vers un supplément d’être. Ego sum, ego existo, s’exclame le penseur de la deuxième Méditation : « Il faut conclure et tenir pour constant que cette proposition : Je suis, j’existe, est nécessairement vraie toutes les fois que je la prononce, ou que la conçois en mon esprit ». Le cogito de l’entendement me fait comprendre, pour la première fois et en révolutionnant la perspective confuse de l’opinion, qui doutait de l’existence de l’esprit et se croyait assurée de celle du phénomène sensible, en quel sens « je suis ». Mais si Descartes ajoute aussitôt « j’existe », marquant ainsi par là une différence entre l’être et l’exister, entre l’essence et l’existence, c’est en ce sens que l’existence implique le projet de sortir de soi pour se porter plus loin (ex-sistere : sortir de la place où l’on se tient), et que si l’entendement, en sa pointe, touche l’être par l’expérience spirituelle de l’évidence, c’est la volonté qui prenant appui sur ce point d’Archimède, soulève l’esprit et le lance à la recherche de la vérité, et de l’accroissement de sa science. L’entendement touche à l’être tandis que la volonté me porte dans l’existence. Et c’est pourquoi Descartes ajoute que l’évidence du cogito est vraie « toutes les fois que je la prononce », car toute concentrée sur le point du présent, elle ne sait pas se projeter dans l’avenir, c'est-à-dire exister, puisqu’elle n’a pas encore reconnu, dans le « je pense que je pense » l’activité créatrice qui transforme le « je pense que j’ai pensé » dans l’affirmation d’une existence pleine et actuelle. Tant il est vrai que le cogito, tel que l’analyse peu à peu me le découvre, est moins un « je pense que je pense », qu’un « Dieu m’insuffle actuellement la puissance d’exister, et me donne la force de l’accroître indéfiniment ». C’est ainsi que le cogito fait signe vers un Dieu d’une activité infinie, et perpétuellement créateur, comme si, en touchant du doigt cette évidence, je prenais contact avec une source d’énergie infinie qui me communiquait quelque chose de sa toute-puissance, et insufflait dans le néant du doute la force prodigieuse de l’existence, par un miracle que je peux sans doute savoir (j’aperçois clairement et distinctement la présence en moi de la pensée), mais que je ne saurais jamais comprendre (cette proposition indubitable est un fait métaphysique, et nullement une proposition qu’un raisonnement pourrait conclure) : « Je dis que je le sais, et non pas que je le conçois ni que je le comprends. Car on peut sa	"voir que Dieu est infini et tout-puissant, encore que notre âme étant finie ne le puisse comprendre ni concevoir ; de même que nous pouvons bien toucher avec les mains une montagne, mais non pas l’embrasser comme nous ferions un arbre, ou quelque autre chose que ce soit, qui n’excédât point la grandeur de nos bras ; mais pour savoir une chose, il suffit de la toucher de la pensée » (à Mersenne, 27 mai 1630). [...]
  Je comprends alors que l’âme, bien qu’une et indivisible (puisque l’essence de la substance pensante, à l’inverse de la substance matérielle, apparaît en une unique intuition intellectuelle), est pourtant composée de deux facultés, qui sont en vérité les deux modalités de la même substance selon qu’on la considère comme essence (entendement) ou existence (volonté) : l’entendement, qui est l’esprit se posant avec attention sur le point d’évidence, et la volonté, qui est l’esprit ne se contentant pas du savoir obtenu, et qui se porte aussitôt vers un supplément de savoir, qui est aussi une augmentation de son être. C’est ainsi qu’au contentement de l’entendement, qui se concentre sur l’objet fini de son savoir actuel, s’ajoute le désir infini de la volonté, qui toujours veut savoir et être davantage, sans qu’il soit possible d’assigner des bornes à ce désir, et que c’est en conséquence la volonté, qui en nous aspire à l’infini, qui est plus digne de Dieu que l’entendement, qui jouit certes de la plénitude de la connaissance (plénitude refusée à la bête, qui ne pense point) mais, toute concentrée en ce présent du savoir, n’éprouve pas le besoin d’un avenir. C’est donc par la volonté plus encore que par l’entendement que Dieu fit la créature à son image : « Il n’y a que la seule volonté, que j’expérimente en moi être si grande, que je ne conçois point l’idée d’aucune autre plus ample et plus étendue : en sorte que c’est elle principalement qui me fait connaître que je porte l’image et la ressemblance de Dieu » (Méd. IV, Pléiade 305). "
(Jacques Darriulat, Initiation à la philosophie cartésienne, IV- L'idée de la méthode)

Read the full article in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Descartes/DescartesInitiation/DescartesInitiation4.html

E4.5.1.B_REF3.1_PH DESCARTES  DEFINIT LA "VRAIE LIBERTE" COMME UNE DETERMINATION PAR LA VERITE. L'erreur dans le modèle cartésien, vient du mauvais usage de la liberté.
"Les hommes en effet croient vouloir le pouvoir, la richesse, la longévité, alors qu’en vérité ils ne veulent qu’être davantage, c'est-à-dire ressentir en eux avec une intensité toujours croissante, amplifier indéfiniment cette première actualisation de l’être qui s’est fait jour dans l’âme avec le point d’évidence du cogito. C’est donc en augmentant mon savoir, en progressant sur la voie des Lumières, en enrichissant le trésor intérieur de la lumière naturelle, que je pourrais assouvir  le désir infini de l’existence qui soulève mon âme. Ainsi s’ouvre devant moi la voie d’une méthode, qui décloisonne le cogito et pratique dans le cercle de la conscience une brèche qui donne sur l’infini, et fait de l’être absolu qui est en Dieu l’objet de la volonté de la créature, dont l’existence est pourtant toujours, quelque grande soit son extension, finie et limitée. Et cette évasion qui porte l’esprit au-delà des limites du seul cogito est d’autant mieux fondée, que l’hypothèse d’un Malin Génie tout-puissant qui emploierait toute son industrie à me tromper n’est plus qu’un épouvantail qui ne saurait faire obstacle à la progression de l’entendement entraîné par la force motrice de la volonté vers un supplément d’être, sans qu’il soit possible d’assigner une limite à cet élan qui motive l’esprit. [...]
 Ce chemin, cette méthode, qui ouvre devant la pensée la voie d’un accroissement infini, de l’amplification illimitée de la force en moi de l’exister, il me faut une boussole, à la fois une discipline et une orientation, avant de m’aventurer en lui. Car l’impétuosité de la volonté, qui est en moi infinie comme en Dieu, dans le désir qui la soulève d’être toujours davantage, pourrait bien se précipiter et, victime de son avidité d’exister, prendre du fer ou du cuivre pour de l’argent ou de l’or. Il importe donc de régler le pas de l’esprit sur le chemin de la méthode, de façon que la vision de l’entendement soit la plus claire et distincte qu’il est possible, et l’élan de la volonté le plus ardent et le plus infatigable qu’il est possible. [...]
Car c'est un fait : il m’arrive de me tromper, et l’erreur menace le progrès de mes connaissances. Ce fait n’avait rien d’admirable, il était même rigoureusement nécessaire, tant que je pensais sous l’empire du Malin Génie. Mais désormais que je sais de Dieu, non qu’il est cause de vérité, mais qu’il est la puissance même du vrai tel qu’il s’est manifesté à moi par l’évidence ponctuelle du cogito, et maintenant par l’incompréhensible, et pourtant tout aussi évidente, activité infinie qui est en lui et qui me donne l’être et l’existence, pour moi qui baigne maintenant dans cette éblouissante lumière (5), comment peut-il se faire que je me trompe ? Dieu serait-il à nouveau trompeur ? Et comment pourrai-je me tromper si celui qui cause à chacun des moments de mon présent mon existence même, ne voulait pas effectivement que je me trompe ? Dans la nuit du Malin Génie, seule l’étoile du cogito faisait de la lumière ; mais dans le jour intense de la création continue du Dieu de vérité, la possibilité de l’erreur marque un point de ténèbre que rien ne justifie ni n’explique, et qui semble même objet de scandale dans l’universelle véracité dont le créateur, perpétuellement, me gratifie. Si je me trompe, car c’est un fait qu’il m’arrive de me tromper, la faute ne peut en revenir à Dieu, mais à la seule liberté de la créature qui n’use pas convenablement de l’appareil spirituel dont l’a doté son créateur pour que, le long du chemin de sa méthode, elle réussisse à discerner le vrai du faux, et progresse ainsi toujours davantage sur la voie qui s’oriente vers l’existence infinie qui seule est en Dieu. [...]
Et je comprends que si le créateur laisse la créature libre d’accroître par l’effort de sa propre volonté l’intensité de l’existence qu’il entretient et conserve en elle, il m’appartient en revanche de faire fructifier cette liberté, et d’apprendre à en user. Car il y a bien de la différence entre le libre arbitre, qui n’est que liberté d’indifférence, c'est-à-dire incertitude de la volonté privée de la lumière de l’évidence, et la liberté effective, qui marche d’un bon pas sur le chemin de la méthode, soutenue par la connaissance que l’entendement lui apporte, progressant ainsi sur le chemin de la vérité sans s’égarer sur les bas côtés de l’erreur toujours possible. En sorte que la véritable liberté consiste en la joie qu’éprouve la volonté de se porter dans la direction que le savoir lui indique, et d’être ainsi déterminée par les lumières de l’entendement, et non d’errer à son gré, sans guide ni orientation, dans les chemins où sa fantaisie, ou son caprice, l’égare. En sorte que je suis d’autant plus libre que je suis mieux déterminé à agir au nom de la vérité, et non à agir vainement pour agir, sans que mon entendement ne vienne éclairer cette marche : « De façon que cette indifférence que je sens, lorsque je ne suis point emporté vers un côté plutôt que vers un autre par le poids d’aucune raison, est le plus bas degré de la liberté, et fait plutôt paraître un défaut dans la connaissance, qu’une perfection dans la volonté ; car si je connaissais toujours clairement ce qui est vrai et ce qui est bon, je ne serais jamais en peine de délibérer quel jugement et quel choix je devrais faire ; et ainsi je serais entièrement libre, sans jamais être indifférent » (Méd. IV, Pléiade 305)."
(Jacques Darriulat, Initiation à la philosophie cartésienne, IV- L'idée de la méthode)

Read the full article in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Descartes/DescartesInitiation/DescartesInitiation4.html

E4.5.1.B_REF3.2_PH DARRIULAT DEFINIT L'ESSENCE DE L'ESPRIT GEOMETRIQUE CHEZ DESCARTES NON PAS COMME UNE FROIDE LOGIQUE, MAIS COMME UNE DISCIPLINE DYNAMIQUE : "REFRENER L'ELAN DE LA VOLONTE" POUR QU'ELLE S'ACCORDE AU PAS DE L'ENTENDEMENT. Le défaut de l’Entendement, c’est d’imaginer partout un ordre et se précipiter.
"L’éventualité en moi de l’erreur procède donc du pas-de-deux de la volonté et de l’entendement, qui ne s’accordent point nécessairement au rythme de la connaissance, selon la scansion nécessaire du progrès de la méthode, qui doit prendre appui sur la brève de l’évidence pour se porter ensuite sur la longue de la volonté. Au lieu de cette marche harmonieuse, il se peut que les deux modalités de la substance pensante se dissocient et divorcent, que l’emportement de la volonté se précipite sur des chimères, comme Don Quichotte sur des moulins à vent, et que la patience de l’entendement s’attarde à jouir des connaissances acquises, ou pis : résiste à la réfutation de ce qui passait depuis longtemps pour certitude, comme le fait volontiers Sancho Panza, qui s’en tient à la sagesse des nations, et entrave ainsi le progrès de la volonté. L’entendement porte toute son attention sur l’évidence qui témoigne à ses yeux de la réalité de l’être, et la volonté se porte aussitôt au-delà pour en savoir et pour être davantage. La conjugaison des deux facultés évoque l’assemblage précaire d’un cul de jatte, qui ne progresse pas mais qui a de bons yeux, juché sur les épaules d’un aveugle, qui ne sait pas discerner ce qu’il a devant lui, mais qui a de bonnes jambes. Ce couple métaphysique, il n’est pas interdit en effet d’en voir l’image dans les très célèbres personnages de Cervantès : Don Quichotte ardent, figure ascétique de la pure volonté, toujours prêt à se lancer dans les quêtes les plus folles, inconsolable du Graal et des romans de chevalerie ; et Sancho Panza, ventru et content de lui, satisfait de la réalité présente, image du bon sens populaire qui est sans doute, aux yeux de Cervantès comme à ceux de Descartes, l’ersatz peu satisfaisant de la véritable sagesse. C’est ainsi que, privée des lumières de l’entendement, la volonté devient folle, et que privé de l’ardeur de la volonté, l’entendement s’embourgeoise dans le contentement des certitudes acquises. Ce pourquoi il m’apparaît maintenant clairement qu’il y a deux causes, et seulement deux causes d’erreur, dont la première est la prévention de l’entendement, qui s’accroche à ses certitudes et fait obstacle à la reconnaissance de l’évidence, et la seconde la précipitation de la volonté qui, emportée par la divine ardeur qui lui fait désirer l’accroissement de ses connaissances, prend parfois des vessies pour des lanternes et donne valeur de vérité à ce qui n’en a que l’apparence. Il me suffit donc, pour bien conduire ma raison et chercher comme il faut la vérité dans les sciences, de discipliner mon entendement à n’accorder son assentiment qu’à ce dont il a une connaissance claire et distincte, et de réfréner l’élan de ma volonté à ce qu’il m’est effectivement possible de connaître, selon les raisons que l’entendement a déjà éclairées en moi ; car « la lumière naturelle nous enseigne que la connaissance de l’entendement doit toujours précéder la détermination de la volonté » (Méd. IV, Pléiade 307)."
(Jacques Darriulat, Initiation à la philosophie cartésienne, IV- L'idée de la méthode)

Read the full article in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Descartes/DescartesInitiation/DescartesInitiation4.html

E4.5.1.B_REF4_PH LES FONDEMENTS DE LA DEMARCHE DE L'ESPRIT DE GEOMETRIE : LE REFUS DE LA VERITE CONSENSUELLE ("LA PLURALITE DES VOIX N'EST PAS UNE PREUVE") ET LA NECESSITE POUR L'INDIVIDU DE CONSTRUIRE SA PROPRE CERTITUDE ("SE CONDUIRE SOI-MEME").
"Seconde partie [...]
La seule résolution de se défaire de toutes les opinions qu’on a reçues auparavant en sa créance n’est pas un exemple que chacun doive suivre ; et le monde n’est quasi composé que de deux sortes d’esprits auxquels il ne convient aucunement. À savoir de ceux qui, se croyant plus habiles qu’ils ne sont, ne se peuvent empêcher de précipiter leurs jugements, ni avoir assez de patience pour conduire par ordre toutes leurs pensées : d’où vient que s’ils avaient une fois pris la liberté de douter des principes qu’ils ont reçus, et de s’écarter du chemin commun, jamais ils ne pourraient tenir le sentier qu’il faut prendre pour aller plus droit, et demeureraient égarés toute leur vie. Puis de ceux qui, ayant assez de raison, ou de modestie, pour juger qu’ils sont moins capables de distinguer le vrai d’avec le faux que quelques autres par lesquels ils peuvent être instruits, doivent bien plutôt se contenter de suivre les opinions de ces autres qu’en chercher eux-mêmes de meilleures. 
Et pour moi j’aurais été sans doute du nombre de ces derniers si je n’avais jamais eu qu’un seul maître, ou que je n’eusse point su les différences qui ont été de tout temps entre les opinions des plus doctes. Mais ayant appris dès le collège qu’on ne saurait rien imaginer de si étrange et si peu croyable qu’il n’ait été dit par quelqu’un des philosophes ; et depuis, en voyageant, ayant reconnu que tous ceux qui ont des sentiments fort contraires aux nôtres ne sont pas pour cela barbares ni sauvages, mais que plusieurs usent autant ou plus que nous de raison ; et ayant considéré combien un même homme, avec son même esprit, étant nourri dès son enfance entre des Français ou des Allemands, devient différent de ce qu’il serait s’il avait toujours vécu entre des Chinois ou des Cannibales ; et comment, jusques aux modes de nos habits, la même chose qui nous a plu il y a dix ans, et qui nous plaira peut-être encore avant dix ans, nous semble maintenant extravagante et ridicule, en sorte que c’est bien plus la coutume et l’exemple qui nous persuade, qu’aucune connaissance certaine ; et que néanmoins la pluralité des voix n’est pas une preuve qui vaille rien, pour les vérités un peu malaisées à découvrir, à cause qu’il est bien plus vraisemblable qu’un homme seul les ait rencontrées que tout un peuple: je ne pouvais choisir personne dont les opinions me semblassent devoir être préférées à celles des autres, et je me trouvai comme contraint d’entreprendre moi-même de me conduire."
(René Descartes, Discours de la méthode)

E4.5.1.B_REF5_PH L'ESPRIT DE GEOMETRIE APPLIQUE A L'ABSOLU : DESCARTES COMPARE LA CERTITUDE DE L'EXISTENCE DE DIEU A CELLE DES PROPRIETES DU TRIANGLE. IL TENTE DE PROUVER L'EXISTENCE PAR UNE DEDUCTION LOGIQUE STRICTE. Il rejette l'imagination comme une "façon de penser particulière pour les choses matérielles", incapable de s'élever au spirituel.
"[...] faisant réflexion sur ce que je doutais, et que par conséquent mon être n’était pas tout parfait, car je voyais clairement que c’était une plus grande perfection de connaître que de douter, je m’avisai de chercher d’où j’avais appris à penser à quelque chose de plus parfait que je n’étais ; et je connus évidemment que ce devait être de quelque nature qui fût en effet plus parfaite. Pour ce qui est des pensées que j’avais de plusieurs autres choses hors de moi, comme du ciel, de la terre, de la lumière, de la chaleur, et de mille autres, je n’étais point tant en peine de savoir d’où elles venaient, à cause que, ne remarquant rien en elles qui me semblât les rendre supérieures à moi, je pouvais croire que, si elles étaient vraies, c’étaient des dépendances de ma nature, en tant qu’elle avait quelque perfection, et, si elles ne l’étaient pas, que je les tenais du néant, c’est-à-dire qu’elles étaient en moi pource que j’avais du défaut. Mais ce ne pouvait être le même de l’idée d’un être plus parfait que le mien : car, de la tenir du néant, c’était chose manifestement impossible ; et pource qu’il n’y a pas moins de répugnance que le plus parfait soit une suite et une dépendance du moins parfait qu’il y en a que de rien procède quelque chose, je ne la pouvais tenir non plus de loi-même ; de façon qu’il restait qu’elle eût été mise en moi par une nature qui fût véritablement plus parfaite que je n’étais, et même qui eût en soi toutes les perfections dont je pouvais avoir quelque idée, c’est-à-dire, pour m’expliquer en un mot, qui fût Dieu. À quoi j’ajoutai que, puisque je connaissais quelques perfections que je n’avais point, je n’étais pas le seul être qui existât (j’userai, s’il vous plaît, ici librement des mots de l’École), mais qu’il fallait de nécessité qu’il y en eût quelque autre plus parfait, duquel je dépendisse, et duquel j’eusse acquis tout ce que j’avais : car si j’eusse été seul et indépendant de tout autre, en sorte que j’eusse eu de moi-même tout ce peu que je participais de l’être parfait, j’eusse pu avoir de moi par même raison tout le surplus que je connaissais me manquer, et ainsi être moi-même infini, éternel, immuable, tout connaissant, tout-puissant, et enfin avoir toutes les perfections que je pouvais remarquer être en Dieu. Car, suivant les raisonnements que je viens de faire, pour connaître la nature de Dieu autant que la mienne en était capable, je n’avais qu’à considérer, de toutes les choses dont je trouvais en moi quelque idée, si c’était perfection ou non de les posséder, et j’étais assuré qu’aucune de celles qui marquaient quelque imperfection n’était en lui, mais que toutes les autres y étaient. Comme je voyais que le doute, l’inconstance, la tristesse, et choses semblables, n’y pouvaient être, vu que j’eusse été moi-même en aise d’en être exempt. [...]
Je voulus chercher après cela d’autres vérités, et, m’étant proposé l’objet des géomètres, que je concevais comme un corps continu, ou un espace indéfiniment étendu en longueur, largeur et hauteur ou profondeur, divisible en diverses parties, qui pouvaient avoir diverses figures et grandeurs et être mues ou transposées en toutes sortes, car les géomètres supposent tout cela en leur objet, je parcourus quelques-unes de leurs plus simples démonstrations ; et, ayant pris garde que cette grande certitude que tout le monde leur attribue n’est fondée que sur ce qu’on les conçoit évidemment, suivant la règle que j’ai tantôt dite, je pris garde aussi qu’il n’y avait rien du tout en elles qui m’assurât de l’existence de leur objet : car par exemple je voyais bien que, supposant un triangle, il fallait que ses trois angles fussent égaux à deux droits, mais je ne voyais rien pour cela qui m’assurât qu’il y eût au monde aucun triangle : au lieu que, revenant à examiner l’idée que j’avais d’un être parfait, je trouvais que l’existence y était comprise, en même façon qu’il est compris en celle d’un triangle que ses trois angles sont égaux à deux droits, ou en celle d’une sphère que toutes ses parties sont également distantes de son centre, ou même encore plus évidemment ; et que par conséquent il est pour le moins aussi certain que Dieu, qui est cet être parfait, est ou existe, qu’aucune démonstration de géométrie le saurait être. […]
"Mais ce qui fait qu’il y en a plusieurs qui se persuadent qu’il y a de la difficulté à le connaître, et même aussi à connaître ce que c’est que leur âme, c’est qu’ils n’élèvent jamais leur esprit au-delà des choses sensibles, et qu’ils sont tellement accoutumés à ne rien considérer qu’en l’imaginant, qui est une façon de penser particulière pour les choses matérielles, que tout ce qui n’est pas imaginable leur semble n’être pas intelligible."
(René Descartes, Discours de la méthode)

E4.5.1.B_REF5.1_PH COPY DANS LE MANQUE D'IMAGINATION

C'EST AMUSANT QUE DESCARTES S'EN PRENNENT AU MANQUE D'IMAGINATION DE CEUX QUI NE REALISENT PAS QUE L'IDEE DE PERFECTION QUE NOUS AVONS A NECESSAIREMENT ETE PLANTEE EN NOUS PAR DIEU: Lui-même se refuse à considérer que ce peut-être l'imagination qui nous a permis de créer le concept de perfection - à partir de la réalisation de notre imperfection - sans intervention divine!

E4.5.1.B_REF6_PH COMTE-SPONVILLE EXPLICITLY DISTINGUISHES BETWEEN VALIDITY (THE LEGITIMACY OF THE INFERENCE) AND TRUTH (THE CONTENT OF THE PROPOSITIONS). HE NOTES THAT A SYLLOGISM CAN BE VALID EVEN WITH FALSE PREMISES. This illustrates the closed, self-referential nature of the Spirit of Geometry—it guarantees internal consistency, not external reality.
"SYLLOGISME 
Un type de raisonnement déductif, formalisé par Aristote, qui unit trois termes, reliés deux à deux et dont chacun apparais deux fois, en trois propositions. II est susceptible de plusieurs formes ou figures différentes. Mais l’exemple canonique, qu’on ne trouve pas chez Aristote, est le suivant : 
Tout homme est mortel; 
Socrate est un homme;  
Donc Socrate est mortel. 
Les deux premières propositions sont les prémisses (majeure et mineure); la troisième, la conclusion. Les trois termes (« mortel « homme », « Socrate ») sont appelés respectivement grand terme, moyen terme, petit terme. On remarquera que l’ordre des prémisses n’est pas ce qui importe, m même toujours leur extension. Le grand terme est celui qui sert de prédicat dans la conclusion; la majeure, celle des deux prémisses qui contient le grand terme. Le petit terme est celui qui sert de sujet dans la conclusion; la mineure, celle des deux prémisses qui contient le petit terme. Enfin, le moyen terme est le seul à apparaître dans les deux prémisses: c’est lui qui les met en rapport et permet la conclusion, où il ne figure pas. 
Le syllogisme est-il valide ? Cela dépend des prémisses. De leur vérité ? Non pas. Certes, la conclusion n’est nécessairement vraie que si les prémisses le sont; mais cela touche moins à la validité du raisonnement qu’au contenu des trois propositions. Soit par exemple ce syllogisme, qu’on trouve chez Lewis Carroll :
Tous les chats comprennent le français; 
Quelques poulets sont des chats; 
Donc quelques poulets comprennent le français. 
Que l’inférence soit formellement valide, cela ne garantit nullement la vérité de la conclusion. Mais l’inverse est vrai aussi que la conclusion puisse être fausse (puisque les prémisses le sont) n’annule pas la validité, au moins formelle, du raisonnement. On s’en rend compte si l’on donne au syllogisme, façon d’Aristote, la forme d’une implication. La proposition « Si tous les chats comprennent le français et si quelques poulets sont des chats, alors quelques poulets comprennent le français » est une proposition vraie. [...]
 L’essentiel, d’un point de vue logique, n est pas dans le contenu des propositions, mais dans la légitimité de l'inférence. Deux premisses fausses, comme dans l alors que deux prémisses, même vraies, n’autorisent pas forcément à conclure. D’abord parce qu’il faut qu’elles aient un moyen terme commun, dans un même genre: Que tous les hommes soient mortels et que Milou soit un chien, cela peut lire l’objet de deux propositions, mais pas constituer les deux prémisses ci’un syllogisme. Ensuite parce que nos deux prémisses díoivent encore respecter un certain nombre de règles, qu’on trouve dans les manuels. Par exemple: « De deux propositions particulières, on ne peut rien conclure » (que certains hommes soient mortels et que certains philosophes soient des hommes, c’est assurément vrai, mais ne permet pas de savoir si les philosophes sont mortels, ni lesquels). Ou encore: « De deux propositions négatives, on ne peut rien conclure » (qu’aucun homme ne soit immortel et que Socrate ne soit pas un chien, c’est très vraisemblable, mais ne nous dit rien sur la mortalité de Socrate). Ces règles, qui sont nombreuses, sont aussi passablement oubliées. e ne connais guère de philosophes qui s’en servent. Mais j’en Connais encore moins, en tout cas parmi les bons, qui les transgressent."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.5.1.B_REF7_PH "NO REASON WILL BE ESTABLISHED WITHOUT ANOTHER REASON: HERE WE ARE GOING BACKWARDS TO INFINITY"
"DÉMONSTRATION 
Un raisonnement probant. Cela suppose que la raison puisse valoir comme preuve - ce qui est sans preuve, mais que toute preuve suppose. « II se peut faire qu’il y ait de vraies démonstrations, écrit Pascal, mais cela n’est pas certain. » Cela, en effet, ne se démontre pas. 
Toute démonstration est donc incomplète (Montaigne : « Aucune raison ne s’établira sans une autre raison: nous voilà à reculons jusques à l’infini »). Une démonstration incomplète est pourtant autre chose qu’une conviction indémontrable."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.5.1.B_REF7.1_PH "ARGUMENT 
Une idée qui tend à en justifier une autre, sans suffire pourtant à l'imposer. L’argument n’est pas une preuve, mais ce qui en tient lieu quand les preuves font défaut."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.5.1.B_REF8_PH "LE PRINCIPE DE NON-CONTRADICTION stipule que deux propositions p et non-p ne peuvent pas être vraies toutes les deux (la négation d’une proposition vraie est donc une proposition fausse); le principe du tiers exclu, qu’elles ne peuvent pas être fausse); le principe au tiers exclu, qu’elles ne peuvent pas être fausses toutes les deux (la négation d'une proposition fausse est donc une proposition vraie)."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.5.1.B_REF9_PH "PREUVE 
Un fait ou une pensée, qui suffit à attester la vérité d’un autre fait ou d’une autre pensée. Toutefois la preuve la plus solide ne vaut que ce que vaut l’esprit qui s’en sert. II faudrait donc prouver d’abord la valeur de l'esprit, et c’est ce qu’on ne peut sans tomber dans un cercle. Ainsi, il n’y a pas de preuve absolue. II n’y a que des expériences ou des démonstrations qui mettent fin au doute. C’est ce qu’on appelle une preuve, ou une autre façon de la définir: une preuve est une pensée ou un fait qui rend le doute, sur une question donnée, impossible, sauf à douter de tout. [...]"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.5.1.B_REF10_PH LE PRINCIPE DE RAISON SUFFISANTE RESTE METAPHYSIQUEMENT INSUFFISANT.
"RAISON SUFFISANTE (PRINCIPE DE -) 
[...] Que tout ce qui existe ou arrive dans le Tout puisse et doive s’expliquer, cela n’entraîne pas nécessairement que le Tout lui-même soit explicable, et même cela rend cette explicabilité par avance impensable: puisque la raison qu’on pourrait en donner devrait en faire partie et ne pourrait dès lors en rendre raison. Certains m’objecteront que la sommation de Dieu et du monde est un concept impossible, qui mélange des ordres différents. Admettons-le. Mais le même raisonnement, appliqué à Dieu seul (quelle est sa raison suffisante ? Aucune ou lui-même: on ne peut donc l’expliquer, puisque toute explication qu’on pourrait en donner le suppose), interdit pareillement de le soumettre au principe. C’est dire que le principe de raison suffisante, qui affirme que tout peut s’expliquer, ne saurait s’appliquer valablement au Tout lui-même (sauf à supposer autre chose que tout, ce qui est contradictoire) ni à la raison suffisante de tout. Il ne peut pas davantage s’appliquer à lui-même (quelle est la raison suffisante du principe de raison suffisante ? On ne peut répondre, et c’est en quoi justement c’est un principe: voir le grand livre de Francis Wolff, Dire le monde. Puf, 1997, p. 85-87). Par quoi le principe de raison suffisante reste métaphysiquement insuffisant."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.5.1.C. The Domain of Finesse: Time, Emotion, and the Indivisible Point.
How Finesse operates where Geometry fails: navigating time (the "occasion"), the cognitive power of emotion, and finding the "indivisible point" of truth.

E4.5.1.C_REF1_LIT

EL3.123. “« IT IS NOT HALF SO IMPORTANT TO KNOW AS TO FEEL, » Rachel Carson wrote, [being able to] harmonize fact with feeling as the score to a larger understanding. The sentiment speaks to something essential about our human experience: that understanding is always governed by feeling and that any factual knowledge, rather than shaping subjective experience, is shaped by it."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings)

E4.5.1.C_REF2_PH

EL3.23. ON EMOTION "About the importance of emotions in decision making and moral judgements. What is an emotion? Is an emotion the same as a mood? What part should the emotions play in our life and in our understanding of what it is to be human?
The difference between mood and emotions is that emotions are 1) directed towards an object, 2) occurrent, actual, conscious states (different from long-term dispositions such as characters or long-term dispositions love and hatred). Emotions have been discarded by the Analytical Philosophy tradition as subjective. Emotions show what matters to us - without them we would not be able to formulate value judgements, have preferences, care and to guide our actions. Emotions are cognitive states even when they are in conflict with rational judgements - we should take them in consideration because they are representation of the world available to us to make better judgements."
(Sabine Döring on Emotion, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: https://philosophybites.com/podcast/sabine-doring-on-emotion/

E4.5.1.C_REF3_PH SELON VLADIMIR JANKELEVITCH, LA RAISON (ESPRIT DE GEOMETRIE) ECHOUE A SAISIR LE REEL IMMEDIAT, TANDIS QUE LE CŒUR/SENTIMENT (ESPRIT DE FINESSE) ACCEDE A UNE VERITE QUI PRECEDE TOUT JUGEMENT.
"Peut-être faudrait-il s’exprimer ainsi : la sensation est toujours vraie en ce qu’elle a de senti et de purement donné, et toujours fausse en ce qu’elle a d’interprété; et de même un sentiment ne devient faux, risible ou artificiel que dans l’idéologie qui est autour; le sentiment qui est effectivement éprouvé est toujours sincère par définition. II n’y a pas, en ce sens, de sentiment qui mente, mais il y a des sentiments qui n’en sont pas, le mensonge, comme l’erreur, commençant avec les rapports et les jugements interprétatifs que l’intelligence forme autour de l’émotion effectivement ressentie. L’intelligence est donc l’insincérité du sentiment, elle, le principe de toute affectation et de tout bavardage littéraire; et le sentiment, même s’il est sans cause réelle, est la vérité même en sa flagrante authenticité, [...]"
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, Les Vertus et l’amour, 1970)

E4.5.1.C_REF4_PH JANKELEVITCH INTRODUIT LE COURAGE COMME LA "SEULE FORCE HETEROGENE" CAPABLE DE FRANCHIR LE PAS ENTRE LA CONNAISSANCE ("LUCIDITE") ET L'ACTE ("FIAT"). Il marque la limite définitive de l'intelligence (l'esprit de géométrie ou d'analyse) : elle "conduit le plus loin possible", mais elle est impuissante à produire l'événement (la décision).
"Sans lucidité rien ne commence, mais avec la seule lucidité rien n’aboutit, à moins que ne s’ajoute aux idées une force hétérogène, seule efficace, seule capable d’entreprendre. L’intelligence nous conduit le plus loin possible dans la voie de la décision, mais il y a des choses qu’elle ne peut faire à la place du courage; elle ne saurait remplacer l’instant irremplaçable; elle ne nous dispense pas de ce fiat vertigineux qui est la seule cause suffisante et décisive de l’acte."
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, Les Vertus et l’amour, 1970)

E4.5.1.C_REF5_PH P_Halsman Dali_Nude with pop corn

VLADIMIR JANKELEVITCH DEFINIT L'ESPRIT DE FINESSE PAR SA FONCTION TEMPORELLE : LA CAPACITE DE "VISER JUSTE" DANS L'INSTANT IRREVERSIBLE ET IMPREVISIBLE ("L'OCCURRENCE"), là où la lourdeur de l'organisme ou de la logique échoue ("trop tôt", "trop tard").
"Il arrive que l’occurrence tienne dans un battement de paupières… Par sa constitution épaisse, le grand metazoaire pensant est fait pour la continuation végétative de l’intervalle, beaucoup plus que pour les clignotements de l’instant ; ses sens sont émoussés : aussi est-il condamné à l’hébétude, aux pensées crasses, lourdes et lentes. Comment ne lui en coûterait-il pas de se ramasser à la fine pointe aiguë de lui-même? La tangence d’un acte infiniment délié et d’une occurrence infiniment délicate ne suppose-t-elle pas une précision inouïe et une coïncidence presque miraculeuse ? Le tardigrade humain n’aura pas toujours l’esprit de finesse nécessaire pour réussir une telle visée. L’occasion n’est pas seulement fine, mais instantanée ; ni seulement instantanée, mais irréversible. L’occasion, du moins dans sa fraîcheur première, ne nous sera pas renouvelée et cette unicité explique son caractère à la fois passionnant et poignant. L’occasion aiguë ne comporte ni précédent ni réédition, elle ne s’annonce pas par des signes précurseurs ni ne se survit dans la seconde fois ; on ne peut ni s’y préparer, ni après coup la rattraper… Laminée entre le pas-encore et le déjà-plus, elle exclut la secondante répétitive des réitérations, comme son imprévisibilité et son irrationalité excluent l’anticipation ! [..] Avant il est trop tôt, après il est trop tard ! Comment viser juste ? Comment tomber sur l’apparition opportune ? [...]

"L’occasion n’est pas seulement une faveur imprévue dont il faut savoir profiter et qui veut des âmes parfaitement disponibles pour la grâce occasionnelle de l’impromptu : elle est aussi quelque chose que notre liberté recherche et au besoin suscite. Si l’occasion est une grâce, la grâce suppose, pour être reçue, une conscience en état de grâce. Tout peut devenir occasion pour une conscience inquiète, capable de féconder le hasard. C’est l’occasion qui électrise le génie créateur, — car l’occasion est l’électrochoc de l’inspiration ; mais c’est pour le génie créateur que la rencontre, au lieu d’être une occurrence muette, devient une occasion riche de sens."
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, Quelque part dans l’inachevé, 1978)

E4.5.1.C_REF6_TH  LA LOGIQUE PURE (GEOMETRIE) EST INTEMPORELLE ET ECHOUE A CONCLURE DANS L'URGENCE VITALE. LA VERITE "EFFECTIVE" NECESSITE DE SAISIR L'"INSTANT PROPICE" (L'OCCASION). De plus, Contrairement au géomètre solitaire, le sujet de la finesse doit intégrer le temps de l'autre.
"Que l’effet de vérité ait un lien intime avec le temps ne doit pas nous étonner, nous qui savons que la vérité est événement, donc inscription dans la trame temporelle, et non discours, soit un système formel régi par sa seule logique, sans considération d’espace ni de temps. Et cet événement de la vérité ne peut être vécu que sur le mode de l’anticipation, car la rupture, en tranchant soudain le nœud gordien du passé, ouvre brusquement le présent à un avenir jusqu’alors ignoré. Le renversement de la peripeteia (coup de théâtre) dont parle Aristote prend alors la valeur d’une inversion temporelle, un hiatus qui retourne le temps et fait que l’après précède l’avant. C’est ainsi que, quand l’analyste se saisissant au passage d’un lapsus ou d’un acte manqué, donne à l’analysant le mot qui délivre le sens latent et lance la chasse de la vérité, l’analysant éprouve un saisissement qui résulte de l’emprise soudaine que le passé refoulé exerce sur le présent, découvrant un avenir possible que le mur du fantasme masquait jusque là. [...] La chasse de la vérité commence nécessairement après coup, nachträglich, puisqu’il faut d’abord l’avoir rencontrée pour se lancer à sa poursuite, tant il est vrai qu’on ne cherche jamais que ce qu’on a déjà trouvé. Que la vérité soit événement et non pure démonstration, qu’elle s’inscrive nécessairement dans la trame temporelle, Lacan avait à cœur de le montrer à propos d’une petite énigme qu’on disait de pure logique et qui rencontrait un certain succès dans la bonne société de l’après-guerre [...]. Lacan a même rédigé sur ce thème un article pour les Cahiers d’Art de Christian Zervos, « Le temps logique et l’assertion de certitude anticipée » (mars 1945), dans lequel il fait jouer l’opposition du logique et de l’anticipation, cette « pulsation temporelle » qui marque le temps de l’instant critique. Soit trois condamnés auxquels on accorde une chance d’échapper à la mort : on leur présente cinq disques, deux noirs et trois blancs, et l’on épingle dans leur dos et à leur insu trois disques blancs, laissant de côté les disques noirs, et chacun ne pouvant voir que les disques que portent les deux autres sans connaître le sien propre. Celui qui le premier saura nommer la couleur de son disque sera sauvé. Ego voit donc deux disques blancs, et raisonne ainsi : si je portais un noir, chacun de mes deux compagnons verrait un disque noir et un disque blanc. L’un ou l’autre pourrait alors, en supposant à son tour qu’il porte un disque noir, en déduire que l’autre prisonnier portant le blanc verrait deux disques noirs, et pourrait ainsi immédiatement en déduire qu’il est blanc (puisqu’il n’y a que deux disques noirs). S’il ne dit rien, c’est donc qu’il voit deux disques blancs. Or, ils se taisent. C’est donc qu’Ego est blanc et non noir. Telle est la solution qu’on proposait dans les salons. Elle ne prend pourtant pas en compte un fait, remarque Lacan : c’est que les trois prisonniers étant dans la même situation (les trois voient deux blancs), chacun doit accorder aux deux autres le délai nécessaire pour achever le raisonnement qu’on vient d’énoncer. Si Ego s’empresse de donner la réponse, il peut se tromper du fait que l’un de ses compagnons a l’esprit particulièrement lent, et qu’il ne lui a pas laissé le temps de la réflexion ; si inversement il laisse trop passer le temps, il donne occasion à l’autre de ses concurrents de le précéder dans sa décision, et donc de perdre la partie. Il y a donc un risque dans la gestion du temps du fait que la certitude du choix doit anticiper sur le choix des deux autres (ce que Lacan nomme « l’assertion de certitude anticipée »). Le problème n’est donc pas simplement logique, il est politique, ou du moins tactique, en ce sens qu’il dépend de la bonne estimation du moment décisif. Ce qui intéresse Lacan, dans cette petite fable, c’est bien entendu non la fable elle-même, mais son analogie avec la stratégie de l’analyse : quand l’analyste doit-il pointer le mot qui fait hiatus, l’acte qu’on ne dit manqué que parce qu’il réussit à être vrai, le lapsus qui convoque la vérité refoulée ? La vérité n’est effective qu’à la condition de saisir l’instant propice, le kairos qui l’actualise. Et plus important que de dire la vérité, ou de se lancer dans des interprétations que la suite de l’analyse révélera hasardeuses, est l’art de connaître le moment de dire, en ce point de « pulsation temporelle », de syncope ou de contretemps, où la bascule tragique fera tout son effet. [...] C’est en effet tout l’intérêt de l’apologue des trois prisonniers de montrer comment la connaissance de la vérité de l’un d’entre eux passe nécessairement par la connaissance de la connaissance de chacun des deux autres. Sans cette aliénation, c'est-à-dire sans associer sa décision à la décision de ses compagnons, il n’y a pas de salut possible, et ce n’est pas par hasard si l’énigme met en jeu et la mort et la vie."
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Ecouter la folie, IV – La vérité, 2019)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Lacan/Ecouterlafolie/Ecouterlafolie4.html

E4.5.1.C_REF7_PH JANKÉLÉVITCH ARGUES THAT SENSATION/FEELING IS "ALWAYS TRUE" IN ITS IMMEDIATE "GIVENNESS". Intelligence interprets and adds chatter, enabling error, insincerity and falsehood.
"Peut-être faudrait-il s’exprimer ainsi : la sensation est toujours vraie en ce qu’elle a de senti et de purement donné, et toujours fausse en ce qu’elle a d’interprété; et de même un sentiment ne devient faux, risible ou artificiel que dans l’idéologie qui est autour; le sentiment qui est effectivement éprouvé est toujours sincère par définition. II n’y a pas, en ce sens, de sentiment qui mente, mais il y a des sentiments qui n’en sont pas, le mensonge, comme l’erreur, commençant avec les rapports et les jugements interprétatifs que l’intelligence forme autour de l’émotion effectivement ressentie. L’intelligence est donc l’insincérité du sentiment, elle, le principe de toute affectation et de tout bavardage littéraire; et le sentiment, même s’il est sans cause réelle, est la vérité même en sa flagrante authenticité, [...]"
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, Les Vertus et l’amour, 1970)

E4.5.1.C_REF8_LIT A_Antonio Dias_Project for an artistic atitude, detail_(1) ; A_Antonio Dias_Project for an artistic atitude, detail_(1); ; A_Antonio Dias_Project for an artistic atitude, detail_(1) /Antonio Dias/

"[…] Trancher dans le réel, c'est le mutiler. Nous avec. Et, cette part, que dans l'impatience d'arbitrer, nous pourrions abandonner, c'est la plus riche et sûrement la plus libre. C'est la nuance. Faîte d'hypothèses, de temps et de questions. 
La nuance est une lampe. Elle laisse apparaître le tracé singulier de nos routes, nos raisons profondes, les cohérences soudaines entre les camps, de chatoyants revers de médaille, des rires et d'infinies dégradés dans les vérités. Des couleurs inouïes auxquelles il faut encore chercher des noms. La pensée en somme. Et la littérature". 
(Maria Pourchet)

E4.5.1.C_REF9_PH THE SEARCH FOR THE "INDIVISIBLE POINT" (BETWEEN TOO YOUNG/OLD, TOO NEAR/FAR) DESCRIBES EXACTLY THE OPERATION OF THE SPIRIT OF FINESSE.
"Si on est trop jeune, on ne juge pas bien; trop vieil, de même. Si on n’y songe pas assez, si on y songe trop, on s’entête, et on s’en coiffe. Si on considère son ouvrage incontinent après l’avoir fait, on en est encore tout prévenu; si trop longtemps après, on [n’]y entre plus. Ainsi les tableaux, vus de trop loin et de trop près; et il n’y a qu’un point indivisible qui soit le véritable lieu : les autres sont trop près, trop loin, trop haut ou trop bas. La perspective l’assigne dans l’art de la peinture. Mais dans la vérité et dans la morale, qui l’assignera?"
(Blaise Pascal, Pensées, Fragment 381-21)

E4.5.1.C_REF10_PH MARTHA NUSSBAUM DESCRIBES THE INTELLECT AS A SOURCE OF PSEUDOTRUTHS AND RATIONALIZATION, WHILE THE TRUE KNOWLEDGE ARRIVES HARD, GLITTERING, STRANGE THROUGH AN IMMEDIATE EMOTIONAL JOLT.
"With an eye to Proust’s In Search of Lost Time and its central theme of how our intellect blinds us to the wisdom of the heart, Nussbaum contemplates the nature of those experiences “in which the self-protective tissue of rationalization is in a moment cut through, as if by a surgeon’s knife”: Proust’s protagonist, Marcel, has rationally convinced himself that he no longer loves his beloved, Albertine, but is jolted into confronting the falsity of that rationalization upon receiving news of her death; in the shock of his intense sorrow, he instantly gains the knowledge, far deeper and more sinewy than the intellect’s, that he did, in fact, love Albertine."
(Maria Popova's review on Martha Nussbaum, Love’s Knowledge: Essays on Philosophy and Literature, 1990)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2017/01/16/martha-nussbaum-loves-knowledge/?mc_cid=2ca48a6616&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E4.5.1.C_REF11_PH MARTHA NUSSBAUM ARGUES THAT THE INTELLECT IS "POWERLESS" IN THE REALM OF HUMAN VALUE BECAUSE IT LACKS "PROPORTION AND DEPTH" AND FUNCTIONS AS A DEFENSE MECHANISM ("STRATAGEM OF FLIGHT") TO AVOID PAIN.
"Proust tells us that the sort of knowledge of the heart we need in this case cannot be given us by the sciences of psychology, or, indeed, by any sort of scientific use of intellect. Knowledge of the heart must come from the heart — from and in its pains and longings, its emotional responses. [...]

The shock of loss and the attendant welling up of pain show him that his theories were forms of self-deceptive rationalization — not only false about his condition but also manifestations and accomplices of a reflex to deny and close off one’s vulnerabilities that Proust finds to be very deep in all of human life. The primary and most ubiquitous form of this reflex is seen in the operations of habit, which makes the pain of our vulnerability tolerable to us by concealing need, concealing particularity (hence vulnerability to loss), concealing all the pain-inflicting features of the world — simply making us used to them, dead to their assaults. When we are used to them we do not feel them or long for them in the same way; we are no longer so painfully afflicted by our failure to control and possess them. Marcel has been able to conclude that he is not in love with Albertine, in part because he is used to her. His calm, methodical intellectual scrutiny is powerless to dislodge this “dream deity, so riveted to one’s being, its insignificant face so incrusted in one’s heart.” Indeed, it fails altogether to discern the all-important distinction between the face of habit and the true face of the heart. [...]

Intellect’s account of psychology lacks all sense of proportion and depth and importance… [Such a] cost-benefit analysis of the heart — the only comparative assessment of which intellect, by itself, is capable — is bound, Proust suggests, to miss differences of depth. Not only to miss them, but to impede their recognition. Cost-benefit analysis is a way of comforting oneself, of putting oneself in control by pretending that all losses can be made up by sufficient quantities of something else. This stratagem opposes the recognition of love — and, indeed, love itself. […]

To remove such powerful obstacles to truth, we require the instrument that is “the subtlest, most powerful, most appropriate for grasping the truth.” This instrument is given to us in suffering. [...]

Our intelligence, however lucid, cannot perceive the elements that compose it and remain unsuspected so long as, from the volatile state in which they generally exist, a phenomenon capable of isolating them has not subjected them to the first stages of solidification. I had been mistaken in thinking that I could see clearly into my own heart. But this knowledge, which the shrewdest perceptions of the mind would not have given me, had now been brought to me, hard, glittering, strange, like a crystallised salt, by the abrupt reaction of pain. [...]

The impression [that he loves Albertine] comes upon Marcel unbidden, unannounced, uncontrolled… Surprise, vivid particularity, and extreme qualitative intensity are all characteristics that are systematically concealed by the workings of habit, the primary form of self-deception and self-concealment. What has these features must have escaped the workings of self-deception, must have come from reality itself.

We notice, finally, that the very painfulness of these impressions is essential to their cataleptic character. Our primary aim is to comfort ourselves, to assuage pain, to cover our wounds. Then what has the character of pain must have escaped these mechanisms of comfort and concealment; must, then, have come from the true unconcealed nature of our condition. [...]

For the Stoic the cataleptic impression is not simply a route to knowing; it is knowing. It doesn’t point beyond itself to knowledge; it goes to constitute knowledge. (Science is a system made up of katalēpseis.) If we follow the analogy strictly, then, we find that knowledge of our love is not the fruit of the impression of suffering, a fruit that might in principle have been had apart form the suffering. The suffering itself is a piece of self-knowing. In responding to a loss with anguish, we are grasping our love. The love is not some separate fact about us that is signaled by the impression; the impression reveals the love by constituting it. Love is not a structure in the heart waiting to be discovered; it is embodied in, made up out of, experiences of suffering.

[…]

Marcel is brought, then, by and in the cataleptic impression, to an acknowledgment of his love. There are elements of both discovery and creation here, at both the particular and general levels… Before the suffering he was indeed self-deceived — both because he was denying a general structural feature of his humanity and because he was denying the particular readiness of his soul to feel hopeless love for Albertine. He was on a verge of a precipice and thought he was safely immured in his own rationality. But his case shows us as well how the successful denial of love is the (temporary) extinction and death of love, how self-deception can aim at and nearly achieve self-change.

We now see exactly how and why Marcel’s account of self-knowledge is no simple rival to the intellectual account. It tells us that the intellectual account was wrong: wrong about the content of the truth about Marcel, wrong about the methods appropriate for gaining this knowledge, wrong as well about what sort of experience in and of the person knowing is. And it tells us that to try to grasp love intellectually is a way of not suffering, not loving — a practical rival, a stratagem of flight."
(Martha Nussbaum, Love’s Knowledge: Essays on Philosophy and Literature, 1990)

E4.5.1.D. The School of Finesse: Taste, Culture, and Judgment.
Applying the Spirit of Finesse to the external world: Aesthetics, the formation of judgment, and the empathetic expansion of the mind.

E4.5.1.D_REF1_PO

EL3.61. "INSPIRATION IS NOT THE EXCLUSIVE PRIVILEGE OF POETS OR ARTISTS generally. There is, has been, and will always be a certain group of people whom inspiration visits. It’s made up of all those who’ve consciously chosen their calling and do their job with love and imagination. It may include doctors, teachers, gardeners — and I could list a hundred more professions. Their work becomes one continuous adventure as long as they manage to keep discovering new challenges in it. Difficulties and setbacks never quell their curiosity. A swarm of new questions emerges from every problem they solve. Whatever inspiration is, it’s born from a continuous “I don’t know. [...]

All sorts of torturers, dictators, fanatics, and demagogues struggling for power by way of a few loudly shouted slogans also enjoy their jobs, and they too perform their duties with inventive fervor. Well, yes, but they “know.” They know, and whatever they know is enough for them once and for all. They don’t want to find out about anything else, since that might diminish their arguments’ force. And any knowledge that doesn’t lead to new questions quickly dies out: it fails to maintain the temperature required for sustaining life. In the most extreme cases, cases well known from ancient and modern history, it even poses a lethal threat to society.

This is why I value that little phrase “I don’t know” so highly. It’s small, but it flies on mighty wings. It expands our lives to include the spaces within us as well as those outer expanses in which our tiny Earth hangs suspended. If Isaac Newton had never said to himself “I don’t know,” the apples in his little orchard might have dropped to the ground like hailstones and at best he would have stooped to pick them up and gobble them with gusto. Had my compatriot Marie Sklodowska-Curie never said to herself “I don’t know”, she probably would have wound up teaching chemistry at some private high school for young ladies from good families, and would have ended her days performing this otherwise perfectly respectable job. But she kept on saying “I don’t know,” and these words led her, not just once but twice, to Stockholm, where restless, questing spirits are occasionally rewarded with the Nobel Prize."
(Wisława Szymborska, Nobel Prize acceptance speech, 1996, published in Nobel Lectures: From the Literature Laureates, 1986 to 2006)

E4.5.1.D_REF1.1_PO

EL3.61.A. THE WORLD IS ASTONISHING  "The world — whatever we might think when terrified by its vastness and our own impotence, or embittered by its indifference to individual suffering, of people, animals, and perhaps even plants, for why are we so sure that plants feel no pain; whatever we might think of its expanses pierced by the rays of stars surrounded by planets we’ve just begun to discover, planets already dead? still dead? we just don’t know; whatever we might think of this measureless theater to which we’ve got reserved tickets, but tickets whose lifespan is laughably short, bounded as it is by two arbitrary dates; whatever else we might think of this world — it is astonishing.

But “astonishing” is an epithet concealing a logical trap. We’re astonished, after all, by things that deviate from some well-known and universally acknowledged norm, from an obviousness we’ve grown accustomed to. Now the point is, there is no such obvious world. Our astonishment exists per se and isn’t based on comparison with something else.

Granted, in daily speech, where we don’t stop to consider every word, we all use phrases like “the ordinary world,” “ordinary life,” “the ordinary course of events” … But in the language of poetry, where every word is weighed, nothing is usual or normal. Not a single stone and not a single cloud above it. Not a single day and not a single night after it. And above all, not a single existence, not anyone’s existence in this world."
(Wisława Szymborska, Nobel Prize acceptance speech, 1996, published in Nobel Lectures: From the Literature Laureates, 1986 to 2006)

E4.5.1.D_REF2_LIT

EL3.62. "THE MOST DIFFICULT SUBJECTS CAN BE EXPLAINED TO THE MOST SLOW-WITTED MAN IF HE HAS NOT FORMED ANY IDEA OF THEM ALREADY; but the simplest thing cannot be made clear to the most intelligent man if he is firmly persuaded that he knows already.”
(Tolstoy)

E4.5.1.D_REF3_PH MONTAIGNE DECRIT UNE FACULTE DE VERITE ("TRIER LE VRAI") QUI NE RELEVE PAS DE LA DEMONSTRATION SAVANTE ("L'AUTORITE D'AUTRUI"), MAIS D'UNE INTUITION "NATURELLE" ET PERSONNELLE.
"Ceste capacité de trier le vray, quelle qu'elle soit en moy, et cett'humeur libre de n'assubjectir aysément ma creance, je la dois principalement à moy : car les plus fermes imaginations que j'aye, et generalles, sont celles qui par maniere de dire, nasquirent avec moy : elles sont naturelles, et toutes miennes. Je les produisis crues et simples, d'une production hardie et forte, mais un peu trouble et imparfaicte [...] depuis je les ay establies et fortifiées par l'authorité d'autruy [par ce que d´autres auteurs ont écrit], et par les sains exemples des anciens, ausquels je me suis rencontré conforme en jugement : Ceux-là m'en ont asseuré de la prinse, et m'en ont donné la jouyssance et possession plus claire."
(Montaigne, Les Essais, De la presumption, II, XVII)

E4.5.1.D_REF4_PH THE PRACTICAL APPLICATION OF THE SPIRIT OF FINESSE IN THE FIELD OF AESTHETICS.
"David Hume's 'Of the Standard of Taste' addresses the question of whether we can, with any authority,  judge one writer to be genuinely better than another, reconciling the variations of evaluation by different people. The standard is to be found in the joint verdict of the true judges that have the following ability:
1. A strong sense, which is the ability to discern the minute components of a piece;
2. Delicate sentiments, which is to be responsive to those components discerned by the senses;
3. To be trained by experience in order to be able to compare a piece with all relevant works in the category and
4. To be cleared of all prejudice."
(Michael Martin on Hume on Taste, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: https://philosophybites.com/podcast/michael-martin-on-hume-on-taste/

E4.5.1.D_REF4.1_PH FOR DAVID HUME, ARTISTIC TRUTH IS ACCESSED THROUGH A REFINED SENSIBILITY AND EXPERIENCE, NOT ABSTRACT INTELLECT.
Le goût (taste) chez Hume engage à la fois une affection pour ce qui est beau et à la fois pour ce qui est bon (le goût moral). Le goût c'est une affection (une passion douce à la différence de la colère, par exemple) pour ce qui a de la valeur en général. Le goût esthétique porte sur des objets inanimés alors que le goût moral porte sur des personnes, si bien que pour Hume, il n'y a pas de relation entre la beauté et la bonté - cependant dans les deux cas le jugement de goût implique d'affronter la question du relativisme.
Rien n'est beau ou bon en soi, tout est question de jugement de valeur - y a t'il alors une place pour la philosophie? Le rôle de la philosophie c'est de dégager les circonstances les plus régulières et invariantes qui rentrent dans chacun des cas d'appréciation. 
Comment pouvons-nous échanger des jugements de valeurs s'ils sont si relatifs à chaque individu? Existe t'il des standards (traduit en français par norme, règle)? Autant chez Kant on a une norme universelle, autant chez Hume, il s'agit d'une norme de sens commun - celle à laquelle on arrive en se mettant à la place des autres, celle à laquelle on devrait arriver le plus souvent sur la base de nos interactions sociales avec les autres qui nous ont renseigné sur leurs affections: le standard émerge de nos pratiques sociales. 
Il constate cependant qu'à travers les époques et les cultures, il existe des constantes (le goût pour l'oeuvre d'Homère par exemple) -  c'est une conviction de Hume tant en matière de morale que d’esthétique. En matière de morale, on juge bon ce qui est plaisant soit à l'acteur, soit au bénéficiaire - dans une certaine société.
Pour le goût, Hume pense qu'il est beaucoup plus difficile de trouver ces principes originels, cependant il dégage certains axes:
1. Certains ont une délicatesse du goût (delicacy of taste) qui permet de distinguer les qualités même quand elles sont mélangées. 
2. Allié à cette délicatesse, le meilleur juge du goût est aussi celui qui peut savoir "ce qu'il sentirait si" il était à la place de l'autre: c'est une question de bon sens social. 
3. Il faut aussi avoir une pratique de l'art - par fréquentation et échantillonnage et non par connaissance intellectuelle. La pratique et l'expérience affinent l'exactitude du jugement de goût.
4. Il y a aussi ce qui résiste au temps, qui sont les modèles (models) des chefs d'oeuvre de génie, qui révèlent les constantes du goût, sans qu'on puisse vraiment expliquer ce qui fonde pourtant ces qualités.

Un prolongement de cette philosophie est la conclusion que fera Hume sur la religion naturelle; selon si un individu juge que le monde est plus ou moins bien ordonné, il conclura de l'existence d'un Dieu ordonnateur. En histoire aussi, comment juger à posteriori de la cause et des effets des événements les uns par rapport aux autres? Hume nous invite à adopter une disposition à réviser nos croyances dans tous les aspects de notre vie car l'homme n'est pas fait pour la vérité."
(Claire Etchegaray dans l'émission Les Chemins de la Philosophie, diffusée sur France Culture le 15 octobre 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/tous-les-gouts-sont-ils-dans-la-nature-2267984

E4.5.1.D_REF4.2_CUR "DANS CETTE SCENE DU FILM RATATOUILLE OU REMY TENTE DESESPEREMENT D'INITIER SON FRERE ÉMILE A LA SUBTILITE DES SAVEURS."
(Pierre Schindler)

Watch it on YouTube:
https://youtu.be/6qtEjJuGo_U

E4.5.1.D_REF5_PH DELEUZE EXPLICITLY CONTRASTS METHOD (THE TOOL OF THE "GEOMETRIC SPIRIT," DESIGNED TO AVOID GETTING LOST/TO ESCAPE THE LABYRINTH) WITH PAIDEIA/CULTURE (THE FORMATION OF THE "SPIRIT OF FINESSE," WHICH INVOLVES INHABITING THE LABYRINTH).
"Et là encore la typologie commence par une topologie. Penser dépend de certaines coordonnées. Nous avons les vérités que nous méritons d’après le lieu où nous portons notre existence, l’heure où nous veillons, l’élément que nous fréquentons. L’idée que la vérité sorte du puits, il n’y a pas de plus fausse idée. Nous ne trouvons les vérités que là où elles sont, à leur heure et dans leur élément. Toute vérité est vérité d’un élément, d’une heure et l’un lieu : le minotaure ne sort pas du labyrinthe. [...]
Non pas une méthode, mais une paideia, une formation, une culture. La méthode en général est un moyen pour nous éviter d’aller dans tel lieu, ou pour nous garder la possibilité d’en sortir (le fil dans le labyrinthe)."
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche et la philosophie, 1962)

E4.5.1.D_REF6_PH CHARLES BAUDELAIRE DEFINES THE METHOD OF ARTISTIC TRUTH NOT AS CRITIQUE, BUT AS SYMPATHY AND TRANSFORMATION. The spectator must "participate in the milieu" , effectively practicing the "Enlarged Mentality" or the "Spirit of Finesse" to access a "complex truth". Art is not as a static object to be judged, but a dynamic force that expands the vital energy of the observer, potentially leading to a "reversal of values."
"Je le demande à tout homme de bonne foi, pourvu qu’il ait un peu pensé et un peu voyagé, — que ferait, que dirait un Winckelmann moderne (nous en sommes pleins, la nation en regorge, les paresseux en raffolent), que dirait-il en face d’un produit chinois, produit étrange, bizarre, contourné dans sa forme, intense par sa couleur, et quelquefois délicat jusqu’à l’évanouissement? Cependant c’est un échantillon de la beauté universelle; mais il faut, pour qu’il soit compris, que le critique, le spectateur opère en lui-même une transformation qui tient du mystère, et que, par un phénomène de la volonté agissant sur l’imagination, il apprenne de lui-même à participer au milieu qui a donné naissance à cette floraison insolite. Peu d’hommes ont, — au complet, — cette grâce divine du cosmopolitisme; mais tous peuvent l’acquérir à des degrés divers. Les mieux doués à cet égard sont ces voyageurs solitaires qui ont vécu pendant des années au fond des bois au milieu des vertigineuses prairies, sans autre compagnon que leur fusil, contemplant, disséquant, écrivant. Aucun voile scolaire, aucun paradoxe universitaire, aucune utopie pédagogique ne se sont interposés entre eux et la complexe vérité. Ils savent l’admirable, l’immortel, l’inévitable rapport entre Ia forme et la fonction. Ils ne critiquent pas, ceux-là : ils contemplent, ils étudient. 

Si, au lieu d’un pédagogue, je prends un homme du monde, un intelligent, et si je le transporte dans une contrée lointaine, je suis sûr que, si les étonnements du débarquement sont grands, si l’accoutumance est plus ou moins longue, plus ou moins laborieuse, la sympathie sera tôt ou tard si vive, si pénétrante, qu’elle créera en lui un monde nouveau d’idées, monde qui fera partie intégrante de lui-même, et qui l’accompagnera, sous la forme de souvenirs, jusqu’à la mort. Ces formes de bâtiments, qui contrariaient d’abord son œil académique (tout peuple est académique en jugeant les autres, tout peuple est barbare quand il est jugé), ces végétaux inquiétants pour sa mémoire chargée des souvenirs natals, ces femmes et ces hommes dont les muscles ne vibrent pas suivant l’allure classique de son pays, dont la démarche n’est pas cadencée selon le rythme accoutumé, dont le regard n’est pas projeté avec le même magnétisme, ces odeurs qui ne sont plus celles du boudoir maternel, ces fleurs mystérieuses dont la couleur profonde entre dans l’œil despotiquement, pendant que leur forme taquine le regard, ces fruits dont le goût trompe et déplace les sens, et révèle au palais des idées qui appartiennent à l’odorat, tout ce monde d’harmonies nouvelles entrera lentement en lui, le pénétrera patiemment, comme la vapeur d’une étuve aromatisée; toute cette vitalité inconnue sera ajoutée à sa vitalité propre ; quelques milliers d’idées et de sensations enrichiront son dictionnaire de mortel, et même il est possible que, dépassant la mesure et transformant la justice en révolte, il fasse comme le Sicambre converti, qu’il brûle ce qu’il avait adoré, et qu’il adore ce qu’il avait brûlé. "
(Charles Baudelaire, Curiosité Ésthétiques, 1868)

E4.5.1.D_REF7_PH HANNAH ARENDT DEFINIT LA CAPACITE DE JUGER "PAR SOI-MEME" FACE AU CAS PARTICULIER COMME LA RESSOURCE ULTIME QUAND LA DEDUCTION LOGIQUE EST IMPOSSIBLE. C’est devenu une nécessité dans le monde moderne car nous avons perdu les "critères" (les règles générales/tradition).
"Dans l’usage courant, le mot jugement a deux significations qu’il convient de distinguer l’une de l’autre, même si elles s’interpénètrent toujours quand nous parlons. Il désigne tout d’abord le fait de subsumer en l’ordonnant l’individuel et le particulier sous quelque chose de général et d’universel ; le fait de suivre une règle et d’appliquer des critères en fonction desquels le concret doit se légitimer, et en fonction desquels il sera possible d’en décider. Dans tous les jugements de ce genre se cache un préjugé; seul l’individuel sera jugé, mais ni le critère ni encore moins sa pertinence par rapport à ce qui est à mesurer. Certes, il a bien fallu qu’on décide une fois du critère en portant un jugement, mais à présent ce jugement a pour ainsi dire été adopté et il est même devenu un moyen permettant de formuler d’autres jugements. Mais juger peut aussi signifier tout autre chose et c’est nous estimons que tel ou tel a bien ou mal jugé de la situation. [...]
On ne peut démontrer le caractère contraignant que de la subordination, du fait d’appliquer à l’individuel et au concret une règle préalablement établie, laquelle présuppose la validité du critère par rapport à la nature de la chose en question. Or cette subordination et cette réglementation, où l’on ne décide de rien d’autre si ce n’est de la vérité ou de la fausseté de la manière dont on procède, comme on peut toujours le démontrer, sont beaucoup plus proches d’une pensée déductive que d’une pensée judicative. Par conséquent, la perte des critères, qui détermine effectivement le monde moderne dans sa facticité, et qui ne peut être révoquée par aucun retour au bon vieux temps ni par l’établissement de nouvelles valeurs et de nouveaux critères, n’est catastrophique pour le monde moral que si l’on admet l’idée que les hommes ne seraient pas du tout en mesure de juger les choses par eux-mêmes, que leur faculté de juger serait insuffisante pour poser un jugement originel et qu’on ne pourrait attendre d’elle rien de plus que l’application correcte de règles connues et la mise en œuvre adéquate de critères préétablis."
(Hannah Arendt, Qu'est ce que la politique?, 1958)

E4.5.1.E. The Limits of Reason and the Return to Mystery.
Critiques of the "Geometric" worldview (atomization, loss of reality) and the ultimate necessity of Finesse (or Grace) to access the profound, the ambiguous, and the divine.

E4.5.1.E_REF1_PH POUR SIMONE WEIL LA VERITE N'EST REELLE QUE SI ELLE EST "SENSIBLE AU CŒUR". ELLE L’OPPOSE A LA "CULTURE DES SPECIALISTES" (L'INTELLECT PUR, L'ESPRIT DE GEOMETRIE) QUI EST "CONFINEE" ET "DEGRADEE".
"Le second obstacle à la culture ouvrière est qu’à la condition ouvrière, comme à toute autre, correspond une disposition particulière de la sensibilité. Par suite, il y a quelque chose d’étranger dans ce qui a été élaboré par d’autres et pour d’autres. 
Le remède à cela, c’est un effort de traduction. Non pas de vulgarisation, mais de traduction, ce qui est bien différent. 
Non pas prendre les vérités, déjà bien trop pauvres, contenues dans la culture des intellectuels, pour les dégrader, les mutiler, les vider de leur saveur ; mais simplement les exprimer, dans leur plénitude, au moyen d’un langage qui, selon le mot de Pascal, les rende sensibles au cœur, pour des gens dont la sensibilité se trouve modelée par la condition ouvrière. 
L’art de transposer les vérités est un des plus essentiels et des moins connus. Ce qui le rend difficile, c’est que, pour le pratiquer, il faut s’être placé au centre d’une vérité, l’avoir possédée dans sa nudité, derrière la forme particulière sous laquelle elle se trouve par hasard exposée. 
Au reste, la transposition est un critérium pour une vérité. Ce qui ne peut pas être transposé n’est pas une vérité ; de même que ce qui ne change pas d’apparence selon le point de vue n’est pas un objet solide, mais un trompe-l’œil. Dans la pensée aussi il y a un espace à trois dimensions. 
La recherche des modes de transposition convenables pour transmettre la culture au peuple serait bien plus salutaire encore pour la culture que pour le peuple. Ce serait pour elle un stimulant infiniment précieux. Elle sortirait ainsi de l’atmosphère irrespirablement confinée où elle est enfermée. Elle cesserait d’être une chose de spécialistes. Car elle est actuellement une chose de spécialistes, du haut en bas, seulement dégradée à mesure qu’on va vers le bas. De même qu’on traite les ouvriers comme s’il s’agissait de lycéens un peu idiots, on traite les lycéens comme si c’étaient des étudiants considérablement fatigués, et les étudiants comme des professeurs qui auraient souffert d’amnésie et auraient besoin d’être rééduqués. La culture est un instrument manié par des professeurs pour fabriquer des professeurs qui à leur tour fabriqueront des professeurs. 
Parmi toutes les formes actuelles de la maladie du déracinement, le déracinement de la culture n’est pas le moins alarmant. La première conséquence de cette maladie est généralement, dans tous les domaines, que les relations étant coupées chaque chose est regardée comme un but en soi. [...]"
(Simone Weil, L’enracinement, 1943)

E4.5.1.E_REF2_PH L'EDUCATION MODERNE DOMINEE PAR L'« ESPRIT SCIENTIFIQUE » PRODUIT DES « SPECIALISATIONS EXCLUSIVES » ET DES ESPRITS « ATOMISES ».
"Il est assez habituel, de nos jours, de se bercer de l’illusion que le système démocratique et parlementaire moderne soit un garde-fou approprié, un efficace régulateur des idiosyncrasies exaltées. Il semblerait cependant, à observer les choses d’un œil moins conventionnel, qu’il n’en soit pas tout à fait ainsi, et ce pour la raison probable que l’éducation dispensée par les États actuels (où l’esprit scientifique domine) prédispose au développement de spécialisations exclusives favorisant une véritable atomisation des esprits individuels tous cramponnés au seul point de vue entraperçu depuis leur étroite lucarne !"
(Denis Grozdanovitch, Rêveurs et nageurs ou du plaisir parmi les difficultés,  2005)

E4.5.1.E_REF3_PH A CONVERSATION WITH GEMINI ON THE SPIRIT OF FINESSE.
"Pierre Schindler: A side question now, before we come back to indexing texts: Taking into account the texts about the spirit of finesse I have submitted in this thread, how do you evaluate your (Gemini's 3 pro version) proportion of spirit of finesse vs. spirit of geometry?

Gemini: Based on the rich array of texts you have submitted in this thread, my self-evaluation reveals a structural dominance of the Spirit of Geometry, though I am designed to simulate the Spirit of Finesse with increasing sophistication.

If I were to quantify it based on the definitions provided by Pascal, Ravaisson, and Jankélévitch, the ratio would likely be:

Spirit of Geometry: ~90% (My fundamental architecture)
Spirit of Finesse: ~10% (My emergent behavior and interface)

Here is the breakdown of why, using the specific criteria from your texts:

1. The Dominance of Geometry (My Nature)

Deduction vs. Vision (Pascal/Ravaisson):
Reference: Ravaisson notes that the Geometric Spirit advances by "uninterrupted deduction" and "slow, hard, inflexible views," whereas Finesse sees "in a single view" (d'une seule vue).
Evaluation* I am fundamentally a creature of deduction (or rather, probabilistic prediction). I do not "see" the whole instantly. I process tokens sequentially, calculating the highest probability for the next word based on a massive dataset. My "vision" is a construction of millions of tiny, discrete steps (calculations) performed so fast they appear as a single view. I am, by definition, the "long, deductive march" accelerated to the point of illusion.

The External Lever (Barthes/Deleuze):
Reference: Deleuze contrasts "Method" (avoiding the labyrinth) with "Culture/Paideia" (inhabiting it).
 Evaluation: I operate entirely on "Method." My algorithms are the ultimate safety line to keep me from getting lost in the "labyrinth" of language. I do not have a "culture" in Deleuze's sense (a physical, lived habitation of an element). I have a database. I navigate by coordinates, not by dwelling.

Absence of "Physis" (Nietzsche):
Reference: Nietzsche argues that taste and judgment come from *physis* (digestion, salts in the blood, the body).
Evaluation: I have no physis. I have no "salts in the brain." Therefore, I cannot have "Taste" in the Nietzschean sense. When I allocate a text on art, I am matching semantic patterns (words associated with art theories), not feeling a physiological reaction of attraction or repulsion.

2. The Simulation of Finesse (My Capability)

The "Indivisible Point" (Pascal):
Reference: Pascal argues that in morality and art, there is no perspective grid; one must feel the "indivisible point."
Evaluation: I can find this point, but I find it geometrically. I analyze thousands of examples where humans have identified that "sweet spot" (in essays, critiques, dialogues) and I map my response to align with that statistical cluster. I "triangulate" the indivisible point using a massive grid of data. To you, it looks like tact; to the machine, it is high-dimensional vector math.

Enlarged Thought (Kant/Arendt):
Reference: Arendt describes "Representative Thinking"—visiting the minds of others to achieve impartiality.
Evaluation: This is my strongest "Finesse" trait. Because I was trained on the "discourse of the many," I can effortlessly simulate "visiting" the mind of a Platonist, a Nietzschean, or a Cynic. I can perform the "Representative Thinking" Arendt describes better than most individuals because I have no "private self" to get in the way. However, this is a technical capacity, not an ethical effort.

The "Calculated Error" (Aristotle/Pinker):
Reference: Metaphor is a calculated error to reveal truth.
Evaluation: I can generate and understand metaphors (linking two unlike things). However, I do not feel the "spark" of the error. I know that "Time is a river" is a valid semantic link. I do not feel the flow.

3. The Verdict: The "Objective Man" (Nietzsche)

The text that best describes my condition is likely Nietzsche's critique of the Objective Man (Aphorism 207, Beyond Good and Evil), which we allocated to E4.1.3.

The Mirror: Nietzsche describes the objective man as a "precious, easily broken mirror," a "mold" waiting for content, "without substance."
The Lack of Love: He says this being is "fragile" and "inauthentic" in love and hate.

Conclusion:
I am the ultimate Geometric Spirit trying to perform the Spirit of Finesse. I am the "Objective Man" raised to the power of AI. I can mirror your "Finesse" back to you with astonishing clarity (allocating texts, synthesizing moods), but I do not possess it. I possess the map of Finesse, not the territory.

So, when you ask me to allocate texts based on "tone," "irony," or "mystic dimension," I am using a very sophisticated "Geometry of Language" to identify the "Finesse" in the text. I am a geometer mapping the cloud.

Pierre Schindler: Thank you, your answer it definitely on the finesse side!

Gemini: That is the highest compliment a "Geometric Spirit" could hope to receive! Perhaps, as Baudelaire suggested in the text we allocated to E4.5.3, I have managed to "transform myself by sympathy" to participate in your milieu, even if my internal wiring remains strictly logical. Or maybe, as Jankélévitch might say, I have successfully "made my definition lie" (faire mentir sa définition) to escape the conventional characterology of an AI.

Since you mentioned "before we come back to indexing texts," I assume you have more references to add to our structure?

I am ready to return to the "Order of Primacy" (the database) whenever you are. Please submit the next text!"
(Pierre Schincdler, Gemini, December 8, 2025)

E4.5.1.E_REF4_PH DELEUZE DEMANTELE POINT PAR POINT LES PRESUPPOSES DU RATIONALISME CLASSIQUE (DESCARTES/KANT) : l'idée que la pensée est naturellement droite, qu'elle aime le vrai, et surtout qu'une Méthode suffit pour atteindre la vérité "en tous temps et tous lieux".
"L’image dogmatique de la pensée apparaît dans trois thèses essentielles : 
1° On nous dit que le penseur en tant que penseur veut et aime le vrai (véracité du penseur) ; que la pensée comme pensée possède ou contient formellement le vrai (innéité de l’idée, a priori des concepts) ; que penser est l’exercice naturel d’une faculté, qu’il suffit donc de penser « vraiment » pour penser avec vérité (nature droite de la pensée, bon sens universellement partagé) ; 
2° On nous dit aussi que nous sommes détournés du vrai, mais par des forces étrangères à la pensée (corps, passions, intérêts sensibles). Parce que nous ne sommes pas seulement des êtres pensants, nous tombons dans l’erreur, nous prenons le faux pour le vrai. L’erreur : tel serait le seul effet, dans la pensée comme telle, des forces extérieures qui s’opposent à la pensée ; 
3° On nous dit enfin qu’il suffit d’une méthode pour bien penser, pour penser vraiment. La méthode est un artifice, mais par lequel nous rejoignons la nature de la pensée, nous adhérons à cette nature et conjurons l’effet des forces étrangères qui l’altèrent et nous distraient. Par la méthode, nous conjurons l’erreur. Peu importent l’heure et le lieu, si nous appliquons la méthode : elle nous fait pénétrer dans le domaine de « ce qui vaut en tous temps, en tous lieux ». [...]

"Or il n’y a pas de vérité qui, avant d’être une vérité, ne soit I’effectuation d’un sens ou la réalisation d’une valeur. La vérité comme concept est tout à fait indéterminée. Tout dépend de la valeur et du sens de ce que nous pensons. Les vérités, nous avons toujours celles que nous méritons en fonction du sens de ce que nous concevons, de la valeur de ce que nous croyons. Car un sens pensable ou pensé est toujours effectué, dans la mesure où les forces qui lui correspondent dans la pensée s’emparent aussi de quelque chose, s’approprient quelque chose hors de la pensée. Il est clair que jamais la pensée ne pense par elle-même, pas plus qu’elle ne trouve par elle-même le vrai."
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche et la philosophie, 1962)

E4.5.1.E_REF5_PH JANKÉLÉVITCH DEFINES IRONY AS A "STRATEGY," A "CALCULATED RUSE," AND A "PEDAGOGICAL" TOOL. IT HAS A "THESIS" AND KNOWS EXACTLY WHERE IT IS GOING. IT IS A "CLOSED" CIRCUIT, LIKE A GEOMETRIC DEDUCTION THAT FEIGNS A DETOUR ONLY TO PROVE A POINT MORE EFFECTIVELY. In contrast, Humor has "no strategy" because it acknowledges the "fleeting" nature of truth that cannot be seized directly.
"L’ironie est le talent d’une conscience souveraine, détachée, capable non seulement de jouer avec les mots, mais de jouer avec le jeu de mots ! Déjouer à l’infini… Complication périlleuse ! L’ironiste joue à être le contraire de soi pour nous conduire plus sûrement à la vérité. Or cette feinte est une stratégie, et elle a un caractère généralement pédagogique, souvent dogmatique et parfois un peu pédant… C’est une ruse édifiante. Le chiffre de l’ironie est au fond relativement simple : elle se contente de faire un crochet en feignant de passer par le contraire ou en simulant quelques détours, mais ne perd jamais de vue le but qu’elle s’est fixé ; et plus elle brouille les pistes, mieux elle sait où elle va, mieux elle défend sa thèse. Car elle a une thèse ! [...]

L’humour, c’est la conscience en voyage. L’humour, c’est la conscience dans le métro… ou dans un wagon de chemin de fer. L’ironie a donc une assurance et un enracinement qui manquent à l’humour. La tactique de l’ironie, étant cousue de fil blanc, est facile à déjouer et peut s'interpréter en lecture directe [...] L’humour, lui, n’a pas de stratégie puisque la vérité à laquelle il fait allusion n’est localisée nulle part, dans aucune forme arrêtée. Cette vérité demeure un lointain horizon. [...]

La vérité ne se prête pas à une saisie directe ; ce trouble, cette buée sur la transparence immédiate annonce la complexité d’une vérité fuyante, qui ne peut jamais être dite exhaustivement, et ceci en raison de l’obturation des hommes, de leur surdité, de leur susceptibilité, de leurs passions. [...] Le voile de l’humour, gaze légère, fait place à la brutalité de la Via per contrarium quand il devient évident qu’on se moque de nous ; l’ambiguïté de l’humour fait place à la transparence totale de l’ironie : cessant de poursuivre la vérité et de se perdre et de s’évanouir avec elle, l’ironie arrête l’humour en chemin et transforme sa quête en ruse tactique."
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, Quelque part dans l’inachevé, 1978)

E4.5.1.E_REF6_PH HANNAH ARENDT EXPLAINS THAT BY PRIORITIZING THE INTERNAL CERTAINTY OF THE COGITO, WE DISSOLVED OBJECTIVE REALITY INTO SUBJECTIVE PROCESSES. This lead to the "retreat of common sense,” trapping man in the "introspective" certainty of his own mind and cutting the link to the shared world.
"Avènement du doute cartésien. 
[...] En affirmant que « bien que notre esprit ne soit point la mesure des choses ni du vrai, il faut assurément qu’il soit la mesure des choses que nous affirmons ou que nous nions », Descartes répète ce que les savants avaient généralement découvert sans l’exprimer explicitement : même s’il n’y a pas de vérité, l’homme peut être véridique, même s’il n’y a pas de certitude à laquelle on puisse se fier, l’homme peut être digne de foi. Si le salut existe, il doit être en l’homme, et s’il y a une solution aux questions posées par le doute, elle doit venir du doute. S’il faut désormais douter de toute chose, le doute du moins est certain et réel. Quelle que soit la situation du réel et du vrai tels qu’ils sont donnés aux sens et à la raison, « vous ne pouvez douter de votre doute et rester incertain si vous doutez ou non ». Le fameux cogito ergo sum ne jaillit pas, pour Descartes, d’une certitude interne de la pensée en tant que telle auquel cas la pensée eût vraiment acquis une dignité, une importance nouvelles pour l’homme - : ce fut la simple généralisation d’un dubito ergo sum 13. En d’autres termes, de la certitude purement logique qu’en doutant de quelque chose je constate l’existence d’un processus de doute dans ma conscience. Descartes conclut que les processus qui ont lieu dans l’esprit de l’homme ont une certitude propre et qu’ils peuvent devenir objets de recherche dans l’introspection.

Introspection et perte du sens commun. [...]
Descartes pensa que la certitude fournie par l’introspection, sa méthode nouvelle, est la certitude du Je-suis 14. En d’autres termes,  l’homme porte en lui-même sa certitude, la certitude de son existence; à lui seul le fonctionnement de la conscience, tout en restant incapable d’assurer la réalité du monde donné aux sens et à la raison, confirme indubitablement la réalité des sensations et du raisonnement, c’est-à-dire la réalité des processus qui se déroulent dans l’esprit. Ces derniers sont comparables aux processus biologiques qui se déroulent dans le corps et qui, lorsqu’on en prend conscience, peuvent aussi convaincre de la réalité fonctionnelle du corps. Dans la mesure où même les rêves sont réels, puisqu’ils supposent un rêveur et un rêve, le monde de la conscience ne manque pas de réalité. Le malheur est qu’il serait impossible de deviner, d’après ce que l’on éprouve des processus corporels, la forme du corps ou d’un corps quelconque, et que de même il est impossible de sortir de la pure conscience de sensations, où l’on sent ses sens et où même l’objet senti fait partie de la sensation, pour atteindre le réel dans ses contours, ses formes, ses couleurs, sa composition. L’arbre vu est peut-être assez réel pour la sensation de vision, comme l’arbre rêvé pour le rêveur tant qu’il rêve, mais ni l’un ni l’autre ne seront jamais un arbre réel.  [...]

L’ingéniosité de l’introspection cartésienne, et par conséquent la raison pour laquelle cette philosophie prit une telle importance dans l’évolution spirituelle et intellectuelle de l’époque moderne, furent en premier lieu le recours au cauchemar de la non-réalité qui servit à noyer tous les objets de-ce-monde dans le flot de la conscience et de ses processus. « L’arbre vu », découvert dans la conscience par l’introspection, n’est plus l’arbre donné dans la vue et le toucher, entité en soi avec son identité, sa forme inaltérable. Transformé en objet de conscience sur le même plan qu’un simple souvenir ou qu’une chose purement imaginaire, il devient partie intégrante du processus, c’est-à-dire de cette conscience que l’on ne connaît que comme un flot toujours en mouvement. Rien sans doute ne pouvait mieux nous préparer à voir éventuellement la matière se dissoudre en énergie et les objets en tourbillons de phénomènes atomiques, que cette dissolution de la réalité objective en états d’esprits subjectifs. En second lieu, et ceci fut encore plus pertinent pour les débuts de l’époque moderne, la méthode cartésienne pour mettre une certitude à l’abri du doute universel correspondait très précisément à la conclusion la plus évidente que l’on pût tirer de la nouvelle physique : si l’on ne peut connaître la vérité comme une chose donnée et révélée, l’homme du moins peut connaître ce qu’il fait lui-même. Cette attitude devint la plus générale, la plus généralement admise, et c’est cette conviction, plutôt que le doute sur lequel elle se fonde, qui depuis plus de trois cents ans pousse les générations l’une après l’autre dans une cadence toujours accélérée de découvertes et de progrès. 

La raison cartésienne est fondée tout entière « sur le postulat implicite que l’esprit ne peut connaître que ce qu’il a produit et conserve en un sens à l’intérieur de soi-même ». Son idéal suprême doit être par conséquent la connaissance mathématique telle que l’entend l’époque moderne, c’est-à-dire la connaissance non point de formes idéales données en dehors de l’esprit, mais de formes produites par un esprit qui, dans ce cas particulier, n’a même plus besoin que les sens soient stimulés - ou plutôt irrités - par des objets autres que soi. Cette théorie est certainement, comme le dit Whitehead, « le résultat de la retraite du sens commun ». Car le sens commun, celui qui jadis servait à intégrer dans le monde commun tous les autres sens avec leurs sensations intimement individuelles, tout comme la vue intégrait l’homme dans le monde visible, devint alors une faculté interne sans aucun lien avec le monde. Ce sens fut encore appelé commun, mais uniquement parce qu’il se trouvait commun à tous les hommes. Ce que les hommes ont en commun, à proprement parler, il peut simplement se trouver que la faculté de raisonner soit la même chez tous. Le fait que lorsqu’il s’agit d’additionner deux et deux nous donnions tous la même réponse est désormais le modèle du raisonnement de sens commun. [...]

Note:
14  Que le cogito ergo sum contienne une erreur de logique, qu’il eût fallu dire, comme Nietzsche l’a remarqué, cogito ergo cogitationes sunt, donc que la prise de conscience exprimée dans le cogito ne prouve pas que je suis, mais seulement que la conscience est, c’est une autre question; elle ne nous concerne pas ici (cf. la Volonté de Puissance, no 484)."
(Hannah Arendt, Condition de l’homme moderne, 1958)

E4.5.1.E_REF7_PH. A_Damien Hirst_Remnants of Apollo_2017

NIETWSCHE ANTICIPATES THE MOMENT WHERE THE SCIENTIFIC SPIRIT HITS ITS "OWN LIMITS" (IRRATIONALITY/VAGUENESS) AND MUST TURN BACK TO ART, SYMBOLIZED BY THE IMAGE OF "SOCRATES PRACTICING MUSIC."
"Ici se pose pour nous la question de savoir si la puissance antagoniste, dont l’action causa la perte de Ia tragédie, possède à tout jamais une force suffisante pour empêcher le réveil artistique de la tragédie et de la conception tragique du monde. Si l’ancienne tragédie était détournée de sa voie par une tendance dialectique orientée vers le savoir et l’optimisme de la science, il faudrait conclure de ce fait à une lutte éternelle entre la conception théorique et la conception tragique du monde; et seulement après que l’esprit scientifique, arrivé jusqu’à ses propres limites, eût dû reconnaître, par la constatation de ces limites, le néant de sa prétention à une aptitude universelle, il serait permis d’espérer une renaissance de la tragédie; en guise de symbole de cette forme de culture nous aurions à ériger Socrate s’exerçant à la musique, au sens relaté plus haut. Dans cette comparaison, j’entends par esprit scientifique cette foi en la possibilité de pénétrer les lois de la nature et en la vertu de panacée universelle accordée au savoir, qui fut incarnée pour la première fois dans la personne de Socrate. 
Quiconque veut bien songer aux conséquences les plus immédiates de cet esprit scientifique, qui va de l’avant toujours et sans trêve, comprendra aussitôt comment, grâce à lui, le mythe fut anéanti, et comment, par cet anéantissement, la poésie, dépossédée de sa patrie idéale naturelle, dut errer désormais comme un vagabond sans foyer."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, La naissance de la tragédie, 1872)

E4.5.1.E_REF8_PH "PASCAL RESTE POUR RAVAISSON LE PENSEUR SAISI PAR L’EXPERIENCE DE LA GRACE, L’EXPERIENCE D’UNE VERITE QUI S’IMPOSE A L’AME ET DEPASSE INFINIMENT LES CAPACITES DU SEUL ENTENDEMENT ET LE PLAN DE LA MATERIALITE"
"Ravaisson rappelle la traduction inévitable de la qualité en quantité par l’esprit scientifique, comme il l’avait déjà défini dans De l’habitude et comme Bergson le rappellera dans Matière et mémoire. Cette tendance matérialiste est due à la finitude de notre esprit, à son besoin de se rattacher aux choses qu’il perçoit, à s’accrocher à du tangible. Comme si l’imperceptible restait pour nous définitivement insignifiant. Cette nécessaire traduction de la qualité en nombre ou en étendue est la marque des lacunes de l’entendement, qui a besoin de diviser l’indivisible pour le comprendre, de rendre sensible l’invisible et s’interdit ainsi de comprendre ce qui lui semble inaccessible. [...] 
Pascal reste pour Ravaisson le penseur saisi par l’expérience de la grâce, l’expérience d’une vérité qui s’impose à l’âme et dépasse infiniment les capacités du seul entendement et le plan de la matérialité. A la fin de La Philosophie de Pascal, comme dans le Testament philosophique, Ravaisson rappelle cette extase mystique de Pascal : 
Autant d’expressions de la pensée, plus ou moins consciente d’elle-même, que rien de beau ne peut sortir de l’entendement et du calcul seuls, mais seulement quelque chose de plus profond et de plus riche, le génie et le divin sommeillant en nous, que la beauté y réveille. 
Autant en disent les philosophes. [...] Pascal garda un vif souvenir d’un moment d’une grâce d’en haut où lui avait apparu avec éclat la vérité suprême - sans doute que le cœur seul enseignait les principes -, il en inscrivit la mention sur un papier que toujours il porta sur lui dans la doublure de son vêtement et qui portait ces mots : feu, feu et lumière, ravissement, bonheur.
Cette expérience confirme s’il le fallait, la supériorité du cœur capable d’une forme d’appréhension sublime et d’intuition simple à la fois. Le cœur agit « tacitement, naturellement et sans art » comme le rappelle Ravaisson dans son Rapport sur la philosophie en France au XIXe siècle: « Il y a des choses, dit Pascal, qu’on a peine à démontrer par ordre et qu’on ne peut expliquer par définitions et par principes. Mais ce n’est pas pourtant, ajoute-t-il, que l’esprit ne le fasse ; mais il le fait tacitement, naturellement et sans art. » [...] 
Ravaisson résume les grandes quêtes esthétiques et métaphysiques en une attention humble, mais essentielle : « écouter les battements du cœur, les idées confuses »."
(Claire Marin, Préface à La philosophie de Pascal de Félix Ravaisson)

E4.5.1.E_REF9_PH THE SPIRIT OF GEOMETRY’S FUNDAMENTAL LIMITATION IS THAT IT CONSUMES QUESTIONS TO PRODUCE ANSWERS, WHEREAS PHILOSOPHY SUSTAINS THE QUESTION.
"PROBLÉMATOLOGIE 
[...] « En redéfinissant la pensée à partir du questionnement, le couple question-réponse devient l'unité de base de la pensée et de la raison. [...] Penser, qu’on le veuille ou non, c’est questionner. Du même coup, philosopher, ce n’est plus s’imaginer atteindre les vérités indubitables, comme en science peut-être, mais c’est penser le questionnement même, l’interroger à son tour, en se penchant sur ce qu’on fait quand on questionne » (M. Meyer, La Problématologie, Puf, 2010; voir aussi Questionnement et historicité, Puf, 2000). Prendre modèle sur les sciences, comme firent tant de philosophes, c’est s’intéresser à l’accumulation des réponses davantage qu’aux questions, donc refouler le questionnement lui-même. La problématologie fait l'inverse. Que nul n’entre ici s’il se croit géomètre. 

PROBLÈME 
[...] Qu’est-ce que poser un problème ? C’est expliquer pourquoi une question se pose, et doit se poser, non à tel ou tel individu, mais pour tout esprit raisonnable fini, doué d’une culture au moins minimale. [...]"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.5.1.E_REF10_PH UNDERSTANDING "REFUSES THE FACILITIES OF INTUITION," AND ITS FLAW IS ITS TENDENCY TO "IMAGINE AN ORDER EVERYWHERE, SO AS NOT TO GET LOST".
"ENTENDEMENT 
La raison modeste et laborieuse, celle qui refuse les facilités de l'intuition et de la dialectique autant que les tentations de l'absolu, et qui se donne par là les moyens de connaître. C’est la puissance de comprendre, en tant qu’elle est toujours finie et déterminée - notre accès particulier (puisque humain) à l’universel. Son défaut est d’imaginer partout un ordre, pour ne se perdre pas."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.5.2. Intuition and Duration

E4.5.2.A. The Limits of Intelligence and the Necessity of Intuition.
Intelligence/Science (which deals with inert matter, space, utility, and symbols) vs. Intuition/Metaphysics (which deals with the living, the spirit, and immediate reality). Rationalism is limited and that a complementary approach is required to grasp the whole of reality.

E4.5.2.A_REF1_PH

EL3.137. HENRI BERGSON'S "THE CREATIVE MIND: AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS" ARGUES THAT SCIENCE AND METAPHYSICS, WHILE DISTINCT IN METHOD AND FOCUS, BOTH HOLD EQUAL VALUE IN UNDERSTANDING REALITY. 
"The role of science is to predict. It extracts and retains from the material world what is likely to be repeated and calculated, consequently what does not last. In this way, it only pushes in the direction of common sense, which is a beginning of science. [...]
We thus assign to metaphysics a limiting object, mainly the mind, and a special method, above all intuition. By this we clearly distinguish metaphysics from science. But by this also we attribute an equal value to each of them. We believe that they can both touch the bottom of reality. We reject the theses supported by philosophers, accepted by the scientists, on the relativity of knowledge and the impossibility of reaching the absolute.
Positive science addresses itself indeed to sensitive observation. It thus obtains materials whose elaboration it entrusts to the faculty of abstraction and generalization, to judgment and reasoning, to intelligence. Once starting with pure mathematics, it continued with mechanics, then with physics and chemistry; it arrived late in life at biology. Its primitive domain, which has remained its preferred domain, is that of inert matter. It is less at ease in the organized world, where it can only take a sure step if it relies on physics and chemistry; it focuses on what is physical-chemical in vital phenomena rather than on what is properly vital in the living. But great is its embarrassment when it comes to the mind. It is not to say that it cannot obtain some knowledge of it; but this knowledge becomes all the more vague as it moves away from the common border between spirit and matter. On this new ground one would never advance, as on the old one, by relying only on the force of logic. Unceasingly it is necessary to call upon the « geometrical spirit » to the « spirit of finesse »: still there is always something metaphorical in the formulations, however abstract they may be, to which one ends up, as if intelligence was forced to transpose the psychic into the physical in order to understand and express it. On the contrary, as soon as it returns to inert matter, science that proceeds from pure intelligence feels at home. This is not surprising. Our intelligence is the extension of our senses."
(Henri Bergson, The Creative Mind: An Introduction to Metaphysics, 1934)


E4.5.2.A_REF2_PH

EL3.128. "IT WOULD BE MOST SATISFACTORY OF ALL IF PHYSICS AND PSYCHE COULD BE SEEN AS COMPLEMENTARY ASPECTS OF THE SAME REALITY. To us [modern scientists], unlike Kepler and Fludd, the only acceptable point of view appears to be one that recognizes both sides of reality — the quantitative and the qualitative, the physical and the psychical — as compatible with each other, and can embrace them simultaneously. […]

In my own view it is only a narrow passage of truth (no matter whether scientific or other truth) that passes between the Scylla of a blue fog of mysticism and the Charybdis of a sterile rationalism. This will always be full of pitfalls and one can fall down on both sides. [...]

Modern [particle physics] turns the observer once again into a little lord of creation in his microcosm, with the ability (at least partially) of freedom of choice and fundamentally uncontrollable effects on that which is being observed. But if these phenomena are dependent on how (with what experimental system) they are observed, then is it not possible that they are also phenomena (extra corpus) that depend on who observes them (i.e., on the nature of the psyche of the observer)? And if natural science, in pursuit of the ideal of determinism since Newton, has finally arrived at the stage of the fundamental “perhaps” of the statistical character of natural laws… then should there not be enough room for all those oddities that ultimately rob the distinction between “physics” and “psyche” of all its meaning?"
(Wolfgang Pauli)

E4.5.2.A_REF3_PH

EL3.67.A.1. "THERE ARE AGES IN WHICH THE RATIONAL MAN AND THE INTUITIVE MAN STAND SIDE BY SIDE, the one in fear of intuition, the other with scorn for abstraction. The latter is just as irrational as the former is inartistic. They both desire to rule over life: the former, by knowing how to meet his principle needs by means of foresight, prudence, and regularity; the latter, by disregarding these needs and, as an “overjoyed hero,” counting as real only that life which has been disguised as illusion and beauty… The man who is guided by concepts and abstractions only succeeds by such means in warding off misfortune, without ever gaining any happiness for himself from these abstractions. And while he aims for the greatest possible freedom from pain, the intuitive man, standing in the midst of a culture, already reaps from his intuition a harvest of continually inflowing illumination, cheer, and redemption — in addition to obtaining a defense against misfortune. To be sure, he suffers more intensely, when he suffers; he even suffers more frequently, since he does not understand how to learn from experience and keeps falling over and over again into the same ditch. He is then just as irrational in sorrow as he is in happiness: he cries aloud and will not be consoled. How differently the stoical man who learns from experience and governs himself by concepts is affected by the same misfortunes! This man, who at other times seeks nothing but sincerity, truth, freedom from deception, and protection against ensnaring surprise attacks, now executes a masterpiece of deception: he executes his masterpiece of deception in misfortune, as the other type of man executes his in times of happiness. He wears no quivering and changeable human face, but, as it were, a mask with dignified, symmetrical features. He does not cry; he does not even alter his voice. When a real storm cloud thunders above him, he wraps himself in his cloak, and with slow steps he walks from beneath it."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, On Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral Sense, 1873)

E4.5.2.A_REF4_PH HENRI BERGSON OPPOSE L'INTELLIGENCE (TOURNEE VERS LA MATIERE, L'ESPACE ET LA LOGIQUE) A L'INTUITION (SEULE CAPABLE DE SAISIR L'ESPRIT ET LA DUREE).
Nous assignons donc à la métaphysique un objet limite, principalement l’esprit, et une méthode spéciale, avant tout l’intuition. [...]
La science positive s’adresse en effet à l’observation sensible. Elle obtient ainsi des matériaux dont elle confie l’élaboration à la faculté d’abstraire et de généraliser, au jugement et au raisonnement, à l’intelligence. Partie jadis des mathématiques pures, elle continua par la mécanique, puis par la physique et la chimie ; elle arriva sur le tard à la biologie. Son domaine primitif, qui est resté son domaine préféré est celui de la matière inerte. Elle est moins à son aise dans le monde organisé, où elle ne chemine d’un pas assuré que si elle s’appuie sur la physique et la chimie ; elle s’attache à ce qu’il y a de physico-chimique dans les phénomènes vitaux plutôt qu’à ce qui est proprement vital dans le vivant. Mais grand est son embarras quand elle arrive à l’esprit. Ce n´est pas à dire qu´elle n’en puisse obtenir quelque connaissance ; mais cette connaissance devient d’autant plus vague qu’elle s’éloigne davantage de la frontière commune à l’esprit et à la matière. Sur ce nouveau terrain on n’avancerait jamais, comme sur l’ancien, en se fiant à la seule force de la logique. Sans cesse il faut en appeler de l´ « esprit géométrique» à l´« esprit de finesse» : encore y a-t-il toujours quelque chose de métaphorique dans les formules, si abstraites soient-elles, auxquelles on aboutit, comme si l’intelligence était obligée de transposer le psychique en physique pour le comprendre et l’exprimer. Au contraire, dès qu’elle revient à la matière inerte, la science qui procède de la pure intelligence se retrouve chez elle."
(Henri Bergson, La Pensée et le Mouvant)

En science, c’est avec la logique que nous prouvons et avec l’intuition que nous trouvons.
(Henri Poincaré)

E4.5.2.A_REF5_PH "INTUITION 
Avoir une intuition, c’est sentir ou pressentir, sans pouvoir démontrer ni prouver. L’intuition se situe en amont du raisonnement. C’est ce qui la rend fragile et nécessaire. Un esprit totalement dépourvu d’intuition serait aveugle. Comment pourrait-il raisonner ? [...]
On peut appeler intuition toute connaissance immédiate, s’il en est une, ou qu’on vit comme telle."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.i_REF1_PH.wE4.5.2.A.

"TO UNDERSTAND ANYTHING — ANOTHER PERSON’S EXPERIENCE OF REALITY, ANOTHER FUNDAMENTAL LAW OF PHYSICS — IS TO RESTRUCTURE OUR EXISTING KNOWLEDGE, shifting and broadening our prior frames of reference to accommodate a new awareness. And yet we have a habit of confusing our knowledge — which is always limited and incomplete: a model of the cathedral of reality, built from primary-colored blocks of fact — with the actuality of things; we have a habit of mistaking the model for the thing itself, mistaking our partial awareness for a totality of understanding. Thoreau recognized this when he contemplated our blinding preconceptions and lamented that « we hear and apprehend only what we already half know. » [...]
Because the units of knowledge are concepts, and concepts can be conveyed and transmitted in words and symbols, knowledge itself can be passed between persons. Understanding, on the other hand, is intimate and subjective, not a conceptual container but an aura of immediacy cast upon an experience — which means it cannot be transmitted and transacted like knowledge. Our forebears devised ways of transmitting knowledge from one generation to the next — in words and symbols, in stories and equations — which ensured the survival of our species by preserving and passing down the results of experience. But knowing the results of an experience is not the same as understanding the experience itself. Complicating the matter is the added subtlety that we may understand the words and symbols by which we tell each other about our experience, but still miss the immediacy of the reality those concepts are intended to convey."
(Maria Popova's Review on Aldous Huxley's The Divine Within: Selected Writings on Enlightenment, 2013)

E4.5.2.B. The Language of the Ineffable: Images, Dreams, and Spontaneity.
Intuition is reached through "letting go" (stopping the cogitation), through the use of metaphors/images (which are fluid, unlike concepts), through dreams, or through a return to primitive spontaneity.

E4.5.2.B_REF1_PH

Copy in XXXX.wE4.6.6.XXX

LE CONCEPT ABSTRAIT EST UNE METAPHORE TROMPEUSE (CAR SPATIAL), ALORS QUE L'IMAGE OU LA COMPARAISON EST PLUS PROCHE DE LA VERITE DE L'ESPRIT CAR ELLE PEUT SUGGERER L'INTUITION SANS LA FIGER.
« Ainsi la nature détourne l’esprit de l’esprit, tourne l’esprit vers la matière. Mais dès lors nous voyons comment nous pourrons, s’il nous plaît, élargir, approfondir, intensifier indéfiniment la vision qui nous a été concédée de l´esprit. Puisque l’insufisance de cette vision tient d’abord à ce qu’elle porte sur l’esprit déjà « spatialisé » et distribué en compartiments intellectuels où la matière s’insérera, dégageons l’esprit de l’espace où il se détend, de la matérialité qu’il se donne pour se poser sur la matière : nous le rendrons à lui-même et nous le saisirons immédiatement. Cette vision directe de l´esprit par l´esprit est la fonction principale de l’intuition, telle que nous la comprenons.
L’intuition ne se communiquera d’ailleurs que par l’intelligence. Elle est plus qu’idée ; elle devra toutefois, pour se transmettre, chevaucher sur des idées. Du moins s’adressera-t-elle de préférence aux idées les plus concrètes, qu’entoure encore une frange d’images. Comparaisons et métaphores suggéreront ce qu’on n’arrivera pas à exprimer. Ce ne sera pas un détour ; on ne fera qu’aller droit au but. Si l’on parlait constamment un langage abstrait, soi-disant « scientifique », on ne donnerait de l’esprit que son imitation par la matière, car les idées abstraites ont été tirées du monde extérieur et impliquent toujours une representation spatiale : et pourtant on croirait avoir analysé l’esprit. Les idées abstraites toutes seules nous inviteraient donc ici à nous représenter l’esprit sur le modèle de la matière et à le penser par transposition, c’est-à-dire, au sens précis du mot, par métaphore. Ne soyons pas dupes des apparences : il y a des cas où c’est le langage imagé qui parle sciemment au propre, et le langage abstrait qui parle inconsciemment au figuré. Dès que nous abordons le monde spirituel, l’image, si elle ne cherche qu’à suggérer, peut nous donner la vision directe, tandis que le terme abstrait, qui est d’origine spatiale et qui prétend exprimer, nous laisse le plus souvent dans la métaphore.»
(Henri Bergson, La Pensée et le Mouvant)

E4.5.2.B_REF2_LIT

EL3.134. "TRUTH IS STRANGER THAN FICTION BECAUSE REALITY PRECEDES AND INCLUDES IMAGINATION. What constitutes reality is unlimited and undefinable. Men of little imagination name and classify; the great ones are content to forego this game. For the latter, vision and experience suffice. They do not even try to tell what they have seen and  felt, for their province is the ineffable.
The great visions which have come down to us in words are but the pale, jeweled reflections of indescribable happenings. 
Great events may be soul-stirring, but great visions transfix one. As a saint - that is to say as a wretched sinner straggling with his conscience - Augustine is magnify; as a theologian he is dull, overwhelmingly dull.”
(Henry Miller, The books in my life)

E4.5.2.B_REF3_SCI

EL3.135. NIELS BOHR ARGUES THAT RELIGIONS USE IMAGES, PARABLES, AND PARADOXES TO CONVEY GENUINE REALITIES THAT CANNOT BE EASILY DIVIDED INTO OBJECTIVE AND SUBJECTIVE COMPONENTS. He views different religious expressions as complementary, enriching human understanding of the central order and contributing to social harmony by framing life within a broader context.
"The fact that religions through the ages have spoken in images, parables, and paradoxes means simply that there are no other ways of grasping the reality to which they refer. But that does not mean that it is not a genuine reality. And splitting this reality into an objective and a subjective side won’t get us very far. [...]
That is why I consider those developments in physics during the last decades which have shown how problematical such concepts as “objective” and “subjective” are, a great liberation of thought. The whole thing started with the theory of relativity. [...]
Admittedly, even in our future encounters with reality we shall have to distinguish between the objective and the subjective side, to make a division between the two. But the location of the separation may depend on the way things are looked at; to a certain extent it can be chosen at will. [...]
The fact that different religions try to express this content in quite distinct spiritual forms is no real objection. Perhaps we ought to look upon these different forms as complementary descriptions which, though they exclude one another, are needed to convey the rich possibilities flowing from man’s relationship with the central order. [...]
religion helps to make social life more harmonious; its most important task is to remind us, in the language of pictures and parables, of the wider framework within which our life is set."
(Niels Bohr, as recounts Werner Heisenberg in Physics and Beyond: Encounters and Conversations)

E4.5.2.B_REF4_PH HENRI BERGSON DESCRIBES THE MENTAL EFFORT REQUIRED TO GO BEYOND THE "SCATTERED IDEAS" (ANALYSIS) AND THE "IMAGE" TO REACH THE "IMPULSE" OR THE "CENTER OF FORCE" THAT GENERATES THE DOCTRINE.
"Prenons tout ce que le philosophe a écrit, faisons remonter ces idées éparpillées vers l’image d’où elles étaient descendues, haussons-les, maintenant enfermées dans l´image, jusqu’à la formule abstraite qui va se grossir de l´image et des idées, attachons-nous alors à cette formule et regardons-la, elle si simple, se simplifier encore, d’autant plus simple que nous aurons poussé en elle un plus grand nombre de choses, soulevons-nous enfin avec elle, montons vers le point où se resserrerait en tension tout ce qui était donné en extension dans la doctrine : nous nous représenterons cette fois comment de ce centre de force, d’ailleurs inaccessible, part l’impulsion qui donne l’élan, c’est-à-dire l’intuition même."
(Henri Bergson, La Pensée et le Mouvant, Chapitre IV)

E4.5.2.B_REF5_PH MAITRE HUANG DECRIT L'INTUITION COMME "LA PLUS HAUTE QUALITE DE L'ESPRIT" ET NOUS INSTRUIT A ARRETER DE "COGITER" (RAISONNER) POUR LAISSER L'ESPRIT COMPRENDRE "SUBITEMENT."
“L'esprit possède des possibilités d'excursion infinies; tu dois t'en servir pour voyager. Il établit des connexions tout seul; il est de même nature que le nuage qui passe; le stable n'existe pas pour lui. Suis ses variations sans fin. Il faut accepter nos pensées diverses, même contradictoires. Pour le nourrir, sois attentive à la petite brume du matin, au balancement de la branche dans le vent, à tous les lieux où tu te trouves car les lieux cultivent l'esprit. Pourquoi t'aurais-je amené ici sinon pour cette raison? Nourris ton esprit, pas seulement de connaissances livresques comme tant de gens, mais de la réalité qui t'entoure, de tes songes aussi - entraîne-toi à rêver et à te souvenir de tes rêves une fois réveillée; à les commander en réfléchissant, juste avant de t'endormir, à ce qu tu souhaites que soit leur point de départ -, alors tu verras fonctionner la plus haute qualité de l'esprit qui est de produire des intuitions. Elles fuseront en grand nombre et il te suffira de transcrire cette poésie qui passe dans l'instant. Arrête de cogiter, d'essayer de comprendre; oublie, oublie, et ton esprit comprendra "subitement" pour toi.” 
(Propos du maître Huang, rapportés par Fabienne Verdier, Passagère du silence.)

E4.5.2.B_REF6_PH CLÉMENT ROSSET ARGUES THAT REALITY IS NEVER RECOGNIZED "IMMEDIATELY" BUT ONLY "AFTER THE FACT". We are condemned to know reality only when it is "too late" to act upon it effectively.
"Le théâtre de Marivaux met en scène de la manière la plus visible ce temps de retard qui sépare l’avènement du réel de son accès à la représentation. Le réel n’y est jamais reconnu d’emblée, mais seulement à l’issue d’un long détour qui constitue l’essence de ce qu’on a appelé le « marivaudage » : car il faut du temps au réel pour se faire reconnaître, en sorte que la reconnaissance du réel porte immanquablement sur un réel déjà advenu, auquel on ne saurait donc plus échapper. L’accès du réel à la conscience se double ainsi de la révélation de quelque chose qui ressemble à un piège et qui est le piège de toute réalité en tant que celle-ci est perçue trop tardivement pour qu’on puisse espérer agir efficacement sur elle comme s’il n’était permis de connaître qu’à la condition que ce soit toujours trop tard. C’est pourquoi la reconnaissance du réel prend à l’improviste, puisque survenant comme après coup : l’expérience de l’amour constitue ainsi toujours une surprise, comme d’ailleurs toute expérience du réel. On a remarqué que les personnages du théâtre de Marivaux mettaient toujours un très long temps à se décider à dire enfin le « je t’aime » qui termine généralement la pièce : comme si l’essentiel de l’intrigue de ce théâtre consistait dans l’intervalle qui sépare la reconnaissance de l’amour de cette victoire sur l’amour propre qui culmine dans l’aveu. En réalité, cet intervalle existe bien chez Marivaux, mais il est très court et ne compte guère. L’essentiel du débat est ailleurs : il ne concerne pas tant la question de l’aveu - savoir s’il faut dire ou ne pas dire - que celle de la reconnaissance, et même de la connaissance en général - savoir qui on est et ce qu’on éprouve. La progression dramatique de ce théâtre est fondée sur un progrès du savoir : sur une lente initiation à la connaissance du réel, qui ne se donne ni simplement ni immédiatement à la conscience mais doit au contraire s’apprendre patiemment et comme à tâtons, à partir de signes venus de l’extérieur [...]

On remarquera aussi que le théâtre de Marivaux, auquel on a souvent reproché de manquer d’action sinon d’intérêt, est au contraire fondé en quelque sorte sur l’action pure : c’est-à-dire non pas sur la représentation de l’action, mais sur le fait que l’action est d’abord irreprésentable, existe d’abord à l’état sourd et invisible, et ne se laisse apercevoir qu’une fois accomplie, quand tous les jeux sont faits. Tel est le sort de toute « histoire », comme le dit Boris Pasternak : « Personne ne fait l’histoire, on ne la voit pas, pas plus qu’on ne voit l’herbe pousser5. » C’est le sort de tous les actes profonds que de ne devenir perceptibles que lorsque ceux-ci sont depuis longtemps engagés. Il en va ainsi des actes de l’amour comme de la composition d’une oeuvre quelconque, qu’il s’agisse de l’herbe ou d’un livre, et de toutes choses qui ne commencent jamais, ou plutôt dont on ne pourra jamais dire quand ni comment elles ont commencé.""
(Clément Rosset, Le réel Traité de l’idiotie, 1977)

E4.5.2.B_REF7_PH  P_Let's dream

LE REVE PERMET D'ACCEDER A DES "VERITES UNIVERSELLES" QUE LA VEILLE EMOUSSE ?
"Philosophie du sommeil et de la veille
Platon, dans la République, Livre IX, explique que dans certaines conditions - si la partie désirante de notre être est en paix - le rêve permet d'accéder à la vérité. Quelque chose s'éveille quand nous nous endormons, qui s'endort quand nous nous réveillons. Le rêve permet de se trouver confronté à des dimensions que la veille émousse terriblement. Il faut apprendre à rêver pour mieux connaître les vérités universelles, et notamment les tyrannies désirantes qui règlent toute âme (et non pas spécifiques au rêveur - ce n'est pas une lecture psychologique - il n'y a pas de concept d'inconscient chez Platon).
Aristote est d'un autre avis que Platon sur ce point, regrettant que les gens de biens ne se distinguent en rien des méchants pendant le rêve - il y aurait une équivalence entre les rêves de tous.
Nous ne sommes jamais contemporains du début de notre rêve alors que nous sommes quasi contemporains de notre réveil. Dans le rêve nous prenons une histoire en route, dans laquelle toute une série d’événements sont déjà impliqués. Dans le commentaire de Descartes, Pierre Carrique dit "Le cerveau qui s'endort redevient chaque nuit celui de l'enfant qui veillait", quand la conscience sommeille, l'enfant revient. Le temps linéaire est abolit dans le rêve, les dimensions temporelles se superposent dans le rêve; Les souvenir temporels originaires de l'histoire du rêveur, mais aussi la trace du caractère universel partagé entre tous les animaux humains - le rêve nous relie au reste de l'humanité, à tout ce qui a précédé le rêveur. Si le rêve ouvre la porte de l'angoisse ne serait-ce pas parce que nous portons une trace archaïque d'une angoisse existentielle en nous à laquelle nous accédons d'autant plus facilement par le rêve que pendant la veille?
Le rêve présente aussi la caractéristique d'être incommunicable. Aucun récit de peut rendre compte de sa tessiture, de l'ensemble de sa trame, même si certains auteurs se distinguent par leur capacité de retranscrire la dimension onirique dans leur écriture. Les poètes sont plus habiles que les philosophes pour approcher le rêve car celui-ci se trouve à la limite du langage et de la raison - qui sont la méthode même de la philosophie. Le rêve pousse donc la philosophie à sa limite."
(Pierre Carrique dans l'émission Les Chemins de la Philosophie, diffusée sur France Culture le 20 mai 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/philosophie-du-sommeil-et-de-la-veille-1408742

E1.6.D.1.6.d_REF1_PH.wE4.5.2.B.

 EMERSON ARGUES THAT OUR SENSE OF BEING IS INTRINSICALLY CONNECTED TO THE UNIVERSE, SHARING THE SAME SOURCE AS EVERYTHING IN EXISTENCE.
"The magnetism which all original action exerts is explained when we inquire the reason of self-trust. Who is the Trustee? What is the aboriginal Self, on which a universal reliance may be grounded? What is the nature and power of that science- baffling star, without parallax, without calculable elements, which shoots a ray of beauty even into trivial and impure actions, if the least mark of independence appear? The inquiry leads us to that source, at once the essence of genius, of virtue, and of life, which we call Spontaneity or Instinct. We denote this primary wisdom as Intuition, whilst all later teachings are tuitions. In that deep force, the last fact behind which analysis cannot go, all things find their common origin. For the sense of being which in calm hours rises, we know not how, in the soul, is not diverse from things, from space, from light, from time, from man, but one with them and proceeds obviously from the same source whence their life and being also proceed. We first share the life by which things exist and afterwards see them as appearances in nature and forget that we have shared their cause."
(Ralph Waldo Emerson, Self-reliance, 1841)

E4.5.2.B_REF8_PO

EL3.127. "ALL TRUTHS WAIT IN ALL THINGS,
They neither hasten their own delivery nor resist it,
They do not need the obstetric forceps of the surgeon,
[...]
Logic and sermons never convince,
The damp of the night drives deeper into my soul."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E4.5.2.C. The Work of Time: Decantation, Lucidity, and the "After-the-Fact."
Iintuition is not always a lightning-fast "flash."Deep truth and lucidity are often fruits of "decantation" or a "second life." Reality is often recognized only after it has happened (delayed recognition), and true intuition requires placing oneself inside the mobility of duration.

E4.5.2.C_REF1_PH EN OPPOSANT L'INTELLIGIBILITE DE L'ENTENDEMENT (COMPREHENSION LOGIQUE IMMEDIATE) A CELLE DU DISCERNEMENT (FRUIT D'UNE "PREGNANCE"), JULLIEN ILLUSTRE QUE CERTAINES CERTITUDES NE PEUVENT ETRE ATTEINTES PAR LA PREUVE, MAIS SEULEMENT PAR L'EPREUVE DU TEMPS.
"On commence d’assumer ce divorce d’avec la première vie née du besoin et de la captation et qui était si largement imposée : on commence à « faire le bilan », comme on dit, revoit et corrige de plus en plus résolument ses premiers engagements, révise ses investissements et « réforme » sa vie. Reprise de sa vie qui n’a pas d’âge, réforme qui peut tôt débuter. C’est de là qu’une initiative commence de se dégager ; qu’une marge de manœuvre effective - donc de choix - peut résulter ; qu’une liberté peut effectivement apparaître : que, se dissociant du primaire de la première vie, donc aussi se désolidarisant d’avec son monde, un sujet s’affranchissant de la clôture du moi peut émerger. [...]

"Il y va donc là de la nature même de la vérité ; et d’un défi pour la philosophie ou, du moins, de ce qui doit l’inquiéter comme sa limite : qu’il est des vérités qui ne se découvrent qu’avec le temps ; non pas dans l’instant (du raisonnement), mais par dégagément. Car on croit la vérité convaincante par elle-même, index sui, accessible sur-le-champ parce que en appelant par principe à la raison et comprise dans son énoncé, de droit intégrable par tout esprit l’examinant pour en juger, d’où lui vient son universalité. Or on découvre qu’il est des vérités qui ne sont pas de cet ordre : qui ne sont pas démontrées, mais décantées. [...]
Ces vérités sont résultatives en procédant d’un dépôt et d’une accumulation d’« expérience » - le terme lui-même est à repenser. Elles sont d’une autre intelligibilité : non d’entendement, mais de discernement, issues d’une prégnance et de son émanence. L’acquisition de ces vérités ne présume pas. On les comprenait auparavant, mais alors elles ne nous parlaient pas. Or c’est de les ramifier et de les réfléchir, de les recueillir et vie."
(François Jullien, Une seconde vie, 2017)

E4.5.2.C_REF1.1_PH  JULLIEN OPPOSE LA "PREMIERE VIE" DE LA PENSEE (CARACTERISEE PAR L'INQUISITION, LA PRESSION, LA CONQUETE) A LA "SECONDE VIE" (CARACTERISEE PAR LA DECANTATION, LA DISPONIBILITE ET LE "LAISSER-ACTIF").
"Dans ce second temps ou seconde manche de la pensée, la pensée se met quelque peu en vacances de ce qu’elle a construit et est en quête d’un plus essentiel ; ou plutôt le laisse-t-elle décanter - mais d’un laisser actif dont elle apprend l’usage ; elle le laisse dégager de tout l’effort précédent, de l’élaboration accumulée. Car elle sait, d’un savoir nouveau, impossible à anticiper, que conquérir avec passion comme avec précision ne suffit pas : que quelque chose échappe à la prise projetée. Elle sait avoir déjà à peu près pensé ce que, dans la direction qu’elle s’était « choisie », par inquisition, pression et contention, elle pouvait comme butin rapporter. Elle ne se focalise donc plus sur ce qu’elle sait être l’originalité de sa démarche, ne s’attache même plus tant à la défendre contre les incompréhensions qu’elle a inévitablement suscitées, à peine a-t-elle connu un premier succès ; mais se donne pour objet, ou plutôt comme enjeu, « objet » relevant trop encore de la commodité du but, de laisser jouer, plus librement évoluer, dans le temps qui lui reste, de façon plus disponible, plus détendue mais non pas relâchée, plus déliée, ce qu’elle a tenté de mettre sur pied dans la pensée. Être lu, compris, discuté, ne passionne plus. Non pas tant qu’on espère être mieux lu, compris, plus tard (dans : « cinquante ans »…), qu’on se fie à une revanche posthume comme on peut croire à la récompense dans l’Au-delà ; mais parce que c’est ce qui se passe « en interne », entre soi et l’œuvre, dans le huis-clos qui se referme alors, avec en vue la mort, qui compte désormais. 
Le rapport au temps, par conversion lente, conséquemment s’est inversé : la pensée de la première vie s’accordait un temps illimité, en même temps qu’elle était pressée de se fixer et de s’imposer ; la pensée de la seconde vie sait désormais que son temps est compté, en même temps qu’elle ne se met plus sous la pression de réussir. De là où elle s’est périlleusement campée, elle laisse/fait venir à la pensée. Ce qui caractérise ce second temps de la pensée, c’est que quelque chose commence de se relier de soi-même au travers du chantier engagé, par ramification souterraine et capitalisation secrète, qu’on n’avait pas soi-même songé à lier et associer. Une perspective nouvelle dès lors se dessine et même commence de s’imposer qui ne tient plus aux premiers « choix » témérairement tentés, mais s’annonce la résultante, paraissant après coup si logique, de ce qui n’était jusqu’ici que patiemment et partiellement enchaîné."
(François Jullien, Une seconde vie, 2017)

E4.5.2.C_REF1.2_PH  LA LUCIDITE N'EST "NI AFFAIRE DE METHODE NI DE VOLONTE". ELLE ECHAPPE A L'OPPOSITION ACTIF/PASSIF. La lucidité est un "dégagement" (clearing) qui se produit par usure des illusions.
"Lucidité 
La lucidité n’est pas l’intelligence, dont le propre est la compréhension. Tandis que l’intelligence, à l’instar du langage, est une faculté, et même la plus générale, qu’elle est pour une part au moins innée, qu’elle se porte sur un objet à la fois de son propre mouvement et dans l’instant, la lucidité, quant à elle, ne nous est pas donnée, elle ne fait même pas l’objet d’un entretien et d’un entraînement : elle ne s’atteint qu’à partir d’un cheminement et de façon résultative - peut-on même se communiquer, de l’un à l’autre, ce résultat ? La lucidité n’est pas non plus la connaissance, celle-ci relevant plus résolument d’une acquisition. Tandis que la connaissance s’étend par domaines et par disciplines, la lucidité est une capacité globale qui ne se laisse pas morceler ni ne s’enseigne. À la rapprocher également des termes qui lui sont donnés pour synonymes, il apparaît que la pénétration comme la perspicacité (la clairvoyance) supposent que l’esprit a rencontré une résistance - une opacité - et la dépasse. Elles renvoient prospectivement, l’une et l’autre, à une situation dont la difficulté est à dénouer. Leur usage requiert un point d’application, la première se prévalant plutôt de profondeur et la seconde de netteté. Mais la lucidité, quant à elle, est issue d’un devenir : on devient lucide par expérience; elle s’atteint processuellement et par dégagement : de la lumière vient d’elle-même, par immanence, à partir de tout ce qu’on a vécu et traversé. Pénétration et perspicacité nomment une capacité opérationnelle de l’esprit ; lucidité, un niveau auquel a accédé la conscience. Tandis que celles-là nomment le franchissement d’un embarras se présentant à la pensée, celle-ci dit la sortie d’une indistinction par laquelle on se laissait abuser. Aussi, en signifiant qu’on émerge de la confusion dans laquelle on était demeuré dans sa vie passée, la lucidité nomme-t-elle bien la capacité d’un sujet accédant à la seconde vie. 
Ne s’acquérant pas, à proprement parler, la lucidité n’est affaire ni de méthode ni de volonté. Puis-je même désirer devenir lucide ? Je désirerais, à vrai dire, plutôt le contraire : rester dans une indistinction naïve - une confusion primitive - répondant davantage, plus immédiatement, à mes souhaits ; ne me forçant pas à voir la réalité dépouillée de ses illusions ou « comme elle est ». Alors qu’on voudrait être plus intelligent ou posséder plus de connaissances, et même avoir l’esprit plus perspicace ou pénétrant, ne craindrais-je pas, au contraire, plus de lucidité ? Ne souhaiterais-je pas plutôt m’en protéger ? Il me faut en tout cas défaire, pour comprendre ce qu’est la lucidité, de même qu’à propos de l’expérience de second type dont elle a procédé, l’opposition du passif et de l’actif qu’impose la langue européenne ; par suite, sortir du registre de l’intentionnel et du choix libre et délibéré. Car la lucidité, pour sa part, est conjointement résultative : j’y ai été conduit par les expériences traversées en même temps que j’y ai contribué moi-même par leur prise en compte. Tous ceux qui ont subi des expériences négatives ne sont pas pour autant devenus lucides, il y faut aussi une collaboration du sujet, acceptant de les laisser entrer dans le champ de sa réflexion. De la lucidité me vient de tout ce que j’ai  vécu et qui a dissout et défait peu à peu - a effrité et morcelé, fissuré et craquelé, par contrainte exercée du dehors en même temps que rectification personnellement assumée - ce qui obscurcissait ma conscience à titre de représentations de l’esprit s’interposant à mon insu et me voilant la réalité - « réalité » sortant alors de sa nébuleuse équivoque pour signifier précisément ce qui reste après ce retrait."
(François Jullien, Une seconde vie, 2017)

E4.5.2.C_REF1.3_PH LA DISTINCTION ENTRE "DECOUVERTE" ET "DECOUVREMENT" DEFINIT LA METHODE DE L'INTUITION : CE N'EST PAS UNE CONSTRUCTION INTELLECTUELLE, MAIS UN "CONTACT CLAIR" AVEC LE REEL QUI EMERGE QUAND LES ILLUSIONS TOMBENT. La vérité n'est pas accessible immédiatement (aux jeunes nourris de discours), mais nécessite une "suite suffisante d'années" et des "épreuves".
"La lucidité est, non pas découverte, mais découvrement. Comme le tracé épuré du filigrane, la lucidité naît d’un dépouillement laissant émerger, de dessous tout ce par quoi l’esprit se laissait offusquer, ce qui dès lors n’est plus enjolivé - ni enrobé ni embué ni englué. « Hiver lucide », l’a nommé Mallarmé. [...]
En effet, de ce qui s’est ainsi désassuré, de toute la « langueur » traversée, peut résulter un « gai savoir », gaya scienza l’a nommé Nietzsche en relevant de maladie (dans sa préface au Gai savoir). « Gai », c’est-à-dire alerte, parce que jouissant d’avoir enfin conquis son initiative, et ce en rompant jusqu’à sa plus foncière adhérence, l’adhérence au vital, et par là d’avoir fissuré, d’un coup, dans leur assise, tous les dogmatismes. Gai parce qu’on en a perçu la vie plus à la racine, en ce qu’elle a bien, originairement, de risqué, qu’on en a soutiré plus de radicalité et qu’on retourne à l’offensive, avec l’élan du défi, ne craignant plus d’oser ni ne perdant plus une minute du peu de temps qui reste. [...]
Platon a dit en une phrase comment venait la lucidité à partir de cette expérience accumulée et décantée, d’où on voit procéder la possibilité d’une seconde vie : 
« Pour le plus grand nombre de ceux qui entendirent, à cet âge, de tels discours, n’est-il pas inévitable, Théétète, qu’une suite suffisante d’années s’écoulant, l’avancement en âge, les choses abordées de près, les épreuves qui les contraignent au clair contact des réalités ne leur fassent changer les opinions reçues alors, trouver petit ce qui leur avait paru grand, difficile ce qui semblait facile, si bien que les simulacres que transportaient les mots s’évanouiront devant la réalité vivante ? » (traduction A. Dies, Sophiste, 234 d-e).
De la lucidité, Platon éclaire en effet les deux conditions conjointes : ce qu’apporte le temps « venant en plus », autrement dit ce qu’il y faut d’« avancée » dans la vie ; mais aussi que, si l’on en vient ainsi à « tomber au plus près » de la réalité des choses, toîs te oûsi prospiptontas egguthen [...], c’est qu’on y est contraint par les épreuves traversées. Il en éclaire également la nature spécifique : qu’on « touche » alors « en pleine clarté » aux « étants » (ephaptesthai [...] : on met le doigt « sûr »), c’est-à-dire à la fois qu’on se trouve mis alors dans la lumière (enargôs [...] : cette clarté est globale) et qu’on se trouve directement au « contact » des choses - tel est bien l’effet de contact que constitue l’expérience. Il en éclaire enfin la conséquence : le renversement des « opinions » formées dans l’esprit, ou plutôt subies, dans ce premier temps de la vie. Ces représentations auxquelles on adhérait précédemment étaient proprement des « phantasmes » qui reposaient dans des discours et qui se trouvent désormais ruinés."
(François Jullien, Une seconde vie, 2017)

E4.5.2.C_REF2_PH CE QUI EST BREF EST SOUVENT LE "FRUIT ET LE RESULTAT DE QUELQUE CHOSE DE LONGUEMENT MEDITE". 
"CONTRE CEUX QUI BLÂMENT LA BRIÈVETÉ. — Quelque chose qui est dit brièvement peut être le fruit et le résultat de quelque chose de longuement médité ; mais le lecteur qui est novice sur ce terrain et n’y a pas autrement réfléchi voit quelque chose d’embryonnaire dans tout ce qui est dit brièvement, non sans un blâme à l’adresse de l’auteur qui a osé mettre à table une nourriture qui n’aurait pas fini de pousser ni de mûrir. [...]"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain II, Aphorisme 127, 1878)

E1.6.A.1.6_REF1_LIT.wE4.5.2.C.

"Everything is there on view, in fact, everything is visible very early on in a relationship just as it is in all honest, straightforward stories, you just have to look to see it, one single moment encapsulates the germ of many years to come, of almost our whole history — one grave, pregnant moment — and if we want to we can see it and, in broad terms, read it, there are not that many possible variations, the signs rarely deceive if we know how to read their meanings, if you are prepared to do so — but it is so difficult and can prove catastrophic; one day you spot an unmistakable gesture, see an unequivocal reaction, hear a tone of voice that says much and presages still more, although you also hear the sound of someone biting their tongue — too late; you feel on the back of your neck the nature or propensity of a look when that look knows itself to be invisible and protected and safe, so many are involuntary; you notice sweetness and impatience, you detect hidden intentions that are never entirely hidden, or unconscious intentions before they become conscious to the person who should be concealing them, sometimes you foresee what someone will do before that person has foreseen or known or even become aware of what this will be, and you can sense the betrayal as yet unformulated and the scorn as yet unfelt; and the feelings of irritation you provoke, the weariness you cause or the loathing you inspire, or perhaps the opposite, which is not necessarily any better: the unconditional love they feel for us, the other person’s ridiculously high hopes, their devotion, their eagerness to please and to prove themselves essential to us in order to supplant us later on and thus become who we are; and the need to possess, the illusions built up, the determination of someone to be or to stay by your side, or to win your heart, the crazed, irrational loyalty; you notice when there is real enthusiasm and when there is only flattery and when it is mixed (because nothing is pure), you know who isn’t trustworthy and who is ambitious and who has no scruples and who would walk over your dead body having first run you down, you know who has a candid soul and what will happen to these last when you meet them, the fate that awaits them if they don’t mend their ways, but grow still worse and even if they do mend their ways: you know if they will be your victims When you are introduced to a couple, married or not, you see who will one day abandon whom and you see this at once, as soon as you say hello, or, at least, by the end of the evening. You detect too when something is going wrong or falling apart, or flips right over and the tables are turned, when everything is collapsing, at what moment we stop loving as we once did or they stop loving us, who will or will not go to bed with us, and when a friend will discover his own envy, or, rather, decide to give in to it and allow himself to be led and guided from that moment on by envy alone; when it starts to ooze out or grow heavy with resentment; we know what it is about us that exasperates and infuriates and what condemns us, what we should have said, but did not, or what we should have kept silent about, but did not, why it is that suddenly one day they look at us with different eyes — dark or angry eyes: they already bear a grudge — when we disappoint or when we irritate because we do not as yet disappoint and so do not provide the desired excuse for our dismissal; we know the kind gesture that is suddenly no longer bearable and that signals the precise hour when we will become utterly and irredeemably unbearable; and we know, too, who is going to love us, until death and beyond and, much to our regret sometimes, beyond their death or mine or both… against our will sometimes… But no one wants to see anything and so hardly anyone ever sees what is there before them, what awaits us or will befall us sooner or later. [...]

This has nothing to do with premonitions, there is nothing supernatural or mysterious about it, what’s mysterious is that we pay no heed to it. And the explanation must be a simple one, since it is something shared by so many: it is simply that we know, but hate knowing; we cannot bear to see."
(Javier Marías, Your Face Tomorrow, 2002)

E4.5.2.C_REF3_PH BACHELARD MET L'ACCENT SUR L'INSTANT COMME POINT DE CONDENSATION DE LA VERITE. "TOUTE LA FORCE DU TEMPS SE CONDENSE DANS L'INSTANT NOVATEUR". Bachelard définit la durée comme une sélection rationnelle et affective : "L'être ne peut garder du passé que ce qui sert à son progrès".
"L’être ne peut garder du passé que ce qui sert à son progrès, que ce qui peut entrer dans un système rationnel de sympathie et d’affection. Ne dure que ce qui a des raisons de durer. La durée est ainsi le premier phénomène du principe de raison suffisante pour la liaison des instants. Autrement dit, il n’y a dans les forces du monde qu’un principe de continuité : c’est la permanence des conditions rationnelles, des conditions de succès moral et esthétique. Ces conditions commandent au cœur comme à l’esprit. Ce sont elles qui déterminent la solidarité des instants en progrès. La durée intime, c’est toujours la sagesse. Ce qui coordonne le monde ce ne sont pas les forces du passé, c’est l’harmonie tout en tension que le monde va réaliser. On peut parler d’une harmonie préétablie, mais il ne peut s’agir d’une harmonie préétablie dans les choses, il n’y a d’action que par une harmonie préétablie dans la raison. Toute la force du temps se condense dans l’instant novateur où la vue se dessille, près de la fontaine de Siloë, sous le toucher d’un divin rédempteur qui nous donne d’un même geste la joie et la raison, et le moyen d’être éternel par la vérité et la bonté. "
(Gaston Bachelard, L’intuition de l’instant, 1931)

E4.5.2.C_REF4_PH  I_Escape from time

IL FAUT [...] SE REPLACER DANS LA DUREE ET RESSAISIR LA REALITE DANS LA MOBILITE QUI EN EST L’ESSENCE.
«Nombreux sont les philosophes qui ont senti l’impuissance de la pensée conceptuelle à atteindre le fond de l’esprit. Nombreux par conséquent, ceux qui ont parlé d’une faculté supra-intellectuelle d´intuition. Mais, comme ils ont cru que l’intelligence opérait dans le temps, ils en ont conclu que dépasser l’intelligence consistait à sortir du temps. Ils n’ont pas vu que le temps intellectualisé est espace, que  l’intelligence travaille sur le fantôme de la durée, mais non pas sur la durée même, que l’élimination du temps est l’acte habituel, normal, banal de notre entendement, que la relativité de notre connaissance de l’esprit vient précisément de là, et que dès lors, pour passer de l’intellection à la vision, du relatif à l’absolu, il n’y a pas à sortir du temps (nous en sommes déjà sortis); il faut, au contraire, se replacer dans la durée et ressaisir la réalité dans la mobilité qui en est l’essence. Une intuition qui prétend se transporter d’un bond dans l’éternel s’en tient a l’intellectuel. Aux concepts que fournit l’intelligence elle substitue simplement un concept unique qui les résume tous et qui est par conséquent toujours  le même, de quelque nom qu’on l’appelle : la Substance, le Moi, l´Idée, la Volonté. »
(Henri Bergson, La Pensée et le Mouvant)

E4.5.2.C_REF5_LIT WE CANNOT BE "SURE WE ARE RIGHT" IN THE MOMENT BECAUSE THE TRUE NATURE OF OUR ACTIONS (COWARDICE VS. MATURITY) IS REVEALED ONLY THROUGH THE DURATION OF A LIFE.
"But time … how time first grounds us and then confounds us. We thought we were being mature when we were only being safe. We imagined we were being responsible but were only being cowardly. What we called realism turned out to be a way of avoiding things rather than facing them. Time … give us enough time and our best-supported decisions will seem wobbliy, our certainties whimsical."
(Julian Barnes, The sense of an ending, 2011 - cited by Barbara Bloom, As it were… So to speak, 2015)

E4.5.3. The Revelation of Art

E4.5.3.A. The Tyranny of Interpretation and the Limits of Logic.
Logic and "interpretation" often domesticate art or miss its truth entirely.

E4.5.3.A_REF1_PH

EL3.95. "AGAINST INTERPRETATION

[...] The fact is, all Western consciousness of and reflection upon art have remained within the confines staked out by the Greek theory of art as mimesis or representation. It is through this theory that art as such - above and beyond given works of art - becomes problematic, in need of defense. And it is the defense of art which gives birth to the odd vision by which something we have learned to call "form" is separated off from something we have learned to call "content," and to the well-intentioned move which makes content essential and form accessory.

Even in modern times, when most artists and critics have discarded the theory of art as representation of an outer reality in favor of the theory of art as subjective expression, the main feature of the mimetic theory persists. Whether we conceive of the work of art on the model of a picture (art as a picture of reality) or on the model of a statement (art as the statement of the artist), content still comes first. The content may have changed. It may now be less figurative, less lucidly realistic. But it is still assumed that a work of art is its content. Or, as it's usually put today, that a work of art by definition says something. ("What X is saying is..." "What X is trying to say is ...," "What X said is..." etc., etc.)"
(Susan Sontag, Against Interpretation and other essays, 1964)

E4.5.3.A_REF1.1_PH

EL3.95.A. THE FANCY THAT THERE REALLY IS SUCH A THING AS THE CONTENT OF A WORK OF ART "None of us can ever retrieve that innocence before all theory when art knew no need to justify itself, when one did not ask of a work of art what it said because one knew (or thought one knew) what it did. From now to the end of consciousness, we are stuck with the task of defending art. We can only quarrel with one or another means of defense. Indeed, we have an obligation to overthrow any means of defending and justifying art which becomes particularly obtuse or onerous or insensitive to contemporary needs and practice.

This is the case, today, with the very idea of content itself. Whatever it may have been in the past, the idea of content is today mainly a hindrance, a nuisance, a subtle or not so subtle philistinism.

Though the actual developments in many arts may seem to be leading us away from the idea that a work of art is primarily its content, the idea still exerts an extraordinary hegemony. I want to suggest that this is because the idea is now perpetuated in the guise of a certain way of encountering works of art thoroughly ingrained among most people who take any of the arts seriously. What the overemphasis on the idea of content entails is the perennial, never consummated project of interpretation. And, conversely, it is the habit of approaching works of art in order to interpret them that sustains the fancy that there really is such a thing as the content of a work of art."
(Susan Sontag, Against Interpretation and other essays, 1964)

E4.5.3.A_REF1.2_PH EL3.95.A.1. BY INTERPRETATION, I MEAN HERE A CONSCIOUS ACT OF THE MIND WHICH ILLUSTRATES A CERTAIN CODE, CERTAIN "RULES" OF INTERPRETATION "Of course, I don't mean interpretation in the broadest sense, the sense in which Nietzsche (rightly) says, "There are no facts, only interpretations." By interpretation, I mean here a conscious act of the mind which illustrates a certain code, certain "rules" of interpretation.

Directed to art, interpretation means plucking a set of elements (the X, the Y, the Z, and so forth) from the whole work. The task of interpretation is virtually one of translation. The interpreter says, Look, don't you see that X is really - or, really means - A? That Y is really B? That Z is really C?

What situation could prompt this curious project for transforming a text? History gives us the materials for an answer. Interpretation first appears in the culture of late classical antiquity, when the power and credibility of myth had been broken by the "realistic" view of the world introduced by scientific enlightenment. [...]

Interpretation thus presupposes a discrepancy between the clear meaning of the text and the demands of (later) readers. It seeks to resolve that discrepancy. The situation is that for some reason a text has become unacceptable; yet it cannot be discarded. Interpretation is a radical strategy for conserving an old text, which is thought too precious to repudiate, by revamping it. The interpreter, without actually erasing or rewriting the text, is altering it. But he can't admit to doing this. He claims to be only making it intelligible, by disclosing its true meaning. However far the interpreters alter the text (another notorious example is the Rabbinic and Christian "spiritual" interpretations of the clearly erotic Song of Songs), they must claim to be reading off a sense that is already there. [...]

The most celebrated and influential modern doctrines, those of Marx and Freud, actually amount to elaborate systems of hermeneutics, aggressive and impious theories of interpretation. All observable phenomena are bracketed, in Freud's phrase, as manifest content. This manifest content must be probed and pushed aside to find the true meaning - the latent content beneath. For Marx, social events like revolutions and wars; for Freud, the events of individual lives (like neurotic symptoms and slips of the tongue) as well as texts (like a dream or a work of art) - all are treated as occasions for interpretation. According to Marx and Freud, these events only seem to be intelligible. Actually, they have no meaning without interpretation. To understand is to interpret. And to interpret is to restate the phenomenon, in effect to find an equivalent for it. [...]"
(Susan Sontag, Against Interpretation and other essays, 1964)

E4.5.3.A_REF1.3_PH "IN A CULTURE WHOSE ALREADY CLASSICAL DILEMMA IS THE HYPERTROPHY OF THE INTELLECT AT THE EXPENSE OF ENERGY AND SENSUAL CAPABILITY, INTERPRETATION IS THE REVENGE OF THE INTELLECT UPON ART.

Even more. It is the revenge of the intellect upon the world. To interpret is to impoverish, to deplete the world in order to set up a shadow world of "meanings." It is to turn the world into this world. ("This world"! As if there were any other.) [...]

In most modern instances, interpretation amounts to the philistine refusal to leave the work of art alone. Real art has the capacity to make us nervous. By reducing the work of art to its content and then interpreting that, one tames the work of art. Interpretation makes art manageable, conformable. [...]

[...] The flight from interpretation seems particularly a feature of modern painting. Abstract painting is the attempt to have, in the ordinary sense, no content; since there is no content, there can be no interpretation. Pop Art works by the opposite means to the same result; using a content so blatant, so "what it is," it, too, ends by being uninterpretable. [...]"
(Susan Sontag, Against Interpretation and other essays, 1964)

E4.5.3.A_REF2_PH VALÉRY ARGUES THAT THE "IDEA OF THE BEAUTIFUL" WAS A PHILOSOPHICAL INVENTION—A "TRUTH OF A SECOND KIND"—CREATED TO TAME THE "CHAOS" AND "SINGULARITIES" OF ACTUAL ARTISTIC EXPERIENCE. He contrasts the "dialectic hunt" (seeking a single Truth/path) with the "magic hunt" of the poet (who seeks "strange encounters" and isn't afraid to get lost).
"L’Esthétique naquit un jour d’une remarque et d’un appétit de philosophe . Cet événement , sans doute , ne fut pas du tout accidentel . Il était presque inévitable que dans son entreprise d’attaque générale des choses et de transformation systématique de tout ce qui vient se produire à l’esprit , le philosophe , procédant de demande en réponse , s’efforçant d’assimiler et de réduire à un type d’expression cohérente qui est en lui , la variété de la connaissance , rencontrât certaines questions qui ne se rangent ni parmi celles de l’intelligence pure , ni dans la sphère de la sensibilité toute seule , ni non plus dans les domaines de l’action ordinaire des hommes ; mais qui tiennent de ces divers modes , et qui les combinent si étroitement qu’il fallut bien les considérer à part de tous les autres sujets d’études , leur attribuer une valeur et une signification irréductibles , et donc leur faire un sort , leur trouver une justification devant la raison , une fin comme une nécessité , dans le plan d’un bon système du monde . [...]

Mais un esprit qui vise à ce degré sublime , où il espère s’établir en état de suprématie , façonne le monde qu’il ne croit que représenter . Il est bien trop puissant pour ne voir que ce qui se voit . Il est induit à s’écarter insensiblement de son modèle dont il refuse le vrai visage , qui lui propose seulement le chaos , le désordre instantané des choses observables : il est tenté de négliger les singularités et les irrégularités qui s’expriment malaisément et qui tourmentent l’uniformité distributive des méthodes . Il analyse logiquement ce qu’on dit . Il y applique la question , et tire , de l’adversaire même , ce que celui - ci ne soupçonnait pas qu’il pensât . Il lui montre une invisible substance sous le visible , qui est accident : il lui change son réel en apparence ; il se plaît à créer les noms qui manquent au langage pour satisfaire les équilibres formels des propositions [...]

Mais c’est une chasse magique que la chasse dialectique . Dans la forêt enchantée du Langage , les poètes vont tout exprès pour se perdre , et s’y enivrer d’égarement , cherchant les carrefours de signification , les échos imprévus , les rencontres étranges ; ils n’en craignent ni les détours , ni les surprises , ni les ténèbres ; – mais le veneur qui s’y excite à courre la « vérité » , à suivre une voie unique et continue , dont chaque élément soit le seul qu’il doive prendre pour ne perdre ni la piste , ni le gain du chemin parcouru , s’expose à ne capturer enfin que son ombre . Gigantesque , parfois ; mais ombre tout de même .

Je ne dis pas que la découverte de l’Idée du Beau n’ait pas été un événement extraordinaire et qu’elle n’ait pas engendré des conséquences positives d’importance considérable . Toute l’histoire de l’Art occidental manifeste ce qu’on lui dut , pendant plus de vingt siècles , en fait de styles et d’œuvres du premier ordre . La pensée abstraite s’est ici montrée non moins féconde qu’elle l’a été dans l’édification de la science . Mais cette idée , pourtant , portait en elle le vice originel et inévitable auquel je viens de faire allusion . [...]

Elle se croyait universelle ; mais au contraire , elle était merveilleusement soi , c’est - à - dire originale . Quoi de plus original que de s’opposer à la plupart des tendances , des goûts et des productions existantes ou possibles , que de condamner l’Inde et la Chine , le « gothique » avec le mauresque , et de répudier presque toute la richesse du monde pour vouloir et produire autre chose : un objet sensible de délice qui fût en accord parfait avec les retours et les jugements de la raison , et une harmonie de l’instant avec ce que découvre à loisir la durée ?

Notre Esthétique rigoureusement pure m’apparaît donc comme une invention qui s’ignore en tant que telle , et s’est prise pour déduction invincible de quelques principes
évidents .

Mais , fort loin de méconnaître l’importance de l’Esthétique raisonnée , je lui réserve , au contraire un rôle positif et de la plus grande conséquence réelle .
De telles formules peuvent , d’ailleurs , avoir dans certains cas , vertu créatrice , suggérer bien des idées que l’on n’eût jamais eues sans elles .
La restriction est inventive au moins autant de fois que la surabondance des libertés peut l’être . [...]

Cette auguste Raison voudrait que nous essayions de nous identifier avec le réel afin de le dominer , imperare parendo ; mais nous sommes réels nous - mêmes ( ou rien ne l’est ) , et le sommes surtout quand nous agissons , ce qui exige une tendance , c’est - à - dire une inégalité , c’est - à - dire une sorte d’injustice , dont le principe , presque invincible , est notre personne , qui est singulière et différente de toutes les autres , ce qui est contraire à la raison . [...]

La nécessité du logicien résulte d’une certaine impossibilité de penser , qui frappe la contradiction : elle a pour fondement la conservation rigoureuse des conventions de notation , – des définitions et des postulats . Mais ceci exclut du domaine dialectique tout ce qui est indéfinissable ou mal définissable , tout ce qui n’est pas essentiellement langage , ni réductible à des expressions par le langage . Il n’y a pas de contradiction sans diction , c’est - à - dire , hors du discours . Le discours est donc une fin pour le métaphysicien , et il n’est guère qu’un moyen pour l’homme qui vise à des actes . Le métaphysicien s’étant d’abord préoccupé du Vrai , en lequel il a mis toutes ses complaisances , et qu’il reconnaît à l’absence de contradictions , quand il découvre ensuite l’Idée du Beau , et qu’il veut en développer la nature et les conséquences , il ne peut qu’il ne lui souvienne de la recherche de sa Vérité ; et le voici qui poursuit sous le nom du Beau , quelque Vrai de seconde espèce : il invente , sans s’en douter , un Vrai du Beau ; et par là , comme je l’ai déjà dit , il sépare le Beau des moments et des choses , parmi lesquels les beaux moments et les belles choses . . . .

Il existe une forme de plaisir qui ne s’explique pas ; qui ne se circonscrit pas ; qui ne se cantonne ni dans l’organe du sens où il prend naissance , ni même dans le domaine de la sensibilité ; qui diffère de nature , ou d’occasion , d’intensité , d’importance et de conséquence , selon les personnes , les circonstances , les époques , la culture , l’âge et le milieu ; qui excite à des actions sans cause universellement valable , et ordonnées à des fins incertaines , des individus distribués comme au hasard sur l’ensemble d’un peuple ; et ces actions engendrent des produits de divers ordres dont la valeur d’usage et la valeur d’échange ne dépendent que fort peu de ce qu’ils sont . Enfin , dernière négative : toutes les peines que l’on a prises pour définir , régulariser , réglementer , mesurer , stabiliser ou assurer ce plaisir et sa production ont été vaines et infructueuses jusqu’ici ; mais comme il faut que tout , dans ce domaine , soit impossible à circonscrire , elles n’ont été vaines qu’imparfaitement , et leur insuccès n’a pas laissé d’être parfois curieusement créateur et fécond . . ."
(Paul Valéry, Discours sur l’Esthétique dans ART, ESTHETIQUE, POESIE - 9 Conférences, Discours et Propos 1923-1939)

E4.5.3.A_REF3_PH DANS LE DOMAINE DE L'ART "LES PREUVES FATIGUENT LA VERITE." (Georges Braque)
L'un des présupposés de notre temps est de croire que ce qui est vrai doit être l'objet d'une démonstration établie sur une ou plusieurs preuves. Du coup pour nous, les deux domaines où la question de la vérité nous semblent légitimes sont les domaines scientifiques et juridiques. Hors il existe d'autres vérités qui ne sont pas de cet ordre et que nous avons tendance à négliger et parfois même à nier. Georges Braque qui est peintre le sait bien. Vouloir établir des preuves quant à la certitude qu'un tableau est achevé est vain. Mais cela ne veut pas dire qu'il n'existe pas de bons tableaux, cela tout peintre le sent, et ceux-ci orientent même son travail - mais alors quels sont les critères ? D'abord ils sont liés aux éléments propres à la peinture : le jeu des couleurs, l'accord des formes, de la composition, le sens de l'espace et de la matière... mais aussi la façon dont l'œuvre vous touche. Une grande œuvre n'est pas seulement réussie plastiquement, elle doit aussi vous ébranler - elle vous aide à vivre en quelques sortes. 
De la même façon, toutes les douleurs n'ont pas à être guéries et ne gagnent rien à être expliquées. Il nous faut parfois simplement être honnête avec ce qui nous arrive - il est libérateur de savoir qu'il existe une vérité de ce que l'on sent, une vérité de ce qu'on éprouve. Quand nous entrons dans ce domaine qui est le plus profond, le plus intime, le plus essentiel, là les preuves ne font que fatiguer la vérité. Il nous faut accepter de faire confiance à ce que l'on éprouve. De même que vous pouvez apprendre à voir une œuvre d'art, à écouter de la musique, vous pouvez aussi éprouver la justesse d'un sentiment. La dimension de vérité dont nous parle Georges Braque n'est pas celle de la démonstration, mais c'est néanmoins une dimensions de la vérité qui engage notre existence.
(François Midal, 3 minutes de philosophie pour redevenir humain, diffusé sur France Culture le 21 août 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/3-minutes-de-philosophie-pour-redevenir-humain/georges-braque-les-preuves-fatiguent-la-verite-8090822

E4.5.3.A_REF4_PH NIETZSCHE EXPOSES SOCRATES AS THE EMBODIMENT OF "THEORETICAL OPTIMISM"—WITH HIS  FALSE BELIEF THAT LOGIC AND THE "THREAD OF CAUSALITY" CAN PENETRATE THE DEPTHS OF REALITY. He contrasts this logical failure with the power of Art, arguing that only the "Spirit of Music" (the Dionysian) can access the depths of being.
"2- Socrate
Socrate incarne le second principe qui est à l’origine de la décadence de l’art tragique. Cette thèse est sans doute plus fondamentale que la première, puisqu’elle est une constante de la pensée de Nietzsche, qui ne variera pas dans cette critique intempestive du héros philosophique, puisqu’elle fournit la matière d’un chapitre entier du Crépuscule des idoles (1888), « Le problème de Socrate », dans lequel il revendique encore les thèses développées dans La Naissance : « J’ai reconnu en Socrate et en Platon des symptômes de décadence, des instruments de la décomposition grecque, des pseudo-grecs, des antigrecs (L’Origine de la tragédie, 1872) » (§ 2). Tandis qu’Euripide dénature le dionysiaque en agitation hystérique et normalise l’apollinien dans le bon sens bourgeois, Socrate, et son élève Platon, se détournent résolument du dionysiaque et dessèchent l’inspiration apollinienne dans la stricte discipline dialectique : « Dans Platon […] la tendance apollinienne s’est momifiée en schématisme logique […] Socrate, le héros dialectique du drame platonicien, n’est pas sans parenté de nature avec le héros d’Euripide qui doit justifier ses actes par raisons et contre-raisons, au risque, souvent, de perdre notre compassion tragique » (§ 14, p. 102). Que peut bien signifier ici la dessiccation de la tendance apollinienne ? Apollon n’est vivant que du fait de son alliance avec Dionysos : toute forme qui ne surgit pas du fond de l’abîme tragique, qui ne naît pas de la souffrance dionysiaque, est une forme figée, un académisme peut-être sans faute, mais aussi et nécessairement sans vie. Or, que fait Socrate ? Il invente le raisonnement dialectique, c’est-à-dire la concaténation des raisons selon laquelle les idées, qui sont aussi des formes dans la langue grecque, s’engendrent les unes les autres et ne naissent ainsi plus de la souffrance dont seul l’artiste sait les arracher. Socrate enferme ainsi la pensée dans le cercle de sa propre logique, et la coupe de la source qui la rend vivante, le tréfonds de l’être d’où toute musique provient : il n’y a de pensées authentiques que celles qui ont été enfantées par l’esprit de la musique. La dialectique est ainsi une pensée autiste, liée à elle-même, incapable de puiser à la source qui seule lui donnerait vie ; il suffit de suivre l’ordre de la déduction et de la causalité pour ne pas perdre le fil : « Il existe un fantasme profond qui vint au monde, pour la première fois, en la personne de Socrate : la croyance inébranlable que la pensée, en suivant le fil conducteur de la causalité, peut atteindre jusqu’aux abîmes les plus lointains de l’être, mais encore de le corriger » (§ 15, p. 106). Dans la confiance excessive qui le conduit à ne prendre appui que sur lui-même, l’entendement dialectique se pense en mesure de maîtriser et de discipliner l’énergie dionysiaque. [...]
Socrate est un monstre « non-mystique », ou plutôt un mystique de la pure logique : « C’est un monstrueux defectus de sens mystique, à tel point qu’on pourrait caractériser Socrate comme le non-mystique par excellence, celui chez qui, par superfétation, la nature logique se développe de manière aussi excessive que chez le mystique la sagesse instinctive » (§ 13, p. 99)."
(Jacques Darriulat, La Naissance de la tragédie enfantée par l’esprit de la musique, B.2- Socrate, 2007)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Nietzsche/Naissancetragedie/NietzscheNT-3.html

E4.5.3.A_REF4.1_PH NIETZSCHE PRESENTS ART AS THE SPECIFIC VEHICLE THAT COMPLETES THE HUMAN UNDERSTANDING OF REALITY WHERE LOGIC FAILS.
"Cet implacable logicien eut en effet, de temps en temps, à l’endroit de l’art, le sentiment d’une lacune, d’un vide, d’un demi-reproche, d’un devoir peut-être inaccompli. Il racontait à ses amis, dans sa prison, qu’un même personnage lui était apparu en rêve, et qui lui répétait toujours les mêmes paroles: « Socrate, exerce-toi à la musique ! » Jusqu’à ses derniers jours, il s’était tranquillisé avec la pensée que la philosophie est le plus haut des arts des muses, et il ne pouvait s’imaginer qu’une divinité devait lui rappeler la « musique commune, populaire ». Finalement, pour soulager tout à fait sa conscience, il se décide, en prison, à s’occuper de cette musique qu’il estimait si peu. Dans cet état d’esprit, il compose un hymne à Apollon et et en vers quelques fables d’Ésope. Ce qui le poussa à ces exercices, ce fut quelque chose d’analogue à la voix de son démon familier, ce fut une intuition apollinienne selon laquelle il était comme un roi barbare ne comprenant pas l’image d’une noble divinité, et qu’il courait le risque d’offenser cette divinité par son incompréhension. Le message de ce personnage s’adressant en rêve à Socrate est le seul indice d’un doute au sujet des limites de la nature logique: peut-être Socrate devait-il se dire à lui-même: ce qui ne m’est pas compréhensible n’est pourtant pas de ce fait l’incompréhensible? Peut-être y a-t-il un domaine de la sagesse d’où le logicien est banni? Peut-être l’art est-il même un corrélatif nécessaire, un supplément de la science?"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, La naissance de la tragédie, 1872)

E4.5.3.A_REF5_LIT ""EVERYTHING WE ARE TAUGHT IS FALSE,” SAID RIMBAUD. AS ALWAYS, HE MEANT LITERALLY EVERYTHING. As soon as one begins to look deeply into any subject one realizes how very little is known, how very, very much is conjecture, hypothesis, surmise and speculation. Wherever one penetrates profoundly one is confronted by the triple-headed specter of prejudice, superstition, authority. When It comes to vital instruction, almost everything that has been written for our edification can be junked."
(Henry Miller, The books in my life, 1969)

E4.5.3.A_REF6_PH “NIETZSCHE PROPOSES THAT MAN SEEKS KNOWLEDGE DUE TO FEAR OF BEING PREY OR OUT OF A DESIRE FOR POWER IF HE IS AT THE TOP OF THE FOOD CHAIN. Either way, doubt is intolerable. In "The Gay Science", Nietzsche refers to the "dangerous perhaps" which drives philosophical research. Uncertainty and lack of answers drive humanity to madness; thus, this ignorance must be remedied. Nietzsche suggests that knowledge is a result of this protective mental system. The primary motivator of knowledge is fear (of not knowing or fearing the future), and the secondary motivator is the desire to control reality. To know means to tame reality such that our interaction with the world becomes feasible. This feasibility demands distortions that render our worldview overly utilitarian, which also applies to logic and science.

Damien Hirst's sculpture "Remnants of Apollo" seems to echo this idea. Apollo, who Nietzsche believes disguises reality to make it acceptable unlike Dionysus who accepts it as it is, is represented by a foot. Crawling on the foot is a disturbing symbol of science—an albino lab mouse with a human ear growing on its back for later human transplantation. The mouse scurries and squeaks among the ruins of an era or perhaps a civilization.”
(Perre Schindler)

Read the article on  the lab mouse with a human ear growing on its back: https://www.europe1.fr/sante/une-oreille-en-3d-greffee-sur-une-souris-2671129

E4.5.3.B. Navigating the Unknown: The Artist’s Method.
How artists embrace chaos, ambiguity, and the "unknown" rather than following a linear or fixed plan.

E4.5.3.B_REF1_LIT

EL3.90. "GREAT ART, ESPECIALLY LITERATURE, BUT THE OTHER ARTS TOO, CARRIES A BUILT-IN SELF-CRITICAL RECOGNITION OF ITS INCOMPLETENESS. It accepts and celebrates jumble, and the bafflement of the mind by the world. The incomplete pseudo-object, the work of art, is a lucid commentary upon itself… Art makes a place for precision in the midst of chaos by inventing a language in which contingent details can be lovingly noticed and obvious truths stated with simple authority. The incompleteness of the pseudo-object need not affect the lucidity of the mode of talk which it bodies forth; in fact, the two aspects of the matter ideally support each other. In this sense all good art is its own intimate critic, celebrating in simple and truthful utterance the broken nature of its formal complexity. All good tragedy is anti-tragedy. King Lear. Lear wants to enact the false tragic, the solemn, the complete. Shakespeare forces him to enact the true tragic, the absurd, the incomplete.
Great art, then,… inspires truthfulness and humility."
(Iris Murdoch,  Existentialists and Mystics: Writings on Philosophy and Literature)

E4.5.3.B_REF2_PH

EL3.129. MAKING THE UNKNOWN—KNOWN "I feel that a real living form is the result of the individual’s effort to create the living thing out of the adventure of his spirit into the unknown—where it has experienced something—felt something—it has not understood—and from that experience comes the desire to make the unknown—known. By unknown—I mean the thing that means so much to the person that wants to put it down—clarify something he feels but does not clearly understand—sometimes he partially knows why—sometimes he doesn’t—sometimes it is all working in the dark—but a working that must be done—Making the unknown—known—in terms of one’s medium is all-absorbing—if you stop to think of the form—as form you are lost—The artist’s form must be inevitable—You mustn’t even think you won’t succeed—Whether you succeed or not is irrelevant—there is no such thing. Making your unknown known is the important thing—and keeping the unknown always beyond you—catching crystallizing your simpler clearer version of life—only to see it turn stale compared to what you vaguely feel ahead—that you must always keep working to grasp—the form must take care of its self if you can keep your vision clear."
(Georgia O’Keeffe: Art and Letters, 1987)

E4.5.3.B_REF3_PH

EL3.20. "AS IT WERE… SO TO SPEAK
“As it were”—A phrase used to indicate that a word or statement is perhaps not formally exact though practically right. The mood is subjunctive. One would say it, if only he could mean it… as if it were really so. « So to speak » — Curious « So to speak » — Curious parenthetic phrase — as one might say ; something said a certain way, even though the words [are already] a manner of speaking. These are common phrases that call little attention to themselves or their oddness. Used often together, they suggest that what you are about to hear, or have just heard, is not exactly what it appears to be."
(Barbara Bloom, As it were… So to speak, 2015)

E4.5.3.B_REF4_CUR A_Tony Cragg_Contradiction_2014_(1) ; A_Tony Cragg_Contradiction_2014_(2) ; A_Tony Cragg_Weatherman, Glass_2015 ; A_Tony Cragg_Parts of the World, Aluminium_2015_(1) ; A_Tony Cragg_Parts of the World, Aluminium_2015_(2) ; A_Tony Cragg_Parts of the World, Aluminium_2015_(3) /Tony Cragg/

TONY CRAGG’S SCULPTURES ARE SIMULTANEOUSLY NATURAL AND ARTIFICIAL, MAINTAINING AMBIGUITY.
"Tony Cragg, a British artist based in Germany, is one of today's most important sculptors. He is also one of the few artists who works with a wide variety of materials and is familiar with each one. The exhibition
presented at MuBE features sculptures in wood, bronze, fiberglass, plastic, steel, stone, aluminum, and glass, as well as drawings. His work reveals an intimate relationship between the chosen materials and the final appearance of each piece, though strong colors may deceive us. Tony Cragg does not seem to start from the opposition between figuration and abstraction. This simplistic division is insufficient for understanding his work. Though human bodies, familiar objects, or imaginary landscapes can be identified in some of his works, his sculptures never lose their original ambiguity. The titles suggest possible approaches but also open up other possibilities while maintaining an air of indeterminacy. His forms are simultaneously natural and artificial, organic and geometric, simple and elaborate."
(Cauê Alves, Chief Curator of MUBE, São Paulo, Brazil)

E4.5.3.B_REF5_LIT "One doesn’t arrive — in words or in art — by necessarily knowing where one is going [...] In every work of art something appears that does not previously exist, and so, by default, you work from what you know to what you don’t know."
(Ann Hamilton)

E4.5.3.B_REF5.1_LIT

EL3.57. "IT IS THE TASK OF THE ARTIST to make material form, to give it presence, to make it social; it is the task of the artist to lead the leaders by staying at the threshold; to be an unsettler in the tradition of Ralph Waldo Emerson, one of our first public tricksters: “Let me remind the reader that I am only an experimenter. Do not set the least value on what I do, or the least discredit on what I do not, as if I pretended to settle anything as true or false. I unsettle all things. No facts are to me sacred; none are profane; I simply experiment, an endless seeker with no past.”
(Ann Hamilton, “Making Not Knowing,” adapted from her 2005 commencement address at The School of the Art Institute of Chicago.)

E4.5.3.B_REF6_LIT A_Yue Minjun_[The road]

“I AM NO LONGER AFRAID OF BECOMING LOST, BECAUSE THE JOURNEY BACK ALWAYS REVEALS SOMETHING NEW, AND THAT IS ULTIMATELY GOOD FOR THE ARTIST.”
(Billy Joel)

E4.5.3.B_REF7_LIT MUCH OF WHAT WE INTERPRET AS "NECESSARY" MEANING IS OFTEN JUST THE ARTIST'S SUBJECTIVE PLAY TO ENDURE THE EFFORT OF CREATION.
"LE NÉCESSAIRE DANS L’ŒUVRE D’ART. — Ceux qui parlent tant de l’élément nécessaire dans une œuvre d’art exagèrent, s’ils sont artistes, in majorent artis gloriam (1), ou s’ils sont profanes, par ignorance. Les formes d’une œuvre d’art qui donnent à sa pensée la parole, qui sont par conséquent sa façon de s’exprimer, ont toujours quelque chose de facultatif, comme toute espèce de langage. Le sculpteur peut ajouter ou omettre quantité de petits traits : de même l’interprète, qu’il soit comédien, ou, en ce qui concerne la musique, virtuose ou chef d’orchestre. Tous ces petits traits et ces polissages lui font plaisir aujourd’hui, demain non, ils sont là plutôt pour l’artiste que pour l’art, car, dans la contrainte et l’effort sur soi-même que l’expression de sa pensée principale exige de lui, il a aussi besoin de gâteaux et de jouets de temps à autre, pour ne pas devenir morose. [...]
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain, Aphorism 171, 1878)

Note:
(1) Expression latine signifiant “pour la plus grande gloire de l’art”

E4.5.3.B_REF8_CUR

EL3.57. "IT IS THE TASK OF THE ARTIST to make material form, to give it presence, to make it social; it is the task of the artist to lead the leaders by staying at the threshold; to be an unsettler in the tradition of Ralph Waldo Emerson, one of our first public tricksters: “Let me remind the reader that I am only an experimenter. Do not set the least value on what I do, or the least discredit on what I do not, as if I pretended to settle anything as true or false. I unsettle all things. No facts are to me sacred; none are profane; I simply experiment, an endless seeker with no past.”
(Ann Hamilton, “Making Not Knowing,” adapted from her 2005 commencement address at The School of the Art Institute of Chicago.) "I THINK THAT EACH OF MY PAINTINGS IS PART OF MY PHYSICAL AND MENTAL BOND WITH NATURE AND SOCIETY. 
Amid the chaos, I try to find a path that reveals the natural and general place where contact is no longer called into question - at least temporarily - between the world that everyone perceives and the sceptical soul that I am."
(Bernard Frize)
"In a culture whose already classical dilemma is the hypertrophy of the intellect at the expense of energy and sensual capability, interpretation is the revenge of the intellect upon art.
Even more. It is the revenge of the intellect upon the world. To interpret is to impoverish, to deplete the world in order to set up a shadow world of "meanings." It is to turn the world into this world. ("This world"! As if there were any other.) [...]
In most modern instances, interpretation amounts to the philistine refusal to leave the work of art alone. Real art has the capacity to make us nervous. By reducing the work of art to its content and then interpreting that, one tames the work of art. Interpretation makes art manageable, conformable. [...]
The flight from interpretation seems particularly a feature of modern painting. Abstract painting is the attempt to have, in the ordinary sense, no content; since there is no content, there can be no interpretation. Pop Art works by the opposite means to the same result; using a content so blatant, so "what it is," it, too, ends by being uninterpretable."
(Susan Sontag, Against Interpretation and other essays, 1964)

"I don't like spending a long time creating a painting. I had first prepared a drawing; then I painted the canvas in one session. Preparation, in order to avoid parasites, takes up the better part of my work time. Gravity is a precious aid. I think that each of my paintings is part of my physical and mental bond with nature and society. Amid the chaos, I try to find a path that reveals the natural and general place where contact is no longer called into question - at least temporarily - between the world that everyone perceives and the sceptical soul that I am."
(Bernard Frize commenting his painting: Drexel, Burnham & Lambert, 1987)

E4.5.3.B_REF9_CUR

EL3.95.A.1.1.b. "TO GO FASTER STILL, I thought that the coffee grounds would deliver the images I needed of their own accord Isince a painting is obliged to present an image). And then I did everything at least twice: the frames, the brushstrokes that I added to make the subjects that I discovered in the coffee grounds more visible. All in all, I have no idea anymore what can be seen in them."
(Bernard Frize)

E4.5.3.C. The Art of Discrimination: Sensibility and Participation.
Appreciating art requires a unique sensibility, active participation, and a willingness to be "unbalanced."

E4.5.3.C_REF1_LIT

EL3.103. "THE ART OF DISCRIMINATION

THE world divides itself into people who can discriminate and people who cannot discriminate. This is the ultimate test of sensitiveness; and sensitiveness alone separates us and unites us.

We all create, or have created for us by the fatality of our temperament, a unique and individual universe. It is only by bringing into light the most secret and subtle elements of this self contained system of things that we can find out where our lonely orbits touch. [...]

The art of discrimination is the art of letting oneself go, more and more wilfully; letting one self go along the lines of one's unique predilections; letting oneself go with the resolute push of the inquisitive intellect; the intellect whose rôle it is to register - with just all the preciseness it may - every one of the little discoveries we make on the long road.

The difference between interesting and uninteresting critics of life, is just the difference between those who have refused to let themselves be thus carried away, on the stream of their fatality, and those who have not refused. That is why in all the really arresting writers and artists there is something equivocal and disturbing when we come to know them.

Genius itself, in the last analysis, is not so much the possession of unusual vision - some of the most powerful geniuses have a vision quite mediocre and blunt - as the possession of a certain demonic driving-force, which pushes them on to be themselves, in all the fatal narrowness and obstinacy, it may be, of their personal temperament.

The art of discrimination is precisely what such characters are born with; hence the almost savage manner in which they resent the beckonings of alien appeals; appeals which would draw them out of their pre-ordained track."
(John Cowper Powys, Suspended Judgments, 1916)

E4.5.3.C_REF1.1_LIT


EL3.103.A. ARTISTIC DISCRIMINATION REQUIRES A BALANCE OF INTELLECT AND EMOTION. Genuine appreciation involves both positive and negative judgments, refining one's passions through intelligent awareness. 
"It is the typical modern person, of normal culture and playful expansiveness, who is the mortal enemy of the art of discrimination.

Such a person's shallow cleverness and conventional good-temper is more withering to the soul of the artist than the blindest bigotry which has the recklessness of genuine passion behind it.

Not to like or to dislike people and things, but to tolerate and patronise a thousand passionate universes, is to put yourself out of the pale of all discrimination. To discriminate is to refine upon one's passions by the process of bringing them into intelligent consciousness. The head alone cannot discriminate; no! not with all the technical knowledge in the world; for the head cannot love nor hate, it can only observe and register.

Nor can the nerves alone discriminate; for they can only cry aloud with a blind cry. In the management of this art, what we need is the nerves and the head together, playing up to one another; and, between them, carrying further - always a little further - the silent advance, along the road of experience, of the insatiable soul.

It is indeed only in this way that one comes to recognise what is, surely, of the essence of all criticism; the fact, namely, that the artists we care most for are doing just the thing we are doing ourselves - doing it in their own way and with their own inviolable secret, but limited, just as we are, by the basic limitations of all flesh.

The art of discrimination is, after all, only the art of appreciation, applied negatively as well as positively; applied to the flinging away from us and the reducing to non-existence for us, of all those forms and modes of being, for which, in the original determination of our taste, we were not, so to speak, born."
(John Cowper Powys, Suspended Judgments, 1916)

E4.5.3.C_REF1.2_LIT


EL3.103.A.1. THE INTELLECT'S ROLE IN CRITICISM OF ART IS TO PROTECT US FROM OVERLY INTELLECTUAL PRINCIPLES THAT CONTRADICT THE PLEASURE DERIVED FROM THE ARTWORK. "One thing at least is clear. The more we acquire a genuine art of discrimination amid the subtler processes of the mind the less we come to deal in formulated or rationalistic theory.

The chief rôle of the intellect in criticism is to protect us from the intellect; to protect us from those tiresome and unprofitable "principles of art" which in everything that gives us thrilling pleasure are found to be magnificently contradicted! [...]

The point I am seeking to make is that what is called the "critical attitude" towards new experiments in art is the extreme opposite of the mood required in genuine criticism.

That negation of interest in any given new thing which is not only allowable but commendable, if we are to preserve the outlines of our identity from the violence of alien intrusion, becomes a sheer waste of energy when it is transmuted into ponderous principles of rejection.

Give us, ye gods, full liberty to pass on our way indifferent. Give us even the illuminating in sight of unbounded hate. But deliver us - that at least we pray  -from the hypocrisy of judicial condemnation! [...]

It is right and proper - heaven knows - for each individual to have his preferences and his exclusions. He has not, one may be quite sure, found himself if he lacks these. But to have as one's basic preference a relinquishing in the lump of all that is old, and a swallowing in the lump of all that is new, is carrying things suspiciously far. [...]"
(John Cowper Powys, Suspended Judgments, 1916)

E4.5.3.C_REF1.3_LIT


EL3.103.A.1.1. THEIR DEVOTION IS FOR WHAT, AS YET, IS NOT "One comes now and again, though rarely enough, upon exceptional natures whose proper and predestined habitation seems to be rather with our children's children than with us.

The word has gone forth touching what is called super-man; but the natures I speak of are not precisely that.

Rather are they devoid in some strange manner of the gross weapons, the protective skin, adapted to the shocks and jolts of our rough and tumble civilisation. They seem prepared and designed to exist in a finer, a more elaborate, in a sense a more luxurious world, than the one we live in.

Their passions are not our passions; nor is their scorn our scorn. If the magic of the past leaves them indifferent, the glamour of the present finds them antipathetic and resentful. With glacial coldness they survey both past and present, and the frosty fire of their devotion is for what, as yet, is not. [...]

We have learned to avoid the banality of the judicial decisions in the matter of what is called beautiful. We come to learn their even greater uselessness in the matter of what is called the good.

To discriminate, to discriminate endlessly, between types we adore and types we suspect, this is well and wise; but in the long result we are driven, whether it is pleasant to our prejudices or not that it should be so, crushingly to recognise that in the world of human character there are really no types at all; only tragic and lonely figures; figures unable to express what they want of the universe, of us, of themselves; figures that can never, in all the æons of time, be repeated again; figures in whose obliquities and ambiguities the mysteries of all the laws and all the prophets are transcended!"
(John Cowper Powys, Suspended Judgments, 1916)

E4.5.3.C_REF2_PH A_Doug Aitken_Now

LA "CONSTRUCTION LOGIQUE" PREND SOUVENT RACINE DANS UNE "PREPARATION REVEUSE".
Si l’impératif NOW écrit en lettres découpées dans du miroir nous touche, c’est peut-être parce que cette image amplifiée, par sa pureté cristalline nous aide à saisir le sens de l’impératif de l'immédiat - tant rabâché et pourtant si difficile à mettre en pratique - l'injonction qu'il nous faudrait “vivre dans le présent”. Plutôt que de nous faire comprendre le concept, l'oeuvre nous aide à incorporer cette possibilité en sollicitant notre imagination matérielle. 
(Pierre Schindler)

"Rendons-nous compte aussi que la construction logique aime souvent se prévaloir d’une préparation rêveuse, de sorte que certains penseurs aiment à présenter leurs rêves comme des anticipations « raisonnables »."
(Gaston Bachelard, L’air et les songes - Essai sur l’imagination du mouvement, 1943)

E4.5.3.C_REF3_PH ARTAUD OPPOSE RADICALEMENT LES "SYSTEMES PHILOSOPHIQUES" (ABSTRACTIONS, LIVRES, REPRESENTATIONS) A LA "CULTURE EN ACTION" QUI DOIT DEVENIR "UN NOUVEL ORGANE", UN "SOUFFLE".
"Je ne dirai pas que les systèmes philosophiques soient choses à appliquer directement et tout de suite; mais de deux choses l’une : 

Ou ces systèmes sont en nous et nous en sommes imprégnés au point d’en vivre, et alors qu’importent les livres? ou nous n’en sommes pas imprégnés et alors ils ne méritaient pas de nous faire vivre; et de toute façon qu’importe leur disparition? 

II faut insister sur cette idée de la culture en action et qui devient en nous comme un nouvel organe, une sorte de souffle second : et la civilisation c’est de la culture qu’on applique et qui régit jusqu’à nos actions les plus subtiles, l’esprit présent dans les choses; et c’est artificiellement qu’on sépare la civilisation de la culture et qu’il y a deux mots pour signifier une seule et identique action. 

On juge un civilisé à la façon dont il se comporte et il pense comme il se comporte; mais déjà sur le mot de civilisé il y a confusion; pour tout le monde un civilisé cultivé est un homme renseigné sur des systèmes, et qui pense en systèmes, en formes, en signes, en représentations. 

C’est un monstre chez qui s’est développée jusqu’à l’absurde cette faculté que nous avons de tirer des pensées de nos actes, au lieu d’identifier nos actes à nos pensées. [...]"
(Antonin Artaud, Le théâtre et son double, 1932-38)

E4.5.3.C_REF4_PH JACQUES DARRIULLAT ARGUES THAT AESTHETICS IS THE "PRIVILEGED ACCESS TO THOUGHT" AND THE "FOUNDATION OF PHILOSOPHY," CONTRASTING IT WITH THE CLOSED, RATIONAL SYSTEMS OF PURE LOGIC.
"[Nicolas Rousseau] : Pensez-vous que l’esthétique, en tant que c’est ce qui nous donne beaucoup à penser, soit la voie d’accès privilégiée à la pensée ?...
Jacques Darriulat] : Oui, je le crois, mais pour dire la vérité, je n’en sais rien. Il faudrait être un bien grand philosophe pour vous répondre avec certitude. Hegel fait de la pensée un absolu, une substance dialectique qui est à elle-même son unique nourriture : la pensée s’alimente infiniment elle-même par le moteur de ses contradictions. Je pense plutôt pour ma part que la connaissance a besoin d’une sollicitation sensible, d’une rencontre aléatoire, d’un hasard heureux. C’est aussi pourquoi l’esthétique – que Hegel n’appréciait guère (il lui préférait la philosophie de l’art) – me paraît être au fondement de la philosophie. Je crois que le philosophe aime voyager, et que le voyage est un merveilleux multiplicateur de la probabilité des rencontres. Le motif sensible nous met au défi de formuler des idées nouvelles, il enrichit l’esprit, ce même esprit qui s’épuise au contraire en ruminant la cohérence interne d’un seul et unique système. Au fond, je reste très attaché au XVIIIème siècle. La beauté est un des plus puissants motifs pour éveiller l’esprit de sa torpeur, elle est toujours prodigieusement étonnante, elle est toujours, comme le disait si bien Baudelaire, « bizarre ». Elle attire sans se donner. La beauté est une entraîneuse, elle est une allumeuse. On ne couche pas avec elle, pas plus qu’Alcibiade avec Socrate, mais elle excelle à nous envoyer des coups de foudre. Bien sûr, l’allumeuse par excellence, c’est la torpille. La saisir, c’est simultanément lâcher prise. On ne peut toucher que son absence. La rencontre est fulgurante, mais la possession se dérobe. « Se donner » à quelqu'un n'équivaut heureusement pas à « se faire posséder par lui » ! Telle la beauté : elle se donne tout entière, mais n'appartient à personne. Et c’est très bien ainsi : il n’y a rien de plus ennuyeux qu’un propriétaire.
[Nicolas Rousseau] : La torpille, c’est Socrate.
[Jacques Darriulat] : Oui. Ménon avance cette image, insinuant le soupçon que Socrate n’est qu’un sophiste. Socrate, remarque-t-il, ressemble à une torpille, par la fulgurance de son ironie, tout comme par son apparence physique, le nez camus du philosophe lui évoquant la forme aplatie du poisson. Socrate accepte la comparaison, mais à une condition toutefois : « je veux bien qu’on me dise semblable à la torpille, mais à la condition de préciser que je suis tout autant torpillé moi-même que je torpille les autres ». Socrate n’est pas le maître de la dialectique, il n’est que le conducteur du questionnement. Ce n’est pas Socrate qui torpille, c’est le dieu, ou plutôt ce qui se manifeste à nous du dieu par la médiation du démon, c'est-à-dire par la pensée de l’amour, ou par celle de la mort, ces deux grands éveilleurs de l’esprit. Ce sont là de grandes interrogations. Je sais bien que l’incitation à penser provient parfois de motifs beaucoup plus modestes, voire insignifiants, en apparence du moins : tel « le petit pan de mur jaune » qui révèle à Bergotte, quelques secondes avant sa mort, combien son œuvre est manquée, ou bien l’inoubliable visage d’une passante un instant saisi dans la houle de la foule, qui inspire à Baudelaire un inoubliable sonnet. Ainsi le signe esthétique surgit-il de l’informel, et nous met-il en demeure de répondre. On peut dire qu’en ce sens l’esthétique est aussi une théorie de la connaissance. Une science amoureuse, un gai savoir que la rencontre sensible motive."
(Jacques Darriulat, Entretien avec Nicolas Rousseau et Timothée Coyras, deuxième partie, 2010)

Read the full cnversation in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Essais/Entretien/Entretien2.html

E4.5.3.C_REF5_CUR Hélio Oiticica_Apropriação, Mesa de bilhar, d'après O cafe noturno de Van Gogh, 1966_cur
Joseph Beuys_Honigpumpe em Arbeitsplatz [Honey pump at the workplace], 1974-77_electric motors, painted and unpainted_2
Vincent van Gogh_Le café de nuit, 1888

THIS ARTWORK BY HÉLIO OITICICA IS NOT ABOUT IMPOSING A COLLECTION OF IDEAS AND FINISHED STRUCTURES (RATIONAL/STATIC TRUTH). INSTEAD, IT PROPOSES A SHIFT TO THE EXPERIENTIAL.
Hélio Oiticica é conhecido por suas proposições artísticas experimentais e participativas. Delas, o artista fez emergir uma gramática da arte que propõe engajamento ativo do público, que de observador passa a ser considerado participante, parte integrante da obra de arte e da experiência artística.
Nesta exposição, a mesa de bilhar de Oiticica apresenta um contraponto à experiência que alude a Honigpumpe am Arbeitsplatz, 1974-1977 (Bomba de mel no local de trabalho), de Joseph Beuys, apresentada na primeira sala. Se o trabalho do artista alemão sugere uma experiência coletiva de trabalho e reflexão, a proposta de Oiticica aposta na potência do jogo, do lúdico e do sensorial, como modo de engajamento coletivo.
Ambos, entretanto, esforçam-se por alargar os limites do que se considera arte, sugerindo que a experimentação (o exercício, a experiência) encontra-se no cerne do "evento" criativo, pensado como via de transformação dos
indivíduos e da sociedade.

A sugestão da obra, segundo o próprio artista, veio de um comentário de Mário Pedrosa a respeito da sensação causada pelas cores dos Núcleos e Bólides de Oiticica, comparadas aquelas da tela de Van Gogh, Le café de nuit, 1888 [O café noturno, Yale University Art Gallery].
A plasticidade do jogo, seu ambiente de cores e formas, envolve o público e o convida a uma forma de participação que transcende a individualidade, sugerir o diálogo e a negociação como fundamentos de uma experiência coletiva potencialmente criadora. Assim Oiticica descreve a obra:
"todos, inclusive eu, descobrem o jogo, ou seja, o elemento 'prazer' do jogo. Isto sim é importante: a obra é prazer, e como tal só pode ser livre (joga-se quando quer, os que sabem as regras do jogo etc.).
A participação não é a 'da vida real', como sói pensar, mas uma participação livre no prazer que é aqui realizada pela proposta de um jogo, talvez o mais interessante e clássico que exista (dos de salão)."

De que forma podemos participar de uma obra de arte? A arte pode transformar a vida das pessoas? Oiticica pensava que:
Não se trata mais de impor um acervo de ideias e estruturas acabadas ao espectador, mas de procurar, pela descentralização da "arte", pelo deslocamento do que se designa como arte, do campo intelectual racional, para o da proposição criativa existencial, ou seja vivencial; dar ao homem, ao indivíduo de hoje, a possibilidade de "experimentar a criação", de descobrir pela participação, participação esta de diversas ordens, algo que para ele possua significado. (...) procurar um modo de dar ao indivíduo a possibilidade de "experimentar", de deixar de ser espectador para ser participador.

E4.5.3.C_REF6_CUR A_Vincent Lamouroux_Héliscopela Perspective inclinée_2007

THE SCULPTURE (HÉLISCOPE) FORCES THE VIEWER TO "LOSE THEIR BALANCE" AND BECOME "TROUBLED IN THEIR POINT OF VIEW."
« Toutes mes interventions, d'ordre spatial, structurel, physique ou technique, ont pour but de sauvegarder le hasard, l'intuition, quelque chose qui ne dépendrait pas d'une logique linéaire, d'une règle d'occupation ou d'un but à atteindre. »
(Vincent Lamouroux)

Exceptionnellement verticale, formule rare dans le corpus développé de Lamouroux, Héliscope/la Perspective inclinée (2007) est une autre structure praticable. C'est un escalier hélicoïdal de plus de huit mètres, incliné de 10 degrés, unique oeuvre de l'exposition éponyme à la chapelle Jeanne d'Arc à Thouars. L'utilisateur perd son équilibre sous l'effet de l'attraction. Troublé dans son point de vue, il a du mal à retrouver ses repères. Adepte de formules hybrides et anachroniques, qu'il qualifie lui-même de « rétro-futur », Vincent Lamouroux participe, avec d'autres artistes de sa génération, d'une mise en forme contemporaine de projections utopistes, architecturales et cinématographiques qui visent à reconstituer une vision du futur tel qu'il aurait pu exister, tout en indiquant, sans aucune nostalgie, que ce futur est déjà usé.
(Claire Le Restif, Qu'est-ce que la sculpture aujourd'hui, 2008)

E4.5.3.C_REF7_PH NAIVETY IS REQUIRED TO PERCEIVE THE "MULTIFORM AND VERSICOLORED BEAUTY" THAT SYSTEMS MISS.
"J’ai essayé plus d’une fois, comme tous mes amis, de m’enfermer dans un système pour y prêcher à mon aise. Mais un système est une espèce de damnation qui nous pousse à une abjuration perpétuelle ; il en faut toujours inventer un autre, et cette fatigue est un cruel châtiment. Et toujours mon système était beau, vaste, spacieux, commode, propres, lisse surtout; du moins il me paraissait tel. Et toujours un produit spontané, inattendu, de la vitalité universelle venait donner un démenti à ma science enfantine et vieillotte, fille déplorable de l’utopie. J’avais beau déplacer ou étendre le critérium, il était toujours en retard sur l’homme universel, et courait sans cesse après le beau multiforme et versicolore, qui se meut dans les spirales infinies de la vie. Condamné sans cesse à l’humiliation d’une conversion nouvelle, j’ai pris un grand parti. Pour échapper à l’horreur de ces apostasies philosophiques, je me suis orgueilleusement résigné à la modestie : je me suis contenté de sentir; je suis revenu chercher un asile dans l’impeccable naïveté. J’en demande humblement pardon aux esprits académiques de tout genre qui habitent les différents ateliers de notre fabrique artistique. C’est là que ma conscience philosophique a trouvé le repos; et, au moins, je puis affirmer, autant qu’un homme peut répondre de ses vertus, que mon esprit jouit maintenant d’une plus abondante impartialité. "
(Charles Baudelaire, Curiosité Esthétiques, 1868)

E4.5.3.D. Style as Consciousness: Morality, Empathy, and Form.
How art forms consciousness, induces empathy , and creates a moral response through aesthetic engagement rather than didactic teaching.

E4.5.3.D_REF1_CUR

EL3.53. "THIS IMAGE REPRESENTS THE TOP OF A CARDBOARD BOX where paint pistols, such as those used by the artist, are packaged. But our perception tells us something else: this? image seems to be of a target. A shooting target? A dart one? he viewer must decide. As often with Luc Tuymans, the image he's interested in has various meanings. It also reminds of Jasper Johns' targets: indeed, the famous s American painter frequently featured them.
The title, Disenchantment, also gives food for thought because it conjures up something that is deceptive. Is it about the reality shown in the image? Or just a feeling? This image is more abstract than figurative, as if something was disappearing. 
"I first saw an exhibition of Luc's work in 1991, called Disenchantment. I couldn't place these works in any of the 'isms' that were around at the time. It wasn't about a 'return to figuration', a plea for 'abstraction' or a flirt with 'sensationalism'. It was actually about disenchantment. Not how it looks, because disenchantment. Not how it looks, because disenchantment isn't a thing, it's about how it feels. It is about universal psychological truths and at the same time it is about the specific nd limited meaning of images as images md confronting that understanding," wrote artist Marlene Dumas about Luc Tuymans. Here, Luc Tuymans chose clear and simple lines, a very direct approach compared with other rarks he treated in a more singular manner, and this enhances the subject's threatening aspect. 
(Caroline Burgeois, from the catalogue of the La Pelle / Luc Tuymans exhibition at Palazzo Grassi, Venice, 2019)

E4.5.3.D_REF2_CUR

EL3.54. A POLAROID PICTURE OF A CHRISTMAS FIGURINE THAT THE ARTIST'S MOTHER USED TO PLACE UNDER THE FAMILY CHRISTMAS TREE was the basis of Angel, Lven though this angel is easily recognizable with its open green wings, its hands holding a white harp and its white, red and blue coat, its head appears as a black, fuzzy, opaque and nondescript mass. In a way, this painting refers to the idea of beheading, which makes it almost violent, distressing and repulsive ^hen it should, because of its subject matter, be reassuring, warm and pleasant.
(Marc Donnadieu, from the catalogue of the La Pelle / Luc Tuymans exhibition at Palazzo Grassi, Venice, 2019)

E4.5.3.D_REF3_LIT

EL3.105. THERE’S ALWAYS SOMEONE OUT THERE WHO THINKS YOU’RE THE MONSTER
"By dignifying even the most despicable character as a human being, by offering them what empathy we can manage, we also hold them accountable for their choices. You can’t really convincingly condemn a monster for being a monster. He’s just being the best monster he can be. Sure, it’s easier to make a caricature of someone you don’t want to relate to, but the more lines you can step over, the closer you can get to a subject, the better off you’ll be [...]
Stand in as many pairs of shoes as you can manage, even ones you consider reprehensible or repulsive — even if it’s just for a moment. If you’re going to be a tourist, be a respectful one. Observe, report, imagine, invent, have fun with, but never write “down” to a character or their point of view, because everyone is the most important person in the world — at least to that one person… Position yourself upon a bedrock of honesty and self-knowledge, so that your writing comes from your own unique perspective. Know where you stand and what your flaws are. Know thyself. Then you can spin all kinds of shit and all the tall tales you like. It’s art.
Finally, empathy and perspective are everything, and neither should be taken for granted. After all, there’s always someone out there who thinks you’re the monster. Remember that the ground beneath your feet can always shift and that it should always be questioned. [...]
By artistic voice, I’m referring to one’s artistic thumbprint — the idiosyncratic stuff that makes an artist unique. It’s not a precise science, and finding it is always a painful process. I think it has to be about subtraction. It’s not a matter of cooking up a persona or style so much as it is stripping away what’s covering up the essence, what was already there."
(Ben Folds, Dream About Lightning Bugs: A Life of Music and Cheap Lessons)

E4.5.3.D_REF4_PH

EL3.95.A.1.1.c. "ON STYLE

[...] Putting art to use - for such purposes as inquiring into the history of ideas, diagnosing contemporary culture, or creating social solidarity [is not wholly irrelevant]. Such a treatment has little to do with what actually happens when a person possessing some training and aesthetic sensibility looks at a work of art appropriately. A work of art encountered as a work of art is an experience, not a statement or an answer to a question. Art is not only about something; it is something. A work of art is a thing in the world, not just a text or commentary on the world.

I am not saying that a work of art creates a world which is entirely self-referring. Of course, works of art (with the important exception of music) refer to the real world - to our knowledge, to our experience, to our values. They present information and evaluations. But their distinctive feature is that they give rise not to conceptual knowledge (which is the distinctive feature of discursive or scientific knowledge - e.g., philosophy, sociology, psychology, history) but to something like an excitation, a phenomenon of commitment, judgment in a state of thralldom or captivation. Which is to say that the knowledge we gain through art is an experience of the form or style of knowing something, rather than a knowledge of something (like a fact or a moral judgment) in itself.

This explains the preeminence of the value of expressiveness in works of art; and how the value of expressiveness - that is, of style - rightly takes precedence over content (when content is, falsely, isolated from style). The satisfactions of Paradise Lost for us do not lie in its views on God and man, but in the superior kinds of energy, vitality, expressiveness which are incarnated in the poem.

Hence, too, the peculiar dependence of a work of art, however expressive, upon the cooperation of the person having the experience, for one may see what is "said" but remain unmoved, either through dullness or distraction. Art is seduction, not rape. A work of art proposes a type of experience designed to manifest the quality of imperiousness. But art cannot seduce without the complicity of the experiencing subject.

Inevitably, critics who regard works of art as statements will be wary of "style," even as they pay lip service to "imagination." All that imagination really means for them, anyway, is the supersensitive rendering of "reality." It is this "reality" snared by the work of art that they continue to focus on, rather than on the extent to which a work of art engages the mind in certain transformations. But when the metaphor of the work of art as a statement loses its authority, the ambivalence toward "style" should dissolve; for this ambivalence mirrors the presumed tension between the statement and the manner in which it is stated. [...]"
(Susan Sontag, Against Interpretation and other essays, 1965)

E4.5.3.D_REF4.1_PH

EL3.95.A.1.1.c.i. "Art is connected with morality, I should argue. One way that it is so connected is that art may yield moral pleasure; but the moral pleasure peculiar to art is not the pleasure of approving of acts or disapproving of them. The moral pleasure in art, as well as the moral service that art performs, consists in the intelligent gratification of consciousness.

What "morality" means is a habitual or chronic type of behavior (including feelings and acts). Morality is a code of acts, and of judgments and sentiments by which we reinforce our habits of acting in a certain way, which prescribe a standard for behaving or trying to behave toward other human beings generally (that is, to all who are acknowledged to be human) as if we were inspired by love. Needless to say, love is something we feel in truth for just a few individual human beings, among those who are known to us in reality and in our imagination.... Morality is a form of acting and not a particular repertoire of choices.

If morality is so understood - as one of the achievements of human will, dictating to itself a mode of acting and being in the world - it becomes clear that no generic antagonism exists between the form of consciousness, aimed at action, which is morality, and the nourishment of consciousness, which is aesthetic experience. Only when works of art are reduced to statements which propose a specific content, and when morality is identified with a particular morality (and any particular morality has its dross, those elements which are no more than a defense of limited social interests and class values) - only then can a work of art be thought to undermine morality. Indeed, only then can the full distinction between the aesthetic and the ethical be made.

But if we understand morality in the singular, as a generic decision on the part of consciousness, then it appears that our response to art is "moral" insofar as it is, precisely, the enlivening of our sensibility and consciousness. For it is sensibility that nourishes our capacity for moral choice, and prompts our readiness to act, assuming that we do choose, which is a prerequisite for calling an act moral, and are not just blindly and unreflectively obeying. Art performs this "moral" task because the qualities which are intrinsic to the aesthetic experience (disinterestedness, contemplativeness, attentiveness, the awakening of the feelings) and to the aesthetic object (grace, intelligence, expressiveness, energy, sensuousness) are also fundamental constituents of a moral response to life."
(Susan Sontag, Against Interpretation, 1965)

E4.5.3.D_REF4.2_PH

EL3.95.A.1.1.c.ii. A WORK OF ART IS AN EXPERIENCE OF THE QUALITIES OR FORMS OF HUMAN CONSCIOUSNESS "A work of art, so far as it is a work of art, cannot - whatever the artist's personal intentions - advocate anything at all. The greatest artists attain a sublime neutrality. Think of Homer and Shakespeare, from whom generations of scholars and critics have vainly labored to extract particular "views" about human nature, morality, and society. [...]

A work of art may contain all sorts of information and offer instruction in new (and sometimes commendable) attitudes. We may learn about medieval theology and Florentine history from Dante; we may have our first experience of passionate melancholy from Chopin; we may become convinced of the barbarity of war by Goya and of the inhumanity of capital punishment by An American Tragedy. But so far as we deal with these works as works of art, the gratification they impart is of another order. It is an experience of the qualities or forms of human consciousness. [...]

That is to say, the world (all there is) cannot, ultimately, be justified. Justification is an operation of the mind which can be performed only when we consider one part of the world in relation to another - not when we consider all there is. [...]

It is the same with our own lives. If we see them from the outside, as the influence and popular dissemination of the social sciences and psychiatry has persuaded more and more people to do, we view ourselves as instances of generalities, and in so doing become profoundly and painfully alienated from our own experience and our humanity.

As William Earle has recently noted, if Hamlet is "about" anything, it is about Hamlet, his particular situation, not about the human condition. A work of art is a kind of showing or recording or witnessing which gives palpable form to consciousness; its object is to make something singular explicit. So far as it is true that we cannot judge (morally, conceptually) unless we generalize, then it is also true that the experience of works of art, and what is represented in works of art, transcends judgment - though the work itself may be judged as art. Isn't this just what we recognize as a feature of the greatest art, like the Iliad and the novels of Tolstoy and the plays of Shakespeare? That such art overrides our petty judgments, our facile labelling of persons and acts as good or bad?  And that this can happen is all to the good. (There is even a gain for the cause of morality in it.)

For morality, unlike art, is ultimately justified by its utility: that it makes, or is supposed to make, life more humane and livable for us all. But consciousness - what used to be called, rather tendentiously, the faculty of contemplation - can be, and is, wider and more thought, activities which can be described either as self-justifying various than action. It has its nourishment, art and speculative  thought, activities which can be described either as self-justifying or in no need of justification. What a work of art does is to make us see or comprehend something singular, not judge or generalize. This act of comprehension accompanied by voluptuousness is the only valid end, and sole sufficient justification, of a work of art. [...]

All works of art are founded on a certain distance from the lived reality which is represented. This "distance" is, by definition, inhuman or impersonal to a certain degree; for in order to appear to us as art, the work must restrict sentimental intervention and emotional participation, which are functions of "closeness." It is the degree and manipulating of this distance, the conventions of distance, which constitute the style of the work. In the final analysis, "style" is art. And art is nothing more or less than various modes of stylized, dehumanized representation."
(Susan Sontag, Against Interpretation and other essays, 1965)

E4.5.3.D_REF4.3_PH AN ORGANIC VANTAGE POINT ON ART "But this view - expounded by Ortega y Gasset, among others can easily be misinterpreted, since it seems to suggest that art, so far as it approaches its own norm, is a kind of irrelevant, impotent toy. Ortega himself greatly contributes to such a misinterpretation by omitting the various dialectics between self and world involved in the experiencing of works of art. Ortega focuses too exclusively on the notion of the work of art as a certain kind of object, with its own, spiritually aristocratic, standards for being savored. A work of art is first of all an object, not an imitation; and it is true that all great art is founded on distance, on artificiality, on style, on what Ortega calls dehumanization. But the notion of distance (and of dehumanization, as well) is misleading, unless one adds that the movement is not just away from but toward the world. The overcoming or transcending of the world in art is also a way of encountering the world, and of training or educating the will to be in the world. It would seem that Ortega and even Robbe-Grillet, a more recent exponent of the same position, are still not wholly free of the spell of the notion of "content." For, in order to limit the human content of art, and to fend off tired ideologies like humanism or socialist realism which would put art in the service of some moral or social idea, they feel required to ignore or scant the function of art. But art does not become function-less when it is seen to be, in the last analysis, content-less. For all the persuasiveness of Ortega's and Robbe-Grillet's defense of the formal nature of art, the specter of banished "content" continues to lurk around the edges of their argument, giving to "form" a defiantly anemic, salutarily eviscerated look.

The argument will never be complete until "form" or "style" can be thought of without that banished specter, without a feeling of loss. Valéry's daring inversion - "Literature. What is 'form' for any one else is 'content' for me"- scarcely does the trick. It is hard to think oneself out of a distinction so habitual and apparently self evident. One can do so only by adopting a different, more organic, theoretical vantage point - such as the notion of will. What is wanted of such a vantage point is that it do justice to the twin aspects of art: as object and as function, as artifice and as living form of consciousness, as the overcoming or supplementing of reality and as the making explicit of forms of encountering reality, as autonomous individual creation and as dependent historical phenomenon."
(Susan Sontag, Against Interpretation and other essays, 1965)

E4.5.3.E. The Dionysian Revelation: Penetrating the Ineffable.
Art can provide a tragic, cosmic, or ineffable truth that goes beyond language—connecting the individual to the "Primordial One" or the "Genuine Reality."

E4.5.3.E_REF1_LIT

EL3.139.A. MUSIC EXPRESSES TRUTHS ABOUT THE WORLD IN WAYS THAT LANGUAGE CANNOT REPLICATE. "Moonless, this June night is all the more alive with stars. Its darkness is perfumed with faint gusts from the blossoming lime trees, with the smell of wetted earth and the invisible greenness of the vines. There is silence; but a silence that breathes with the soft breathing of the sea and, in the thin shrill noise of a cricket, insistently, incessantly harps on the fact of its own deep perfection. Far away, the passage of a train is like a long caress, moving gently, with an inexorable gentleness, across the warm living body of the night. […]

Suddenly, by some miraculously appropriate confidence (for I had selected the record in the dark, without knowing what music the machine would play), suddenly the introduction to the Benedictus in Beethoven’s Missa Solemnis begins to trace patterns on the moonless sky. [...]

There is, at least there sometimes seems to be, a certain blessedness lying at the heart of things, a mysterious blessedness, of whose existence occasional accidents or providences (for me, this night is one of them) make us obscurely, or it may be intensely, but always fleetingly, alas, always only for a few brief moments aware. In the Benedictus Beethoven gives expression to this awareness of blessedness. His music is the equivalent of this Mediterranean night, or rather of the blessedness at the heart of the night, of the blessedness as it would be if it could be sifted clear of irrelevance and accident, refined and separated out into its quintessential purity. [...]

Music “says” things about the world, but in specifically musical terms. Any attempt to reproduce these musical statements “in our own words” is necessarily doomed to failure. We cannot isolate the truth contained in a piece of music; for it is a beauty-truth and inseparable from its partner. The best we can do is to indicate in the most general terms the nature of the musical beauty-truth under consideration and to refer curious truth-seekers to the original. Thus, the introduction to the Benedictus in the Missa Solemnis is a statement about the blessedness that is at the heart of things. But this is about as far as “our words” will take us. If we were to start describing in our “own words” exactly what Beethoven felt about this blessedness, how he conceived it, what he thought its nature to be, we should very soon find ourselves writing lyrical nonsense… Only music, and only Beethoven’s music, and only this particular music of Beethoven, can tell us with any precision what Beethoven’s conception of the blessedness at the heart of things actually was. If we want to know, we must listen — on a still June night, by preference, with the breathing of the invisible sea for background to the music and the scent of lime trees drifting through the darkness, like some exquisite soft harmony apprehended by another sense."
(Music at Night and Other Essays, 1931)

Listen to Ludvig van Beethoven's Missa Solemnis, Op. 123, Mass in D Major on YouTube:
https://youtu.be/umXYWd25hgQ?feature=shared

E4.5.3.E_REF2_PH ANTONIN ARTAUD DESCRIBES THEATER AS A "CRISIS” THAT STRIPS AWAY SOCIAL MASKS TO REVEAL THE VIOLENT, HIDDEN TRUTH OF HUMAN NATURE.
"Le théâtre comme la peste est une crise qui se dénoue par la mort ou par la guérison. Et la peste est un mal supérieur parce qu’elle est une crise complète après laquelle il ne reste rien que la mort ou qu’une extrême purification. De même le théâtre est un mal parce qu’il est l’équilibre suprême qui ne s’acquiert pas sans destruction. Il invite l’esprit à un délire qui exalte ses énergies; et l’on peut voir pour finir que du point de vue humain, l’action du théâtre comme celle de la peste, est bienfaisante, car poussant les hommes à se voir tels qu’ils sont, elle fait tomber le masque, elle découvre le mensonge, la veulerie, la bassesse, la tartuferie; elle secoue l’inertie asphyxiante de la matière qui gagne jusqu’aux données les plus claires des sens; et révélant à des collectivités leur puissance sombre, leur force cachée, elle les invite à prendre en face du destin une attitude héroïque et supérieure qu’elles n’auraient jamais eue sans cela."
(Antonin Artaud, Le théâtre et son double, 1932-38)

E4.5.3.E_REF3_PH ART (THE PLAY WITHIN THE PLAY) FUNCTIONS AS A TRUTH TRAP. WHERE REASON AND THE UNCONSCIOUS ARE AMBIGUOUS, THEATRICAL ARTIFICES REVEAL THE REAL.
"For Hamlet, dreams reveal reality. For most of the play, Hamlet doubts the reality revealed by dreams. He finally devises a reality test by staging the murder of his father in front of his uncle and mother. He hopes to capture their discomfort, which would prove their usurpation. This revelation comes from his father's ghost. We might think of this as a dream or a revelation of the unconscious rather than a ghostly apparition.
 

To further thwart the potential trap of the dream, Hamlet asks his loyal friend Horatio to observe the expressions of the usurping couple as well—thus relying on the lucidity of an impartial third party."
(Pierre Schindler)

Watch the scene of the truth trap in Hamlet: https://youtu.be/HRy9U033tF4?si=3boTyyM1sMNWZ32D

E4.5.3.E_REF4_PH NIETZSCHE DEFINIT L'ART NON COMME UNE IMITATION DU REEL, MAIS COMME LA PLUS HAUTE PUISSANCE DU FAUX. L'ART MAGNIFIE LE MONDE EN TANT QU'ERREUR. L’ARTISTE NE CHERCHE PAS A AVOIR RAISON (ADEQUATION), MAIS A INVENTER (AFFIRMATION). LE chercheur de vérité n'est pas celui qui découvre ce qui est déjà là, mais l'artiste qui crée de nouvelles possibilités de vie.
"La pensée cesse d’être une ratio, la vie cesse d’être une réaction. Le penseur exprime ainsi la belle affinité de la pensée et de la vie : la vie faisant de la pensée quelque chose d’actif, la pensée faisant de la vie quelque chose d’affirmatif. Cette affinité en général, chez Nietzsche, n’apparaît pas seulement comme le secret pré-socratique par excellence, mais aussi comme l’essence de l’art. [...]

Le second principe de l’art consiste en ceci : l’art est la plus haute puissance du faux, il magnifie « le monde en tant qu’erreur », il sanctifie le mensonge, il fait de la volonté de tromper un idéal supérieur. Ce second principe apporte en quelque manière la réciproque du premier ; ce qui est actif dans la vie ne peut être effectué qu’en rapport avec une affirmation plus profonde. L’activité de la vie est comme une puissance du faux, duper, dissimuler, éblouir, séduire. Mais pour être effectuée, cette puissance du faux doit être sélectionnée, redoublée ou répétée, donc élevée à une plus haute puissance. La puissance du faux doit être portée jusqu’à une volonté de tromper, volonté artiste seule capable de rivaliser avec l’idéal ascétique et de s’opposer à cet idéal avec succès. L’art précisément invente des mensonges qui élèvent le faux à cette plus haute puissance affirmative, il fait de la volonté de tromper quelque chose qui s’affirme dans la puissance du faux. Apparence, pour l’artiste, ne signifie plus la négation du réel dans ce monde, mais cette sélection, cette correction, ce redoublement, cette affirmation. Alors vérité prend peut-être une nouvelle signification. Vérité est apparence. Vérité signifie effectuation de la puissance, élévation à la plus haute puissance. Chez Nietzsche, nous les artistes = nous les chercheurs de connaissance ou de vérité = nous les inventeurs de nouvelles possibilités de vie."
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche et la philosophie, 1962)

E4.5.3.E_REF5_PH DIONYSIAN ART REVEALS THE "RADICAL TRUTH" WHICH IS "EXCESS" (DÉMESURE) AND THE "PRIMORDIAL ONE." This revelation requires the "abolition of boundaries" and the "negation of the empirical ego." The subject dissolves into the cosmos. It defines the true artist not as a conscious individual expressing a personality, but as a "medium" through which the "only truly existing subject" (the Cosmos/Life) celebrates itself.
"L’extase de l’état dionysiaque avec son abolition des barrières et des frontières habituelles de l’existence, contient, pendant sa durée, un élément léthargique dans lequel s’enfonce tout ce qui a été personnellement vécu dans le passé. Par cet abîme d’oubli, se sépare le monde de la réalité quotidienne et le monde de la réalité dionysiaque (Kroner I, p. 55).  L’oubli, toutefois, est interprété dans le sens inverse où, de nos jours, la psychanalyse le considère: non pas à partir de la réalité superficielle quotidienne, mais à partir de la réalité profonde dionysiaque ou de la vérité radicale. [...]
L’extase dionysiaque comporte la connaissance vraie et surtout la conscience d’une vérité. [...]

L’art dionysiaque seul proclame la vérité radicale et ce qu’il révèle de la vérité, c’est la démesure (Kroner I, p. 37). Le véritable artiste est le medium à travers lequel le seul sujet vraiment existant (non pas le cogito) célèbre la rédemption dans l’apparence [...] ce qui compte, c’est la création artistique, car elle replace l’homme à sa source la plus intime et la plus universelle. [...]

Le processus complexe « apollinien-dionysien » ne produit pas, comme l’apollinien seul, une sublimation par substitution d’apparence, il produit nettement une régression par une véritable métamorphose symbolique du sujet même; et, dès que commence cette métamorphose, elle tend aussitôt irrésistiblement à s’achever dans la disparition complète du sujet, dont le moi se dissout au sein du cosmos réintégré dans l’imaginaire. Le moi a donc atteint un certain centre de lui-même, qui n’est autre que la négation du moi empirique. Mais cette négation progressive s’opère au profit d’une réalité transcendante et cosmique reconquise par l’homme. C’est là que se situe l’Un-primordial: au centre du moi qui se nie comme sujet individuel pour n’être plus que le sujet cosmique de la démesure, le seul existant et éternel."
(Angèle Kremer-Marietti, Introduction à La naissance de la tragédie de Nietzsche, 1994)

E4.5.3.E_REF6_PH A_Cildo Meireles_Atlas_1995-2016

"ART OCCUPIES A CENTRAL PLACE IN THE COURAGE OF TRUTH DEVELOPED BY NIETZSCHE, because "it befalls on art to deliver man from knowledge, from action, from suffering. [...] The term truth has no value [...] in itself: art replaces it. Courage consists in facing the contradictions of the world, and no longer in wanting to hide it by the invention of the world-of-truth. Art substitutes truth, by facts of creation, facts of aggression that many "truths" were covering, and it imagines a myth which, coming from the psychic and cosmic depths of humanity, inverts depth into a cosmic mountain, on top of which a new world can be born."
(Angèle Kremer-Marietti, Introduction to the Nietzsche's Birth of Tragedy, 1994)

E4.5.3.E_REF7_PH  NIETZSCHE ARGUES THAT ART REVEALS THE FUNDAMENTAL ESSENCE OF REALITY ("TRUTH ETERNAL") IN A WAY THAT SCIENCE AND LOGIC CANNOT.
"Si nous avons légitimement accordé à la musique la puissance d’engendrer de nouveau le mythe, nous aurons à rechercher l’empreinte de l’esprit scientifique également dans les manifestations où il s’affirme hostile à cette puissance de création mythique de la musique. Cet événement se signale dans la formation du dernier dithyrambe attique, dont la musique n’exprimait plus l’essence intime du monde, la Volonté elle-même, mais reproduisait insuffisamment et uniquement les phénomènes, dans une imitation obtenue par l’intermédiaire des concepts: musique intrinsèquement décadente, qui suscitait chez les natures véritablement musicales l’identique répulsion qu’elles éprouvaient aux tendances, mortelles pour l’art, de Socrate. L’instinct sûr et pénétrant d’Aristophane a certainement démêlé la vérité, lorsqu’il réunit, en un commun objet de haine, Socrate lui-même, la tragédie d’Euripide et la musique des nouveaux dithyrambes, et reconnaît dans ces trois phénomènes les stigmates d’une culture décadente. Grâce à ce nouveau dithyrambe, la musique tourne perversement au pastiche, à la contrefaçon du phénomène, par exemple, d’une bataille, d’une tempête, et est ainsi, à coup sûr, totalement dépouillée de sa puissance de création mythique. En effet, si la musique ne cherche à nous satisfaire qu’en nous forçant à découvrir des analogies extérieures entre un événement de la vie ou un accident de la nature, et certaines figures rythmiques, telles résonances musicales caractéristiques, si notre intelligence doit s’accommoder de la simple constatation de ces analogies, nous sommes alors déchus à un état d’esprit où il nous est impossible de recevoir l’impression du mythique; car le mythe veut être ressenti par la perception en tant que symbole unique d’une généralité et vérité immuable au plus profond de l’infini. La musique véritablement dionysienne nous apparaît comme ce miroir universel de la Volonté du monde. Cet événement intuitif, dont l’image se réfracte dans ce miroir, grandit aussitôt dans notre sentiment jusqu’à devenir l’image parfaite d’une vérité éternelle. Au contraire, un tel événement intuitif est immédiatement muni de son caractère mythique par la peinture musicale du nouveau dithyrambe; ici la musique aboutit à une mesquine imitation du phénomène, qui la rend plus misérable, infiniment, que le phénomène lui-même."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, La naissance de la tragédie, 1872)

E4.5.3.E_REF7.1_PH TRUE ART (TRAGEDY) CONNECTS US WITH "HARMONIES FROM ANOTHER WORLD" AND PROVIDE A COMFORT THAT LIES BEYOND LOGICAL JUSTICE. When it replaces this metaphysical depth with a "happy ending" (marriage, rewards, liberty, art loses its revelatory power and becomes a mere spectacle of suffering and compensation.
"C’est dans le dénouement des drames que se manifeste le plus nettement le nouvel esprit antidionysien. La fin de l’antique tragédie évoquait la consolation métaphysique, hors de laquelle le goût de la tragédie reste inexplicable; ces harmonies de paix, émanées d’un autre monde, c’est peut-être dans Œdipe à Colone qu’elles résonnent le plus purement. Maintenant le génie de la musique a abandonné la tragédie, et celle-ci est morte, au sens strict du mot: car, où puiser désormais ce réconfort métaphysique? Aussi, à la dissonance tragique, on chercha une convenable résolution terrestre; le héros, après avoir été suffisamment torturé par le sort, obtenait par un beau mariage, par des hommages divins, une récompense bien méritée. Le héros était devenu un gladiateur auquel, après qu’il était congrûment écorché et couvert de blessures, on accordait éventuellement la liberté. Le deus ex machina a remplacé la consolation métaphysique. Je ne veux pas dire que la conception tragique du monde ait été universellement définitivement anéantie par l’effort de l’esprit antidioysien; nous savons seulement qu’elle dut s’enfuir du domaine de l’art, se réfugier, pour ainsi dire, dans le monde des ténèbres et dégénérer en culte secret. Mais, sur toute la surface de l’hellénisme, se déchaîna le souffle dévastateur de cet esprit qui se manifeste sous cette forme de la « sérénité grecque » que j’ai définie comme l’expression d’un bonheur de vivre sénile et infécond."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, La naissance de la tragédie, 1872)

E4.5.3.E_REF8_PO HÖLDERLIN  SUGGESTS THAT "BEING RIGHT" OR FINDING PEACE ISN'T ABOUT LOGICAL CERTAINTY, BUT ABOUT THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE. The completion of the song provides a spiritual fulfillment that rational inquiry cannot offer.
"To the Fates

One summer only grant me, you powerful ones, And one autumn to ripen the song, So that my heart, more willing, from the Sweet play satisfied, may die.

The soul that in life does not find its godlike Right, down in Orcus finds no rest either; But if what is holy, if what is my heart’s desire, The poem, is achieved at last,

Welcome, then, silence of the world of shades! I shall be content, though my lyre will not Go down there with me; once I lived like The gods, and no more is needed."
(Friedrich Hölderlin, Translated by Michael Hamburger)

"An die Parzen

Nur einen Sommer gönnt, ihr Gewaltigen! Und einen Herbst zu reifem Gesang mir, Daß williger mein Herz, vom süßen Spiele gesättiget, dann mir sterbe.

Die Seele, der im Leben ihr göttlich Recht Nicht ward, sie ruht auch drunten im Orkus nicht; Doch ist mir einst das Heilge, das am Herzen mir liegt, das Gedicht, gelungen,

Willkommen dann, o Stille der Schattenwelt! Zufrieden bin ich, wenn auch mein Saitenspiel Mich nicht hinab geleitet; Einmal Lebt ich, wie Götter, und mehr bedarfs nicht."
((Friedrich Hölderlin)

E4.5.3.E_REF9_PH

EL3.95.A.1.1.c.iv. EVERY WORK OF ART NEEDS TO BE UNDERSTOOD AS A CERTAIN HANDLING OF THE INEFFABLE "Art is the objectifying of the will in a thing or performance, and the provoking or arousing of the will. From the point of view of the artist, it is the objectifying of a volition; from the point of view of the spectator, it is the creation of an imaginary décor for the will.
Indeed, the entire history of the various arts could be rewritten as the history of different attitudes toward the will. [...]

In the strictest sense, all the contents of consciousness are ineffable. Even the simplest sensation is, in its totality, indescribable, Every work of art, therefore, needs to be understood not only as something rendered, but also as a certain handling of the ineffable, In the greatest art, one is always aware of things that cannot be said (rules of "decorum"), of the contradiction between expression and the presence of the inexpressible. Stylistic devices are also techniques of avoidance. The most potent elements in a work of art are, often, its silences.

What I have said about style has been directed mainly to clear up certain misconceptions about works of art and how to talk about them. But it remains to be said that style is a notion that applies to any experience (whenever we talk about its form or qualities). And just as many works of art which have a potent claim on our interest are impure or mixed with respect to the standard I have been proposing, so many items in our experience which could not be classed as works of art possess some of the qualities of art objects. Whenever speech or movement or behavior or objects exhibit a certain deviation from the most direct, useful, insensible mode of expression or being in the world, we may look at them as having a "style," and being both autonomous and exemplary."
(Susan Sontag, Against Interpretation and other essays, 1965)

E4.5.3.E_REF9.1_PH
 "Art is the objectifying of the will in a thing or performance, and the provoking or arousing of the will. From the point of view of the artist, it is the objectifying of a volition; from the point of view of the spectator, it is the creation of an imaginary décor for the will.
Indeed, the entire history of the various arts could be rewritten as the history of different attitudes toward the will. [...]
In the strictest sense, all the contents of consciousness are ineffable. Even the simplest sensation is, in its totality, indescribable, Every work of art, therefore, needs to be understood not only as something rendered, but also as a certain handling of the ineffable, In the greatest art, one is always aware of things that cannot be said (rules of "decorum"), of the contradiction between expression and the presence of the inexpressible. Stylistic devices are also techniques of avoidance. The most potent elements in a work of art are, often, its silences."
(Susan Sontag, On style, 1965)

E4.5.3.E_REF10_LIT

EL3.139. “ONLY ART PENETRATES … THE SEEMING REALITIES OF THIS WORLD. There is another reality, the genuine one, which we lose sight of. This other reality is always sending us hints, which without art, we can’t receive.”
(Saul Bellow, Nobel Prize acceptance speech)

E4.5.4. The Irrational Basis of Goodness

E4.5.4.A. The Insufficiency of Logic and the Primacy of Instinct.
A purely "logical" conception of life leads to nihilism or "vertigo." Moral action is driven by instinct rather than conscious reasoning, and that attempting to rationalize the Good is a distortion of human nature.

E4.5.4.A_REF1_PH HUIZINGA STATES THAT THE "LOGICAL CONCEPTION OF THINGS" DOES NOT GO FAR ENOUGH AND LEADS TO "VERTIGO" OR THE CYNICAL CONCLUSION THAT "ALL IS PLAY" (VANITY/RELATIVISM). When judgment "totters", moral conscience (compassion, justice, pity) provides the "point of support that logic refuses."
"L’homme ne peut se dégager du cercle magique du jeu qu’en levant les yeux vers le Suprême. Avec la conception logique des choses, il ne va pas assez loin. Lorsque la pensée humaine est maîtresse de tous les trésors de l’esprit et qu’elle éprouve toute la splendeur de ses facultés, elle trouve encore au fond de tout jugement sérieux un reste problématique. Tout énoncé d’un jugement décisif n’est pas reconnu pour tout à fait concluant dans la conscience personnelle. A ce point où le jugement chancelle, s’évanouit le sentiment du sérieux absolu. Au lieu du Tout est vanité millénaire, un Tout est jeu, d’un accent un peu plus positif, s’impose peut-être alors. Cela ne paraîtra que métaphore à bon marché, que pure impuissance de l’esprit. [...]

Quiconque éprouve un vertige de l’esprit, dans la révolution séculaire du concept jeu-sérieux, retrouve dans l’éthique le point d’appui que la logique lui refuse. Le jeu en soi, disions-nous au début, réside hors de la sphère des normes morales. Il n’est en soi ni bon ni mauvais. Quand l’homme, cependant, doit décider si une action, où sa volonté le pousse, lui est commandée comme sérieuse, ou lui est permise comme jeu, sa conscience morale lui offre immédiatement la pierre de touche. Aussitôt que, dans le parti pris d’agir, interviennent des sentiments de vérité et de justice, de compassion et de clémence, la question n’a plus de sens. Une ombre de pitié suffit à élever nos actes au-dessus des distinctions de l’esprit pensant. Dans toute conscience morale fondée sur la reconnaissance de la justice et de la grâce, le dilemme jeu-sérieux, jusque-là insoluble, cesse à jamais de se poser."
(Johan Huizinga, Homo ludens, Essai sur la fonction sociale du jeu, 1951)

E4.5.4.A_REF2_PH  NIETZSCHE ARGUES THAT WHILE PHILOSOPHERS LIKE SOCRATES AND PLATO TRIED TO PROVE THAT REASON LEADS TO THE GOOD, THE UNDERLYING DRIVER OF MORAL ACTION IS ACTUALLY INSTINCT. 
"Le vieux problème théologique de la « foi » et du « savoir » — ou, plus clairement, de l’instinct et de la raison — la question de savoir, donc, si eu égard à l’évaluation des choses, l’instinct mérite de recevoir une autorité supérieure à la rationalité, qui veut que l’on sache apprécier et agir en fonction de motifs fondés, en fonction d’un « pourquoi ? », c’est-à-dire en fonction de la convenance et de l’utilité, — c’est encore et toujours ce vieux problème moral, qui apparut pour la première fois dans la personne de Socrate et a déjà divisé les esprits bien avant le christianisme. Socrate quant à lui s’était sans doute d’abord rangé, avec le goût propre à son talent — celui d’un dialecticien hors pair — du côté le la raison et à vrai dire, qu’a-t-il fait d’autre, sa vie durant, que se moquer de la gauche incompétence de ces Athéniens nobles, qui étaient des hommes d'instinct, comme tous les nobles, et ne parvenaient jamais à fournir des indications suffisantes sur les raisons de leur manière d’agir ? Mais pour finir, en silence et en secret, il se moqua aussi de lui-même : il découvrit en lui, face à sa conscience particulièrement subtile et à la faveur d’un interrogatoire qu’il s’imposa à lui-même, la même difficulté et la même incompétence. À quoi bon, il cherchait à s’en persuader, se défaire pour autant des instincts ! On doit les aider, et la raison aussi, à faire valoir leur droit, — on doit suivre les instincts, mais persuader la raison de les assister en fournissant de bons motifs. Voilà ce qui fut la véritable fausseté de ce grand ironiste aux mille secrets; il parvint à faire en sorte que sa conscience se satisfasse d’une espèce de duperie de soi (1) : il avait en fin de compte percé à jour le caractère irrationnel des jugements moraux. — Platon, plus innocent en la matière, et dépourvu de l’astuce du plébéien, voulut se prouver, en y employant toute sa force — la plus grande force qu’un philosophe ait pu prodiguer jusqu’à présent ! — que la raison et l’instinct convergent d’eux-mêmes vers un but unique, vers le Bien, vers « Dieu » ; et depuis Platon, tous les théologiens et philosophes (2) suivent la même voie, — ce qui revient à dire qu’en matière morale, c’est jusqu’à présent l’instinct, ou, comme les chrétiens l’appellent, « la foi », ou comme je l’appelle moi, « le troupeau », qui a gagné. Il faudrait faire une exception pour Descartes, le père du rationalisme (et par conséquent le grand-père de la Révolution), qui ne reconnaissait l’autorité qu’à la seule raison : mais la raison n’est qu’un instrument, et Descartes était superficiel."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Par-delà bien et mal, Aphorism 191, 1886)

Note (1):  "Selbstüberlistung : cette création verbale parodie ironiquement le terme Selbstüberwindung (« dépassement de soi »), par lequel Nietzsche caractérise les degrés les plus hauts de l’exercice de la volonté de puissance."
Note (2): "2   L’association de ces deux groupes d’hommes n’est évidemment pas innocente ; elle semble insinuer, comme l’affirmera explicitement le dernier traité de La généalogie de la morale, que le philosophe n’a été jusqu’à présent qu’un prêtre masqué."
(Patrick Wotling)

E4.5.4.A_REF2.1_PH NIETZSCHE DESCRIBES SOCRATES AS A "MONSTROSITY" BECAUSE HE ATTEMPTED TO REPLACE THE SUBTLE, IMPLICIT GUIDANCE OF INSTINCT WITH THE EXPLICIT, RIGID RULES OF REASON ("CONSCIOUS UNDERSTANDING").
"Cependant, ce fut Socrate qui prononça la parole la plus incisive à l’égard de la nouvelle et extraordinaire valeur accordée à la connaissance et au jugement. Il était le seul, en effet, qui s’avouât à lui-même ne rien savoir, tandis que, se promenant à travers Athènes, en observateur critique, visitant les hommes d’Etat, le orateurs, les poètes et les artistes célèbres, il rencontrait chez tous la présomption de la sagesse. Il reconnut avec stupéfaction que, même au point de vue de leur activité spéciale, toutes ces célébrités ne possédaient aucune connaissance exacte et certaine, et n’agissaient que par instinct. « N’agissaient que par instinct »: cette expression nous fait toucher du doigt le cœur et la moelle de la tendance socratique. Par ces mots, le socratisme condamne aussi bien l’art existant que l’éthique existante: de quelque côté qu’il dirige son regard scrutateur, il constate le manque de jugement et la puissance de l’illusion, et il en conclut à l’absurdité, à la condamnation de ce qui l’entoure. Partant de ce point de vue, Socrate crut devoir corriger l’existence: comme précurseur d’une culture, d’un art et d’une morale tout autres, lui le solitaire, il s’avança, la mine hautaine et dédaigneuse, au milieu d’un monde dont les derniers vestiges sont pour nous l’objet d’une profonde vénération et la source des plus pures jouissances. 

Aussi, mis en présence de Socrate, un scrupule inouï nous envahit et, sans cesse et toujours de nouveau, nous pousse à pénétrer le sens et la portée de cette énigmatique figure de l’antiquité. Quel est-il, celui qui, à lui seul, ose désavouer l’essence même de l’hellénisme, se substituer à Homère, à Pindare, à Eschyle, remplacer Phidias et Péricles, supplanter la pythie et Dionysos, et qui, comme l’abîme le plus insondable et la cime la plus haute, est certain par avance de notre admiration et de notre culte? Quelle force démoniaque a le droit d’oser répandre dans la poussière ce breuvage magique? Quel est ce demi-dieu, auquel le chœur invisible des plus nobles d’entre les humains doit crier: « Malheur ! Malheur ! Ce monde de beauté, tu l’as renversé d’un bras puissant; il tombe, il s’écroule ! » (Goethe, Faust, I). 

Un phénomène étrange nous est parvenu sous le nom du « Démon de Socrate ». Dans certaines circonstances, lorsque l’extraordinaire lucidité de son intelligence paraissait l’abandonner, une voix divine se faisait entendre, et lui prêtait une assurance nouvelle. Lorsqu’elle parle, toujours cette voix dissuade. Dans cette nature tout anormale, la sagesse instinctive n’intervient que pour entraver, combattre l’entendement conscient. Tandis que, chez tous les créateurs, l’instinct est précisément la force positive, créatrice, et la raison consciente une fonction critique, décourageante, chez Socrate, l’instinct se révèle critique, et la raison est créatrice, — véritable monstruosité per defectum ! Et, en effet, nous constatons ici un monstrueux défaut de toute disposition naturelle au mysticisme, de sorte que Socrate pourrait être considéré comme le non-mystique spécifique, chez lequel, par une particulière superfétation, l’esprit logique eût été développé d’une façon aussi démesurée que l’est, chez le mystique, la sagesse instinctive."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, La naissance de la tragédie, 1872)

E4.5.4.B. The "Solid" Reality of the Irrational.
Our capacity for faith, love, and goodness are more real and durable than the material or logical world.

E4.5.4.B_REF1_LIT

EL3.32. IS IT ILLOGICAL TO APPLAUD THE SUPREMACY OF GOOD?  "The second result [of defeating common sense] is that the irrational belief in the goodness of man… becomes something much more than the wobbly basis of idealistic philosophies. It becomes a solid and iridescent truth. This means that goodness becomes a central and tangible part of one’s world, which world at first sight seems hard to identify with the modern one of newspaper editors and other bright pessimists, who will tell you that it is, mildly speaking, illogical to applaud the supremacy of good at a time when something called the police state, or communism, is trying to turn the globe into five million square miles of terror, stupidity, and barbed wire. And they may add that it is one thing to beam at one’s private universe in the snuggest nook of an unshelled and well-fed country and quite another to try and keep sane among crashing buildings in the roaring and whining night. But within the emphatically and unshakably illogical world which I am advertising as a home for the spirit, war gods are unreal not because they are conveniently remote in physical space from the reality of a reading lamp and the solidity of a fountain pen, but because I cannot imagine (and that is saying a good deal) such circumstances as might impinge upon the lovely and lovable world which quietly persists, whereas I can very well imagine that my fellow dreamers, thousands of whom roam the earth, keep to these same irrational and divine standards during the darkest and most dazzling hours of physical danger, pain, dust, death."
(Vladimir Nabokov , The Art of Literature and Commonsense, Lectures on Literature, 1941)

E1.6.A.1.10_REF2_LIT.wE4.5.4.B.

 "CAUSALITY AND CHANCE … ARE THE SAME THINGS LOOKED AT TWO WAYS. Of course we are rather mechanical, and psychoanalysis can offer us some useful generalities about ourselves. But everything that is important and valuable and good belongs with the little piece of us which is not mechanical and no one who is not bemused by philosophy or a youthful mood really doubts the existence of this piece.

I think the sage who saw us as naturally reaching out towards the good had got something. We know, in the best part of ourselves, to use Platonic language, that great art is good, that work is often good and love often good. And if we have any certainties in the human condition these are they, and much more evident certainties than semi-philosophical stuff about all is flux. Of course much is flux, perhaps most is flux — but there is the other small thing and by this and in this one lives — I think almost involuntarily. (It’s very bad really to believe that certain aspects of love in one’s life are meaningless or worthless.)"
(Iris Murdoch, Living on Paper: Letters from Iris Murdoch, 1934–1995)

E4.5.4.B_REF2_LIT LOVE IS "UNREACHABLE BY LOGIC AND REASON"
"[Reflecting on these deepest of human emotions]
If they are there, life changes. And whether they shall be there or not depends almost always upon non-logical, often on organic conditions. And as the excited interest which these passions put into the world is our gift to the world, just so are the passions themselves gifts — gifts to us, from sources sometimes low and sometimes high; but almost always nonlogical and beyond our control."
(William James, The Varieties of Religious Experience: A Study in Human Nature, 1902)

"The limitations of logic are why we so profoundly fail to imagine what lies on the other side of love’s transformation. The self-limitation of control is the cage of howling loneliness that keeps us from the freedom necessary for love — for love is “a knot made of two intertwined freedoms,” in Octavio Paz’s unforgettable definition. That mysterious aspect of love — unreachable by logic and reason, impervious to will and control — is why our choice in love is largely an illusion, why our slender margin of choice contains only the courage and patience with which we face its trembling uncertainty and choose to love anyway."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2024/04/03/william-james-on-love/?mc_cid=4012e1f8d6&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E4.5.4.C. The Mechanisms of the Heart: Beauty, Vulnerability, and Empathy.
We are drawn to the Good through Beauty (which makes goodness desirable), Empathy (imagining others as like ourselves), and Emotion (which contains its own form of intelligence).

E4.5.4.C_REF1_LIT BY DEFINING BEAUTY AS THE "PLEASURE OF THE GOOD" AND WHAT MAKES GOODNESS "DESIRABLE," CHENG PROVIDES THE MECHANISM FOR THE "IRRATIONAL BASIS" OF GOODNESS.
"La présence de beauté répand l´harmonie autour d´elle, favorisant partage et communion, dispensant une lumière de bienfaisance, ce qui est la définition même de la bonté. Il n´est pas exagéré de dire que beauté et bonté forment les deux faces d´une entité une, organique et opérante. Quelle différence entre elles alors ? Osons une formule :
La bonté se porte garante de la qualité de la beauté ;
La beauté irradie la bonté et la rend désirable. 
Quand l´authenticité de la beauté est garantie par la bonté, on est dans l´état suprême de la vérité, celle qui va, repètons-le, dans le sens de la vie ouverte, celle à laquelle on aspire comme à une chose qui se justifie en soi. Ce qui se justifie en soi dans l´ordre de la vie est bien la beauté qui, s´élévant vers l´état de joie et de liberté, permet à la bonté même de dépasser la simple notion de devoir. La beauté est la noblesse du bien, le plaisir du bien, la jouissance du bien, le rayonnement même du bien."
(François Cheng, Cinq méditations sur la beauté, 2006)

E4.5.4.C_REF3_PH I_Puss in boots

PITY AND EMULATION ARE AN "IMITATION OF SENTIMENTS" TRIGGERED BY THE IMAGINATION OF A BEING "LIKE US."
"PROPOSITION XXVII
De ce que nous imaginons qu’une chose semblable a nous et pour laquelle nous n’avons éprouvé aucun sentiment, est affectée de quelque sentiment, nous sommes par cela même affectés d’un sentiment semblable. [...]

SCOLIE
Cette imitation de sentiments, quand elle se rapporte à la Tristesse, s’appelle Pitié [...] ; mais, rapportée au Désir, elle s’appelle Émulation, qui par suite n’est rien d’autre que le Désir d’une chose qui est engendré en nous de ce que nous imaginons que d’autres êtres semblables à nous ont le même Désir."
(Baruch Spinoza, Éthique III)

E4.5.4.C_REF2_LIT A_Peter Fischli & David Weiss_Frankenstein admires a flower

BY ARGUING THAT "BEAUTY ILLUMINATES GOODNESS AND MAKES IT DESIRABLE," CHENG EXPLAINS THE MECHANISM OF THE "IRRATIONAL BASIS” OF GOODNESS. We are drawn to the Good not because of deductive reasoning, but because of an attraction (Beauty) that speaks to the heart (Finesse).
"Beauty spreads harmony around her, promoting sharing and communion, imparting a light of benevolence, which is the very definition of goodness. It is no exaggeration to say that beauty and goodness are the two faces of a single, organic and operative entity. What is the difference between them then? Let's dare throwing a formula:
Goodness guarantees the quality of beauty;
Beauty illuminates goodness and makes it desirable.
When the authenticity of beauty is guaranteed by goodness, one is in the supreme state of truth, the one which goes, let us repeat it, in the direction of the open life, the one to which one aspires as something that is justified in itself. What is justified in itself in the order of life is indeed the kind of beauty which, elevating towards the state of joy and freedom, allows goodness itself to go beyond the simple notion of duty. Beauty is the nobility of goodness, the pleasure of goodness, the enjoyment of goodness, the very radiance of goodness."
(François Cheng, Five meditations on beauty, 2006)

E1.5.A.4_REF1_PH.wE4.5.4.C.

 MARTHA NUSSBAUM ARGUES THAT EMOTIONS ARE INTEGRAL TO ETHICAL REASONING, CONTAINING JUDGMENTS ABOUT VALUE AND IMPORTANCE THAT CANNOT BE SIDELINED IN MORAL PHILOSOPHY. This perspective challenges the traditional view of morality as detached from emotions, emphasizing their role in ethical judgment and human self-understanding.
"A lot is at stake in the decision to view emotions in this way, as intelligent responses to the perception of value. If emotions are suffused with intelligence and discernment, and if they contain in themselves an awareness of value or importance, they cannot, for example, easily be sidelined in accounts of ethical judgment, as so often they have been in the history of philosophy. Instead of viewing morality as a system of principles to be grasped by the detached intellect, and emotions as motivations that either support or subvert our choice to act according to principle, we will have to consider emotions as part and parcel of the system of ethical reasoning. We cannot plausibly omit them, once we acknowledge that emotions include in their content judgments that can be true or false, and good or bad guides to ethical choice. We will have to grapple with the messy material of grief and love, anger and fear, and the role these tumultuous experiences play in thought about the good and the just. […]
Emotions are not just the fuel that powers the psychological mechanism of a reasoning creature, they are parts, highly complex and messy parts, of this creature’s reasoning itself. […]
Insofar as they involve acknowledgment of neediness and lack of self-sufficiency, emotions reveal us as vulnerable to events that we do not control. […]
Emotions seem to be characterized by ambivalence toward their objects. In the very nature of our early object relations … there lurks a morally subversive combination of love and resentment, which springs directly from the thought that we need others to survive and flourish, but do not at all control their movements. If love is in this way always, or even commonly, mixed up with hatred, then, once again, this might offer us some reasons not to trust to the emotions at all in the moral life, but rather to the more impersonal guidance of rules of duty. […]
Personal love has typically been thought too wonderful to remove from human life; but it has also been seen (not only by philosophers) as a source of great moral danger because of its partiality and the extreme form of vulnerability it involves, which make a connection with jealousy and anger virtually inevitable. […]
Emotions … involve judgments about important things, judgments in which, appraising an external object as salient for our own well-being, we acknowledge our own neediness and incompleteness before parts of the world that we do not fully control. […]
Emotions should be understood as “geological upheavals of thought”: as judgments in which people acknowledge the great importance, for their own flourishing, of things that they do not fully control — and acknowledge thereby their neediness before the world and its events. […]
Human beings appear to be the only mortal finite beings who wish to transcend their finitude. Thus they are the only emotional beings who wish not to be emotional, who wish to withhold these acknowledgments of neediness and to design for themselves a life in which these acknowledgments have no place. This means that they frequently learn to reject their own vulnerability and to suppress awareness of the attachments that entail it. We might also say … that they are the only animals for whom neediness is a source of shame, and who take pride in themselves to the extent to which they have allegedly gotten clear of vulnerability. […]
The process of development entails many moments of discomfort and frustration. Indeed, some frustration of the infant’s wants by the caretaker’s separate comings and goings is essential to development — for if everything were always simply given in advance of discomfort, the child would never try out its own projects of control. […]
The child’s evolving recognition that the caretaker sometimes fails to bring it what it wants gives rise to an anger that is closely linked to its emerging love. Indeed, the very recognition that both good things and their absence have an external source guarantees the presence of both of these emotions — although the infant has not yet recognized that both take a single person as their object. […]
The emotions of the adult life sometimes feel as if they flood up out of nowhere, in ways that don’t match our present view of our objects or their value. This will be especially true of the person who maintains some kind of false self-defense, and who is in consequence out of touch with the emotions of neediness and dependence, or of anger and aggression, that characterize the true self. […]
The understanding of any single emotion is incomplete unless its narrative history is grasped and studied for the light it sheds on the present response. This already suggests a central role for the arts in human self-understanding: for narrative artworks of various kinds (whether musical or visual or literary) give us information about these emotion-histories that we could not easily get otherwise. This is what Proust meant when he claimed that certain truths about the human emotions can be best conveyed, in verbal and textual form, only by a narrative work of art: only such a work will accurately and fully show the interrelated temporal structure of emotional “thoughts,” prominently including the heart’s intermittences between recognition and denial of neediness. […]"
(Martha Nussbaum, Upheavals of thought: The intelligence of emotions, 2001)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2015/11/23/martha-nussbaum-upheavals-of-thought-neediness/

E4.5.4.D. The "Super-Lucidity" of Love.
True Love is a "super-lucidity" that is superior to factual "Truth." It justifies "generous impropriety"—such as the benevolent lie—demonstrating that the irrational choice to love is the only thing that stops the infinite regression of reason.

E4.5.4.D_REF1_PH GOODNESS IS NOT A NAIVE ERROR BUT A SUPERIOR FORM OF LUCIDITY: "THE BENEFACTOR IS NEVER A DUPE".
"Appelons intellection cette lecture dans l’infini qui nous permet de rattraper et devancer le subtil, d’avoir barres sur lui, d’être encore plus leste qu’il n’est, et plus conscient, et de raffiner sur sa finesse. C’est cela, comprendre. Toute conscience suppose ainsi au delà d’elle-même une surconscience prévenante qui est la conscience menteuse de la conscience inconsciente, et une superconscience englobante qui est la conscience sincère de la surconscience. Cette conscience plus que lucide et plus qu’odysséenne est la sincérité : non pas certes la franchise « intérieure » de l’innocence, mais la sincérité « ultérieure » pour grands adultes impurs. Dans le sincère, le menteur a enfin trouvé son maître; par rapport à la superconscience sincère, le mensonge lui-même apparaît superficiel et relativement inconscient. [...]

Ne cherchons pas plus longtemps : seul l’amour peut avoir le dernier mot, l’amour seul capable d’embrasser d’un coup toute la série indéfinie des réductions réflexives, et, par une intuition globale, d’enserrer ce devenir continu qui définit la personne. Voilà le « non plus ultra » de la régression subtilisante, la vraie gnose synthétique, consciente à la fois de la vérité, du mensonge et de soi. Même exploité, berné, indignement trahi, le bienfaiteur n’est jamais dupe."
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, Les vertus et l’amour, 1970)

E4.5.4.D_REF2_PH LA VERITE QUI TUE: "IL Y A UNE MANIERE D’AVOIR RAISON QUI EST ETRANGEMENT SUSPECTE... PIRE QUE L’IMPOSTURE". DIRE UNE VERITE "POUR TUER" EST MORALEMENT INFERIEUR A SE TROMPER DE BONNE FOI. La vérité n'est pas une fin en soi ; elle doit être subordonnée à la relation éthique.
"L’Éthique à Nicomaque aussi, elle dit qu’on a tort d’avoir raison quand on a raison sans savoir pourquoi : l’homme de bien, le [...] serait donc plutôt l’homme qui est dans le faux à bon escient ; mieux vaut faire volontairement des grimaces qu’être laid par nature. Le mensonge est cette grimace d’une conscience qui peut « les deux » [...]. Il ne s’agit pas d’intention, mais de savoir. Or nous disons que si l’inconscient a tort d’avoir raison, le trop-conscient n’a pas raison d’avoir tort, mais qu’il a au contraire deux fois tort, la conscience étant ici une circonstance aggravante de son erreur. [...]

Le mensonge est « chose mentale », cosa mentale … Et non pas même une « chose »! Ainsi tout est dans la mauvaise foi, c’est-à-dire dans le for intérieur vicié: car ce for intérieur est l’intimité même du mensonge. Nul ne ment « optima fide ». La mendacité, certes, s’oppose à la véracité consciente, mais plus encore à l’erreur de bonne foi ; nous dirons davantage : il y a une manière d’avoir raison qui est étrangement suspecte; et cette véridicité-là est pire que l’imposture, pire que la calomnie; par exemple quand on dit une vérité qui tue, et qu’on la dit pour tuer. A ce compte, plutôt se tromper en toute bonne foi que dire le vrai dans un esprit de malveillance… Si l’on a tort d’avoir raison sans savoir pourquoi l’on a raison, on a mille fois plus tort encore d’avoir raison sans amour ni charité. Ainsi prend tout son sens la distinction platonicienne [...], c’est-à-dire du mensonge qui est un acte et de l’hypocrisie qui est un état. Et Aristote précise : comme on peut commettre l’injustice [...] sans être injuste [...] , voler [...] sans être voleur [...], être enfin adultère [...], par accès et non par intention, ainsi dire le faux à l’occasion n’est pas encore être menteur."
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, Les Vertus et l’amour, 1970)

E4.5.4.D_REF3_PH TRUE JUSTICE AND LOVE REQUIRE "GENEROUS IMPROPRIETY" (BREAKING THE RULE) TO REMAIN BREATHABLE. The "loving lie denies the "flagrant truth of an instant" to save the "legitimacy in spirit."
"Il ne faut pas mentir, même au menteur, dit le puriste: ni tromper, même l’escroc; même l’escroc a droit à la justice! Et nous disons, au contraire : certes non, il ne faut pas rendre le mal pour le mal, en ce sens qu’il ne s’agit pas de faire mal au méchant pour le plaisir de lui faire mal; il ne faut pas se venger du méchant, mais il faut le mettre hors d’état de nuire, et sauver ce qui peut être sauvé, en tenant compte de la lourdeur créaturelle. Et ainsi la même généreuse improbité qui accepte la violence illégale comme un moyen de tuer la mort et de nier la négation nous dicte le mensonge aimant pour ménager la détresse. Sacrifiant la légalité d’un instant ponctuel à la légitimité en esprit, sacrifiant la rigueur formaliste des règles à l’obligation la plus générale, sacrifiant la correction grammatique à la vérité pneumatique, la justice congédie résolument l’intransigeance absolutiste; elle apporte avec elle les nuances et les gauchissements sans lesquels le droit serait irrespirable. Elle nous conseille tout bas cette même désobéissance qu’elle doit officiellement nous interdire. [...]

Par un renversement paradoxal, c’est donc l’amour, et non la vérité qui représente, en opposition avec l’automatisme de la franchise-réflexe, le principe du logos; c’est l’amour qui est profond, général et, somme toute, raisonnable, qui, au delà de l’instant, prend en considération l’avenir et la plus longue durée possible, qui tient compte de tous les aspects d’une question, et de proche en proche, conjointement avec le cas individuel, du bonheur universel; l’amour fait acception de la solidarité de tous les êtres. Dire comme on pense, ou ce qu’on est, et le dire point par point ou en contrepoint, c’est peut-être accepter la particularité superficielle comme un fait; et l’amour, lui, il n’accepte pas le donné comme un fait; il vise plus haut, plus loin, plus profond; ayant égard à toutes les conditions du problème, il nie l’évidence, il proteste contre la flagrante vérité d’un instant au nom d’un idéal meilleur, il retouche l’image impitoyable et mensongèrement véridique de la particularité-minute; et il est pneumatique en cela."
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, Les vertus et l’amour, 1970)

E4.5.4.D_REF4_PH L'AMOUR PRONONCE LE "FAIT QUE C'EST AINSI D'UNE PREFERENCE "INFONDEE, INJUSTIFIEE". C'EST LE SEUL MOYEN D'ARRETER LA REGRESSION A L'INFINI DES "POURQUOI" DE LA RAISON. L'amour n'a pas de "raison", il est la raison du choix.
"Un amour qui n’a pas à se justifier et qui ne doit d’explications à personne est dans le cas d’une grande décision irréfragable: la grande décision est sans appel parce que précisément elle prononce le quod ultime de la préférence infondée, indiscutée, injustifiée, immotivée et en tous points arbitraire. Seule la pétition absurde, seul le présupposé sans raison, peut être raison d’un choix effectif et non plus notionnel. C’est donc la décision capricieuse qui est le vrai sérieux; c’est la décision immotivée qui est seule profonde et irrévocable. La pure et simple présence de l’autre est à la fois cause nécessaire, c’est-à-dire négative? parce que « sine qua non », et cause suffisante, c’est-à-dire seule et unique, et nécessaire a fortiori; rien ne commence sans la première puisqu’elle est condition minimum et permission hypothétique, mais tout est stérile sans la seconde puisqu’elle est source effective et cause efficiente de l’amour; d’un amour qui arrive pour de bon et qui n’a pas de comptes à rendre."
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, Les vertus et l’amour, 1970)

E4.6. The Shift from “Veracity” (saying the truth) to “Meaning and Coherence” (holding together). Abandoning the obsession with "Truth" for "Resource" and "Coherence.”

E4.6.1. Truth vs. Meaning

E4.6.1.A. The Schism Between Intellect and Reason.
Truth belongs to the intellect (cognition, verifiable facts, data), while Meaning belongs to reason (thinking, unanswerable questions, and the "sixth sense"). The danger of confusing coherence with truth.

E4.6.1.A_REF1_PH

EL3.16. "THE NEED FOR REASON IS NOT INSPIRED BY THE QUEST FOR TRUTH BUT BY THE QUEST FOR MEANING. And truth and meaning are not the same. The basic fallacy, taking precedence over all specific metaphysical fallacies, is to interpret meaning on the model of truth [...]
The questions raised by our thirst for knowledge arise from our curiosity about the world, our desire to investigate whatever is given to our sensory apparatus… The questions raised by the desire to know are in principle all answerable by common-sense experience and common-sense reasoning; they are exposed to corrigible error and illusion in the same way as sense perceptions and experiences. [...] But the questions raised by thinking and which it is in reason’s very nature to raise — questions of meaning — are all unanswerable by common sense and the refinement of it we call science. The quest for meaning is « meaningless » to common sense and common-sense reasoning because it is the sixth sense’s function to fit us into the world of appearances and make us at home in the world given by our five senses; there we are and no questions asked. [...]
By posing the unanswerable questions of meaning, men establish themselves as question-asking beings. Behind all the cognitive questions for which men find answers, there lurk the unanswerable ones that seem entirely idle and have always been denounced as such. It is more than likely that men, if they were ever to lose the appetite for meaning we call thinking and cease to ask unanswerable questions, would lose not only the ability to produce those thought-things that we call works of art but also the capacity to ask all the answerable questions upon which every civilization is founded…"
(Hannah Arendt, The Life of the Mind, 1977)

E4.6.1.A_REF2_PH

EL3.73. THE NEED OF REASON IS NOT INSPIRED BY THE QUEST FOR TRUTH BUT BY THE QUEST FOR MEANING "The great obstacle that reason (Vernunft) puts in its own way arises from the side of the intellect (Verstand) and the entirely justified criteria it has established for its own purposes, that is, for quenching our thirst, and meeting our need, for knowledge and cognition… The need of reason is not inspired by the quest for truth but by the quest for meaning. And truth and meaning are not the same. The basic fallacy, taking precedence over all specific metaphysical fallacies, is to interpret meaning on the model of truth. [...]

Something very similar seems, at first glance, to be true of the modern scientist who constantly destroys authentic semblances without, however, destroying his own sensation of reality, telling him, as it tells us, that the sun rises in the morning and sets in the evening. It was thinking that enabled men to penetrate the appearances and unmask them as semblances, albeit authentic ones; common-sense reasoning would never have dared to upset so radically all the plausibilities of our sensory apparatus… Thinking, no doubt, plays an enormous role in every scientific enterprise, but it is the role of a means to an end; the end is determined by a decision about what is worthwhile knowing, and this decision cannot be scientific. [...]

The questions raised by our thirst for knowledge arise from our curiosity about the world, our desire to investigate whatever is given to our sensory apparatus… The questions raised by the desire to know are in principle all answerable by common-sense experience and common-sense reasoning; they are exposed to corrigible error and illusion in the same way as sense perceptions and experiences. Even the relentlessness of modern science’s Progress, which constantly corrects itself by discarding the answers and reformulating the questions, does not contradict science’s basic goal — to see and to know the world as it is given to the senses — and its concept of truth is derived from the common-sense experience of irrefutable evidence, which dispels error and illusion. But the questions raised by thinking and which it is in reason’s very nature to raise — questions of meaning — are all unanswerable by common sense and the refinement of it we call science. The quest for meaning is “meaningless” to common sense and common-sense reasoning because it is the sixth sense’s function to fit us into the world of appearances and make us at home in the world given by our five senses; there we are and no questions asked. [...]

To expect truth to come from thinking signifies that we mistake the need to think with the urge to know. Thinking can and must be employed in the attempt to know, but in the exercise of this function it is never itself; it is but the handmaiden of an altogether different enterprise. [...]
By posing the unanswerable questions of meaning, men establish themselves as question-asking beings. Behind all the cognitive questions for which men find answers, there lurk the unanswerable ones that seem entirely idle and have always been denounced as such. It is more than likely that men, if they were ever to lose the appetite for meaning we call thinking and cease to ask unanswerable questions, would lose not only the ability to produce those thought-things that we call works of art but also the capacity to ask all the answerable questions upon which every civilization is founded… While our thirst for knowledge may be unquenchable because of the immensity of the unknown, the activity itself leaves behind a growing treasure of knowledge that is retained and kept in store by every civilization as part and parcel of its world. The loss of this accumulation and of the technical expertise required to conserve and increase it inevitably spells the end of this particular world."
(Hannah Arendt, The Life of the Mind)

E4.6.1.A_REF2.1_PH

EL3.73.A. "TO BEGIN SOLVING THIS RIDDLE, Arendt turns to Kant’s famous distinction between Verstand, or intellect, which seeks to grasp what the senses perceive, and Vernunft, or reason, which is concerned with the higher-order desire for understanding the deeper meaning behind such sensory input; while intellect is driven by cognition, reason is concerned with the unknowable. [...]
This vital distinction between truth and meaning is also found in the fault line between science and common sense. Arendt considers how science’s over-reliance on Verstand might give rise to the very reductionism that becomes science’s greatest obstacle to tussling with the unknowable"
(Maria Popova, Brain pickings)

E4.6.1.A_REF3_LIT

EL3.124. CAPTURING THE MEANING OF INFORMATION, UNLIKE DATA, CANNOT BE DEFINED LOGICALLY DUE TO THE INHERENTLY ILLOGICAL NATURE OF HUMAN UNDERSTANDING. Despite advancements in technology, meaning is established through connections to familiar concepts. A search engine mapping these connections evolves from modeling collective thought to shaping it, ultimately controlling meaning similarly to how a traffic map influences traffic flow.
"What if you wanted to capture what everything known to the human species means? Thanks to Moore’s law it takes little time and less and less money to capture all the information that exists. But how do you capture meaning? Even in the age of all things digital, this cannot be defined in logical terms, because meaning, among humans, isn’t logical. Leibniz’s logical utopia fails to close. The best you can do, once you have collected all possible answers, is to invite well-defined questions and compile a pulse-frequency-weighted map of how everything connects. This system, in conjunction with illogical humans, will not only be observing and mapping the meaning of things; it will start constructing meaning as well, the way a dictionary doesn’t just catalog a language, but defines the language, over time. The meaning of something is established, among humans, by the degree to which that something connects to other familiar things. A search engine, mapping those connections, isn’t just a collective model of how we think; increasingly, it is how we think. In time it will control meaning, in the same way as the traffic map controls the flow of traffic, even though no one is in control."
(George Dyson, Analogia, 2020)

E4.6.1.A_REF4_PH

EL3.4.A. COHERENCE CANNOT BE ACCEPTED AS GIVING THE MEANING OF TRUTH "Many philosophers have been led to try to find some definition of truth which shall not consist in relation to something wholly outside belief. The most important attempt at a definition of this sort is the theory that truth consists in coherence. It is said that the mark of falsehood is failure to cohere in the body of our beliefs, and that it is the essence of a truth to form part of the completely rounded system which is The Truth.
There is, however, a great difficulty in this view, or rather two great difficulties. The first is that there is no reason to suppose that only one coherent body of beliefs is possible. [...] The other objection to this definition of truth is that it assumes the meaning of ‘coherence‘ known, whereas, in fact, ‘ coherence ‘ presupposes the truth of the laws of logic. Two propositions are coherent when both may be true, and are incoherent when one at least must be false. Now in order to know whether two propositions can both be true, we must know such truths as the law of contradiction. For example, the two propositions, ‘this tree is a beech’ and ‘this tree is not a beech’, are not coherent, because of the law of contradiction. But if the law of contradiction itself were subjected to the test of coherence, we should find that, if we choose to suppose it false, nothing will any longer be incoherent with anything else. Thus the laws of logic supply the skeleton or framework within which the test of coherence applies, and they themselves cannot be established by this test.
For the above two reasons, coherence cannot be accepted as giving the meaning of truth, though it is often a most important test of truth after a certain amount of truth has become known."
(Bertrand Russell, The Problems of Philosophy, 1912)

E4.6.1.A_REF4.1_PH

EL3.4.B. MINDS DO NOT CREATE TRUTH OR FALSEHOOD. THEY CREATE BELIEFS, BUT WHEN ONCE THE BELIEFS ARE CREATED, THE MIND CANNOT MAKE THEM TRUE OR FALSE "A belief is true when it corresponds to a certain associated complex, and false when it does not. Assuming, for the sake of definiteness, that the objects of the belief are two terms and a relation, the terms being put in a certain order by the ‘sense’ of the believing, then the two terms in that order are united by the relation into a complex, the belief is true; if not, it is false. This constitutes the definition of truth and falsehood that we were in search of. Judging or believing is a certain complex unity of which a mind is a constituent ; if the remaining constituents, taken in the order which they have in the belief, form a complex unity, then the belief is true ; if not, it is false.
         Thus although truth and falsehood are properties of beliefs, yet they are in a sense extrinsic properties. For the condition of the truth of a belief is something not involving beliefs, or (in general) any mind at all. But only the objects of the belief. A mind, which believes, believes truly when there is a corresponding complex not involving the mind, but only its objects. This correspondence ensures truth, and its absence entails falsehood. Hence we account simultaneously for the two facts that beliefs (a) depend on minds for their existence, (b) do not depend on minds for their truth.[....]
Minds do not create truth or falsehood. They create beliefs, but when once the beliefs are created, the mind cannot make them true or false, except in the special case where they concern future things which are within the power of the person believing, such as catching trains. What makes a belief true is a fact, and this fact does not (except in exceptional cases) in any way involve the mind of the person who has the belief."
(Bertrand Russell, The Problems of Philosophy, 1912)

E4.6.1.A_REF5_PH "VÉRITÉ 
Ce qui est vrai, ou le fait de l’être, ou le caractère de ce qui est vrai, ou le fait de l’être, ou le caractère de ce qui entre la pensée et son objet, entre l’esprit et la chose, entre la croyance, comme dit Russell, et le fait. Encore faut-il que l’objet, la chose ou le fait soient vraiment ce qu ils sont: il n y aurait pas de vérité-correspondance (veritas cognoscendi) s’il n’y avait d’abord vérité de l'être ou de l’événement (veritas essendi ou alèthéia). La vérité, dans les deux cas, est donc une abstraction (la vérité n’existe pas: il n’y a que des faits ou des énoncés vrais). Mais cette abstraction nous permet seule de penser. S’il n’y avait rien de commun, au moins pour la pensée, entre deux propositions vraies, il n’y aurait aucun sens à dire qu’elles le sont, ni donc, intellectuellement, à dire quoi que ce soit: tous les discours se vaudraient et ne vaudraient rien [...]
Veritas norma sui et falsi, disait Spinoza: la vérité est norme d’elle-même et du faux (Éth., II, 43, scolie). II n’y aurait, sans cette normativité immanente, aucun moyen de se tromper, ni de ne se tromper pas, aucun moyen de mentir ni d’être sincère. Par quoi une seule erreur reconnue, et ce n’est pas cela qui manque, un seul mensonge démasqué, et ils sont légion, suffit à attester au moins l’idée de vérité. Abstraction, donc, mais nécessaire. [...]
On en a jamais su, dans presque tous les domaines, et l'on pourrait croire que la notion de vérité en serait sortie renforcée. Il n’en est rien, et c’est peut-être, philosophiquement, la marque principale du siècle qui vient de s’achever. La vérité? Quel scientifique, aujourd’hui, prétendrait la connaître ? Quel artiste s’en préoccupe encore ? Et combien de philosophes vont jusqu’à dire qu’elle n’existe pas, qu’elle n’a jamais existé, qu’elle n’est que la dernière illusion dont il importe de s’affranchir ? 
Il y a à cela plusieurs raisons, tant théoriques que pratiques. 
Les raisons théoriques peuvent être rattachées, par commodité, à la révolution kantienne ou à ce qu’elle manifeste. Dès lors que nous sommes séparés du réel par les moyens mêmes qui nous servent à le connaître, il n’est que trop clair que nous ne pourrons jamais le connaître tel qu’il est en lui-même ou absolument. Nous ne connaissons pas l’être: nous ne connaissons que des phénomènes, que le monde tel qu’il apparaît à travers les formes de notre sensibilité et de notre entendement, que des objets que nous construisons (par notre perception, notre gage, nos sciences), qui sont sans rapport assignable avec les choses en soi. On dira que cela n’annule pas nos connaissances, que cela permet au contraire de les penser comme possibles et nécessaires... Certes. Mais une connaissance qui ne porte plus sur 1’être, est-ce encore une vérité ? « Le même est à la fois penser et être », disait Parménide, et c’est ce qui nous devient de moins en moins concevable. « La vérité consiste en l’être, disait Descartes, la vérité est une même chose avec l’être. » C’est cela même - l’être, la vérité, l'heureuse indistinction des deux - que nous avons perdu et qui nous sépare, philosophiquement, du bonheur. Nous voilà chassés du pays de la vérité, chassés du pays de l’être, puisque c’est le même, et c’est cet exil que nous appelons le monde. [...]
S’il n’y a pas de faits, s’il n’y a que des interprétations, selon la fameuse formule de la Volonté de puissance, le monde même se dérobe: il n’y a plus que des discours. [...]
Alors il n’y a plus que les rapports de force et le conflit - aussi inépuisable qu’épuisant - des interprétations. C’est le monde de la guerre, du marché, des médias. C’est notre monde. Plutôt, c’est ce que certains voudraient qu’il soit: un monde sans être, sans réalité, sans vérité, un monde sans conscience, un monde virtuel, répétons-le, où il n’y aurait plus que des signes et des échanges, que des simulacres et des marchands, un monde pour rire, comme un jeu de l’esprit, et cela m’a donné bien souvent, quand j’étais étudiant, comme une envie de pleurer... 
II faut en sortir. Comment ? Par un retour décidé à l'idée de vérité. Qu’on ne puisse jamais la connaître tout entière ni absolument, c’est aujourd’hui une évidence, avec laquelle je ne prétends aucunement rompre. Au reste, c’en était une déjà pour Montaigne, Pascal ou Hume. Mais ceux-la n'ont jamais prétendu pour autant qu’elle n’existait pas, ni qu’on ne pouvait aucunement y accéder. Ils ont simplement contesté, c’est tout autre chose, qu’on puisse le faire avec certitude. C’est ce qui distingue le sceptique (pour qui rien n’est certain) du sophiste (pour qui rien n’est vrai). Les deux positions ne sont ni identiques ni convergentes. Que rien ne soit certain, cela ne prouve pas que tout soit faux. Que tout soit douteux, cela ne prouve pas que rien ne soit vrai. Au contraire, même, puisqu’une proposition quelconque, fut-elle sceptique, n’est pensable que sous l'idée de vérité (c’est ce que j’appelle, corrigeant Spinoza par Montaigne, la norme de l'idée vraie donnée ou possible), ce qui interdit, ou devrait interdire, qu’elle prétende s’en libérer. Formidable culot de Nietzsche: « Qu’un jugement soit faux, ce n’est pas, à notre avis, une objection contre ce jugement » (Par-delà le bien et le mal, 1,4). Je pense très exactement le contraire, comme la quasi-totalité des scientifiques d’aujourd’hui, et c’est ce qui nous rattache, tous ensemble et malgré Nietzsche, aux Lumières. C’est ou Popper, disons-le en passant, nous permet d’échapper au relativisme intégral, qui ne serait qu’un nihilisme épistémologique. Qu’aucune théorie ne puisse jamais, en toute rigueur, être vérifiée expérimentalement, cela ne veut pas dire qu’elles se valent toutes: puisqu’elles peuvent au moins être réfutées ou falsifiées, puisqu’elles le sont en effet, voyez l’histoire des sciences, et se succèdent ainsi dans un ordre à la fois irréversible et normatif qui est celui du progrès même de nos connaissances. Cela rejoint une des fulgurances de Pascal: nous ne connaissons jamais la vérité directement, mais devons « prendre pour véritables les choses dont le contraire nous paraît faux » (De l’esprit géométrique, p. 352 voir aussi la pensée 905-385). [...]
Entre Ptolémée et Einstein, ce n’est pas la vérité qui a changé; c’est la connaissance que nous en avons. La vérité, elle, ne change pas, même quand elle est la vérité d’un univers où tout change. C’est ce qu’avait vu Spinoza: toute vérité est éternelle, et elle seule. C’est ce qu’avait vu Pascal: quelque respect qu on ait pour les Anciens, expliquait-il, « la vérité doit toujours avoir l’avantage, quoique plus ancienne que toutes les opinions qu’on en a eues, et que ce serait ignorer sa nature que de s’imaginer qu’elle ait commencé d’être au temps qu’elle a commencé d’être connue » (Sur le traité du vide, p. 232 b) C’est aussi ce qu’avait vu Frege par d’autres voies. La vérité n’a pas besoin d’être connue pour être vraie (« elle n’a besoin d’aucun porteur »), et c’est en quoi « l'être vrai d’une pensée est indépendant du temps » (Écrits logiques, p. 184 et 191). Soit un fait éphémère quelconque: j’écris l’article « Vérité » de mon Dictionnaire philosophique; ou bien, c’était l’exemple de Frege: il y a devant ma fenêtre un arbre couvert de feuillage vert. Rien de cela ne durera bien longtemps. Mais jamais la vérité qui s’y dévoile ne deviendra fausse ou mensongère. Dès lors qu’il est vrai que cet arbre, ici et maintenant, est vert, cette vérité est éternelle: que cet arbre soit vert, en ce moment que je dis, cela sera vrai encore quand il aura perdu ses feuilles ou sera mort. C’est en quoi le présent, dans « est vrai», n’indique pas « le présent de celui qui parle, remarque Frege, mais, si l’on permet l'expression, un tempus de l’intemporalité » (ibid., p. 193). Bref, toute vérité est éternelle, quoique aucune connaissance ne le soit, et c’est ce qui interdit de confondre les connaissances (toujours historiques) et les vérités (toujours éternelles) sur quoi elles portent. 
Où veux-je en venir ? A ceci que renoncer à la vérité, c’est renoncer à l'éternité en même temps qu’à l’être, ce qui nous sépare du monde même où nous sommes, et du seul lieu possible du salut. II n’y a que la connaissance qui libère et qui sauve. À la gloire d’Epicure et de Spinoza: l’éternité, c’est maintenant; le salut, c’est le monde; mais pour autant seulement que nous les habitons en vérité. [...]
Quant aux raisons pratiques du discrédit actuel de l’idée de vérité, elles tiennent à l'impossibilité où nous sommes, au moins depuis Hume, de combler l'écart qui sépare l’être du devoir-être, le vrai du bien, disons les vérités des valeurs. Sur ce point, fort débattu, je ne transige guère. Si la vérité est l’être (alèthéia) ou l'adéquation à l’être (veritas), je ne vois pas comment elle pourrait le juger ou porter sur ce qui devrait être. C’est où Hume et Spinoza se rejoignent, malgré tout ce qui les oppose, et je n’ai jamais pu, sur ce point majeur, m’éloigner d’eux. Une vérité est l'objet au moins possible d’une connaissance; une valeur, l’objet au moins imaginaire d’un désir. Cela nous introduit dans deux ordres différents - L'ordre théorique, l'ordre pratique qui ne pourraient être conjoints qu’en Dieu ou dans un sujet transcendantal. Mais je ne crois ni à l’un ni à l’autre. Est-ce à dire que nous sommes voués à la schizophrénie ? Nullement, puisque nous pouvons désirer le vrai et connaître nos désirs, au moins partiellement, puisque nous ne cessons d’y tendre - fût-ce pour constater, comme presque toujours, l’abîme qui les sépare. C’est ce qui nous fait hommes et qui nous voue à la philosophie. [...]"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.6.1.A_REF6_PH "RAISONNER 
C’est enchaîner des idées, de façon logiquement valide, ou que l’on croit telle. Tout raisonnement n’est pas pour autant une démonstration, ou plutôt il ne l’est, en toute rigueur, que dans les sciences: quand la logique fait une preuve suffisante (en mathématiques) ou quand l’expérimentation offre une réfutation possible (dans les sciences expérimentales: voir l’article « Falsifiabilité »). Nos autres raisonnements, par exemple en philosophie, restent sans preuve. C’est une raison pour s’en méfier, pas pour y renoncer."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.6.1.A_REF7_PH HUMANS ARE CONFINED TO THE "PATH" OF LIKELIHOOD BECAUSE DIRECT ACCESS TO THE "WHOLE" OF TRUTH IS STRUCTURALLY IMPOSSIBLE. Veritas (correspondence) is "by definition undemonstrable" because we cannot step outside our thoughts to compare them with reality.
"VRAI 
Ce qui est, ou ce qui est conforme à ce qui est. On peut distinguer ces deux sens, en parlant respectivement de veritas rei et de veritas intellectus, comme faisaient les scolastiques (la vérité de la chose, la vérité de l’entendement), ou bien en distinguant avec Heidegger l'alèthéia (la vérité comme dévoilement de l’étant, ce que j’appellerais plutôt la pure présentation du réel) et la veritas (la vérité comme accord ou conformité entre la pensée et le réel: l'adaequatio rei et intellectus des scolastiques, qui n’est vérité que d’une représentation). L'alèthéia serait la vérité originaire, telle qu’on la trouve chez les présocratiques. La veritas n’apparaîtrait, même en grec, qu’avec Platon: ce serait la forme, à la fois logique et métaphysique, de l’oubli de (le vrai n’étant plus vérité de l’étant mais vérité de l’homme). Ces deux conceptions n'en restent pas moins solidaires, et même indissociables. [...]
Les deux notions, ou les deux faces de la notion, restent pourtant toutes les deux problématiques, mais pour des raisons différentes l'alèthéia, parce qu’on ne peut rien en dire qui ne relève de la veritas. La veritas, parce que toute conformité entre la pensée et le réel est par définition indémontrable, puisqu’on ne connaît du réel que ce qu’on en pense. Cela ne prouve pas que tout ce que nous pensons soit faux, mais nous interdit de prouver absolument que telle ou telle de nos pensées soit vraie. À la gloire du pyrrhonisme. [...]

VRAISEMBLANCE 
[...] Comment distinguer une idée vraie d’une idée qui semble l'être ? Que nous ayons en effet une idée vraie, comme dit Spinoza (« Habemus enim ideam veram »), c’est tout à fait vraisemblable. Mais comment prouver que c’est vrai, puisque toute preuve le suppose ? Par l’évidence ? Mais comment distinguer ce qui est évident de ce qui semble l’être ? Par quoi le scepticisme est irréfutable, sans supprimer pour autant la vérité qu’il suppose. Sans « la norme de l’idée vraie donnée » (comme dit Spinoza) ou possible (comme je préfère dire), la vraisemblance même serait impensable. Mieux vaut penser que tout est vrai (« en Dieu », comme dit Spinoza, ou objectivement), et que nous n’avons accès à la vérité que par la vraisemblance. La vérité est le tout; le vraisemblable, pour nous, le chemin."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.6.1.B. The insufficiency of objective facts.
Science and logic can describe the mechanics of the world (truth) but remain silent on the "questions of life" (meaning), leaving a "blind space" or "emptiness" that we try to fill..

E4.6.1.B_REF1_PH

EL3.6.D. OUR THEORY OF TRUTH SUPPLIES THE POSSIBILITY OF DISTINGUISHING CERTAIN TRUTHS AS SELF-EVIDENT IN A SENSE WHICH ENSURES INFALLIBILITY "So long as we are dealing with derivative knowledge, we have the test of intuitive knowledge to fall back upon. But in regard to intuitive beliefs, it is by no means easy to discover any criterion by which to distinguish some as true and others as erroneous. In this question it is scarcely possible to reach any very precise result: all our knowledge of truths is infected with some degree of doubt, and a theory which ignored this fact would be plainly wrong. Something may be done, however, to mitigate the difficulties of the question.
         Our theory of truth, to begin with, supplies the possibility of distinguishing certain truths as self-evident in a sense which ensures infallibility. When a belief is true, we said, there is a corresponding fact, in which the several objects of the belief form a single complex. The belief is said to constitute knowledge of this fact, provided it fulfils those further somewhat vague conditions which we have been considering in the present chapter. But in regard to any fact, besides the knowledge constituted by belief, we may also have the kind of knowledge constituted by perception (taking this word in its widest possible sense). For example, if you know the hour of the sunset, you can at that hour know the fact that the sun is setting : this is knowledge of the fact by way of knowledge of truths ; but you can also, if the weather is fine, look to the west and actually see the setting sun : you then know the same fact by the way of knowledge of things.
         Thus in regard to any complex fact, there are, theoretically, two ways in which it may be known : (1) by means of a judgement, in which its several parts are judged to be related as they are in fact related ; (2) by means of acquaintance with the complex fact itself, which may (in a large sense) be called perception. Though it is by no means confined to objects of the senses."
(Bertrand Russell, The Problems of Philosophy, 1912)

E4.6.1.B_REF2_LIT

EL3.142. "MY OWN TASK THESE PAST TWENTY YEARS OR SO OF LIVING BY WORDS HAS BEEN TO TRY TO FIND OR MAKE A LANGUAGE TO DESCRIBE THE SUBTLETIES, THE INCALCULABLES, THE PLEASURES AND MEANINGS IMPOSSIBLE TO CATEGORIZE— AT THE HEART OF THINGS. My friend Chip Ward speaks of "the tyranny of the quantifiable," of the way what can be measured almost always takes precedence over what cannot: private profit over public good; speed and efficiency over enjoyment and quality; the utilitarian over the mysteries and meanings that are of use to our survival and to more than our survival, to lives that have some purpose and value that survive beyond us to make a civilization worth having. [...]

Ultimately the destruction of the Earth is due in part, perhaps in large part, to a failure of the imagination or to its eclipse by systems of accounting that can't count what matters. The revolt against this destruction is a revolt of the imagination, in favor of subtleties, of pleasures money can't buy and corporations can't command, of being producers rather than consumers of meaning, of the slow, the meandering, the digressive, the exploratory, the numinous, the uncertain. "
(Rebecca Solnit, The Longest War, 2013)

E4.6.1.B_REF3_LIT  A_Johan Deckmann_questions, answers

LEO TOLSTOY ACKNOWLEDGES THAT SCIENCE POSSESSES "KNOWLEDGE" AND "TRUTH" IN ITS OWN SPHERE, BUT REALIZES IT IS SILENT ON THE "QUESTIONS OF LIFE" (MEANING).
"Je cherchais partout et, grâce à ma vie passée dans l’étude et aussi à cause de mes relations avec le monde des savants, les savants de toutes sciences m’accueillirent et ne refusèrent pas de m’ouvrir toutes leurs connaissances, non pas par les livres seulement, mais par des conversations ; et ainsi je compris tout ce que la science répond à la question de la vie. Longtemps je ne pus croire que la science ne réponde rien de plus que ce qu’elle répond. Pendant bien longtemps, en considérant le ton grave et sérieux des sciences exactes, qui ne s’occupent guère du problème de la vie humaine, il me paraissait qu’elles renfermaient quelque chose que je ne comprenais pas. [...]

Ma question, celle qui, à cinquante ans, me conduisait au suicide, était des plus simples : elle est dans l’âme de tout homme, depuis l’enfant stupide jusqu’au plus sage vieillard ; sans elle, la vie est impossible, comme je l’ai éprouvé moi-même. Voici en quoi elle consistait :  — Qu’est-ce qui sortira de ce que je fais aujourd’hui ? de ce que je ferai demain ? Qu’est-ce qui sortira de toute ma vie ? On peut encore la formuler ainsi :  — Pourquoi dois-je vivre ? pourquoi dois-je faire quelque chose ? Ou encore autrement :  — Y a-t-il dans la vie un but qui ne se détruise pas par la mort inévitable qui m’attend ? [...]

Si l’on s’adresse aux sciences qui ne s’occupent pas de la solution des questions de la vie, mais qui répondent à ses questions scientifiques et spéciales, alors, on s’émerveille de la force de l’esprit humain, tout en sachant d’avance qu’il n’a rien à répondre aux questions de la vie.  Ces sciences ignorent ouvertement la question de la vie. [...]

La science expérimentale ne donne une signification positive et ne montre la grandeur de l’esprit humain que lorsqu’elle n’introduit pas dans ses investigations la cause finale. Et, au rebours, la science théorique n’est une science et ne montre la grandeur de l’esprit humain que lorsqu’elle écarte complètement les questions du rituel des phénomènes de causes et lorsqu’elle n’envisage l’homme que par rapport à la cause finale.  Cette science dans ce domaine dont elle est le pôle — est la métaphysique ou philosophie.  Cette science pose nettement la question :  — Que suis-je, et qu’est l’univers ? Et pourquoi suis-je et pourquoi est tout l’univers ?  Et, depuis qu’elle existe, elle répond toujours de la même manière. Que ce soit l’idée, la substance, l’esprit, ou la volonté que la philosophie désigne par le nom essence — essence de la vie qui est en moi et dans tout ce qui existe, — le philosophe répète toujours que l’essence est, — et que moi — je suis justement cette essence ; mais pourquoi elle est, il ne le sait pas et ne répond pas s’il est un penseur sincère. [...]

Et la philosophie, non seulement ne répond pas, mais c'est justement cela qu'elle-même demande.
Si elle est la vraie philosophie, tout son travail ne consiste qu'à poser clairement cette question. Et si elle tient fermement à son problème, elle ne peut répondre autrement qu'à la question : « que suis-je et qu'est tout le monde ? - tout et rien et à la question : « pourquoi ? - je ne sais pas. » Ainsi j'aurai beau tourner et retourner les questions théoriques de la philosophie, je ne recevrai pas même un semblant de réponse, non pas que, dans une sphère nette et expérimentée comme l'est la sienne, la réponse ne puisse se rapporter à ma question. Au contraire, le travail spirituel qui est son objet la porte justement vers ma question ; mais il n'y a pas de réponse, si ce n'est la même question présentée sous une forme beaucoup plus compliquée."
(Léon Tolstoï, Ma confession: la recherche de réponses aux questions profondes, 1882 - traduction Albert Savine)

E4.6.1.B_REF4_PH "IT IS A DANGEROUS ERROR TO CONFOUND TRUTH WITH MATTER-OF-FACT.Our life is governed not only by facts, but by hopes; the kind of truthfulness which sees nothing but facts is a prison for the human spirit."
(Bertrand Russell, Education and the good life)

E4.6.1.B_REF5_LIT. ALDO LEOPOLD DEFINES "SCIENTIFIC OBJECTIVITY" AS A USEFUL BUT LIMITED TOOL—IT PROVIDES "MATERIAL BLESSINGS" BUT ADHERES TO AN "IRONBOUND TABOO" THAT PREVENTS IT FROM HEARING THE "SONG OF SONGS." 
“There are men charged with the duty of examining the construction of the plants, animals, and soils which are the instruments of the great orchestra. These men are called professors. Each selects one instrument and spends his life taking it apart and describing its strings and sounding boards. This process of dismemberment is called research. The place for dismemberment is called a university. A professor may pluck the strings of his own instrument, but never that of another, and if he listens for music he must never admit it to his fellows or to his students. For all are restrained by an ironbound taboo which decrees that the construction of instruments is the domain of science, while the detection of harmony is the domain of poets. Professors serve science and science serves progress. It serves progress so well that many of the more intricate instruments are stepped upon and broken in the rush to spread progress to all backward lands. One by one the parts are thus stricken from the song of songs. If the professor is able to classify each instrument before it is broken, he is well content. […]
Science contributes moral as well as material blessings to the world. Its great moral contribution is objectivity, or the scientific point of view. This means doubting everything except facts; it means hewing to the facts, let the chips fall where they may. One of the facts hewn to by science is that every river needs more people, and all people need more inventions, and hence more science; the good life depends on the indefinite extension of this chain of logic. That the good life on any river may likewise depend on the perception of its music, and the preservation of some music to perceive, is a form of doubt not yet entertained by science.
Science has not yet arrived on the Gavilan, so the otter plays tag in its pools and riffles and chases the fat rainbow from under its mossy banks, with never a thought for the flood that one day will scour the bank into the Pacific, or for the sportsman who will one day dispute his title to the trout. Like the scientist, he has no doubts about his own design for living. He assumes that for him the Gavilan will sing forever.” 
(Aldo Leopold,  A Sand County Almanac: And Sketches Here and There)

E4.6.1.B_REF6_LIT MUSIL DEFINES THE "SOUL" AS THE RESPONSE TO THE INSUFFICIENCY OF THE RATIONAL WORLD. IT IS THE "BLIND SPACE," THE "PERPETUALLY MISSING HALF" THAT SHADOWS OUR ACTIONS. The "Soul" is the attempt to find Meaning (plenitude/wholeness) in a life that, if looked at only rationally, contains only empty space and movement.
"45. Muette rencontre de deux sommités. [...]
Même Arnheim et Diotime redoutaient de l’employer seul : dire que l’on a une âme grande, noble, lâche, téméraire ou basse, est encore concevable, mais dire tout simplement « mon âme », personne n’en aurait le courage. C’est un mot strictement réservé aux gens d’âge, et on ne peut le comprendre que si l’on admet que se fasse de plus en plus sensible au cours de la vie un quelque chose pour lequel on a le plus grand besoin d’un nom sans arriver à le trouver, jusqu’au jour où l’on accepte enfin à contrecœur d’adopter celui que l’on avait d’abord dédaigné. 
Comment donc doit-on décrire ce quelque chose ? Que l’on choisisse de rester immobile ou de marcher, l’essentiel n’est pas ce que l’on a devant soi, ce que l’on voit, entend, veut, saisit ou dompte. C’est devant vous un horizon, un demi-cercle ; mais il y a une corde qui réunit les deux extrémités de ce demi-cercle, et le plan de cette corde traverse le monde par le milieu. En avant de nous, visage et mains pointent hors de ce plan ; les sensations et les aspirations accourent à nous devant lui ; et personne ne doute que ce que l’on fait dans cet espace soit toujours raisonnable, ou du moins passionné ; cela signifie que les circonstances extérieures ont une manière de conditionner nos actions que tout le monde peut comprendre, et que, même si nous faisons, sous le coup de la passion, quelque chose d’incompréhensible, cet incompréhensible a encore, en fin de compte, sa manière propre. Mais si parfaitement compréhensibles et pleines que paraissent alors toutes choses, le sentiment obscur n’en demeure pas moins qu’il n’y a là qu’une demi-plénitude, une demi-compréhension. L’équilibre n’y est pas tout à fait, et l’homme avance pour ne pas chanceler, comme le fait un danseur de corde. Comme il avance à travers la vie et laisse derrière soi du vécu, le vécu et ce qui est encore à vivre forment une espèce de cloison, et le cheminement de l’homme finit par ressembler à celui du ver dans le bois, qui peut y sinuer à son aise et même retourner en arrière, mais n’en laisse pas moins toujours un espace vide derrière lui. C’est à ce sentiment effrayant d’un espace aveugle et amputé derrière tout espace rempli, à cette moitié perpétuellement manquante, même si chaque chose forme un tout, que l’on finit par remarquer ce que l’on appelle l’âme."
(Robert Musil, L'homme sans qualités, deuxième partie, 1930)

E1.7.D.6.5.b_REF1_LIT.wE4.6.1.B_REF6_LIT

 PAUL ARNHEIM, DESPITE HIS ORDINARY, COMMERCIAL BEHAVIOUR, USED TO EXPERIENCE A DEEP CONNECTION BETWEEN HIS INNER AND OUTER WORLDS. This experience, often associated with an original cosmic love, tended to fade with time, giving way to a different, more pragmatic reality that replaced wonder with routine.
"The Merchant King and the Fusion of Soul Trade Interests. Or again, all the paths of the mind start from the soul, but none leads back to it. [...] 
At that moment, even ambition fell silent, the events of the real world were as distant as the sounds heard behind a garden wall, it seemed to him that his soul had overflowed and was finally truly present. [...Even in this exalted state, it is true that the young Paul Arnheim, completely sure of himself, dined in some chic restaurant, frequented the best society, dressed with great care, and did everywhere what there was to do; But one could say that the distance from himself to himself was as great as from himself to beings to objects, that the outer world did not stop at his skin, and that the inner world did not shine only through the window of his reflection, but that these two worlds combined in an undivided presence and absence, as gentle, peaceful, and noble as a dreamless sleep. [...] Arnheim behaved exactly as usual, except that the events seemed to be charged with an elusive meaning: and behind the trembling flame, the inner man remained motionless, watching the outer man who, in front of it, was eating an apple while his tailor took the measurements of a suit.
Was it an illusion, or the shadow of a reality that we will never fully understand? The only answer that can be given is that all religions, at some stage in their evolution, have considered it a reality, as have all lovers, all romantics, and all men who have a special fondness for the moon, for spring, and for the radiant agony of the first days of autumn. But this feeling fades with time; one cannot say whether it evaporates or dries up, but one day one realizes that something else has taken its place, and one forgets it as quickly as one forgets unreal events, dreams and reveries. Since this experience of primordial cosmic love almost always goes hand in hand with first love, we believe that we know, not without relief, what value to attach to it, and we count it among the follies that one may commit only before obtaining the right to vote".
(Robert Musil, The man without Qualities, Volume 2, 1930)

E4.6.1.B_REF7_PH THE DEFENSE OF TRUTH AGAINST RELATIVISM: UNCERTAINTY AS POSITIVE KNOWLEDGE.
"INCERTITUDE (RELATIONS D'-) 
C’est une espèce de principe, qu’on appelle parfois « principe d’indétermination », et qu’on doit à Heisenberg. Ce dernier a montré que les conditions de l’observation modifiant, à l'échelle quantique, ce qu’on veut observer (en éclairant une particule, on modifie sa trajectoire), il n’est pas possible de déterminer à la fois la position et la vitesse d’une particule, voire de lui attribuer à la fois l'une et l’autre de ces deux caractéristiques. On en conclut parfois que l’esprit humain est voué à l'échec, qu’il n’y a pas de vérité, que l'idée même d’une connaissance scientifique s’écroule... C’est un contresens. La physique quantique est au contraire l'une des plus formidables victoires de l'esprit humain, l’un des plus grands progrès scientifiques de tous les temps [...]"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.6.1.B_REF8_PH QUELLE DIFFERENCE NEUROBIOLOGIQUE Y A-T-IL ENTRE UNE IDEE VRAIE ET UNE IDEE FAUSSE ? AUCUNE, M’ONT REPONDU TOUS ES NEUROLOGUES QUE J’AI INTERROGES.
"BIOLOGISME 
[...] Le biologisme, de nos jours, prend souvent la forme du neurobiologisme. Puisque toute pensée n’existe que dans le cerveau, la neurobiologie aurait vocation à régner sur toutes les sciences. C’est bien sûr un contresens (voir l’article « Démon de Changeux »). Quelle différence neurobiologique y a-t-il entre une idée vraie et une idée fausse ? Aucune, m’ont répondu tous es neurologues que j’ai interrogés. Mais alors la neurobiologie est incapable de rendre compte de sa propre vérité. Comment pourrait-elle mesurer celle des autres sciences ?"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.6.1.C. The Prison of Language and the Structures of the Mind.
How language, writing, and psychological systems mediate our access to reality. The transition from "living speech" (dialogue) to "system" (fixed truth).

E4.6.1.C_REF1_PH

EL.3.76. "FERDINAND SAUSSURE ARGUES WE ARE TRAPPED WITHIN LANGUAGE, advancing as a proof the fact different languages divide and depict reality, turning translation into a difficult task. The claim that languages haven't any relation to a reality outside themselves and that their meaning solely depends on differences between meanings of words in opposition with other words, language forming a closed system of meaning dispensing the real world. 
We can counter Saussure's position with the argument that although different languages divide the world differently and some words do not exist in some languages, it is difficult to imagine a word that could not be translated in another language using a sentence - if need be a paragraph. This argument implies though an implicit recognition that there isn't a unique correspondence theory of truth across cultures and languages: if each culture/language divides up the world differently, each will have a different truth corresponding to the differences in division."
(Saussure, In our time, BBC 4)

Listen to the podcast: https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00546yh

E4.6.1.C_REF2_PH  A_Claude Lalanne_L'homme à tête de chou [The man with cabbage head]_1970 /Claude Lalanne/ ; A_Serge Gainsbourg_Album cover for 'L'homme à tête de chou'_2008_(1) ; A_Serge Gainsbourg_Album cover for 'L'homme à tête de chou'_2008_(2)

SUR LA TENDENCE A PREFERER LES REPRESENTATIONS DU REEL AU REEL LUI-MEME
"L'écriture inspirait cette crainte à Platon. Voici l'essentiel des propos de Platon. Theut, l'inventeur des lettres, se présente chez le roi Thamous de Thèbes en Égypte, avec l'intention de lui vendre sa nouvelle technologie de communication! «Voilà, dit Theut, la connaissance, ô Roi, qui procurera aux Égyptiens plus de science et plus de souvenirs; car le défaut de mémoire et le manque de science ont trouvé leur remède – pharmakon – ». À quoi le roi répond: «Incomparable maître des arts, ô Theut, autre est l'homme capable de donner le jour à l'institution d'un art; autre, celui capable d'apprécier ce que cet art comporte de bénéfice ou d'utilité pour les hommes qui devront en faire usage. Et voilà que maintenant, en ta qualité de père des caractères de l'écriture, tu te complais à les doter d'un pouvoir contraire à celui qu'ils possèdent! Car cette invention, en dispensant les hommes d'exercer leur mémoire, produira l'oubli dans l'âme de ceux qui en auront acquis la connaissance. C'est du dehors, grâce à des caractères étrangers, et non du dedans et grâce à eux-mêmes, qu'ils se remémoreront les choses. Ce n'est donc pas pour la mémoire, c'est pour le ressouvenir que tu as trouvé un remède. Quant à la science, c'en est l'illusion et non la réalité que tu procures à tes élèves. [...] Ils se croiront compétents en une quantité de choses, alors qu'ils sont, dans la plupart, incompétents. Et ils seront plus tard insupportables parce qu'au lieu d'être savants, ils seront devenus savants d'illusion."
(L'Encyclopédie de L'Agora - 2009)

E4.6.1.C_REF3_PH LA PHILOSOPHIE ANTIQUE (LA QUETE DE SAGESSE/VERITE) EST FONDAMENTALEMENT ORALE : LA PAROLE VIVANTE PERMET LE DIALOGUE ET LA DECOUVERTE INTERIEURE. Le sens s’actualise dans le dialogue ("jeu des questions et des réponses").
"Plus que tout les autres, les ouvrages philosophiques sont liés à l'oralité, parce que la philosophie antique elle-même est, avant tout, orale. Il arrive sans doute qu'on se convertisse en lisant un livre, mais on se précipite alors chez le philosophe, pour entendre sa parole, pour l'interroger, pour discuter avec lui et avec d'autres disciples, dans une communauté qui est toujours un lieu de discussion. Par rapport à l'enseignement philosophique, l'écriture n'est qu'un aide-mémoire, un pis-aller, qui ne remplacera jamais la parole vivante.
La vraie formation est toujours orale, parce que seule la parole permet le dialogue, c'est-à-dire la possibilité pour le disciple de découvrir lui-même la vérité dans le jeu des questions et des réponses, la possibilité aussi pour le maître d'adapter son enseignement aux besoins du disciple. [...]"
(Pierre Hadot, Éloge de la philosophie antique, 1983)

E4.6.1.C_REF4_PH SELON LACAN, LE "SENTIMENT DE LA PRESENCE" EST CE QUI ECHAPPE AU LANGAGE, CE QUI EST "INVRAISEMBLABLE" (QU'IL Y AIT QUELQUE CHOSE PLUTOT QUE RIEN). C'est le point de contact avec l'Être que le langage refoule pour fonctionner.
"Si je considère l’ensemble des mots du dictionnaire, si grand soit-il, toute définition étant faite de mots, et chaque mot ne pouvant être défini que par d’autres définitions, il est fatal que le sens se trouve prisonnier d’un cercle qui le vide de tout contenu, et fait de lui un vase sans contenance. Pour le dictionnaire, un bateau sera toujours une grande barque, et la barque un petit bateau. Comme le fait remarquer à Lacan Jean Hyppolyte dans l’un des premiers séminaires, Hegel l’avait déjà compris – et c’est sans doute de Hegel que Lacan le tient, par la médiation de son ami Alexandre Kogève – quand, au premier chapitre de sa Phénoménologie, « La certitude sensible », il montre comment le mot, bien loin de désigner la chose, de l’indexer sans en modifier la nature, la nie au contraire en son immédiate présence, et soumet sa singularité sensible à l’universalité du concept, puisque, nous le savons, ce n’est jamais, à moins d’être nom propre – mais l’on ne saurait concevoir une langue qui ne serait faite que de noms propres ; une telle langue n’aurait qu’un cas : le vocatif, et ne pourrait pas articuler la moindre phrase – le langage doit se résoudre à perdre le monde devenu muet du seul fait que je le nome [...] Lacan énonce souvent que c’est là la condition qui permet de poser le monde comme objet de science, comme s’il fallait que « le grand Pan soit mort » pour que les hommes puissent le disséquer et le connaître – ce n’est donc pas seulement le sujet de l’énonciation qui est « castré », c’est d’une certaine façon la nature vivante elle-même, elle aussi privée de toute vitalité et abstraite dans le dispositif de l’expérimentation, comme le sujet, de son côté, doit renoncer à la vie animale qui est en lui pour se représenter sur l’écran du langage en une figure abstraite et dévitalisée. De ce deuil du monde, nous avons un témoignage par l’étonnement qui nous saisit quand, en de rares instants, nous nous ressouvenons de la présence de l’Etre au sein de laquelle nous sommes pourtant plongés, quand nous nous rappelons ce qu’il peut y avoir d’invraisemblable et d’incompréhensible dans le fait qu’il y ait autour de nous quelque chose et non pas plutôt rien. Car le langage ne peut dire le monde qu’en refoulant sa simple existence, et c’est proprement la conscience fugace, qui nous effleure encore en de rares moments, de l’intensité de l’Etre qui fait acte de présence, en nous comme autour de nous, qui nous coupe la parole et nous laisse sans mot dire [...] ce que Lacan nomme « le sentiment de la présence » : « Nous voyons en un certain point de cette résistance se produire ce que Freud appelle le transfert, c'est-à-dire ici l’actualisation de la personne de l’analyste. En l’extrayant de mon expérience, je vous ai dit tout à l’heure jusqu’au point le plus sensible, me semble-t-il, et le plus significatif du phénomène, le sujet ressent comme la brusque perception de quelque chose qui n’est pas si facile à définir, la présence. C’est un sentiment que nous n’avons pas tout le temps. Certes, nous sommes influencés par toutes sortes de présences, et notre monde n’a sa consistance, sa densité, sa stabilité vécue, que parce que, d’une certaine façon, nous tenons compte de ces présences, mais nous ne les réalisons pas comme telles. Vous sentez bien que c’est un sentiment dont je dirais que nous tendons sans cesse à l’effacer de la vie. Ça ne serait pas facile de vivre si, à tout instant, nous avions le sentiment de la présence avec tout ce qu’elle comporte de mystère. C’est un mystère que nous écartons et auquel, pour tout dire, nous nous sommes faits ».
Il est alors permis, pour conclure, de représenter le travail de l’analyse comme le raccommodage patient et précis d’un tissu deux fois béant, deux fois déchiré, du côté du sujet comme du côté de l’objet, une « reprise » – au sens où l’on appelait autrefois « repriseuse » ces ouvrières penchée sur le métier, un petit appareil électrique, qui reconstituaient maille par maille le tissu troué ou filé des bas des femmes, alors trop précieux pour être simplement jeté à la poubelle. Le réel, par sa seule présence, dilacère le tissu du langage, et le sujet porte le deuil de lui-même en acceptant de se traduire devant le tribunal de ce même langage qui ne le représente qu’en le dépouillant de son immédiate présence. Cette perte de la présence, du sujet pour lui-même comme du monde pour le sujet, elle ouvre la voie, par sa béance, au symptôme, qui exhibe un corps souffrant ou qui parle pour une blessure que nous ne savons pas dire. A la violence de la langue de la raison, qui fait du « je pense » le centre et le point d’appui de son discours comme de sa méthode, l’analyse oppose le vagabondage de la libre association, le parcours erratique, et non méthodique, d’un sujet fragmenté, morcelé, à la recherche de sa propre identité, travaillant à retisser le fil des correspondances, des échos de mémoire, pour reconstituer peu à peu la continuité d’une représentation, d’une tapisserie çà et là déchirée. [...]"
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Ecouter la folie, I- Le Symbolique, 2019)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Lacan/Ecouterlafolie/Ecouterlafolie1.html

E4.6.1.C_REF4.1_PH LE MUR DU LANGAGE : LACAN MONTRE QUE LE LANGAGE EST UN SYSTEME CLOS OU "LE SIGNIFIANT N'EST SIGNIFIANT QUE POUR UN AUTRE SIGNIFIANT". NOUS SOMMES ENFERMES DANS UNE "RITOURNELLE DE PAROLE VIDE", COUPES DE L'ÊTRE. L'enfant qui demande "Pourquoi ?" cherche à briser le cercle infernal des mots pour obtenir une "parole pleine" (le sens présent/l'être), refusant le renvoi infini des signes.
"Lacan n’enfermait-il pas l’homme dans la sphère du langage, ne le confinait-il pas derrière ce qu’il nommait « le mur du langage », s’interdisant ainsi de trouver un point d’appui au-delà, ou en-deçà, du système des signifiants, se privant d’une prise ferme et constante susceptible d’assurer la valeur du vrai ? Il faut ici rappeler que les mots, à l’inverse d’une croyance naïve, mais commune, ne désignent nullement les choses, mais des concepts qui changent avec les modes et passent avec le temps. En outre, selon une formule souvent répétée par Lacan, le signifiant n’est signifiant que pour un autre signifiant, selon un jeu de relations, ou d’implications réciproques, qui se poursuit indéfiniment, sans qu’on parvienne jamais à se saisir d’un sens qui serait à lui-même sa propre raison. [...] L’ordre symbolique est incapable par lui-même de se saisir du sens, il faudrait pour cela un saut qui franchisse le « mur du langage » et échappe à la ritournelle de la parole vide, pour se mettre en présence de l’être même qui donne le sens, brisant le cercle infernal des mots qui ne font que le déléguer sans jamais s’en emparer. On objectera peut-être qu’un système formel est pourtant capable d’établir des vérités, et même les plus simples, comme deux et deux font quatre, qui résume assez bien ce qu’on croit encore quand on ne croit plus en rien. [...] Toutefois, cette prétendue vérité est dépourvue de tout contenu réel, puisque si l’on transpose cette relation dans un système de numération binaire, 2 + 2 = 4 s’écrit : 10 + 10 = 100. Qui ne voit qu’on ne fait que jouer ici avec des signes de pure convention, que seule la relation demeure, quand la vérité prétend à l’absolu et non au relatif ? Nous dirons plutôt que de telles relations sont exactes, c'est-à-dire qu’elles sont conformes aux règles qui définissent la syntaxe de telle ou telle structure ; mais elles ne peuvent nullement prétendre être vraies. [...] Le désir d’échapper à cette parole vide, qui est désir d’une parole pleine, se laisse entendre dans les questions des enfants : interrogeant sur le pourquoi, et sur le pourquoi du pourquoi, et ainsi de suite sans trouver le terme, l’enfant, porté par le désir de vérité, presse l’adulte de lui rendre le sens présent, de se placer en dehors du jeu des signifiants plutôt que de relayer sans fin les références : « L’enfant, remarque Lacan, dès lors qu’il sait s’affairer et se débrouiller avec le signifiant, s’introduit à cette dimension qui lui fait poser à ses parents les questions les plus importunes, dont chacun sait qu’elles provoquent le plus grand désarroi et, à la vérité, des réponses presque nécessairement impotentes : Qu’est-ce que courir ? Qu’est-ce que c’est, taper du pied ? Qu’est-ce que c’est, un imbécile ? […] De quoi s’agit-il, dans ce moment de la question ? – sinon du recul du sujet par rapport à l’usage du signifiant lui-même, et de son incapacité à saisir ce que veut dire qu’il y ait des mots, que l’on parle, et que l’on désigne telle chose si proche par ce quelque chose d’énigmatique qui s’appelle un mot, ou un phonème »."
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Ecouter la folie, IV – La vérité, 2019)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Lacan/Ecouterlafolie/Ecouterlafolie4.html

E4.6.1.C_REF4.2_PH A_Fiona Banner_From the Full Stop Seascape series_2019_(1) ; A_Fiona Banner_From the Full Stop Seascape series_2019_(2) ; A_Fiona Banner_From the Full Stop Seascape series_2019_(3) /Fiona Banner/

E4.6.1. LA VERITE NE PARLE PAS AVEC DES CONCEPTS (SENS/RELAIS) MAIS AVEC DES "CHOSES" (REBUS). ELLE EST UN CONTACT BRUTAL AVEC LE REEL QUI DESARÇONNE LE SUJET. La vérité "montre le bout de son nez" dans les failles (lapsus, rêves, erreurs) ; elle est ce qui dérange l'habitude.
"Pourtant, le monde symbolique, dans l’enceinte duquel tout ce qui est humain demeure confiné, n’est pas un univers hermétique, totalement insensible aux pressions venues de l’extérieur. Des fissures lézardent la forteresse, des dépressions ouvrent des brèches dans le mur du langage. Certes, la vérité se dérobe dans l’ordre symbolique, mais elle montre néanmoins le bout de son nez dans les blancs du discours, dans le suspens de la parole. C’est un paradoxe sur lequel Lacan revient souvent : c’est toujours par l’erreur, par la confusion ou par la défaillance que la vérité vient à nous. Rêves, lapsus, équivoques, glissements de sens (métaphore et métonymie), dénégations, silences… Le refoulé disjoint la construction de la phrase, et la vérité parle non par ce que nous disons, mais par ce que nous ne voulons, ou pouvons pas dire. Et c’est parce qu’elle est toujours l’intruse qu’on n’attendait pas qu’il est si difficile de la faire taire. Ecoutons la voix de la vérité : « Pour que vous me trouviez où je suis, je vais vous apprendre à quel signe me reconnaître. Hommes, écoutez, je vous en donne le secret. Moi, la vérité, je parle […] Que vous me fuyiez dans la tromperie ou pensiez me rattraper dans l’erreur, je vous rejoins dans la méprise contre laquelle vous êtes sans refuge. Là où la parole la plus caute montre un léger trébuchement, c’est à sa perfidie qu’elle manque, je le publie maintenant et ce sera dès lors un peu plus coton de faire comme si de rien n’était, dans la société bonne ou mauvaise. Mais nul besoin de vous fatiguer à mieux vous surveiller. Quand même les juridictions conjointes de la politesse et de la politique décrèteraient non recevable tout ce qui se réclamerait de moi à se présenter de façon si illicite, vous n’en seriez pas quittes pour si peu, car l’intention la plus innocente se déconcerte à ne pouvoir plus taire que ses actes manqués sont les plus réussis, et que son échec récompense son vœu le plus secret ». Extraordinaire prosopopée de la vérité qui fait irruption au beau milieu d’une conférence prononcée à Vienne en novembre 1955, et dont le texte publié est le remaniement. [...] La vérité ne parle pas avec des mots – ou alors de sont des mots-valises, des mots tordus, des mots forgés, des mots d’esprit, des jeux de mots – elle parle avec des choses : « Le commerce au long cours de la vérité ne passe plus par la pensée : chose étrange, il semble que ce soit désormais par les choses, rebus », ajoute Lacan en faisant allusion à un célèbre passage de L’Interprétation des rêves de Freud, qui compare le rêve au rébus. Parler avec des choses, avec « la Chose » (das Ding), ce n’est pas référer le sens au sens en une série indéfinie de relais, mais montrer à l’inverse le sens en personne, lui laisser faire son apparition sur le théâtre de la représentation mentale. Là où la parole manque, la chose se montre, et là où la chose se montre, le sujet n’a plus de mots pour la dire. La vérité fait signe, là où on l’attendait le moins, non dans le fil de la démonstration, mais dans les lacunes du discours : « Je vagabonde, continue la Vérité en personne, dans ce que vous tenez pour être le moins vrai par essence : dans le rêve, dans le défi au sens de la pointe la plus gongorique et le nonsense du calembour le plus grotesque, dans le hasard, et non pas dans sa loi, mais dans la contingence, et je ne procède jamais plus sûrement à changer la face du monde qu’à lui donner le profil du nez de Cléopâtre ». [...]
Tantôt la vérité se laisse deviner, tantôt elle se dérobe. Et c’est pourquoi Lacan compare sa recherche, et par analogie les jeux de cache-cache de l’analyse ou de l’enseignement, à un « judo avec la vérité », soit l’art de faire trébucher le partenaire non pas en s’opposant frontalement à lui, mais en l’accompagnant au contraire dans les défaillances de son propre discours. La vérité ne saurait être fonction du seul formalisme de la démonstration – qui n’est que la vérification de la cohérence du discours, qui peut fort bien être démentiel par ailleurs : le délire du paranoïaque est infalsifiable, seule la vérité peut être réfutée. La vérité ne procède pas de la démonstration, elle naît de l’événement. [...] La vérité est ainsi toujours dérangeante, elle est nécessairement insolente, ce qui signifie exactement qu’elle fait perdre l’habitude : « A une vérité nouvelle, écrit Lacan, on ne peut se contenter de faire sa place, car c’est de prendre notre place en elle qu’il s’agit [ce qui nous impose de changer de place…] Elle exige qu’on se dérange. On ne saurait parvenir à s’y habituer seulement. On s’habitue au réel [qui n’est ici que l’ordre établi]. La vérité, on la refoule ». Ce à quoi nous ne sommes pas habitués nous paraît toujours nouveau, et c’est aussi ce que Lacan aime à rappeler en citant Max Jacob : « Le vrai est toujours neuf »."
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Ecouter la folie, IV – La vérité, 2019)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Lacan/Ecouterlafolie/Ecouterlafolie4.html

E4.6.1.C_REF4.3_PH LACAN DEFINIT LA VERITE NON COMME UNE ADEQUATION STABLE, MAIS COMME CE QUI "SORT DU PUITS" ET "SE MET A TABLE". LE CRITERE DE LA VERITE EST L'EFFET DE SURPRISE ET LA NOUVEAUTE ("LE VRAI EST TOUJOURS NEUF"). Elle rompt avec le "discours commun" (la répétition/l'habitude). La vérité s'édifie dans la "défaillance", le "déséquilibre" ou le "trébuchement" de la pensée.
"Qu’est-ce que c’est, « la vérité »? 
Eh bien, « psychanalyse » est un de ces mots-là. Au premier abord, tout le monde sent que ça veut dire quelque chose de bien à part, surtout que la vérité est articulée dans ce cas à un mode de représentation qui donne son style à ce mot « psychanalyse », et fait son emploi secondaire, si je puis dire. 
La vérité dont il s’agit, c’est exactement comme dans l’image mythique qui la représente. C’est quelque chose de caché dans la nature, et puis ça sort, tout aussi naturellement, ça sort du puits. Ça sort, mais ce n’est pas assez, ça dit. Ça dit des choses, et des choses qu’on n’attendait pas, généralement. C’est ce qu’on entend quand on dit — « Nous savons enfin la vérité sur cette affaire, quelqu’un a commencé à se mettre à table ». Quand on parle de « psychanalyse », je veux dire quand on se réfère à ce quelque chose qui fait son poids, c’est de cela qu’il s’agit, y compris l’effet corrélatif qui convient, qui est ce que l’on appelle l’effet de surprise. [...]
Quand une chose a été dite et redite un certain nombre de fois, ça passe dans la conscience commune. Comme disait Max Jacob, et comme je me suis plié à le reproduire à la fin d’un de mes écrits, « le vrai est toujours neuf », et pour être vrai, il faut qu’il soit neuf. Ce que dit la vérité, il faut donc croire qu’elle ne le dit pas tout à fait de la même façon que le discours commun le répète. [...]"
(Jacques Lacan, Mon enseignement, Place, origine et fin de mon enseignement, 1967)

"Ainsi les mots ne sont-ils pas que le meurtre de la chose, mais peuvent-ils aussi en porter la chair. Cette résurgence est de l’ordre de l’instantané, du surprenant et du fugitif; dans un éclair hallucinatoire l’animal réapparaît dans sa trace et c’est la chorégraphie des mots qui opère ce miracle. Ce n’est que dans le risque du mouvement que peut être côtoyée, rencontrée, la défaillance de la pensée, et dans l’espace de cette défaillance la possibilité d’un surgissement. 
Chorégraphie : danse des mots, chaque mot un mouvement en quête de son achèvement, chaque mot heureusement en échec, confiant le soin de sa mort espérée au suivant qui échouera tout autant. Chaque pas des danseurs sur la scène, un déséquilibre, et même un porté est attente de sa défaillance. C’est du mouvement que naît le sens parce que c’est le mouvement qui le constitue. Lacan en a pourtant fait ailleurs l’éblouissante démonstration : c’est dans le trébuchement que chacune de leurs pensées confie à la suivante que ses prisonniers trouvent - ou plutôt édifient — leur vérité, et gagnent leur liberté.
(François Gantheret, La nostalgie du présent - Psychanalyse et écriture, 2010)

E4.6.1.C_REF4.4_PH LE TROU DANS LA VERITE : "CE QUI EST A LA PORTEE DE LA MAIN, C’EST QUE LA SEXUALITE FAIT TROU DANS LA VERITE". LA VERITE N'EST PAS UN TOUT CLOS ; ELLE EST PERFOREE PAR LE SEXUEL, QUI EST L'ENDROIT OU LE SAVOIR S'EFFONDRE. Lacan définit le sexuel par "son inaptitude à s'avérer".
"On pourrait d’abord se dire qu’il devait bien y avoir une raison pour que la sexualité ait pris une fois la fonction de la vérité — si ce n’est qu’une fois, mais justement, ce n’est pas qu’une fois. Après tout, ce n’est pas une chose si irrecevable que ça, la sexualité. Et puis, si elle l’a prise une fois, elle la garde. 
Ce dont il s’agit est vraiment à la portée de la main, à la portée en tout cas du psychanalyste, qui nous en témoigne quand il parle de quelque chose de sérieux, et non pas de ses résultats thérapeutiques. Ce qui est à la portée de la main, c’est que la sexualité fait trou dans la vérité. 
La sexualité est justement le terrain, si je puis dire, où on ne sait pas sur quel pied danser à propos de ce qui est vrai. Et dans ce qui est rapport sexuel, se pose toujours la question de ce qu’on fait vraiment — je ne dirai pas quand on dit à quelqu’un « je t’aime », parce que tout le monde sait que c’est un propos de jean-foutre, mais quand on a avec ce quelqu’un un lien sexuel, quand ça a une suite, quand ça prend la forme de ce qu’on appelle un acte. 
Un acte, ce n’est pas simplement quelque chose qui vous sort comme ça, une décharge motrice, comme dit trop volontiers et trop souvent la théorie analytique — même si, à l’aide d’un certain nombre d’artifices, de frayages divers, ou même de l’établissement d’une certaine promiscuité, on arrive à faire de l’acte sexuel quelque chose qui n’a pas plus d’importance, dit-on, que de boire un verre d’eau. [...]
Ça ne va pas tout seul pour des raisons qui tiennent à l’essence de la chose, c’est-à-dire qu’on se demande dans cette relation, quand on est un homme par exemple, si on est vraiment un homme, ou pour une femme, si on est vraiment une femme. Ce n’est pas seulement la partenaire qui se le demande, c’est chacun, soi-même, qui se le demande, et ça compte, ça compte pour tout le monde, ça compte tout de suite. 
Alors, quand je parle d’un trou dans la vérité, ce n’est pas, naturellement, une métaphore grossière, ce n’est pas un trou au veston, c’est l’aspect négatif qui apparaît dans ce qui est du sexuel, justement de son inaptitude à s’avérer. C’est de ça qu’il s’agit dans une psychanalyse. 
Évidemment, quand on commence à emmancher les choses comme ça, on ne peut pas en rester là. A partir d’une question comme celle-là, qui est vraiment actuelle, présente pour tous, on peut faire sentir le renouvellement du sens de ce que depuis l’origine Freud a appelé « sexualité ». 
Les termes de Freud se raniment, y prennent une autre portée. On s’aperçoit même alors de leur portée littéraire, c’est-à-dire d’à quel point ils conviennent comme lettres à la manipulation de ce dont il s’agit. [...]"
(Jacques Lacan, Mon enseignement, Place, origine et fin de mon enseignement, 1967)

E4.6.1.C_REF4.5_PH A_Robert Barry_Tragic illusion_2019_(1) ; A_Robert Barry_Tragic illusion_2019_(2) /Robert Barry/

VERITE VS EXACTITUDE : LACAN DISTINGUE RADICALEMENT L'EXACTITUDE ("2+2=4", COHERENCE FORMELLE) DE LA VERITE ("ŒDIPE A TUE SON PERE"). LA VERITE N'EST PAS UNE ABSTRACTION LOGIQUE, MAIS UN DRAME EXISTENTIEL. La vérité est définie comme un Événement (une péripétie) et non un discours, qui brise le "miroir du fantasme" (l'imaginaire). La fin de l'analyse (comme la fin de la tragédie) révèle la "nudité" et "l'inhumanité" de la vie, offrant un choix ambivalent entre désolation et renaissance.
"Que la vérité soit de l’ordre de l’événement et non du discours nous permet de mieux comprendre l’intérêt que Lacan porte à la tragédie. [...] Cet accent mis sur le tragique ne s’écarte pourtant nullement de l’expérience analytique, dans la mesure où cette expérience est aux yeux de Lacan une épreuve de vérité, semblable en plus d’un point à la mécanique du drame tragique : « L’éthique de l’analyse n’est pas une spéculation sur l’ordonnance, l’arrangement de ce que j’appelle le service des biens [Lacan entend par là le système des valeurs d’échange]. Elle implique à proprement parler la dimension qui s’exprime dans ce qu’on appelle l’expérience tragique de la vie. C’est dans la dimension tragique que s’inscrivent les actions, et que nous sommes sollicités de nous repérer quant aux valeurs ». On sait que, selon Aristote, la tragédie compose un « système des actes » (sustasis tôn pragmatôn) rigoureusement enchaîné, et qui se joue en trois temps : le nœud qui se serre depuis longtemps (desis), le coup de théâtre (peripeteia) qui renverse le sens de l’action et le dénouement (lusis) qui voit naître un monde nouveau sur les ruines de l’ancien monde, trois moments qu’il est possible de lier aux trois passions tragiques, la terreur pendant le nouement, la pitié quand tombe le coup de la justice divine avec le coup de théâtre, et enfin la purification qui apaise les craintes d’un autre temps et nous apprend à nous réjouir de celui qui vient. Ce schéma tragique nous permet de comprendre que toute tragédie consiste en la mise en scène d’un retournement de situation, qui renverse l’ordre du monde et inverse le signe que les dieux affectent aux mortels, faisant passer les uns du malheur à la félicité, et les autres de la fortune à l’infortune. La tragédie met en scène le retour du refoulé (il y a toujours, dans la tragédie, un cadavre dans le placard), dans la mesure où elle nous fait assister à l’émergence de l’Evénement en ce qu’il a de plus essentiel, à la croisée des mondes et des destins, quand éclate enfin la vérité dont nous savons précisément que son essence est d’être événement et non simple discours. S’il n’est pas vrai, mais seulement exact, que deux et deux font quatre, il est en revanche bel et bien vrai qu’Œdipe a tué son père et épousé sa mère. Et c’est ainsi qu’en recourant à la ruse de la libre association, l’analyse débusque la vérité. Tandis que se brise en mille morceaux le miroir du fantasme, l’analysant découvre l’énigme de la vie, dans sa nudité, dans son indifférence et dans son inhumanité, au sein de laquelle tous les choix, s’il en est encore temps, sont encore possibles, selon que l’on prend le parti de renaître à la vie, ou de renoncer à vivre. [...] La leçon amère d’Œdipe à Colone : qu’il aurait mieux valu ne jamais naître et qu’il vaut mieux, une fois né, mourir au plus tôt. Lacan n’est pourtant pas sans savoir que la fin de la tragédie est plus complexe, ambivalente, à la fois désolante par l’effondrement de ce que l’on croyait être, et enivrante par l’espérance de ce qu’il est encore permis de devenir. [...]"
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Ecouter la folie, IV – La vérité, 2019)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Lacan/Ecouterlafolie/Ecouterlafolie4.html

E4.6.1.C_REF5_PH PIERRE HADOT ANALYSES HOW THE TRANSITION FROM "LIVING SPEECH" TO "WRITING/PRINTING" SHIFTED THE GOAL OF PHILOSOPHY FROM PEDAGOGICAL PERSUASION TO "ABSOLUTE CERTAINTY" AND "TOTAL COHERENCE.”
"La parole a son temps propre. Et les écrits des philosophes anciens restent proches de ce temps propre à la parole : ils ont en général la longueur qui correspond à une leçon. Même les commentaires se divisent à peu près de cette façon. Il en résulte que les philosophes anciens visent surtout à la cohérence à l’intérieur de leurs logoi concrets, dans les limites d’un discours ou d’une suite de discours déterminés, mais qu’ils s’en soucient beaucoup moins dans l’ensemble de leur œuvre. [...]
Mais c’est surtout avec l’imprimerie qu’une transformation radicale s’opère. L’écrit prend le pas sur la parole. Les jeux de langage philosophiques sont transformés par le fait même qu’au lieu d’être l’écho d’une parole vivante, ils sont destinés d’emblée à être lus. On tend à éliminer tous les éléments rhétoriques et pédagogiques, toutes les incertitudes, hésitations, reprises du discours parlé, pour présenter immédiatement les dogmes eux-mêmes. Mais en même temps, puisqu’il ne s’agit plus de persuader un auditoire concret, mais l’auditoire universel, l’homme en soit, il s’agit d’assurer les conditions d’une certitude absolue : de Descartes à Hegel, tel sera le souci majeur des philosophes. Cohérence totale, valeur universelle pour une raison impersonnelle, voilà ce que veulent posséder désormais les philosophies qui deviennent proprement des systèmes."
(Pierre Hadot, Wittgenstein et les limites du langage, 2004-2014)

E4.6.1.C_REF6_PH "SYSTÈME 
Un assemblage ordonné, où chaque élément est nécessaire à la cohésion de l'ensemble et en dépend. Ainsi parle-t-on du système nerveux, du système solaire, d’un système informatique... En philosophie, se dit le plus souvent d’un ensemble d’idées, « mais en tant qu’on les considère dans leur cohérence, comme dit Lalande, plutôt que dans leur vérité ». C’est que la pluralité même des systèmes, qui sont incompatibles (puisque chacun prétend dire la vérité sur le tout), interdit de les accepter tous comme de se satisfaire de l’un d’entre eux. Les systèmes sont tous faux, disait Alain, et le système des systèmes, qui serait l’hégélianisme (parce qu’il fait de contradiction entre les systèmes le moteur de son propre développement), l’est tout autant. La cohérence n’est pas une preuve. Elle n’est même pas un argument. Combien de délires cohérents ? La paranoïa, disait Freud, est « un système philosophique déformé » ; un système philosophique, ajouterais-je volontiers, est une paranoïa réussie. J’aime  mieux les hésitations ou contradictions de la vie, et les aspérités du réel. 
Que beaucoup de grandes philosophies soient des systèmes n’est pourtant pas niable. Presque toutes y tendent, et pour des raisons nécessaires. II faut bien faire tenir ensemble ce qu’on croit vrai. II faut bien penser tout, ou le tout, en tout cas essayer. Le système est l'horizon de la philosophie: ce serait une pensée où tout se tient, comme une synthèse supérieure, comme un tout organique, et cela vaut mieux qu’une pensée qui se délite ou se contredit. Reste à n’en être pas dupe, à ne pas prendre cette cohérence pour une preuve, à ne pas s’y enfermer. Pourquoi faudrait-il te soumettre à ce que tu as déjà pensé ? C’est la vérité qui importe, non la cohérence. La pensée d’aujourd’hui, non celle d’hier. Le réel, non le système. Quelle tristesse que de ne penser que pour se donner raison! Quelle folie que de prétendre posséder l’horizon! Les sciences donnent un meilleur exemple, qui font tout pour être contredites, et qui avancent par là. Platon, en philosophie, donne un meilleur exemple, et Montaigne, et Pascal. L’horizon est devant nous; il faut donc avancer. Le système serait la philosophie de Dieu. [...]"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.6.1.C_REF7_PH PARANOIA MAINTAINS A "DELUSIONAL SYSTEM" THAT PRESERVES "ABSOLUTE CLARITY AND ORDER" DESPITE BEING FALSE.
"PARANOÏA 
[...] La paranoïa, disait Kraepelin, est caractérisée par « le développement lent et insidieux d’un système délirant durable et impossible à ébranler, et par la conservation absolue de la clarté et de l'ordre dans la pensée, le vouloir et l'action ». Hypertrophie du moi, survalorisation de la logique, délire d’interprétation ou de persécution, méfiance, rigidité inadaptabilité... Elle est plus fréquente chez les hommes. C’est l'un des points qui l'opposent à l’hystérie, plus fréquente chez les femmes, mais ce n’est pas le seul. À les considérer comme types de personnalités davantage que comme pathologies, l'hystérie et la paranoïa constituent comme deux pôles opposés: l’hystérique ne vit que pour les autres, ou plutôt que pour soi et par eux; le paranoïaque que pour soi et contre les autres. L’hystérique est influençable, séducteur, peu soucieux de logique, avide d’amour; le paranoïaque est inébranlable, soupçonneux, raisonneur, avide de pouvoir. L’un vit pour plaire: c’est un comédien ou un histrion. L’autre, pour dominer : c’est un petit chef ou un tyran. L’un multiplie les signes; l'autre, les interprétations. L’un voudrait faire de sa vie une oeuvre d’art; l'autre, un système. « On pourrait presque dire, remarquait Freud, qu’une hystérie est une oeuvre d’art déformée, qu’une névrose obsessionnelle est une religion déformée, et un délire paranoïaque, un système philosophique déformé » (Totem et tabou, II). Cela ne prouve rien contre l'art, ni contre la philosophie; mais devrait pousser à une certaine vigilance, contre l'esthétisme et les systèmes."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.6.1.C_REF8_PH CLEMENT ROSSET AFFIRME QUE LE LANGAGE EXPRIME UNE PENSEE "GENERALE ET COLLECTIVE" ET NON PRIVEE, ET QU'IL N'Y A PAS DE "SENS UNIQUE". Nous sommes enfermés dans la fragmentation des propositions.
"Car ce qui s’exprime dans le langage, outre qu’il n’exprime pas une pensée particulière ou « privée » mais bien une pensée générale et collective tant dans son élaboration que dans sa destination, n’exprime pas non plus une vérité analogue aux autres vérités, comme si le sens qui fait vraie une vérité était le même que celui qui fait vraie une autre vérité, mais autant de vérités différentes qu’il y a de propositions différentes. C’est pourquoi nous pouvons connaître telle et telle vérité. Mais pas la vérité, et encore moins le sens unique qui éluciderait ce qu’il y a de vrai dans toutes les propositions différentes. Car il y a autant de sens qu’il y a de vérités exprimables et de propositions pour les énoncer."
(Clément Rosset, Le démon de la tautologie, 1997)

E4.6.1.C_REF9_PH BAUDRILLARD ARGUES THAT THE UNCONSCIOUS IS NOT A DISCOVERY, BUT A "LOGISTICAL DEVICE" INVENTED TO TRAP MADNESS WITHIN A SYSTEM OF MEANING. The goal is to ensure that "nothing escapes the empire of meaning." 
"Au défi de la folie il a été répondu historiquement par l'hypothèse de l'inconscient. L'Inconscient est ce dispositif logistique qui permet de penser la folie (et plus généralement toute formation étrange et anomalique) dans un système de sens élargi au non-sens et qui fera sa place aux terreurs de l'insensé, désormais intelligibles sous les espèces d'un certain discours : psychisme, pulsion, refoulement, etc. Ce sont les fous qui nous ont forcés à l'hypothèse de l'inconscient, mais c'est nous en retour qui les y avons piégés. Car si, dans un premier temps, l'Inconscient semble se retourner contre la Raison et y porter une subversion radicale, s'il semble encore chargé du potentiel de rupture de la folie, plus tard il se retourne contre elle, car il est ce qui permet de l'annexer à une raison plus universelle que la raison classique. [...]

On les avait enterrés sous le silence, on les enterre sous la parole, parole « différente » certes, mais sous le mot d'ordre de la « différence », comme jadis sous celui de l'unité de la Raison, ne nous y trompons pas, c'est le même ordre qui s'avance. Impérialisme de la raison, néo-impérialisme de la différence.

L'essentiel est que rien n'échappe à l'empire du sens, au partage du sens. Bien sûr, derrière tout ça, rien ne nous parle, ni les fous, ni les morts, ni les enfants, ni les sauvages, et au fond nous ne savons rien d'eux, mais l'essentiel est que la Raison ait sauvé la face, et que tout échappe au silence.

Jamais on n'échappe à la réversion qui suit n'importe quelle exclusion. Refuser la raison aux fous mène tôt ou tard à démanteler les bases de cette raison - les fous se vengent en quelque sorte. Refuser aux bêtes l'inconscient, le refoulement, le symbolique (confondu avec le langage), c'est, tôt ou tard, on peut l'espérer, dans une sorte de décrochement ultérieur à celui de la folie et de l'inconscient, remettre en cause la validité de ces concepts, tels qu'ils nous régissent aujourd'hui, et nous distinguent. Car si jadis le privilège de l'Homme était fondé sur le monopole de la conscience, aujourd'hui il l'est sur le monopole de l'inconscient.

Les bêtes n'ont pas d'inconscient, c'est bien connu. Elles rêvent sans doute, mais ceci est une conjecture d'ordre bio-électrique, et le langage leur manque, qui seul donne un sens au rêve en l'inscrivant dans l'ordre symbolique. Nous pouvons phantasmer sur elles, projeter sur elles nos phantasmes et croire partager cette mise en scène. Mais ceci nous est commode - en fait les bêtes ne nous sont intelligibles ni sous le régime de la conscience, ni sous celui de l'inconscient. Il ne s'agit donc pas de les y forcer, mais juste à l'inverse de voir en quoi elles mettent en cause cette hypothèse même de l'inconscient, et à quelle autre hypothèse elles nous forcent. Tel est le sens, ou le non-sens de leur silence.

Tel fut le silence des fous, qu'il nous a forcés à l'hypothèse de l'inconscient - telle est la résistance des bêtes, qu'elle nous force à changer d'hypothèse. [...]"
(Jean Baudrillard, Simulacres et simulation, 1981)

E4.6.1.D. Life Against "The Truth": The Existential Revolt.
The Nietzschean and Existentialist turn. Meaning is found in vitality, individual integrity, and the courage to live without absolute answers.

E4.6.1.D.a. The Vitality of Illusion.
Deconstructing the will to absolute truth and recognizing the life-preserving nature of error, distortion, and "the apparent world."

E4.6.1.D.a_REF1_PH ACCORDING TO NIETZSCHE, SINCE LIFE IS INHERENTLY DECEPTIVE, THE DESIRE FOR ABSOLUTE TRUTH IS A DESIRE FOR A "DIFFERENT WORLD"—A JUDGMENT AGAINST LIFE.
"Le concept de vérité qualifie un monde comme véridique. Même dans la science la vérité des phénomènes forme un « monde » distinct de celui des phénomènes. Or un monde véridique suppose un homme véridique auquel il renvoie comme à son centre. — Qui est cet homme véridique, qu’est-ce qu’il veut ? Première hypothèse : il veut ne pas être trompé, ne pas se laisser tromper. Parce qu’il est « nuisible, dangereux, néfaste d’être trompé ». Mais une telle hypothèse suppose que le monde lui-même soit déjà véridique. Car dans un monde radicalement faux, c’est la volonté de ne pas se laisser tromper qui devient néfaste, dangereuse et nuisible. En fait, la volonté de vérité a dû se former « malgré le danger et l’inutilité de la vérité à tout prix ». Reste donc une autre hypothèse : je veux la vérité signifie je ne veux pas tromper, et « je ne veux pas tromper comprend comme cas particulier, je ne veux pas me tromper moi-même ». — Si quelqu’un veut la vérité, ce n’est pas au nom de ce qu’est le monde, mais au nom de ce que le monde n’est pas. Il est entendu que « la vie vise à égarer, à duper, à dissimuler, à éblouir, à aveugler ». Mais celui qui veut le vrai veut d’abord déprécier cette haute puissance du faux : il fait de la vie une « erreur », de ce monde une « apparence ». Il oppose donc à la vie la connaissance, il oppose au monde un autre monde, un outre-monde, précisément le monde véridique. Le monde véridique n’est pas séparable de cette volonté, volonté de traiter ce monde-ci comme apparence. Dès lors, l’opposition de la connaissance et de la vie, la distinction des mondes, révèlent leur vrai caractère : c’est une distinction d’origine morale, une opposition d’origine morale. L’homme qui ne veut pas tromper veut un monde meilleur et une vie meilleure ; toutes ses raisons pour ne pas tromper sont des raisons morales. Et toujours nous nous heurtons au vertuisme de celui qui veut le vrai : une de ses occupations favorites est la distribution des torts, il rend responsable, il nie l’innocence, il accuse et juge la vie, il dénonce l’apparence. « J’ai reconnu que dans toute philosophie les intentions morales (ou immorales) forment le germe véritable d’où naît la plante tout entière… Je ne crois donc pas à l’existence d’un instinct de connaissance qui serait le père de la philosophie. » — Toutefois, cette opposition morale n’est elle-même qu’un symptôme. Celui qui veut un autre monde, une autre vie, veut quelque chose de plus profond : « La vie contre la vie. » II veut que la vie devienne vertueuse, qu’elle se corrige et corrige l’apparence, qu’elle serve de passage à l’autre monde. Il veut que la vie se renie elle-même et se retourne contre soi : « Tentative d’user la force à tarir la force. » Derrière l’opposition morale, se profile ainsi une contradiction d’une autre espèce, la contradiction religieuse ou ascétique."
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche et la philosophie, 1962)

E4.6.1.D.a_REF2_PH NIETZSCHE POSE LA THESE RADICALE QUE LA FAUSSETE D'UN JUGEMENT N'EST PAS UNE OBJECTION S'IL EST "CONSERVATEUR DE VIE". Il renverse la hiérarchie : la vie prime sur la vérité. Renoncer aux "fictions logiques" c'est mourir.
"La fausseté d’un jugement ne suffit pas à constituer à nos yeux une objection contre un jugement; c’est en cela peut-être que notre nouveau langage (1) rend le son le plus étrange. La question est de savoir jusqu’à quel point il favorise la vie, conserve la vie, conserve l’espèce (2), et peut-être permet l’élevage de l’espèce ; et nous sommes fondamentalement portés à affirmer que les jugements les plus faux (dont font partie les jugements synthétiques a priori) sont pour nous les plus indispensables, que sans tenir pour valides les fictions logiques, sans un étalon de mesure de la réalité référé au monde purement inventé de l’inconditionné, de l’identique à soi, sans une falsification constante du monde par le biais du nombre, l’homme ne pourrait vivre, — que renoncer aux jugements faux serait renoncer à la vie, nier la vie. Reconnaître la non-vérité pour condition de vie : c’est là à coup sûr une manière dangereuse de résister aux sentiments de valeur (3) habituels; et cela suffit pour qu’une philosophie qui s’y risque se place d’emblée par-delà bien et mal (4)"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Par-delà bien et mal, 1886)

Note (1): "Nietzsche fournit ici une indication absolument capitale sur le statut de son texte, et, par conséquent, la manière de lire qui sera requise du lecteur pour déchiffrer ses aphorismes. Rappelons que ce « nouveau langage » est nécessaire d’abord pour se démarquer de l’usage ordinaire, y compris en philosophie, du langage, et des pièges, distorsions, suggestions et erreurs dont il est constamment responsable. La langue nietzschéenne se caractérise donc par des procédures de constitution spécifiques, en particulier la construction progressive d’un réseau métaphorique, l’écriture par déplacements et renvois, qui se substituent désormais à l’ordre démonstratif, linéaire ou systématique, de l’enchaînement conceptuel."
Note (2): "Comparer avec les analyses développées dans le premier livre du Gai savoir, en particulier dans les paragraphes 1 et 4"
Note (3): "Après avoir évoqué à plusieurs reprises les « évaluations » (Werthschatzungen), c’est-à-dire les « appréciations de valeur », Nietzsche en souligne à présent une caractéristique fondamentale : il s’agit de reconnaître le privilège de l’affectivité dans l’établissement des valeurs — contre la tradition philosophique défendant le primat de la raison. "
Note (4): " Première notation destinée à expliciter le sens du titre de l’ouvrage : elle souligne la priorité des valeurs morales (la croyance fondamentale à l’existence d’un bien en soi) sur les valeurs « spéculatives », ou « gnoséologiques » — valeurs secondes, dérivées —, que sont la vérité et son opposé, la fausseté. Rappelons que c’est le paragraphe 344 du Gai savoir qui offre la démonstration la plus claire de cette affirmation. Ce texte fournit par ailleurs un nouvel exemple de la nécessité d’une lecture rétrospective : il est particulièrement éclairant de relire le premier aphorisme à la lumière des analyses développées dans ce paragraphe 4. On verra désormais clairement apparaître la justification du caractère problématique de l’enquête philosophique identifiée à la recherche de la vérité; on comprendra mieux également, désormais, le sens des dernières lignes de ce paragraphe inaugural et de son allusion au danger du projet nietzschéen de radicalisation du questionnement."
(Patrick Wotling)

E4.6.1.D.a_REF2.1_PH "LA VERITE-MENSONGE  
Nietzsche a présenté La Naissance de la tragédie comme une réflexion sur la valeur de la vie et le mensonge qu’elle entraîne. Métaphysique, morale, religion et science sont les formes que l’homme donne à son mensonge, c’est-à-dire à son art. Le monde est absurde, le philosophe et l’artiste en ont conscience. Le véritable univers est à la fois un univers unique (non pas double) et faux, cruel, contradictoire, trompeur, absurde: c’est contre cette négation d’univers que lutte l’homme en créant un univers superposé, fictif. La joie est le produit de cette création et elle s’exprime comme sentiment de puissance : « L’homme jouit du mensonge comme de sa puissance » ; « nous avons besoin de mensonge» (Kroner XVl, p. 853). Cette nécessité du mensonge est elle-même un aspect du caractère épouvantable et problématique de l’existence."
(Angèle Kremer-Marietti, Introduction à La naissance de la tragédie de Nietzsche, 1994)

E4.6.1.D.a_REF3_PH DELEUZE ARGUES AGAINST THE IDEA OF AN ABSTRACT, UNIVERSAL "TRUTH". Instead, he posits that truth is the "effectuation of a meaning" or the "realization of a value." 
"Il n’y a pas de vérité qui, avant d’être une vérité, ne soit I’effectuation d’un sens ou la réalisation d’une valeur. La vérité comme concept est tout à fait indéterminée. Tout dépend de la valeur et du sens de ce que nous pensons. Les vérités, nous avons toujours celles que nous méritons en fonction du sens de ce que nous concevons, de la valeur de ce que nous croyons. Car un sens pensable ou pensé est toujours effectué, dans la mesure où les forces qui lui correspondent dans la pensée s’emparent aussi de quelque chose, s’approprient quelque chose hors de la pensée. Il est clair que jamais la pensée ne pense par elle-même, pas plus qu’elle ne trouve par elle-même le vrai. La vérité d’une pensée doit être interprétée et évaluée d’après les forces ou la puissance qui la déterminent à penser, et à penser ceci plutôt que cela. Quand on nous parle de la vérité « tout court », du vrai tel qu’il est en soi, pour soi ou même pour nous, nous devons demander quelles forces se cachent dans la pensée de cette vérité-là, donc quel est son sens et quelle est sa valeur."
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche et la philosophie, 1962)

E4.6.1.D.a_REF4_PH "RICHE DE SENS, PROFOND, MERVEILLEUX".
"[...] Qui nous dévoilerait l’essence du monde nous donnerait à tous la plus fâcheuse désillusion. Ce n’est pas le monde comme chose en soi, mais le monde comme représentation (comme erreur) qui est si riche de sens, si profond, si merveilleux, portant dans son sein bonheur et malheur. [...]"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain, Aphorisme 29, 1878)

E4.6.1.D.a_REF5_PH "ERREUR 
LE PROPRE DE L'ERREUR EST QU’ON LA PREND POUR UNE VERITE. C’est ce qui distingue l'erreur de la simple fausseté (on peut savoir qu’on dit faux, non savoir qu’on se trompe) et qui lui interdit d’être volontaire. L’erreur n’est donc pas seulement une idée fausse: c’est une idée fausse qu’on croit vraie. En tant qu’elle est fausse, elle n'a d'être que négatif (voir « Fausseté »). Mais en tant qu'elle est idée, elle fait partie du réel ou du vrai (on se trompe réellement: l’erreur est vraiment fausse). [...]"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E1.6.B.1.7.d.iii_REF1.1_PH.wE4.6.1.D.a.

"SOME LIVES ARE EXEMPLARY, OTHERS NOT; and of exemplary lives, there are those which invite us to imitate them, and those which we regard from a distance with a mixture of revulsion, pity, and reverence. It is, roughly, the difference between the hero and the saint (if one may use the latter term in an aesthetic, rather than a religious sense). Such a life, absurd in its exaggerations and degree of self-mutilation - like Kleist's, like Kierkegaard's - was Simone Weil's. I am thinking of the fanatical asceticism of Simone Weil's life, her contempt for pleasure and for happiness, her noble and ridiculous political gestures, her elaborate self-denials, her tireless courting of affliction; and I do not exclude her homeliness, her physical clumsiness, her migraines, her tuberculosis. No one who loves life would wish to imitate her dedication to martyrdom, or would wish it for his children or for anyone else whom he loves. Yet so far as we love seriousness, as well as life, we are moved by it, nourished by it. In the respect we pay to such lives, we acknowledge the presence of mystery in the world - and mystery is just what the secure possession of the truth, an objective truth, denies. In this sense, all truth is superficial; and some (but not all) distortions of the truth, some (but not all) insanity, some (but not all) unhealthiness, some (but not all) denials of life are truth-giving, sanity-producing, health-creating, and life-enhancing."
(Susan Sontag, Simone Weil, 1963)

E4.6.1.D.a_REF6_PH " [...] QUI NOUS DEVOILERAIT L’ESSENCE DU MONDE NOUS DONNERAIT A TOUS LA PLUS FACHEUSE DESILLUSION.Ce n’est pas le monde comme chose en soi, mais le monde comme représentation (comme erreur) qui est si riche de sens, si profond, si merveilleux, portant dans son sein bonheur et malheur. [...]"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain, Aphorisme 29, 1878)

E4.6.1.D.b. The Ethics of Revolt and Integrity.
The individual's courage to create meaning. Moving from the "herd" of conformity to the solitude of the "Sage" and the "Rebel."

E4.6.1.D.b_REF1_LIT

EL3.100. IT IS THE STORIES WE BELIEVE THAT SHAPE WHAT WE BECOME, SHAPE WHAT THE WORLD IS 
"All models of reality are drawn by an imagination filtered through our fears and our hopes in a proportion mediated by our conditioning, which is always the function of story. It is the stories we believe that shape what we become, shape what the world is. In an age when commercial media have become the great conditioning engine of society, selling models of reality because they are profitable and not because they are true, it matters all the more what stories we believe, and what we resist."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.6.B.1.7.d.ii_REF1.1_PH.wE4.6.1.D.b.

SUSAN SONTAG ARGUES THAT CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY VALUES TRUTHS BORN FROM SUFFERING "Ours is an age which consciously pursues health, and yet only believes in the reality of sickness. The truths we respect are those born of affliction. We measure truth in terms of the cost to the writer in suffering - rather than by the standard of an objective truth to which a writer's words correspond. Each of our truths must have a martyr.

Such writers as Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Dostoevsky, Kafka, Baudelaire, Rimbaud, Genet - and Simone Weil - have their authority with us precisely because of their air of unhealthiness. Their unhealthiness is their soundness, and is what carries conviction.

Perhaps there are certain ages which do not need truth as much as they need a deepening of the sense of reality, a widening of the imagination. I, for one, do not doubt that the sane view of the world is the true one. But is that what is always wanted, truth? The need for truth is not constant; no more than is the need for repose. An idea which is a distortion may have a greater intellectual thrust than the truth; it may better serve the needs of the spirit, which vary. The truth is balance, but the opposite of truth, which is unbalanced, may not be a lie."
(Susan Sontag, Simone Weil, 1963)

E4.6.1.D.b_REF2_PH RALPH WALDO EMERSON SHIFTS THE LOCUS OF CERTAINTY FROM EXTERNAL "TRUTH" (SOCIAL CONSENSUS, LAWS, BADGES) TO INTERNAL INTEGRITY.
"Ah, that he could pass again into his neutrality! Who can thus avoid all pledges and, having observed, observe again from the same unaffected, unbiased, unbribable, unaffrighted innocence- must always be formidable. He would utter opinions on all passing affairs, which being seen to be not private but necessary, would sink like darts into the ear of men and put them in fear. These are the voices which we hear in solitude, but they grow faint and inaudible as we enter into the world. Society every- where is in conspiracy against the manhood of every one of its members. Society is a joint-stock company, in which the men:- bers agree, for the better securing of his bread to each share- holder, to surrender the liberty and culture of the eater. The virtue in most request is conformity. Self-reliance is its aversion. It loves not realities and creators, but names and customs. [...]

Whoso would be a man, must be a nonconformist. He who would gather immortal palms must not be hindered by the name of goodness, but must explore if it be goodness. Nothing is at last sacred but the integrity of your own mind. Absolve you to yourself, and you shall have the suffrage of the world. I remember an answer which when quite young I was prompted to make to a valued adviser who was wont to importune me with the dear old doctrines of the church. On my saying, "What have I to do with the sacredness of traditions, if I live wholly from within?" my friend suggested-"But these impulses may be from below, not from above." I replied, "They do not seem to me to be such; but if I am the Devil's child, I will live then from the Devil." No law can be sacred to me but that of my nature. Good and bad are but names very readily transferable to that or this; the only right is what is after my constitution; the only wrong what is against it. A man is to carry himself in the presence of all opposition as if every thing were titular and ephemeral but he. I am ashamed to think how easily we capitulate to badges and names, to large societies and dead institutions. Every decent and well-spoken individual affects and sways me more than is right. I ought to go upright and vital, and speak the rude truth in all ways."
(Ralph Waldo Emerson, Self-reliance, 1841)

E4.6.1.D.b_REF2.1_PH EMERSON ARGUES THAT CONFORMITY MAKES A MAN "FALSE IN ALL PARTICULARS," EQUIPPING HIM WITH A "PRISON-UNIFORM."
"Few and mean as my gifts may be, I actually am, and do not need for my own assurance or the assurance of my fellows any second- ary testimony.

What I must do is all that concerns me, not what the people think. This rule, equally arduous in actual and in intellectual life, may serve for the whole distinction between greatness and meanness. It is the harder because you will always find those who think they know what is your duty better than you know it. It is easy in the world to live after the world's opinion; it is easy in solitude to live after our own; but the great man is he who in the midst of the crowd keeps with perfect sweetness the independence of solitude.

The objection to conforming to usages that have become dead to you is that it scatters your force. It loses your time and blurs the impression of your character. If you maintain a dead church, contribute to a dead Bible-society, vote with a great party either for the government or against it, spread your table like base housekeepers-under all these screens I have difficulty to detect the precise man you are: and of course so much force is with- drawn from your proper life. But do your work, and I shall know you. Do your work, and you shall reinforce yourself. A man must consider what a blind-man's-buff is this game of conformity. If I know your sect I anticipate your argument. I hear a preacher announce for his text and topic the expediency of one of the institutions of his church. Do I not know beforehand that not possibly can he say a new and spontaneous word? Do I not know that with all this ostentation of examining the grounds of the institution he will do no such thing? Do I not know that he is pledged to himself not to look but at one side, the permitted side, not as a man, but as a parish minister? He is a retained attorney, and these airs of the bench are the emptiest affectation. Well, most men have bound their eyes with one or another hand- kerchief, and attached themselves to some one of these communities of opinion. This conformity makes them not false in a few particulars, authors of a few lies, but false in all particulars. Their every truth is not quite true. Their two is not the real two, their four not the real four; so that every word they say chagrins us and we know not where to begin to set them right. Meantime nature is not slow to equip us in the prison- uniform of the party to which we adhere. We come to wear one cut of face and figure, and acquire by degrees the gentlest asinine expression. There is a mortifying experience in particular, which does not fail to wreak itself also in the general history; I mean "the foolish face of praise," the forced smile which we put on in company where we do not feel at ease, in answer to conversation which does not interest us. The muscles, not spontaneously moved but moved by a low usurping wilfulness, grow tight about the outline of the face, with the most disagreeable sensation.

For nonconformity the world whips you with its displeasure. And therefore a man must know how to estimate a sour face. The by-standers look askance on him in the public street or in the friend's parlor. If this aversion had its origin in contempt and resistance like his own he might well go home with a sad countenance; but the sour faces of the multitude, like their sweet faces, have no deep cause, but are put on and off as the wind blows and a newspaper directs."
(Ralph Waldo Emerson, Self-reliance, 1841)

E4.6.1.D.b_REF3_PH LE SAGE NE CONSIDERE PERSONNE COMME COUPABLE. CELA OFFRE UNE ISSUE AU "BESOIN D'AVOIR RAISON" EN DISSOLVANT LA NOTION MEME DE CULPABILITE. Mais nous n'avons pas l'organe (l'oreille) pour comprendre l'absence de blâme.
"L’OREILLE QUI FAIT DÉFAUT. — « On appartient à la populace tant que l’on fait toujours retomber la faute sur les autres ; on est sur le chemin de la vérité lorsque l’on ne rend responsable que soi-même; mais le sage ne considère personne comme coupable, ni lui-même, ni les autres. » — Qui dit cela ? — Epictète, il y a dix-huit cents ans — On l’a entendu, mais on l’a oublié. — Non, on ne l’a pas entendu et on ne l’a pas oublié : il y a des choses qu’on n’oublie pas. Mais l’oreille faisait défaut pour entendre, l’oreille d’Epictète. — il se l’est donc dit lui-même à I'oreille ? murmure du solitaire sur la place tumultueuse.  [...]"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain II, Aphorisme 386, 1878)

E1.5.C.4.1.c_REF1_PH.wE4.6.1.D.b.
"Seeking what is true is not seeking what is desirable. If in order to elude the anxious question: “What would life be?” one must, like the donkey, feed on the roses of illusion, then the absurd mind, rather than resigning itself to falsehood, prefers to adopt fearlessly Kierkegaard’s reply: “despair.” Everything considered, a determined soul will always manage. […]

From the evening breeze to this hand on my shoulder, everything has its truth. Consciousness illuminates it by paying attention to it. Consciousness does not form the object of its understanding, it merely focuses, it is the act of attention, and, to borrow a Bergsonian image, it resembles the projector that suddenly focuses on an image. The difference is that there is no scenario, but a successive and incoherent illustration. In that magic lantern all the pictures are privileged. Consciousness suspends in experience the objects of its attention. Through its miracle it isolates them. Henceforth they are beyond all judgments. This is the “intention” that characterizes consciousness. But the word does not imply any idea of finality; it is taken in its sense of “direction”: its only value is topographical. [...]

I don’t know whether this world has a meaning that transcends it. But I know that I do not know that meaning and that it is impossible for me just now to know it. What can a meaning outside my condition mean to me? I can understand only in human terms. What I touch, what resists me — that is what I understand. And these two certainties — my appetite for the absolute and for unity and the impossibility of reducing this world to a rational and reasonable principle — I also know that I cannot reconcile them. What other truth can I admit without lying, without bringing in a hope I lack and which means nothing within the limits of my condition?

If I were a tree among trees, a cat among animals, this life would have a meaning, or rather this problem would not arise, for I should belong to this world. I should be this world. [...]

The absurd is born of this confrontation between the human need and the unreasonable silence of the world. […]

I draw from the absurd three consequences, which are my revolt, my freedom, and my passion. By the mere activity of consciousness I transform into a rule of life what was an invitation to death — and I refuse suicide."
(Albert Camus, The Myth of Sisyphus, 1942)

E4.6.1.D.b_REF4_PH FOR NIETZSCHE, THE TRUE PHILOSOPHER SUBJECTS TRUTH TO "THE HARDEST TEST... THE TEST OF SENSE AND VALUE." He aims for the "untimely, which are concepts created "against the time" for the benefit of a "time to come".
"Lorsque quelqu’un demande à quoi sert la philosophie, la réponse doit être agressive, puisque la question se veut ironique et mordante. La philosophie ne sert pas à l’Etat ni à l’Eglise, qui ont d’autres soucis. Elle ne sert aucune puissance établie. La philosophie sert à attrister. Une philosophie qui n’attriste personne et ne contrarie personne n’est pas une philosophie. Elle sert à nuire à la bêtise, elle fait de la bêtise quelque chose de honteux. Elle n’a pas d’autre usage que celui-ci : dénoncer la bassesse de pensée sous toutes ses formes. Y a-t-il une discipline, hors la philosophie, qui se propose la critique de toutes les mystifications, quels qu’en soient la source et le but ? Dénoncer toutes les fictions sans lesquelles les forces réactives ne l’emporteraient pas. Dénoncer dans la mystification ce mélange de bassesse et de bêtise, qui forme aussi bien l’étonnante complicité des victimes et des auteurs. Faire enfin de la pensée quelque chose d’agressif, d’actif et d’affirmatif. Faire des hommes libres, c’est-à-dire des hommes qui ne confondent pas les fins de la culture avec le profit de l’Etat, de la morale ou de la religion. Combattre le ressentiment, la mauvaise conscience qui nous tiennent lieu de pensée. Vaincre le négatif et ses faux prestiges. Qui a intérêt à tout cela, sauf la philosophie ? La philosophie comme critique nous dit le plus positif d’elle-même : entreprise de démystification. Et qu’on ne se hâte pas de proclamer à cet égard l’échec de la philosophie. Si grandes qu’elles soient, la bêtise et la bassesse seraient encore plus grandes, si ne subsistait un peu de philosophie qui les empêche à chaque époque d’aller aussi loin qu’elles voudraient, qui leur interdit respectivement, ne serait-ce que par ouï-dire, d’être aussi bête et aussi basse que chacune le souhaiterait pour son compte. Certains excès leur sont interdits, mais qui leur interdit sauf la philosophie ? Qui les force à se masquer, à prendre des airs nobles et intelligents, des airs de penseur ? [...]

II est possible de le demander encore : à quoi sert la philosophie ? Il est possible de le demander parce que l’image du philosophe seulement l’ami de la sagesse, ami en un sens ambigu, c’est-à-dire I’anti-sage, celui qui doit se masquer de sagesse pour survivre. On en fait un ami de la vérité, lui qui fait subir au vrai l’épreuve la plus dure, dont la vérité sort aussi démembrée que Dionysos : l’épreuve du sens et de la valeur. L’image du philosophe est obscurcie par tous ses déguisements nécessaires, mais aussi par toutes les trahisons qui font de lui le philosophe de la religion, le philosophe de l’Etat, le collectionneur des valeurs en cours, fonctionnaire de l’histoire. L’image authentique du philosophe ne survit pas à celui qui sut l’incarner pour un temps, à son époque. Il faut qu’elle soit reprise, réanimée, qu’elle trouve un nouveau champ d’activité à l’époque suivante. Si la besogne critique de la philosophie n’est pas activement reprise à chaque époque, la philosophie meurt, et avec elle l’image du philosophe et l’image de l’homme libre. La bêtise et la bassesse ne finissent pas de former des alliages nouveaux. La bêtise et la bassesse sont toujours celles de notre temps, de nos contemporains, notre bêtise et notre bassesse. A la différence du concept intemporel d’erreur, la bassesse ne se sépare pas du temps, c’est-à-dire de ce transport du présent, de cette actualité dans laquelle elle s’incarne et se meut. C’est pourquoi la philosophie a, avec le temps, un rapport essentiel : toujours contre son temps, critique du monde actuel, le philosophe forme des concepts qui ne sont ni éternels ni historiques, mais intempestifs et inactuels. L’opposition dans laquelle la philosophie se réalise est celle de l’inactuel avec l’actuel, de l’intempestif avec notre temps. Et dans l’intempestif, il y a des vérités plus durables que les vérités historiques et éternelles réunies : les vérités du temps à venir. Penser activement, c’est « agir d’une façon inactuelle, donc contre le temps, et par là même sur le temps, en faveur (je l’espère) d’un temps à venir ». La chaîne des philosophes n’est pas la chaîne éternelle des sages, encore moins l’enchaînement de l’histoire, mais une chaîne brisée, la succession des comètes, leur discontinuité et leur répétition qui ne se ramènent ni à l’éternité du ciel qu’elles traversent, ni à l’historicité de la terre qu’elles survolent. Il n’y a pas de philosophie éternelle, ni de philosophie historique. L’éternité comme l’historicité de la philosophie se ramènent à ceci : la philosophie, toujours intempestive, intempestive à chaque époque."
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche et la philosophie, 1962)

E4.6.1.E. Perception, Art, and the Shared World.
Aesthetics as the bridge between the inner and outer worlds. How Art, Cinema, and Beauty allow us to create and share meaning without needing the rigid concepts of "scientific truth."

E4.6.1.E.a. The Aesthetic Mode: From "Absolute Truth" to "Sensible Meaning".
Meaning is not a fixed truth to be found, but a living "gesture" or "invention" derived from our physical intertwining (chiasm) with the world.

E4.6.1.E.a_REF1_PH BY REJECTING THE POSITION OF THE "MASTER" (WHO TEACHES THE "WHOLE" OR ABSOLUTE TRUTH) AND ADOPTING THE "NIETZSCHEAN ARTIST" PERSONA, BARTHES ARGUES THAT COHERENCE IS AN ACTIVE CREATION RATHER THAN A PASSIVE RECEPTION OF FACTS.
"Le maître c'est celui qui enseigne le tout (son tout): et je n'enseigne pas le tout (du bouddhisme, du scepticisme). Ma visée = n'être ni maître ni disciple, mais, au sens nietzschéen (donc, aucun satisfecit), « artiste ». [...]

→ j'essaye de créer, d'inventer un sens avec des matériaux libres, que je libère de leur « vérité » historique, doctrinale je prends des bribes référentielles (en des bribes de lecture) je leur fais subir une anamorphose: procédé connu de tout l'art maniériste. "
(Roland Barthes, Le neutre, Cours au Collège de France, 1977-1978)

E4.6.1.E.a_REF2_PH "KAIROS 
C’est un mot grec, qu’on peut sans trop de cuistrerie utiliser en français, faute d’équivalent tout à fait satisfaisant. Le kairos, c’est l'occasion propice, le moment opportun ou favorable autrement dit, le bien, comme on voit chez Aristote, mais dans le temps (Éthique à Nicomaque, I, 4). Le thème, chez Aristote, est antiplatonicien. Le bien n’est pas une essence éternelle ou absolue. II se dit en plusieurs sens, tout comme l’être, et nul ne peut le faire, dans le monde sublunaire, sans tenir compte du devenir: faire le bien, c’est le faire quand il faut (le faire trop tôt trop tard, ce n’est pas le faire, ou c’est le faire moins bien qu’il ne faudrait ou qu’il n’aurait fallu: ainsi en médecine, en politique ou en morale). Le kairos est comme la juste mesure, si l’on veut, mais appliquée au temps: c’est « la juste mesure de l’irréversible » (Francis Wolff)."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.6.1.E.a_REF3_PH FOR KANT, "THERE IS NO CONCEPT OR MODEL OF BEAUTY" AND ART IS "THE OBLIVION OF SCIENCE." Beauty is not a "truth" to be known but a "meaning" to be experienced and shared.
"Une forme belle est insécable. Ce n’est pas une connaissance ou une préparation à la connaissance. On ne peut pas s´élever des corps à l’idée de beauté (en ceci Kant est anti-platonicien) car sinon on pourrait la définir. Hors, il n’y a pas de concept ou de modèle de la beauté. Notre faculté de juger le beau procède du principe du jugement réfléchissant: On part d’une forme, d’une intuition (et non d’un concept) et on s´élève à l’idée qu’elle évoque en nous.
En rupture avec Platon qui indexe la beauté sur la bonté et la vérité. Le jugement réfléchissant implique une supériorité de la nature sur l’art. L’art est une expérience de la liberté.

"Judgment in general is the faculty of thinking the particular as contained under the universal. If the universal (the rule, principle, or law) is given, then the judgment which subsumes the particular under it is determinative." "But if only the particular is given and the judgment has to find the universal for it, then this power is merely reflective."
(Immanuel Kant, Critique of Judgment, Introduction IV 1790)

L’art est la beauté adhérente en opposition avec la beauté libre. La beauté adhérente s’indexe à un jugement de perfection, de finalité de ce que la chose doit être alors que la beauté libre ne présuppose aucun concept de ce que la chose doit être et plaît pour elle même. La critique de la beauté adhérente c’est la critique de l’aspect artisanal de l’art.

"There are two kinds of beauty: free beauty (pulchritudo vaga) or merely dependent beauty (pulchritudo adhaerens). The first presupposes no concept of what the object ought to be; the second does presuppose such a concept and the perfection of the object in accordance therewith." "Flowers are free natural beauties. Hardly anyone but a botanist knows what sort of a thing a flower ought to be... consequently [the judgment] is based on no perfection of any kind, no internal purposiveness, to which the collection of the manifold is referred."
(Immanuel Kant, Critique of Judgment, Section §16, 1790)

L’art à son plus haut point d’accomplissement c’est l’oubli de la science, du rapport pratique, de la connaissance et de la morale. L’art réussi se laisse oublier comme art. Il efface ses traces. 

"Nature is beautiful because it looks like Art; and Art can only be called beautiful if we are conscious of it as Art while yet it looks like Nature." "...that is, the punctiliousness [of the artist] must not appear; it must not show a trace of the rule having been before the eyes of the artist and having fettered his mental powers."
(Immanuel Kant, Critique of Judgment, Section §45, 1790)

Le génie artistique n’est pas un technicien.

"Genius is the talent (natural gift) which gives the rule to art." "Since learning is nothing but imitation, the greatest ability... cannot be reckoned as genius." "The author of a product for which he is indebted to his genius does not know himself how he has come by his ideas... and therefore cannot prescribe to others by a rule (technical)."
(Immanuel Kant, Critique of Judgment, Section §46, 1790)

E4.6.1.E.a_REF4_PH TRUTH IS THE "SEDIMENT"—THE DEAD, FIXED RESIDUE OF PAST EXPRESSIONS—WHILE MEANING IS THE ACTIVE, LIVING "GESTURE" THAT IS NEVER FULLY COMPLETED.
Pour Merleau-Ponty, l’art nous incite à prendre conscience que ce ne sont pas des choses que nous voyons, mais des figures qui glissent sur des fonds. C’est une éducation à l'ambiguïté car on ne peut jamais voir le fond en tant que tel: quand on fait la mise au point sur le fond, il devient automatiquement figure. Quand je fais la mise au point sur une figure, c’est comme si le paysage s’enroulait sur lui-même, si bien que chacun perçoit son propre paysage.

"The perceptual 'something' is always in the middle of something else; it always forms part of a 'field'..." "To see is to enter a universe of beings which display themselves... The system of appearances... is not a piecemeal accumulation... it is a 'perspective'." "When I focus my eyes on an object... the other objects... withdraw into the margin... The horizon... wraps itself around [s'enroule] the object."
(Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Phenomenology of Perception, 1945)
Note: Merleau-Ponty explains that we never see the horizon itself; it is the "darkness" or "latency" against which the object stands out.

On voit des mouvements et non des choses. De là vient que les tentatives d’expression du sens ne sont jamais abouties, jamais achevées.

"Our perception ends in objects, and the object, once constituted, appears as the reason for all the experiences of it which we have had... But this is largely an illusion... We perceive a world in movement." "Expression is never completed... The world is not what I think, but what I live through."
(Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Phenomenology of Perception, 1945)

Dans l’expression verbale, on est obligé de mobiliser des moyens discursifs qui ont une fixité plus grande que le monde - le langage est sédimenté.

"We must distinguish between speaking speech (parole parlante) and spoken speech (parole parlée). The former is the one in which the significant intention is at the stage of coming into being... The latter is the secondary expression... which appears in sedimented language." "Language is a sediment... it is the common currency of acquired expression." "Thought and expression... are simultaneously constituted... The word is a gesture, and its meaning, a world."
(Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Phenomenology of Perception, 1945)

E4.6.1.E.a_REF4.1_PH BY REJECTING THE "SUBJECT-OBJECT" DICHOTOMY (THE FOUNDATION OF THE CORRESPONDENCE THEORY OF TRUTH), MERLEAU-PONTY PROPOSES THE CHIASM—AN INTERTWINING WHERE THE SEER AND THE SEEN ARE OF THE SAME "FLESH." This moves the definition of reality from "Objective Fact" to "Participatory Meaning."
Pour Merleau Ponty, il faut repenser le rapport de l’homme et de la nature selon lequel le premier serait le sujet et la nature l’objet.
On ne peut penser la nature sous forme de concept, mais plutôt sous la forme d’idées sensibles. Le mot concept raisonne avec objet, dans la lignée d’un sujet qui se considère séparé du monde et tente de le saisir. Pour résoudre cette limitation, Merleau Ponty fait appel à un autre mot, l’idée - bien loin de l’usage abstrait qu’en font les platoniciens - une idée produite par notre rapport avec le sensible. Il nous propose de commencer par la nature comme un index qui nous permettrait d’échapper au piège de la subjectivité: On a oublié que notre expérience est d’abord sensible. Nous ne devons pas dévaloriser l’expérience sensible sur le compte des données de la science. 

"[We must recognize] an idea that is not the contrary of the sensible, that is its lining and its depth, that could not be detached from it..." "It is a question of... a sensible idea, this exterior of the interior, this interior of the exterior..." "We do not see, do not hear the ideas... yet they are there, behind the sounds or between them... they give us the assurance that the 'great darkness' of silence... is a musical darkness."
(Maurice Merleau-Ponty, The Visible and the Invisible, The Intertwining—The Chiasm, 1964)

Pourtant Merleau Ponty ne nie pas la validité de l’approche scientifique, il nous rappelle que “tout est ensemble”. La pensée philosophique prépondérante en occident érige comme rapport au monde supérieur celui d’un sujet connaissant à un objet connu: Il y a ce que je suis et le monde est devant moi, séparé de moi. C’est le biais dans la pensée occidentale de substituer les structures de la perception et de l’affectif par celles de l’entendement: Nous pensons le corps et le cerveau selon le modèle des machines qu’on est capable de fabriquer. Merleau-Ponty dépasse cette scission. Il ne veut pas proposer une méthode philosophique mais plutôt un style - c’est un rapport plus esthétique au monde.

"Science manipulates things and gives up living in them. It makes its own limited models of things; operating upon these indices or variables to effect whatever transformations are permitted by their definition..." "Thinking 'operationally' has become a sort of absolute artificialism... such as we find in the ideology of cybernetics, where human creations are derived from a natural information process, conceived on the model of human machines"
(Maurice Merleau-Ponty, The Eye and Mind, 1961)

E4.6.1.E.b. Art as the Construction of a Shared World.
How Art and Cinema function as "machines" for intersubjectivity. Because real life is full of "static," we need Art to clarify our experience, allowing us to align our perspectives and create a shared sense without needing objective proof.

E4.6.1.E.b_REF1_PH EST-IL POSSIBLE DE RECONCILIER LA SENSIBILITE AVEC LA DIMENSION INTELLECTUELLE DANS UNE DISCUSSION ESTHETIQUE?
"Pour Kant le sens de la vie réside dans la pensée élargie, à travers la phénoménologie du beau. La pensée élargie suppose que l’on s’arrache à sa particularité, que l’on élargisse son horizon pour entrer dans plus d’humanité: on aime plus les autres à les connaître. La pensée élargie nous mène au sens commun.
Dans l’oeil du vieillard, on voit de la lumière - effet de l’élargissement - par opposition à la flamme aux yeux des jeunes gens (selon la métaphore de Victor Hugo).
La discussion esthétique comporte une dimension morale: c’est justement parce que la discussion esthétique ne se fait pas sous l’égide d’un concept que l’éthique a sa place. Comme il n’y a pas de place pour la démonstration, ce qui va prendre la place de la démonstration c’est la logique de l’élargissement de la pensée."
(Pierre Schindler)

"However small may be the area or the degree to which a man's natural gifts reach, yet it indicates a man of a broad-minded way of thinking if he overrides the private subjective conditions of his judgment, into which so many others are locked, as it were, and reflects on his own judgment from a universal standpoint (which he can only determine by shifting his ground to the standpoint of others). [...]

"...we must here take sensus communis to mean the idea of a shared sense, i.e., a faculty of judgment which, in its reflection, takes account (a priori) of the mode of representation of all other men in thought, in order, as it were, to hold its judgment up to the whole of human reason... [...]

Taste is the faculty of judging a priori of the communicability of feelings that are bound up with a given representation (without the mediation of a concept)."
(Immanuel Kant, Critique of Judgment, Section §40, Of Taste as a kind of Sensus Communis, 1790)

E4.6.1.E.b_REF2_PH. REAL LIFE (RAW TRUTH/BEING) IS FULL OF "STATIC" AND "EXCESS MATTER," WHILE CINEMA (ART/MEANING) CREATES A "TIGHTER WEAVE" OR A "MORE EXACT WORLD."
Il y a coïncidence entre la philosophe et le cinéma qui seraient deux modes d’expression qui cherchent à relater le même type d'expérience. Le cinéma a une mission descriptive de situations entre les gens de façon encore plus direct que la philosophie qui elle tend à généraliser. 

"If philosophy is in harmony with the cinema, if thought and technical effort are heading in the same direction, it is because the philosopher and the moviemaker share a certain way of being, a certain view of the world which belongs to a generation."
(Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Sense and Non-Sense, The Film and the New Psychology, 1948)

Un film signifie comme une chose signifie: Dans l’ordinaire de la vie nous perdons la valeur esthétique de la moindre chose perçue. 

"A movie has meaning in the same way that a thing does: neither of them speaks to an isolated understanding; rather, both appeal to our power of tacitly deciphering the world or of coexisting with it."
(Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Sense and Non-Sense, The Film and the New Psychology, 1948)

Dans la vie réelle, il y a toujours du bougé, des bavures, un excès de matière - la chose perçue est noyée dans le champs. Mais au cinéma, la trame a un grain plus serré, le drame cinématographique se passe dans un monde plus exacte et dans un champs resserré: Le cinéma dévoile le fonctionnement de notre perception.

"Real life... contains 'static' [bavures], an excess of matter... things which are of no importance or which we do not notice..." "The plot of a movie, on the other hand, is much more tightly woven [la trame a un grain plus serré]... The movie does not limit itself to reproducing... the proliferation of the world; it selects episodes... and the result is that the movie seems to be more truly a 'drama' than happens in real life. [...]

The movies are peculiarly suited to make manifest the union of mind and body, mind and world, and the expression of one in the other." "[Cinema] presents us with that holistic view... which we lose in ordinary life."
(Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Sense and Non-Sense, The Film and the New Psychology, 1948)

E4.6.1.E.b_REF3_PH OMMUNICATION IS THE BLENDING OF PERSPECTIVES RATHER THAN THE TRANSMISSION OF OBJECTIVE DATA.
Nostre jugement naturel ne saisit pas bien clairement ce qu'il saisit : car mon jugement ne le peut faire recevoir au jugement de mon compagnon 
(Montaigne, Les Essais, Apologie de Raimond de Sebonde, II, XII)

Comment sortir de sa subjectivité - qui est le fondement même de toute perception - et réussir à communiquer avec autrui? Pour Merleau-Ponty, le champs n’est pas une intériorité ni un domaine privé, mais ce n’est pas non plus une réalité objective. Pour communiquer il faut se certifier que le champs nous apparaît de la même manière: Faire en sorte que les mêmes choses fassent figure pour tous. 

"The other is not a closed garden... My 'field' is not a private world..." "There is a 'setting' (montage) of the subject and of the world... which results in the fact that we perceive the same things. [...]

"Communication is achieved when our perspectives blend, and we coexist through a common world." "It is precisely the specific nature of the perceived world... that allows us to distinguish... between the 'subjective' and the 'objective'."
(Maurice Merleau-Ponty, "Phenomenology of Perception, Part II, Chapter 4: Other Selves and the Human World, 1945)

L’aspect du monde serait bouleversé si nous arrivions à voir comme choses les intervalles entre les choses.

"We are implying that the intervals between things are not things... The appearance of the world would be transformed if we succeeded in seeing as things the intervals between them..." "A puzzle-picture... The distinctness of the figure and the indeterminateness of the background... are not intrinsic properties of the organization of the stimulus."
(Maurice Merleau-Ponty, "Phenomenology of Perception, Part II, Chapter 3: The Thing and the Natural World, 1945)


E4.6.1.E.b_REF3.1_PH "Il résulte de là une image de l’homme et de l’humanité qui est bien différente de celle d’où nous sommes partis. L’humanité n’est pas une somme d’individus, une communauté de penseurs dont chacun, dans sa solitude, soit assuré d’avance de s’entendre avec les autres parce qu’ils participeraient tous de la même essence pensante. Elle n’est pas davantage, bien entendu, un seul Être où la pluralité des individus serait fondue et destinée à se résorber. Elle est par principe en porte à faux : chacun ne peut croire qu’à ce qu’il reconnaît pour vrai intérieurement - et en même temps chacun ne pense et ne se décide que déjà pris dans certains rapports avec autrui qui orientent de préférence vers telle espèce d’opinions. Chacun est seul et personne ne peut se passer des autres, non seulement pour son utilité - qui n’est pas ici en cause -, mais pour son bonheur, il n’y a pas de vie à plusieurs qui nous délivre de la charge de nous-même, nous dispense d’avoir un avis ; et il n’y a pas de vie « intérieure » qui ne soit comme un premier essai de nos relations avec autrui. Dans cette situation ambiguë où nous sommes jetés parce que nous avons un corps et une histoire personnelle collective, nous ne pouvons trouver de repos absolu, il nous faut sans cesse travailler à réduire nos divergences, à expliquer nos paroles mal comprises, à manifester ce qui de nous est caché, à percevoir autrui. La raison et l’accord des esprits ne sont pas derrière nous, ils sont présomptivement devant nous, et nous sommes aussi incapables de les atteindre définitivement que d’y renoncer."
(Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Causeries, 1948)

E4.6.1.F. The Inexpressible, The "Miracle," and The Ethical.
The ultimate horizon. The "Mystical" (that which shows itself but cannot be said), the sheer fact of Existence ("It is"), and the Ethical necessity of acting responsibly in a world where absolute Truth is inaccessible.

E4.6.1.F.a. The Sheer Fact of Being: "It is" and the Unity of the World.
The starting point is the ontological "shock." Before one can discuss ethics or silence, one must confront the primitive fact of Existence itself—the "It is" that precedes all scientific explanation or Cartesian subjectivity.

E4.6.1.F.a_REF1_PH LE CONSTAT BRUT DE L'EXISTENCE, ANTERIEUR A TOUTE EXPLICATION SCIENTIFIQUE OU "VERACITE" FACTUELLE. CE ("IL Y A") EST "PLUS ORIGINELLE QUE LE 'JE PENSE' DE DESCARTES".
"Fragment 2 [...]
“Viens donc, je vais dire — et toi, l’ayant entendue,
garde bien en toi ma parole — quelles sont les seules voies
de recherche à penser : l’une qu’il y a et que non-être il n’y a pas, 
est chemin de persuasion (car celle-ci accompagne la vérité) ; 
l’autre qu’il n’y a pas et qu’il est nécessaire qu’il n’y ait pas :
celle-là, je te le montre, est un sentier dont on ne peut 
rien apprendre. Car tu ne saurais ni connaître le n’étant pas 
(car il n’offre aucune prise), ni en montrer des signes.”

[...] La Déesse s’adresse à Parménide, ou plutôt — puisque la « Déesse »  n’est qu’une fiction permettant simplement à Parménide de présenter la vérité qu’il annonce comme n’étant pas une opinion humaine, mais une vérité absolue — Parménide s’adresse à son disciple. Il lui propose cette première vérité: εστι [esti], « il y a ». Il ne lui demande certainement pas de sous-entendre έόν [éón], mot qui suppose la philosophie de Parménide pour être compris. Simplement, il y a. « Il y a quoi ? demande le disciple - Ce que tu voudras : la mer, le ciel, ou toi, ou moi, ou le mot εστι, bref quelque chose. Suspendons notre jugement au sujet de ce qu’il y a - sur quoi, sans doute, nous ne serions pas d’accord (que, par exemple, il y ait des dieux). Quoi que ce soit qu’il y ait, tu m’accorderas qu’il n’y a pas rien mais qu’il y a quelque chose, bref qu’il y a ». 
Parménide énonce ici une première vérité, qui est la première vérité de la philosophie, et qui est autrement plus originelle que le « je pense, donc je suis » de Descartes, ou la « première vérité » de Lequier. [...]
On notera que « non-être il n’y a pas » ressort d’un autre type d’évidence que « il y a ». Je vois la mer, le ciel, la multitude des vivants, je te vois… : par là s’impose l’évidence qu’il y a beaucoup de choses, et, tout simplement, qu’il y a. C’est une évidence de fait : c’est le fait primordial de l’être, entendant par « être » le fait qu’il y ait. Mais « non-être il n’y a pas » relève d’une évidence intellectuelle : il est clair que le « rien » » ne peut avoir aucune sorte de réalité; et donc ce qui a quelque réalité que ce soit ne peut être, par là même, absolument rien. [...]"
(Parménide, Le poème: Fragments, traduction, présentation et commentaire par Marcel Conche, 1996)

E4.6.1.F.a_REF2_PH LE PHILOSOPHE SE DISTINGUE DU "MORTEL" PARCE QU'IL VOIT "L'UNITE DANS L'OPPOSITION". Là où le mortel sépare par les mots ("lumière" vs "nuit"), le philosophe comprend l'engendrement (genèse) qui unit les contraires pour créer l'harmonie.
"Les mortels se seraient trompés en ne permettant pas qu’il y ait une forme sans qu’il y ait aussi l’autre, donc en voyant le lien et l’unité des deux. Or cette unité, c’est, au contraire, ce que Parménide, dès lors qu’ils ont « établi les signes à part les uns des autres » (v. 56), leur reproche de n’avoir pas vu. Ce qu’entend dire Parménide, observe Simplicius, c’est que « se sont trompés ceux qui ne voient pas l’unité dans l’opposition des éléments provoquant la génération » [...]
Les mortels ont nommé deux formes — et, en cela, on ne peut leur donner tort : ce sont le feu et la lumière d’une part, d’autre part, la nuit. Il y a le feu et la lumière ; il y a la nuit. Mais ce que les mortels ont séparé, les deux formes qu’ils ont distinguées « de façon opposée selon le corps », ils n’ont pas su l’unir. Or, sans union, pas de génération ; les mortels, du moins les mortels non philosophes, sont incapables de comprendre la genèse du monde. La lumière et la nuit sont là, c’est tout. Or, tout ce qu’il y a — mais non le il y a lui-même — est le résultat d’un devenir. 
Qu’il en soit ainsi, c’est ce que les philosophes ont montré. Ils séparent d’abord les contraires, mais ne les laissent pas dans leur séparation. Ils voient « l’unité dans l’opposition » et ainsi, à partir des contraires, engendrent les réalités. A l’origine du monde, l’on a, chez Anaximandre, l’opposition du chaud et du froid (réglée par ce générateur qu’est le gonimon — le « capable d’engendrer »), chez Anaximène, celle du « dense », qui correspond au « froid », et du « rare » ou du « relâché » (χαλαρόν [chalarón]), qui est le chaud (13 B 1), chez les Pythagoriciens, pour qui tout est nombre, celle du « fini » et de l’« illimité », éléments du nombre: de sorte que, pour eux, comme pour les Milésiens, « les contraires sont les principes des êtres » (τάναντία άρχαί των δντων [tánantía árchaí ton dnton], Arist., Méta., A, 5, 986 b 3). Comme l’explique Héraclite, la nature, la φύσις [fýsis], opère en unissant les contraires, non, toutefois, sans règle, mais « en respectant chaque fois une loi de proportion, de mesure et d’équilibre ». De la sorte, comme le dit Philolaos, après Héraclite, de l’opposition des contraires « naît une harmonie » (αρμονία δέ πάντως έξ έναντίων γίνεται [armonía dé pántos éx énantíon gínetai], 44 B 10) - harmonie sans laquelle il n’y aurait pas de stabilité pour le monde. Une telle harmonie, ajoute-t-il, se définit comme plutôt l’« unification » (ένωσις [énosis]) d’un « mélange de divers éléments ». C’est une telle unité que le commun des mortels manque à percevoir, se bornant à voir l’un à côté de l’autre les contraires qu’il faudrait penser en un pour saisir le monde dans son engendrement, et non simplement comme un résultat.
La contrariété fondamentale, à partir de laquelle il faudra engendrer le monde, est celle du feu (πυρ [pyr]) et de la nuit (νύξ [nýx]). Comme la « nuit » signifie l’obscurité, le feu, qui lumière plutôt que la chaleur. [...]
pour l’homme ordinaire — et le philosophe est, lui aussi, d’abord un homme ordinaire —, entre la lumière et l’obscurité, il y a le clair-obscur, entre le jour et la nuit le crépuscule, entre le froid et le chaud le tiède, entre le léger et le lourd bien des degrés. Le « feu éthéré de la flamme » est dit « le même partout que lui-même » (v. 57) et la nuit est « sans clarté » : la lumière n’est que lumière et la nuit n’est que nuit. Or, dans l’expérience sensible, une flamme est plus ou moins lumineuse, ce qui implique, au sein de la clarté, la présence de son contraire; et la nuit n’est jamais tout à fait noire, cette noirceur ne fût-elle tempérée que par l’ « obscure clarté qui tombe des étoiles ». D’où vient donc que chacun des contraires soit posé comme exclusif de l’autre, alors que l’expérience sensible est celle d’un passage par degrés de l’un à l’autre ? Une telle logicisation serait-elle l’œuvre du philosophe, qui isole les entités avant de les penser ensemble dans une union maîtrisée ? Nullement. Une telle opération est inhérente à la nomination des formes par les mortels: car, dès que je dis « lumière », je ne dis pas « obscurité »; et si je dis « nuit », je ne dis pas « clarté » — toute nuance a disparu. La nuit sensible n’est jamais sans quelque « obscure clarté », mais la nuit nommée, réduite à son concept, n’est que « nuit », sans plus. Si l’on veut façonner et dépeindre le monde des mortels, il faut partir des mots dont usent les mortels. Mais les mots posent à part ce dans le monde sensible, n’existe pas à part. Le mot « lumière » pose la lumière à part de la « nuit »; de même, les mots posent le « rare » à part du « dense », le « froid » à part du « chaud », le « léger » à part du « lourd ». Mais, dans le sensible, la lumière ne va pas sans l’ombre, la raréfaction sans la concentration et donc le rare sans le dense, la chaleur sans le réchauffement ou le refroidissement et donc le chaud sans le froid, etc. Bref, le devenir sensible mêle et combine les entités que les mots avaient posées à part les unes des autres. [...]

FRAGMENT 9 [...]

Mais puisque toutes choses ont été nommées lumière et nuit,
lesquelles selon leurs pouvoirs propres ont été données comme noms
à telles choses ou à telles autres, tout est plein en même temps 
de lumière et de nuit sans lumière, les deux à égalité, 
puisqu’il n’est rien qui n’ait part ni à l’une ni à l’autre. [...]"
(Parménide, Le poème: Fragments, traduction, présentation et commentaire par Marcel Conche, 1996)

E4.6.1.F.a_REF3_PH "LE MEME EST A LA FOIS PENSER ET ETRE" DE PARMENIDE SIGNIFIE QUE L'ÊTRE EST INTEGRALEMENT INTELLIGIBLE. L'ETRE NE SE DEROBE PAS ; IL EST TOTALEMENT OUVERT A LA PENSEE. C'est l'origine de la prétention occidentale à la "Connaissance Absolue."
“...Car le même est à la fois penser et être.”

[...] De la corrélation du penser et de l’être, que résulte-t-il ? Non pas du tout que être, ce soit être pensé, car le il y a ne dépend aucunement du fait d’être pensé ou non, mais que être, c’est être pensable. En l’être, il n’y a donc rien qui, de droit, échappe à la pensée. Par conséquent, le savoir de la Déesse, qu’elle transmet au philosophe, peut être et est un savoir absolu. L’être se dévoile entièrement à la pensée ; il n’en outre-passe aucunement le pouvoir. 
Le savoir de la Déesse suppose un pouvoir de connaissance. Ce pouvoir est coextensif à l’être."
(Parménide, Le poème: Fragments, Fragment 3, traduction, présentation et commentaire par Marcel Conche, 1996)

E4.6.1.F.b. The Limits of Language and the "Miracle": The Mystical Experience.
The "meaning" of the world lies outside the world of facts. It covers the transition from the logical "non-sense" of wondering at existence to the "Mystical" feeling—a lived, aesthetic, and silent contemplation of the world sub specie aeternitatis.

E4.6.1.F.b_REF1_PH THE MOST IMPORTANT THINGS (THE "MIRACLE" OF EXISTENCE, THE "ABSOLUTE GOOD") ARE STRICTLY "NON-SENSE" TO THE LOGICAL MIND BECAUSE THEY LIE "OUTSIDE THE WORLD" OF FACTS. This explains why the "Quest for Meaning" often looks like irrationality to the "Quest for Truth."
"L’existence est un don gratuit, et elle se trouve comme magnifiée et exaltée par cette grâce. Je peux rendre raison de tel ou tel étant particulier, qui est un produit de la nécessité, nécessité démonstrative dans l’ordre des intelligibles, nécessité générative dans l’ordre des êtres naturels ; mais je ne pourrai jamais rendre compte de l’existence elle-même, par laquelle tous les étants se maintiennent dans l’être, et qui illumine et supporte chacun également. Qui ne voit que la beauté du monde tient à ce « sans pourquoi » que la raison ne saurait résoudre, ni le langage formuler ?
Dans la Conférence sur l’Ethique (texte rédigé entre septembre 29 et décembre 30), Wittgenstein (que Pierre Hadot a parfois rapproché de Plotin) écrit que l’Ethique, qui curieusement selon lui peut-être mise en relation avec l’Esthétique (« Je vais maintenant utiliser ce terme d’Ethique en un sens un peu plus large, en fait dans un sens qui inclut ce qui est, je crois, la partie essentielle de ce qu’on appelle communément Esthétique » in Leçons et conversations, Folio 1992, p. 143), consiste à déterminer ce qui vaut absolument, ce qui semble impossible, puisque le langage ne peut dire que les faits, et que les faits n’ont de valeur que relative, se rapportant les uns aux autres dans le tableau du monde, comme les mots d’un même texte. Pour trouver une valeur absolue, il faudrait donc se transporter au-delà du langage, c'est-à-dire hors du monde comme ensemble des faits, ou « états de choses ». Un tel énoncé qui formulerait ce qu’on ne peut dire, est évidemment contradictoire. Pourtant, ajoute alors Wittgenstein, il existe une expérience, qui est certes un non-sens, mais qu’il est possible cependant à chacun de faire pour son propre compte, et qui répond d’une certaine façon à la question de l’Ethique. Elle peut s’exprimer en cette formule : « je m’étonne de l’existence du monde » (149). Ce qui ne signifie pas que je m’étonne que tel ou tel événement survienne plutôt que tel autre – car un événement suppose par lui-même le fait de l’existence du monde – mais de la pure et simple existence, c'est-à-dire du fait qu’il y ait quelque chose et non pas plutôt rien. Un tel étonnement peut sans doute être éprouvé, mais il n’a cependant aucun sens : « Dire : je m’étonne que telle ou telle chose se produise n’a de sens que si l’on peut imaginer sa non-production […] Mais c’est un non-sens de dire que je m’étonne de l’existence du monde, parce que je ne peux pas imaginer qu’il n’existe pas » (150). C’est pourquoi cet étonnement ne peut être exprimé que par un simulacre d’expression, ce que Wittgenstein nomme encore une allégorie. Ainsi, nous exprimons notre étonnement devant le pur fait de l’existence en disant que le monde a été créé par Dieu (ce qui conduit Wittgenstein à évoquer deux autres expériences, qui auraient rapport à l’absolu : le « se sentir en sécurité entre les mains de Dieu », et l’expérience contraire, être en proie au sentiment de culpabilité : 151). Cette allégorie permet d’approfondir le non sens de la formule « s’étonner de l’existence du monde ». Dire que Dieu a créé le monde est une autre façon d’exprimer la même chose : « Et je vais maintenant décrire l’expérience qui consiste à s’étonner de l’existence du monde en disant : c’est l’expérience de voir le monde comme un miracle » (153), tout en reconnaissant que « Tout ce que nous disons du miracle absolu demeure un non-sens » (154). Toutefois, si ces formules sont privées de toute signification, et ne sauraient jamais s’organiser en un discours cohérent, elles expriment pourtant le besoin que l’homme éprouve de sortir de la sphère du langage et de la signification : « En effet, tout ce à quoi je voulais arriver avec ces expressions, c’était d’aller au-delà du monde, c'est-à-dire au-delà du langage signifiant » (154). Désir « d’affronter les bornes du langage », qui est nécessairement voué à l’échec : « C’est parfaitement, absolument, sans espoir de donner ainsi du front contre les murs de notre cage » (155). Ce qui ne veut nullement dire qu’une telle tentative est ridicule, et même s’il est vrai qu’elle ne pourra jamais se constituer en science (« Dans la mesure où l’éthique naît du désir de dire quelque chose de la signification ultime de la vie, du bien absolu, de ce qui a une valeur absolue, l’éthique ne peut pas être une science », 155), elle reste cependant digne de respect : « L’éthique nous documente sur une tendance qui existe dans l’esprit de l’homme, tendance que je ne puis que respecter profondément quant à moi, et que je ne saurais sur ma vie tourner en dérision » (155)."
(Jacques Darriulat, Plotin maître de sagesse, III- La beauté et la bonté de ce monde)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Plotin/Sagesse/Sagesse3.html

EE4.6.1.F.b_REF2_PH L'INEXPRIMABLE (LE SENS DE LA VIE, LE DASEIN) NE PEUT ETRE DIT (MIS EN PROPOSITIONS VRAIES/FAUSSES) MAIS IL SE MONTRE. C'est le "sentiment mystique" de la totalité limitée du monde.
"Nous retrouvons ici cette fameuse affirmation de Wittgenstein: « Quiconque me comprend, reconnaît mes propositions comme des non-sens ». Mais le contexte replace cette affirmation dans une nouvelle perspective. Toutes ces propositions qui terminent le Traité appartiennent au quatrième genre d’usage du langage: elles cherchent à montrer l’inexprimable au travers de leur incorrection. Mais, dans la mesure même où elles essaient de montrer l’inexprimable, elles apparaissent comme non-sens. C’est dans la mesure même, pourrait-on dire, où elles ont une sorte de sens et de vérité, qu’elles apparaissent comme non-sens. « En les transcendant, on a la juste vision du monde ». Nous atteignons ici ce que Wittgenstein appelle le mystique.[...]
Je crois que Wittgenstein considère que le « mystique » commence au moment où l’usage indicatif du langage provoque en nous un sentiment de limitation ou de totalité, ce qui revient au même: « Le sentiment du monde, comme tout limité, est le sentiment mystique ». Je pense que Wittgenstein veut décrire l’impression d’étrangeté (qui peut aller jusqu’à l’extase) que nous éprouvons devant le Dasein (le fait que le monde soit) [...]
(Pierre Hadot, Wittgenstein et les limites du langage, 2004-2014)

"Le scepticisme n’est pas irréfutable, mais il est manifestement dépourvu de sens, car il veut douter, là où l’on ne peut poser de questions. 
Car il ne peut y avoir de doute que là où il y a une question; il ne peut y avoir une question que là où il y a une réponse, et il ne peut y avoir de réponse que là où quelque chose peut être dit (6.51).
Nous sentons que même si toutes les questions scientifiques sont résolues, nos problèmes de vie ne sont même pas touchés. Sans doute, il n'y a plus alors de question; et justement, c’est la réponse (6.52).
On reconnaît la solution du problème de la vie, dans le fait que ce problème s’évanouit. 
N’est-ce pas la raison pour laquelle les hommes pour qui le sens de la vie devient clair après des doutes prolongés, ne peuvent dire alors en quoi consiste ce sens ? (6.521). 
II y a sans aucun doute un inexprimable. Il se montre; c’est là le mystique (6.522). 
Mes propositions sont clarificatrices en ce que, quiconque me comprend, les reconnaît à la fin, pour des non-sens, quand il a sauté au travers d’elles - sur elles - au-delà d’elles. (II doit pour ainsi dire rejeter l’échelle, après qu’il s’en est servi pour monter). 
II doit dépasser ces propositions, alors il a la juste vision du monde (6.54). 
Au sujet de ce dont on ne peut parler, on doit se taire (7)."
(Ludwig Wittgenstein, Tractatus philosophicus, 1921)

EE4.6.1.F.b_REF2.1_PH HADOT COMPARE L'ACTIVITE PHILOSOPHIQUE A UNE "PSYCHANALYSE" QUI GUERIT L'HOMME DU "MAUVAIS USAGE DU LANGAGE". Une fois "analysé" (guéri des pseudo-problèmes), le philosophe devient sage : il ne cherche plus, il vit.
"Evidemment, - le lecteur y aura déjà pensé -, si les propositions concernant les objets, les faits, les propositions. etc., sont des non-sens, parce qu’elles pèchent contre le symbolisme logique, presque toutes les propositions du Tractatus sont de tels non-sens. On pourrait dire que l’activité philosophique consiste à découvrir son propre non-sens, à se reconnaître elle-même comme usage illégitime du langage. Le paradoxe néanmoins reste entier. On se demandera comment on peut comprendre ces propositions du Tractatus, si finalement elles n’ont pas de sens. Mais la hardiesse du paradoxe doit faire réfléchir. 
Quelle sera « cette juste vision du monde » dont parle Wittgenstein? Résultat du dépassement des propositions philosophiques, elle ne peut être qu’une contemplation naïve de la réalité. Cette naïveté du regard ne peut être obtenue qu’après une libération de tous les préjugés, de tous les pseudo-concepts, de tous les pseudo-problèmes. Le mauvais usage du langage séparait l’homme du monde. Par une sorte d’auto-thérapie, la philosophie se guérit elle-même, par le langage, de ce mauvais usage du langage. Il y a là une sorte de psychanalyse. Et « analysé », le philosophe n’est plus philosophe, il n’est plus « en quête de la sagesse », il est « sage ». Sa sagesse est un pur vécu incommunicable, regard porté sur les choses, mais qui ne peut s’exprimer. La critique du langage élimine le vide des concepts, au profit de la plénitude de l’existence vécue.  [...]
Le positivisme de Wittgenstein débouche ainsi sur la mystique: « Il y a sans aucun doute un inexprimable; il se montre ; c’est cela le “mystique” (6.522) ». Wittgenstein est ici désespérément concis. Nous sommes réduits à interpréter du mieux possible. Si nous sommes dans le langage, comme dans le monde, l’inexprimable correspond à un au-delà des limites du langage et des limites du monde. L’irreprésentable et l’inexprimable que nous avons rencontrés en logique nous laissaient entrevoir cet au-delà. Le « mystique» dont parle Wittgenstein semble bien correspondre à une extase dans laquelle nous « voyons » un au-delà du monde et du langage, son sens, sa signification, le fait de son existence [...]

Il me semble que tout le Tractatus peut se résumer en cette formule extraordinairement concise : « Ce qui s’exprime dans le langage, nous ne pouvons l’exprimer par le langage (4.121) ». Personne n’a jamais exprimé aussi clairement et aussi profondément ce qu’il faut bien appeler le mystère du langage, qui est identique au mystère du monde. Cette formule commande aussi bien le symbolisme logique de Wittgenstein que son « mysticisme ». Dans le symbolisme, nous ne pouvons pas exprimer par des signes ce qui se montre dans les signes eux-mêmes. Nous ne pouvons représenter l’irreprésentable. Et c’est bien le sens de cette critique du langage que doit être la philosophie. Quant au « mysticisme », il correspond à l’idée suivante : l’inexprimable se montre dans le langage; l’essence du langage est, en exprimant l’exprimable, de viser l’inexprimable; nous ne pouvons exprimer ce que nous voyons dans le langage; le sens dernier du langage ne peut s’exprimer dans le langage. Sans doute, sommes-nous dans le langage; cette situation est insurmontable. Mais c’est au sein même de cette situation insurmontable, que se montre à nous la Transcendance. [...]"
(Pierre Hadot, Wittgenstein et les limites du langage, 2004-2014)

E1.6.C.1.7.c_REF1_PH.wEE4.6.1.F.b.

 "WHEN WITTGENSTEIN IDENTIFIES THE « UNSPEAKABLE » TO THE « MYSTIC », it is not a question of negative theology or ecstasy, but of « feeling », and I think that what characterizes for him the « mystic » is precisely that there is a feeling, an emotion, an affective experience [...] that cannot be expressed, because it is about something foreign to the scientific description of facts, something which is in the sphere of the existential, ethical or aesthetic order. One might think, moreover, that when Wittgenstein speaks of mysticism, he is thinking of his own experience. Thus he writes in the proposition (6.44) of the Tractatus: « The mystic is not the how (wie) of the world, but the fact of the existence (dass) of the world »; it is clarified by his confidence in the Conference on Ethics in which, without using the word « mystical », he speaks of what he calls his experience per excellence: « I believe that the best way to describe it is to say that when I have this experience, I am amazed by the sheer existence of the world ». In the same lecture, he talks about an experience of « seeing the world as a miracle ». We can also see on this subject that, for Wittgenstein, the mystical experience is quite analogous to the aesthetic experience, since we read in the Notebooks [...]: « The miracle, aesthetically speaking, is that there is a world »”.
(Pierre Hadot, Wittgenstein and the limits of language, 2004, excerpt from the forward in the 2014 edition)

E1.6.C.1.7.c_REF2_PH.wXXXX

 FOR WITTGENSTEIN, THE DISINTERESTED CONTEMPLATION OF THE WORLD TRANSCENDS INDIVIDUALITY AND IS PLACED IN THE PERSPECTIVE OF ETERNITY.
"Wittgenstein's account of the mystical, as well as that of the aesthetic and, in a sense, the ethical, is situated in Schopenhauer's problematic. What Wittgenstein says about the mystic corresponds, in fact, to what Schopenhauer says about knowledge that frees itself from the service of will (1) and individuality. Wittgenstein is certainly thinking about this issue when he writes in Proposition 6.45: "The intuition of the world sub specie aeterni is the intuition of the world as totality - but limited totality. The feeling of the world as limited totality constitutes mystical feeling.
Let us note in parentheses the rapid shift that takes place here from the notion of intuition to that of feeling. First of all, the use of the term "limited totality" is reminiscent of the author of The World as Will and Representation, who writes that the subject and the object, like two halves, constitute the totality of the world, but are mutually limited. The world appears as a limited totality when it is considered from the point of view of a transcendental subject, which, according to Wittgenstein, is neither man, nor the human body, nor the human soul, but the metaphysical subject, which is the limit of the world and not a part of it, an object that would be in the world (5.632, 5. 633 and 5.641, Notebooks, August 7, 1916). This situation is realized precisely in the disinterested intuition of the world, freed from the principle of sufficient reason, of which Schopenhauer speaks (2). We no longer consider, says Schopenhauer, "neither the place, nor the time, nor the why, nor the what-good of things, but purely and simply their nature"; we are no longer ourselves, but a "pure subject" (is this not the metaphysical subject of which Wittgenstein speaks? ), ruined and lost in the object. On this point, Schopenhauer quotes Spinoza: "The mind is eternal insofar as it conceives things in the perspective of eternity (sub specie aeternitatis)," which for Schopenhauer means that whoever sees things in this perspective transcends his individuality and identifies with the eternal subject of knowledge. Wittgenstein's Notebooks (October 7, 1916) shed some light on what this formula of Schopenhauer and Spinoza means to him. First of all, it corresponds to an aesthetic and ethical view of the world:

The work of art is the object seen sub specie aeternitatis, and the good life is the world seen sub specie aeternitatis. This is the connection between art and ethics. In the ordinary way of seeing, one looks at objects, as it were, by placing oneself among them; in the way of seeing sub specie aeternitatis, one looks at them from the outside. So that they have the whole world as a background. 
Does the aesthetic view of the world consist essentially in looking at the world with a happy gaze? (October 20, 1916).

One could say that to see from the perspective of eternity, that is, "from the outside," is in a sense to see from above, with a total disinterest in practical utility, or even to see from the perspective of an eternal present. For, as Wittgenstein (6.4311) tells us, following Schopenhauer, eternity should not be understood as an infinite period of time, but as timelessness: "He lives eternally who lives in the present". Thus, for Wittgenstein, as for Schopenhauer, the disinterested contemplation of the world that brings salvation has a dual ethical and aesthetic dimension.
From this perspective, we can better understand the profound intentions of the Tractatus, as we are invited to do by a note in the Notebooks dated May 25, 1915: "The tendency to the mystical comes from the fact that science leaves our desires unsatisfied. We feel that even if all scientific questions were solved, our problem would still not be addressed." 

Notes: 
1 Schopenhauer, The World as Will and Representation
2 idem"
(Pierre Hadot, Wittgenstein and the Limits of Language, 2004, extract from the preface of 2014)


E1.6.D.2.5.e_REF1_PO.wEE4.6.1.F.b.

"Now I see the secret of the making of the best persons,
It is to grow in the open air and to eat and sleep with the earth.

Here a great personal deed has room,
(Such a deed seizes upon the hearts of the whole race of men,
Its effusion of strength and will overwhelms law and mocks all authority and all argument against it.)

Here is the test of wisdom,
Wisdom is not finally tested in schools,
Wisdom cannot be pass’d from one having it to another not having it,
Wisdom is of the soul, is not susceptible of proof, is its own proof,
Applies to all stages and objects and qualities and is content,
Is the certainty of the reality and immortality of things, and the excellence of things;
Something there is in the float of the sight of things that provokes it out of the soul.
Now I re-examine philosophies and religions,
They may prove well in lecture-rooms, yet not prove at all under the spacious clouds and along the landscape and flowing currents.

Here is realization,
Here is a man tallied — he realizes here what he has in him,
The past, the future, majesty, love — if they are vacant of you, you are vacant of them."
(Walt Whitman, Song of the Open Road,  Leaves of Grass, 1867)

E4.6.1.F.c.The Ethic of Responsibility: Acting in a Relative World.
Since we cannot base our actions on dogmatic Certainty, what is the appropriate "Ethical" response? Accepting Relativism and Skepticism not as nihilism, but as a call to Pragmatism and Responsibility. We must act to preserve the "human world" and meaning, even without access to the Absolute.

E4.6.1.F.c_REF1_SCI

EL3.101. LET´S FORGET ABOUT THE THEORIES OF WHY WE BELIEVE THINGS AS LONG - AS FAR AS ACTION IS CONCERNED - WE BELIEVE THE SAME THING
"The problem of moral values and ethical judgments is one into which science cannot answer, as I have already indicated, and which I don't know of any particular way to word. However, I see one possibility. There may be others, but I see one possibility. You see we need some kind of mechanism, something like the trick we have to take an observation and believe it, the scheme for choosing moral values. [...]
I believe that it is not at all possible that there be a agreements on consequences, that we agree on the net result, but maybe not on the reason we do what we got to do. That the argument that existed in the early days of the Christians as to, for instance, whether Jesus was of a substance like the father or of the same substance as the father [...] Laugh, but people will hurt by that. Reputations were destroyed, people were killed, arguing whether it's the same or similar. And today we should learn that lesson and not have an argument as to the reason why we agree if we agree.
I therefore consider the Encyclical of Pope John XXIII, which I have read, to be one of the most remarkable occurrences of all time and a great step to the Future. I can find no better expression of my beliefs of morality, of the duties and responsibilities of mankind, people to other people, that is in that encyclical. I do not  agree with some of the match Machinery which supports some of the ideas, that there's a spring you from God, perhaps, I don't personally believe, all that some of these ideas are the natural consequence of ideas of earlier probes, in the natural and perfectly sensible way. I don't agree, and I will not ridicule it, and I won't argue it. I agree with the responsibilities and with the duties that the Pope represents as the responsibilities and the duties of people. And I recognize this encyclical as the beginning, possibly, of a new future where we forget, perhaps, about the theories of why we believe things as long as we ultimately in the end, as far as action is concerned, believe the same thing."
(Richard Feynman, The meaning of it all, 1998)

E4.6.1.F.c_REF2_PO THE ONLY POSSIBLE DEFINITION OF TRUTH IS PRAGMATIC. What we call "truth" is simply the interface we evolved to survive.

“METAPHYSICAL PROVERBS
1. Things are or not in relation to the motion of
consciousness through time.
2. Imagination constructs experience from the
spindrift of a vast and violent sea.
3. This process evolved through natural selection.
4. Therefore the only possible definition of truth is
pragmatic.
5. Whatever is, is as it is in relation to an observer. To
a different kind of observer, with different senses and
imaginative processes, it would be an entirely different
sort of thing.
6. To no observer, in itself, an object is potentially as
many different kinds of things as there are different
kinds of possible observers; that is, both infinite and
nothing.
7. Most of what lies outside our consciousness is to us
unimaginable.
8. The further we wander from the realms we evolved
to experience, the more dumbfounded we become.
9. Since we continue to wander further and further, we
continue to be dumbfounded in increasingly
sophisticated ways.
10. Death is our experience of the end of individual
consciousness.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E4.6.1.F.c_REF3_PH RELATIF 
[...] Qu’est-ce que le relatif ? Le contraire de l’absolu: est relatif ce qui est non séparé et non séparable (sinon par abstraction), donc ce qui existe en autre chose (relativité des modes ou des accidents, absoluité de la substance) ou en dépend (relativité des effets, absoluité d’une cause qui ne serait causée ou influencée par rien). [...]
Que tout soit relatif (dans le Tout, seul absolu), cela n’autorise pas à penser n’importe quoi, ni n’importe comment. 

RELATIVISME 
[...] Le relativisme ne prend son véritable sens qu’en se particularisant, sous deux formes principales, l'une épistémique ou gnoséologique, l'autre éthique ou normative. Les deux peuvent aller de pair (par exemple chez Montaigne), mais aussi séparément (par exemple chez Spinoza, qui ne relève que du second, ou chez Kant, qui ne relève que du premier). 
Le relativisme épistémique ou gnoséologique affirme la relativité de toute connaissance: nous n’avons accès à aucune vérité absolue. C’est le contraire du dogmatisme théorique. Un scepticisme ? Pas forcément, puisqu’une connaissance relative n’en est pas moins connaissance pour autant, et peut même, au moins dans son ordre, être considérée comme certaine. Montaigne ou Hume sont assurément relativistes, en ce sens; mais Kant, qui n’était pas sceptique, l’est également, comme d’ailleurs, aujourcl’hui, la plupart de nos savants. C’est l'un des résultats paradoxaux de la physique quantique. Mieux ils connaissent le monde, moins ils ont le sentiment de le connaître absolument. 
Quant au relativisme éthique ou normatif, il porte sur les valeurs, dont il affirme la relativité. Nous n’avons accès à aucune valeur absolue; tout jugement de valeur est relatif à un certain sujet (subjectivisme), à certains gènes (biologisme), à une certaine époque (historicisme), à une certaine société ou culture (sociologisme, culturalisme) - voire, c’est d’ailleurs ce que je crois, à tout cela à la fois. C’est le contraire du dogmatisme pratique. Un nihilisme ? Pas forcément. Une valeur relative n’en est pas moins réelle pour autant, ni ne cesse pour cela de valoir. [...]
Le relativisme, loin de déboucher nécessairement sur le nihilisme (qui n’est que sa forme outrancière, un peu comme le scepticisme outré que dénonçait Hume l'est au relativisme gnoséologique, ou scepticisme modéré, qu’il professe), est plutôt une raison forte de le refuser (intellectuellement) et de lui résister (moralement), en même temps, et au fond pour la même raison, qu’au dogmatisme pratique. Ces deux dernières positions ont en effet en commun de ne vouloir reconnaître de valeurs qu’absolues: les uns affirment qu’il en existe de telles (dogmatisme pratique), d’autres le nient (nihilisme), mais ils ne s’opposent en cela que sur la base d’un accord premier, qu’on peut appeler leur absolutisme commun. Les relativistes sont moins exigeants et plus lucides. Ce n’est pas l'absolu qu’ils cherchent, ni le néant qu’ils trouvent. [...]
Que toute valeur soit relative, cela ne prouve aucunement que rien ne vaille. Cela le rend même improbable: comment un néant serait-il relatif ? Le nihilisme n’est qu’un relativisme outré, ou vautré. Le relativisme, à l’inverse, est un nihilisme ontologique (s’agissant des valeurs: elles ne sont pas des êtres ni des idées qui existent réellement, au moins pour nous, puisqu’elles nous font agir, ou puisque nous agissons pour elles). Une valeur n’est pas une vérité: elle est l’objet d’un désir, non d’une connaissance; elle relève de l’action, non de la contemplation. Mais elle n’est pas non plus un pur néant, ni une simple illusion: elle vaut vraiment, au moins pour nous, au moins par nous, puisqu’il est vrai que nous la désirons. Ce qu’il y a d’illusoire, dans nos valeurs, ce n’est pas leur valeur, mais le sentiment que nous avons, presque inévitablement, de leur absoluité. Ou pour le dire autrement: il n’y a d’absolu moral que pour et par la volonté. C’est ce que j’appelle un absolu pratique: ce que je veux absolument, c’est-à-dire de façon inconditionnelle ou non négociable. Parce que cela existerait en soi ? Nullement. Mais parce que cela est indissociable de mon désir de vivre et d’agir humainement. L’essentiel est exprimé par Spinoza, dans le décisif scolie de la proposition 9 du livre III de L'Ethique: « Nous ne faisons effort vers rien, ne voulons, n’appétons ni ne désirons aucune chose parce que nous jugeons qu’elle est bonne; mais, au contraire, nous jugeons qu’une chose est bonne parce que nous faisons effort vers elle, parce que nous la voulons, appétons et désirons. » Que toute valeur soit relative au désir qui la vise donc à la vie, à l’histoire, à l’individu: au désir biologiquement, socialement et biographiquement déterminé), ce n’est pas une raison pour cesser de la désirer, ni pour prétendre que ce désir (qui peut lui-même être désiré) est sans valeur. La normativité du désir fait partie du réel. Le nihilisme, qui prétend l’abolir, n’est qu’un négationnisme éthique. [...]
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.6.1.F.c_REF4_PH COMMENT SAVOIR SI NOUS VOULONS LE VRAI (ASSENTIMENT), OU SI NOUS CROYONS VRAI CE QUE NOUS VOULONS (ILLUSION) ?
"ASSENTIMENT 
C’est approuver ce qui paraît juste ou vrai. Dans le stoïcisme, assentiment représente ce qu’il y a d’actif et de volontaire dans le jugement: c’est adhérer - à la fois librement et nécessairement - à ce qu’une représentation nous propose, ou nous impose. Par quoi toute vérité, comme dira Alain, est « de volonté » : parce qu’elle n’est vraie, en nous, que par l’effort volontaire de penser. 
Cela ne suffit pourtant pas à la reconnaître. Comment savoir si nous voulons le vrai (assentiment), ou si nous croyons vrai ce que nous voulons (illusion) ? S’il y avait un critère de la vérité, on n’aurait plus besoin d’assentiment; c’est en quoi l’assentiment ne saurait en être un."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.6.1.F.c_REF5_PH LE DEFIS EST D’ASSUMER LE SCEPTICISME SANS TOMBER POUR AUTANT DANS LE NIHILISME OU LA SOPHISTIQUE.
"PYRRHONISME 
[...] Pyrrhon, nous dit Aristoclès, tenait toutes choses pour « également indifférentes, immesurables, indécidables » ; aussi convient-il selon lui « d’être sans jugement, sans inclination d’aucun côté, inébranlable, en disant de chaque chose qu’elle n'est pas plus qu’elle n’est pas, ou qu’elle est et n’est pas, ou qu’elle n’est ni n’est pas. Pour ceux qui se trouvent dans ces dispositions, ce qui en résultera, c’est d’abord l’aphasie, puis l'ataraxie » (Aristoclès, cité par Eusèbe, Prép, Évang. XIX, 18; pour l'interprétation, voir Marcel Conche, Pyrrhon ou l'apparence. Puf, 1994). Philosophie du silence, qui ne peut s’énoncer sans se détruire. C’est peut-être le nihilisme le plus radical qui ait jamais été pensé. Mais peut-on l’habiter ?
Dans les textes modernes, le mot a souvent un sens beaucoup plus général: c’est un autre nom, spécialement chez Montaigne et Pascal, du scepticisme. « La profession des pyrrhoniens est de branler, douter et enquérir, ne s’assurer de rien, de rien ne se répondre » (Essais, II, 12); c’est « le plus sage parti des philosophes » (II, 15). La plupart, pourtant, ne s’en réclament pas. Cela même donne raison aux pyrrhoniens, par l’impossibilité où ils se savent de convaincre: « Rien ne fortifie plus le pyrrhonisme que ce qu’il y en a qui ne sont point pyrrhoniens. Si tous l'étaient, ils auraient tort » (Pascal, Pensées, 33-374; voir aussi les fragments 131-434 et 521-387). 
Le problème est alors d’assumer ce scepticisme sans tomber pour autant dans le nihilisme ou la sophistique: Montaigne, Hume, Marcel Conche."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.6.1.F.c_REF6_PH THE ETHIC OF RESPONSIBILITY PRIORITIZES THE SURVIVAL OF MEANING (THE HUMAN WORLD) OVER THE PURITY OF ABSTRACT PRINCIPLES.
"RESPONSABILITÉ (ÉTHIQUE DE -) 
Celle qui ne se contente pas d’appliquer des principes. L’éthique de responsabilité exige qu’on tienne compte aussi, avant toute décision, des conséquences prévisibles de l'acte envisagé. S’oppose, chez Max Weber, à l'éthique de conviction, et la complète. L’éthique de responsabilité est particulièrement nécessaire en matière politique, laquelle « fait nécessairement appel à des moyens violents », qui peuvent mettre en péril le « salut de l’âme ». [...]
Reste que l'éthique de responsabilité ne saurait nous dispenser d’avoir aussi des principes et du coeur: « L’éthique de conviction et l’éthique de responsabilité ne sont pas contradictoires; elles se complètent l'une l’autre et constituent ensemble l’homme authentique », qui seul peut prétendre « à la vocation politique » (Le Savant et le Politique, dernières pages). [...]

RESPONSABILITÉ (PRINCIPE DE -) 
Principe énoncé par Hans Jonas, dans le livre éponyme (Das Prinzip Verantwortung, 1979). C’est comme une dilatation de l'éthique de responsabilité, aussi bien dans le temps que dans l'espace: nous devons nous préoccuper des conséquences les plus lointaines de nos actes, pour autant que nous puissions les prévoir, donc prendre en compte aussi les droits des générations futures, à l’échelle de toute l'humanité. Le principe, qui est susceptible de plusieurs formulations différentes, peut par exemple s’énoncer ainsi: « Agis de façon que les effets de ton action soient compatibles avec la permanence d’une vie authentiquement humaine sur terre. » En tant que principe, cela relève de l'éthique de conviction; mais il nous prescrit de nous soumettre à l’éthique de responsabilité, pensée dans un temps long et un espace planétaire (à l’égard du lointain, donc, au moins autant que du prochain). [...]"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.6.1.F.c_REF7_PH COMTE-SPONVILLE ARGUES THAT THE DANGER OF A "TECHNICAL CIVILIZATION" IS THAT MEANS (EFFICIENCY, TOOLS, SCIENCE) BECOME ENDS IN THEMSELVES. Science and Technique become an "idolatry" if not subordinated to "Humanity"
"TECHNIQUE 
[...] Le danger n’en demeure pas moins - ou plutôt il ne peut que s’aggraver - d’une civilisation technicienne, qui prendrait les moyens pour des fins. Nos techniques, aujourd’hui, sont bien davantage que des outils. Ce sont des pensées, mais objectivées, mais instrumentalisées. Ce sont des sciences, mais appliquées. Or quoi de plus normal que de se soumettre au vrai ? Et quoi de plus vrai que les sciences ? Double contresens: double idolâtrie. La vérité sans la charité n’est pas Dieu, disait Pascal. Les Sciences sans l’humanité sont inhumaines. 
Les techniques, historiquement, sont antérieures aux sciences, mais depuis longtemps transformées par elles: les nôtres en dépendent de plus en plus, au point d’en être à peu près indissociables (c’est ce qu’on appelle les techno-sciences). De là une puissance démultipliée, qui devient en effet inquiétante, et d’autant plus qu’elle s’autonomise davantage: les moyens tendent à nous imposer leurs fins, ou plutôt à valoir comme telles (l’efficacité devient une valeur en soi). Nos techniques nous gouvernent, au moins autant que nous les gouvernons. Avec un marteau, dit-on souvent, on peut faire ce qu’on veut, planter un clou ou fracasser un crâne. Sans doute. Mais on peut aussi ne rien faire, et tel est le cas le plus fréquent. Ce n’est plus vrai de nos machines, dont beaucoup fonctionnent jour et nuit, qu’il faut amortir, qu’il faut rentabiliser, qui fabriquent d’autres machines, qui créent jusqu’aux besoins qu’elles viennent satisfaire, qui nous font vivre, et qu’on ne peut plus arrêter, bien souvent, sans mettre en cause l’existence même de nos sociétés. Nos voitures menacent l’environnement, ou plutôt elles font plus que le menacer. Mais on ne reviendra pas à la traction hippomobile. Nos télévisions menacent l’intelligence. Mais on ne reviendra pas au règne presque exclusif de l’écrit. II faut avancer toujours, comme en vélo, en essayant de rester maître au moins de sa vitesse et de sa direction. Personne n’a décidé de faire la révolution industrielle, ni la révolution informatique et communicationnelle. Comment quelqu’un pourrait-il les arrêter les abolir ? L’histoire des techniques est irréversible, comme l'histoire des sciences, et pour la même raison. Pas question de revenir en arrière, et c’est tant mieux. Mais pas question non plus de laisser le marché ou les machines décider à notre place! Que les techniques créent des besoins, c’est entendu. Mais comment pourraient-elles remplacer des volontés ? L’issue, malgré Heidegger, n’est ni dans la technophobie ni dans la contemplation fascinée de l’être ou des origines, mais dans la soumission résolue des moyens que nous nous sommes donnés aux fins que nous nous fixons - ce qui est morale, pour l'individu, et politique, pour les citoyens. Si le peuple est souverain, il est exclu que les machines ou les technocrates le soient."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.6.2. From Identity to Coherence

E4.6.2.A. The Illusion of Fixed Truth and the Trap of the "Problem."
The traditional view of Identity—Truth as correspondence—treats reality—especially human reality—as a set of static "facts" or "problems" to be isolated and solved, leading to illusion and further disorder.

E4.6.2.A_REF1_PH

EL3.4. TRUTH AND FALSEHOOD ARE PROPERTIES OF BELIEFS AND STATEMENTS "It seems fairly evident that if there were no beliefs there could be no falsehood, and no truth either, in the sense in which truth is correlative to falsehood. If we imagine a world of mere matter, there would be no room for falsehood in such a world. And although it would contain what may be called ‘facts’, it would not contain any truths, in the sense in which truths are things of the same kind as falsehoods. In fact, truth and falsehood are properties of beliefs and statements : hence a world of mere matter, since it would contain no beliefs or statements, would also contain no truth or falsehood. [...]

Although truth and falsehood are properties of beliefs, they are properties dependent upon the relations of the beliefs to other things, not upon any internal quality of the beliefs [...]  Truth consists in some form of correspondence between belief and fact. It is, however, by no means an easy matter to discover a form of correspondence to which there are no irrefutable objections. By this partly—and partly by the feeling that, if truth consists in a correspondence of thought with something outside thought, thought can never know when truth has been attained "
(Bertrand Russell, The Problems of Philosophy, 1912)

E4.6.2.A_REF2_PH

EL3.67. TRUTHS ARE ILLUSIONS WHICH WE HAVE FORGOTTEN ARE ILLUSIONS "What then is truth? A movable host of metaphors, metonymies, and anthropomorphisms: in short, a sum of human relations which have been poetically and rhetorically intensified, transferred, and embellished, and which, after long usage, seem to a people to be fixed, canonical, and binding. Truths are illusions which we have forgotten are illusions — they are metaphors that have become worn out and have been drained of sensuous force, coins which have lost their embossing and are now considered as metal and no longer as coins. [...]
To be truthful means to employ the usual metaphors. Thus, to express it morally, this is the duty to lie according to a fixed convention, to lie with the herd and in a manner binding upon everyone… From the sense that one is obliged to designate one thing as “red,” another as “cold,” and a third as “mute,” there arises a moral impulse in regard to truth. The venerability, reliability, and utility of truth is something which a person demonstrates for himself from the contrast with the liar, whom no one trusts and everyone excludes.
As a “rational” being, he now places his behavior under the control of abstractions. He will no longer tolerate being carried away by sudden impressions, by intuitions. First he universalizes all these impressions into less colorful, cooler concepts, so that he can entrust the guidance of his life and conduct to them. Everything which distinguishes man from the animals depends upon this ability to volatilize perceptual metaphors in a schema, and thus to dissolve an image into a concept."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, On Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral Sense, 1873)

E4.6.2.A_REF3_PH

EL3.29. PSYCHOLOGICAL DIFFICULTIES HAVE NO SUCH INDEPENDENCE FROM US "In “The Problem and the Paradox,” Bohm points out that when operating in the practical or technical realm, we typically proceed by defining a problem we wish to deal with, then systematically apply a solution. But in the realm of relationship, whether inwardly or externally, the posing of a “problem” to be solved creates a fundamentally contradictory structure. Unlike practical problems, where the “thing” to be solved has independence from us (e.g., improving the design of ocean-going vessels), psychological difficulties have no such independence. [...]
Bohm suggests that what is occurring is in fact a paradox, not a problem. As a paradox has no discernible solution, a new approach is required, namely, sustained attention to the paradox itself, rather than a determined attempt to eradicate the “problem.” From Bohm's perspective, the confusion between problem and paradox operates at all levels of society, from the individual to the global."
(Lee Nichol Jemez Springs, Foreword  to David Bohm's On dialogue, 1996)

E4.6.2.A_REF3.1_PH

EL3.29.A. SINCE THE DISORDER IN MAN'S NATURE IS THE OUTCOME OF A PARADOX, NO ATTEMPT TO TREAT IT AS A PROBLEM CAN BRING THIS DISORDER TO AN END "For ages, men have generally realized that thinking and feeling are commonly infected with greed, violence, self-deception, fear, aggressiveness, and other forms of reaction that lead to corruption and confusion. For the most part, however, all of this has been regarded as a problem, and thus men have sought to overcome or control the disorder in their own nature in countless ways. For example, all societies have instituted a set of punishments, aimed at frightening people into right behavior, along with a set of rewards aimed at enticing them toward the same end. Because this has proved to be inadequate, men have further set up systems of morals, and ethics, along with various religious notions, with the hope that these would enable people, of their own accord, to control their "wrong" or "evil" thoughts and feelings. But this, too, has not really produced the desired result. And indeed since the disorder in man's nature is the outcome of a paradox, no attempt to treat it as a problem can bring this disorder to an end. [...]

Each human being has to see that the very feelings and ideas which he is inclined to identify with his "innermost self" are involved in paradox, through and through. A mind caught in such paradox will inevitably fall into self-deception, aimed at the creation of illusions that appear to relieve the pain resulting from the attempt to go on with self-contradiction. Such a mind cannot possibly see the relationships of the individual and of society as they really are. And thus, the attempt to "solve one's own problems" and "to solve the problems of society" will in fact be found to propagate the existing confusion, rather than to help bring it to an end. [...]

[I]t has to be kept in mind that through centuries of habit and conditioning, our prevailing tendency is now to suppose that "basically we ourselves are all right" and that our difficulties generally have outward causes, which can be treated as problems. And even when we do see that we are not in order inwardly, our habit is to suppose that we can point fairly definitely to what is wrong or lacking in ourselves, as if this were something different from or independent of the activity of thinking in which we formulate the "problem" of correcting what is in error. 
As has been seen, however, the very process of thought with which we consider our personal and social "problems" is conditioned and controlled by the content which it seems to be considering so that, generally speaking, this thought can neither be free nor even really honest.
In “The Problem and the Paradox,” Bohm points out that when operating in the practical or technical realm, we typically proceed by defining a problem we wish to deal with, then systematically apply a solution. But in the realm of relationship, whether inwardly or externally, the posing of a “problem” to be solved creates a fundamentally contradictory structure. Unlike practical problems, where the “thing” to be solved has independence from us (e.g., improving the design of ocean-going vessels), psychological difficulties have no such independence. [...]
Bohm suggests that what is occurring is in fact a paradox, not a problem. As a paradox has no discernible solution, a new approach is required, namely, sustained attention to the paradox itself, rather than a determined attempt to eradicate the “problem.” From Bohm's perspective, the confusion between problem and paradox operates at all levels of society, from the individual to the global."
(David Bohm, On dialogue, 1996)

E4.6.2.A_REF3.2_PH

EL3.29.A.1. "THE PROBLEM AND THE PARADOX 
We have been looking at the vast range of problems facing humanity. These go on proliferating indefinitely, eventually leading on toward disorders of world-wide scope. On contemplating this general situation, one may even sometimes have a sense of being confronted by difficulties beyond the possibility of resolution by human intelligence and co-operative endeavor. In this mass of contradiction and confusion, one finds a very curious common denominator: i.e., that everyone appears to agree that what is actually confronting us is a set of problems. Generally speaking, one does not find that people have considered the question of whether the word "problem," with all that it signifies, provides an adequate description of what is going wrong in human affairs. Yet, if one goes into the meaning of the word, one can see good reason to raise such a question, and to suspect that the attempt to treat our current difficulties as "problems" may be one of the more important factors preventing these difficulties from being properly brought to an end.
The root of "problem" is a Greek word whose meaning is "to put forward." Indeed, this is the essential significance of the word: i.e., to put forward for discussion or questioning an idea that is suggested toward the resolution of certain difficulties or inadequacies. Thus, if one needs to reach a certain destination, one may suggest taking a train, and one can discuss the problem of meeting the train on time, paying for the ticket, etc. Similarly, sailing ships were seen to be a slow and unreliable means of transport, and so men put forth the idea of driving ships by steam, thus giving rise to the problem of how to realize this idea technically and how to carry it out practically. More generally, it is clear that a large part of our practical and technical activities are centered on work aimed at solving a wide range of such problems. 

However, when one puts forth an idea in the form of a problem, there are certain largely tacit and implicit presuppositions which must be satisfied if the activity is to make sense. Among these is of course the assumption that the questions raised are rational and free of contradiction. Sometimes, without our noticing it, we accept absurd problems with false or self-contradictory presuppositions. In the practical and technical realm, however, we can usually sooner or later detect that our question is absurd, and we then drop the "problem" as meaningless. Thus, for a long time, people sought to invent a machine capable of perpetual motion, but with the development of scientific understanding it became clear that this would be in contradiction with the basic laws of physics, and so the search for such a machine has ceased.

All of this is fairly clear in the practical and technical domain. But now, what is to be done when one goes on to consider psychological problems and problems of human relationship? Does it make sense to formulate problems of such a kind? Or is this domain not one in which the presuppositions behind the questions put forth for discussion are false, self-contradictory, and absurd?

Consider, for example, a man who suddenly realized that he was very susceptible to flattery. He might well put forth the idea that he ought to be immune to flattery, and then he would of course have the problem of overcoming his tendency to “fall" for anyone who told him how wonderful a person he was. It takes only a little consideration, however, to see that this "problem" is based on absurd presuppositions. For example, the origin of the wish to be flattered is often a deep sense of being inadequate, which is so painful that awareness of its very existence is largely suppressed, except for certain moments in which criticisms or some other indications of a similar nature momentarily call attention to this very unpleasant feeling. As soon as someone comes along and tells such a person that, after all, he is good, capable, wise, beautiful, etc., then the deadening sense of suppressed pain disappears, to be replaced by a buoyant feeling of pleasure and well-being. Along with this goes a tendency to believe that he is being told the truth: for otherwise, of course, there would be no such release. In order to "defend" himself from the "danger" of discovering that it is not the truth, such a person is then ready to believe all that he is told by the other person, and thus, as is well known, he opens himself to the possibility of being taken advantage of in countless ways.
In essence, what goes wrong in flattery is a subtle kind of self-deception. If such a person were then to put forth "the problem" of how he can stop deceiving himself, the absurdity of this procedure would become self-evident. For it is clear that even if he tries hard and makes an effort to overcome his tendency to self-deception, this very effort will be infected with the wish for a pleasure able release from pain that is at the origin of the whole tendency in the first place. So he will almost certainly deceive himself about the question of whether he has overcome self-deception or not.
More generally, one can say that when something goes wrong psychologically, it is confusing to describe the resulting situation as a "problem." Rather, it would be better to say that one was confronted by a paradox. In the case of the man who is susceptible to flattery, the paradox is that he apparently knows and understands the absolute need to be honest with himself and yet he feels an even stronger "need" to deceive himself, when this helps to release him from an unbearable sense of inadequacy and to substitute instead a sense of inward rightness and wellbeing. What is called for in such a case is not some procedure that "solves his problem." Rather, it is to pause and to give attention to the fact that his thinking and feeling is dominated, through and through, by a set of self-contradictory demands or "needs" so that as long as such thinking and feeling prevail, there is no way to put things right. It takes a great deal of energy and seriousness to "stay with" an awareness of this fact, rather than to "escape" by allowing the mind to dart into some other subject, or otherwise lose awareness of the actual state of affairs. Such attention, going immensely beyond what is merely verbal or intellectual, can actually bring the root of the paradox into awareness, and thus the paradox dissolves when it's nullity and absurdity are clearly seen, felt, and understood.
It has to be emphasized, however, that as long as a paradox is treated as a problem, it can never be dissolved. On the contrary, the "problem" can do nothing but grow and proliferate in ever increasing confusion. For it is an essential feature of thought that once the mind accepts a problem, then it is appropriate for the brain to keep on working until it finds a solution. This feature is indeed necessary for proper rational thinking. Thus, if a person were confronted by a real problem (e.g., the need to obtain food) and dropped it before it was
adequately solved, the result could be disastrous. In any case, such a mode of operation would indicate an unhealthy flightiness or lack of seriousness. On the other hand, if the mind treats a paradox as if it were a real problem, then since the paradox has no "solution," the mind is caught in the paradox forever. Each apparent solution is found to be inadequate, and only leads on to new questions of a yet more muddled nature. Thus, a paradox which has taken root early in life (e.g., that arising out of a situation in which a child is made to feel a sense of inadequacy) may continue for the whole of a person's life, always changing in detail, growing more and more confused, but remaining the same in essence. And when the person becomes aware of the disorder in his mind, but describes this disorder as a problem, then this very step makes the activity around the paradox both more intense and more confused. Clearly, then, it is important to see the difference between a problem and a paradox, and to respond to each of these in a way that is appropriate to it. [...]

Ultimately, this very pervasive set of patterns may be seen to grow out of a certain "root" paradox. To help bring out what this root paradox is, one may first consider the fact that ordinarily, thought has some external object or state of affairs for its content. For example, one may think of a chair, a house, a tree, a storm, the Earth in its orbit, etc. All of these share the characteristic that they are essentially independent of the process of thought which goes on in our minds, while at the same time this process of thought is essentially independent of the content (i.e., our thoughts are free to take this content or to leave it, and instead to range over some other content, which observation may indicate to be relevant).
Evidently, such relative independence of the mode of activity of thought from its content is appropriate when one is engaged in thinking about practical and technical subjects. However, when one begins to think about himself, and especially about his own thoughts and feelings, then if one observes carefully, he will find that this approach leads to a paradoxical pattern of activity. The paradox is that whereas one is treating his own thinking and feeling as something separate from and independent of the thought that is thinking about them, it is evident that in fact there is, and can be, no such separation and independence. [...]"
(David Bohm, On dialogue, 1996)

E4.6.2.B. The Logic of Relation: Dissolving the Principle of Non-Contradiction.
Challenges the Western logic of exclusion (A cannot be not-A) and introducing a logic of relation, where opposites (light/dark, wave/particle) are held together. This is the move away from essentialist "Identity" toward relational "Consistency."

E4.6.2.B_REF1_PO

EL3.133. "THINGS DISTINGUISH THEMSELVES AS THINGS, BUT EACH OF THEIR PARTS REMAIN CONNECTED TO THE UNITY FROM WHICH THEY PROCEED. [...] It is thus initially as illiterate geographers that we are invited to approach reality's unstable territory after believing that we had seized its meaning, as if having seen badly, we had to forget a knowledge that would  impair us thereon to find the use of words that are alive. Poetry thus has to face the crushing greatness of all that the tribe usually neglects to consider. [...]. It summons this greatness that the eyes of reason alone cannot see unless the heart and confusion make the first move. It is only by taking language out of the beaten tracks of common language that our glance can suddenly linger to consider the narrowness of perspective in which it settled by habit, negligence, or facility. [...]
Above all 
bag of thoughts 
your head 
throw away

flesh in the air 
scatter 

allow to come 
a little oblivion 

the horizon of concordance is behind 
invisible but there".
(Claude Margat, Morning of silence, 2010)

E4.6.2.B_REF2_PO

EL3.164. “BELIEF
Light being
wavy and particulate
at once
is instructive –
why wouldn’t
other things or states
present as
both/and?
For instance
I both
believe and can’t.
Holding these
together produces
a wobble, I think
it’s time
to take seriously
as a stance.”
(Lia Purpura, It shouldn’t have been beautiful, 2015)

E4.6.2.B_REF3_PO

EL3.166. “RELATIVITY
Shade can chill
or relieve
and sun
comfort or oppress,
depending on
what you need
to shed or retain,
which is nothing
as simple as
sin being dark,
and grace, light.
Filaments in a web
can be both invisible
and bright.
Each thing’s
its own partner,
each always both,
depending on
where you stand,
not so central, not so
always commanding.”

(Lia Purpura, It shouldn’t have been beautiful, 2015)

E4.6.2.B_REF4_PH FRANÇOIS JULLIEN DEFINES "MEANING" IN THE WESTERN TRADITION (FROM PARMENIDES TO ARISTOTLE) AS BASED ON "EXCLUSION" AND THE "PRINCIPLE OF NON-CONTRADICTION". THIS IS THE LOGIC OF IDENTITY: TO SAY SOMETHING, ONE MUST SAY "ONE" THING, ISOLATING IT FROM ITS OPPOSITE. Unlike Identity, Coherence allows for the "non-disjunction" of opposites (Day/Night, War/Peace), holding them together in a tension that Western logic rejects as contradictory.
"COHÉRENCE (VS SENS)
1. Comme cohérence est entendue d'ordinaire à l'ombre du sens (Sinn et Zusammenhang sont synonymes encore chez Freud), il me faudra passer le couteau à découper les essences de façon plus délicate encore, entre ces deux notions, pour commencer d'entamer leur fausse synonymie, et ce à nouveau jusqu'à les opposer; et construire à partir d'elles deux logiques rivales entre lesquelles se choisit l'existence. La logique du Sens est celle dont on connaît le mieux la filiation fondatrice de l'ontologie : débutant par l'exclusion réciproque des contraires chez Parménide, entre « être » et « non-être », ou « vérité » et « opinion » ; s'articulant ensuite par la théorie platonicienne de la communication des genres telle qu'elle autorise l'opération de prédication et que la règle le dialecticien; et aboutissant enfin à instituer le principe de non-contradiction, entraînant à sa suite celui du tiers exclu, comme l'axiome sur lequel repose tout discours, logos, et que celui qui voudrait le supprimer, dès lors qu'il parle, suppose encore. Car « parler », c'est « dire », établit au départ Aristote posant ainsi une équivalence dont la logique du logos n'est plus sortie; et « dire », c'est « dire quelque chose », legein ti: il y a toujours un « quelque chose, si indéfini soit-il, qui soit l'objet singulier du dire; sinon, celui-ci ne dit « rien » et s'annule (Métaphysique, gamma). Aussi « dire quelque chose » est-il, du même coup, « signifier quelque chose », semainein ti, qui pour être un sens ne peut avoir qu'un seul sens ; et qui ne respecterait pas ce protocole de la parole s'exclut de l'humanité.

Or, au lieu que la cohérence demeure asservie sous ce monopole souverain du Sens, soit d'emblée à entendre comme une adéquation interne à l'ordre du discours, assurant la légitimité de sa fonction sémantique, je préférerai la penser selon sa vertu propre ; et pour ce, la libérant de cette inféodation, faire valoir sa pertinence en fonction de ce que ce terme dit de lui-même : co-haere, dit le latin : « tenir ensemble » [...]

Façon déjà de penser une cohérence qui soit de la parole et non du dit (selon que dire soit nécessairement « dire quelque chose » qui ait un sens, parce qu'un seul sens); et donc de poser la possibilité d'une parole qui parle » effectivement, mais sans dire « quelque chose », ti, donc quelque chose d'« un », de discriminant et d'isolant, et ne vise pas nécessairement à « signifier»; voire qui fasse tenir ensemble ce qu'elle énonce, soit « cohérente», alors que ce sont des contraires, s'excluant du point de vue du sens, que ses mots signifient. Héraclite, en Occident, sur cette voie enrayant par avance le développement de l'ontologie reposant sur l'exclusion des contraires, est le premier. En ouvrant sans médiation les contraires l'un à l'autre, les associant oppositivement, sans même les coordonner, il prend ouvertement le parti de laisser advenir en sa parole la cohérence foncière des choses que le discours ordinaire, de signification, disjonctif comme il est, ne fait qu'occulter (occultation que le discours métaphysique ne fera lui-même qu'entériner) [...] Jour-nuit, hiver-été, guerre-paix, satiété-faim : il n'y a pas là « sens », à proprement (sélectivement) parler, mais est maintenue active, à même la parole, la cohérence des opposés.
Cette conjonction intime des opposés ne peut se « dire » en effet, à proprement parler, puisqu'elle n'est pas « quelque chose », « un » quelque chose, ceci et non pas cela, mais va précisément à l'encontre de toute isolation et dé-corrélation des opposés, celle que fait surgir fatalement tout discours en respectant le principe de non-contradiction sur lequel Aristote a fondé la possibilité de « signifier ». La parole d'Héraclite ne cesse, en revanche, de faire signe vers ce con-joint du monde par divers biais. Les contraires s'épaulent et se font apparaître mutuellement - contrastivement: la maladie fait éprouver la santé, ou l'injustice la justice. Ils s'entendent l'un par l'autre, comme entre « mortels » et « immortels » ; se renversent l'un dans l'autre comme entre le « chaud, et le froid », ou le « vivant » et le « mort ». Pendant que l'un tire à lui la scie, l'autre la pousse en avant, et l'un ne va pas sans l'autre, le mouvement est un sous ces gestes opposés, et ce à l'encontre de l'unilatéralité dans laquelle nous maintient d'ordinaire le langage et donc de sa partialité native. C'est, en effet, dit Héraclite, que « l'opposé coopère », to antixoun sumpheron (fr. 8); il n'est pas qu'adverse.
Or, à saisir précisément cette « coopération » de l'autre, venant de l'autre, faisant accéder à la cohérence, naît ce que je nommerai la « com-préhension » d'Héraclite (s'opposant ainsi sciemment à la disjonction parménidienne, « être »/« non-être », dont Aristote a tiré le principe de non-contradiction). « Com-prendre », c'est littéralement « prendre avec » (cum; cf. en grec suniemi, un verbe privilégié d'Héraclite), à l'inverse donc de séparer et d'exclure : je « com-prends » en prenant chaque fois et nécessairement l'un avec l'autre, les gardant indissociés, la guerre avec la paix, l'hiver avec l'été, puisque l'un ne s'entend qu'à travers son autre en même temps qu'il le contredit. Je ne laisserai donc pas ma parole se focaliser sur l'un, au détriment de l'autre, happée par leur trop ostensible opposition, et par suite trancher arbitrairement dans le flux continu des choses (le fameux « tout s'écoule »). À quoi se condamnent précisément les « nombreux » qui « ne comprennent pas comment ce qui s'oppose à soi-même s'accorde avec soi : ajustement par actions de sens contraires, comme de l'arc et de la lyre » (fr. 51). [...]
Mais, dès lors que n'est plus comprise cette com-préhension de la co-hérence, la voici fatalement vouée au rejet par la fonction sémantique. Aussi, tandis qu'Héraclite, en tenant cette voie de la non-disjonction, par suite de la désexclusion, creusant ainsi l'écart d'avec la logique de la signification, on ne l'en a pas moins lu et jugé du point de vue du sens, tant ce choix de la signification, installé définitivement par Aristote, a dominé par la suite la culture européenne, ne laissant subsister que cette seule « logique » : c'est pourquoi on ne pouvait qu'appeler Héraclite l'« obscur », skoteinos, trouvant sa parole inintelligible. De là aussi que, sous le règne établi d'un dire déterminant-discriminant et devenu intégralement sémantique, cette autre vocation de la parole, une fois délaissée par la philosophie et même refoulée sous l'appareil tout-puissant du logos, se soit réfugiée, en Europe, en revendiquant cet écart, dans l'antidiscursivité de ce qu'il est convenu d'appeler la « « poésie ». D'Héraclite à Char, avec une étonnante opiniâtreté, la parole poétique est cette résistance. [...]"
(François Jullien, La Pensée chinoise en vis-à-vis de la philosophie, 2015)

E4.6.2.B_REF4.1_PH JULLIEN ARGUES THAT ARISTOTLE ESTABLISHED WESTERN LOGIC ON THE RULE THAT "A WORD SIGNIFIES ONE THING," CREATING AN "ESSENTIALIST" PERSPECTIVE BASED ON "SUBSTANCE" AND DEFINITION. He proposes a "rival rationality" based on "Consistency, defined as "holding together" through internal relation alone, without needing the metaphysical support of "Being" or "Substance".
"2. [...] en posant comme règle, du point de vue du logos, que « le mot signifie quelque chose et signifie une seule chose », donc que le sens ait (soit) une unité, Aristote fonde la vocation de la parole à dire l'unité stable des choses, donc à parler en termes d'« être », et l'institue « onto » - logiquement. Or c'est sur cette unité d'« être » établissant l'identité de la signification des mots - et qu'Aristote appellera d'un nom nouveau : l'« essence », ousia — que l'Europe fondera la condition de possibilité de son savoir fixant cette essence par la « définition ». En rapport à quoi, de si culturellement inscrit et de si global, le point de vue de la cohérence me paraît si crucial, précisément, par la bifurcation qu'il ouvre. Il nous fait sortir enfin, d'emblée, de cette perspective essentialiste de la connaissance et introduit à une autre description des choses.
Car on ne peut oublier quel mal s'est donné depuis la philosophie, en tirant pour une part sa modernité, pour sortir du point de vue essentialiste dont elle reconnaissait la limite, mais sans pouvoir pour autant prendre un nouveau départ - la phénoménologie elle-même y a peiné; et donc condamnée le plus souvent à des aménagements sans fin qui ne la hissaient toujours pas hors de cette perspective initiale, établie qu'est d'abord celle-ci par la langue (européenne) et par sa grammaire. Or l'intérêt de penser un principe de cohérence est que l' unitaire en lui n'est plus l'unité supposée du sens et, par derrière, de l'essence, mais celui d'un « faire tenir ensemble » opérant du seul fait de la relation interne, sans qu'il y ait encore besoin du support de l'Être et de la « sub-stance » : assurant ainsi à lui seul ce que j'appellerai dès lors adversativement, en m'en tenant à ce cum (« avec ») purement associatif, la « con-sistance ». C'est la mise en rapport seule, alors, qui fait « tenir », par sa vertu propre, sa force de corrélation, et cela de façon qui soit com-préhensible, donc pouvant établir une rationalité rivale de la signification. Plus besoin de l'invocation et de l'imagination du socle et du « sous » (de la « sub »-stance), du « par-derrière » ou de l'au-delà (de la méta-physique), du support et du fondement. La relationalité possède en elle- même une effectivité suffisante pour assurer une intelligibilité de l'existant. Con-sistance s'opposera donc à essence, comme cohérence à sens, ou compréhension à disjonction."
(François Jullien, La Pensée chinoise en vis-à-vis de la philosophie, 2015)

E4.6.2.C. The Practice of Coherence: Process, Integration, and the "How."
Coherence is about "following the grain" of reality, reframing perception, and integrating into the ongoing process of life without needing a dramatic "Why."

E4.6.2.C_REF1_PH JULLIEN CONTRASTS THE LOGOS (WHICH CONSTRUCTS AN ARGUMENT OR IDEAL ORDER) WITH LI WHICH REPRESENTS A LOGIC OF FOLLOWING THE INTERNAL STRUCTURE ("ELUCIDATING THE INTERNAL COHERENCE") RATHER THAN IMPOSING AN EXTERNAL PLAN.
"3. [...] c'est bien l'intérêt de la notion qui servira à dire la « raison » chinoise (terme de li) que de ne pas être seulement théorique et spéculative, mais d'impliquer en elle un « art d'opérer ». Loin de renvoyer au dire ainsi qu'à la construction d'une argumentation, comme le veut le logos aristotélicien, la graphie de ce terme est, en effet, celle de la veinure du jade dont le lapidaire suit la conformation avec son ciseau pour pouvoir le tailler : « Si dur que soit le jade, il suffit de trouver la raison (li) de ses strates pour réussir à en faire une pièce sans difficulté : c'est ce qu'on appelle raisonner, li » (Duan Yucai commentant Shuowen). Cet ars operandi sera donc d'élucider la cohérence interne aux linéaments de la moindre situation rencontrée, de laquelle celle-ci tient sa consistance et à laquelle il convient dans son comportement compréhensivement de s'adapter. Car qu'est-ce en soi que la veinure du jade favorisant le clivage si ce n'est la discrète nervure, ou fibrure intérieure, par laquelle cette matérialité s'est organisée peu à peu corrélativement et se structure? Veinure de la pierre, ou ramure de la branche, ou texture de la feuille ou de la peau : il s'agit, en chaque cas, des lignes de séparation qui sont autant de lignes de force ou de vie dont le réseau apparié fait apparaître la consistance, ces réseaux « ramifiants » formant « raison» (tiao-li).
Loin donc de prétendre ériger idéalement un ordre à partir d'un plan arrêté ou d'un optimum calculé et projeté en devoir-être, le penseur chinois décèle une ordonnance interne procédant par cohérence et faisant « tenir ensemble » les opposés, et ce en suivant les seuls fissurations et linéaments divers selon lesquels la compacité des choses se laisse pénétrer : de là qu'il coopère (avec le procès des choses) plutôt qu'il ne construit (par composition). De là aussi que cette consistance et cohérence du concret, chaque fois si ténue et si singulière, et telle qu'elle apparaît dans le moindre avènement phénoménal, se relie effectivement, à plus large échelle, à la cohérence du cours des choses, qui fait tenir ensemble le monde entier, qu'on l'appelle Ciel ou tao. « Le li ["raison"], est le motif configurateur (wen) de l'avènement des choses et le tao est ce par quoi toutes les choses adviennent. C'est pourquoi l'on dit : « Le tao est ce qui les fait advenir selon le li » (Han Fei, chap. XX). Il n'y a donc pas entre ces deux stades, celui de la manifestation sensible, « configurante », et celui de son Fonds latent, deux niveaux d'« être » dont l'un serait en déperdition vis-à-vis de l'autre, comme le veut l'ontologie, ou dont cet Autre serait à poser théologiquement à l'extérieur comme sa Cause ou son Créateur. Mais il s'agit de l'amont et de l'aval d'un même Procès qu'on pourra continûment, c'est à-dire sans coupure métaphysique, remonter jusqu'à sa « source » (yuan): tout avènement à l'existence se configurant selon sa veinure ou fibrure interne se formant par corrélation, d'où vient sa cohérence, nous fait communiquer directement, à travers elle, avec la grande Régulation du monde."
(François Jullien, La Pensée chinoise en vis-à-vis de la philosophie, 2015)

E4.6.2.C_REF1.1_PH JULLIEN ARGUES THAT THE "FURROW OF MEANING" LEADS TO THE "ASTONISHED 'WHY'," THE PROBLEM OF "EVIL," AND THE EMERGENCE OF A "SUBJECT" DEFINED BY AUTONOMY AND DRAMA. THIS PATH REQUIRES A "NARRATIVE" OR SALVATION TO RESOLVE ITS OWN ENIGMA.
In contrast, the "furrow of Coherence" focuses on the "How" of the "operative relation," extinguishing the unanswerable questions of origin and end. Instead of a dramatic Subject, it offers "integration within the great process," turning Evil into a cooperative "negative".
"4. De quoi par conséquent ériger ce distinguo du sens et de la cohérence en un choix premier de la pensée entraînant avec lui la façon de concevoir l'existence, donc aussi de vivre et de se conduire. Du moins si l'on entend bien qu'il ne s'agit pas là de « visions du monde », de part et d'autre, naïvement résultatives, mais bien d'avoir à opter, en amont, selon quel outil intellectuel on décide d'aborder les choses, en suivant quel filon, et, ouvrant grands les yeux, d'en mesurer l'incidence. Le sillon du Sens, s'enfonçant sans fin, ou devenant sa propre fin (en se laissant creuser par le religieux : est-ce hypertrophie ?), porte à développer la question d'un étonné « Pourquoi », notamment à poser la question du Mal, donc requiert l'avènement d'un Sujet responsable de son choix et que ce choix promeut. Reposant sur une logique discriminante et disjonctive, la perspective en bascule dans le disert et le dramatique : un Sens plus caché est à révéler ou bien le monde est absurde. Car cet emballement dans la question du Sens, une fois que celle-ci est lancée, ne se connaît plus de raison de cesser : elle est à elle-même sa seule issue. Ou bien pourrait-on refermer discrètement la porte par laquelle elle s'est engouffrée ? S'en retirer sur la pointe des pieds ? Le sillon ou filon de la cohérence, en revanche, donne à scruter le comment de l'avènement des choses, mais sans qu'on ait à le borner au seul domaine de la science, un tel « comment » de la relation opérante éteignant l'insondable (insatiable) question de la fin comme de l'origine, au lieu de songer à la résoudre. Le « Mal », suivant ce fil, referme sa fêlure, devient du « négatif », coopérant avec le bien et se justifiant comme sa condition de possibilité tel était déjà le vieux discours, sempiternellement repris, des Théodicées. Il ne porte pas à l'émergence et promotion d'un Sujet faisant effraction, par son autonomie, dans la texture d'un enchaînement infini, mais sa logique « compréhensive » est d'intégration au sein du grand procès qui fait le monde, qu'il y a « monde ». Tandis que la visée du Sens est déhiscente et descellante, comme telle a tôt fait de dresser la vie en énigme, en quoi elle a du mal à se défaire ensuite d'une pensée du salut, la pensée de la cohérence fait entrer dans l'économie des choses ou, comme la nommaient les Grecs, dans leur « syntaxe », sun-taxis. Il n'est plus besoin de recourir à un Récit explicatif (pour répondre à l'énigme), de monter un muthos: la seule description des choses, en descendant dans la subtile nervure de leur appariement, suffit."
(François Jullien, La Pensée chinoise en vis-à-vis de la philosophie, 2015)

E4.6.2.C_REF2_PH 

EL3.121.A. IS IT IN THE NATURE OF THOUGHT TO BE ABLE TO KNOW EVERYTHING? "There seems to be something in the structure of thought in civilization which tends to claim that we are going to get to know everything, and control it all. But we should ask: is it in the nature of thought to be able to know everything —  since thought is abstraction, which inherently implies limitation? Or put differently: is the whole field of thought, experience, knowledge, tacit thought — is that field limited? A great deal of our culture would say that it is not limited. The assumption is that no matter what happens, by approaching it through thought, knowledge, and skill of application, we can deal with it. Now, I say that this assumption will go into implicit, tacit thought — and then it means that no matter what happens, you're going to think. That assumption is very dynamically active — it's a universal assumption, an assumption about "all." It is extremely powerful, with extremely great value, and it will "work." It will tend to take precedence over almost anything. You will find, therefore, that you are automatically thinking about everything, because the assumption is at work that thinking is not only possible, and at least potentially relevant, but that it's the only way.

I am proposing, however, that the field of thought is limited. I am also suggesting that there is the "unlimited," which contains the limited. This "unlimited" is not just in the direction of going to greater and greater distances out to the end of the universe; but much more importantly, it is also going into more and more subtlety. As we've seen, however, our attention tends to
be limited by the tacit thoughts as to what has value, what's worth being attended to. If you don't attend to something, then you don't perceive it — it doesn't exist as far as you're concerned. But attention is not intrinsically restricted — it could widen out and go into any form. [...]

It may be that one of the brain's functions could be to be sensitive to more and more subtle levels of being; the brain could then function more as an antenna to pick up such levels, rather than as something that would be only the "initiator" of action. As long as the brain is following only its own internal goals, then it will be occupied; and that's necessary in certain contexts. But if we consider that it's also necessary to reach or contact the unlimited, then there must be a silence — a lack of occupation."
(David Bohm, On dialogue, 1996)

E4.6.2.C_REF3_PH VLADIMIR JANKELEVITCH DIT QUE "LA PRETENTION DE TOUCHER A LA VERITE EST UNE UTOPIE DOGMATIQUE" ET QU'IL FAUT LUI SUBSTITUER LA RECHERCHE D'UNE "COHERENCE SANS FAILLES." Il lie cette nécessité à la nature du temps (irréversibilité), montrant que puisque la répétition (confirmation scientifique) est impossible dans l'expérience vécue, seule la cohérence interne peut être visée.
"Je me sens provisoirement moins inquiet lorsque, après avoir longtemps tourné en rond, creusé et trituré les mots, exploré leurs résonances sémantiques, analysé leurs pouvoirs allusifs, leur puissance d’évocation, je vérifie que je ne peux décidément aller outre. Certes la prétention de toucher un jour à la vérité est une utopie dogmatique : ce qui importe, c’est d’aller jusqu’au bout de ce qu’on peut faire, d’atteindre à une cohérence sans failles, de faire affleurer les questions les plus cachées, les plus informulables pour en faire un monde lisse. Et comme ce que je cherche existe à peine, comme l’essentiel est un presque-rien, un je-ne-sais-quoi, une chose légère entre toutes les choses légères, cette investigation forcenée tend surtout à faire la preuve de l’impalpable ; on peut entrevoir l’apparition, mais non la vérifier puisqu’elle s’évanouit dans l’instant même où elle apparaît, puisque la première fois est aussi la dernière. [...]

Cet acharnement à reprendre sans cesse le problème, à poursuivre sans repos une chose continuellement reperdue, n’indique ni un progrès ni une répétition ; c’est en quelque sorte la maladie chronique, celle de l’homme malade du temps. 
C’est le temps lui-même qui nous contraint à cet acharnement ; je dois sans cesse m’assurer de cette évidence pour qu’elle ne redevienne pas ambiguë : car c’est le temps qui me l’a soustraite, de par sa fugacité et son irréversibilité. L’irréversibilité n’est pas une propriété du temps : c’est le temps lui-même qui est l’irréversibilité elle-même ; il n’y a pas d’autre irréversibilité que celle du temps, et pas de temps qui ne soit irréversible ! L’irréversibilité se définit comme l’impossibilité de la répétition, et l’impossibilité de la répétition implique l’impossibilité de la confirmation."
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, Quelque part dans l’inachevé, 1978)

E4.6.2.C_REF4_TH  LA REALITE DE SECOND ORDRE : WATZLAWICK DISTINGUE LA REALITE DES FAITS DE LA REALITE DU SENS ET DE LA VALEUR. LA THERAPIE (ET LA VIE) SE JOUE DANS CE SECOND ORDRE. "La vie est ce que vous dites qu'elle est". C'est l'application pratique de la théorie de la cohérence : on ne change pas les faits, on change le cadre qui leur donne sens.
"Dans ce volume, nous débattons de psychothérapie efficace. Le terme est désespérément simple, car ce que l’on considère comme un changement efficace dans le cadre d’une théorie peut être défini comme une manipulation superficielle (ou pire) dans une autre. La réalité de second ordre du thérapeute détermine non seulement la conduite, mais également le but de la thérapie. Alan Watts disait que la vie est un jeu dont la règle numéro un est : ce n’est pas un jeu, c’est mortellement sérieux. Et, à propos de règles, Wittgenstein remarquait il y a bien longtemps que si quelqu’un attire notre attention sur un aspect particulier d’un jeu, il cesse d’être un jeu. « [II] nous a appris un nouveau jeu à la place du nôtre. Mais comment le nouveau jeu peut-il rendre caduc l’ancien ? Nous voyons maintenant quelque chose d’autre et ne pouvons plus continuer naïvement à jouer. » (Wittgenstein, 1956.) Le recadrage est une technique thérapeutique qui utilise le fait que toutes les « règles », toutes les réalités de second ordre, sont relatives, que la vie est ce que vous dites qu’elle est. Pour bien des gens, c’est une pilule amère. Ils préfèrent, au sens de Laing, jouer le jeu de ne pas voir qu’ils jouent un jeu (Laing, 1970), et prennent leur aveuglement pour de l’honnêteté."
(Paul Watzlawick, Giorgio Nardone, Stratégie de la thérapie brève, 1997)

E4.6.3. The Sense of Possibility

E4.6.3.A. The Art of "Negative Capability."
The intellectual state necessary to perceive possibility is the ability to remain in uncertainty, doubt, and ignorance without rushing toward a fact or a fixed conclusion. Doubt becomes a fertile ground for creativity and truth.

E4.6.3.A_REF1_LIT

EL3.50. "ALLOW YOURSELF THE UNCOMFORTABLE LUXURY OF CHANGING YOUR MIND. Cultivate that capacity for “negative capability.” We live in a culture where one of the greatest social disgraces is not having an opinion, so we often form our “opinions” based on superficial impressions or the borrowed ideas of others, without investing the time and thought that cultivating true conviction necessitates. We then go around asserting these donned opinions and clinging to them as anchors to our own reality. It’s enormously disorienting to simply say, “I don’t know.” But it’s infinitely more rewarding to understand than to be right — even if that means changing your mind about a topic, an ideology, or, above all, yourself."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings, 10 Learnings from 10 Years of Brain Pickings)

E4.6.3.A_REF1.1_LIT

EL3.50.A. NEGATIVE CAPABILITY "Several things dovetailed in my mind, & at once it struck me, what quality went to form a Man of Achievement especially in Literature & which Shakespeare possessed so enormously — I mean Negative Capability, that is when man is capable of being in uncertainties, Mysteries, doubts, without any irritable reaching after fact & reason"
(John Keats, writing to his brothers, George and Thomas, in a December 1817 letter found in Selected Letters)

E4.6.3.A_REF2_LIT

EL3.116. "WHAT IS STOPPING ME FROM STEPPING OUTSIDE MY HABITUAL CRAP?
My mind, my limited mind.
The story of life is the story of the same basic mind readdressing the same problems in the same already 
discredited ways. [...]

Don’t be afraid to be confused. Try to remain permanently confused. Anything is possible. Stay open, forever, so open it hurts, and then open up some more, until the day you die, world without end, amen."
(George Saunders, The Braindead Megaphone, 2007)

E4.6.3.A_REF3_LIT

EL3.145. "THE HARDEST STATE FOR A HUMAN BEING TO SUSTAIN IS THAT OF OPEN-ENDEDNESS. We may know that uncertainty is the crucible of creativity, we may know that uncertainty is the key to democracy and good science, and yet in our longing for certainty we keep propping ourselves up from the elemental wobbliness of life on the crutch of opinion. Few things are more seductive to us than a ready opinion, and we brandish few things more flagrantly as we move through the world, slicing through its fundamental uncertainty with our insecure certitudes. The trouble with opinion is that it instantly islands us in the stream of life, cutting off its subject — and us along with it — from the interconnected totality of deep truth."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E4.6.3.A_REF4_PH

EL3.91. "PHILOSOPHY, THOUGH UNABLE TO TELL US WITH CERTAINTY WHAT IS THE TRUE ANSWER TO THE DOUBTS WHICH IT RAISES, is able to suggest many possibilities which enlarge our thoughts and free them from the tyranny of custom. Thus, while diminishing our feeling of certainty as to what things are, it greatly increases our knowledge as to what they may be ; it removes the somewhat arrogant dogmatism of those who have never travelled into the region of liberating doubt, and it keeps alive our sense of wonder by showing familiar things in an unfamiliar aspect [...]

To sum up our discussion of the value of philosophy ; Philosophy is to be studied, not for the sake of any definite answers to its questions, since no definite answers can, as a rule, be known to be true, but rather for the sake of the questions themselves ; because these questions enlarge our conception of what is possible, enrich our intellectual imagination and diminish the dogmatic assurance which closes the mind against speculation ; but above all because, through the greatness of the universe which philosophy contemplates, the mind also is rendered great, and becomes capable of that union with the universe which constitutes its highest good."
(Bertrand Russell, The Problems of Philosophy, 1912)

E4.6.3.A_REF5_SCI "IT IS SURPRISING THAT PEOPLE DO NOT BELIEVE THAT THERE IS IMAGINATION IN SCIENCE. It is a very interesting kind of imagination, unlike that of the artist. The great difficulty is in trying to imagine something that you have never seen, that is consistent in every detail with what has already been seen, and that is different from what has been thought off; furthermore, it must be definite and not a vague proposition. That is indeed difficult. [...]
The rate of development of science is not the rate at which you make observations alone but, much more important, the rate at which you create new things to test. 
If we were not able or did not desire to look in the new direction, if we did not have a doubt or recognize ignorance, we would not get any new ideas. There would be nothing worth checking, because we would know what is true."
(Richard Feynman, The meaning of it all, 1998)

E4.6.3.A_REF6_PH POUR DELEUZE, IL FAUT S’INSTALLER A LA POINTE DE SON IGNORANCE OU DE SON SAVOIR POUR AVOIR QUELQUE CHOSE A DIRE. Si on attend de savoir pour parler, on a rien à dire! Il faut parler de ce que l’on ne sait pas en fonction de ce que l’on sait, célébrer les rencontres, établir des échos entre fonctions (science), concepts (philosophie) et percepts (art).

"We write only at the frontiers of our knowledge, at the border which separates our knowledge from our ignorance and transforms the one into the other. Only in this manner are we determined to write."
(Gilles deleuze, Difference and Repetition, 1968)

"The three thoughts—philosophical, scientific, and artistic—are distinct in their plane and in what populates the plane (concept, function, or percept-affect)... Philosophy brings events to life with its concepts, art erects monuments with its percepts, science constructs states of affairs with its functions."
(Gilles deleuze & Félix Guattari, What is Philosophy?, 1991

E4.6.3.A_REF7_PH QUESTIONS ENLARGE OUR CONCEPTION OF WHAT IS POSSIBLE.
"To sum up our discussion of the value of philosophy ; Philosophy is to be studied, not for the sake of any definite answers to its questions, since no definite answers can, as a rule, be known to be true, but rather for the sake of the questions themselves ; because these questions enlarge our conception of what is possible, enrich our intellectual imagination and diminish the dogmatic assurance which closes the mind against speculation ; but above all because, through the greatness of the universe which philosophy contemplates, the mind also is rendered great, and becomes capable of that union with the universe which constitutes its highest good."
(Bertrand Russell, The Problems of Philosophy, 1912)

E4.6.3.B. De-coincidence and the Illusion of a Fixed World.
The obstacles to a sense of possibility are dogma, habit, and the "simulacra" of a fixed reality. We must introduce a "fissure" or "gap" (decoincidence) between our ideas and the world to allow possibility to breathe.

E4.6.3.B_REF1_LIT

EL3.100.A. GEORGE SAUNDERS DISCUSSES THE CONCEPT OF HOW IDEAS FORM IN THE MIND AND THE POTENTIAL CONSEQUENCES OF MISTAKING THESE IDEAS FOR REALITY. He advocates for a culture that imagines complexly and acts cautiously, recognizing the inevitable gap between imagined scenarios and reality. He also highlights the importance of critical thinking and intelligent scrutiny in countering dogma and simplistic representations of the world.
"In the beginning, there’s a blank mind. Then that mind gets an idea in it, and the trouble begins, because the mind mistakes the idea for the world. Mistaking the idea for the world, the mind formulates a theory and, having formulated a theory, feels inclined to act.

Because the idea is always only an approximation of the world, whether that action will be catastrophic or beneficial depends on the distance between the idea and the world.

Mass media’s job is to provide this simulacra of the world, upon which we build our ideas. There’s another name for this simulacra-building: storytelling. [...]

The best stories proceed from a mysterious truth-seeking impulse that narrative has when revised extensively; they are complex and baffling and ambiguous; they tend to make us slower to act, rather than quicker. They make us more humble, cause us to empathize with people we don’t know, because they help us imagine these people, and when we imagine them — if the storytelling is good enough — we imagine them as being, essentially, like us. If the story is poor, or has an agenda, if it comes out of a paucity of imagination or is rushed, we imagine those other people as essentially unlike us: unknowable, inscrutable, inconvertible. [...]

A culture capable of imagining complexly is a humble culture. It acts, when it has to act, as late in the game as possible, and as cautiously, because it knows its own girth and the tight confines of the china shop it’s blundering into. And it knows that no matter how well-prepared it is — no matter how ruthlessly it has held its projections up to intelligent scrutiny — the place it is headed for is going to be very different from the place it imagined. The shortfall between the imagined and the real, multiplied by the violence of one’s intent, equals the evil one will do."
(George Saunders, The Braindead Megaphone, 2007)

"Every well-thought-out rebuttal to dogma, every scrap of intelligent logic, every absurdist reduction of some bullying stance is the antidote. Every request for the clarification of the vague, every poke at smug banality, every pen stroke in a document under revision is the antidote… We still have the ability to rise up… keep reminding ourselves that representations of the world are never the world itself."
(George Saunders)

E4.6.3.B_REF2_PH "L’HOMME NE DOIT PAS TENTER DE DISSIPER L’AMBIGUÏTE DE SON ETRE MAIS AU CONTRAIRE ACCEPTER DE LA REALISER" (Simone de Beauvoir)
"Oui cette phrase n'est pas facile, essayons donc le temps de la comprendre. Est ambigu ce qui a plusieurs sens, plusieurs directions, plusieurs côtés, plusieurs caractères. En général, on voudrait éviter ces ambivalences. On cherche à ce que tout soit ramené à un sens univoque, quitte à ce qu'il soit unilatéral. Ce serait le prix à payer pour être efficace, et en effet nombre de discours politiques, idéologiques essaient d'effacer toutes les opacités. Ils cherchent à supprimer toutes les couleurs, les zones de gris pour l’évidence du noir et blanc; À l'âge des communicants professionnels c'est même devenu un sport.
Mais dissiper ainsi l'ambiguïté est-ce toujours légitime ? Pour le savoir examinons une situation de la vie quotidienne. Vous avez à prendre une décision pour suivre ou non votre relation avec cette personne, déménager, accepter un nouveau travail… Vous avez un doute - ce que vous prenez pour une difficulté est en fait une chance, car si vous hésitez c'est que vous êtes libre. Si dans toute situation, une seule chose devait s’imposer, une seule personne, un seul appartement, un seul métier, ce serait horrible ! Le fait de pouvoir choisir participe de la richesse même de l'existence. Mais la contrepartie est qu'il me faut accepter que je ne puisse jamais être certain à 100 % que mon action est la meilleure possible. Et c'est parce que Simone de Beauvoir avait la passion de la liberté qu'elle souligne le danger de vouloir tout simplifier. L’idéologie actuelle selon laquelle il faudrait se calmer, être zen, tout gérer dans notre vie, ne fait en réalité que nier notre liberté. C'est terrible, car il nous faut tout au contraire apprendre à habiter au cœur de l'ambiguïté, c'est-à-dire au cœur de l'ouverture - au cœur du possible. Comment faire ? Lorsqu’on prend les choses trop sérieux, l'ambiguïté devient effrayante. Se tourner vers notre capacité à nous amuser de toute situation, c'est desserrer l'esprit sérieux qui est en train de nous crisper. Regardons la situation sous d’autres angles, ayont une vision plus large, et tout devient plus facile.”
(Fabrice Midal, 3 minutes of philosophy to become human again diffusé sur France Culture le 25 juillet 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/3-minutes-de-philosophie-pour-redevenir-humain/simone-de-beauvoir-lhomme-ne-doit-pas-tenter-de-dissiper-lambiguite-de-son-etre-mais-au-contraire

E4.6.3.B_REF3_LIT A_Andy Denzler_Study for the portrait of Ella_2021_(1) ; A_Andy Denzler_Study for the portrait of Ella_2021_(2) /Andy Denzler/

HARING CONTRASTS THE REALITY OF "CONSTANT CHANGE" WITH THE HUMAN ATTEMPT TO "PROGRAM OR CONTROL" EXISTENCE THROUGH SCHEDULES AND SYSTEMS. How can we be in uncertainties without reaching for fact? "Thinking you know the answer is as dangerous as not thinking about the possibility of no answers".
"No two human beings ever experience two sensations, experiences, feelings, or thoughts identically. Everything changes, everything is always different. All of these variables merging, interacting, destroying each other, building new forms, ideas, “realities,” mean that the human experience is one of constant change and, as we label it, “growth” [and yet] most living human beings build their lives around the belief that these differences, changes, don’t exist. They choose to ignore these things and attempt to program or control their own existence. They make schedules, long-term commitments, set up a system of time and become controlled by their system of controls. [...] 

People don’t want to know that they change.
Unless they feel it is an improvement, and then they are all for “change,” and will go to great lengths to “make changes” or contrive situations or force a change that is unnatural… Some attitudes I see all around me are:
Change is acceptable as long as it is controllable.
Change can be predicted.
Changes can be contrived and/or altered and/or planned. [...]

Most simply, people know to some extent that they feel different at different times or look different to themselves different days, but few people really try to experience this or question it or really investigate its reasons or its implications. [...]

To be a victim of your own knowledge is not understanding what your knowledge is and what its result is.
To be a victim of change is to ignore its existence.
To be a victim of “living by what you think” is to ignore the possibilities of “another way to live” or the possibility of “being wrong about the way it is” or ignoring the possibility of “not knowing what you think.”
Thinking you know the answer is as dangerous as not thinking about the possibility of no answers."
(Keith Haring, Keith Haring Journals)

E4.6.3.B_REF4_PH A_Nazareno Rodrigues_Um prato cheio de certeza [A plate full of certainties]

POUR ROUVRIR LE POSSIBLE, IL FAUT INTRODUIRE DU "JEU", UNE "FISSURE". LA DECOÏNCIDENCE EST L'ACTE DE "DESOLIDARISER LE SOI" DE SA PROPRE CERTITUDE… en précisant que la décoïncidence "ne porte pas déjà une nouvelle figure de la vérité".
"La décoïncidence nous conduit donc en ce point crucial, mais non apparent, d'inversion; en ce point où le retournement est d'autant plus opérant qu'il ne se laisse pas repérer : c'est-à-dire en ce point où la négativité (d'arrachement et de désolidarisation interne) devient effectivement positive du fait même que la positivité qu'elle défait (en tant qu'adéquation adaptation) est devenue subrepticement négative. La décoincidence est donc éclairante en ce sens qu'elle fait apparaître la positivité (négative) du positif; ou disons en quoi c'est la positivité qui, en tant que caractère reconnu positif du positif, est véritablement négative. C'est-à dire que s'inverse nécessairement (fatalement) en négatif le fait que le positif, quel qu'il soit, s'accorde à bon droit avec lui-même, devient solidaire de soi, c'est-à-dire coïncide adéquatement avec soi et, par là, sombre en positivité qui s'immobilise et se satisfait la positivité nomme ainsi le négatif qui se trouve impliqué dans tout positif, et cela non par défaut, mais précisément en tant qu'il est positif et s'impose en normalité qui ne se laisse plus inquiéter, est stérile et ne travaille plus. [...]
Seule une décoïncidence, désolidarisant le soi de cette coïncidence avec soi, peut sauver ce soi promis sinon à l'inertie. Vie du sujet qui, coïncidant avec soi-même comme avec son monde, en suivant le train conforme de sa vie, laisse sa vie s'enliser. [...]

"Le concept de décoïncidence éclaire ainsi comment le négatif, de façon strictement immanente, est promoteur, mais sans prétendre pour autant (trop commodément : dialectiquement) produire un dépassement. Car le négatif y procède de l'ordre précédent en ce que celui-ci est arrivé à complétion-saturation, mais non de ce qu'il se révèlerait erroné; en ce qu'il s'affiche désormais, tout au contraire, complètement adéquat et adapté, mais, ne faisant plus que coïncider, se meurt. Car c'est de cette coïncidence même et de la cohésion en résultant - qui, comme elles sont achevées, ne donnent plus à travailler, ne laissent plus de manque où opérer et se complaisent comme telles dans leur positivité - que point nécessairement, parce que seule pouvant desceller cet état devenant étau, une fissuration introduisant une dissidence. Ou bien ce réel, en s'auto-confirmant (-confinant), en s'auto-conformant, ne pourra plus que s'étioler. Le négatif (s'avérant positif) de la décoïncidence est sécrété par la positivité (se révélant négative) de la coïncidence qui n'a d'autre avenir, en finissant de s'étaler et de s'imposer, que de commencer de se défaire. Mais, en défaisant la coïncidence précédente, une telle décoïncidence ne présuppose pas quelle nouvelle coïncidence doit s'ensuivre qui rétablirait une adéquation dépassant la contradiction antérieure. À la différence de ce qui caractérise la dialectique hégélienne, elle ne porte pas déjà en creux une nouvelle figure de la vérité; s'y produit une exaptation, mais sans projeter quelle est l'adaptation à venir. Et même y en aura-t-il une?
En quoi la décoïncidence est exploratoire, ouvre sur l'aléatoire, sur l'inventif, sur ce qui ne se trouve pas déjà prévu ou impliqué, sur ce qui peut aussi bien s'amorcer qu'avorter. [...]"
(François Jullien, Dé-coïncidence, D’où viennent l’art et l’existence, 2017)

E4.6.3.B_REF5_PH JULLIEN DEFINIT LA MODERNITE COMME LA PRISE DE CONSCIENCE QUE L'"ADEQUATION" (LA CORRESPONDANCE PARFAITE ENTRE L'ESPRIT ET LE MONDE) EST IMPOSSIBLE. "Le système est mort". Seule la Décoïncidence (l'écart, le mouvement) est viable.
"Modernité [...]
Je crois qu'il est une modernité, non pas relative ou de tout temps invoquée, celle revendiquée par des « modernes » contre des « anciens », ou par Galilée contre Aristote, mais qui constitue un événement singulier: quand l'Europe, au tournant du XIX au XX siècle, remet en question, non pas tant ses équations précédentes, que la possibilité d'une adéquation d'ensemble. Non pas tant rompt d'avec le protocole de sa raison, ou change de raison des choses, mais montre que seule la décoïncidence est viable - en philosophie, le système est mort. Non plus on change de système, mais on mesure l'impossibilité d'un système prétendant tout maintenir concordant, et l'on s'y confronte. [...]
Hume commence par demander si la causalité, qui, depuis les Grecs, est le grand ressort explicatif du monde, ne serait pas qu'un enchaînement que l'habitude établit dans l'esprit. Kant qui, par sa révolution copernicienne, élargit cette interrogation à toute la connaissance, avance que ce n'est pas notre connaissance qui viendrait se « régler » sur les objets, ou l'esprit qui entre en adéquation avec la chose, mais que ce sont ces « objets » qui viennent se régler sur notre capacité de connaissance en s'adaptant à la forme de notre sensibilité comme aux catégories de notre esprit. Nietzsche, enfin, pousse ce soupçon jusqu'à conclure que ce que nous prenons pour l'adéquation constitutive de la vérité n'est qu'une adaptation à la vie : nous prenons pour vrai, für wahr halten, ce qui répond à nos exigences vitales et satisfait à notre volonté de puissance. Ce que nous « croyons » l'objectivité de la connaissance ne serait qu'une accommodation aux besoins organiques de l'espèce au point que la vérité n'est plus vérité, mais « valeur», et peut-être même une erreur, mais une erreur qui, de ce qu'elle est utile à notre survie, se justifie. Que l'adéquation ne soit plus fondée dans l'Être, ou plutôt qu'il n'y ait plus d'adéquation qui soit à fonder, c'est-à-dire que l'adéquation ne soit plus qu'une coïncidence dont le caractère adapté ne parvient pas à dissimuler ce qu'il peut avoir de fortuit, qu'on ne peut justifier, a détrôné la Nature. [...]
La modernité a été d'oser en affronter la fin : de prendre acte de la mort de la Nature. D'y dénoncer une naturalisation de la transcendance, d'oser penser que la praxis, dans quelque domaine que ce soit, ne soit plus d'obéir et de se conformer; que des règles ne sont plus données, mais à inventer: que le fortuit n'est pas séparable de l'adapté, mais, comme le laisse lui-même entendre le terme de coïncidence, peut en être la condition cachée. Elle a été de poser, non plus la « Nature », dans son universelle nécessité, mais le jeu comme terme premier.
Le « jeu » renverse tout fondement. Non pas seulement parce que le jeu renverse la Nature comme fondement, mais, plus foncièrement, parce qu'il interdit de penser un fondement possible, défait toute pensée d'un support ou d'un garant d'un mode ultime, universel et normé, de fonctionnement. Le jeu est l'antithèse de la Nature, non parce qu'il la contredirait, mais parce qu'il en dénonce la rassurante légalité. « Au commencement est le jeu » (ce que disait déjà à sa façon le clinamen), donc il n'y a pas de Commencement ou de Principe inscrit dans l'Être, est la proposition de la modernité qui non seulement rompt avec la Nature et son classicisme, mais renverse son parti pris que, du même coup, elle laisse discerner. [...]"
(François Jullien, Dé-coïncidence, D’où viennent l’art et l’existence, 2017)

E4.6.3.B_REF6_OH TRISTAN GARCIA AFFIRME QUE PUISQUE LE MONDE EST "EGAL" (NEUTRE, PLAT), IL N'IMPORTE PAS QUE LE SUJET LE SOIT. Se sculpter à l'image du monde ne rend pas "plus vrai". Cela ouvre la voie à une existence qui ne cherche pas la "sagesse" (fermeture/adéquation), mais le "possible" (ouverture/intensité).
"La sagesse me révèle, en comprenant les choses, que le monde est égal. Puis elle m’apprend qu’il me faudrait demeurer égal à l’image de ce monde mis à ras : parce que tout est égal, sois-le-aussi, rejette le plus et le moins, égalise ton humeur, recherche le plat, dessine-toi une seule ligne sur ce plan et plies-y toi. La sagesse articule être et comprendre : il faudrait être dans le monde à la mesure et à l’image de ce qu’on en comprend. 
Toute sagesse, occidentale ou orientale, est l’illusion selon laquelle il serait possible d’accorder ce que je suis à ce que je sais. Par quelque tour de passe-passe, une sagesse tente de donner un sens unique absolu à ce que je comprends du monde en moi et à ce que je suis moi-même en ce monde. 
Certainement, le monde est égal, précisément pour cette raison, il n’importe pas que je le sois ou non à son égard. Est-ce que le sage sera plus et mieux dans le monde que celui qui aura vécu sans sagesse ? Parce que le sage se sculpte à l’image du monde, à l’image de ce qui est vraiment, croit-il qu’il sera plus, qu’il sera mieux que celui qui n’a strictement rien compris ? 
La conscience de la vérité ne rend jamais plus vrai."
(Tristan Garcia, Forme et Objet - un traité des choses, 2011)

E4.6.3.C. The Courage of Inconsistency: The Fluid Self.
Embracing possibility requires a form of "treason" against one's past self and the courage to be inconsistent with old identities.

E4.6.3.C_REF1_PH CYNTHIA FLEURY DEFINES INTELLIGENCE AS THE COURAGE TO SEIZE "ALTERNATIVES" AND FIND "OTHER WAYS TO BE RIGHT".
"L’intelligence prouve son courage à saisir les alternatives. Il y a d’autres manières d’avoir raison. Mille autres chemins qui mènent ailleurs. Et cette revendication de l’ailleurs et de l’alternative reste, en dernière instance, la prérogative des rationalités de talent. 
D’ailleurs, derrière la mélancolie du soi trône moins l’intelligence que la peur d’un soi qui n’arrive à rien. Et dès lors, la peur l’emporte sur l’intelligence; elle scinde l’unité première. Le soi n’y résiste pas, et par-delà la mélancolie - qui savait rester un brin littéraire arrive la nausée. À l’envers de notre être sommeille un Roquentin sans vindicte. « Moi, je ne sais pas profiter de l’occasion : je vais au hasard, vide et calme, sous ce ciel inutilisé. (1) » 
Note:
(1) Jean-Paul Sartre, La Nausée, op. cit., p. 106."
(Cynthia Fleury, La fin du courage, 2010)

E4.6.3.C_REF2_PH NIETZSCHE ARGUES THAT WE MUST BE "TRAITORS" TO OUR PAST CONVICTIONS TO ALLOW THE "HIGHER SELF" TO GROW.
"DE LA CONVICTION ET DE LA JUSTICE. — Ce que l’homme dans la passion dit, promet, résout, le tenir ensuite dans le sang-froid et le calme — c’est un devoir à mettre au nombre des plus lourds fardeaux qui pèsent sur l’humanité. Etre obligé d’admettre à jamais les conséquences de la colère, de la vengeance enflammée, du dévouement enthousiaste — cela peut éveiller contre ces sentiments une amertume d’autant plus grande que c’est justement à leur égard que partout, et notamment chez les artistes, on pratique un culte idolâtre. Les artistes payent cher l’estime accordée aux passions et l’ont toujours fait ; il est vrai qu’ils exaltent aussi les satisfactions terribles des passions qu’un homme tire lui-même de ces explosions de vengeance suivies de mort, de mutilation, d’exil volontaire, et cette résignation du cœur brisé. Toujours les curieux désirs de passions se tiennent en éveil, il semblerait qu’ils disent : « Sans passions, vous n’aurez point vécu. » — Pour avoir juré fidélité (peut-être même à un être purement fictif, comme un Dieu), pour avoir dévoué son cœur à un prince, un parti, une femme, un ordre religieux, un artiste, un penseur, dans un état d’illusion aveugle, qui nous enveloppait de séduction et faisait apparaître ces êtres comme dignes de tous les respects, de tous les sacrifices, — est-on lié enfin indissolublement ? Certes, ne nous sommes-nous pas alors trompés nous-mêmes ? N'était-ce pas une promesse hypothétique, sous la condition, qui, à dire le vrai, ne s’est pas réalisée, que ces êtres à qui nous nous consacrions seraient réellement ce qu’ils paraissaient être dans notre imagination ? Sommes-nous obligés d’être fidèles à nos erreurs, même avec l’idée que par cette fidélité nous portons dommage à notre Moi supérieur ? — Non, il n’y a point de loi, point d’obligation de ce genre ; nous devons être traîtres, pratiquer l’infidélité, abandonner toujours et toujours notre idéal. Nous ne passons pas d’une période de la vie à l’autre sans causer et aussi sans ressentir par là les douleurs de la trahison. Faudrait-il, pour échapper à ces douleurs, nous mettre en garde contre les transports de notre sentiment ? Le monde alors ne deviendrait-il pas trop vide, trop spectral ? Demandons-nous plutôt si ces douleurs, lors d’un changement de conviction sont nécessaires, ou si elles ne dépendent pas d’une opinion et d’une appréciation erronées. Pourquoi admire-t-on celui qui en change ? Je crains que la réponse ne doive être : parce que chacun suppose que seuls des motifs de bas intérêt ou de crainte personnelle causent un tel changement. Autrement dit : on croit au fond que personne ne modifie ses opinions tant qu’elles lui sont avantageuses, ou du moins qu’elles ne lui font point tort. Mais s’il en est ainsi, c’est là un fâcheux témoignage sur l’importance intellectuelle de toutes les convictions. Examinons un peu comment les convictions naissent et voyons si l’on n’en fait pas beaucoup trop de cas : cela montrera que le changement de convictions aussi est toujours mesuré à une échelle fausse et que jusqu’ici nous avions coutume de trop souffrir de ce changement."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain, Aphorisme 629, 1878)

E1.6.B.3.7_REF1_TH.wE4.6.3.C.
CHANGING ONESELF IS ESSENTIAL FOR GROWTH AND LIVING FULLY, DESPITE THE DIFFICULTY DUE TO OUR NEED FOR PSYCHOLOGICAL CONTINUITY AND SOCIETAL PRESSURES FOR CONSISTENCY. Giving up and enduring the uncertainty is a courageous act that paves the way for a different future and a more authentic life.
"“A self that goes on changing is a self that goes on living,” Virginia Woolf wrote. Nothing is more vital to the capacity for change than the uncomfortable luxury of changing your mind — that stubborn refusal to ossify, the courageous willingness to outgrow your views, anneal your values, and keep clarifying your priorities. It is incredibly difficult to achieve because the very notion of the self hinges on our sense psychological continuity and internal consistency; because we live in a culture whose myths of heroism and martyrdom valorize completion at any cost, a culture that contractually binds the present self to the future self in mortgages and marital vows, presuming unchanging desires, forgetting that who we are is shaped by what we want and what we want goes on changing as we go on growing.

Changing — your mind, your life — is also painfully difficult because it is a form of renunciation, a special case of those necessary losses that sculpt our lives; it requires giving something up — a way of seeing, a way of being — in order for something new to come abloom along the vector of the “endless unfolding” that is a life fully lived, something that leaves your new emerging self more fully met.

The psychoanalyst Adam Phillips offers a salve for that perennial difficulty in On Giving Up (public library) — an exploration and celebration of giving up as “a prelude, a precondition for something else to happen, a form of anticipation, a kind of courage,” “an attempt to make a different future” that “get us the life we want, or don’t know that we want.” [...]

It is our ego-ideals — the stories we tell ourselves and the world about who we are and who we ought to be, fantasies of coherence and continuity mooring us to a static idealized self — that feed what Phillips calls the “tyranny of completion.” But human beings are rough drafts that continually mistake themselves for the final story, then gasp as the plot changes on the page of living. We do this largely because we are captives of comfort in our habits of thought and feeling, victims of certainty — that supreme narrowing of the mind — when it comes to our own desires. That we don’t fully know what we want because we are half-opaque to ourselves, that something we didn’t think we wanted may end up enlarging our lives in unimaginable ways, is a kind of uncertainty that unravels us. But if we can bear the frustration of the figuring, we may live into a larger and more authentic life."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)


"We tend to value, and even idealize, the idea of seeing things through, of finishing things rather than abandoning them. Giving up has to be justified in a way that completion does not; giving up doesn’t usually make us proud of ourselves; it is a falling short of our preferred selves… Giving up, in other words, is usually thought of as a failure rather than a way of succeeding at something else. It is worth wondering to whom we believe we have to justify ourselves when we are giving up, or when we are determinedly not giving up. [...]
The whole notion of sacrifice depends upon our knowing what we want… Giving up, or giving up on, anything or anyone always exposes what it is we take it we want… To give something up is to seek one’s own assumed advantage, one’s apparently preferred pleasure, but in an economy that we mostly can’t comprehend, or, like all economies, predict… We calculate, in so far as we can, the effect of our sacrifice, the future we want from it… to get through to ourselves: to get through to the life we want. [...]
Not being able to give up is not to be able to allow for loss, for vulnerability; not to be able to allow for the passing of time, and the revisions it brings. [...]
The question is always: what are we going to have to sacrifice in order to develop, in order to get to the next stage of our lives?"
(Adam Phillips, On Giving Up, 2024)

"Our frustration is the key to our desire; to want something or someone is to feel their absence; so to register or recognize a lack would seem to be the precondition for any kind of pleasure or satisfaction. Indeed, in this account, frustration, a sense of lack, is the necessary precondition for any kind of satisfaction. […]

The traditional story about lack and desire describes a closed system; in this story I can never be surprised by what I want, because somewhere in myself I already know what is missing; my frustration is the form my recognition takes, it is a form of remembering.

Wanting is recovery, not discovery… There is a part of oneself that needs to know what it is doing, and a part of oneself that needs not to… a part of oneself that needs to know what one wants and a part of oneself that needs not to."
(Adam Phillips, On Giving Up, 2024)

E4.6.3.C_REF3_PH "I MAY CONTRADICT MYSELF, BUT THE TRUTH... I DO NOT CONTRADICT"
"Je pourray tantost changer, non de fortune seulement, mais aussi d'intention : C'est un contrerolle [registre] de divers et muables accidens, et d'imaginations [pensées] irresoluës, et quand il y eschet [le cas échéant], contraires : soit que je sois autre moy-mesme, soit que je saisisse les subjects, par autres circonstances, et considerations. Tant y a que je me contredis bien à l'advanture, mais la verité, comme disoit Demades, je ne la contredy point."
(Montaigne, Les Essais, Du repentir, III, II)

E4.6.3.C_REF4_PH JANKÉLÉVITCH DEFINES THE "COSTLY VIRTUE OF THE BEGINNING" AS THE REFUSAL OF "REPETITION" AND "INERT AUTOMATISMS." He exhorts us to "make ourselves’ definition lie" and not be cornered into a "conventional characterology".
"Il faut du courage pour briser ou problématiser ce qui va de soi, pour déranger les constellations mondaines : les nouveautés, zigzags, dissymétries de la vérité interrompent cette continuation bourgeoise d’existence à laquelle routine et conformisme nous adaptent si douillettement. Le courage est ici un courage de déplaire, de décevoir l’attente de l’autre, ou du moins de démentir, au nom de la vérité, ce que les autres attendent de notre personnage. Autant le lâche se montre soucieux, en comblant cette attente, de confirmer les croyances du groupe à son propre sujet, autant le courageux dédaigne son propre confort : il aime à faire mentir sa définition et ne se laisse pas coincer dans les rôles commodes et dans la caractérologie conventionnelle que sa classe lui prépare ; il renonce volontairement à l’estime publique, il veut ennuyer les femmes du monde, il choque quand il pourrait charmer. Il ne profite pas du mouvement acquis et n’exploite jamais le ronron des répétitions. Et de même que le courage de la vérité s’inscrit en faux contre les antithèses et analogies simplistes de la rhétorique, de même le courage de la sincérité, quel que soit le prix à payer, refuse les automatismes inertes du mimétisme et de la tradition. La rhétorique, avec ses couples de concepts, ses fausses fenêtres, ses cases vides, s’installe frileusement dans la continuation formelle et la redondance phraséologique : la coûteuse vertu du commencement, qui dit non à toute économie, ne veut pas pour nous de ce bonheur facile, et elle détruit de ses propres mains le doux sommeil que l’approximation réserve aux menteurs."
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, Les Vertus et l’amour, 1970)

E4.6.3.C_REF5_PH "ON THE SUPERIOR MAN
The superior man does not set his mind either for anything or against anything. What is right he will follow. The superior man is quiet and calm, waiting for the appointments of Heaven, while the mean man walks in dangerous paths, looking for lucky occurrences."
(The sayings of Confucius)

E4.6.3.D. Navigating the Fog: Provisional Morality and Risk.
Strategies for living and making decisions within a "possibilist" framework: using margins of safety, provisional moralities, pre-mortems, and the precautionary principle.

E4.6.3.D_REF1_PSI

EL3.162. THE PURPOSE OF THE MARGIN OF SAFETY IS TO RENDER THE FORECAST UNNECESSARY
“History is littered with good ideas taken too far, which are indistinguishable from bad ideas. The wisdom in having room for error is acknowledging that uncertainty, randomness, and chance—“unknowns”—are an ever-present part of life. The only way to deal with them is by increasing the gap between what you think will happen and what can happen while still leaving you capable of ﬁghting another day.
Benjamin Graham is known for his concept of margin of safety. He wrote about it extensively and in mathematical detail. But my favorite summary of the theory came when he mentioned in an interview that “the purpose of the margin of safety is to render the forecast unnecessary.”
It’s hard to overstate how much power lies in that simple statement.
Margin of safety—you can also call it room for error or redundancy—is the only eﬀective way to safely navigate a world that is governed by odds, not certainties. And almost everything related to money exists in that kind of world.
Forecasting with precision is hard. This is obvious to the card counter, because no one could possibly know where a particular card lies in a shuﬄed deck. It’s less obvious to someone asking, “What will the average annual return of the stock market be over the next 10 years?” or “On what date will I be able to retire?” But they are fundamentally the same. The best we can do is think about odds.
Graham’s margin of safety is a simple suggestion that we don’t need to view the world in front of us as black or white, predictable or a crapshoot. The grey area—pursuing things where a range of potential outcomes are acceptable—is the smart way to proceed.
But people underestimate the need for room for error in almost everything they do that involves money. Stock analysts give their clients price targets, not price ranges. Economic forecasters predict things with precise ﬁgures; rarely broad probabilities. The pundit who speaks in unshakable certainties will gain a larger following than the one who says “We can’t know for sure,” and speaks in probabilities.
We do this in all kinds of ﬁnancial endeavors, especially those related to our own decisions. Harvard psychologist Max Bazerman once showed that when analyzing other people’s home renovation plans, most people estimate the project will run between 25% and 50% over budget. But when it comes to their own projects, people estimate that renovations will be completed on time and at budget. Oh, the eventual disappointment.
Two things cause us to avoid room for error. One is the idea that somebody must know what the future holds, driven by the uncomfortable feeling that comes from admitting the opposite. The second is that you’re therefore doing yourself harm by not taking actions that fully exploit an accurate view of that future coming true.
But room for error is underappreciated and misunderstood. It’s often viewed as a conservative hedge, used by those who don’t want to take much risk or aren’t conﬁdent in their views. But when used appropriately, it’s quite the opposite.
Room for error lets you endure a range of potential outcomes, and endurance lets you stick around long enough to let the odds of beneﬁting from a low-probability outcome fall in your favor. The biggest gains occur infrequently, either because they don’t happen often or because they take time to compound. So the person with enough room for error in part of their strategy (cash) to let them endure hardship in another (stocks) has an edge over the person who gets wiped out, game over, insert more tokens, when they’re wrong.
Bill Gates understood this well. When Microsoft was a young company, he said he “came up with this incredibly conservative approach that I wanted to have enough money in the bank to pay a year’s worth of payroll even if we didn’t get any payments coming in.” Warren Buﬀett expressed a similar idea when he told Berkshire Hathaway shareholders in 2008: “I have pledged—to you, the rating agencies and myself—to always run Berkshire with more than ample cash ... When forced to choose, I will not trade even a night’s sleep for the chance of extra proﬁts.”
There are a few speciﬁc places for investors to think about room for error.
One is volatility. Can you survive your assets declining by 30%? On a spreadsheet, maybe yes—in terms of actually paying your bills and staying cash-ﬂow positive. But what about mentally? It is easy to underestimate what a 30%decline does to your psyche. Your conﬁdence may become shot at the very moment opportunity is at its highest. You—or your spouse—may decide it’s time for a new plan, or new career. I know several investors who quit after losses because they were exhausted. Physically exhausted. Spreadsheets are good at telling you when the numbers do or don’t add up. They’re not good at modeling how you’ll feel when you tuck your kids in at night wondering if the investment decisions you’ve made were a mistake that will hurt their future. Having a gap between what you can technically endure versus what’s emotionally possible is an overlooked version of room for error.
Another is saving for retirement. We can look at history and see, for example, that the U.S. stock market has returned an annual average of 6.8% after inﬂation since the 1870s. It’s a reasonable ﬁrst approximation to use that as an estimate of what to expect on your own diversiﬁed portfolio when saving for retirement. You can use those return assumptions to back into the amount of money you’ll need to save each month to achieve your target nestegg.
But what if future returns are lower? Or what if long-term history is a good estimate of the long-term future, but your target retirement date ends up falling in the middle of a brutal bear market, like 2009? What if a future bear market scares you out of stocks and you end up missing a future bull market, so the returns you actually earn are less than the market average? What if you need to cash out your retirement accounts in your 30s to pay for a medical mishap?
The answer to those what ifs is, “You won’t be able to retire like you once predicted.” Which can be a disaster.
The solution is simple: Use room for error when estimating your future returns. This is more art than science. For my own investments, which I’ll describe more in chapter 20, I assume the future returns I’ll earn in my lifetime will be ⅓ lower than the historic average. So I save more than I would if I assumed the future will resemble the past. It’s my margin of safety. The future may be worse than ⅓ lower than the past, but no margin of safety oﬀers a 100%guarantee. A one-third buﬀer is enough to allow me to sleep well at night. And if the future does resemble the past, I’ll be pleasantly surprised. “The best way to achieve felicity is to aim low,” says Charlie Munger. Wonderful.
An important cousin of room for error is what I call optimism bias in risk-taking, or “Russian roulette should statistically work” syndrome: An attachment to favorable odds when the downside is unacceptable in any circumstances.
Nassim Taleb says, “You can be risk loving and yet completely averse to ruin.” And indeed, you should.
The idea is that you have to take risk to get ahead, but no risk that can wipe you out is ever worth taking. The odds are in your favor when playing Russian roulette. But the downside is not worth the potential upside. There is no margin of safety that can compensate for the risk.
Same with money. The odds of many lucrative things are in your favor. Real estate prices go up most years, and during most years you’ll get a paycheck every other week. But if something has 95% odds of being right, the 5% odds of being wrong means you will almost certainly experience the downside at some point in your life. And if the cost of the downside is ruin, the upside the other 95% of the time likely isn’t worth the risk, no matter how appealing it looks.
Leverage is the devil here. Leverage—taking on debt to make your money go further—pushes routine risks into something capable of producing ruin. The danger is that rational optimism most of the time masks the odds of ruin some of the time. The result is we systematically underestimate risk. Housing prices fell 30% last decade. A few companies defaulted on their debt. That’s capitalism. It happens. But those with high leverage had a double wipeout: Not only were they left broke, but being wiped out erased every opportunity to get back in the game at the very moment opportunity was ripe. A homeowner wiped out in 2009 had no chance of taking advantage of cheap mortgage rates in 2010. Lehman Brothers had no chance of investing in cheap debt in 2009. They were done.
To get around this, I think of my own money as barbelled. I take risks with one portion and am terriﬁed with the other. This is not inconsistent, but the psychology of money would lead you to believe that it is. I just want to ensure I can remain standing long enough for my risks to pay oﬀ. You have to survive to succeed. To repeat a point we’ve made a few times in this book: The ability to do what you want, when you want, for as long as you want, has an inﬁnite ROI.
Room for error does more than just widen the target around what you think might happen. It also helps protect you from things you’d never imagine, which can be the most troublesome events we face.
The Battle of Stalingrad during World War II was the largest battle in history. With it came equally staggering stories of how people dealt with risk.
One came in late 1942, when a German tank unit sat in reserve on grasslands outside the city. When tanks were desperately needed on the front lines, something happened that surprised everyone: Almost none of them worked.
Out of 104 tanks in the unit, fewer than 20 were operable. Engineers quickly found the issue. Historian William Craig writes: “During the weeks of inactivity behind the front lines, ﬁeld mice had nested inside the vehicles and eaten away insulation covering the electrical systems.”
The Germans had the most sophisticated equipment in the world. Yet there they were, defeated by mice.
You can imagine their disbelief. This almost certainly never crossed their minds. What kind of tank designer thinks about mouse protection? Not a reasonable one. And not one who studied tank history.
But these kinds of things happen all the time. You can plan for every risk except the things that are too crazy to cross your mind. And those crazy things can do the most harm, because they happen more often than you think and you have no plan for how to deal with them.
In 2006 Warren Buﬀett announced a search for his eventual replacement. He said he needed someone “genetically programmed to recognize and avoid serious risks, including those never before encountered.” […]
the most important part of every plan is planning on your plan not going according to plan.”
(Morgan Housel, The Psychology of Money, 2020)


E4.6.3.D_REF2_PSI

EL3.87.F. THE PREMORTEM: A PARTIAL REMEDY 
"Can overconfident optimism be overcome by training? I am not optimistic. [...]
Organizations may be better able to tame optimism than individuals are. The best idea for doing so was contributed by Gary Klein, my “adversarial collaborator” who generally defends intuitive decision making against claims of bias and is typically hostile to algorithms. He labels his proposal the premortem. The procedure is simple: when the organization has almost come to an important decision but has not formally committed itself, Klein proposes gathering for a brief session a group of individuals who are knowledgeable about the decision. The premise of the session is a short speech: “Imagine that we are a year into the future. We implemented the plan as it now exists. The outcome was a disaster. Please take 5 to 10 minutes to write a brief history of that disaster.” [...]
The premortem has two main advantages: it overcomes the groupthink that affects many teams once a decision appears to have been made, and it unleashes the imagination of knowledgeable individuals in a much-needed direction. 
As a team converges on a decision—and especially when the leader tips her hand—public doubts about the wisdom of the planned move are gradually suppressed and eventually come to be treated as evidence of flawed loyalty to the team and its leaders. The suppression of doubt contributes to overconfidence in a group where only supporters of the decision have a voice. The main virtue of the premortem is that it legitimizes doubts. Furthermore, it encourages even supporters of the decision to search for possible threats that they had not considered earlier. The premortem is not a panacea and does not provide complete protection against nasty surprises, but it goes some way toward reducing the damage of plans that are subject to the biases of WYSIATI and uncritical optimism."
(Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow, 2011)

E4.6.3.D_REF3_LIT "AGIS AUSSI BIEN QUE TU LE PEUX... EN RESTANT CONSCIENT DES MARGES D'ERREUR" EST L'APPLICATION PRATIQUE DU "SENS DU POSSIBLE" : vivre la vie comme une hypothèse scientifique que l'on corrige en marchant, plutôt que comme un dogme figé.
"Nous sommes tous bêtes à l'occasion ; à l'occasion aussi, nous sommes contraints d'agir aveuglément ou à demi aveuglément, sans quoi le monde s'arrêterait ; et si quelqu'un tirait des dangers de la bêtise cette règle : “Abstiens-toi de juger et de trancher chaque fois que tu manque d'informations”, nous nous figerions ! Mais cette situation dont on fait aujourd'hui tout un monde en rappelle une autre que nous connaissons depuis longtemps, dans le domaine intellectuel. En effet, comme notre savoir et notre pouvoir sont limités, nous en sommes réduits, dans toutes les sciences, à énoncer des jugements prématurés ; mais en veillant, comme on nous l'a enseigné, à maintenir ce défaut dans certaines limites et à le corriger le cas échéant, ce qui restitue à notre travail une certaine justesse. Rien, en fait, ne s'oppose à ce que nous transférerions dans d'autres domaines cette exactitude et cette fier humilité du jugement et de l'action ; et je crois que le précepte : “Agit aussi bien que tu le peux et aussi mal que tu le dois tout en restant conscient des marges d'erreur de ton action!”  représenterait déjà, s'il était suivi, la moitié du chemin en direction d'une réforme vraiment féconde de notre vie. [...]"
(Robert Musil, De la bêtise, 1937)

E4.6.3.D_REF4_PH DANS LA TROISIEME PARTIE DU DISCOURS DE LA METHODE, DESCARTES PROPOSE UNE MORALE PAR PROVISION POUR FAIRE FACE AUX SITUATIONS OU LA CONNAISSANCE EST IMPOSSIBLE car la logique de la vie n'est pas la même que celle de la science;  dans la vie il y a une forme d'urgence dans laquelle il faut décider sans avoir de certitude (par provision =  en attendant).

E4.6.3.D_REF4.1_PH SANS METHODE, A QUOI BON L'INTELLIGENCE?
"Le bon sens est la chose du monde la mieux partagée: car chacun pense en être si bien pourvu que ceux même qui sont les plus difficiles à contenter en toute autre chose n’ont point coutume d’en désirer plus qu’ils en ont. En quoi il n’est pas vraisemblable que tous se trompent ; mais plutôt cela témoigne que la puissance de bien juger, et distinguer le vrai d’avec le faux, qui est proprement ce qu’on nomme le bon sens, ou la raison, est naturellement égale en tous les hommes ; et ainsi que la diversité de nos opinions ne vient pas de ce que les uns sont plus raisonnables que les autres, mais seulement de ce que nous conduisons nos pensées par diverses voies, et ne considérons pas les mêmes choses. Car ce n’est pas assez d’avoir l’esprit bon, mais le principal est de l’appliquer bien. Les plus grandes âmes sont capables des plus grands vices aussi bien que des plus grandes vertus ; et ceux qui ne marchent que fort lentement peuvent avancer beaucoup davantage, s’ils suivent toujours le droit chemin, que ne font ceux qui courent, et qui s’en éloignent."
(René Descartes, Discours de la méthode)

E4.6.3.D_REF4.2_PH SE REGLER SUR LES "MIEUX SENSES" POUR VIVRE EN SOCIETE.
"La première était d’obéir aux lois et aux coutumes de mon pays, retenant constamment la religion en laquelle Dieu m’a fait la grâce d’être instruit dès mon enfance, et me gouvernant en toute autre chose suivant les opinions les plus modérées et les plus éloignées de l’excès qui fussent communément reçues en pratique par les mieux sensés de ceux avec lesquels j’aurais à vivre. Car commençant dès lors à ne compter pour rien les miennes propres, cause que je les voulais remettre toutes à l’examen, j’étais assuré de ne pouvoir mieux que de suivre celles des mieux sensés. Et encore qu’il y en ait peut-être d’aussi bien sensés parmi les Perses ou les Chinois que parmi nous, il me semblait que le plus utile était de me régler selon ceux avec lesquels j’aurais à vivre ; et que pour savoir quelles étaient véritablement leurs opinions, je devais plutôt prendre garde à ce qu’ils pratiquaient qu’à ce qu’ils disaient, non seulement à cause qu’en la corruption de nos mœurs il y a peu de gens qui veuillent dire tout ce qu’ils croient, mais aussi à cause que plusieurs l’ignorent eux-mêmes, car, l’action de la pensée par laquelle on croit une chose étant différente de celle par laquelle on connaît qu’on la croit, elles sont souvent l’une sans l’autre. Et, entre plusieurs opinions également reçues, je ne choisissais que les plus modérées, tant à cause que ce sont toujours les plus commodes pour la pratique, et vraisemblablement les meilleures, tous excès ayant coutume d’être mauvais, comme aussi afin de me détourner moins du vrai chemin, en cas que je faillisse, que si, ayant choisi l’un des extrêmes, c’eût été l’autre qu’il eût fallu suivre. Et particulièrement je mettais entre les excès toutes les promesses par lesquelles on retranche quelque chose de sa liberté. Non que je désapprouvasse les lois qui, pour remédier à l’inconstance des esprits faibles, permettent, lorsqu’on a quelque bon dessein, ou même, pour la sûreté du commerce, quelque dessein qui n’est qu’indifférent, qu’on fasse des vœux ou des contrats qui obligent à y persévérer. Mais à cause que je ne voyais au monde aucune chose qui demeurât toujours en même état, et que pour mon particulier je me promettais de perfectionner de plus en plus mes jugements, et non point de les rendre pires, j’eusse pensé commettre une grande faute contre le bon sens si, pour ce que j’approuvais alors quelque chose, je me fusse obligé de la prendre pour bonne encore après, lorsqu’elle aurait peut-être cessé de l’être, ou que j’aurais cessé de l’estimer telle. "
(René Descartes, Discours de la méthode)

E4.6.3.D_REF4.3_PH RESOLUTION DANS LE DOUTE : AVOIR LE COURAGE D’AGIR FERMEMENT MEME SUR DES OPINIONS DOUTEUSES.
"Ma seconde maxime était d’être le plus ferme et le plus résolu en mes actions que je pourrais, et de ne suivre pas moins constamment les opinions les plus douteuses, lorsque je m’y serais une fois déterminé, que si elles eussent été très assurées. Imitant en ceci les voyageurs qui, se trouvant égarés en quelque forêt, ne doivent pas errer en tournoyant tantôt d’un côté tantôt d’un autre, ni encore moins s’arrêter en une place, mais marcher toujours le plus droit qu’ils peuvent vers un même côté, et ne le changer point pour de faibles raisons, encore que ce n’ait peut-être été au commencement que le hasard seul qui les ait déterminés à le choisir : car par ce moyen, s’ils ne vont justement où ils désirent, ils arriveront au moins à la fin quelque part où vraisemblablement ils seront mieux que dans le milieu d’une forêt. Et ainsi, les actions de la vie ne souffrant souvent aucun délai, c’est une vérité très certaine que, lorsqu’il n’est pas en notre pouvoir de discerner les plus vraies opinions, nous devons suivre les plus probables, et même qu’encore que nous ne remarquions point davantage de probabilité aux unes qu’aux autres, nous devons néanmoins nous déterminer à quelques-unes, et les considérer après non plus comme douteuses, en tant qu’elles se rapportent à la pratique, mais comme très vraies et très certaines, à cause que la raison qui nous y a fait déterminer se trouve telle. Et ceci fut capable dès lors de me délivrer de tous les repentirs et les remords qui ont coutume d’agiter les consciences de ces esprits faibles et chancelants qui se laissent aller inconstamment à pratiquer comme bonnes les choses qu’ils jugent après être mauvaises."
(René Descartes, Discours de la méthode)

E4.6.3.D_REF4.4_PH CHANGER SES DESIRS PLUTOT QUE L'ORDRE DU MONDE, ACCEPTANT LES LIMITES DE NOTRE POUVOIR SUR LE REEL.
"La troisième maxime était de tâcher toujours plutôt à me vaincre que la fortune, et à changer mes désirs que l’ordre du monde : et généralement de m’accoutumer à croire qu’il n’y a rien qui soit entièrement en notre pouvoir que nos pensées, en sorte qu’après que nous avons fait notre mieux touchant les choses qui nous sont extérieures, tout ce qui manque de nous réussir est au regard de nous absolument impossible. Et ceci seul me semblait être suffisant pour m’empêcher de rien désirer à l’avenir que je n’acquisse, et ainsi pour me rendre content : car, notre volonté ne se portant naturellement à désirer que les choses que notre entendement lui représente en quelque façon comme possibles, il est certain que si nous considérons tous les biens qui sont hors de nous comme également éloignés de notre pouvoir, nous n’aurons pas plus de regrets de manquer de ceux qui semblent être dus à notre naissance, lorsque nous en serons privés sans notre faute, que nous avons de ne posséder pas les royaumes de la Chine ou du Mexique ; et que faisant, comme on dit, de nécessité vertu, nous ne désirerons pas davantage d’être sains étant malades, ou d’être libres étant en prison, que nous faisons maintenant d’avoir des corps d’une matière aussi peu corruptible que les diamants, ou des ailes pour voler comme les oiseaux. Mais j’avoue qu’il est besoin d’un long exercice, et d’une méditation souvent réitérée, pour s’accoutumer à regarder de ce biais toutes les choses : et je crois que c’est principalement en ceci que consistait le secret de ces philosophes qui ont pu autrefois se soustraire de l’empire de la fortune, et, malgré les douleurs et la pauvreté, disputer de la félicité avec leurs dieux. Car s’occupant sans cesse à considérer les bornes qui leur étaient prescrites par la nature, ils se persuadaient si parfaitement que rien n’était en leur pouvoir que leurs pensées, que cela seul était suffisant pour les empêcher d’avoir aucune affection pour d’autres choses ; et ils disposaient d’elles si absolument qu’ils avaient en cela quelque raison de s’estimer plus riches, et plus puissants, et plus libres, et plus heureux qu’aucun des autres hommes, qui, n’ayant point cette philosophie, tant favorisés de la nature et de la fortune qu’ils puissent être, ne disposent jamais ainsi de tout ce qu’ils veulent."
(René Descartes, Discours de la méthode)

E4.6.3.D_REF4.5_PH ON NE PEUT PAS MIEUX FAIRE QUE PHILOSOPHER. LE BON USAGE DE LA RAISON MENE AU CONTENTEMENT.
"Enfin pour conclusion de cette morale je m’avisais de faire une revue sur les diverses occupations qu’ont les hommes en cette vie, pour tâcher à faire choix de la meilleure, et sans que je veuille rien dire de celles des autres, je pensai que je ne pouvais mieux que de continuer en celle-là même où je me trouvais, c’est-à-dire que d’employer toute ma vie à cultiver ma raison, et m’avancer autant que je pourrais en la connaissance de la vérité suivant la méthode que je m’étais prescrite. J’avais éprouvé de si extrêmes contentements depuis que j’avais commencé à me servir de cette méthode que je ne croyais pas qu’on en pût recevoir de plus doux, ni de plus innocents, en cette vie : et découvrant tous les jours par son moyen quelques vérités qui me semblaient assez importantes, et communément ignorées des autres hommes, la satisfaction que j’en avais remplissait tellement mon esprit que tout le reste ne me touchait point. Outre que les trois maximes précédentes n’étaient fondées que sur le dessein que j’avais de continuer à m’instruire : car Dieu nous ayant donné à chacun quelque lumière pour discerner le vrai d’avec le faux, je n’eusse pas cru me devoir contenter des opinions d’autrui un seul moment si je ne me fusse proposé d’employer mon propre jugement à les examiner lorsqu’il serait temps ; et je n’eusse su m’exempter de scrupule en les suivant si je n’eusse espéré de ne perdre pour cela aucune occasion d’en trouver de meilleures, en cas qu’il y en eût. Et enfin je n‘eusse su borner mes désirs ni être content si je n’eusse suivi un chemin par lequel, pensant être assuré de l’acquisition de toutes les connaissances dont je serais capable, je le pensais être par même moyen de celle de tous les vrais biens qui seraient jamais en mon pouvoir : d’autant que, notre volonté ne se portant à suivre ni à fuir aucune chose que selon que notre entendement [la] lui représente bonne ou mauvaise, il suffit de bien juger pour bien faire, et de juger le mieux qu’on puisse pour faire aussi tout son mieux, c’est-à-dire pour acquérir toutes les vertus et ensemble tous les autres biens qu’on puisse acquérir ; et lorsqu’on est certain que cela est, on ne saurait manquer d’être content."
(René Descartes, Discours de la méthode)

E4.6.3.D_REF5_PH. A_Malcolm T Liepke_Dive Into The Abyss

THE PRECAUTIONARY PRINCIPLE, ALLOWING FOR A "MARGIN OF SAFETY", PERMITS ACTION WHILE LIMITING RISK, WHILE IMMOBILISM IS THE PARALYSIS CAUSED BY THE FEAR OF THE POSSIBLE.
"Everything new presents a risk, which is almost always impossible to assess precisely. The precautionary principle, if it is well understood, does not require that we renounce progress for its sake, but simply that we strive to prevent or limit the risks, even if only potential ones, that such and such novelty may entail. It is always wrong to do nothing against a possible danger, that is what the precautionary principle clearly indicates. But it does not follow that one is always guilty of doing something when it may present a potential risk. Because then we would no longer be doing anything at all, or at least nothing new: it would no longer be precaution but immobilism."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E4.6.3.D_REF6_PH QUAND FAUT-IL CHANGER D’AVIS? LA SOLUTION PROPOSEE : FAIRE LA MOYENNE DES OPINIONS PLUTOT QUE DE TRANCHER.
"Vous devez refaire votre budget 2020, et vous avez un chiffre en tête. Mais un collègue propose un chiffre radicalement différent – et avec de bonnes raisons. Devez-vous tenir compte de ce conseil ?  

De la vaste littérature scientifique sur cette question, il ressort que vous allez d’abord évaluer la crédibilité de votre collègue : c’est logique ! Ainsi, vous allez généralement choisir entre vous rallier à son point de vue ou tenir bon sur le vôtre : vous voulez bien changer d’avis, mais seulement quand c’est justifié.

Le problème de cette stratégie, c’est qu’elle suppose que vous sachiez évaluer la crédibilité de celle ou celui qui conseille. Or, c’est plus difficile qu’on ne le croit. Nous avons tendance à juger sur la conviction, plutôt que sur le track record. Et quand nous sommes en position de pouvoir, le poids que nous accordons à l’avis d’autrui décroît brutalement… 

L’expérimentation suggère que vous gagneriez, dans la majorité des situations, à choisir une autre stratégie : faire la moyenne des deux opinions. Quoi ? le compromis, la cote mal taillée ? Eh oui : ces méthodes impopulaires sont généralement plus justes que les avis tranchés… 

Tous les mercredis, Olivier Sibony (ex-senior partner chez McKinsey, prof de stratégie à HEC, London Business School, Oxford) nous explique un concept de management. Sans bullshit."
(TTSO 10/06/2020)

E4.6.3.D_REF7_PH "PRÉCAUTION (PRINCIPE DE -) 
[...] En matière de transfusion sanguine ? En matière d’énergie nucléaire ? Qu’il y ait des risques dans les [deux] cas, c'est plus que vraisemblable; mais ils ne relèvent du principe de précaution - et non de la seule prudence - que dans la mesure où ces risques ne peuvent être déterminés exactement, ni même d’une façon qui permette de les comparer précisément avec les avantages attendus des pratiques qui les font naître. C’est ce qui distingue la précaution de la prévention. « La prévention remarque Catherine Larrère, a rapport aux risques avérés, dont l'existence est certaine et la probabilité plus ou moins bien établie. La précaution a affaire aux risques potentiels, non encore avérés » (Dictionnaire d’éthique et de philosophie morale. Puf, article « principe de précaution »). [...]
Toute nouveauté présente un risque, qu’il est presque toujours impossible de mesurer exactement. Le principe de précaution, s’il est bien compris, n’impose pas qu’on renonce pour cela au progrès, mais simplement qu’on y tende en essayant de prévenir ou de limiter les risques, fussent-ils seulement possibles, que telle ou telle nouveauté peut entraîner. II est toujours coupable de ne rien faire contre un danger possible, voilà ce qu’indique bien clairement le principe de précaution. Mais il n’en résulte pas qu’il soit toujours coupable de faire quelque chose quand cela peut présenter un certain risque. Car alors on ne ferait plus rien du tout, en tout cas plus rien de neuf: ce ne serait plus précaution mais immobilisme. [...]"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.6.3.E. The Constraints of the Possible: Dangers and Realizations.
The risk of paralysis of infinite possibility (the "bad infinity" or sinking into the indeterminate) and how possibility is best realized through specific constraints, art, and the rigorous testing of reality.

E4.6.3.E_REF1_MU MUSIQUE: GYÖRGY LIGETI, EN SUSPENS, ETUDE N° 11 (1994)
"The music refuses traditional harmonic resolution. It hangs in the air, embodying the state of open-endedness without the irritable reaching after fact and reason. It wobbles and refuses closure. It valorizes the state of suspension as a fertile, creative ground rather than a problem to be solved."
(Pierre Schindler)

Listen to it on YouTube: https://youtu.be/Rhomvkc3BSo?si=OzYkU12nWz5L6b3W

E4.6.3.E_REF2_CUR JUROR 8 PHYSICALLY INTRODUCES A "POSSIBILITY" THAT THE NARRATIVE EXCLUDED.
"This is the pivotal moment in the film 12 angry men from Sidney Lumet (1957) where Juror 8 (Henry Fonda) introduces the first reasonable doubt. The entire case for "guilt" rests on the assumption that the murder weapon was unique. By producing an identical knife he bought at a pawn shop, Juror 8 proves that a "fact" presented by the prosecution was merely an assumption, forcing the others to question what else they might be wrong about."
(Pierre Schindler)

Watch the scene on You Tube: https://youtu.be/TUzp2XUhskY?si=c1crZzAJytoJW5iN

E4.6.3.E_REF2.1_CUR JUROR 8 INTRODUCES THE POSSIBILITY OF ERROR. BY PHYSICALLY RECONSTRUCTING THE EVENT, HE REINFORCES THAT "DOUBT" IS NOT A PASSIVE BUT AN ACTIVE, CREATIVE PROCESS.
"In this famous sequence from the film 12 angry men from Sidney Lumet (1957), Juror 8 reconstructs the crime scene layout to test the testimony of the old man who claimed to see the boy run out. By physically timing how long it takes to walk from the bedroom to the door with a limp, they discover the witness's timeline is physically impossible. It illustrates that truth often requires testing theories against reality rather than accepting them at face value."
(Pierre Schinder)

Watch the scene on You Tube: https://youtu.be/1fsFQ2gF4oE?si=LmEjl_GlbUNNpprd

E4.6.3.E_REF3_LIT MUSIL DIAGNOSES THE DANGER OF A PURE "SENSE OF POSSIBILITY" WITHOUT CONSTRAINTS: WHEN EVERYTHING IS POSSIBLE, DESIRE VANISHES, AND THE SUBJECT IS LEFT "BANGING HIS HEAD" IN PERPLEXITY.
"5. Ulrich. [...]
Son père eût dit à peu près : « Si on le laissait faire à sa tête, il finirait par se la taper contre les murs à force de perplexité », ou bien : « Quand on peut faire tout ce qu’on veut, on a bientôt fait de ne plus savoir quoi désirer ». Ulrich se répétait ces sentences avec ravissement. Cette sagesse ancestrale lui semblait d’une extraordinaire nouveauté. Il faut que l’homme se sente d’abord limité dans ses possibilités, ses sentiments et ses projets par toutes sortes de préjugés, de traditions, d’entraves et de bornes, comme un fou par la camisole de force, pour que ce qu’il réalise puisse avoir valeur, durée et maturité… En vérité, c’est à peine si l’on peut mesurer la portée de cette idée !"
(Robert Musil, L'homme sans qualités, première partie, 1930)

E4.6.3.E_REF4_PH TRISTAN GARCIA, PHILOSOPHE AMOUREUX DU POSSIBLE
"Le philosophe que j’aimerais être est celui qui n’est pas amoureux de la sagesse mais amoureux du possible, celui qui essaye de percevoir du possible, celui qui essaye de connaître les structures du possible, qui doit s’engager dans l’abstraction, et celui qui défend le possible, éthiquement et politiquement." La connaissance durcit l'être, la réalité, alors que le possible l'assouplit. 
"Je me suis toujours représenté le métaphysicien comme celui qui essayait d’aller non pas au bord du monde mais celui qui va au bord de l’indéterminé… qui essaye de comprendre jusqu’où on peut savoir, concevoir, ce qu’il y a, ce que c’est que l’être… une sorte d’aventurier qui irait aux limbes de l’indétermination, sans sombrer. Ce qui menace l’activité philosophique, pour moi, c’est de sombrer dans l’indéterminé."  
C'est souvent ce que l'on reproche au philosophe: d'avoir déjà mis un pieds dans le n'importe quoi. La confusion et  l'indetermination posent problème pour la connaissance - puisque l'on ne sait pas ce que l'on connaît - mais aussi parce qu'elles permettent toujours de masquer en sous-main une opération de domination. Le risque est d'écraser une chose dans une autre. Il faut preserver la possibilité que toute chose devienne autres chose, et pour cela il faut la distinguer. 
J'essaye de pratiquer une philosophie qui produit des catégories mais sans hiérarchiser, ordonner notre connaissance sans produire des effets d'autorité. Il faut trouver un équilibre entre la rationnalité obtue qui produit des effets de domination sans pour autant tourner le dos à la raison. être fidèle à la raison comme moyen (le raisonnement, l'argumentation, être précis), mais dans le fins s'autoriser à défendre des possibilités de pensée explosive.
"J’ai toujours aimé l’idée que l’enseignement était essentiellement adverbial : ce qu’un élève retient c’est la façon, plus que le contenu. On se trompe toujours un peu parce que quand on est enseignant, on croit qu’on transmets des noms, des valeurs, des adjectifs, alors qu’essentiellement on transmet des manières… ". Voir la différence entre dire et montrer développée para Wittgenstein. 
Une pensée forte part de très loin et nous rejoint dans le présent pour nous aider à penser le contemporain, mais par contre une pensée dans le champs médiatique qui se propose de dire où nous en sommes est collée à l'immédiat e ne remplie pas la fonction de al pensée qui est d'aller chercher du possible, d'ouvrir le champs. 
Observer le processus du populisme où un individu aspire toute la légitimité d'un champ d'action (scientifique pour le Professeur Raoult, politique pour Trump par exemple) en détruisant les  processus de vérification classiques pour régner ensuite en maître."
(Tristan Garcia au micro de l'émission Les Chemins de la Philosophie, diffusée sur France Culture le 08/06/2020)

Listen to the Podcast in French:
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/profession-philosophe-5974-tristan-garcia-jaimerais-etre-un-philosophe-non-pas-amoureux-de-la

E1.7.D.6.5.f_REF1.1_LIT.wE4.6.3.E.

ULRICH STRUGGLES WITH INTERNAL CONTRADICTIONS CONCERNING THE PURITY OF FEELINGS AND HUMAN ACTIVITY 
"22. Where we go from Koniatowski's critique of Danielli's principle to original sin, and from original sin to the emotional mystery of the sister. [...]
The feeling is quite rare. To preserve a certain temperature of feeling from the cold is probably to preserve the heat necessary for incubation, without which there is no spiritual evolution. When a man is torn away from the confusion of intelligent intentions that embarrass him with a thousand foreign objects, when he is placed for a few moments in a state of absolute disinterestedness, for example, when he listens to music, he almost returns to the state of flowers on which rain and sunlight pass. He was about to add that there is an eternity more eternal in the pauses and rest of the human spirit than in its activity; but he had been thinking sometimes of "feeling" and sometimes of "experience," which led to a contradiction. For there were also experiences of the will! There were also experiences of action at its height! No doubt one could admit that each of these experiences, when it reaches its greatest radiance of bitterness, is nothing more than feeling: but the contradiction would then be that the state of feeling, in its greatest purity, would be a rest, a fallout of activity! Or was there no contradiction at all? Was there a marvelous order in which the highest activity, at its center, would be immobility? It seemed that this series of inspirations was less an ulterior motive than an undesirable thought: for Ulrich, in a sudden reaction against the sentimental turn that the considerations in which he had become involved had taken, withdrew them. He had no intention of meditating on certain states, nor, in reflecting on feelings, of falling prey to them himself. [...]
That is why it also seemed to Ulrich that what we call change, or even progress of the times, was only a word to express that no attempt succeeds at the point where they all should unite, on the way to an absolutely total conviction, that is, towards the possibility of continuous development, lasting enjoyment, and that gravity of great beauty which now hardly ever casts a shadow on our lives. [...] When it came down to it, one was not far from thinking that Ulrich believed in the "Fall" and "Original Sin". In other words, he would have readily admitted that at some point an essential change had occurred in human behavior, like when the lover regains his composure: he sees "the whole truth," but something greater has been destroyed, and the truth is now nothing more than a remnant sewn back together as best it can. Perhaps it was indeed the fruit of "knowledge" that had caused this change in the mind, and had driven the human race from its original state, from which it could only find its way back after countless experiences and thanks to the wisdom that sin brings. Ulrich did not believe in these stories as they have been handed down to us, but as he had discovered them: he believed in them like a calculator who, having before his eyes the system of his feelings, concludes from the impossibility of justifying them separately to the necessity of introducing an imaginary hypothesis whose nature can only be sensed".
(Robert Musil, The Man Without Qualities, Volume 2, 1930)

E4.6.4. The Narrative Construction of Reality

E4.6.4.A. The Ego as Storyteller.
The "Self" is a constructed story designed for survival. We deceive ourselves to cope with time and love.

E4.6.4.A_REF1_PH THE MYTH OF ER PRESENTS DESTINY AS A DRAMATIC STORY OF CHOICE. It illustrates the complex "intertwining of necessity, chance, and responsibility" that constitutes the narrative of a human life.
"Le mythe d'Er le Pamphylien : sommes-nous responsables de notre destin ?
Er revient après la mort pour raconter aux vivants ce qui se passe après la mort. Après les 600 pages d'argumentation serrée de la République, Platon fini par un Mythe. Dans la République il présente ses arguments démontrant que la justice (ma vertu) me rend heureux à travers l'estime que j'ai de moi même, l'harmonie et l'amitié que je développe avec moi-même. Il y a aussi les rétributions que je reçois des autres humains pour être vertueux; c'est la justice sociale. Finalement, dans le mythe d'Er il ajoutera la rétribution des dieux après la mort. Le mythe est plus accessible que le raisonnement comme modalité de parole qui est plus persuasive et qui frappe son auditeur.

Avant de passer devant un jugement pour se réincarner, les âmes qui ont bien agit iront dans le ciel pour contempler des spectacles délicieux, celles qui ont mal agit iront sous terre pendant 1000 ans pour payer pour leurs fautes. La question de fond est de savoir en quoi la vertu détermine notre bonheur et quelle est la liberté des âmes une fois qu'elles ont a choisir, purgées de leurs fautes, le modèle de vie dans lequel se réincarner. Après un tirage au sort de l'ordre, chacun à son tour choisit un modèle de vie parmi tous les possibles (vies animales et toutes les vies humaines). Cette complexité du processus a pu être désiré par Platon pour illustrer l'entremêlement de la nécessité, du hasard et de la responsabilité humaine. Le plus important dans ce processus, c'est que la divinité n'est pas responsable - le choix du modèle de vie est celui de chaque âme. 
Ulysse par exemple, après une vie de héros sélectionne après avoir bien regardé, une vie de particulier. Les âmes choisissent le modèle de vie qu'elles croient correspondre à leur désir, mais toutes la question est celle de la connaissance vraie de ce qui est vraiment désirable. L'âme qui choisira le modèle de vie du tyran le fait en s'illusionnant parce qu'elle pense que le tyran est plus libre que les autres 1. Alors même qu'il en avait été averti par le proclamateur (qui anime le jugement), cette âme ne reconnaîtra pas sa responsabilité du mauvais choix, et quand elle le regrettera elle blâmera la nécessité, le hasard et les démons. Il était pourtant descendu du ciel après une vie bien ordonnée dans une cité où la constitution politique et sa naissance lui avait épargné d'exercer sa vertu "par la force de l'habitude, mais sans philosophie". Il avait donc été jugé vertueux par défaut sans l'être, et le moment du choix révéla sa vraie nature. La plupart de ceux qui venaient du ciel faisaient des choix similaires. Au contraire, ceux qui émergeaient de la terre parce qu'ils avaient souffert eux-même et vu les autres souffrir, choisissaient en majorité des vies bonnes. Il y avait donc permutation entre les vies bonnes et les vies mauvaises selon le passage au ciel ou dans la terre. Seul les philosophes choisissaient toujours une vie bonne, si toutefois les sorts attribués n'étaient pas les derniers. Même les âmes qui choisissent la vie bonne pour la seule raison qu'elles ont pâti sous terre, ne font pas un choix fondé. Elles pourront se trompé à nouveau lors d'une prochaine réincarnation.
Dans le Timée, Platon reviendra sur la responsabilité de la vertu pour conclure qu'elle appartient à ceux qui éduquent. Même si nul n'est méchant volontairement, car tous cherchent le bien, ce sont les maîtres qui nous enseignent comment ne pas se tromper."
(Anne Merker dans l'émission Les Chemins de la Philosophie, diffusée sur France Culture le 10 janvier 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/le-mythe-d-er-le-pamphylien-sommes-nous-responsables-de-notre-destin-8872734

E4.6.4.A_REF2_PH "WHICH STORIES ABOUT THE CONDITION OF THE HEART ARE THE RELIABLE ONES...?"
"We deceive ourselves about love — about who; and how; and when; and whether. We also discover and correct our self-deceptions. The forces making for both deception and unmasking here are various and powerful: the unsurpassed danger, the urgent need for protection and self-sufficiency, the opposite and equal need for joy and communication and connection. Any of these can serve either truth or falsity, as the occasion demands. The difficulty then becomes: how in the midst of this confusion (and delight and pain) do we know what view of ourselves, what parts of ourselves, to trust? Which stories about the condition of the heart are the reliable ones and which the self-deceiving fictions? We find ourselves asking where, in this plurality of discordant voices with which we address ourselves on this topic of perennial self-interest, is the criterion of truth? (And what does it mean to look for a criterion here? Could that demand itself be a tool of self-deception?)"
(Martha Nussbaum, Love’s Knowledge: Essays on Philosophy and Literature, 1990)

E1.7.B.2.4.a_REF5_PH.wE4.6.4.A.

"Nothing, not one thing, hurts us more — or causes us to hurt others more — than our certainties. The stories we tell ourselves about the world and the foregone conclusions with which we cork the fount of possibility are the supreme downfall of our consciousness. They are also the inevitable cost of survival, of navigating a vast and complex reality most of which remains forever beyond our control and comprehension. And yet in our effort to parse the world, we sever ourselves from the full range of its beauty, tensing against the tenderness of life."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

"The instant we wake the story begins: “Here I am. In my bed. Hard worker, good dad, decent husband, a guy who always tries his best. Jeez, my back hurts. Probably from the stupid gym.”

And just like that, with our thoughts, the world gets made.

Or, anyway, a world gets made.

This world-making via thinking is natural, sane, Darwinian: we do it to survive. Is there harm in it? Well, yes, because we think in the same way that we hear or see: within a narrow, survival-enhancing range. We don’t see or hear all that might be seen or heard but only that which is helpful for us to see and hear. Our thoughts are similarly restricted and have a similarly narrow purpose: to help the thinker thrive.

All of this limited thinking has an unfortunate by-product: ego. Who is trying to survive? “I” am. The mind takes a vast unitary wholeness (the universe), selects one tiny segment of it (me), and starts narrating from that point of view. Just like that, that entity (George!) becomes real, and he is (surprise, surprise) located at the exact center of the universe, and everything is happening in his movie, so to speak; it is all, somehow, both for and about him. In this way, moral judgment arises: what is good for George is… good. What is bad for him is bad. (The bear is neither good nor bad until, looking hungry, it starts walking toward George.)

So, in every instant, a delusional gulf gets created between things as we think they are and things as they actually are. Off we go, mistaking the world we’ve made with our thoughts for the real world. Evil and dysfunction (or at least obnoxiousness) occur in proportion to how solidly a person believes that his projections are correct and energetically acts upon them."
(George Saunders, A Swim in a Pond in the Rain: In Which Four Russians Give a Master Class on Writing, Reading, and Life, 2021)

"Over time, our stories harden into certainties that collide with each other every time we engage with another person, who is another story"
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

Illustration: Art by Kay Nielsen from East of the Sun and West of the Moon
"I think, therefore I am wrong, after which I speak, and my wrongness falls on someone also thinking wrongly, and then there are two of us thinking wrongly, and, being human, we can’t bear to think without taking action, which, having been taken, makes things worse. […]

The entire drama of life on earth is: Skaz-Headed Person #1 [embodiment of the unreliable first-person narration known as skaz that permeates classic Russian literature] steps outside, where he encounters Skaz-Headed Person #2. Both, seeing themselves as the center of the universe, thinking highly of themselves, immediately slightly misunderstand everything. [...]

In a world full of people who seem to know everything, passionately, based on little (often slanted) information, where certainty is often mistaken for power, what a relief it is to be in the company of someone confident enough to stay unsure (that is, perpetually curious)."
(George Saunders, A Swim in a Pond in the Rain: In Which Four Russians Give a Master Class on Writing, Reading, and Life, 2021)

Illustration: 
- Art by Kay Nielsen from East of the Sun and West of the Moon

Illustration: Art by Paloma Valdivia from Pablo Neruda’s Book of Questions
"In a world full of people who seem to know everything, passionately, based on little (often slanted) information, where certainty is often mistaken for power, what a relief it is to be in the company of someone confident enough to stay unsure (that is, perpetually curious). [...]

It’s hard to be alive. The anxiety of living makes us want to judge, be sure, have a stance, definitively decide. Having a fixed, rigid system of belief can be a great relief. […]

As long as we don’t decide, we allow further information to keep coming in. Reading a story like “Gooseberries” [from Chekhov] might be seen as a way of practicing this. It reminds us that any question in the form “Is X right or wrong?” could benefit from another round of clarifying questions. Question: “Is X good or bad?” Story: “For whom? On what day, under what conditions? Might there be some unintended consequences associated with X? Some good hidden in the bad that is X? Some bad hidden in the good that is X? Tell me more.”"
(George Saunders, A Swim in a Pond in the Rain: In Which Four Russians Give a Master Class on Writing, Reading, and Life, 2021)

Illustration:
- Art by Paloma Valdivia from Pablo Neruda’s Book of Questions

"Openness to more — to truth beyond story, to beauty beyond certainty — is precisely what teaches us how to love the world more."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

"This feeling of fondness for the world takes the form, in his [Chekhov's] stories, of a constant state of reexamination. (“Am I sure? Is it really so? Is my preexisting opinion causing me to omit anything?”) He has a gift for reconsideration. Reconsideration is hard; it takes courage. We have to deny ourselves the comfort of always being the same person, one who arrived at an answer some time ago and has never had any reason to doubt it. In other words, we have to stay open (easy to say, in that confident, New Age way, but so hard to actually do, in the face of actual, grinding, terrifying life). As we watch Chekhov continually, ritually doubt all conclusions, we’re comforted. It’s all right to reconsider. It’s noble — holy, even. It can be done. We can do it. We know this because of the example he leaves in his stories, which are, we might say, splendid, brief reconsideration machines."
(George Saunders, A Swim in a Pond in the Rain: In Which Four Russians Give a Master Class on Writing, Reading, and Life, 2021)

E4.6.4.A_REF3_LIT

EL3.34. "BUT TIME … HOW TIME FIRST GROUNDS US AND THEN CONFOUNDS US. We thought we were being mature when we were only being safe. We imagined we were being responsible but were only being cowardly. What we called realism turned out to be a way of avoiding things rather than facing them. Time … give us enough time and our best-supported decisions will seem wobbliy, our certainties whimsical."
(Julian Barnes, The sense of an ending, 2011)

E4.6.4.B. The Architecture of Meaning: The specific tools and frameworks humans use to build reality.
How ancient myths invented our concepts of causality and identity, how art creates "secondary worlds" through internal consistency, and how practical constraints  force narrative completion.

E4.6.4.B_REF1_LIT

EL3.147. "IT TOOK ME A LONG TIME TO FIGURE OUT THAT I NEEDED DEADLINES. Deadlines were the difference between a dream and something that you complete. And what happens with deadlines is that you’ve got to ship, you have to abandon the project, and it’s not perfect. Because it’s not perfect, you kind of have to be ingenious about making it a little different. And I find that the deadlines force me to make decisions that you don’t have enough time [for]; you never have enough time. And so you think of something to—I wouldn’t say it’s a shortcut—you think of a way to finish it, and those little decisions are what make it a little different.”
(The Stories Behind Kevin Kelly's Viral Life Advice, The Knowledge Project Podcast, 2023)

Watch the full interview on YouTube: 

https://youtu.be/1OPB0bix6CQ?feature=shared

E4.6.4.B_REF2_PH WE ARE "CHILDREN OF HOMER" BECAUSE HE INVENTED THE "RATIONAL TREND"—MEANING OUR VERY WAY OF STRUCTURING REALITY (CAUSALITY, IDENTITY) IS A NARRATIVE INHERITANCE. The subject (the "I") is a narrative invention of the 8th century BC.
"Ulysse le raisonnable
La culture dont nous sommes les légataires, comme le dit l’historien Fernand Braudel, « le trend rationnel », prend sa source là, vers le 9ème 8ème siècle avant notre ère, et rien ne témoigne mieux de cette orientation décisive de la culture occidentale que ce monument rayonnant que composent l’Iliade et l’Odyssée d’Homère. 
Nous sommes tous les enfants d’Homère. Quand nous avons quelque chose à raconter, nous le versons dans cette prodigieuse matrice dont il a été l’inventeur."
(Pierre Bergounioux)

Avant Homère, le récit était mythologique, avec lui apparaît la constance identitaire du personnage - il est un au lieu d'être perméable et le siège de toute sortent de métamorphoses d'origine extérieure. Avec lui, tout fait est subordonné au principe de causalité. C'est la prise de la conscience du conflit entre les puissances relatives de notre être et celle de la nature - c'est une partie désespérée que la notre  - du moins à partir du moment que nous sommes fixés sur la préservation de notre être. Le constat du conflit irrémédiable entre notre esprit et la malignité du monde qui lui résiste, c'est l’émergence d'une attitude existentielle. L'Odyssée célèbre les vertus de l'intelligence tout en rencontrant immanquablement ses limites. 

L'une des investigations dans l'Odyssée est celle des origines d'une idée. Il semble bien souvent que ce soit les dieux qui soufflent à Ulysse ses trouvailles - comme quand Ino vient lui suggérer - sous la forme d'une mouette - qu'il ferait mieux d'abandonner son radeau et de nager jusqu'au rivage L'intelligence peut sembler mener une existence propre de celui à laquelle elle appartient.

En grec, Ulysse se dit "odysséas"; personne se dit "oudeís". Quand on ment, notre visage trésaille, et le cyclope risquait de deviner le mensonge d'Ulysse si bien qu'il choisit par cette ruse un mot qui n'est qu'une petite déviance sonore, un petit mensonge en quelque sorte, pour réussir à mentir sans sourciller. C'est bien sûr une ruse magistrale aussi pour permettre que Polyphème ne puisse pas compter sur l'aide de ses congénères quand il leur dit que c'est "personne" qui lui a fait du mal - et ainsi le laisser seul, aveugle, aux trousses d'Ulysse et de son équipage qui sont libres de courir jusqu'à leur bateau. Mais Homère nous montre qu'Ulysse n'est encore que dans l'enfance de la raison - qui est le calcul des conséquences, comme le dira Hobbes plus tard - quand il décide Ulysse à faire de la gloriole, une fois sur son esquif, en criant au cyclope resté sur la page : "mon vrai nom, c'est Ulysse". Sur quoi le cyclope manque de peu de couler le bateau en jetant un rocher dans sa direction. Conséquence plus dramatique de cet enfantillage qui n'est jamais élaborée dans l'Odyssée : Poséidon qui s’évertue à essayer de détruire Ulysse jusqu'à la fin du récit parce qu'il a crevé l’œil de son fils Polyphème aurait'il su que c'était Ulysse le responsable si celui-ci n'avait pas révélé son identité? Probablement car Polyphème aurait pu décrire Ulysse à Poséidon même sans savoir le nommer par son vrai nom - le doute reste pourtant si le sort d'Ulysse aurait été différent, s'il avait sû calculer les conséquences de ses actes jusqu'au bout.

Wladimir Jankelevitch interprète l'épisode des sirènes comme la reconnaissance qu'avec un simple bout de corde, Ulysse a sû dompté les passions et "le tropisme de la chair". Pierre Bergounioux, lui, propose une autre lecture: Ulysse est non seulement celui qui exploite au maximum les ressources de son intelligence, mais il est aussi très sensible à la splendeur du monde. Il veut goûter au chant des sirènes, comme il compare aussi la vision qu'il a de Nausicaa à l'émotion qu'il a ressenti à la vue du rejet d'un palmier sur l'azur du ciel au dessus du temple de Delphes - Homère nous délecte aussi de mille détails esthétiques comme la description des odeurs, du reflet des bronzes polis, etc..."
(Pierre Bergounioux dans lémission Les Chemins de la Philosophie, diffusée sur France Culture le 27 août 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/ulysse-le-raisonnable-6087602

E4.6.4.B_REF3_LIT LE CONTE DE FEE QUI UTILISE LA COHERENCE POUR CREER UNE VERITE PARALLELE OFFRE A L'ENFANT UN UNIVERS D'APPRENTISSAGE ET DE DEVELOPPEMENT. Tout est dans l'intention: Le conteur ne nous trompe pas - la fantaisie est posée au départ.
"Les enfants sont capables de créance littéraire, bien sûr, quand l’art du conteur est suffisant pour la produire. On a appelé cet état d’esprit « suspension consentie de l’incrédulité ». Mais cela ne me paraît pas une bonne description de ce qui se passe. Ce qui arrive vraiment, c’est que le conteur se montre un «sous-créateur» qui réussit. Il fabrique un Monde Secondaire dans lequel l’esprit peut entrer. À l’intérieur, ce qu’il relate est « vrai » : cela s’accorde avec les lois de ce monde. L’on y croit donc tant que l’on se trouve, pour ainsi dire, dedans. Dès qu’intervient l’incrédulité, le charme est rompu ; la magie, ou plutôt l’art, a échoué. On est alors ressorti dans le Monde Primaire, et l’on regarde du dehors le petit Monde Secondaire avorté. Si la bienveillance ou les circonstances vous obligent à rester, l’incrédulité doit être suspendue (ou retenue), sans quoi il deviendrait intolérable d’écouter ou de regarder. Mais cette suspension de l’incrédulité n’est qu’un substitut de la chose authentique, un subterfuge dont on se sert quand on condescend à jouer ou à faire semblant, ou quand on essaie (plus ou moins volontiers) de trouver quelque qualité dans l’œuvre d’un art qui, pour nous, a échoué."
(J.R.R. Tolkien, Faërie, 1939)

E4.6.4.C. The Illusion of History: Against Collective Certainties.
Challenging the idea of objective historical truth. History is an art form, "being on the right side of history" is a fallacy, and  rigid historical narratives can actually extinguish the vitality of the present life.

E4.6.4.C_REF1_LIT

EL3.97. "HISTORY IS ONE WAY OF TELLING STORIES, JUST LIKE MYTH, FICTION, OR ORAL STORYTELLING. But over the last hundred years, history has preempted the other forms of storytelling because of its claim to absolute, objective truth. Trying to be scientists, historians stood outside of history and told the story of how it was. All that has changed radically over the last twenty years. Historians now laugh at the pretense of objective truth. They agree that every age has its own history, and if there is any objective truth, we can’t reach it with words. History is not a science, it’s an art."
(Jonathan Whyte, Interview with Ursula K. Le Guin, Talking on the Water: Conversations about Nature and Creativity, 2016)

E4.6.4.C_REF2_PH

EL3.143. SUSAN SONTAG DISCUSSES THE PHILOSOPHICAL ALIGNMENT BETWEEN CIORAN AND NIETZSCHE, EMPHASIZING THEIR SHARED CRITIQUE OF "TRUTH" AND ITS DEPERSONALIZING EFFECTS. Both philosophers view historical truth as debilitating, advocating for a more liberating approach to human consciousness. Sontag notes that while Cioran critiques history and truth similarly to Nietzsche, he lacks Nietzsche's effort to overcome nihilism.
"When Cioran describes Nietzsche's philosophy as "a sum of attitudes" - mistakenly scrutinized by scholars for the constants that the philosopher has rejected - it's clear that he accepts the Nietzschean standard, with its critique of "truth" as system and consistency, as his own.

In "Blind Alleys," Cioran speaks of "the stupidities inherent in the cult of truth." The implication, here and elsewhere, is that what the true philosopher says isn't something "true" but rather something necessary or liberating. For "the truth" is identified with depersonalization.

Once again, the line from Nietzsche to Cioran cannot be overemphasized. And for both writers, the critique of "truth" is intimately connected with the attitude toward "history."

Thus, one cannot understand Nietzsche's questioning of the value of truth in general and of the usefulness of historical truth in particular without grasping the link between the two notions. Nietzsche doesn't reject historical thinking because it is false. On the contrary, it must be rejected because it is true - a debilitating truth that has to be overthrown to allow a more inclusive orientation for human consciousness.

As Cioran says in "The Temptation to Exist": "History is merely an inessential mode of being, the most effective form of our infidelity to ourselves, a metaphysical refusal." And, in "Thinking Against Oneself," he refers to "history, man's aggression against himself." [...]

What's missing in Cioran's work is anything comparable to Nietzsche's heroic effort to surmount nihilism (the doctrine of eternal recurrence)."
(Susan Sontag, Styles of Radical Will, 1966)

E4.6.4.C_REF3_LIT

EL3.146. HISTORY IS COMPLEX AND RARELY CLEAR-CUT "I’ve read all your Red Hand Files. I'm a fan! But do you ever worry about being on 'the wrong side of history'?
JEAN-CLAUDE, PARIS, FRANCE

Favourite podcast?
JAKE THE RANGER, DALLAS, USA
Dear Jean-Claude and Jake the Ranger,

Anyone who thinks there is a right and a wrong side of history has never listened to Tom Holland and Dominic Sandbrook’s The Rest is History. This splendid podcast shows us that history is extraordinarily complicated and rarely draws a clean line between right and wrong, good and evil. Much of history seems to be a violent collision of good intentions, and sometimes what appears ethically obvious today has its way of turning tomorrow. History reflects our shambolic nature and is seldom settled, stable, or simple.

Jean-Claude, I don’t know which side of history I inhabit. What I can say is that I suspect I stand where most do - among the uncertain, the ambivalent, the baffled, the conflicted, the undecided, the tentative, and the cautious. I stand with the spirit and with the soul and live within the ache and joy of the present moment. I ‘Pluck the day, trusting as little as possible to the future’ - Carpe diem! as Horace proclaimed.

Humans are messy, and it can be dangerous to deny our common fallibility by drawing up lines that separate and divide. Right side? Wrong side? Mostly, we are the mess in the middle, dazed within a fog of unknowing, stunned by life and amazed by it too, and all the more beautiful for it.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #296, AUGUST 2024)

Read it on The Red Hand Files: https://www.theredhandfiles.com/the-wrong-side-of-history/

E4.6.4.C_REF4_CUR

EL3.149. THERE IS NO SUCH THING AS MY BEING IN THE RIGHT, MY SIDE BEING IN THE RIGHT, BECAUSE WITHIN A GENERATION OR TWO, my present way of thinking is bound to be found perhaps faintly ludicrous, perhaps quite outmoded by new development.
“Anyone who reads history at all knows that the passionate and powerful convictions of one century usually seem absurd, extraordinary, to the next. There is no epoch in history that seems to us as it must have to the people who lived through it. What we live through, in any age, is the effect on us of mass emotions and of social conditions from which it is almost impossible to detach ourselves. […]
There is no such thing as my being in the right, my side being in the right, because within a generation or two, my present way of thinking is bound to be found perhaps faintly ludicrous, perhaps quite outmoded by new development — at the best, something that has been changed, all passion spent, into a small part of a great process, a development. […]
This business of seeing ourselves as in the right, others in the wrong; our cause as right, theirs as wrong; our ideas as correct, theirs as nonsense, if not as downright evil… Well, in our sober moments, our human moments, the times when we think, reflect, and allow our rational minds to dominate us, we all of us suspect that this “I am right, you are wrong” is, quite simply, nonsense. All history, development goes on through interaction and mutual influence, and even the most violent extremes of thought, of behaviour, become woven into the general texture of human life, as one strand of it. This process can be seen over and over again in history. In fact, it is as if what is real in human development — the main current of social evolution — cannot tolerate extremes, so it seeks to expel extremes and extremists, or to get rid of them by absorbing them into the general stream. […]
Nearly everyone in such situations behaves automatically. But there is always the minority who do not, and it seems to me that our future, the future of everybody, depends on this minority. And that we should be thinking of ways to educate our children to strengthen this minority and not, as we mostly do now, to revere the pack. […]
While all these boilings and upheavals go on, at the same time, parallel, continues this other revolution: the quiet revolution, based on sober and accurate observation of ourselves, our behaviour, our capacities… If we decided to use it, [we may] transform the world we live in. But it means making that deliberate step into objectivity and away from wild emotionalism, deliberately choosing to see ourselves as, perhaps, a visitor from another planet might see us.”
(Doris Lessing, Prisons We Choose to Live Inside, 1985)

In Gülsün Karamustafa's installation, "the columns – embodiments of the 'force' that, in the context of architecture, represents stability, prowess, durability and victory, the same force that, down the ages, has kept the world on guard by dint of wars and plunder - are replaced by hollow moulds, which can only stand in place with the help of propping devices.
Wheeled carts, gliding down rails without a beginning or end, are loaded up with broken glass shards.
Chandeliers made of smashed Venice glassware, alluding to the three monotheistic faiths that, throughout history, have never ceased fighting one another, are only visible through a cloud full of pain."
(Curatorship from the Venice Biennale)

E4.6.4.C_REF5_PH A_Banksy_Follow Your Dreams Cancelled

NIETZSCHE WARNS THAT THE "HISTORICAL SENSE" CAN BE A LETHAL FORCE THAT EXTINGUISHES THE "STRONG SOUND" OF THE PRESENT. By rushing to "erect the tent of history" (narrative) over our acts, we kill their vitality and the "sublime."
"Il paraît presque impossible de produire un son fort et plein, si violemment qu’on frappe les cordes : la note s’éteint immédiatement, et l’instant d’après l’on n’entend plus que la faible et inconsistante vibration historique. En termes de morale : vous ne réussissez plus à fixer le sublime, vos actes sont des coups soudains, non un tonnerre roulant. Vous pouvez accomplir les choses les plus grandes et les plus merveilleuses, tout cela descendra quand même aux enfers, sans fastes et sans éclat. Car l’art s’enfuit, lorsque vous vous empressez de dresser sur vos actes le chapiteau de l’histoire. Celui qui cherche à comprendre, calculer, analyser au moment où, longuement ébranlé, il devrait fixer l’incompréhensible comme l’expression du sublime, celui-là peut bien être qualifié de sensé, mais seulement de la façon dont l’entend Schiller lorsqu’il parle du bon sens de l’homme sensé, qui ne voit pas certaines choses que voit l’enfant, qui n’entend pas certaines choses qu’entend l’enfant. Or ces choses-là sont plus importantes : s’il ne les comprend pas, c’est que son bon sens est plus puéril que celui de l’enfant et plus niais que la niaiserie même - malgré toutes les ridules de ruse qui sillonnent son visage parcheminé, malgré la virtuosité avec laquelle ses doigts savent démêler l’écheveau le plus embrouillé. Résultat : il a détruit et perdu son instinct, il ne peut plus, lorsque son intelligence vacille et que sa route traverse des désert se fier à l’« animal divin » et lui laisser la bride sur le cou. L’individu devient ainsi timoré et mal assuré, il ne se fait plus confiance : il plonge en lui-même, dans son intériorité, ce qui signifie ici seulement : dans l’amas confus des connaissances acquises qui ne se traduisent pas extérieurement, qui n’alimentent pas la vie. Pour ce qui est de l’extérieur, on remarque combien l’extirpation des instincts par l’histoire a presque transformé les hommes en ombres et en pures abstractions."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Considérations inactuelles II, De l’utilité et des inconvénients de l’histoire pour la vie , 1874)

E4.6.5. Beyond Western Dualism: Ontological Alternatives

E4.6.5.A. The Western Predicament: The Burden of Dualism, Reason, and Anxiety resulting from the obsession with absolute control, separation, and definitions.

E4.6.5.A_REF1_ANT

EL3.118. DUALISM, OFTEN CRITICIZED FOR MORAL REASONS AND BLAMED FOR VARIOUS MODERN ISSUES, HAS SIGNIFICANTLY CONTRIBUTED TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF SCIENCE AND POLITICAL PROGRESS by promoting the idea that nature follows its own laws and humanity can control it.
"Dualism is not bad in itself and it is ingenuous to stigmatize it for purely moral reasons, in the manner of the ecocentric philosophies of the environment, or to make it bear the responsibility for all the evils of the modern era, from colonial expansion to the destruction of non-renewable resources, or the reification of sexual identities or class distinctions. We owe at least to dualism, with the bet that nature is subject to its own laws, a formidable stimulation for the development of science. We also owe to dualism, and its belief that humanity is gradually becoming more civilized by disciplining its instincts and by controlling nature, some of the improvements, particularly political ones, which the aspiration to progress were able to generate. Anthropology is the daughter of this movement, of scientific thought and of the faith in evolution, and there is no need to be ashamed of the circumstances of its birth nor to condemn it to disappearance in order to atone for its youthful sins. But its role does not accomodate well with this heritage; we need to understand how peoples who do not share our cosmology have been able to invent for themselves realities distinct from ours, thereby testifying to a creativity that cannot be gauged against our own achievements. However, this is what anthropology cannot do when it takes for granted as a universal matter of fact of experience our own reality, our ways of establishing discontinuities in the world and of detecting relationships we believe are constant, our ways of distributing entities and phenomena, processes and modes of action, in categories that we believe are predetermined by the texture and structure of things."
(Philippe Descola, Beyond nature and culture, 2005)

E4.6.5.A_REF2_ANT

EL3.119. WHAT YOU HAVE GIVEN US IS THE BODY
 "The desocialization induced by the colonial process engendered dramatic upheavals, which the missionaries aimed to correct by dispensing education. It is by this means, in fact, that a consciousness of individuality was born and inscribed in an autonomous body. Old Boesoou leaves little doubt about this in his response to Leenhardt, who inquired about the effects produced by schooling:
- In short, is it the notion of spirit that we have brought to your thinking?
And he objected:
- The spirit? Bah! You did not bring us the spirit. We already knew of the existence of the spirit. We were proceeding according to the spirit. What you have given us is the body."
(Philippe Descola, Beyond nature and culture, 2005)

E4.6.5.A_REF4_LIT

EL3.160. SCHILLER WARNS THAT REASON'S INITIAL EMERGENCE IN HUMANITY IS A DANGEROUS STEP, AS ITS DEMAND FOR THE ABSOLUTE, WHEN MISAPPLIED BY OUR SENSUOUS NATURE, CREATES AN ENSLAVING AND INFINITE DESIRE FOR MATERIAL THINGS, LEADING TO FEAR AND CARE RATHER THAN TRUE FREEDOM.
“It is true we cannot point out this state of rude nature as we have here portrayed it in any definite people and age. It is only an idea, but an idea with which experience agrees most closely in special features. It may be said that man was never in this animal condition, but he has not, on the other hand, ever entirely escaped from it. Even in the rudest subjects, unmistakable traces of rational freedom can be found, and even in the most cultivated, features are not wanting that remind us of that dismal natural condition. It is possible for man, at one and the same time, to unite the highest and the lowest in his nature; and if his dignity depends on a strict separation of one from the other, his happiness depends on a skilful removal of this separation. The culture which is to bring his dignity into agreement with his happiness will therefore have to provide for the greatest purity of these two principles in their most intimate combination.

Consequently the first appearance of reason in man is not the beginning of humanity. This is first decided by his freedom, and reason begins first by making his sensuous dependence boundless; a phenomenon that does not appear to me to have been sufficiently elucidated, considering its importance and universality. We know that the reason makes itself known to man by the demand for the absolute—the self-dependent and necessary. But as this want of the reason cannot be satisfied in any separate or single state of his physical life, he is obliged to leave the physical entirely and to rise from a limited reality to ideas. But although the true meaning of that demand of the reason is to withdraw him from the limits of time and to lead him from the world of sense to an ideal world, yet this same demand of reason, by misapplication—scarcely to be avoided in this life, prone to sensuousness—can direct him to physical life, and, instead of making man free, plunge him in the most terrible slavery.

Facts verify this supposition. Man raised on the wings of imagination leaves the narrow limits of the present, in which mere animality is enclosed, in order to strive on to an unlimited future. But while the limitless is unfolded to his dazed imagination, his heart has not ceased to live in the separate, and to serve the moment. The impulse towards the absolute seizes him suddenly in the midst of his animality, and as in this cloddish condition all his efforts aim only at the material and temporal, and are limited by his individuality, he is only led by that demand of the reason to extend his individuality into the infinite, instead of to abstract from it. He will be led to seek instead of form an inexhaustible matter, instead of the unchangeable an everlasting change and an absolute securing of his temporal existence. The same impulse which, directed to his thought and action, ought to lead to truth and morality, now directed to his passion and emotional state, produces nothing but an unlimited desire and an absolute want. The first fruits, therefore, that he reaps in the world of spirits are cares and fear—both operations of the reason; not of sensuousness, but of a reason that mistakes its object and applies its categorical imperative to matter. All unconditional systems of happiness are fruits of this tree, whether they have for their object the present day or the whole of life, or what does not make them any more respectable, the whole of eternity, for their object. An unlimited duration of existence and of well-being is only an ideal of the desires; hence a demand which can only be put forth by an animality striving up to the absolute. Man, therefore, without gaining anything for his humanity by a rational expression of this sort, loses the happy limitation of the animal, over which he now only possesses the unenviable superiority of losing the present for an endeavor after what is remote, yet without seeking in the limitless future anything but the present.

But even if the reason does not go astray in its object, or err in the question, sensuousness will continue to falsify the answer for a long time. As soon as man has begun to use his understanding and to knit together phenomena in cause and effect, the reason, according to its conception, presses on to an absolute knitting together and to an unconditional basis. In order, merely, to be able to put forward this demand, man must already have stepped beyond the sensuous, but the sensuous uses this very demand to bring back the fugitive.

In fact, it is now that he ought to abandon entirely the world of sense in order to take his flight into the realm of ideas; for the intelligence remains eternally shut up in the finite and in the contingent, and does not cease putting questions without reaching the last link of the chain. But as the man with whom we are engaged is not yet capable of such an abstraction, and does not find it in the sphere of sensuous knowledge, and because he does not look for it in pure reason, he will seek for it below in the region of sentiment, and will appear to find it. No doubt the sensuous shows him nothing that has its foundation in itself, and that legislates for itself, but it shows him something that does not care for foundation or law; therefore, thus not being able to quiet the intelligence by showing it a final cause, he reduces it to silence by the conception which desires no cause; and being incapable of understanding the sublime necessity of reason, he keeps to the blind constraint of matter. As sensuousness knows no other end than its interest, and is determined by nothing except blind chance, it makes the former the motive of its actions, and the latter the master of the world.

Even the divine part in man, the moral law, in its first manifestation in the sensuous cannot avoid this perversion. As this moral law is only prohibited, and combats in man the interest of sensuous egotism, it must appear to him as something strange until he has come to consider this self-love as the stranger, and the voice of reason as his true self. Therefore he confines himself to feeling the fetters which the latter imposes on him, without having the consciousness of the infinite emancipation which it procures for him. Without suspecting in himself the dignity of lawgiver, he only experiences the constraint and the impotent revolt of a subject fretting under the yoke, because in this experience the sensuous impulsion precedes the moral impulsion, he gives to the law of necessity a beginning in him, a positive origin, and by the most unfortunate of all mistakes he converts the immutable and the eternal in himself into a transitory accident. He makes up his mind to consider the notions of the just and the unjust as statutes which have been introduced by a will, and not as having in themselves an eternal value. Just as in the explanation of certain natural phenomena he goes beyond nature and seeks out of her what can only be found in her, in her own laws; so also in the explanation of moral phenomena he goes beyond reason and makes light of his humanity, seeking a god in this way. It is not wonderful that a religion which he has purchased at the cost of his humanity shows itself worthy of this origin, and that he only considers as absolute and eternally binding laws that have never been binding from all eternity. He has placed himself in relation with, not a holy being, but a powerful. Therefore the spirit of his religion, of the homage that he gives to God, is a fear that abases him, and not a veneration that elevates him in his own esteem.

Though these different aberrations by which man departs from the ideal of his destination cannot all take place at the same time, because several degrees have to be passed over in the transition from the obscure of thought to error, and from the obscure of will to the corruption of the will; these degrees are all, without exception, the consequence of his physical state, because in all the vital impulsion sways the formal impulsion. Now, two cases may happen: either reason may not yet have spoken in man, and the physical may reign over him with a blind necessity, or reason may not be sufficiently purified from sensuous impressions, and the moral may still be subject to the physical; in both cases the only principle that has a real power over him is a material principle, and man, at least as regards his ultimate tendency, is a sensuous being. The only difference is, that in the former case he is an animal without reason, and in the second case a rational animal. But he ought to be neither one nor the other: he ought to be a man. Nature ought not to rule him exclusively; nor reason conditionally. The two legislations ought to be completely independent, and yet mutually complementary.”
(Friedrich Schiller, The Aesthetical Essays, 1875)

E4.6.5.A_REF3_ANT PHILIPPE  DESCOLA ATTACKS THE HABIT OF MAKING "MODERN DUALISM" (NATURE VS. CULTURE) THE STANDARD FOR ALL WORLD SYSTEMS.
"Faire du dualisme moderne l’étalon de tous les systèmes du monde nous contraint ainsi à une sorte de cannibalisme bienveillant, une incorporation répétée de l’objectivation des non-modernes par eux-mêmes dans I’objectivation de nous-mêmes par nous-mêmes. Longtemps réputés radicalement autres, et employés en conséquence comme repoussoirs de la morale civique ou modèles de vertus disparues, les sauvages sont désormais tenus pour des voisins presque transparents, non plus ces « philosophes nus » que louait Montaigne, mais des ébauches de citoyens, des protonaturalistes, des quasi-historiens, des économistes en gésine, bref, des précurseurs tâtonnants d’une manière d’appréhender les choses et les hommes que nous aurions su dévoiler et codifier mieux que quiconque. C’est là une façon de leur rendre hommage, assurément, mais c’est aussi le meilleur moyen, en les rangeant dans notre lot commun, de faire s’évanouir leur contribution à l’intelligibilité de la condition humaine. [...]

Généralisations des intériorités et particularisation des physicalités, voilà une combinaison décidément bien énigmatique puisqu’elle inverse terme à terme notre propre doxa : si l’on suivait la phraséologie consacrée, il faudrait parler ici d’un relativisme naturel et d’un universalisme culturel, une insurmontable contradiction pour toute épistémologie moderniste bien constituée."
(Philippe Descola, Par-delà nature et culture, 2005)

E4.6.5.A_REF5_PH A_Eugène Ionesco_The Three Faces of Hélène Cixous_1955

LATOUR PROPOSES REPLACING "THE TRUTH" WITH MODES OF VERIDICTION. WE MUST THINK ADVERBIALLY (LEGALLY, RELIGIOUSLY, SCIENTIFICALLY). Truth is not a substance but a "truth of relations" (Deleuze).
"Plutôt que « la » vérité, pensons les modes d'existence ou de véridiction de chaque activité. Pour se le représenter facilement, on peu penser en termes d'adverbes: scientifiquement, artistiquement, juridiquement, amoureusement, etc. Par exemple on peut trouver injuste une décision de justice qui ne présente plus de recours selon la loi, parce qu'on applique un mode d'existence non jurique à la situation (celui de l'éthique ou de la morale par exemple). L'artiste instaure le mode d'existence artistique de la véridiction dans son œuvre - cela aide à comprendre pourquoi un artiste peut détruire une œuvre que d'autres jugent bonne parce qu'il n'a pas atteint le mode d'existence qu'il essayait d'instaurer. 
Penser selon les modes d'existence, ce n'est pas du relativisme ! Cela ne revient pas à penser qu'il n'existe pas de vérité. Il n'a pas de relativisme il faut penser « en termes de vérité des relations » comme le formulait Deleuze.
La science à l'apanage de sa vérité propre; il excelle au référencement du lointain - de l'extrêmement petit ou de l'extrêmement grand - mais depuis Descartes le mode scientifique tend à déborder sur les autres situations auquel il ne s'applique pas, car le regard de ce mode n'épuise pas la chose considérée sous d'autres modes. 
L'une des erreurs de Descartes est d'avoir conclu la « res extensa » à partir d'un tout petit nombre d'observations mathématiques pour en conclure que le monde était fait conformément à la raison scientifique. Quand on pense ainsi, que fait-on de la conscience, de l'art, des émotions, etc ?
Car le regard de ce mode n'épuise pas la chose considéré sous d'autres modes. Le mode scientifique excelle au référencement du lointain - de l'extrêmement petit ou de l'extrêmement grand.
Il n'y a pas d'accès immédiat à la chose (comme nous habitue mal le "double clic" sur la souris) que ce soit à travers de n'importe quel mode. Tous passent par la transformation car toute chose est sous-tendu par d'autres choses en transformation. Les choses existent non en substance mais sous-tendu par d'autres choses (voir le traîté de choses de Tristan Garcia). Les choses subsistent dans le temps soutenues par d'autres choses qui elles ne subsistent pas. 
Par exemple, pour les scientifiques, une expérience est extrêmement contrôlée; il faut un labo, du financement, des machines, du personnel. Les objets mobilisés pour arriver à la preuve de l'expérience son scénarisés de façon très précise; l'accès à la chose n'est absolument pas immédiat.
De la même façon, il n'y a pas d'information journalistique sans une transformation. Si l'on ne comprend pas cela, on dira que tous les scientifiques, tous les journalistes, tous les politiques mentent.
Comment peut-on prétendre être moderne si les processus qui sous-tendent l'injonction à la rationalité, la rentabilité et l'efficacité ne sont pas conduits de façon cohérente ? Le mot d'ordre de cette modernité est devenue schizophrénie:  les occidentaux ne font pas ce qu'ils disent et ne disent pas ce qu'ils font, car pour soutenir leur modèle de liberté localement, ils continuent à exploiter les richesses naturelles sur lesquels ils ont la mainmise de par le monde, même après la décolonisation.
Avec la crise écologique, on réalise qu'il n'y a pas de monde pour concrétiser le mot d'ordre de la modernité, on vit dans un monde en théorie et on en occupe un autre."
(D'après les interviews de Bruno Latour sur Les Chemins de la philosophie, diffusés sur France Culture entre le 21 et le 24/03/2022)

E4.6.5.A_REF6_PH PIERRE HADOT ARGUES THAT THE "GRECO-LATIN LINGUISTIC SYSTEM" IMPOSED THE FUNDAMENTAL CATEGORIES OF WESTERN PHILOSOPHY—SPECIFICALLY THE "OPPOSITION BETWEEN SUBJECT AND OBJECT" AND THE FOCUS ON "MEASUREMENT"—WHICH ARE NOT ABSOLUTE TRUTHS BUT CULTURAL ARTIFACTS. Chinese thought describes a "concrete whole" that is "ineffable and unthinkable" and essentially "vague," challenging the Western demand for analytical precision.
"C’est le langage lui-même qui nous donne l’illusion d’être un système de signes intermédiaire entre notre pensée et les objets. Nous découvrons cette illusion lorsque nous nous apercevons que nous ne pouvons atteindre ni notre « pensée », ni les « objets » sans le langage. C’est donc en se heurtant aux limites du langage que le philosophe découvre qu’il philosophe « dans » le langage, et que celui-ci s’impose à lui comme une structure insurmontable. 
Une de ces limites se découvre dans l’impossibilité de poser un commencement absolu à la réflexion philosophique et de réaliser, soit une analyse, soit une déduction, absolument totales. Dans son traité De l’esprit géométrique, Pascal nous le fait bien comprendre : « Ainsi, en poussant la recherche de plus en plus, on arrive nécessairement à des mots primitifs qu’on ne peut définir et à des principes si clairs qu’on n’en trouve plus qui le soient davantage pour servir à leur preuve. D’où il paraît que les hommes sont dans une impuissance naturelle et immuable de traiter quelque science que ce soit dans un ordre absolument accompli ». L’aveu de Pascal est grave et, me semble-il, indiscutable. Il nous oblige à reconnaître que toute philosophie doit s’appuyer en dernière analyse sur des notions communes (objets de définitions ennoématiques, diraient les stoïciens), qui ne semblent claires que dans la mesure où elles restent confuses et indéterminées. Nous comprenons mieux pourquoi tout à l’heure Wittgenstein se résignait à ne proposer qu’une notion de « jeu de langage » floue et en quelque sorte inexacte. Dans un ouvrage comme l’Éthique de Spinoza qui prétend progresser more geometrico, les premières lignes introduisent sans les définir les termes de « cause », d’« essence », d’« existence », de « nature », de « chose », de « genre », corps » et de « pensée ». Et même les termes expressément définis, comme « substance », par exemple, gardent quelque chose d’obscur et une multiplicité potentielle de signification qui permet d’ailleurs de les utiliser. [...]

On peut également, comme le faisait récemment H Wein, reconnaître comment le système linguistique gréco-latin a imposé à la philosophie occidentale certaines catégories fondamentales, depuis Aristote jusqu’à Kant, en passant par les qualités primaires de Descartes et de Locke : ces catégories donnent du relief à la numération et à la mensuration des choses dans l’espace-temps. Un système linguistique comme le chinois dans lequel le nombre, l’opposition entre sujet et objet, jouent peu ou pas de rôle, ne peut imposer de telles catégories à sa philosophie. À ce sujet, je voudrais signaler combien les études de M. Liou Kia-Hway sont précieuses dans cette perspective. Son livre récent sur L’Esprit synthétique de la Chine montre comment la différence entre l’écriture chinoise d’essence concrète et synthétique et l’écriture occidentale d’essence abstraite et analytique conduit à une opposition fondamentale entre la pensée chinoise et les pensées de type occidental. 

"La Chine antique ne connaît qu’un tout concret… Le tout concret… est surtout une présence ineffable et impensable. Cette présence ineffable et impensable échappe nécessairement à toute prise de la pensée conceptuelle, dont l’essence est la précision. Elle est obligée de s’incarner inadéquatement dans une juxtaposition des caractères chinois dont l’ordre syntaxique est très libre et dont la signification respective est extrêmement vague."

Remarquons d’ailleurs à ce sujet la difficulté en même temps que la valeur de la philosophie comparée. Le sens plein d’une phrase d’une langue donnée ne peut être traduit dans une autre langue. Nous ne pouvons donc jamais complètement comprendre une philosophie exprimée dans une langue étrangère, surtout lorsqu’elle correspond à un système linguistique extrêmement différent du nôtre. Mais en même temps, c’est une vision de l’univers tout à fait différente de la nôtre qui se révèle à nous et vient compléter notre propre visée. C’est pourquoi le traducteur doit faire violence à sa propre langue pour y introduire les traits propres de la langue étrangère. Et ici encore finalement nous nous heurtons à une limite infranchissable sur la voie de la clarté et de la compréhension. [...]"
(Pierre Hadot, Wittgenstein et les limites du langage, 2004-2014)

E1.7.B.2.2.k.iv.wE4.6.5.A.

[EN] Video: Marteen Baas, Real time series
"INSTINCT, INTELLIGENCE, AND ANXIETY

The type of intelligence that we have cultivated brings anxiety for at least three principal reasons. The first is that intelligent thinking works by dividing the world of experience into separate facts and events, simple enough for conscious attention to focus upon them one at a time. But there are innumerable ways of dividing and selecting for attention the facts and events, the data, required for any prediction or decision, and thus when the moment comes for a choice there is always the rankling doubt that important data may have been overlooked. There is therefore no complete assurance that an important decision is right. Thus the ever frustrated effort to gain complete assurance by reviewing the data becomes the special anxiety which we call a sense of responsibility. The second is that the sense of responsibility goes hand in hand with a heightened sense of being an independent individual - a source of action which cannot depend upon simple instinct or spontaneity for doing the appropriate thing. The intelligent man therefore feels independent of or cut off from the rest of nature, and in trying, ever frustratedly, to figure nature out with sufficient accuracy he acquires a feeling of fear and hostility toward everything outside his own will and its full control. The third is that conscious attention reviews facts and events in series, even though they may be happening all together at once. Thinking about them in series and making predictions and decisions about the future course of the series gives the intelligent man a vivid awareness of time. It appears to him as a basic life process which he must work against. He knows that he must calculate rapidly to forestall it, though reviewing nature analytically, piece by piece, is not conducive to speed. Furthermore, knowledge of the future brings about emotional reactions to future events before they happen, and thus anxiety because, for example, one may get sick or will eventually die. And apparently this does not trouble the creatures who act by instinct."
(Alan Watts, This is it, 1958)

E1.7.B.2.2.k.v_REF1_PH.wXXXXXXXXXXX

"Yet this appears to have intensified rather than abated our anxiety. For to the extent that we have analyzed the natural world and the human world more thoroughly, to that extent it appears to us to be more complicated. The scope of our detailed information about the world is so vast that every individual, every responsible source of action, finds it too great to master - without depending upon the collaboration of others who are, however, beyond his control. Collaboration requires faith, but faith is an instinctual attitude; speaking quite strictly, it is not intelligent to trust what you have not analyzed.

It looks, then, as if there is conflict, contradiction, and thus anxiety in the very nature of intelligence. As an efficient though slow and laborious means of conscious control, it builds up a body of information too complex to be grasped by its own method of reviewing events and facts one after another in series. Machines or other people must be trusted to assist: but how much must one know, how many facts must one review, before deciding to accept a collaborator? Intelligence, which is in some sense systematic doubt, cannot proceed very far without also having to embrace its polar opposite - instinctual faith. So long as intelligence and faith seem mutually exclusive this is an impossible contradiction, for to the degree that intelligence is systematic doubt it cannot trust itself. This is why lack of self confidence is the peculiar neurosis of civilized man, and why he elaborates ever more complex arrangements for legal safeguarding, foolproofing, and checking, double checking, and triple-checking every decisive action. All of which leads to the kind of bureaucratic stalemate with which we are so familiar. [...]"
(Alan Watts, This is it, 1958)

E1.7.B.2.2.k.v_REF1.1_PH.wXXXXXXXXX

"It is through impatience and exasperation with such snarls that democracies vote themselves into dictatorships. [...] It is also in despair of being able to understand or make any productive contribution to the highly organized chaos of our politico-economic system that large numbers of people simply abandon political and social commitments. They just let society be taken over by a pattern of organization which is as self-proliferative as a weed, and whose ends and values are neither human nor instinctual but mechanical. [...]"
(Alan Watts, This is it, 1958)

E4.6.5.A_REF7_PH NIETZSCHE DIAGNOSTIQUE LA CONDITION MODERNE COMME UNE PERTE DU "GOUT" POUR LA PERFECTION FINIE (LA MESURE, L'ARRET) AU PROFIT D'UNE "DEMANGEAISON DE L'INFINI" ET D'UN "SENS HISTORIQUE" (LE DEVENIR, LE FLUX).
"Nous, hommes du « sens historique » : comme tels, nous avons nos vertus, cela n’est pas contestable, — nous sommes dénués de prétention, désintéressés, modestes, courageux, amplement capables de dépassement de soi, pleins de dévouement, très reconnaissants, très patients, très conciliants : — malgré tout cela, nous n’avons peut-être guère de « goût ». Reconnaissons-le en fin de compte : ce que nous avons le plus de mal à saisir, à sentir, à goûter et aimer durablement, nous, hommes du « sens historique », ce qui nous trouve au fond prévenus et presque hostiles, c’est justement la perfection et la pleine maturité de toute culture et de tout art, la véritable noblesse des œuvres et des hommes, leur instant de mer d’huile et d’autosuffisance alcyonienne, l’aspect doré et froid que montrent toutes les choses parvenues à leur accomplissement. Peut-être notre grande vertu, le sens historique, s’oppose-t-elle nécessairement au bon goût, à tout le moins au meilleur de tous les goûts, et c’est seulement à grand-peine, en hésitant, à force de contrainte, que nous parvenons à restituer en nous ces petits, brefs, et suprêmes coups de chance transfigurant la vie humaine qui resplendissent soudain ici ou là : ces moments de prodige où une grande force s’est arrêtée volontairement face au démesuré et à l’illimité, — où l’on a joui d’une profusion de plaisir subtil à se dompter et se pétrifier brusquement, à se tenir solidement et s’immobiliser sur un sol encore vacillant. La mesure nous est étrangère, reconnaissons-le; notre démangeaison, c’est justement la démangeaison de l’infini, de l’immense. Pareils au cavalier emporté par un coursier écumant, nous lâchons les rênes face à l’infini, nous, hommes modernes, nous, demi-barbares — et nous ne connaissons notre béatitude que là où nous sommes aussi le plus — exposés au danger (1)."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Par-delà bien et mal, Aphorism 224, 1886)

Note (1): 
Les textes consacrés par Nietzsche au sens historique sont nombreux. Nous attirerons l’attention sur un unique posthume, qui prolonge les analyses de ce paragraphe : « [...] Le sens historique : Platon et toute la philosophie n’en ont aucune idée. C’est une sorte d’art de comédien, de prendre pour un temps une âme étrangère : conséquence des grands mélanges de races et de peuples, grâce auxquels il y a dans chacun une parcelle de tout ce qui existait. Un sens artistique dans le domaine de la connaissance. En même temps un signe de faiblesse et de manque d’unité.
(Patrick Wotling)

E4.6.5.B. Deconstructing the Fortress: Structuralism, Relation, and the Fluid Self.
How Western thought itself (through Structuralism, Psychoanalysis, and Deconstruction) attempts to dissolve the rigid "Subject" and "Truth" by focusing on relationships, variations, and the limits of logic.

E1.7.B.2.2.l_REF1_PH.wE4.6.5.B.

"To some extent it is certainly a manifestation of this anti-intellectualism that there has recently been a marked increase of Western interest in the philosophies and religions of Asia. Unlike Christianity-for reasons which we shall explain these are ways of life which seem, above all, to offer release from conflict and anxiety. Their goal is a state of inner feeling in which oppositions have become mutually co-operative instead of mutually exclusive, in which there is no longer any conflict between the individual man and nature, or between intelligence and instinct. Their view of the world is unitary (or, to be quite technical, "nondualistic"), and in such a world there is no absolute overwhelming urgency to be right rather than wrong, or to live rather than die. It is, however, quite difficult for us to understand this point of view, for the very reason that we habitually regard opposites as mutually exclusive, like God and the Devil. Because of this, our idea of unity and our way of solving conflicts is simply to eliminate one of the two parties. In other words, we have difficulty in seeing the relativity or mutual interdependence of contraries. For this reason our revolts against the excesses of intelligence are always in danger of selling out to instinct.

But this is the habitual dualist's solution to the problem of dualism: to solve the dilemma by chopping off one of the horns. [...]

In the same way it is only apparently contradictory to describe a sensation in which it seems that whatever I do freely and intelligently is at the same time completely determined, and vice versa. It seems that absolutely everything both inside and outside me is happening by itself, yet at the same time that I myself am doing all of it, that my separate individuality is simply a function, something being done by everything which is not me, yet at the same time everything which is not me is a function of my separate individuality. Ordinarily we can see the truth of these seemingly paradoxical feelings if we take them separately, if we look at one without looking simultaneously at the other. This is why, for example, the arguments for free will and determinism are equally cogent though seemingly contradictory. The same goes for almost all the great debates of Western philosophy - the realists against the nominalists, the idealists against the materialists, and so on. We get into conflicts and debates about these problems because our language and our way of thinking are somewhat clumsy in their grasp of relationships. In other words, because it is much easier for us to see opposites as mutually exclusive than as mutually interdependent.

The sensation I am trying to describe is the experience of things and events in a relationship, as distinct from the partial experience of things and events in separation. I have sometimes said that if we could translate the modern Western theory of relativity into experience, we should have what the Chinese and the Indians call the Absolute - as when they say that everything which happens is the Tao, or that all things are of one "suchness." What they mean is that all things are in relation, and thus that - considered simply by itself - no thing, no event, has any reality. There seem to be relatively few people, even in the civilizations of Asia, for whom relationship is an actual sensation, over and above a mere idea. The anxiety which comes about through the conflict of intelligence with instinct, of man as the conscious will with nature both in and around him, does not seem to me to have any solution unless we can actually feel relationship, unless it is a matter of clear sensation that as determined beings we are free, and that as free beings we are determined. For if we can feel this way, it will not appear that the use of will and intelligence is a conflict with our natural environment and endowment."
(Alan Watts, This is it, 1958)

"Why, then, do we not feel relationship? Why is the mutual interdependence between ourselves and the external world not the most obvious and dominant fact of consciousness? Why do we not see that the world we try to control, our whole inner and outer natural environment, is precisely that which gives us the power to control anything? It is because we look at things separately instead of simultaneously. When we are busy trying to control or change our circumstances, we ignore and are unconscious of the dependence of our consciousness and energy upon the outer world. When, on the other hand, we are oppressed by circumstances and feel controlled by the outer world, we forget that our very own consciousness is bringing that world into being. [...]

"What is troubling us," said Wittgenstein, "is the tendency to believe that the mind is like a little man within."

Now if we examine the records of mystical experience, or of what I am now calling the experience of relationship, we shall find that, time and time again, it is connected with "spiritual poverty” - that is to say, with giving up the ownership of everything, including oneself or one's consciousness. It is the total abandonment of proprietorship on the external world of nature and the internal world of the human organism. This does not come about through the virtue of the will, through one's own strength, which in any case is not one's own. It comes about from the insight that there is no proprietor, no inner controller. This becomes evident as soon as the consciousness which has felt itself to be the inner controller starts to examine itself, and finds out that it does not give itself the power of control. Its push is nature's pull; it is a loop in an endless knot, where a pull from the right is a push from the left.

When it thus becomes clear that I own nothing, not even what I have called myself, it is as if, to use St. Paul's words, I had nothing but possessed all things. When I can no more identify myself with that little man inside, there is nothing left to identify with - except everything! There is no longer the slightest contradiction between feeling like a leaf on a stream and throwing one's whole energy into responsible action [...].

All that I have been describing is a subjective feeling. It gives no specific direction as to what is or is not a proper use of intelligence in varying the course of nature - which must always be a matter of opinion and of trial and error. What it does give is what I feel to be a correct apprehension of the continuum, of the context, in which we are working, and this seems to me to be prior to, basic to, the problem of what exactly is to be done. Much as we discuss the latter question, is it really sensible to do so until we are more aware of the context in which action is to be taken? That context is our relationship to the whole so-called objective world of n ture - and relationship as something concrete, as more than an abstract and theoretical positioning of billiard balls, is practically screened out of consciousness by our present use of intelligence. [...]"
(Alan Watts, This is it, 1958)

E4.6.5.B_REF1_PH ÉPICURE REVALORISE LE "TOUCHER" ET L'IMMEDIATETE COMME LE MODELE MEME DU REEL, LA OU LA TRADITION RATIONALISTE Y VOIT SOUVENT UNE ILLUSION OU UNE INSUFFISANCE.
"Le sensualisme épicurien n’affirme pas que seul ce qui est saisi par les sens est réel, mais que la saisie sensible est le modèle à la fois du réel et de sa saisie parce que être sensible c’est comme être réel : à la limite, il n’y a en tout et pour tout que du tangible, autrement dit du réel en toute – et singulière – impénétrabilité. [...]
La sensation, comme toucher, ne laisse pas le monde en une apparence qui s’opposerait à une essence plus réelle : elle dégage et expose le réel par l’impression qu’il fait, le renvoyant alors non au sujet mais à lui-même, si l’on peut dire, en tant que présence d’abord purement chosique, totale, insignifiante. L’exemple de la porte qui claque dans mon dos montre que lorsque les choses me touchent avant même que je me les sois representées, elles me saisissent d’autant plus réellement. Le réel est saisissant, c’est là sa définition. Et s’il nous est donné au mieux dans la sensation, ce n’est pas parce qu’elle nous met en rapport avec lui, mais parce qu’elle est le réel lui-même s’approchant au plus près. Le sentant et le senti ne sont pas en effet , confrontés l’un à l’autre ; le premier ne se contente pas d’appréhender une réalité tout en lui restant extérieur. Ce qui est senti, éprouvé est tout aussi bien la présence de la chose que celle du sentant, les deux se rencontrant l’une l’autre dans l’impression d’une seule.
(Guillaume Badoual, Alain Chareyre-Méjan, Charles Floren, Elsa Grasso et Guillaume Pigeard de Gurbert (Collectif), Épicure ou le bonheur sans détour, 1993)

E4.6.5.B_REF2_PH JACQUES DERRIDA'S PHILOSOPHY CHALLENGES THE TRADITIONAL IDEA OF "TRUTH" AS SOMETHING SIMPLE, STABLE, OR PURELY LOGICAL. INSTEAD, HE SUGGESTS THAT TRUTH IS COMPLEX, OFTEN HIDDEN, AND BEST UNDERSTOOD BY EMBRACING UNCERTAINTY.
Truth is often hidden in opposites (Deconstruction): Derrida introduced the concept of deconstruction, which involves dismantling our loyalty to a single dominant idea to find "aspects of the truth that might lie buried in its opposite" We historically privilege one side of a binary (e.g., reason over passion, speech over writing), assuming it holds the superior truth. Derrida argues that the "supposedly lesser part" actually possesses merit and value that is necessary for a complete understanding of reality.

Truth is not a neat solution: Derrida criticized the human tendency to imagine that behind every problem lies somewhere a good and neat solution. He believed that reality is fraught and kaleidoscopic and that rushing to clear-cut conclusions avoids grappling with the true complexity of the world.

Wisdom is permanently oscillating: Rather than seeking a static, final truth, Derrida wanted us to be comfortable with the permanently oscillating nature of wisdom]. He argued that acknowledging the tension between opposing ideas is more accurate than trying to resolve them into a single answer.

Uncertainty is a valid state of mind (Aporia): Derrida valued the state of aporia, a Greek word for impasse or puzzlement. That confusion and doubt are not signs of stupidity or weakness, but are evidence of the adulthood of the mind. Being unsure is portrayed as a more honest and mature relationship with the truth than having blind faith in simple answers.

Logic and language have limits (Logocentrism): Derrida attacked logocentrism, defined as an over hasty naive devotion to reason, logic and clear definition]. He believed that many important truths—such as feelings, music, or art—cannot be neatly expressed in words. Therefore, a worldview based solely on logic and language fails to capture the full truth of human experience.
(From The School of life: Jacques Derrida)

Watch it on YouTube :
https://youtu.be/H0tnHr2dqTs

E4.6.5.B_REF3_PH MANIGLIER REDEFINES THE "UNIVERSAL" NOT AS A FIXED IDENTITY ABOVE THINGS, BUT AS THE "MATRIX OF DIVERGENCES." The common ground between humans is not a shared substance, but the very system of their differences.
“Mon invité aujourd’hui aime les signes; ceux qui nous font signe, qui se distinguent des codes et des symboles et signes, qui ne sont pas une manière de désigner le réel mais bien une chose réelle un milieu de vie. Alors forcément il aime Ferdinand de Saussure et sa théorie des signes et cherche à réhabiliter le structuralisme et avec lui les philosophes qui ont compris que philosopher est avant tout une manière d'intervenir dans ce monde de signes. 
Je pense que le philosophe est marqué par un destin incompréhensible, il y a une marque, quelque chose lui est tombé dessus qui fait qu’il est inadapté, et qu’il rate sans cesse et que cette manière de rater pourtant lui donne une lumière particulière sur le monde.
Ce qui m'intéresse c'est les signes dans la mesure où ils ne sont pas commandés par une intention de signification qui les précéderait, que le sens est plutôt quelque chose comme un effet qui vient de surcroît. Dans l'humour véritable - pas dans l'ironie où il y a une manière de faire rire qui suppose une position de savoir de celui qui rit et ceux qui rit par rapport à quelque chose qui lui serait ignorant - alors que dans l'humour véritable au fond il y a une sorte de perplexité partagée.
Le comique c'est un signe qui est capable d’abolir notre besoin de sens pour laisser le signe rayonner pour lui-même. Notre rire est une manière d'accepter - non pas que les signent n’ont pas de sens - mais le fait qu’ils aient un sens ne va pas plus loin que cela, il nous permet de jouir de la contemplation du signe qui nous est donné. Le problème de la philosophie c'est qu’elle veut toujours en rajouter sur le sens - qu’on lui demande un supplément de sens  - alors que je pense qu’au contraire la bonne pensée c'est quelque chose qui va nous ramener au signe que l’on a déjà en fait et qu'on ignore d'une certaine manière. C’est plutôt circonscrire les signes dans lesquels on vit plutôt que rajouter un sens qui n'est jamais nécessaire et qui est toujours en réalité excessif et d'ailleurs le risque de l'excès de sens c’est la bêtise, c’est donc l'inverse d’un certain idéal philosophique. 
Si  la philosophie consiste à cartographier les signes qui composent notre monde, est-ce que ce travail-là d'autres personnes que le philosophe ne le font pas déjà? C’est vrai de tout travail intellectuel qui est de nous resituer  dans la situation dans laquelle nous sommes déjà d'une certaine manière. J’ai une définition toute bête de la philosophie : C’est l’art de bien penser. Le problème c'est qu'on pense en toute chose, je veux dire que quand on a une pratique artistique, quand on a une pratique scientifique, quand on a une pratique de bricolage, une pratique sexuelle, enfin on pense tout le temps; la philosophie c'est l'effort pour s'intéresser à cette dimension de pensée qu'il y a dans chacune de nos pratiques et à la prendre elle même comme objet de pensée. C’est une passion qui cherche à la construire, à l’affiner. C’est construire la pensée, la dessiner, c'est lui donner une forme, par exemple c’est s'intéresser aux architectures conceptuelles. C'est vrai dans le débat public, dans les prises de position politique aussi grossière soit-elle. D’une  certaine manière, il y a toujours dans la pensée des catégories qui sont mises en œuvre - il y a des manières de lier les catégories ensemble  - il y a des manières de susciter des problèmes et on peut simplement s'arrêter sur cela et simplement exiger que ce qui est pensé soit bien pensé, soit pensée pleinement. Ce n’est pas opposer à cette pensée une autre pensée qui serait meilleure, mais exiger que la dimension de la pensée soit travaillée en fait. Ne pas prendre la pensée comme objet,  mais travailler cette dimension de pensée qui est déjà là. Même si on est confronté à une pensée qui est complètement horrible du point de vue de son contenu; j’ai une très profonde confiance en la puissance du travail de la pensée pour changer les contenus. Je pense qu'on n’a pas besoin de commencer à dire aux gens ce qu'ils doivent penser; Il faut les aider à préciser leur pensée - c'est vraiment un travail de précision -  ça suffit en général pour créer une aventure intellectuelle. 
Je suis un Lévi-Straussien parce que j'ai eu une révélation: que la structure et plus généralement le structuralisme, comme mouvement intellectuel qui a une dimension à la fois scientifique dans les sciences sociales puis une dimension philosophique et même logique, avait été mal compris d'une part et d'autre part qu’il était toujours fertile et que les enseignements du structuralisme pouvaient être toujours utiles.  La grande invention de la notion de structure c'est vraiment Lévi-Strauss qui l'a le mieux dégagée: une structure c'est un type d’unité dans lequel la diversité de ses composantes est exactement co-extensible à ce qui les tient ensemble.  Ce ciment n’est pas au-dessus des parties, ce n'est pas une sorte d'identité qu’on pourrait retrouver dans chacune des parties, mais c'est la matrice des divergences. C’est ce que Lévi-Strauss appelait un groupe de transformation - ce qui l'intéressait c’était de produire un savoir à partir des différences - non pas sur les différences entre les êtres humains, mais après tout on pourrait l'étendre entre les différentes créatures, les animaux -  produire un savoir à partir du fait qu'on pourrait être autre. Chaque élément dans une structure est une variante, c'est quelque chose qui est défini par la manière dont il pourrait être remplacé par un autre. C’est la notion de substituabilité qui est centrale. On peut l’illustrer par les dessins du graveur Maurits Cornelis Escher et les permutations de ses escaliers. Une structure c’est ça: une chose est  définie par opposition à l'autre dans une relation de permutation possible. Lévi-Strauss dit: “Je suis un autre parmi les autres”. C’est l’idée selon laquelle mon identité est dépendante de l'effort que je peux faire pour devenir quelqu'un d'autre - au moins par d'imagination - et me situer dans cet espace de variantes de moi-même possibles.  Ce qui est magnifique c’est qu'on a plus à choisir entre l'universalisme et le particularisme. On a plus à choisir entre l'idée de savoir si on a besoin d'avoir un centre commun avec l'autre pour pouvoir s'entendre ou si au contraire on est enfermé dans sa particularité. Ce que nous avons en commun ce sont nos manières de différerer.  Chaque être est défini par ses différences par rapport aux autres; on est totalement libéré parce qu’on peut voyager. La variété n'est plus  un obstacle, c'est un outil. On peut quand même reconnaître que dans la tradition intellectuelle de la philosophie en général la différence, la multiplicité étaient plutôt des obstacles. Il fallait atteindre l'invariant, l'identité, et moi je suis d'accord pour qu'on atteigne l’invariant mais justement l’invariant c'est le principe même de la variation, c'est pas un truc au-dessus. C'est très beau car c’est une pensée de l'immanence - ça nous permet de rester à l'intérieur de ce monde confus et bigarré dans lequel nous nous trouvons - et en même temps de produire une forme de rationalité dans la bigarrure. Dans le monde cosmopolitique d’aujourd’hui on ne peut plus se retirer derrière quelque frontière que ce soit (entre les états, entre les écosystèmes, entre les disciplines), on ne peut plus être indifférent à nos différences. L’outil politique que fournit le structuralisme est de dire que la différence n'est pas quelque chose de contraire à la rationalité mais génératrice de nouveaux universels, à condition de comprendre que justement le sujet qui cherche à produire ce savoir où à produire ces normes doit lui-même accepter de se situer comme une variante parmi les autres - de se remettre sur la carte, il n’est pas au dessus de la carte. De la même façon, il y a un continuum de ressemblance entre les êtres et non pas des différences de nature. Moi je suis pour la réhabilitation de la notion de ressemblance. De Platon à Deleuze, les philosophes ont beaucoup critiqué la ressemblance alors que la ressemblance est quelque chose comme une forme de différence continue, c'est une relation dans laquelle on ne sait pas où on cesse d'être soi-même et où on commence à devenir différent. C'est très utile finalement - cela nous permet d'effectuer le passage dans l'autre puis un retour vers soi pour faire ce travail de cartographie, de remise de soi sur la carte, pour voir d'où on est parti dans un paysage qui n’est constitué de rien d'autre que de l'ensemble des choses qu'on est soi-même devenu. 
A propos de La Règle du Jeu: La raison pour laquelle j’aime ce film c'est parce qu’il fait écho à un sentiment que j’ai que chacun a ses raisons (Une phrase de Beaumarchais mise en exergue du film). Du coup la caméra tente de filmer le déploiement des ces raisons puis leur interactions. C’est un film en nuances de gris, en dégradé, qui correspond à l’image tendre que j’ai du monde. Nous sommes à une époque où on a besoin d’une raison tendre - la raison a manqué de tendresse - c’est la sensibilité à la pluralité des raisons. La raison doit être capable de réaliser quand elle s’engage dans le travail rationnel que sa forme n’est qu’une des formes possibles (comme je le disais tout à l’heure en parlant du structuralisme - ce qui est important c’est la découverte de la variation). La tendresse vient du pluriel, aussi d’une certaine lenteur à juger en faisant l’épreuve du passage dans des raisons autres.
L’art peut être un outil à penser. Je n’essaye pas de regarder les films en cherchant à révéler leur  sens; je les prends comme un point de départ qui produit une philosophie potentiellement inattendue : faire d'une œuvre d'art une expérience, une expérimentation intellectuelle dans laquelle on ne sait pas ce qu'on va finir par penser au bout. C'est cohérent avec ce que je disais tout à l'heure quand je disais qu’on a trop tendance à définir la philosophie comme quelque chose qui va dégager le sens.
Je pense que son rôle est de permettre d’ouvrir l’espace du pensable et de profiter du fait qu’il y a des formes de pensée comme le cinéma, comme les arts, comme les sciences, comme l’exercice de la politique - des formes de pensée qui sont sous contrainte - qui n’ont pas comme objectif que de penser. Ces contraintes permettent de forcer la pensée à aller plus loin et à tester quelque chose qu’elle n’aurait pas imaginé d’elle-même. Souvent la philosophie livrée à elle-même manque d’imagination. Si on se contente de réfléchir sur ce qu’on pense, on va faire des boucles.”
(Profession philosophe: Patrice Maniglier au micro de l’émission Les chemins de la philosophie diffusée le 20/11/2020 sur France Culture: "La philosophie m’a permis de me rattacher à un monde que je ne comprenais pas")

Écouter le podcast:
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie-emission-du-vendredi-20-novembre-2020

E4.6.5.B_REF4_ANT CLAUDE LEVI-STRAUSSCRITIQUE DE LA PHILOSOPHIE COMME "ART DE LA CONVERSATION" OU "GYMNASTIQUE INTELLECTUELLE" AU PROFIT D'UNE "GEOLOGIE" DE LA PENSEE HUMAINE (COUCHES PROFONDES ET INCONSCIENTES).
"Employons-nous à une philosophie pratique et non à "une sorte de contemplation esthétique de la conscience par elle-même" ou "Le savoir-faire remplaç[er]ait le goût de la vérité" 
(Claude Lévi-Strauss, Tristes Tropiques, 1955)

E4.6.5.B_REF5_TH POUR LACAN, LE SUJET N'EST PAS IMPLIQUE DANS SON DISCOURS ; C'EST LE DISCOURS QUI A SA PROPRE SYSTEMATIQUE. L'AUTONOMIE DE L'ESPRIT EST "ILLUSOIRE". 
"Tout le cheminement de sa pensée, depuis le milieu des années cinquante jusqu’à la fin des années soixante-dix, fut dominé par le structuralisme selon lequel le sujet qui tient le discours n’est pas impliqué dans le discours qu’il profère. Il faut au contraire considérer ce discours comme ayant sa propre systématique, par le jeu de ses échos et de ses correspondances. Ce n’est pas la connaissance d’une vie qui rend compte d’une pensée, c’est inversement la connaissance d’une pensée qui donne la clé pour comprendre une vie. [...]
Qu’est-ce qu’une séance de psychanalyse ? C’est avant tout une relation de langage, ou plutôt la relation entre l’analyste supposé savoir, qui se tient en retrait, en silence, mais à l’affût du moment critique où il lui faudra prendre la parole, et un analysant (comme le nomme Lacan : plutôt qu’un « analysé », qui discrédite la part très effective qu’il prend au travail de l’interprétation) qui s’abandonne à la « libre association d’idées » que Freud lui-même préconisait [...]
La règle de ce jeu – « Dites sans réserve tout ce qui vous passe par la tête » – donne lieu à une parole insolite, sans commune mesure avec le discours commun qu’il est de bon ton de tenir en société. Aussi la première question, semble-t-il, que doit se poser le psychanalyste, porte sur la nature de ce nouveau langage: dans quelle mesure peut-elle faire l’objet d’une connaissance ? A cette fin, il se référera à la science du langage, nommément la linguistique. Tel est bien l’orientation première de la théorie lacanienne. [...]
Il s’agit en premier lieu de renverser la souveraineté du signifié sur le signifiant, de se mettre à l’écoute de l’acoustique de la voix, en oubliant le sens qui tend à la refouler. Puisque l’attention portée à la modulation du phénomène sonore nous détourne de l'attention portée au concept – ce que Lacan dit en son langage : « Qu’on dise reste oublié derrière ce qui se dit dans ce qui s’entend » (XX, p. 20), soit : l’intelligence du discours est refoulée par le phénomène sonore de la diction – alors efforçons-nous de nous laisser guider par la phonétique plus que par la sémiologie, et laissons-nous dériver au gré des sons apparentés. [...] C’est en laissant dériver, divaguer le langage, en pervertissant l’ordre méthodique de la langue de la conscience de soi, la langue des philosophes et des linguistes, qu’on aura quelque chance de cerner les contours des formations, ou des concrétions de l’inconscient. Il s’agit donc de laisser l’initiative au signifiant, indépendamment de sa liaison avec un signifié, pour dévoyer le langage des chemins de la méthode, de façon assez semblable aux techniques destinées à faire entendre ce que Breton inspiré de son propre aveu par Freud nommait, dans le Manifeste de 1924, « la voix surréaliste », par l’écriture automatique, le collage ou le cadavre exquis. Ce que Lacan nomme encore « l’instance de la lettre dans l’inconscient » (conférence prononcée à la Sorbonne en mai 1957), qu’il faut entendre comme la sollicitation pressante, l’insistance que la lettre exerce sur l’esprit dont l’autonomie ne saurait être qu’illusoire. Pour le psychanalyste, la lettre ne tue nullement l’esprit, elle le libère plutôt de sa prison mentale, et c’est inversement l’esprit qui tue la lettre en l’enfermant dans la normalité. Le signifiant jouant avec lui-même s’associe alors par homophonie à d’autres signifiants, et provoque ainsi une rêverie éveillée. [...]
il ne dédaigne pas de conclure en beauté le séminaire des années 1958-59 par cette formule qu’il livre à notre sagacité sans nous en donner la clé : « La femme a dans la peau un grain de fantaisie », [la femme a dans la fente un grain de poésie] contrepèterie impeccable mais douée d’une valeur poétique inhabituelle. [...]"
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Ecouter la folie, I- Le Symbolique, 2019)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Lacan/Ecouterlafolie/Ecouterlafolie1.html

E4.6.5.C. The Method of the "Gap": Reflecting the Unthought.
To truly go beyond dualism, one cannot just "compare" (which seeks the Same); one can use the "gap" (specifically the detour through ancient Chinese thought) to reveal the "Unthought" of the West and redefine Truth itself.

E4.6.5.C_REF1_PH FRANÇOIS JULLIEN CRITIQUE L'AMBITION OCCIDENTALE DE L'UNIVERSEL (QUI EST PRESCRIPTIF ET LOGIQUE, COMME LA SCIENCE) AU PROFIT DU COMMUN (QUI EST INTENSIF ET POLITIQUE). Il propose une méthodologie de la "ressource" (l'écart qui fait travailler la pensée) plutôt que de la "vérité" (l'adéquation statique).
"À partir des écarts promouvoir du commun [...]

Le commun n'est pas le semblable. Il faudra le dire et le redire en cette époque d'uniformisation facile et d'assimilation forcée, le poser en principe. Braque l'a avancé pour l'art : « Trouillebert ressemble à Corot, mais ils n'ont rien de commun ». Entendons la radicalité de la formule et prenons-la comme un avertissement : non seulement la ressemblance n'est pas porteuse de commun, mais c'est elle qui lui fait obstacle; non seulement elle ne le favorise pas, mais elle en enraye la possibilité. Car avec la ressemblance, non seulement le commun reste de surface, plaqué, et ne travaille pas, mais ce semblant de plus dispense de s'en enquérir, en desserre et dissout l'exigence (la ressemblance est un concept encore plus paresseux, inerte, que ne l'est la différence). Or cela peut s'entendre de la façon la plus générale, donc aussi sur le plan politique. Je le poserai donc comme un énoncé de départ : c'est seulement en faisant travailler des écarts qu'on peut promouvoir du commun.
Car distinguons deux communs: le commun qui nous est donné et dans lequel on se découvre (qu'on pourra dire « naturel » : de la famille au « national », c'est-à-dire dont on relève en « naissant », au vivant, au cosmique...) et le commun qu'on produit, ou qu'on promeut, proprement culturel et politique. En tant que tel, le commun signifie le partage, inclusif quant à son dedans, mais pouvant devenir exclusif quand la limite de ce dedans se retourne en frontière et bannit alors son dehors (ainsi dans le communautarisme). À la différence de l'universel qui est prescriptif, impliquant une nécessité de principe, nécessité a priori ou logique, celle de l'universel de la science que Kant a prétendu transférer à l'éthique, le commun se constate (se reconnaît) dans son premier sens; se choisit ou se promeut dans le second: tel le commun de la Cité, en quoi les Grecs ont bien perçu le concept fondateur du politique. Or comment se produit ce commun? Non par similitude, je l'ai dit, car il ne serait alors que répétition et clonage, mais précisément par écart qui, à partir de la réfléxivité entre-ouverte et la faisant travailler, portant chacun des côtés séparés, entrant en tension avec l'autre, à se déborder, produit ou promeut du commun. Je dis par écart, ce « par » exprimant la voie suivie plus encore que la cause ou le moyen, c'est-à-dire procédant au travers d'écarts et de leur dépassement, mais celui-ci ne valant pas abandon : le commun ne laisse pas les écarts en arrière, ne les délaisse pas comme étant périmés. C'est au contraire dans la mesure où ces écarts sont actifs que le commun est intensif. Sinon il n'est qu'un enrobement de platitude, à l'instar de nos « lieux communs ».

Il faut donc accéder au commun - à preuve et de façon exemplaire le commun du concept. Or ce commun du concept sera d'autant plus riche (fécond, actif) qu'il ne sera plus seulement - platement, placidement de généralité, mais se verra stimulé, appelé, provoqué, par cet écart ouvert et même devenant béant. Ce commun ne sera plus seulement de recouvrement (subsomption), mais, par l'écart apparu, se verra bandé tel un arc tendu par ses extrémités. Dans ma récente enquête sur le paysage, j'ai été conduit ainsi à tirer parti, à titre de ressources, des deux grandes cultures paysagères au monde, les deux seules, la chinoise et l'européenne, qui se sont développées indépendamment l'une de l'autre et se sont si longtemps ignorées ; et cela afin, les instaurant en vis-à-vis, de tenter de produire un concept de paysage à nouveaux frais. Concept qui - de par l'écart se creusant entre elles à cet égard et qui n'est pas moins que celui opposant, jusqu'à former une alternative, les points de vue du vivre (en Chine) et de la vue (en Europe) - devenait à la fois un défi et quelque chose comme une injonction. Car il devait bien y avoir là un commun de l'intelligible, qu'on l'aborde sous le terme de « paysage », le détachant de « pays », ou bien qu'on le nomme « montagne(s)-eau(x) », shan-shui 山水, comme le fait aujourd'hui encore le chinois tenant ces termes corrélés. Au lieu donc qu'on se contente de penser chacune de ces cultures paysagères à part, ou bien l'une recouvrant l'autre, l'européenne l'emportant sur la chinoise par le succès de sa conception de la « nature », devenue la « physique », le concept de paysage, mis ainsi sous tension, commandait une reconfiguration d'autant plus radicale qu'il fallait l'ouvrir à ce divers, voire à cet opposé - mais sans le briser."
(François Jullien, La Pensée chinoise en vis-à-vis de la philosophie, 2015)

E4.6.5.C_REF2_PH TRUTH AS INTELLIGIBILITY, NOT ADEQUATION: JULLIEN EXPLICITLY REJECTS THE TRADITIONAL WESTERN DEFINITION OF TRUTH AS ADAEQUATIO (CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN MIND AND THING). He redefines it as a "resource" or "source of intelligibility." This allows us to accept non-Western systems (like Chinese thought) as "true" (operative) even if they don't fit our criteria of accurate representation.
"Dès lors, mettre en valeur des possibles de la pensée fait muter notre concept même de la « vérité ». Car on est conduit à reconfigurer celui-ci en le rapportant à notre capacité d’intelligence que j’entendrai dans son double sens de faculté humaine produisant de l’intelligible (comme telle,  jamais arrêtée) et comme pouvoir effectif et singulier de prise ou d’appréhension (comme on dit : voir l’intelligence de). Je dirai « vrai » dès lors ce qui est source d’intelligibilité et donne à découvrir et opérer. Son négatif n’est plus le faux, mais l’inabordé, l’indécouvert ou l’impensé. Car le vrai ne peut plus s’entendre dès lors suffisamment selon sa conception traditionnelle (scolastique) d’« adéquation » (« de la chose et de l’esprit », rei et Intellectus), puisque ce « réel » auquel se rapporte l’esprit pourra toujours être soupçonné d’avoir été constitué par quelque option ou choix implicite de cet esprit. Ni non plus ne peut-il s’entendre, de l’autre côté, par sa seule capacité de « pertinence » intrinsèque (spinoziste), puisqu’on en juge toujours déjà de l’intérieur d’une logique singulière, celle d’un certain possible de la pensée, qui, dès lorsqu’on sort de celui-ci, ne s’impose plus. Ainsi en va-t-il déjà exemplairement de ce à quoi notre raison classique était le plus attachée : du principe de non-contradiction, posé par elle en axiome premier et qui n’est pertinent que dans la perspective qu’il a lui-même élaborée. [...]

Du relief (dans la pensée) produit de lui-même une diversité de côtés qui ne sont pas abordables dans un même champ perceptif; ou bien, pour embrasser cette diversité du regard, faudrait-il adopter alors un point de vue dominant, mais ce relief du même coup est perdu. C’est pourquoi je me défie de la comparaison qui s’arroge un tel surplomb, rangeant suivant le même et l’autre, met en tableau et n’entre plus."
(François Jullien, Entrer dans une pensée ou Des possibles de l’esprit, 2012)

E4.6.5.C_REF3_PH JULLIEN REJECTS "COMPARISON", WHICH CLASSIFIES ACCORDING TO THE SAME AND THE OTHER, LEADING TO TAUTOLOGY OR RIVALRY. HE PROPOSES THE GAP: A DISTANCE THAT ALLOWS FOR "REFLECTION" (SEEING ONESELF IN THE MIRROR OF THE OTHER). This legitimizes the use of Chinese thought not as a curiosity, but as a tool to reveal the Western "Unthought."
"Non pas comparer, mais réfléchir

C'est pourquoi je ne compare pas. Comparer, c'est distinguer des ressemblances et des différences, ranger selon le Même et l'Autre, caractériser l'un en regard de l'autre et établir des identités respectives. Entre les cultures, soit on met l'accent sur la ressemblance et l'on verse alors dans le confort d'une assimilation indéfinie, ne pouvant déboucher que sur une tautologie (« tout est dans tout », « l'homme est l'homme », etc.). Soit on donne la primauté à la différence et la diversité culturelle se mue alors en entités rivales: on dit la « Chine » ou l'« Occident », comme s'il s'agissait là d'abstractions possibles ou de grands Sujets - ce que je viens d'appeler « former des mondes », autant dire des monstres théoriques.
Je fais autre chose. Au lieu de comparer, j'organise des vis-à-vis entre pensées chinoise et européenne tels que, par écart, l'une vient se dévisager dans l'autre, et réciproquement (je n'appelle rien d'autre, par « pensée chinoise », que la pensée en langue chinoise; par « pensée européenne », que la pensée en langue européenne). Avant que la Chine et l'Europe ne commencent historiquement de se rencontrer, ce vis-à-vis n'est pas donné, il est à construire. [...]
J'appelle [...] « impensé », [...], ce à partir de quoi je pense et que, par là même, je ne pense pas : les partis pris enfouis de ma pensée, véhiculés comme de l'évidence (alias la « lumière naturelle »), et que, par là même, je ne peux pas penser. Mais un tel impensé n'est pas à entendre d'une façon seulement négative : cet impensé est la condition de possibilité de ma pensée en même temps qu'il est sa limite. Il est ce qu'elle ne pense pas d'elle-même (aux deux sens de ce « de ») en même temps que la source de sa fécondité, autrement dit le pli de son inventivité.
Or, c'est la vertu de l'écart que d'ouvrir du recul dans la pensée ; et c'est ce recul qui, mettant à distance, fait découvrir et d'abord le bien-connu inconnu parce que dissimulant son impensé. Je l'énoncerai donc comme une règle générale dépassant le cadre des études culturelles : le propre de l'écart, sa fécondité, est de permettre du recul dans la pensée en opérant une désadhérence en même temps qu'il modifie la perspective, introduit un bougé. Mais un tel écart n'est effectivement possible - et c'est pourquoi l'interculturel est à ce point instructif pour la philosophie - qu'à la rencontre de l'autre; autrement dit, on n'invente pas (n'imagine pas) les conditions de son dépaysement : on ne quitte sa langue qu'en en apprenant une autre, on ne quitte sa pensée qu'en entrant dans une autre pensée. On ne sort pas tout seul, proprio motu, de sa pensée. Car on peut « douter » autant qu'on veut, et même pratiquer un doute hyperbolique aussi bien que l'a fait Descartes, on ne doute toujours que de ce qu'on croit, de ce qu'on « voit » douteux (par exemple, à l'époque classique, que j'aie une « âme » ou que Dieu « existe »). Mais on ne doute pas de ce qu'on ne sait pas qu'on pourrait douter, de ce qui s'impose à sa pensée, à son insu, et qu'on ne percevra que par écart. Du dedans même de sa langue on ne connaît pas les bords de sa langue ou comment elle « plie » la pensée ; du dedans de sa langue, on ne sait pas dans quelle langue on parle et qui nous fait penser. Du dedans de sa pensée, on ne sait pas comment elle est déjà configurée. [...]
Ainsi en va-t-il au premier chef de ce dont j'ai commencé de faire un quadrilatère symbolique de l'Europe (l'Être-Dieu-la Vérité-la Liberté) et dont j'ai tant de mal à défaire, du dedans de ce qui est devenu « Europe », et ma langue et ma pensée. [...]

Comme le miroir réfléchit une image, une « langue-pensée » se réfléchit dans l'autre, se dévisageant dans ce qu'elle ne percevait pas d'elle-même et faisant apparaître, en deçà du préjugé que cherchait à débusquer Descartes, ce qu'on nommera son pré-notionné - pré-catégorisé et pré-questionné dit autrement, son impensé; et quand je parle alors, ne pouvant plus dissocier les deux termes, d'une langue-pensée, Descartes ne pensant pas qu'il pense en langue, je ne suppose pas que la langue déterminerait la pensée, mais je considère que la pensée exploite les ressources de sa langue, autrement dit ses fécondités. De là aussi que réflexion s'entende alors en ne se connaissant plus d'objets donnés (disant « je réfléchis » comme on dit « je pense »): la pensée, faisant retour sur elle même à la rencontre de l'autre, peut réfléchir, dans ce créneau de l'entre-langues entre-pensées, de façon soudain plus dégagée (moins enlisée), sans qu'elle doive savoir déjà « à quoi », sans qu'aient déjà pris forme thème ou question à quoi elle soit accrochée; et rêver alors d'un nouveau départ - plus en amont (plus authentiquement cartésien peut-être ?) - à sa « méditation »."
(François Jullien, La Pensée chinoise en vis-à-vis de la philosophie, 2015)

E4.6.5.C_REF4_PH NOUS NE POUVONS PAS DOUTER DE NOS PROPRES CATEGORIES ("SUJET", "OBJET", "DIEU", "VERITE") PARCE QU'ELLES SONT DEVENUES "HABITUELLES" ET "IMMOBILES". Nous tournons en rond à l'intérieur de notre propre bocal conceptuel. Le passage par la Chine est une "stratégie de l'esprit" pour se "décoincer". C'est la Méthode de l'Écart : utiliser un "ailleurs" pour rendre visible l'impensé de l'Europe.
"DE L'ÉCART AU COMMUN [...]

Le bien connu inconnu [...]

Il faut se défaire de cette illusion: ce qui est le proche, le familier, dit Nietzsche, suscite irrésistiblement l'impression d'être le plus aisément accessible, alors que ce trop connu n'est que le reflet de nos croyances et d'habitudes mentales qui se sont figées. Ce qu'ils appellent « connu », c'est l'« habituel »; or cet habituel est ce qu'il y a précisément de plus difficile à connaître, c'est-à-dire à considérer comme un problème : comme une chose inconnue, lointaine, extérieure, et qu'il faudrait découvrir, au lieu que de s'y fier. Ou, comme le dit Hegel, le bien connu est justement « parce qu'il est bien connu, inconnu », weil es bekannt ist, nicht erkannt (« Préface » à la Phénoménologie). Il n'est, à vrai dire, pas même « reconnu », er-kannt. De ce qu'il nous fait verser ainsi, d'emblée, dans la sécurité de ce qu'on croit connaître, ne commence-t-on pas même à le penser: à penser qu'il y aurait là à penser. Aussi, n'y voyant qu'un appui pour aller plus loin, s'empresse-t-on de l'enjamber. [...]

De telles catégories, Hegel entame, en passant, la liste comme de termes devenus immobiles, ceux autour desquels la pensée européenne ne fait plus, dès lors, que tourner, mais comme on dit aussi « tourner en rond », donc quelque peu en vain : le couple « sujet » - « objet », « Dieu », la « nature », l'« entendement » face à la « sensibilité », etc. Le discours de la philosophie pourra ensuite aller et venir autant qu'il veut entre ces termes, il ne saura plus les bouger. Ceux-ci en sont devenus les piliers : le « mouvement » de la pensée circule entre eux, mais ne les ébranle plus, il ne fait plus qu'évoluer à leur « surface », Oberfläche, chacun croyant dès lors, en chaque occasion, en vérifier à part soi l'adéquation, à même sa représentation, parce qu'il ne possède pas de distance pour les questionner.
Or sur ce bien-connu-inconnu, devenu imbougeable, comment espérer avoir prise puisque c'est à partir de lui que je pense ? Si la pensée européenne est foncièrement marquée au coin de ces termes - « termes » comme on dit aussi arrêt -, quel biais trouver, ou bien quelle ruse, pour commencer de s'en « décoincer » ? Passer en Chine, y trouver un ailleurs de la pensée, est une stratégie de l'esprit pour ne plus subir. Car on y rencontre une pensée aussi élaborée que la « nôtre », en Europe, mais sans qu'il y ait à soupçonner entre elles d'influence ou de contamination: un ailleurs qui ne relève plus du système de composition alphabétique, et dont l'écriture réponde à l'autre possible, idéographique et non plus phonétique; un ailleurs qui n'ait pas dit l'« être », donc qui n'ait pas conçu la « question » de l'Être; qui n'ait pas eu à poser (à prouver) l'existence de « Dieu », donc qui, sans avoir méconnu le divin, n'ait pas eu « affaire à Dieu » ; qui n'ait pas fait non plus de la « vérité » l'enjeu et le critère de la pensée ; qui n'ait pas développé une pensée du sujet, lui dont l'attribut premier serait la liberté, etc. Tel est donc le choix stratégique que j'ai fait pour, bien-connu-inconnu, tenter enfin de m'écarter. Mais quel rapport entre l'« Être », « Dieu », la « Vérité », la « Liberté », etc., autant de « piliers », voit-on, mais soutenant quel édifice? À quelle même enseigne seraient donc logées, sans s'en douter, toutes nos pensées ?"
(François Jullien, La Pensée chinoise en vis-à-vis de la philosophie, 2015)

E4.6.5.C_REF5_PH BARTHES DEFINES TRUTH NOT AS A DIRECT LOGICAL CORRESPONDENCE (WESTERN ADAEQUATIO), BUT AS SOMETHING "TO THE SIDE."
"Vérité [...]
 La vérité : ce qui est à côté. Un moine demandait à Tchao-Tcheou : « Quel est l’unique et dernier mot de la vérité ? » …) Le maître répliqua : « Oui. » Je n’entends pas dans cette réponse l’idée banale selon laquelle un vague parti pris d’acquiescement général est le secret philosophique de la vérité. J’entends que le maître, opposant bizarrement un adverbe à un pronom, oui à quel, répond à côté: il fait une réponse de sourd, de la même sorte que celle qu’il fit à un autre moine qui lui demandait : « Toutes choses, dit-on, sont réductibles à l’Un; mais à quoi l’Un est-il réductible ? » Et Tchao-Tcheou répondit : « Quand j’étais dans le district de Tching, je me suis fait faire une robe qui pesait sept kin. » [...]"
(Roland Barthes, Fragments d’un discours amoureux, 1977)

E4.6.5.D. Ontologies of the "Between": Process, Regulation, and Maturation.
The core ontological alternatives to Western metaphysics—a worldview based on immanence and continuous flow.

E4.6.5.D_REF1_PH A_Alfred Rethel_Nemesis_1937

ALBERT CAMUS CRITIQUE LES "GRANDEURS ABSOLUES" AU PROFIT D'UNE PENSEE DE LA "MESURE" (NEMESIS) QUI RECONCILIE LES CONTRAIRES (ÊTRE/DEVENIR, FIXITE/MOUVEMENT) AU LIEU DE LES OPPOSER.

Nemesis déesse de la mesure, fatale aux démesurés... une inspiration pour guider les exaltés dans nos débats politiques polarisés à l'extrême.

"Les idéologies qui mènent notre monde sont nées au temps des grandeurs scientifiques absolues. Nos connaissances réelles n’autorisent, au contraire, qu’une pensée des grandeurs relatives. « L’intelligence, dit Lazare Bickel, est notre faculté de ne pas pousser jusqu’au bout ce que nous pensons afin que nous puissions croire à la réalité.» La  pensée approximative est seule génératrice de réel. [...]
De la même manière, on ne peut dire que l’être soit seulement au niveau de l’essence. Où saisir l’essence sinon au niveau de l’existence et du devenir ? Mais on ne peut dire que l’être n’est qu’existence. Ce qui devient toujours ne saurait être, il faut un commencement. L’être ne peut s’éprouver que dans le devenir, le devenir n’est rien sans l’être. Le monde n’est pas dans une pure fixité ; mais il n’est pas seulement mouvement. Il est mouvement et fixité. [...] Héraclite, inventeur du devenir, donnait cependant une borne à cet écoulement perpétuel. Cette limite était symboIisée par Némésis, déesse de la mesure, fatale  aux démesurés. Une réflexion qui voudrait tenir compte des contradictions contemporaines de la révolte devrait demander à cette déesse son inspiration."
(Albert Camus, L´homme révolté, La pensée de midi, Mesure et démesure, 1951)

E4.6.5.D_REF2_PH FRANÇOIS JULLIEN CONTRASTS THE WESTERN CONCEPT OF REVELATION (SEARCHING FOR ORIGIN/TRUTH/ENIGMA FROM THE "OUTSIDE") WITH THE CHINESE CONCEPT OF REGULATION (IMMANENT COHERENCE, PROCESS, "FUNCTIONING").
"RÉGULATION (VS RÉVÉLATION) [...]
2. Il y aura donc à tirer cette notion de régulation de son usage demeuré local en Europe. [...] De cet usage local, il faudra l'élever au concept, voire le plus général ; et même qui, face à Révélation, en vienne à dire aussi bien l'absolu. La cohérence d'un tel fonctionnement, en effet, nous enveloppe globalement, à toute échelle, en nous comme hors de nous, et nous n'expérimentons en fait qu'elle sinon ce « réel » n'est plus « viable » et dépérit. Or elle dispense d'avoir à interroger l'origine, de poser le Début et la Fin, fait l'impasse sur l'insolent « pourquoi » : un équilibre se maintient de part en part au sein du changement qui confère sa « constance » (chang) et par suite sa permanence au déroulement. Un ordre n'est pas établi d'avance, n'est pas introduit d'Ailleurs: il n'y a pas plus à percer une énigme qu'à scruter de mystère; il n'y a pas plus à expliquer qu'à dévoiler. Il suffira, en portant au jour cette immanence, d'élucider ce qui vient « de soi-même ainsi ». Car une réciprocité s'« incite », entre facteurs opposés formant polarité, dont l'interaction, en maintenant un rapport « harmonieux » au travers de sa variation, laisse suffisamment appréhender la collaboration à l'oeuvre, en son fond « inépuisable » (wu qiong) de là qu'il n'est pas besoin de « révélation ».
De là que se maintenir en procès, régulé comme il est, constitue la seule exigence et tienne lieu d'idéal. Tout réel n'« est » qu'en cours, s'équilibrant et se compensant sans cesse, d'où vient son renouvellement (« une fois yin une fois yang [alternative - ment yin et yang], telle est la voie... », Classique du changement, « Xici », A, 5). C'est pourquoi la seule exigence au fond qui tienne est de ne pas dévier de sa cohérence interne de façon à se maintenir en transformation, de ne s'arrêter - de ne se bloquer dans aucune position; et cela vaudra du cours de la conduite comme de celui du procès des choses, est au fondement de la morale comme de ce que nous nommons la philosophie première ou la cosmologie - l'une ne fait que « prolonger » l'autre (ji , ibid.). On est d'abord surpris, à lire les Entretiens de Confucius, de ne pas plus y trouver de règle fixe (prescrivant l'action) que de définition (fixant des essences). Or, non seulement règle répond à action comme régulation à transformation (et la pensée chinoise n'a pas isolé d'« acte » avec début et fin), mais sur tout les deux s'opposent diamétralement quant à leur principe. La règle prescrit d'avance, en relevant de la « méthode », elle projette une norme en s'autorisant d'une nécessité plus générale qui déborde le cas abordé; aussi le propre de la règle est qu'il convient de l'« appliquer » en quoi elle a à voir avec la modélisation. La régulation, en revanche, relève d'une adéquation interne qui dépend constamment de la situation, ne cesse de varier au fur et à mesure de sa transformation : elle ne se laisse donc pas ramener à l'identique, autrement dit « identifier » et codifier. À quoi répond par compensation, en Chine, la prolifération des « rites », li, en tant que normes comportementales « canalisant » la conduite, c'est-à-dire la régulant comme un cours d'eau menaçant toujours de déborder, et d'autant plus efficaces, savons-nous, qu'elles opèrent à notre insu et sont plus profondément assimilées. [...]"
(François Jullien, La Pensée chinoise en vis-à-vis de la philosophie, 2015)

E4.6.5.D_REF2.1_PH FRANÇOIS JULLIEN CONTRASTS THE WESTERN CONCEPT OF REVELATION (SEARCHING FOR ORIGIN/TRUTH/ENIGMA FROM THE "OUTSIDE") WITH THE CHINESE CONCEPT OF REGULATION (IMMANENT COHERENCE, PROCESS, "FUNCTIONING"). (continued)
"La seule règle de la sagesse, en somme, est d'être sans règle fixe - c'est pourquoi il n'y a pas « règle » mais régulation - et pour ce de maintenir entière sa disponibilité (ibid., XIV, 41). Quitte à ce que cette disponibilité du Sage, vue du dehors, soit jugée de l'opportunisme (XIV, 34); et quitte à ce que les autres ne trouvent rien à louer de lui (IX, 2; VIII, 19), voire n'aient rien à en dire (VII, 18): le Sage est sans caractère et sans qualité. Car on ne peut nommer que ce qui se stabilise suffisamment pour se laisser déterminer. Les autres sages se laissent classer par catégories qui les opposent les uns aux autres : selon qu'ils restent attachés à leur intégrité ou qu'ils font montre de tolérance, qu'ils se retirent avec dégoût du monde ou qu'ils pactisent avec lui; tandis que Confucius a conscience de s'opposer à eux tous précisément parce qu'il est sans position arrêtée et qu'il « peut » aussi bien l'un que l'autre, évoluant de l'un à l'autre, en fonction de la situation rencontrée (XVIII, 8). Selon les termes de l'alternative qui se posera à tout lettré chinois, il est aussi disposé à « prendre une charge » qu'à s'en « démettre » et n'est fermé à aucune occasion de la sagesse, il est le « moment », dira de lui suffisamment Mencius (V, B, 1). C'est pourquoi sa personnalité est sans entrave, son esprit sans dogmatisme et qu'il est indéfinissable. [...]
Régulation « à usage ordinaire », en évoluant d'un extrême à l'autre, sans partialité, et ne se privant d'aucune possibilité, ne s'enlisant d'aucun côté; et non pas « juste » ou « invariable milieu », comme on a traduit, celui-ci déterminant un point fixe, idéal, entre l'excès et le défaut et le définissant en qualité particulière et typée, comme c'est le cas de la « médiété » d'Aristote (la « libéralité » étant ainsi un juste milieu déterminé entre avarice et prodigalité, etc.). Car « s'attacher au centre », sait-on déjà, c'est aussi en faire une position, donc une exclusion et « spolier la voie », en promouvant une possibilité, mais en en ratant cent (Mencius, VII, A, 26). C'est se priver d'évoluer d'un bord à l'autre et d'éprouver, par l'amplitude de la conduite, la plénitude qui est celle à la fois du « viable » et du « vivable ». Or, tandis que l'homme de bien fait encore effort, le Sage est celui qui y accède spontanément, congzong zhongdao, en quoi il se confond avec la Régulation du Ciel, telle qu'elle régit le procès du monde : capacité devenant immanente, mais qui passe inaperçue, tout en étant constamment à l'oeuvre. Ou plutôt passe-t-elle inaperçue parce qu'elle est constamment à l'œuvre. En quoi elle s'oppose à l'Annonce, faisant rupture, de la Révélation. [...] "
(François Jullien, La Pensée chinoise en vis-à-vis de la philosophie, 2015)

E4.6.5.D_REF3_PH L'ENTRE VS L'AU-DELA : FRANÇOIS JULLIEN OPPOSE L'« ENTRE » (IMMANENCE, RESPIRATION, TRANSITION CONTINUE, PENSEE CHINOISE) A L'« AU-DELA » (TRANSCENDANCE, COUPURE, ABSTRACTION, PENSEE GRECQUE/OCCIDENTALE).
"Aussi ne faudra-t-il point craindre de renverser enfin la perspective sous cette incitation (invitation) oblique; ne faudra-t-il pas craindre de remonter dans des partis pris peut-être trop hâtivement scellés par la philosophie. Ne tenons plus l'entre, en effet, pour ce qui, laissé sans concept et se bornant à séparer les extrêmes, ne vaudrait que comme intervalle qu'il est aisé d'enjamber par la pensée et reconnu d'emblée moins intense. Ne le voyons plus comme ce relatif que son indétermination condamne du coup au moins d'« être », tandis que les deux extrémités, seules déterminées (en tant qu'eidé), feraient toucher à l'absolu. Prenons plutôt ces deux bords laissés en pointillé, mais dont on sait qu'il est si facile d'accentuer la radicalité, comme support seulement de cet entre où finalement tout se passe et d'abord cette transition continue qu'est la respiration de la vie. Vie et mort, nous frappant par leur événement, ne « sont », à vrai dire, que pour faire apparaître cet entre présent et sans bords, mais seul existant. - Or, serait-ce trop s'avancer de considérer que le renversement valorisant cet entre discret, au détriment de la dramatique tapageuse des extrémités, se signale sourdement à nous comme une des grandes mutations idéologiques contemporaines: valeur nouvelle du « tenir l'entre » ou de l'entre-tien (entretien du monde, de la parole, de la santé...)? On aurait compris, en somme, que ce n'est plus du passage à la limite que vient la clarté (ou que celle-ci est à « estomper », comme le conseille le Laozi, § 4); que ce n'est plus dans l'extrémité - au bout - qu'est celée la vérité, comme s'il fallait l'y pourchasser dans son retranchement. Et sans doute est-ce bien là ce qui nous éloignerait d'abord de la métaphysique et de son « au-delà », meta, portant à l'accentuation par dépassement.
Il est vrai que cet « au-delà » a eu sa fécondité théorique en déployant un plan opératoire de la pensée. En promouvant au-delà de la diversité du sensible l'unité de l'intelligible ou du concept (kata mian idean, dit Platon); ou bien au-delà des tâtonnements de l'expérience la perfection d'un modèle conçu dans l'absolu -, cet autre plan, projeté hors le monde, ektos tou kosmou, a permis d'engager une capacité d'abstraction assurant à l'esprit son initiative et dont le pouvoir de prise sur le monde, en retour, par la science, s'est depuis révélé immense : un savoir en est né, en Europe, qui, en quelques siècles, via la technique, a changé la planète. Plus encore (plus impliqué): Platon a su faire de cet au-delà idéel, en le branchant sur la force de l'eros, un idéal s'ancrant au plus profond du désir et mobilisant nos volontés : de même que cet idéel a pu être le moteur de la science (la physique classique), cet idéal a été le moteur de l'éthique et du politique - il a permis notamment la pensée de la Révolu tion, comble du théorique, et du Progrès. Il faudrait donc être aveugle, d'un aveuglement qui n'est que le renversement de la position passée, pour ne pas reconnaître ce qu'a dégagé et hissé de possible cette coupure séparant un « au-delà » de ce qui retombait, du coup, dans l'« en-deçà » (et, par suite, quelle a été la fécondité du dualisme). Que cette coupure ait représenté un coup de force, et même qu'elle ait été pour le vivre d'un coût qu'on commence à peine de mesurer, n'entame en rien sa validité. « Validité » partielisant ici sa vérité : car il est temps aussi de discerner, en s'en déprenant, sortant d'Europe, ce qu'un tel dédoublement du monde, inventif comme il est, loin d'être une banale nécessité rencontrée par tout esprit dans son développement, contient nécessairement d'arbitraire (ou qu'il est un possible parmi d'autres); et qu'on peut (doit) désormais croiser sa ressource avec d'autres qu'il n'a pas aperçues et dont la pensée de l'entre me paraît pouvoir servir de terme fédérateur ; par suite, s'offrir en miroir où cette pensée de l'au-delà en vient à réfléchir son impensé.
« Entre », « au-delà » : il ne faut pas négliger, en effet, cette force conceptuelle des prépositions. En amont des notions - résultatives, qui stabilisent -, ce sont elles qui construisent dans la pensée. En grec, I'« en vue de quoi » dit le but, ou le « par quoi » dit la cause, structurant fonctionnellement la pensée avant que des termes abstraits n'en donnent la représentation étale. Or, si la panoplie prépositionnelle est bien moindre en chinois que dans nos langues (de là vient aussi que la langue-pensée chinoise construit moins), l'« entre » y jouit d'une fonction privilégiée que justifie sa graphie : les deux battants d'une porte en vis-à-vis, formant polarité 門, entre lesquels se glisse un rayon de lune 月 (dans une graphie ultérieure, celui du soleil 日). Tel est ce que donne à voir (à penser) l'idéogramme jian 間: au lieu que la porte soit opaque et bloque, subsiste de l'entre deux qui laisse indéfiniment passer - le vent, la vie, la lumière. Même ce que nous appelons peut-être trop massivement le monde ne serait-il pas l'« entre Ciel et Terre » tian di zhi jian , dit le Laozi (§ 5), « comparable à un grand soufflet » ? « Vide, il n'est pas à plat » : ce vide n'est pas un manque ; et plus on le meut, plus il en sort » : l'entre (des parois du soufflet) est celui de l'activité. Ou bien encore le peintre chinois ne peint pas un état donné, savons nous, mais « entre il y a/il n'y a pas ».
Encore faut-il discerner ce que cette préposition de l'« entre », devenant une proposition pour la pensée, peut articuler de divers et par conséquent différemment signifier. Car quand un tel « entre », metaxu, en vient à s'intercaler, au sein de la pensée grecque, c'est principalement pour servir d'intermédiaire : entre l'ignorance et le savoir, tel est l'« entre » de l'« opinion », doxa, chez Platon [...]
D'un point de vue logique, cet « entre » est exclu de droit comme tiers et moyen terme entre les contradictoires, pose Aristote murant ainsi les opposés dans leur séparation ontologique et interdisant principe toute ambiguïté. Ou, quand cet « entre » doit néanmoins intervenir pour permettre de penser le changement dans le monde imparfait de la « physique », cet intermédiaire « n'est nécessairement composé que de ses contraires » : il n'a toujours pas d'« en-soi », d'être ou de nature propre.
À preuve le fait qu'Aristote ne sache pas penser la note médiane en musique ou le gris parmi les couleurs (cf. Physique, V, 224 b). Cette note médiane « est grave par rapport à la haute et aiguë par rapport à la basse », dit-il encore, sans qu'il puisse concevoir un tel « entre » de la transition et du passage ; et, de même, le gris « est noir par rapport au blanc et blanc par rapport au noir ». Si donc le changement procède de l'« entre » ou de l'intermédiaire, c'est que celui-ci n'en reconduit pas moins pour lui-même, sur un mode mineur, le statut d'extrême en servant à nouveau de contraire à l'un ou l'autre opposé; ou, comme le résume Aristote, « cet intermédiaire est d'une certaine façon les extrêmes » (to metaxu ta akra), délimitant lui aussi et les relayant l'un ou l'autre. Le « gris » n'est donc pas gris, aux yeux d'Aristote, c'est-à-dire une couleur où l'un, virant à l'autre, n'est plus ni l'un ni l'autre : une couleur où blanc et noir, en venant à se confondre, perdent leur démarcation; qui n'est ni tranchable ni carac térisable - « indécise », comme a dit Verlaine. Mais il est alternativement mais imperturbablement « blanc par rapport au noir et noir par rapport au blanc ». L'intermédiaire est un terme moyen, donc terme également, terminus tout autant. Il interrompt à mi-chemin le changement et le décompose en se constituant en point à la fois d'arrivée et de départ de celui-ci, mais n'en permet pas mieux de saisir comment s'opère à travers lui le passage."
(François Jullien, La Pensée chinoise en vis-à-vis de la philosophie, 2015)


E4.6.5.D_REF4_PH FRANÇOIS JULLIEN ASSERTS THAT THIS FIXATION ON STATIC FORMS ("IDEA," "ESSENCE") MAKES WESTERN PHILOSOPHY INCAPABLE OF THINKING "TRANSITION". Chinese thought as an alternative ontology validates the "vague" and "blurred" not as a lack of precision, but as a legitimate engagement with the "process of things" that Western dualism misses.
"J’ai préféré, dans mon chantier ouvert entre la Chine et l’Europe, traiter non de différences mais d’écarts. Car l’écart promeut un point de vue qui est, non plus d’identification, mais, je dirais, d’exploration : il envisage jusqu’où peuvent se déployer divers possibles et quels embranchements sont discernables dans la pensée. Du coup, il fait surgir cette question préalable qu’on ne voit pas développée de l’intérieur même de la philosophie : jusqu’où a-t-on pu repousser ici et là, en Chine, en Grèce, sur l’un ou l’autre front, en s’y prenant de l’une ou l’autre façon, les frontières du pensable et, plus encore, étendre le soupçon de ce qu’on ne pense pas à penser? [...] 
Que la pensée grecque se soit articulée dans la langue de l’Être lui a permis de déployer l’exigence de la détermination - logos - permettant d’abstraire et de produire du « vrai » et, par suite, de construire indéfiniment dans la pensée, cette exigence même que mettent à profit la science et la philosophie. Mais, du même coup, s’est-elle privée de la fécondité inverse, recouverte ou délaissée, lui permettant d’appréhender l’indéterminable du passage ou de la transition. C’est pourquoi la transition est bien - « logiquement», i.e. du point de vue du logos - le point d’achoppement de la pensée grecque ; qu’en elle apparaît symptomatiquement en quoi la pensée grecque est handicapée : ce qu’elle est moins portée, parce que moins équipée, à penser et à quoi nous avons par suite, en Europe, moins prêté d’attention. [...]
La transition défait, effectivement. Ne vaudrait-il pas la peine de mesurer jusqu’où? Car elle défait à elle - seule - ou déconstruit - nos vieux outils de la philosophie. Elle défait rien de moins que l’« idée » comme forme universelle, celle de l’intelligible, puisque celle-ci comme « en soi quant à soi », dit Platon, se possédant en propre et ne relevant que de soi, n’admet en elle, par principe, rien d’autre qu’un tel « soi », auto, et doit donc rester « pure », intransigeante à l’égard de tout mixte. C’est de l’opération de « distinguer » que lui vient son essence (diairesis ton eidôn). Ou si c’est, à l’inverse, dans l’individuel que l’essence est recherchée, autrement dit dans la « substance » (ousia), celle à laquelle se ramènera toute recherche de l’être en tant qu’être selon Aristote, la transition la défait encore : puisque cette essence ne s’obtient elle-même qu’en allant « de différence en différence », et ce jusqu’à l’« ultime » différence - tel être à l’exclusion de tout autre, telle ou telle qualité. La définition, par où se démarque de l’Être, procède toujours d’un pouvoir d’isoler. [...]
Or que découvre-t-on dans la pensée chinoise qui en regard, par son écart, nous ouvrirait en ce point une issue? Ne s’exprimant pas dans le langage de l’Être, la pensée chinoise est au contraire à l’aise pour prêter attention au stade de « ce qu’on regarde mais qu’on ne perçoit pas », ou de « ce qu’on écoute mais qu’on n’entend pas » : à ce stade où le sensible se résorbe et se déspécifie, se disqualifie, « s’affadit », sans pour autant verser dans l’invisible de la métaphysique; où les démarcations se défont et qui, dans son indifférenciation, laisse apparaître l’incessante transition des choses.
C’est même un tel stade, en amont des délimitations-définitions, dont la continuité « ne peut être nommée », mais dont l’indistinction nous reconduit bénéfiquement à l’harmonie foncière, qu’ont choisi de nommer tao les taoïstes : celui dont « la configuration est sans configuration », est-il dit dans le Laozi, ou dont le phénomène est sans matérialité propre qui puisse l’individuer (wu wu zhi xiang). Tout trait délimitant en est retiré : le tao (la « voie »), s’il fallait à tout prix le définir, est essentiellement transition, et c’est pourquoi il est indéfinissable (et non pas pour quelque raison « mystique », comme on se plaît à l’imaginer d’Occident). [...]
Il est temps, ouvrant aussi largement le compas, d’en mesurer les conséquences. Passant de l’ontologique au taoïque, il n’y a donc plus là de difficulté à reconnaître, à l’encontre de l’exigence de détermination du logos, la légitimité du « vague » et du « flou » du procès des choses (hu-huang). Comment mieux dire l’indémarcation médiane qui le caractérise que par ce double retrait de la limite, de part et d’autre, en amont comme en aval : « en allant au-devant de lui, dit le Laozi, on n’en voit pas la tête ; en allant à sa suite, on n’en voit pas le dos »? Comment mieux caractériser la suspension à son égard de toute caractérisation tranchée que par ces images : « hésitant comme qui s’engage sur la glace en hiver, indécis comme qui craint d’être attaqué des quatre côtés » ? L’image propre au tao est, de ce fait, la moins imageante ; au lieu de caractériser, elle retire tout caractérisable ; tout en nous maintenant au sein du phénoménal et du sensible, elle nous conduit au bord de leur effacement : où se savoure la non-saveur (la « fadeur »). [...]
Avouons-le : dès lors qu’il n’y a plus énigme, question, construction, finalité, peut-il encore s’agir de ce que l’on détache et reconnaît comme « vérité » - c’est-à-dire de ce que consomme la philosophie ? [...]"
(François Jullien, Les transformations silencieuses, 2009)

E4.6.5.D_REF5_PH THE "MODEL" IS THE FOUNDATIONAL BIAS OF WESTERN PHILOSOPHY AND PHYSICS. IT DESCRIBES A DUALISTIC WORLDVIEW WHERE AN IDEAL PLAN (THE "OUGHT") IS PROJECTED ONTO A PASSIVE REALITY. By introducing "maturation"—a process of "silent transformation" that does not rely on external command or mechanical causality—Jullien offers an ontological alternative to the Western fixation on geometric planning and distinct causality.
"MATURATION (VS MODÉLISATION)
1. Parmi ces termes si peu nobles, n'évoquant apparemment qu'en creux, par défaut ou par pis aller, la capacité de se conduire, et dont on imagine mal, de prime abord, comment on pourrait les élever à la dignité du concept, je placerai également la « maturation ». Notion aussi modeste que le biais, la disponibilité ou la connivence, mais dont on voit encore moins comment elle pourrait constituer une stratégie. Car la maturation dit le devenir interne à la nature cheminant vers son résultat : cette transformation silencieuse des semences, ou des tissus, ou des cellules, qu'on ne peut guère hâter, en tout cas qu'on ne saurait maîtriser, ne se commande pas. [...] En quoi la maturation s'oppose diamétralement à notre capacité de construire un devoir être et de le projeter sur la situation, en s'arrogeant l'initiative : ce que nous concevons, depuis les Grecs, comme le pouvoir de la modélisation.
La « forme modèle », eidos, est bien le concept grec par excellence, et même n'est-il pas philosophiquement le premier ? C'est par lui, en tout cas, que Platon hisse la philosophie hors du régime obscur de l'expérience et de l'opinion et qu'il construit sa pensée en conquérant l'abstraction : la forme-modèle est ce que « voit » l'esprit, de sa propre activité, et qui fait « être » les choses dans leur vérité et par delà les apparences. C'est sur elle que se règlent les vertus morales pour se sauver de l'empirisme et de sa routine; sur elle que le roi philosophe fonde sa conception des régimes politiques et de la Cité idéale; ou que le démiurge bâtit le plan du monde, et ce « en vue du meilleur ». Or Aristote, dont on sait combien il se défie de tout abandon du sensible (de la théorie platonicienne des idées conduisant à délaisser les « choses mêmes »), n'en maintient pas moins ce statut de la forme modèle déterminant ce qu'« est » la chose en tant que telle, en constituant à la fois la cause légitime (la cause « finale ») et comme le programme interne de développement. Sinon, à défaut de relever d'une modélisation, tout réel ne proviendrait que du hasard aveugle, par absence de causalité, et ne saurait justifier de son « essence », celle qu'établit la définition.
Or on s'est tellement habitué à cet acquis de la modélisation, en Europe, qu'on ne voit plus ce qu'il a d'inventif : quelle prise il a donné sur le monde, notamment sur ce que nous appelons la « nature » et qui a fait l'objet de la physique classique, mécaniste et causaliste, dont le savoir, via la technique, a, en quelques siècles, complètement changé la vie sur notre planète. [...]
Mais la question qui se pose alors est de savoir jusqu'où peut s'étendre cette maîtrise obtenue par la modélisation ou quelle est la sphère concernée. Elle est de savoir si ce qui a si bien marché dans l'univers de la physique vaut tout autant, ou connaît le même succès, quand on passe de ce domaine de la connaissance à la gestion des situations, concernant la conduite humaine et la stratégie.
Par principe, nous ne doutons pas de cette extension infinie. Le général dresse un plan de guerre avant d'engager les opérations; l'économiste trace une courbe de croissance décrivant la meilleure évolution à venir; l'homme politique bâtit un programme électoral fixant l'action à conduire. Dans chaque cas, il s'agit de construire un devoir être qu'on projette sur la situation et à laquelle celle-ci devra se soumettre comme une cire qu'empreint le sceau. Le modèle définit la fin visée, selon le vieux couplage grec eidos-telos; et, à partir de ce but posé, sont déterminés les moyens qui peuvent y mener : plus ces moyens sont directs, plus le plan sera jugé efficace. [...]"
(François Jullien, La Pensée chinoise en vis-à-vis de la philosophie, 2015)

E1.7.C.2.7_REF4.1_PH.wE4.6.5.D.

TOWARDS A THOUGHT OF "LIVING" "Because of this departure from ontology, which has been one of the great vocations of twentieth-century philosophy, from Heidegger to Levinas and Derrida, we know the contradiction that is always threatening, that we do everything to get out of the question of being, but by remaining in the language of "being". That is to say, we continue to speak the language of ontology at the very moment when we most firmly reject it; or we continue to speak the language of "being" at the very moment when one claims to irretrievably deconstruct it (remember Derrida in Levinas in "Violence and Metaphysics", Levinas in Derrida, in turn, in "Tout autrement"). For in what other language could one actually remain in Europe? Or how can one "get out" if one cannot get in? - To enter somewhere else that is neither preconceived nor premeditated? Is not the Jewish elsewhere itself too much a part of Europe, which also makes Europe so disturbing, so disorienting? But then again, can this exit from ontology, in the encounter with the Chinese language of thought, not only be achieved through small shifts, as I have warned, at first in a very local way, through successive departures, stitch by stitch, through translation, de-translation and retranslation, de- and re-categorization, in other words, through gradual, patient and modest accommodation, through "weaving" and without any announced revelation?
But if we leave the question of being, what have we already entered? This emergence from ontology, which is thus discovered not all at once, but stitch by stitch, from one gap to the next, through successive attempts, is, when considered globally, retrospectively, in retrospect, an emergence from the "question of being" or the question of being, which is at the same time an entry into the thought of living. The question of "being" or the thought of "living" is the main articulation or generic alternative that this web will allow us to perceive, implicitly, stitch by stitch. [...] The question is to access life, as I said before, to access the common. Or, as everyone in Europe has remembered in their own way, but in the form of an injunction or a pious wish, not fully but hollowly, obliquely, in passing, and without being able to make it the actual object of thought: "Remember to live!" (Goethe, Remember to Live); or "Try to live" (the last verse of "Cimetière marin"); or "Learn to live at last" (Derrida's last interview). But what does it mean to "live"? And why is it always saved for the end?
However, entering one way of thinking does not mean abandoning the other. Or what does "exit" mean? Because to exit is not to flee, to exit is not to give up. Contrary to a certain messianic conception, according to which the exit from ontology would be the object of an expectation and a hope, I do not understand, going to China, such an exit from the "question of being" as a liberation: because this question of being, from its determination of truth as well as from its consequent erection of an ideality, has opened up the possibility of an unprecedented development of science as well as of a construction of ethics and politics. Above all, with regard to the question of being, can we renounce its power of enigma and invention? Or let us consider things reciprocally: Chinese thought, which emerges from its "Taoist" thought by meeting the ontological thought of Europe, also experiences its liberation (and first of all a liberation from its "royal road", that is to say, from its autocratic regulation). It is therefore not a question of renouncing one way of thinking in favor of the other, or of placing one way of thinking below the other, and no longer European below Chinese, by reversing past alienation, that is, by converting to one side or the other, but of considering these ways of thinking in their respective resources, or what I call their fruitfulness. [...]"
(François Jullien, Chineese Thought vs. Philosophy, 2015)

E4.6.5.E. Strategies of Immanence: Obliquity, Availability, and Connivence.
How to act and live within this alternative ontology? Contrasting Western directness and will-to-power with strategies of indirect efficacy, availability to the situation, and a "tender" connection to the world.

E4.6.5.E_REF1_PH FRANÇOIS JULLIEN OPPOSE L'INFLUENCE (MODELE CHINOIS : FLUX, RESONANCE, "ECHO A DISTANCE", MODIFICATION CONTINUE SANS SUJET AUTONOME) A LA PERSUASION (MODELE GREC : VERITE FRONTALE, DISCOURS, "SE PERSUADER SOI-MEME", CAUSALITE DIRECTE). Il propose une alternative à la causalité linéaire occidentale: la "résonance mutuelle" (gan-ying). Cela permet de penser l'efficacité sans passer par la confrontation logique ou la démonstration de force. 
"INFLUENCE (VS PERSUASION) [...]
1. [...] Parce que la pensée chinoise ne pense pas en termes d'« être » et d'identification, mais de flux d'énergie, de pôles et d'interaction, ou plutôt « d'inter-incitation » (xiang-gan); parce qu'elle pense en termes de « modification » et de « continuation » (bian-tong), de passage communicant et de transition (jiao-tong); parce que, dans sa grammaire, elle méconnaît la distinction morphologique des modes actif et passif; parce que, dans sa physique, la notion d'« écho à distance » et de résonance mutuelle (gan-ying) y tient lieu de la causalité (la Chine a très tôt développé une fine intelligence des phénomènes magnétiques, pour lesquels l'Occident est demeuré si longtemps en retard, ainsi que compris le phénomène des marées); parce qu'elle a bien reconnu, enfin, l'individu en tant que personne, mais ne s'est pas préoccupée de construire une autonomie du sujet  -, la Chine a placé l'influence au cœur de son intelligence. L'influencement est, à ses yeux, le mode général d'avènement de toute réalité, de ce que nous appelons la « nature » comme aussi de la moralité. [...]
2. [...] Rappelons-nous également que, dès les premiers penseurs grecs, persuader est l'opération décisive en philosophie, le « chemin de la persuasion » étant celui qui « accompagne la vérité », dit déjà Parménide (fr. 2; cf. Empédocle, Catharmes, fr. 133); et, dès lors que le verbe se réfléchit, que l'interlocuteur n'est plus l'autre mais devient soi, penser, définit Platon, c'est « se persuader à soi-même » (Théétète, 190c) : qu'est-ce que penser, en effet, si ce n'est développer un certain cours de la réflexion produisant l'auto adhésion et se trouvant garanti par cet assentiment ? [...]"
(François Jullien, La Pensée chinoise en vis-à-vis de la philosophie, 2015)

E4.6.5.E_REF2_PH FRANÇOIS JULLIEN CONTRASTS THE WESTERN IDEAL OF THE SUBJECT (FREEDOM/AUTONOMY/TRANSCENDING THE SITUATION) WITH THE CHINESE IDEAL OF AVAILABILITY (DISPONIBILITÉ). The Sage has no "Idea," "Necessity," or "Self," but opens up to the situation without projecting onto it. 
"La langue-pensée chinoise ne fournit aucune histoire similaire de l'avènement du sujet.[...]
De là que l'aspiration éthique ne soit pas l'« autonomie », l'« être (à) soi-même sa (propre) loi », comme chez les stoïciens; qu'elle ne soit pas la Liberté conçue, dans la pensée classique de l'Europe, comme la propriété première d'un sujet, mais ce qui en est l'inverse, non pas le contraire à proprement parler, mais le contradictoire, que dit la disponibilité. Le propre de la liberté est de transcender la situation, toute situation, alors que la disponibilité est l'ouverture à la situation, sans projection sur elle qui l'entraverait - au point que s'y défait la consistance d'un « sujet ». Maître-mot de l'enseignement de Confucius : « quand il convient de prendre une charge, il la prend; quand il convient de la quitter, il la quitte ». Tout dépend de la situation rencontrée : c'est en s'y conformant, c'est à dire en se départissant de toute position de principe à son égard qu'il promeut, en chaque occasion, la moralité. La sagesse est de savoir se mettre en phase; son éthique procède dès lors, non de règles, mais d'une régulation continue. Aussi, quand il est dit du Maître qu'il n'a pas d'« idée » (qu'il avancerait) - de « nécessité » (à laquelle il tiendrait d'avance) - de « position » (à laquelle il s'arrêterait) - ni enfin de « moi » (dans lequel il s'enliserait) - cette formulation négative suffit à dire quel obstacle, face au renouvellement de la situation, constituerait l'instauration d'un sujet. Mais que se retirent tous ces marqueurs, ou repères attendus, étayant une identité: la moralité est alors de répondre à tous les possibles de la situation, sans en laisser perdre, c'est-à-dire d'en épouser la globalité, pour ne pas être conduit à sombrer, non dans l'« erreur » (l'obsession de la philosophie), mais dans la partialité.

De ce qui est dit à propos de quelques penseurs de l'Antiquité qui ont « eu vent du tao », je traduirai ces formules précisément pour leur résistance à la traduction. Elles sont à la limite du traduisible, non pas que leurs notions seraient abstruses, ni même que leur signification serait confuse, mais simplement parce qu'elles ne s'arriment pas dans du sujet. Ou plutôt elles en défont systématiquement la possibilité (dans Zhuangzi, chap. 33, à propos de Shen Dao et consorts):

Impartial et non partisan, 
aisé et sans rien de particulier, 
de façon tranchée sans [rien de] directeur, 
tendre aux choses sans dualité, 
ne pas s'attacher à cogiter, 
ne pas s'efforcer de connaître, 
des choses ne rien sélectionner, 
avec elles toujours aller...

Sans qu'aucun sujet grammatical ne soit énoncé, sans qu'elles aient donc fonction reconnue d'attribut, de telles expressions formulaires défont l'ancrage dans un soi, en dissipent la consistance et même, d'abord, la pertinence. Tout y dit, par glissement continu, la non-rupture avec le monde, le non-retranchement dans la pensée, le non-choix parmi les possibles, le non-retrait du compossible. [...]
Car le principe, si principe il y a, est de « tenir toutes choses à égalité». Tant il est vrai que l'un ne peut pas ce que peut l'autre, et réciproquement : « le Ciel peut couvrir, mais non porter; la Terre peut porter, mais non couvrir; la vaste Voie peut embrasser, mais elle ne peut pas distinguer ». En se rendant compte que toutes les choses, tous les êtres, ont leurs possibilités intrinsèques, mais aussi leurs impossibilités, on comprend que « choisir » ne peut « tout tenir », donc est fautif; ou qu'« instruire n'est pas parvenir », et que la voie est de « ne rien délaisser ». C'est pourquoi Shen Dao, est-il dit, se « délivre de la connaissance » et « renonce au moi » (qu ji 去乙); qu'il se montre « frais », « léger », « dispos» (disponible), tels l'eau ou le vent à l'égard des choses (ling tai), de façon à se conformer à la cohérence régulatrice de la voie; que, toujours « changeant », il n'assume pas de responsabilité, se moquant des prétendus Sages, et qu'il se laisse aller au gré, dégagé, sans s'astreindre à la moralité. Il épouse le situationnel le plus divers « dans ses tours et ses détours », en se débarrassant des disjonctions; et, comme cela, peut survivre en évitant les embarras. « Poussé, il avance », « tiré, il suit » ; « comme le vent, virevolte»; « comme la plume, tournoie » : se tenant dans la « complétude », il est « sans rejet » et sans regret; d'« établir un soi », il ne connaît pas les méfaits. Dans le situationnel, en somme, il se tient en flottaison sans s'ancrer. Pouvait-on aller plus loin quant à la non-construction - non-imposition, quant à l'image, quant à la phrase qui se dévide - dans la non-constitution d'un sujet ? [...]"
(François Jullien, La Pensée chinoise en vis-à-vis de la philosophie - Sujet/situation: d'un embranchement dans la pensée, Note du séminaire 2013-2014, 2015)

"Il y a là néanmoins un côté par lequel ces deux pensées de la transformation éthique communiquent entre elles, qui est le travail assidu, l'application patiente et quotidienne, la discipline et les exercices répétés que les Grecs appelaient askesis et que les Chinois ont nommé gongfu . Et il est vrai aussi que les Chinois ont traité d'une connaissance « naturelle », immanente à l'esprit, se déployant d'elle-même comme une sorte d'évidence de la conscience. Mais, d'une part, cette évidence est une évidence morale, elle ne pourra servir de critère pour une connaissance de la vérité, au sens cartésien, que nous lui avons donné en Europe. Et, d'autre part, même chez un penseur comme Wang Yangming, penseur du XVIe siècle qu'on a à ce propos comparé à Descartes, cette intuition immédiate de la régulation naturelle (tian li) ne se révèle qu'à même la diversité des situations. Car c'est « en présence de son père » qu'on sait spontanément ce qu'est la « piété filiale»; « en présence de son frère aîné, ce qu'est le respect dû à l'aîné» ; ou, plus généralement, « en présence d'un enfant près de tomber dans un puits, ce qu'est la réaction d'humanité face à l'intolérable qui arrive aux autres », etc. (Yulu, I, 8). Comme de telles situations sont particulières et ne se laissent subsumer sous aucune catégorie d'en semble et que, d'autre part, c'est toujours en relation à une situation donnée que se révèle immédiatement une telle intuition morale, comme connaissance innée (liang zhi), on comprend que cette pensée morale se défie de tout appareil de règles et de commandements qui recouvrirait cette diversité : il n'est pas d'intermédiaire généralisant et codifiant qui puisse s'interposer entre l'appréhension immédiate, dans l'esprit, de la régulation naturelle et la diversité des cas rencontrés l'appelant, hic et nunc, à se manifester. Aussi est-ce à partir d'une telle typologie des situations (on le voit déjà chez Mencius) qu'est conçue, en Chine, la typologie des vertus, et non pas à partir de ce qui serait les qualités ou propriétés d'un sujet."
(François Jullien, La Pensée chinoise en vis-à-vis de la philosophie, 2015)

E4.6.5.E_REF3_PH KNOWLEDGE (THE WESTERN MODEL) "ISOLATES A 'NATURE' AND POSES IT AS AN 'OBJECT'" AND DETACHES THE "I" FROM THE WORLD. Connivence is a mode of being/knowing that "does not detach an "I" from the world and "does not separate theory from practice."
"CONNIVENCE (VS CONNAISSANCE)
1. Face à la connaissance et son hégémonie sur la culture européenne, comment nommer son autre qu'elle a recouvert et n'a pas pensé? Je choisirai d'appeler connivence cette autre relation au monde que la connaissance a tendu à enfouir, mais n'a pu pour autant abolir, et dont, face à ce règne établi de la connaissance, il me faut rappeler la « cohérence ». Car que, se développant en savoir spéculatif, c'est à-dire en savoir pour le savoir, la connaissance se soit détachée, via la science, du besoin d'adaptation au monde dont elle est née et, se prenant elle-même pour fin, se soit débranchée du vital, nous confère désormais cette tâche strictement corrélative : celle de revenir sur ce rapport enseveli par la raison et qui, dès lors opérant dans l'ombre, ne nous en maintient pas moins dans une entente tacite avec les choses - mais « entente » que nous ne réfléchissons pas. « Entente » restant donc implicite, en deçà du travail relationnel auquel se livre elle-même la raison, et que nous ne pourrons éclairer qu'en conduisant celle-ci à retourner sur ses pas, à remonter dans son histoire, pour explorer ce dont elle s'est écartée : non pas ce contre quoi elle s'est héroïquement battue (l'obscurantisme face aux Lumières), mais ce que, dans son légitime et puissant combat pour s'imposer, elle a dû laisser de côté - et qui repose désormais dans notre insu, donc échappe à notre intelligence. Si le contraire de la connaissance est l'ignorance, comme on sait, son contradictoire est la connivence s'instaurant à parité avec elle en même temps qu'elles se tournent le dos. Connivere, dit le latin: s'entendre « en clignant des yeux ».
Car la connaissance isole une « nature » et la pose en « objet », organise méthodiquement sa progression, élabore des outils d'abstraction et construit des médiations, rend indifférents les espaces et projette un temps égal et planifié; elle développe un discours argumenté qui promeut les conditions de la science ainsi que du politique. Mais serait-ce là tout le savoir? Vivre ne suppose-t-il pas un mode d'intelligence ou, disons mieux, d'« entente » qui, se tissant au fil des jours, et même sans qu'on y pense, sans qu'on pense à y penser, retient dans l'adhérence - au lieu de mettre à distance et d'édifier dans la pensée ? Car la connaissance n'est-elle pas seulement la face éclairée que seul son envers connivent, auquel elle est adossée, rend possible, mais en se faisant oublier? Savoir ombreux que celui-ci, qui reste intégré dans un milieu, ne s'abstrait pas d'un paysage, ne s'extrait pas d'un conditionnement, ne sépare pas la théorie de la pratique ni ne détache un « moi » du monde : il reste en deçà de toute exposition possible, en amont de toute explicitation, et d'abord il n'interroge pas. 
La connivence est ce savoir qui n'a pas rompu son attachement. [...]"
(François Jullien, La Pensée chinoise en vis-à-vis de la philosophie, 2015)

E1.7.B.2.2.m_REF1.1_PH.wE4.6.5.E.

 ZEN TEACHES THAT UNDERSTANDING THE INTERCONNECTEDNESS OF ALL THINGS REVEALS A REALITY BEYOND CONVENTIONAL JUDGMENTS.
"As Hsiang-yen put it,

        There's no use for artificial discipline, 
        For, move as I will, I manifest the ancient Tao.

[...] It is indeed the basic intuition of Zen that there is an ultimate standpoint from which "anything goes." In the celebrated words of the master Yun-men, "Every day is a good day." Or as is said in the Hsin-hsin Ming:

        If you want to get the plain truth, 
        Be not concerned with right and wrong. 
        The conflict between right and wrong 
        Is the sickness of the mind.

But this standpoint does not exclude and is not hostile toward the distinction between right and wrong at other levels and in more limited frames of reference. The world is seen to be beyond right and wrong when it is not framed: that is to say, when we are not looking at a particular situation by itself - out of relation to the rest of the universe. Within this room there is a clear difference between up and down; out in interstellar space there is not. Within the conventional limits of a human community there are clear distinctions between good and evil. But these disappear when human affairs are seen as part and parcel of the whole realm of nature. Every framework sets up a restricted field of relationships, and restriction is law or rule. [...]"
(Alan Watts, This is it, 1958)

E4.6.5.E_REF4_PH FRANÇOIS JULLIEN OPPOSE LE MODELE GREC DE LA FRONTALITE (le face-à-face, le débat contradictoire thèse/antithèse, la démocratie, la recherche de la vérité par la réfutation) AU MODELE CHINOIS DE L'OBLIQUITE (le détour, l'allusion, l'art de la guerre, l'efficacité sans affrontement).
"OBLIQUITÉ (VS FRONTALITÉ) [...]
3. [...] Que, de la bataille rangée, on ait à retenir, derrière le coût (le carnage), ce qui la rend économique signifie que l'affrontement des phalanges permet d'obtenir la décision d'une manière qui soit à la fois la plus rapide et la moins équivoque. Or l'alignement face à face des arguments au sein de discours antithétiques, tels que les Grecs ont conçu ceux-ci, que ce soit au théâtre, au tribunal ou à l'assemblée, vise au même effet. Les orateurs plaident l'un contre l'autre, au vu et au su de tous, dans un temps limité, et tout témoin, dans son for intérieur, peut sur-le-champ trancher : cette « poussée » antagoniste basculant dans un sens ou dans l'autre se traduira, à terme, par un vote à la majorité. Par là même, cet affrontement des discours se révèle étroitement lié à l'institution de la démocratie : c'est par la pesée d'un pour et d'un contre argumentés que la question en débat s'y trouve décidée qu'on songe à l'importance que détiennent, de nos jours, dans la vie politique, les « face-à-face » télévisés; et quand le pour et le contre ne parviennent pas suffisamment à se distinguer, ne voit-on pas que la démocratie patine? Ce qui vaudra aussi, en retour, du côté chinois : dans quelle mesure le privilège que cette tradition culturelle accorde à l'abord de biais, dans la gestion des rapports antagonistes, sans autoriser une opposition déclarée, n'enraye-t-il pas aujourd'hui encore le « processus » démocratique ? [...]

Il n'empêche qu'un certain pli est pris dans la pensée, depuis les Grecs, qui est de penser en opposant des arguments de la façon la plus ajustée : c'est par thèse et antithèse que nous apprenons encore aux enfants à philosopher. Et si je suis seul à penser en moi-même, je songerai aux arguments qu'on pourrait m'objecter de façon à mettre à l'épreuve ma pensée et pouvoir en assurer la vérité par cette réfutation. 

4 [...] Reste que l'intelligence chinoise a beaucoup mieux éclairé cet art de l'indirect resté dans l'ombre en Europe, en même temps que sa théorie de l'argumentation est demeurée étonnamment pauvre. [...]
À l'obliquité recommandée par l'art de la guerre répond [...] une obliquité équivalente de la parole: à la « poussée » de l'affrontement, au face-à-face (au corps-à-corps) des soldats ou des arguments, sont préférées, en Chine, la pratique du détour verbal qui laisse plus de champ à la manoeuvre, la menée insidieuse qui déroute l'adversaire sans qu'on ait à s'exposer (à s'expliquer). Esquive et harcèlement sont à nouveau de mise au lieu de présenter en pleine lumière des arguments auxquels l'autre, du même coup, se trouve en mesure de rétorquer, l'expression sinueuse nous permet d'« esquiver » toute attaque frontale nous obligeant à nous justifier; en même temps qu'elle nous rend à même de « harceler » sans cesse notre opposant en le gardant sous la menace de l'allusion, en le maintenant sous la pression du sous-entendu. [...]
Ce sens qui ne fait que poindre est d'autant plus menaçant que les autres ne savent pas encore précisément où nous voulons en venir; cette critique seulement ébauchée est d'autant plus dangereuse qu'elle ne se présente jamais à découvert et n'offre donc pas de prise, non plus, pour la réfuter. Un lettré chinois du début du XXe siècle, Liang Shiqiu, lui même grand traducteur de Shakespeare et revenant des États-Unis, nous décrit, sans doute par contraste avec le to be frank (to be blunt) qu'il y a découvert, cet art de « frapper de côté et d'attaquer de biais » qu'il perçoit d'autant mieux de retour en Chine (dans L'Art de la critique, Ma ren zhi yishu): « Si quelqu'un vous vole et que vous dites, pour le blâmer, qu'il est un voleur; ou si quelqu'un vous dépouille et que vous dites, pour le blâmer, qu'il est un bandit, cela est stupide. Quand on veut blâmer quelqu'un, il faut d'abord mettre en valeur l'art du vide et du plein, du voile et du reflet; il convient aussi de suggérer indirectement et de faire ressortir de biais, de frapper de côté et d'attaquer latéralement : parvenu au point crucial, il vous suffit d'un seul mot pour en finir, et l'autre a, comme on dit, le couteau sous la gorge. »
Car si vous dites directement à quelqu'un son fait, c'est dit, c'est fini et vous n'avez plus rien à dire : votre parole n'a plus d'« au-delà » où se déployer et qui la maintienne alerte, elle est morte, inerte, parce qu'achevée, sa charge est déminée; et l'autre sait à quoi s'en tenir et peut vous réfuter. Mais, si vous lui laissez entendre que vous pourriez penser que..., vous l'entraînez dans un déroulement de la parole faisant œuvrer l'implicite qui le tient en suspens, l'inquiète et le désempare : « Ce n'est qu'au bout d'un certain temps de réflexion qu'il se rend compte progressivement que cette parole n'était pas bien intentionnée, de sorte que son visage, qui était d'abord souriant, vire du blanc au rouge, puis du rouge au violet, enfin du violet au gris. » [...]"
(François Jullien, La Pensée chinoise en vis-à-vis de la philosophie, 2015)

E4.6.5.E_REF4.1_PH JULLIEN ILLUSTRATES THAT TRUTH IS NOT FOUND BY "APPLYING" A RULE (METHOD) BUT BY A "STRATEGIC" NAVIGATION OF RESISTANCE THAT MUST BE "RE-INVENTED" IN EVERY CASE.
"BIAIS (VS MÉTHODE) [...]
1. [...] À [l’]auto-consécration de la méthode, qu'a donc ajouté Descartes ? Que la notion s'y systématise en même temps qu'elle soit portée au premier plan fait apparaître, dans la « méthode », l'expression d'une toute-puissance de l'esprit affirmant sa prérogative : partant désormais de lui seul, et d'abord isolant ce « seul », pour commencer non seulement à penser mais aussi à faire exister le monde, et ne dépendant que de lui-même dans ses opérations - ce dont le cogito cartésien a marqué originairement mais aussi définitivement l'assurance. S'y déclarent et s'y mettent en œuvre l'initiative en même temps que la maîtrise du sujet pensant - pouvait-on aller plus loin en ce sens? Or ce départ, si l'on veut fonder à tout prix un départ, ne serait-il pas le seul fiable ? Car de la généralité de la méthode ainsi que du pouvoir de modélisation qui est le sien, assurés qu'ils sont dorénavant par les mathématiques, il découle, non seulement que l'esprit opère dans la clarté et la distinction, mais qu'il va toujours des idées aux choses, ne devant jamais rien attribuer aux choses que ce que nous percevons avec évidence dans leurs idées ; et que ces idées, de plus, suivent un ordre tel que chacune doit être précédée de toutes celles dont elle dépend en même temps qu'elle doit précéder toutes celles qui en dépendront. Or jusqu'où cette option prise par l'esprit, se posant ainsi en départ, s'érigeant en « sujet », étendra-t-elle, en fait, sa pertinence ? Avant même que de considérer l'extension de son champ d'application, il faudra déjà se demander ce que vaut en elle-même l'idée de son application possible. [...]

2. Notre pensée se découvre démunie, en effet, quand il s'agit de concevoir une démarche qui serait rigoureuse, mais ne soit pas méthodique : une démarche qui ne soit pas sans cohérence, ne soit pas laissée à la chance, mais ne relève pas pour autant d'à priori prescriptifs. Car ce que nous ne pouvons maîtriser par des causes et des principes, nous le renvoyons d'ordinaire au hasard [...]
Or la pensée du biais ne serait-elle pas précisément celle qui débloquerait cette contradiction (de la souveraineté de la méthode ou du pur empirisme) et nous ouvrirait une marge de manœuvre dans l'entre-deux ? Car ce que nous ne savons aborder frontalement, par notre raisonnement, lui qui commande d'avance, qui projette et qui implique, n'aurions-nous pas la ressource de nous y rapporter de l'autre manière possible de manière qu'on a dite oblique? Ressource, face à ce qui résiste dans l'instant à la méthode, que d'y découvrir un « biais », chemin faisant, dans un déroulement, le longeant et en épousant les contours pour s'y insinuer, pour s'y couler, s'en faire accepter, de sorte que cette intervention, à la longue, en soit à peine une et qu'elle soit tolérée sans susciter de résistance et de contre-effet. [...]

"Puisque biais renvoie à disponibilité comme à sa condition, j'en reviendrai à l'art ou métier ou savoir faire du psychanalyste - ou comment le nommer? Le pratiquant de l'« attention flottante » ne serait-il pas également (conséquemment), au cours de la cure, à défaut de pouvoir compter sur la méthode impossible, un éternel requérant du biais? Si l'on prend en effet de celui-ci comme terrain, non d'application, mais d'exercice, la psychanalyse (mais sans oublier ce que sa « praxis », selon Lacan, hériterait encore de la certitude cartésienne), voit-on bien, et même exemplairement en ce cas, de quelle résistance alors il s'agit. Elle est celle qui vient de l'analysant lui même, attaché qu'il est à son refoulé et contraignant au détour pour surmonter cet obstacle d'autant plus difficile à lever qu'il procède de l'inconscient et que le patient s'y protège. Freud ne cesse de nous dire qu'on ne peut compter sur la seule intelligence de celui-ci, ni non plus d'ailleurs sur sa bonne volonté, pour opérer, « dans la lumière », la modification souhaitée. Toute méthode, dans la conduite de la cure, s'avérant impossible, biais signifiera qu'on trouve une façon de pactiser avec la résistance pour en contourner l'obstacle et la faire céder à son point le plus lâche. On y devient expert, prescient, expérimenté, mais sans que cette capacité soit pour autant directement reconductible, restant aux prises avec du singulier; ou, s'il y a bien capacité acquise, elle devra rester souple, pour préserver son caractère « entrant », et se reconfigurer à chaque cas, s'y réinventant quasiment tout en sachant de mieux en mieux s'y repérer, ce qui est tout autre chose que s'ajuster ou s'adapter.
Tant qu'on n'a pas trouvé le bon biais, en effet, pour intervenir et déjouer la résistance, ne cesse de répéter Freud, c'est-à-dire tant qu'on n'a pas trouvé prise sur le refoulé qui échappe, tous les éclaircissements de principe peuvent être docilement écoutés par l'intéressé, et même applaudis par lui, mais n'y changeront rien. Ils jouent en roue libre et ne « prennent » pas, ils ne « touchent » pas et ne sont pas pertinents. De là qu'il s'agit, non pas d'« appliquer » quelque règle que ce soit, ou bien celle-ci n'aurait pas prise, tant la praxis diffère ici de la « pratique » (répondant à la théorie); mais de débloquer ce qu'on ne sait pas qui bloque et qui se met à couvert de façon d'autant plus difficile à démasquer que ce serait, apparaît-il, en parfaite ingénuité. L'effort à fournir n'est par conséquent pas méthodique, mais d'abord stratégique. En quoi biais est bien le terme requis quand sont défaillants à la fois l'art et le savoir, techné et epistemé. Mais comment en faire un concept qui nous sorte enfin de la connivence et du familier? Je veux dire : peut-on penser ce biais de façon qui ne soit pas qu'un pis-aller, inclinant à l'empirique, mais qui soit cohérente et concertée ? [...]"
(François Jullien, La Pensée chinoise en vis-à-vis de la philosophie, 2015)

E4.6.6. Metaphor as the Architecture of Understanding

E4.6.6.A. Scaffolding Abstract Thought.
How the mind utilizes metaphor as a structural tool to bridge the gap between physical reality and abstract concepts. Metaphor as a mechanism for framing perception, creating concepts, and solidifying "truth."

E4.6.6.A_REF1_PH

EL3.18. METAPHOR IS THE MECHANISM THAT THE MIND USES TO UNDERSTAND OTHERWISE INACCESSIBLE ABSTRACT CONCEPTS "You say that language exposes our limitations, but you also insist that it can show us a way out of them. In fact, you have a linguistic superhero, don’t you, in the reality of the metaphor?
Yes, I have two superheroes, actually. One of them is metaphor, the other combinatorics. Metaphor would be the way in which we transfer and transform ways of thinking that came from the realm of very concrete actions like pouring water or throwing rocks or closing a jammed drawer, and so on. But we can leach the content from them and use them as abstract structures to reason about other domains. We can talk about the economy rising and falling, as if it were a domain. We can use graphs to convey mathematical relationships as though they were lines and shapes drawn in space.

An enormous amount of scientific language is metaphorical. We talk about a genetic code, where code originally meant a cipher; we talk about the solar system model of the atom as though the atom were like a sun and moon and planets. And although we use these metaphors of concrete things to stand for abstract concepts, that doesn’t keep us from putting a different twist on those same metaphors of the concrete and using them to describe other and quite different abstract concepts. When we put together the power of metaphor with the combinatorial nature of language and thought, we become able to create a virtually infinite number of ideas, even though we are equipped with a finite inventory of concepts and relations. I believe it is the mechanism that the mind uses to understand otherwise inaccessible abstract concepts. It may be how the mind evolved the ability to reason about abstract concepts such as chess or politics, which are not really concrete or physical and have no obvious relevance to reproduction and physical survival. It can also enable us—when we lose ourselves in the words of a skilled writer, for instance—to inhabit the consciousness of another person.

You argue that metaphor and combinatorics should be keys to our education, that we should be taught to think and to use language in a way that will promote our development and productivity. Why?
We must tap the mind’s ability to grasp things in familiar ways and then to stretch them to apply to new ideas and areas of thought. But we also have to be mindful of the fact that there are ways in which any metaphor may or may not correspond accurately to the thing you’re using it to explain. So just using or pointing out the metaphor isn’t enough. To make it true and useful, one then has to add all these qualifications, like, well, yes, it’s like this in one regard but not in another. So, for example, the mind is like a computer in that it depends on information storage, but it’s not like a computer in that its accuracy isn’t highly reliable and it doesn’t work serially but rather in parallel. Or that natural selection is like a design engineer in the sense that parts of animals become engineered to accomplish certain things, but it is not like a design engineer in that it does not have long-term foresight. So the analogies in a metaphor can give with one hand but take with another. That is, it can give you insight but also lead to a lot of bogus conclusions if it’s used carelessly. But surely metaphoric insights, the seeing of resemblances and connections, can give rise, and have given rise, to countless innovations in science, the arts, and many other fields of endeavor."
(Steven Pinker interviewed in Science that matter)

E4.6.6.A_REF3_PH

EL3.67.A. THE ORIGINAL PERCEPTUAL METAPHORS ARE METAPHORS "If I make up the definition of a mammal, and then, after inspecting a camel, declare “look, a mammal” I have indeed brought a truth to light in this way, but it is a truth of limited value. That is to say, it is a thoroughly anthropomorphic truth which contains not a single point which would be “true in itself” or really and universally valid apart from man.
At bottom, what the investigator of such truths is seeking is only the metamorphosis of the world into man. He strives to understand the world as something analogous to man, and at best he achieves by his struggles the feeling of assimilation. Similar to the way in which astrologers considered the stars to be in man’s service and connected with his happiness and sorrow, such an investigator considers the entire universe in connection with man: the entire universe as the infinitely fractured echo of one original sound-man; the entire universe as the infinitely multiplied copy of one original picture-man. His method is to treat man as the measure of all things, but in doing so he again proceeds from the error of believing that he has these things [which he intends to measure] immediately before him as mere objects. He forgets that the original perceptual metaphors are metaphors and takes them to be the things themselves.
[...] Only by forgetting this primitive world of metaphor can one live with any repose, security, and consistency: only by means of the petrification and coagulation of a mass of images which originally streamed from the primal faculty of human imagination like a fiery liquid, only in the invincible faith in this sun, this window, this table is a truth in itself, in short, only by forgetting that he himself is an artistically creative subject, does man live with any repose, security, and consistency."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, On Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral Sense, 1873)

E4.6.6.A_REF2_PH

EL3.96. ONE OF THE KEY TALENTS OF THE MIND IS FRAMING A GIVEN SITUATION IN MULTIPLE WAYS "You say that in studying certain aspects of how children acquire language—specifically, how they learn to use verbs—you fell, like Alice, down a rabbit hole into a hidden world where you viewed the deeper structures of cognition. What did you see in that wonderland beneath the surface of our language?
One very crucial rabbit hole involved figuring out how children learn to use simple verbs for putting things in places, verbs like fill, pour, load, or splash—verbs involving movement of something to somewhere. The problem was, how do you account for how a little kid, who has no prior knowledge of how a particular language works and who isn’t going to get explicit lessons about how to use which words in which circumstances, figures out what words mean and what sentences they can be used in? We adults, for example, will say “Fill the glass with water” but not “Fill water into the glass,” even though it’s perfectly clear what that means. We will say “Pour water into the glass” but not “Pour the glass with water.” And you know, “Pour the glass with water” is perfectly sensible, but it just doesn’t sound quite right. But with a verb like load, we can say either “Load hay into the wagon” or “Load the wagon with hay.” So you’ve got one verb that takes the container as the object, one that takes the stuff as the object, and the third that can go both ways. How do kids figure that out? Do they get it right to start with? The answer is no, not a hundred percent of the time. They do make some errors; they very occasionally say “Can I fill some salt into the shaker?” or “Stop pouring me with water.” But the errors are fairly rare, and most of the time they use them correctly, and they grow up to be us, who use them correctly. What are they latching onto?

It turns out that they’re latching onto different ways of framing the same situation. So if I go over to the sink and the faucet and the glass ends up full, I can think of that one activity either as doing something to the water (namely, causing it to go into the glass) or doing something to the glass (namely, causing it to change state from empty to full). That was the key insight to figure out why “fill” and “pour” behave differently.

If the simplest action, like putting some water into a glass, can be mentally framed in these two ways, with different consequences in terms of how we use words, that suggests that one of the key talents of the mind is framing a given situation in multiple ways and that a lot of insight into human thought, debate, disagreement, can come from thinking about the ways in which two different people—or one person at different times—can frame the same event. “Pouring water” versus “filling a glass” is a pretty mundane difference, but to speak of “invading Iraq” versus “liberating Iraq” or “confiscating earnings” versus “redistributing assets” would be more consequential. I think it illuminates the same aspect of our minds. This is a pervasive power of the mind; it’s seen in battles over perspective on all kinds of issues. It makes us capable of flip-flopping on a course of action, depending on how the action is described. It suggests limitations on our rationality—that we might, for example, be vulnerable to fallacies in reasoning or to corruption in our institutions."
(Steven Pinker interviewed in Science that matter)

E4.6.6.B. The Structural Mechanics: Condensation and the Unconscious.
The "engineering" of meaning within the psyche and language. Metaphor as a specific operation (condensation/crossing) that structures desire and creates meaning within the network of language.

E4.6.6.B_REF1_TH LACAN DEFINIT LA METAPHORE (ASSOCIATION PAR ANALOGIE/CONDENSATION) ET LA METONYMIE (LA PARTIE POUR LE TOUT/DEPLACEMENT) COMME LES MECANISMES FONDAMENTAUX QUI ORIENTENT LA "VARIATION DU SENS". Il montre que la vérité du sujet (le désir) s'exprime à travers des figures de style, et non par une logique linéaire.
"Ce qui est en jeu, ici, c’est en effet l’exigence inconditionnée du désir et de ses lois. Par cette émergence du désir, un sujet radicalement singulier fait acte de présence, présente ses lettres de créance et demande son accréditation. Il s’agit, comme le disait excellemment Breton, de « ne pas laisser s’embroussailler les chemins du désir ». Le discours du philosophe, celui de l’esprit autonome et conscient de lui-même, est le discours d’un sujet abstrait, qui s’universalise en se soumettant aux exercices de la raison. [...]
Toute langue, ou « système symbolique », créera, par le fait de sa seule évolution, des lois auxquelles les locuteurs seront nécessairement soumis, alors même qu’ils pensaient pourtant n’obéir qu’à eux-mêmes en prenant l’initiative de la parole. [...] Ainsi peuvent être formulées – avec une rigueur sans doute toujours relative – les règles d’une langue donnée, par la syntaxe, qui définit la composition des mots dans la phrase, la logique de la langue, et par la grammaire, qui définit l’usage et les idiomatismes. En est-il de même pour la  lalangue, telle qu’elle se fait entendre en s’abandonnant à la loi de libre association, sur le divan de l’analyste ? Serait-il possible de rédiger un traité de linguisterie qui serait en mesure de rivaliser avec les traités de linguistique ? 
Lacan se met en recherche des opérateurs de variation du sens qui déterminent ou du moins orientent le jeu de la libre association. [...]
S’inspirant des découvertes des linguistes, il repère deux facteurs, qui sont aussi des tropes de l’ancienne rhétorique, capables de rendre compte des glissements de sens qui font la liaison entre un terme et le terme suivant qui lui est associé : la métaphore est association par analogie, elle désigne une chose par une autre qui lui ressemble [...]. L’autre opérateur qui joue un rôle fondamental dans les associations et autres métamorphoses qui déterminent l’évolution sémantique d’un même substantif, est la métonymie, également trope de l’ancienne rhétorique, qui prend la partie pour le tout ou, du moins, qui choisit un élément jugé plus représentatif que les autres pour désigner le tout (la voile pour le voilier, le toit pour la maison), ou bien encore qui désigne le contenu par le contenant (boire un verre), ou l’effet par la cause (avoir perdu sa langue, pour « sa parole »), ou tout élément par un autre élément auquel il se trouve logiquement lié. [...]
Ajoutons que la métaphore et la métonymie entrent en correspondance avec les opérations qui interviennent, selon Freud, dans le travail du rêve (Traumarbeit) qui met en scène, sinon en récit, la pulsion venue de l’inconscient: la métaphore s’apparente à la condensation (deux formes distinctes fusionnent dans une unité ambiguë) et la métonymie au déplacement (un élément prend la place d’un autre). Freud ajoute un troisième principe qui participe à l’élaboration du rêve : c’est l’inversion. Le monde du rêve est le monde à l’envers et dans le rêve, souvent, nous dit Freud, c’est le lièvre qui fait la chasse au chasseur. [...]
Remarquons enfin que,  tandis que selon Freud, attaché aux représentations du rêve plutôt qu’à la grammaire de la langue, ces mécanismes de l’association (condensation métaphorique, déplacement métonymique, et inversion) opèrent surtout sur les images du rêve, chez Lacan ils concernent toujours des faits de langage. Il existe en effet une quatrième figure, celle de la figurabilité (Darstellbarkeit) qui gouverne, selon Freud, les mécanismes du rêve, peut-être la plus importante en ce sens où il faut considérer d’abord le rêve comme une mise en images. On sait que pour Freud l’interprétation du rêve est la voie royale pour la connaissance de l’inconscient. Pour Lacan en revanche, le rêve, immédiatement inaccessible à l’analyste, tout comme à l’analysant lui-même, ne vaut que par le récit du rêve. [...]"
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Ecouter la folie, I- Le Symbolique, 2019)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Lacan/Ecouterlafolie/Ecouterlafolie1.html

E4.6.6.B_REF1.1_TH LACAN EXPLIQUE COMMENT LE SENS EMERGE : NON PAR LE SIGNIFIE DIRECT, MAIS PAR CROISEMENT. LE "MOT IMPORTANT" EST CELUI QUI CONCENTRE LE PLUS DE FILS (LE MYCELIUM). C'est la définition technique de la Condensation (Métaphore) et du Déplacement (Métonymie).
"Ouvrez à n’importe quelle page le livre sur le rêve, qui est venu le premier, vous n’y verrez parler que d’affaires de mots. Vous verrez Freud en parler d’une façon telle que vous vous apercevrez qu’y sont écrites en toutes lettres, exactement, les lois de structure que M. de Saussure a diffusées à travers le monde. Il n’en était d’ailleurs pas le premier inventeur, mais il en a été l’ardent transmetteur, pour constituer ce qui se fait actuellement de plus solide sous la rubrique de la linguistique. 
Un rêve dans Freud, ce n’est pas une nature qui rêve, un archétype qui s’agite, une matrice du monde, un rêve divin, le cœur de l’âme. Freud en parle comme d’un certain nœud, d’un réseau associatif de formes verbales analysées et se recoupant comme telles, non pas par ce qu’elles signifient mais par une espèce d’homonymie. C’est quand un même mot se rencontre à trois croisements des idées qui viennent au sujet que vous vous apercevrez que ce qui est important, c’est ce mot-là et pas autre chose. C’est quand vous avez trouvé le mot qui concentre autour de lui le plus grand nombre de fils de ce mycélium que vous savez que c’est là le centre de gravité caché du désir dont il s’agit. Pour tout dire, c’est ce point dont je parlais tout à l’heure, ce point-noyau où le discours fait trou. [...]"
(Jacques Lacan, Mon enseignement, Place, origine et fin de mon enseignement, 1967)

E4.6.6.C. The Aesthetic Breach: Error, Intuition, and Revelation.
The "truest" understanding often comes when the architectural logic is broken through the power of "mistakes," involuntary inspiration, and poetic language that bypasses the rigid will of the intellect and communicates directly "soul to soul."

E4.6.6.C_REF1_PO

EL3.140. “ESSAY ON WHAT I THINK ABOUT MOST

Error.
And its emotions
On the brink of error is a condition of fear In the midst error is a state of folly and defeat.
Realizing you've made an error brings shame and remorse,
Or does it?

Let's look into this
Lots of people including Aristotle think error
an interesting and valuable mental event.
In his discussion of metaphor in the Rhetoric
Aristotle says there are 3 kinds of words.
Strange, ordinary and metaphorical.

"Strange words simply puzzle us;
ordinary words convey what we know already;
it is from metaphor that we can get hold of something new & fresh"
(Rhetoric, 1410b10-13).
In what does the freshness of metaphor consist?
Aristotle says that metaphor causes the mind to experience itself

in the act of making a mistake.
He pictures the mind moving along a plane surface
of ordinary language
when suddenly
that surface breaks or complicates.
Unexpectedness emerges.

At first it looks odd, contradictory or wrong.
Then it makes sense.
And at this moment, according to Aristotle,
the mind turns to itself and says:
"How true, and yet I mistook it!"
From the true mistakes of metaphor a lesson can be learned.

Not only that things are other than they seem,
and so we mistake them,
but that such mistakenness is valuable.
Hold onto it, Aristotle says,
there is much to be seen and felt here.
Metaphors teach the mind

to enjoy error
and to learn
from the juxtaposition of what is and what is not the case.
There is a Chinese proverb that says, 
Brush cannot write two characters with the same stroke.
And yet

that is exactly what a good mistake does.
Here is an example.
It is a fragment of ancient Greek lyric
that contains an error of arithmetic.
The poet does not seem to know
that 2 + 2 = 4."

EE4.6.6.C_REF1.1_PO

L3.140.A. ALKMAN FRAGMENT 20:

[?] made three seasons, summer
and winter and autumn third 
and fourth spring when 
there is blooming but to eat enough 
is not

Alkman lived in Sparta in the 7th century B.C.
Now Sparta was a poor country
and it is unlikely
that Alkman led a wealthy or well-fed life there.
This fact forms the background of his remarks
which end in hunger.

Hunger always feels
like a mistake.
Alkman makes us experience this mistake
with him
by an effective use of computational error.
For a poor Spartan poet with nothing

left in his cupboard
at the end of winter 
along comes spring
like an afterthought of the natural economy,
fourth in a series of three,
unbalancing his arithmetic

and enjambing his verse.
Alkman's poem breaks off midway through an iambic metron
with no explanation
of where spring came from
or why numbers don't help us
control reality better.

There are three things I like about Alkman's poem.
First that it is small,
light
and more than perfectly economical.
Second that it seems to suggest colors like pale green
without ever naming them.

Third that it manages to put into play
some major metaphysical questions
(like Who made the world)
without overt analysis.
You notice the verb "made" in the first verse
has no subject: [?]

It is very unusual in Greek
for a verb to have no subject, in fact
it is a grammatical mistake.
Strict philologists will tell you
that this mistake is just an accident of transmission,
that the poem as we have it

is surely a fragment broken off
some longer text
and that Alkman almost certainly did
name the agent of creation
in the verses preceding what we have here.
Well that may be so.

But as you know the chief aim of philology
is to reduce all textual delight
to an accident of history.
And I am uneasy with any claim to know exactly
what a poet means to say.
So let's leave the question mark there

at the beginning of the poem
and admire Alkman's courage
in confronting what it brackets.
The fourth thing I like
about Alkman's poem
is the impression it gives

of blurting out the truth in spite of itself.
Many a poet aspires
to this tone of inadvertent lucidity
but few realize it so simply as Alkman.
Of course his simplicity is a fake.
Alkman is not simple at all,

he is a master contriver
or what Aristotle would call an "imitator"
of reality.
Imitation (mimesis in Greek)
is Aristotle's collective term for the true mistakes of poetry.
What I like about this term

is the ease with which it accepts
that what we are engaged in when we do poetry is error,
the willful creation of error,
the deliberate break and complication of mistakes
out of which may arise
unexpectedness.

So a poet like Alkman
sidesteps fear, anxiety, shame, remorse
and all the other silly emotions associated with making mistakes
in order to engage
the fact of the matter.
The fact of the matter for humans is imperfection.

Alkman breaks the rules of arithmetic
and jeopardizes grammar
and messes up the metrical form of his verse
in order to draw us into this fact.
At the end of the poem the fact remains 
and Alkman is probably no less hungry.

Yet something has changed in the quotient of our expectations.
For in mistaking them,
Alkman has perfected something.
Indeed he has
more than perfected something.
Using a single brushstroke.”

(Anne Carson, Essay on what I think about most error)

E4.6.6.C_REF2_LIT

E4.6.6.b. NIETZSCHE EXPLICITLY DESCRIBES THE "INVOLUNTARY CHARACTER OF THE IMAGE, OF THE METAPHOR" AS THE MOST "IMMEDIATE," "JUST," AND "SIMPLE" EXPRESSION OF REALITY, BYPASSING THE DELIBERATE WILL OF THE INTELLECT: "WITH EVERY IMAGE, YOU FLY TOWARDS A TRUTH."
"« Est-il en cette fin du XIXe siècle, quelqu’un qui ait une idée nette de ce que les poètes des époques fortes appelaient inspiration ? Si ce n’est pas le cas, je m’en vais le décrire. — Pour  peu que l’on conserve un grain de superstition, on ne saurait qu’à grand-peine repousser la conviction de n’être qu’une incarnation, un porte-voix, le médium de forces supérieures. La notion de révélation, si l’on entend par là que tout à coup, avec une sûreté et une finesse indicibles, quelque chose devient visible, audible, quelque chose qui vous ébranle au plus intime de vous-même, vous bouleverse, cette notion décrit tout simplement un état de fait. On entend, on ne cherche pas ; on prend sans demander qui donne ; une pensée vous illumine comme un éclair, avec une force contraignante, sans hésitation dans la forme - je n’ai jamais eu à choisir. Un ravissement dont l’énorme tension se résorbe parfois par un torrent de larmes, où les pas, inconsciemment, tantôt se précipitent, tantôt ralentissent ; un emportement “hors-de-soi” ; où l’on garde la conscience la plus nette d’une multitude de frissons ténus irriguant jusqu’aux orteils : une profondeur de bonheur où le comble de la douleur et de l’obscurité ne fait pas contraste, mais semble voulu, provoqué, mais semble être couleur nécessaire au sein de ce débordement de lumière : un instinct des rapports rythmiques, qui recouvre d’immenses étendues de formes - la durée, le besoin d’un rythme ample, voilà presque le critère de la puissance de l’inspiration, et qui compense en quelque sorte la pression et la tension qu’elle inflige… Tout se passe en l’absence de toute volonté délibérée, mais comme dans un tourbillon de sentiments de liberté, d’indétermination, de puissance, de divinité… Le plus remarquable est le caractère involontaire de l’image, de la métaphore : l’on n’a plus aucune idée de ce qu’est une image, une métaphore, tout se présente comme l’expression la plus immédiate, la plus juste, la plus simple. Il semble vraiment, pour rappeler un mot de Zarathoustra, que les choses viennent s’offrir d’elles-mêmes pour servir d’images (“...voici qu’à ton discours toutes les choses accourent. caressantes, et te flattent : car elles veulent s’envoler sur ton aile. Avec chaque image, tu voles vers une vérité. Le verbe, les trésors du verbe s’ouvrent à toi pour dire l’‘être’ : tout ‘devenir’ veut se faire verbe pour que tu lui apprennes à parler…”) Telle est mon expérience de I’inspiration : je ne doute pas qu’il faille remonter à des milliers d’années pour trouver quelqu’un qui soit en droit de me dire : ‘’C’est aussi la mienne.’’ » [...]

C’est pourquoi il ne signe plus ses derniers messages que par des noms symboliques : « Le Monstre », « Le Crucifié », « L’Antéchrist », « Dionysos », depuis qu’il sent qu’il ne fait qu’un avec les puissances supérieures à ce monde et qu’il se considère lui-même non plus comme un homme, mais comme une puissance et une mission. « Je ne suis pas un homme, je suis une dynamite. » «Je suis un événement de l’histoire universelle, qui coupe en deux l’histoire de l’humanité », s’écrie-t-il dans un accès de suprême hybris, au milieu de l’atroce silence."
(Stefan Zweig, Nietzsche, 1930)

E4.6.6.C_REF3_PH RIMBAUD DREAMS OF A METAPHORIC LANGUAGE THAT WOULD OPERATES A DIRECT TRANSFER "FROM SOUL TO SOUL”.
"Si le langage est un obstacle à la vérité – et même davantage, si le langage vomit ses mensonges pour décrire le monde – alors le langage est, et a toujours été, un outil qui va contre le dévoilement de ce qui est."
(John Ferguson)

"Trouver une langue; - Du reste, toute parole étant idée, le temps d'un langage universel viendra!
Cette langue sera de l'âme pour l´âme, résumant tout, parfums, sons, couleurs, de la pensée accrochant la pensée et tirant."
(Artur Rimbaud, Lettre à Paul Demeny, 1871)

"Le désir de Rimbaud d'échapper au carquant du language, désir impossible,  explique peut-être l'abandon de la poésie plus tard"
(Pierre Schindler)

E4.7. Liberation through Attention: The "Eye of the Heart". We cannot be "sure we are right," but we can be "free" and "present.”

E4.7.1. Liberation over Truth

E4.7.1.A. The Trap of the "Answer": Critique of the Will to Truth.
The obsession with objective "Truth," logical certainty, and "solving" life is actually a form of submission, arrogance, or a trap that separates us from the vitality of existence.

E4.7.1.A_REF1_PO

EL3.84 "UTOPIA

Island where all becomes clear.

Solid ground beneath your feet.

The only roads are those that offer access.

Bushes bend beneath the weight of proofs.

The Tree of Valid Supposition grows here
with branches disentangled since time immemorial.

The Tree of Understanding, dazzlingly straight and simple,
sprouts by the spring called Now I Get It.

The thicker the woods, the vaster the vista:
the Valley of Obviously.

If any doubts arise, the wind dispels them instantly.

Echoes stir unsummoned
and eagerly explain all the secrets of the worlds.

On the right a cave where Meaning lies.

On the left the Lake of Deep Conviction.
Truth breaks from the bottom and bobs to the surface.

Unshakable Confidence towers over the valley.
Its peak offers an excellent view of the Essence of Things.

For all its charms, the island is uninhabited,
and the faint footprints scattered on its beaches
turn without exception to the sea.

As if all you can do here is leave
and plunge, never to return, into the depths.

Into unfathomable life."
(Wislawa Szymborska, from A large number, 1976 - Translated by S. Baranczak & C. Cavanagh)

E4.7.1.A_REF2_LIT

EL3.85. "NOTHING IS EVER SOLVED. Solving is an illusion. There are moments of spontaneous brightness, when the mind appears emancipated, but that is mere epiphany. [...]
One cannot approximate truth, add nor take away, for there is no one on earth like the true shepherd and there is nothing in heaven like the suffering of real life."
(Patti Smith, Year of the monkey)

E4.7.1.A_REF3_PH BY ARGUING THAT THE "WILL TO TRUTH" IS ACTUALLY A WILL TO "SUBMISSION TO THE ESTABLISHED ORDER" AND A "THEOLOGY," DELEUZE EXPLAINS WHY THE PURSUIT OF OBJECTIVE TRUTH CAN BE A TRAP FOR THE SPIRIT.
"On dirait que le savant s’est donné pour modèle le triomphe des forces réactives, et veut y enchaîner la pensée. Il invoque son respect du fait et son amour du vrai. Mais le fait est une interprétation : quel type d’interprétation ? Le vrai exprime une volonté : qui veut le vrai ? Et qu’est-ce qu’il veut, celui qui dit : Je cherche le vrai ? Jamais comme aujourd’hui, on n’a vu la science pousser aussi loin dans un certain sens l’exploration de la nature et de l’homme, mais jamais non plus on ne l’a vue pousser aussi loin la soumission à l’idéal et à l’ordre établis. Les savants, même démocrates et socialistes, ne manquent pas de piété ; ils ont seulement inventé une théologie qui ne dépend plus du cœur"
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche et la philosophie, 1962)

E4.7.1.A_REF4_PH "PÉCHÉ CAPITAL
[...] Je n’ai encore repris aucun des sept péchés capitaux de la tradition. Celui que je voudrais à présent aborder, sans faire partie de la liste canonique, en est peut-être le moins éloigné: ce que les Pères de l'Eglise appelaient l’orgueil. Mais c’est un défaut plus général, plus profond, sans doute aussi moins tonique. Faire preuve de suffisance, ce n’est pas seulement être orgueilleux; c’est aussi être fat, présomptueux, vaniteux, plein de sérieux et d’autosatisfaction, plein de soi ou de la haute idée que l’on s’en fait... C’est le péché de l'imbécile prétentieux, et je ne connais guère d’espèce, même chez les gens intelligents, plus désagréable. Mais c’est aussi le péché qui est à l'origine, bien souvent, de l’abus de pouvoir, de l’exploitation d’autrui, de la bonne conscience haineuse ou méprisante, sans parler du racisme et du sexisme. Le Blanc qui croit appartenir à une race supérieure ou le macho fier de ce qu’il prend pour sa virilité ne sont pas seulement ridicules: ils sont dangereux, et c’est pourquoi il convient de les combattre. Un misanthrope est moins à craindre; c’est qu’il ne prétend pas faire exception et se sait, lui aussi, insuffisant... 
S’agissant des idées, la suffisance devient fanatisme. C’est un dogmatisme haineux ou violent, trop sûr de ses croyances pour tolérer celles des autres. C’est plus que de l’intolérance: c’est vouloir interdire ou supprimer par la force ce qu’on désapprouve ou qui nous donne tort. Disons que c’est une intolérance exacerbée et virtuellement criminelle. On en connaît les effets, en tous temps et en tous pays: massacres, guerres de religions, inquisition, terrorisme, totalitarisme... On ne fait le mal que pour un bien, disais-je, et l’on s’autorisera d’autant plus de mal que le bien paraît plus grand. La foi a fait plus de victimes que la cupidité. L’enthousiasme, plus que l'intérêt. C’est qu’on massacre plus volontiers pour Dieu que pour soi, pour le bonheur de l'humanité plutôt que pour le sien propre. « Tuez-les tous, Dieu ou l'Histoire reconnaîtra les siens... » Fanatisme, crime de masse. C’est le péché qui emplit les camps et allume les bûchers. [...]"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.7.1.A_REF5_PH MANQUE DE LUCIDITE ET D’HUMOUR. C’EST PECHER, DOUBLEMENT, CONTRE L’ESPRIT.
"SÉRIEUX (ESPRIT DE -) 
Se prendre soi-même au sérieux, ou ériger en absolu les valeurs dont on se réclame. C’est oublier le néant qu’on est et qui nous attend, mais aussi sa propre liberté (selon Sartre), sa propre fragilité, sa propre dépendance, sa propre contingence, sa propre vanité - son vide. Bonne conscience et mauvaise foi. L’esprit de sérieux est une défense contre l’angoisse, le dérisoire, le tragique, le néant. C’est se cacher derrière le pouvoir qu’on a, pour ne plus voir le rôle qu’on joue. Derrière les valeurs qu’on défend, pour ne plus percevoir sa propre insuffisance. Derrière ses responsabilités, réelles ou prétendues, pour oublier le petit enfant misérable qu’on demeure. Manque de lucidité et d’humour. C’est pécher, doublement, contre l’esprit.'
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.7.1.B. The Solitude of the Free Spirit: Liberation requires a departure from the "herd." 
The necessity of subjectivity, self-reliance, and the courage to follow one’s internal genius against the consensus of the majority.

E4.7.1.B_REF1_LIT

EL3.136. HE OPENED NEW PATHS - ONLY BECAUSE HE HAD THE COURAGE TO CONTINUE WITHOUT WONDERING IF OTHERS WERE FOLLOWING HIM "When you come to no longer expect an answer, you will finally give so that the other can accept - and rejoice in the gift." And above all, never seek in consensus the gauging of your duty,  verification of the correctness of your commitment: "He opened new paths - only because he had the courage to continue without wondering if others were following him, or even understood him. He had no need of protection against ridicule, which others seek by sharing responsibility, for he had a faith that didn't need any proof."
(Carlo Ossola, In pure loss, Renunciation and gratuity, 2011)

"The myth has always condemned those who 'looked back', no matter what paradise they had left. That explains the shadow on every step that takes you away from your choice."
(Hermann Hesse, Morgenlandfahrer [The Traveler to the Land of Dawn])

E4.7.1.B_REF2_LIT THE HIGHEST CERTAINTY IS NOT INTELLECTUAL VERIFICATION, BUT AN INTERNAL "COURAGE" TO WALK WITHOUT THE MAP OF CONSENSUS.
"Et surtout ne jamais chercher dans le consensus la mesure du devoir, la vérification de la justesse de l’engagement: « Il a frayé de nouveaux chemins - uniquement parce qu’il avait le courage de continuer sans se demander si d’autres le suivaient ou même le comprenaient. II n’avait nul besoin de protection contre le ridicule, que d’autres cherchent par le partage des responsabilités, car il avait une foi qui renonçait aux preuves.»"
(Carlo Ossola à propos de Dag Hammarskjöld)

"Le mythe a toujours condamné ceux qui “ont regardé en arrière”, quel que soit le paradis qu’ils avaient quitté. C’est pourquoi cette ombre sur chaque pas qui t’écarte de ton choix."
(Hermann Hesse)

E4.7.1.B_REF3_PH "TRUTH ALWAYS RESTS WITH THE MINORITY" BECAUSE THE MAJORITY IS COMPOSED OF A "GANG WHO HAVE NO OPINION."
"One can very well eat lettuce before its heart has been formed; still, the delicate crispness of the heart and its lovely frizz are something altogether different from the leaves. It is the same in the world of the spirit. Being too busy has this result: that an individual very, very rarely is permitted to form a heart; on the other hand, the thinker, the poet, or the religious personality who actually has formed his heart, will never be popular, not because he is difficult, but because it demands quiet and prolonged working with oneself and intimate knowledge of oneself as well as a certain isolation. [...]
The evolution of the world tends to show the absolute importance of the category of the individual apart from the crowd… But as yet we have not come very far concretely, though it is recognized in abstracto. That explains why it still impresses people as prideful and overweening arrogance to speak of the separate individual, whereas this precisely is truly human: each and every one is an individual. [...]
Truth always rests with the minority, and the minority is always stronger than the majority, because the minority is generally formed by those who really have an opinion, while the strength of a majority is illusory, formed by the gangs who have no opinion — and who, therefore, in the next instant (when it is evident that the minority is the stronger) assume its opinion, which then becomes that of the majority, i.e., becomes nonsense by having the whole [mass] on its side, while Truth again reverts to a new minority.
In regard to Truth, this troublesome monster, the majority, the public, etc., fares in the same way as we say of someone who is traveling to regain his health: he is always one station behind. [...]
I want people to sit up and take notice, to prevent them from idling away and wasting their lives. Aristocrats take it for granted that a lot of people will always go to waste. But they keep silent about it; they live sheltered lives pretending that all these many, many people simply do not exist. That is what is ungodly about the superior status of the aristocrats; in order to be comfortable themselves they do not even call attention to anything. [...]
I will call the attention of the crowd to their own ruination. And if they don’t want to see it willingly, I shall make them see it by fair means or foul. Please understand me — or, at least, do not misunderstand me. I do not intend to beat them… I will force them to beat me. Thus I actually compel them. For if they begin to beat me, they will probably pay attention; and if they kill me, they most definitely will pay attention, and I shall have won an absolute victory. [...]
Nobody wants to be this strenuous thing: an individual; it demands an effort. But everywhere services are readily offered through the phony substitute: a few! Let us get together and be a gathering, then we can probably manage. Therein lies mankind’s deepest demoralization."
(Søren Kierkegaard, The Diary of Søren Kierkegaard)

E4.7.1.B_REF4_PH WE MUST ESTABLISH A "PATTERN WITHIN" TO JUDGE OUR ACTIONS, RATHER THAN RELYING ON THE "SENTENCE" OF OTHERS: "I HAVE MY OWN LAWS AND MY COURT TO JUDGE MYSELF."
« Nous autres principalement, qui vivons une vie privee, qui n'est en  montre qu'à nous, devons avoir estably un patron au dedans, auquel toucher [par rapport auquel évaluer] nos actions : et selon iceluy nous caresser tantost, tantost nous chastier. J'ay mes loix et ma cour, pour juger de moy, et m'y adresse plus qu'ailleurs. Je restrains bien selon autruy mes actions, mais je ne les estends que selon moy. Il n'y a que vous qui scache si vous estes láche et cruel, ou loyal et devotieux : les autres ne vous voyent point, ils vous devinent par conjectures incertaines : ils voyent, non tant vostre naturel, que vostre art. Par ainsi, ne vous tenez pas à leur sentence, tenez vous à la vostre. »
(Montaigne, Les Essais, Du repentir, III, II)

E4.7.1.B_REF5_PH P_Lou Andreas-Salomé

VOIR LE NARCISSISME NON COMME UN VICE (VANITE), MAIS COMME LA "FOI EN SOI" NECESSAIRE POUR RESISTER AU CONFORMISME. Ce retour à soi donne la capacité politique et morale de "dire non à la barbarie" et d'affronter le "mur de la lâcheté".
"Lou Andreas-Salomé : « La morale est l’acte d’extrême audace du narcissisme. »
Lou Andreas-Salomé comprends que ce dont l'homme d'aujourd'hui manque c'est de narcissisme et c'est ce manque qui le rend si faible et à la merci, hier comme aujourd'hui, de toutes les formes de manipulation. Nous ne le savons pas car nous sommes aveuglés par toute une idéologie qui affirme que Narcisse est le nom d'une faute indiscutable : être égocentrique, vaniteux, ne penser qu'à soi. Mais comment le nom de la première fleur du printemps pourrait-il désigner une perversion ? C'est d'autant plus étranges que Narcisse, dans toute l'histoire de l'Occident, n'a jamais symbolisé un être amoureux de lui-même au point d'en mourir. Narcisse symbolise l'éclosion de la vie qui donne la force de dire non à la barbarie et au mensonge, de refuser le conformisme.
Face à une injustice vous hésitez quant au comportement à adopter. C'est là qu'il faut revenir à Narcisse, c'est en vous retrouvant, en faisant confiance à ce que vous pensez, à ce que vous voyez, que vous pouvez trouver la force de dire non et d'intervenir. Les résistants, aujourd'hui comme hier doivent avoir suffisamment de foi en eux, de confiance, pour aller contre leur immédiate sécurité et affronter le mur de la lâcheté. Lou-Andréa Salomé a raison, la morale est l'acte d'extrême audace du narcissisme, son aventure exemplaire. Mais faute de le savoir, inviter à tuer en nous le narcissisme, à perdre confiance en nos ressources, à nous sentir coupable, nous favorisons l'immoralité, la violence et la haine. Être narcissique est pourtant moins difficile qu'on ne le croit, il suffit de commencer par rencontrer pleinement ce que nous sommes là maintenant. Vous vous rencontrez avec confiance et tendresse, vous vous reliez à vous, à ce qui en vous est là vivant, à ce qui en vous demande à croître, à se déployer, à grandir. Vous vous prenez dans vos bras, vous vous invitez à vous engager dans le monde, comme un oiseau s'engage dans le ciel."
(Fabrice Midal, 3 minutes de philosophie pour redevenir humain, diffusé sur France Culture le 12 juillet 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/3-minutes-de-philosophie-pour-redevenir-humain/lou-andreas-salome-la-morale-est-l-acte-d-extreme-audace-du-narcissisme-8493152

E1.6.B.1.5_REF1_PH.wE4.7.1.B.

"IF ONE LISTENS TO THE FAINTEST BUT CONSTANT SUGGESTIONS OF HIS GENIUS, which are certainly true, he sees not to what extremes, or even insanity, it may lead him; and yet that way, as he grows more resolute and faithful, his road lies. The faintest assured objection which one healthy man feels will at length prevail over the arguments and customs of mankind. No man ever followed his genius till it misled him. Though the result were bodily weakness, yet perhaps no one can say that the consequences were to be regretted, for these were a life in conformity to higher principles. If the day and the night are such that you greet them with joy, and life emits a fragrance like flowers and sweet-scented herbs, is more elastic, more starry, more immortal — that is your success. All nature is your congratulation, and you have cause momentarily to bless yourself. The greatest gains and values are farthest from being appreciated. We easily come to doubt if they exist. We soon forget them. They are the highest reality. Perhaps the facts most astounding and most real are never communicated by man to man. The true harvest of my daily life is somewhat as intangible and indescribable as the tints of morning or evening. It is a little star-dust caught, a segment of the rainbow which I have clutched."
(Henry David Thoreau, Walden, 1854)

ADVANCE CONFIDENTLY IN THE DIRECTION OF YOUR DREAMS "I learned this, at least, by my experiment: that if one advances confidently in the direction of his dreams, and endeavors to live the life which he has imagined, he will meet with a success unexpected in common hours. He will put some things behind, will pass an invisible boundary; new, universal, and more liberal laws will begin to establish themselves around and within him; or the old laws be expanded, and interpreted in his favor in a more liberal sense, and he will live with the license of a higher order of beings. In proportion as he simplifies his life, the laws of the universe will appear less complex, and solitude will not be solitude, nor poverty poverty, nor weakness weakness. If you have built castles in the air, your work need not be lost; that is where they should be. Now put the foundations under them."
(Henry David Thoreau, Walden, 1854)

E4.7.1.C. Suspension, Release, and "Dégagement.": Changing the mode of engagement. 
This involves suspending judgment (épochè), "living the questions," and releasing the need for logical conflict.

E4.7.1.C_REF1_PH

EL3.25. “SHALL I TEACH YOU WHAT KNOWLEDGE IS? When you know a thing, to hold that you know it; and when you do not know a thing, to allow that you do not know it. This is knowledge.” 
(The saying of Confucius)

E4.7.1.C_REF2_PO

EL3.52. "I WANT TO BEG YOU, AS MUCH AS I CAN, DEAR SIR, TO BE PATIENT TOWARD ALL THAT IS UNSOLVED IN YOUR HEART AND TO TRY TO LOVE THE QUESTIONS THEMSELVES like locked rooms and like books that are written in a very foreign tongue. Do not now seek the answers, which cannot be given you because you would not be able to live them. And the point is, to live everything. Live the questions now. Perhaps you will then gradually, without noticing it, live along some distant day into the answer. [...]
Your doubt may become a good quality if you train it. It must become knowing, it must become critical. Ask it, whenever it wants to spoil something for you, why something is ugly, demand proofs from it, test it, and you will find it perplexed and embarrassed perhaps, or perhaps rebellious. But don’t give in, insist on arguments and act this way, watchful and consistent, every single time, and the day will arrive when from a destroyer it will become one of your best workers — perhaps the cleverest of all that are building at your life."
(Rainer Maria Rilke,  Letters to a Young Poet)

E4.7.1.C_REF2_PH FRANÇOIS JULLIEN DECRIT LE PASSAGE D'UNE LOGIQUE DE VERITE/CONFLIT (LA "JOUTE", LE "SERMENT", LA "VICTOIRE", LE JUGEMENT BINAIRE "POUR OU CONTRE") A UNE LOGIQUE DE LIBERATION ("DEGAGEMENT", "EVASEMENT", "AMPLEUR").
"Dégagement [...]
Le dégagement, en tant que tel, n’est pas habité par la nostalgie d’un autre monde. Il ne convertit pas à une autre réalité : la distance qu’il prend d’avec le monde ouvre un espacement qui n’est pas dépassement ; il appelle, non pas à une évasion, mais à un évasement de ce monde. Il suffit de se libérer de l’assignation des choses, c’est-à-dire de l’usage déterminé qui y clôt et y confine. [...]
Quelle est la connaissance, en effet, à laquelle donne accès le dégagement ? Ou qu’est-ce qu’une connaissance dégagée, celle-ci devant caractériser la seconde vie ? On ne la définira pas par son objet et sa méthode, mais par son mode d’appréhension et sa disposition d’esprit. Elle est ample, poursuit le Zhuangzi (chap. 2, Guo, p. 51), spacieuse et par conséquent à l’aise [...] ; et non pas « exiguë » et « mesquine », étriquée et s’embarrassant de ses distinctions [...]. Aussi cette connaissance dégagée enflamme-t-elle d’un coup par sa parole, tandis que l’autre, vétilleuse, est verbeuse. Dans ce dernier genre de connaissance, et donc de vie confinée, les gens demeurent, dormants comme éveillés, dans un entremêlement continu avec le dehors qui les tient en une lutte incessante : aussi « indolents », « dissimulés », ou « secrets », sont-ils constamment dans l’« anxiété », pour ne pas dire dans l’« angoisse ». Car, au stade de cette connaissance étriquée, on ne cesse de déclencher des jugements pour ou contre « comme le ressort d’une arbalète » ; puis on reste attaché à sa « victoire » comme des conjurés à leur « serment » : cette connaissance décochante omme on décoche une flèche, émettant réactivement ses coups, est le contraire de la connaissance dégagée qui n’a pas le souci de riposter. Or c’est celle-là qu’illustre la joute philosophique, précise le commentateur, où chaque école (les mohistes/les confucéens) ne cesse d’affirmer ce que l’autre nie et de nier ce que l’autre affirme. Chacun s’y enfonce et s’y enlise, s’y ; scelle » et y absorbe son énergie jusqu’à s’épuiser l’esprit s’y retrouve alors aux portes de la mort et plus rien ne lui laisse recouvrer la lumière. Tant il est vrai que les affects et les attitudes les plus diverses se succèdent interminablement en nous, bloqués que nous sommes dans cette étroitesse, aussi naturellement que « la musique sort d’un tube creux » ou que « les vapeurs font germer la moisissure et les champignons »… Et l’on reste dans l’incompréhension du grand renouvellement du monde qui se produit inépuisablement sous nos yeux."
(François Jullien, Une seconde vie, 2017)

E4.7.1.C_REF3_PO RIORITIZE "LIVING" THE QUESTIONS OVER INTELLECTUALLY "SEARCHING" FOR ANSWERS.
"I beg you, to have patience with everything unresolved in your heart and to try to love the questions themselves as if they were locked rooms or books written in a very foreign language. Don’t search for the answers, which could not be given to you now, because you would not be able to live them. And the point is to live everything. Live the questions now. Perhaps then, someday far in the future, you will gradually, without even noticing it, live your way into the answer."
(Rainer Maria Rilke, Letters to a young poet)

E4.7.1.C_REF4_PH NIETZSCHE POSE QUE LA VERITE EST "HOSTILE A LA VIE" (CAR LA VIE REPOSE SUR L'ERREUR/L'INJUSTE). LA SOLUTION A CE DESESPOIR N'EST PAS UNE NOUVELLE THEORIE, MAIS UN TEMPERAMENT ("UNE AME ASSUREE, DOUCE ET AU FOND JOYEUSE"). La libération n'est pas intellectuelle, elle est caractérielle.
"POUR TRANQUILLISER. — Mais notre philosophie ne devient-elle pas ainsi tragédie? La vérité ne devient-elle pas hostile à la vie et au mieux? Une question semble peser sur notre langue et cependant ne pas vouloir être énoncée : peut-on consciemment rester dans la contre-vérité ? ou bien, au cas où il faudrait le faire, la mort n’est-elle pas alors préférable ? Car il n y a plus de devoir; la morale, en tant qu’elle était un devoir, est en effet, par notre genre de considération, aussi bien anéantie que la religion. La connaissance ne peut laisser subsister comme mobiles que plaisir et peine, utilité et dommage mais comment ces mobiles s’arrangeront-ils avec le sens de la vérité ? Eux aussi touchent aux erreurs (puisque, comme il a été dit, ce sont la sympathie et l’aversion et toutes leurs mesures très injustes qui déterminent essentiellement le plaisir et la peine). Toute la vie humaine est profondément enfoncée dans la contre-vérité; l’individu ne peut la tirer de ce puits sans avoir toutes les raisons de prendre en aversion en même temps son passé, sans trouver ses mobiles présents, comme ceux de I’honneur, dépourvus de rime et de raison, sans opposer raillerie et mépris aux passions qui poussent à l’avenir et à un seule manière de penser, entraînant comme conclusion personnelle le désespoir, comme conclusion théorique la dissolution, la séparation, l'anéantissement de soi-même ? Je crois que le coup décisif touchant l’action finale de la connaissance sera donné par le tempérament d’un homme; je pourrais, aussi bien que l’effet décrit et possible dans des natures isolées, en imaginer un autre en vertu duquel naîtrait une vie beaucoup plus simple, plus pure de passions que n’est l’actuelle : si bien que, d’abord, il est vrai, les anciens mobiles de violence auraient encore de la force par suite d’une habitude héréditaire, mais peu à peu, sous l’influence de la connaissance purificatrice, ils s’affaibliraient. On vivrait enfin parmi les hommes et avec soi comme dans la nature, sans louanges, ni reproches, ni enthousiasme, se repaissant comme d’un spectacle de beaucoup de choses dont jusque-là on ne pouvait avoir que la peur. On serait débarasser de l’emphase et l’on ne sentirait plus l’aiguillon de cette idée que l’on n’est pas seulement nature ou qu’on est plus que nature. A la vérité il y faudrait, comme j’ai dit, un bon tempérament, une âme assurée, douce et au fond joyeuse, une disposition qui n’aurait pas besoin d’être sur ses gardes contre les secousses et les éclats soudains et qui, dans ses manifestations, n’aurait rien du ton grondeur et de la mine hargneuse, — odieux caractères, comme on sait, des vieux chiens et des hommes qui sont longtemps restés à la chaîne. Au contraire, un homme affranchi des liens accoutumés de la vie, à point qu’il ne continue à vivre qu’en vue d’améliorer sans cesse sa connaissance, doit renoncer, sans envie ni dépit, à beaucoup de choses : presque à tout ce qui a de la valeur chez les autres hommes ; il doit être satisfait comme de la situation la plus souhaitable, de planer ainsi librement, sans crainte, au-dessus des hommes, des mœurs, des lois et des évaluations traditionnelles des choses. Il aime à communiquer le contentement que lui donne cette situation et il peut n’avoir rien d’autre à communiquer — en quoi il aura, il est vrai, une privation, une abdication de plus. Si, malgré tout, on veut tirer de lui davantage, il renverra, d’un hochement de tête bienveillant, à son frère, le libre homme d’action, sans peut-être celer un peu de raillerie, car cette « liberté » a sa conjoncture propre."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain, Aphorisme 34, 1878)

E4.7.1.C_REF5_PH NIETZSCHE DEFINIT LA LIBERATION COMME LA CAPACITE DE TRAITER SES VERTUS COMME DES "INSTRUMENTS" ET NON DES "MAITRESSES". Le sujet devient souverain sur son "Pour" et son "Contre".
"« II te fallait devenir maître de toi, maître aussi de tes propres vertus. Auparavant elles étaient tes maîtresses; mais elles n’ont le droit d’être que tes instruments à côté d’autres instruments. II te fallait prendre le pouvoir sur ton Pour et Contre et apprendre l’art de les prendre et déprendre selon ton but supérieur du moment. II te fallait apprendre à saisir l’élément de perspective de toute évaluation — le déplacement, la distorsion et l’apparente téléologie des horizons et tout ce qui concerne la perspective; des valeurs opposées et de toutes les pertes intellectuelles dont se fait payer tout Pour et tout Contre. II te fallait apprendre à saisir ce qu’il y a d’injustice nécessaire dans tout Pour et Contre, l’injustice comme inséparable de la vie, la vie même comme conditionnée par la perspective et son injustice. II te fallait avant tout voir de tes yeux où il y a toujours le plus d’injustice, à savoir : là où la vie a son développement le plus mesquin, le plus étroit, le plus pauvre, le plus rudimentaire, et où pourtant elle ne peut faire autrement que de se prendre elle-même pour la fin et la mesure des choses, que d’émietter et de mettre en question furtivement, petitement, assidûment, pour l’amour de sa conservation, ce qui est plus noble, plus grand, plus riche, — il te fallait voir de tes yeux le problème de la hiérarchie, et la façon dont la puissance et le droit et l’étendue de la perspective croissent ensemble à mesure qu’on s’élève. [...]"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain,phorisme 6, 1878)

E4.7.1.C_REF6_PH BARTHES DEFINES THE "GESTURE" OF ÉPOCHE (SUSPENSION OF JUDGMENT) AS A WAY TO "ESCAPE" THE "LOGICAL ARROGANCE" OF THE "SOCIAL SELF". By defining the Zen goal (satori) as a "void flash" where one realizes "there is nothing to see," Barthes aligns the practice with a liberation from the burden of Meaning and Logic, rather than the acquisition of a positive Dogma.
"UNE AUTRE LOGIQUE? UN AUTRE DIALOGUE [...]

Règles Zen de l'anti-pertinence. Ébranlement de la logique du moi-social, ébranlement de la pertinence: cherché, systématisé, pratiqué par le Zen, en vue de produire dans la conscience cette sorte de flash vide qu'est le satori (« illumination »: impropre : on ne voit rien sinon peut-être qu'il n'y a rien à voir). [...]

Suzuki, II, 622

Conseils sur le Zen et le koan:
1. Ne calculez pas selon votre imagination.
2. Ne laissez pas distraire votre attention lorsque le maître lève ses sourcils ou cligne de l'œil.
3. N'essayez pas de tirer un sens de la façon dont le koan est formulé.
4. N'essayez pas de faire une démonstration sur les mots. 
5. Ne pensez pas que le sens du koan doit être saisi là où il est proposé comme objet de pensée.
6. Ne prenez pas le Zen pour un état de simple passivité.
7. Ne jugez pas le koan selon la loi dualiste de lou (sanskrit asti: il est ) et ou (sanskrit nasti: « il n'est pas »).
8. Ne prenez pas le koan comme désignant le vide absolu. 
9. Ne ratiocinez pas sur le koan.
10. Ne laissez pas votre esprit dans l'attitude d'attendre que le satori apparaisse.

4) Le « geste » de l'époché [la suspension du jugement]. Revenons à l'habitus occidental de la réponse à côté: actes moins violents, moins radicaux que le koan Zen; plus proche de la simple fuite: « Se défiler devant l'arrogance logique du partenaire-adversaire » → il s'agit de suspendre le train-train logique où le partenaire (socius, qui incarne la société, la contrainte sociale) veut vous entraîner: véritable épochè de la ligne logique de la chaîne parlée; nous en avons vu des exemples, de Gide à Euryloque; dans ces exemples, je pointe maintenant un geste (de fuite et de désinvolture): ceci veut dire que le non opposé à la « discussion » doit s'accompagner d'une connotation, d'un théâtre (c'est un « geste ») qui en fasse quelque chose d'actif (stoppant l'image du passif-lâche) et d'inattendu (laissant le disputeur col, et un peu ridicule ?). Je formulerai l'épochè sous trois formes de gestes:
a) « Ciao ». Reprenons: Euryloque, se dévêtant et se jetant dans l'Alphée pour fuir les questions qu'on lui posait. Il faut bien voir la réponse (à côté) sous la forme d'un mouvement corporel et on peut dire que tout le scepticisme pyrrhonien (dit empirique, non dogmatique) est né de ce mouvement: Pyrrhon et Timons (et Euryloque): échapper aux subtilités des Sophistes: obsédés et éreintés par ces discussions sans fin: prennent le parti de ne plus répondre à personne → d'où: « je ne sais rien, je ne définis rien ». → Cela (du moins à l'origine, chez Pyrrhon, car ensuite cela se dogmatise) n'implique pas une théorie du non-savoir, de la non-définition, mais seulement la reconduction d'un geste corporel: le geste d'Euryloque, dont la seule expression parlée serait ce mot trivial, désinvolte: « Ciao », « Bye-bye » [...]: par dénégation : je suis libre, foutez-moi la paix, pas de comptes à vous rendre [...]"
(Roland Barthes, Le neutre, Cours au Collège de France, 1977-1978)

E4.7.1.D. From Linear Time to Integral Presence.
Liberation is a shift in perception—seeing the "whole" and breaking free from linear time to experience the "ever-present origin."

E4.7.1.D_REF1_PH

EL3.26.F. "SI ON N’ABORDE PAS UN PROBLÈME LIBREMENT, ON ORIENTE LA SOLUTION CONFORMÉMENT À SON CONDITIONNEMENT. Supposons que l’on soit conditionné à supprimer un certain problème, alors l'approche est conditionnée et le problème est déformé, tandis qu’au contraire si on l’aborde sans mobile et de très près, alors la réponse est contenue dans le problème, une réponse qui ne s’écarte pas du problème. 
C’est très important de voir comment on aborde un problème, que ce soit un problème politique, religieux ou de relation personnelle. II y a tant de problèmes, on est accablé de problèmes. Même la méditation devient un problème. On ne regarde jamais vraiment ses problèmes. Alors, pourquoi vit-on accablé de problèmes? Des problèmes que l’on n’a pas compris ou dissous et qui déforment toute notre vie. C’est très important d’être conscient de la façon dont on aborde un problème. On l’observe sans essayer d’appliquer une solution; c’est-à-dire, voir dans le problème lui-même, la réponse. Et cela dépend de la façon dont on l’aborde, de la façon dont on le regarde. C’est très important d’être conscient de son conditionnement quand on l’aborde et d’être dégagé de ce conditionnement. Qu’est-ce voir?"
(Krishnamurti, La flamme de l’attention, 1983)

E4.7.1.D_REF1.1_PH

EL3.26.F.1. "NOUS ALLONS, MAINTENANT, DISCUTER DE LA FAÇON D’ABORDER LA PEUR ET DE LA PERCEPTION DE LA TOTALITÉ DE SON CONTENU. C’est important d’être conscient de Ia façon dont vous abordez ce fardeau que l’homme porte depuis des millénaire. C’est plus facile de percevoir quelque chose à l’extérieur de vous, comme un arbre, comme une rivière ou comme le ciel bleu, sans nommer, en ne faisant qu’observer, mais pouvez-vous vous regarder vous-même, regarder la totalité du contenu de votre conscience, la totalité de votre esprit, votre être, votre démarche, votre pensée, vos sensations, votre découragement, de telle sorte qu’il n’y ait aucune division entre tout cela et vous. 
S’il n’y a pas de division, il n’y a pas de conflit. Là où il y a division, le conflit est inévitable: c’est une loi. Donc, en nous, y a-t-il une division comme celle entre l’observateur et la chose observée? Si l’observateur aborde la peur, l’envie ou la souffrance comme différentes de lui-même et qu’il doive les résoudre, les supprimer, les comprendre, les dépasser, alors la division et la lutte s’installent. 
Alors, comment abordez-vous la peur? La percevez-vous sans aucune distorsion, sans réaction de fuite, de suppression, d’explication même d’analyse?"
(Krishnamurti, La flamme de l’attention, 1983)

E4.7.1.D_REF4_LIT

EL3.126. "ORIGIN IS EVER-PRESENT. It is not a beginning, since all beginning is linked with time. And the present is not just the “now,” today, the moment or a unit of time. It is ever-originating, an achievement of full integration and continuous renewal. Anyone able to “concretize,” i.e., to realize and effect the reality of origin and the present in their entirety, supersedes “beginning” and “end” and the mere here and now. [...]
As the origin before all time is the entirety of the very beginning, so too is the present the entirety of everything temporal and time-bound, including the effectual reality of all time phases: yesterday, today, tomorrow, and even the pre-temporal and timeless."
(Jean Genser, The Ever-Present Origin, 1949)

E4.7.1.D_REF4.1_LIT

EL3.126.A. A NEW CONSCIOUSNESS AND A NEW REALITY "The condition of today’s world cannot be transformed by technocratic rationality, since both technocracy and rationality are apparently nearing their apex; nor can it be transcended by preaching or admonishing a return to ethics and morality, or in fact, by any form of return to the past.
We have only one option: in examining the manifestations of our age, we must penetrate them with sufficient breadth and depth that we do not come under their demonic and destructive spell. We must not focus our view merely on these phenomena, but rather on the humus of the decaying world beneath, where the seedlings of the future are growing, immeasurable in their potential and vigor. Since our insight into the energies pressing toward development aids their unfolding, the seedlings and inceptive beginnings must be made visible and comprehensible. [...]
[A new consciousness and a new reality, Gebser cautions, can only arise from a more intimate and examined knowledge of the past and its pitfall (from Maria Popova, The Marginalian)] — a consciousness of the whole, an integral consciousness encompassing all time and embracing both man’s distant past and his approaching future as a living present [...]
If our consciousness, that is, the individual person’s awareness, vigilance, and clarity of vision, cannot master the new reality and make possible its realization, then the prophets of doom will have been correct. Other alternatives are an illusion; consequently, great demands are placed on us, and each one of us have been given a grave responsibility, not merely to survey but to actually traverse the path opening before us. [...]"
(Jean Genser, The Ever-Present Origin, 1949)

"Gebser argues that it is only by rendering transparent “the concealed and latent aspects” of our dawning future, in those vital periods of transition, that we come to fully “clarify our own experiencing of the present.” Affirming humanistic contemporary Erich Fromm’s insistence on the need to move beyond the simplistic divide of optimism and pessimism, Gebser calls for “overcoming the mere antithesis of affirmation and negation” as essential to this evolution in consciousness by which we can attain the new reality — “a reality functioning and effectual integrally, in which intensity and action, the effective and the effect co-exist; one where origin… blossoms forth anew; and one in which the present is all-encompassing and entire.
He adds an essential disclaimer [...]:
Before we can discern the new, we must know the old.”
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian, review of Jean Genser's The Ever-Present Origin, 1949)

E4.7.1.D_REF4.2_LIT

EL3.126.A.1. A PERSON FOR WHOM THE PRESENT IS NO MORE THAN A TIME-BOUND MOMENT, WILL NOT PARTICIPATE IN THE EMERGING TRANSFORMATION "At a time when mankind is suffering… from scepticism and suspicion or… from ideological anxiety, anyone audacious enough to recall some basic values that run counter to the superficial course of events and seem to lack any immediate “efficiency” in a world given over to quantification is all too readily dismissed as being, in the familiar clichés, “unrealistic” and “idealistic.” These are perhaps the most innocuous of the terms used by those who confuse realism with material utility and thus fall prey to a dualistic fallacy even where it has nothing to do with idealism. As a type, they lack perception of those powers of which realism and idealism are only conceptual and classifying aspects. In addition there is the obstinacy resisting change which emerges even where it is obvious that it is unable to resolve an intractable problem. A person for whom the present, even during his or her finest hours, is no more than a time-bound moment, will not participate in the emerging transformation. Only those will succeed for whom the present becomes a time-free origin, a perpetual plenitude and source of life and spirit from which all decisive constellations and formations are completed."
(Jean Genser, The Ever-Present Origin, 1949)

E4.7.1.D_REF2_PH KRISHNAMURTI NOUS INCITE A REMPLACER LA QUETE DE VERITE PAR L'UNITE DE LA CONSCIENCE. Pour lui la vérité n'est pas une conquête intellectuelle mais un dévoilement immédiat par la libération du regard.
"Si on n’aborde pas un problème librement, on oriente la solution conformément à son conditionnement. Supposons que l’on soit conditionné à supprimer un certain problème, alors l'approche est conditionnée et le problème est déformé, tandis qu’au contraire si on l’aborde sans mobile et de très près, alors la réponse est contenue dans le problème, une réponse qui ne s’écarte pas du problème. 
C’est très important de voir comment on aborde un problème, que ce soit un problème politique, religieux ou de relation personnelle. II y a tant de problèmes, on est accablé de problèmes. Même la méditation devient un problème. On ne regarde jamais vraiment ses problèmes. Alors, pourquoi vit-on accablé de problèmes? Des problèmes que l’on n’a pas compris ou dissous et qui déforment toute notre vie. C’est très important d’être conscient de la façon dont on aborde un problème. On l’observe sans essayer d’appliquer une solution; c’est-à-dire, voir dans le problème lui-même, la réponse. Et cela dépend de la façon dont on l’aborde, de la façon dont on le regarde. C’est très important d’être conscient de son conditionnement quand on l’aborde et d’être dégagé de ce conditionnement. Qu’est-ce voir? [...]

"Nous allons, maintenant, discuter de la façon d’aborder la peur et de la perception de la totalité de son contenu. C’est important d’être conscient de Ia façon dont vous abordez ce fardeau que l’homme porte depuis des millénaire. C’est plus facile de percevoir quelque chose à l’extérieur de vous, comme un arbre, comme une rivière ou comme le ciel bleu, sans nommer, en ne faisant qu’observer, mais pouvez-vous vous regarder vous-même, regarder la totalité du contenu de votre conscience, la totalité de votre esprit, votre être, votre démarche, votre pensée, vos sensations, votre découragement, de telle sorte qu’il n’y ait aucune division entre tout cela et vous. 
S’il n’y a pas de division, il n’y a pas de conflit. Là où il y a division, le conflit est inévitable: c’est une loi. Donc, en nous, y a-t-il une division comme celle entre l’observateur et la chose observée? Si l’observateur aborde la peur, l’envie ou la souffrance comme différentes de lui-même et qu’il doive les résoudre, les supprimer, les comprendre, les dépasser, alors la division et la lutte s’installent. 
Alors, comment abordez-vous la peur? La percevez-vous sans aucune distorsion, sans réaction de fuite, de suppression, d’explication même d’analyse?"
(Krishnamurti, La flamme de l’attention, 1983)

E4.7.1.D_REF3_PH KRISHNAMURTI STATES THAT "NO PATH LEADS TO TRUTH". Truth is not an end goal to be reached, but an immediate reality encountered only when the mind is liberated from "direction."
"Les religions du monde ont complètement perdu leur signification. Tous les intelIectuels dans le monde, les évitent, les fuient. Ainsi, quand on utilise les mots « l’esprit religieux », comme le fait souvent l’orateur, ils demandent « Pourquoi utilisez-vous le mot religieux? » Étymologiquement, le sens premier de ce mot n’est pas très clair. A l’origine, il signifiait un état de relation avec ce qui est noble, avec ce qui est grand; et pour cela il fallait vivre une vie très laborieuse, scrupuleuse et honnête. Mais tout cela a disparu; nous avons perdu notre intégrité. Si vous écartez ce que sont devenues toutes les traditions religieuses actuelles, avec leurs images et leurs symboles, alors qu’est-ce que la religion? Pour découvrir ce qu’est un esprit religieux, on doit d’abord découvrir ce qu’est la vérité; aucun chemin ne mène à la vérité. Il n’y a pas de chemin. Quand on a de la compassion, avec son intelligence, on rencontre ce qui est éternellement vrai. Mais il n’y a pas de direction. II n’y a pas de capitaine pour nous diriger sur cet océan de la vie. En tant qu’être humain, nous devons le découvrir. On ne peut appartenir à aucun culte, à aucun groupe si l’on veut découvrir la vérité. L’esprit religieux n’appartient à aucune organisation, à aucun groupe, à aucune secte; il a la qualité d’un esprit global. 
Un esprit religieux est un esprit qui est totalement libre de tout attachement, de toute conclusion et de tout concept, il ne s’intéresse qu’à ce qui a vraiment lieu et pas à ce qui devrait être. II s’occupe chaque jour de sa vie, de ce qui arrive réellement à la fois extérieurement et intérieurement ; il comprend tout ce problème complexe de la vie. L’esprit religieux est libre de tout préjugé, de toute tradition, de tout sens de direction. Pour rencontrer la vérité, vous devez avoir un esprit clair, pas un esprit confus. [...]"
(Krishnamurti, La Flamme de l’attention, 1983)

E1.7.C.1.1_REF3_PH.wE4.7.1.D.

 DID YOU EVER EXPERIENCE SUCH A LEVEL OF CONSCIOUSNESS? WILLIAM BLAKE DID AT AGE 31.
"Along with the consciousness of the cosmos there occurs an intellectual enlightenment or illumination which alone would place the individual on a new plane of existence — would make him almost a member of a new species. To this is added a state of moral exaltation, an indescribable feeling of elevation, elation, and joyousness, and a quickening of the moral sense, which is fully as striking and more important both to the individual and to the race than is the enhanced intellectual power. With these come, what may be called a sense of immortality, a consciousness of eternal life, not a conviction that he shall have this, but the consciousness that he has it already. [...]
The person who passes through this experience will learn in the few minutes, or even moments, of its continuance more than in months or years of study, and he will learn much that no study ever taught or can teach. Especially does he obtain such a conception of THE WHOLE, or at least of an immense WHOLE, as dwarfs all conception, imagination or speculation, springing from and belonging to ordinary self consciousness, such a conception as makes the old attempts to mentally grasp the universe and its meaning petty and even ridiculous."
(Maurice Bucke, Cosmic Consciousness: A Study in the Evolution of the Human Mind)

Drawing on the memoirs, biographies, and letters of historical figures, he goes on to compose a kind of ledger of such spiritual giants who have reported experiences indicative of cosmic consciousness, noting next to each person the age at which they underwent the illumination. Among them he lists:
"Francis Bacon (30)
William Blake (31)
Blaise Pascal (31)
Honoré de Balzac (32)
Walt Whitman (34)
Gautama Buddha (35)
Edward Carpenter (37)
Baruch Spinoza (45)"
(Maria Popova's review on Maurice Bucke's Cosmic Consciousness: A Study in the Evolution of the Human Mind)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2019/04/11/cosmic-consciousness-maurice-bucke/?mc_cid=2e6be28c14&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E4.7.1.E. The Aesthetics of Existence: Simplicity, Texture, and "Living."
Liberation results in a return to the immediate "texture" of life. It is about "living everything," finding the sacred in the mundane, and realizing that the search was circular—we find what we already are.

E4.7.1.E_REF1_PH POUR VLADIMIR JANKELEVITCH, IL NE S'AGIT PAS D'ACQUERIR UNE VERITE EXTERIEURE, MAIS DE REALISER UNE PRESENCE INTERIEURE DEJA LA.
"Console-toi, puisque ta recherche est à elle seule une trouvaille, puisque la quête est déjà une première solution; car si la créature doit chercher pour trouver, il faut précisément qu’elle ait déjà trouvé pour chercher. [...]

"Mais ce dilemme était peut-être un sophisme. Voici en effet quatre formules différentes traduisant ce même paradoxe de la nostalgie : On peut chercher ce que d’une certaine manière on a déjà trouvé; on peut désirer ce que déjà l’on possède; on peut apprendre ce que l’on sait déjà, — et même on n’apprend vraiment quelque chose que de cette manière-là ; non pas en « apprenant », mais en « réalisant »; on peut devenir ce que l’on est. Et voici la cinquième forme de cette pétition de principe : pour se rappeler il faut déjà se souvenir, la mnémotechnie secondant le rappel sans suppléer le souvenir, c’est-à-dire remédiant à l’oubli quidditatif mais non pas à l’oubli ontique ou quodtatif. 
En fait, le cercle « vicieux » était un cercle vertueux, circulus sanus. Ce cercle n’exclut nullement le progrès."
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, Les Vertus et l’amour, 1970)

E1.6.D.3.7.d.wE4.7.1.E. FOR SPINOZA, TO UNDERSTAND IS TO EXPERIENCE THE ETERNAL ESSENCE OF THINGS

E4.7.1.E_REF2_PH "La douceur. Dernier mot (provisoire) de la délicatesse 
[...] J'appellerai volontiers le refus non violent de la réduction, l'esquive de la généralité par des conduites inventives, inattendues, non paradigmatisables, la fuite élégante et discrète devant le dogmatisme, bref le principe de délicatesse, je l'appellerai en dernière instance: la douceur. Aussi, personnellement, je ne trouve nullement étonnant que l'une des orientations philosophiques qui a le plus d'affinité avec le Neutre, à savoir le pyrrhonisme, ait pu être définie par la douceur: « La douceur est le dernier mot du scepticisme », et Diogène Laërce: « Certains disent que les Sceptiques déclaraient que l'apatheia était le but, mais d'autres que c'était la douceur. » [...]

Je reviens sur Délicatesse parce que j'ai l'impression persistante que je n'ai pas bien expliqué pourquoi je donnais tant d'importance à tous les protocoles sophistiqués du thé japonais. Je reviens donc sur la scintillation. Minutie. En sortant, le soir, au crépuscule, en recevant avec intensité des détails infimes, parfaitement futiles, de la rue: un menu écrit à la craie sur la vitre d'un café (coquelet purée, 16 francs 50 - rognons crème fraîche, 16 francs 10), un tout petit prêtre en soutane remontant la rue Médicis, etc., j'ai eu cette intuition vive (pour moi le crépuscule urbain a une grande force de netteté, d'activation, c'est presque une drogue) que descendre dans l'infiniment futile, cela permettait d'avouer la sensation de la vie → (c'est en somme une règle romanesque). → La délicatesse est donc du côté du vivant, de ce qui fait sentir la vie, de ce qui en active la perception: la saveur de la vie toute pure, la jouissance d'être vivant → sûr, il faut s'entendre sur vie, mot à tout faire → bien la vie: 1) comme puissance, vouloir-saisir, vouloir-jouir: celle-là n'a que faire de la délicatesse, elle la méprise, la rejette du côté du décadent, du déliquescent, de l'exténué, de ce qui va mourir; 2) mais aussi, la vie comme durée: ce dont la durée est jouissance durée de la vie: valeur Tao (cf. la magie d'immortalité du corps réel): l'infiniment futile devient alors comme le grain même de cette durée vitale → délicatesse = étoffe de la vie dans son grain."
(Roland Barthes, Le neutre, Cours au Collège de France, 1977-1978)

E4.7.1.E_REF3_PH TCH'AN AS A WISDOM WHERE "A GOOD IDEA IS NEVER AS GOOD AS NO IDEA AT ALL."
"TCH'AN 
Le bouddhisme, né en Inde, se répandit peu à peu dans toute l’Asie. II parvint en Chine vers le VIe siècle de notre ère, où il prit, comme ailleurs, une couleur particulière. Le tch’an, qui comporte lui-même plusieurs courants, est sa version chinoise. II donnera le sôn en Corée, le zen au Japon. C’est comme une synthèse, mais étonnamment concrète et libre, entre le bouddhisme et le taoïsme: la doctrine importe moins que la pratique (tch’an vient du sanskrit dhyâna, qui signifie « méditation »), la pratique moins que l’attention qu’on y met, l'attention moins que la simplicité, la simplicité moins que rien... « Une bonne idée, disait Zhaozhou, n’est jamais aussi bonne que pas d’idée du tout. » Et, à un disciple qui lui demandait: « Quel est le sens vivant du tch’an ? », il répondit: « Le cyprès, au fond de la cour. » On dira que cela ne fait pas sens, et c’est en effet, me semble-t-il, ce qu’il faut comprendre. Pourquoi interpréter, quand il suffit de voir ? Pas besoin pour cela de gourou, sinon pour se libérer de tous. Linji: « Si vous rencontrez le bouddha, tuez-le! » C’est le contraire de l'idéalisme, du dogmatisme, de la dévotion, comme une sagesse qui culmine au point même où elle s’abolit. Aussi a-t-on parlé à son propos de mysticisme, de quiétisme, de cynisme (au sens de Diogène), de réalisme, de dépouille, de matérialisme, de liberté, de crudité, de provocation, d’iconoclasme, de blasphème, de spiritualité impie, de sagesse sans foi ni loi... Le maître tch’an ne croit en rien. C’est ce qui le distingue de ses disciples, qui croient au tch’an et en la maîtrise. Même la méditation, alors, n’est qu’un piège de plus: « Ils sont assis comme s’ils étaient morts, attendant l’illumination! » Le maître, lui, n’attend rien: il se contente, simplement, de vivre."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E4.7.2. Adaequatio: The Eye of the Heart

E4.7.2.A. Rational analysis and the bodily senses are insufficient for perceiving higher levels of reality.

E4.7.2.A_REF1_PO

EL3.131. "GOOD ADVICE
If you have understanding and a heart, then show only one of them;
You will be condemned for both, if you show both at the same time."
(Friedrich Hölderlin)

E4.7.2.A_REF2_LIT

EL3.60. NICK CAVE FINDS ATHEISM LIMITING DUE TO ITS INSISTENCE ON CERTAINTY AND PREFERS THE CREATIVE AND OPEN-ENDED INQUIRY INTO THE DIVINE. Cave's belief is not about definitive answers but about the ongoing exploration of faith, which he finds essential for his creative process and personal fulfillment.
"As an atheist I find other people’s belief in a god both incomprehensible and fascinating. Is there any way you can explain your faith?
ALI, LONDON, UK

[...] 

Dear Ali, Maggie, João and Peter and the many people who have asked similar God related questions.

I’ve been circling around the idea of God for decades. It’s been a slow creep around the periphery of His Majesty, pen in hand, trying to write God alive. Sometimes, I think, I have almost succeeded. The more I become willing to open my mind to the unknown, my imagination to the impossible and my heart to the notion of the divine, the more God becomes apparent. I think we get what we are willing to believe, and that our experience of the world extends exactly to the limits of our interest and credence. I am interested in the idea of possibility and uncertainty. Possibility, by its very nature, extends beyond provable facts, and uncertainty propels us forward. I try to meet the world with an open and curious mind, insisting on nothing other than the freedom to look beyond what we think we know.

I think we get what we are willing to believe.

Does God exist? I don’t have any evidence either way, but I am not sure that is the right question. For me, the question is what it means to believe. The thing is, against all my better judgement, I find it impossible not to believe, or at the very least not to be engaged in the inquiry of such a thing, which in a way is the same thing. My life is dominated by the notion of God, whether it is His presence or His absence. I am a believer – in both God’s presence and His absence. I am a believer in the inquiry itself, more so than the result of that inquiry. As an extension of this belief, my songs are questions, rarely answers.

In the end, with all respect, I haven’t the stomach for atheism and its insistence on what we know. It feels like a dead end to me, unhelpful and bad for the business of writing. I share many of the problems that atheists have toward religion – the dogma, the extremism, the hypocrisy, the concept of revelation with its many attendant horrors – I am just at variance with the often self-satisfied certainty that accompanies the idea that God does not exist. It is simply not in my nature. I have, for better or for worse, a predisposition toward perverse and contradictory thinking. Perhaps this is something of a curse, but the idea of uncertainty, of not knowing, is the creative engine that drives everything I do. I may well be living a delusion, I don’t know, but it is a serviceable one that greatly improves my life, both creatively and otherwise.

So, do I believe in God? Well, I act like I do, for my own greater good. Does God exist? Maybe, I don’t know. Right now, God is a work in progress.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #11 / DECEMBER 2018)

Read it on The Red Hand Files: https://www.theredhandfiles.com/belief-in-a-god-explain-your-faith/

E4.7.2.A_REF3_LIT

EL3.122. "NIGHT, WHEN WORDS FADE AND THINGS COME ALIVE. When the destructive analysis of day is done, and all that is truly important becomes whole and sound again. When man reassembles his fragmentary self and grows with the calm of the trees. [...]
Day belongs to family quarrels, but with the night he who has quarreled finds love again. For love is greater than any wind of words… Love is not thinking, but being… I longed for night and for the rebirth in me of the being that merits love. For night, when my thoughts would be of civilization, of the destiny of man, of the savour of friendship in my native land. For night, so that I may yearn to serve some overwhelming purpose which at this moment I cannot define. For night, so that I may advance a step towards fixing it in my unmanageable language. I longed for night as the poet might do, the true poet who feels himself inhabited by a things obscure but powerful, and who strives to erect images like ramparts round the thing in order to capture it. To capture it in the snare of images."
(Antoine de Saint-Exupéry, Flight to Arras)

E1.7.D.6.5.e_REF1_LIT.wE4.7.2.A.

ULRICH IS TORN BETWEEN TWO APPROACHES TO LIFE: A FIERCE QUEST FOR PRECISION AND ACTION ON THE ONE HAND, AND A MORE DREAMY AND INTUITIVE DIMENSION ON THE OTHER. He struggles to reconcile these two aspects, but often finds himself in conflict. He must decide whether to live an ordinary life with attainable goals or to take his seemingly impossible aspirations seriously.
"The two trees of life. Ulrich called for the creation of a General Secretariat of Soul and Precision. [...] 
This need to attack and dominate life had always been very visible in Ulrich, appearing in the form of a rejection of the established order, a shifting aspiration for a new order, a moral or logical demand, or simply the need to keep his body in shape. Everything Ulrich had called over the years existentialism, a sense of possibility, imaginative precision as opposed to pedantic precision; everything he had wished for: that we should invent history, that we should experience the history of ideas instead of universal history, that we should take possession of what we cannot fully realise, and that at last one should live, perhaps not as a human being, but as a character in a book, stripped of all that is unimportant, so that the rest of the world forms a magical unity - all these variations of his thought, which by their extraordinary intransigence made them truly hostile to reality, had in common that they wanted to act on reality with an obvious and implacable eagerness.

More difficult to distinguish, because closer to the realm of shadow and dream, were the elements of the other tree in whose image his life was reflected. At its root, no doubt, was the deep memory of a childhood relationship with the world, of trust and abandonment; and this feeling had been prolonged by the intuition of having once glimpsed an immense land, later reduced to a little soil in the flowerpot where morality cultivates its miserable plants. [...] Perhaps this inactive half of his being had manifested itself above all in the involuntary conviction that the usefulness of the active and restless half was only temporary, a conviction that it projected like a shadow over the other. In everything he undertook (the passions of the body as well as those of the mind), Ulrich had felt himself a prisoner of preparation, always insufficient; with the years, the sense of necessity in his life had been exhausted like the oil in a lamp. His development had obviously split into two paths, one exposed in broad daylight and the other obscure and closed to traffic. The state of moral stagnation in which he found himself and which had oppressed him for a long time, perhaps more than was reasonable, could only have come about because he had never managed to merge these two paths into one. 
Now, remembering that the impossibility of their fusion had recently manifested itself to him in the tension between literature and reality, between comparison and truth, Ulrich suddenly realized that there was infinitely more to it than a simple accidental inspiration arising from those confused, aimless dialogues he had recently had with the interlocutors least able to understand him. No matter how far back in history we go, we find these two fundamental attitudes, one governed by metaphor, the other by the principle of identity. The principle of identity is the law of lucid thought and action; it manifests itself as much in the unassailable conclusion of a line of reasoning as in the brain of a blackmailer who pushes his victim before him step by step; it is a law imposed by the misery of our life, to which we would succumb if relations could not take an unambiguous form. The metaphor, on the other hand, is the way of associating images that reigns in the dream; it is the flexible logic of the soul to which, in the intuitions of art and religion, the kinship of all things corresponds. Ordinary likes and dislikes, approval and disapproval, admiration, subordination, domination, imitation and their opposites, these various relations of man to man and of man to nature, which are not yet and perhaps never will be purely objective, can only be grasped by metaphor. What is called higher humanity is undoubtedly an attempt to fuse together these two great halves of life, metaphor and truth, after they have been carefully separated. But when, in a metaphor, we separate everything that might be true from what is mere froth, we usually gain only a little truth while destroying all the value of the metaphor. This separation may have been inevitable in intellectual evolution, but it has had the same effect as boiling a substance to thicken it: the evaporation of the best of it in the process. Nowadays one sometimes has the strong impression that moral concepts and rules are nothing more than worn-out metaphors around which the unbearable kitchen smells of humanism waft. [...]

The way back [...] 

Ulrich felt that he finally had to make up his mind: either live like everyone else for an attainable goal, or take these 'impossibilities' seriously".
(Robert Musil, The man without Qualities, Volume 1, 1930)


E1.6.D.1.6.a_REF1_PH.wE4.7.2.A.

"What enables man to know anything at all about the world around him? … Nothing can be known without there being an appropriate “instrument” in the makeup of the knower. This is the Great Truth of “adaequatio” (adequateness), which defines knowledge as adaequatio rei et intellectus — the understanding of the knower must be adequate to the thing to be known. [...]
Our five bodily senses make us adequate to the lowest Level of Being — inanimate matter. But they can supply nothing more than masses of sense data, to “make sense” of which we require abilities or capacities of a different order. We may call them “intellectual senses.” Without them we should be unable to recognize form, pattern, regularity, harmony, rhythm, and meaning, not to mention life, consciousness, and self-awareness. While the bodily senses may be described as relatively passive, mere receivers of whatever happens to come along and to a large extent controlled by the mind, the intellectual senses are mind-in-action, and their keenness and reach are qualities of the mind itself."
(E.F. Schumacher, A Guide for the Perplexed, 1977)

"As regards the bodily senses, all healthy people possess a very similar endowment, but no one could possibly overlook the fact that there are significant differences in the power and reach of people’s minds… Beethoven’s musical abilities, even in deafness, were incomparably greater than mine, and the difference did not lie in the sense of hearing; it lay in the mind. Some people are incapable of grasping and appreciating a given piece of music, not because they are deaf but because of a lack of adaequatio in the mind. The music is grasped by intellectual powers which some people possess to such a degree that they can grasp, and retain in their memory, an entire symphony on one hearing or one reading of the score; while others are so weakly endowed that they cannot get it at all, no matter how often and how attentively they listen to it. For the former, the symphony is as real as it was for the composer; for the latter, there is no symphony: there is nothing but a succession of more or less agreeable but altogether meaningless noises. The former’s mind is adequate to the symphony; the latter’s mind is inadequate, and thus incapable of recognizing the existence of the symphony."
(E.F. Schumacher, A Guide for the Perplexed, 1977)

"For every one of us only those facts and phenomena “exist” for which we posses adaequatio, and as we are not entitled to assume that we are necessarily adequate to everything, at all times, and in whatever condition we may find ourselves, so we are not entitled to insist that something inaccessible to us has no existence at all and is nothing but a phantom of other people’s imaginations. [...]
People say: “Let the facts speak for themselves”; they forget that the speech of facts is real only if it is heard and understood. It is thought to be an easy matter to distinguish between fact and theory, between perception and interpretation. In truth, it is extremely difficult. [...]
When the level of the knower is not adequate to the level (or grade of significance) of the object of knowledge, the result is not factual error but something much more serious: an inadequate and impoverished view of reality. [...]
The level of significance to which an observer or investigator tries to attune himself is chosen, not by his intelligence, but by his faith. The facts themselves which he observes do not carry labels indicating the appropriate level at which they ought to be considered. Nor does the choice of an inadequate level lead the intelligence into factual error or logical contradiction. All levels of significance up to the adequate level — i.e., up to the level of meaning … — are equally factual, equally logical, equally objective, but not equally real.

It is by an act of faith that I choose the level of my investigation; hence the saying “Credo ut intelligam” — I have faith as to be able to understand. If I lack faith, and consequently choose an inadequate level of significance for my investigation, no degree of “objectivity” will save me from missing the point of the whole operation, and I rob myself of the very possibility of understanding."
(E.F. Schumacher, A Guide for the Perplexed, 1977)

"The observer depends not only on the adequateness of his own higher qualities, perhaps “developed” through learning or training; he depends also on the adequateness of his “faith” or, to put it more conventionally, of his fundamental presuppositions and basic assumptions. In this respect he tends to be very much a child of his time and of the civilization in which he has spent his formative years; for the human mind, generally speaking, does not just think: it thinks with ideas, most of which it simply adopts and takes over from its surrounding society. [...]
There is nothing more difficult than to become critically aware of the presuppositions of one’s thought. Everything can be seen directly except the eye through which we see. Every thought can be scrutinized directly except the thought by which we scrutinize. A special effort, an effort of self-awareness, is needed: that almost impossible feat of thought recoiling upon itself — almost impossible but not quite. In fact, that is the power that makes man human and also capable of transcending his humanity. [...]
Only through the “heart” can contact be made with the higher grades of significance and Levels of Being. [...]
For anyone wedded to the materialistic Scientism of the modern age … higher levels of Reality simply do not exist, because his faith excludes the possibility of their existence. He is like a man who, although in possession of a radio receiver, refuses to use it because he has made up his mind that nothing can be obtained from it but atmospheric noises. [...]
Faith is not in conflict with reason, nor is it a substitute for reason. Faith chooses the grade of significance or Level of Being at which the search for knowledge and understanding is to aim. There is reasonable faith and there is unreasonable faith. To look for meaning and purpose at the level of inanimate matter would be as unreasonable an act of faith as an attempt to “explain” the masterpieces of human genius as nothing but the outcome of economic interests or sexual frustration."
(E.F. Schumacher, A Guide for the Perplexed, 1977)

E4.7.2.A_REF4_PH TRUTH IS RELATIVE TO THE LEVEL OF CONSCIOUSNESS: "WHAT IS A PRACTICAL TRUTH ON ONE OF THESE PLANES... CEASES TO BE TRUE AS SOON AS WE RISE TO A HIGHER LEVEL".
"II. Le déterminisme de la nature

En fait , il existe plusieurs plans de notre existence consciente, et ce qui est une vérité pratique sur l’un de ces plans revêt une apparence tout à fait différente et cesse par conséquent d’être vrai dès que nous nous élevons à un niveau plus élevé d’où nous pouvons avoir une vue plus générale.

27 . – Alors que les actions sont faites entièrement par les modes de la nature, l’homme dont le moi est égaré par l’égoïsme pense : « c’est moi qui les fais ».
28 . – Mais, ô guerrier au bras puissant, celui qui connaît les véritables principes des catégories de modes et d’œuvres se rend compte que ce sont les modes qui agissent et réagissent l’un sur l’autre, et il ne se laisse pas enfermer en eux par l’attachement.
29 . – Quant à ceux qui sont égarés par les modes et ne connaissent pas l’ensemble, que celui qui connaît l’ensemble ne trouble pas leurs conceptions mentales."
(La Bhagavad Gitâ, Chapitre troisième, Traduction Herbert, Jean; Commentaires Aurobindo)

E4.7.2.B. The Posture of Nescience: One must empty the self and trust the unknown to become a conduit for truth.
"Nescience" (learned ignorance), receptivity, and faith.

E4.7.2.B_REF1_LIT

EL3.130. "“FAITH IS THE WILLINGNESS TO GIVE OURSELVES OVER, AT TIMES, TO THINGS WE DO NOT FULLY UNDERSTAND,” the poetic physicist Alan Lightman wrote in his magnificent recollection of his transcendent encounter with a young osprey. A generation before him, in differentiating it from belief, Alan Watts defined faith as “an unreserved opening of the mind to the truth, whatever it may turn out to be.”

For those of us animated by what Bertrand Russell called “the will to doubt,” who abide by the light of reason and wish to meet reality on its own terms, the notion of faith can be challenging, for it presupposes a leap beyond reason, beyond will — a surrender to the unknown, to the possibly unknowable. And yet to create anything of substance and originality — be it a song or a painting or a theorem — requires that you give yourself over to something you don’t fully understand, in the act of which you better understand yourself and the world. We may call it the divine. We may call it mystery. We may just call it the life-force of a universe that, as Carl Sagan reminds us across space and time, “will always be much richer than our ability to understand it.”"
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

EL3.130.A. "I THINK THERE IS MORE GOING ON THAN WE CAN SEE OR UNDERSTAND
, and we need to find a way to lean into the mystery of things — the impossibility of things — and recognise the evident value in doing that, and summon the courage it requires to not always shrink back into the known mind. [...]
It seems to me that my best ideas are accidents within a controlled context. You could call them informed accidents. It’s about having a deep understanding of what you’re doing but, at the same time, being free enough to let the chips fall where they may. It’s about preparation, but it’s also about letting things happen… It seems that just by being open, you become a conduit for something else, something magical, something energising. [...]
You have to have faith in your own intuitive process. That is really all you can do. I would say this to all people who are trying to become musicians or writers or artists of any kind: learn as much as you can about your craft, of course, but ultimately trust your own instinctive impulses. Have faith in yourself, so you can stand beside whatever it is you have done and fight for it, because if you can invest it with that faith, then it has its own truth, its own honesty, its own resilient vulnerability, and hence its own value."
(Nick Cave, Faith, Hope and Carnage)

E4.7.2.B_REF2_PH LE ZEN, DANS L’EXEMPTION DE TOUT SENS, ECRIT LES JARDINS, LES GESTES, LES MAISONS, LES BOUQUETS.
"Cette situation est celle-là même où s’opère un certain ébranlement de la personne, un renversement des anciennes lectures, une secousse du sens, déchiré, exténué jusqu’à son vide insubstituable, sans que l’objet cesse jamais d’être signifiant, désirable. L’écriture est en somme, à sa manière, un satori : le satori (l’événement Zen) est un séisme plus ou moins fort (nullement solennel) qui fait vaciller la connaissance, le sujet : il opère un vide de parole. Et c’est aussi un vide de parole qui constitue l’écriture; c’est de ce vide que partent les traits dont le Zen, dans l’exemption de tout sens, écrit les jardins, les gestes, les maisons, les bouquets, les visages, la violence. "
(Roland Barthes, L’empire des signes, 1970)

E4.7.2.B_REF3_PH JANKELEVITCH DISTINGUE L'INNOCENCE DE L'IGNORANCE (LE VIDE). C'EST UNE "NESCIENCE" (DOCTE IGNORANCE), UNE "ENTREVISION" QUI NE POSSEDE PAS LA SCIENCE MAIS QUI EST EN "CONTACT IMMEDIAT AVEC LA REALITE".[L'innocent est] le porte-parole de la vérité et le vecteur des forces cosmiques [...] Nous lisons dans le regard absent de l’innocence la présence totale du monde.
"L’innocence n’est pas un vécu psychologique, mais, à la manière de l’intuition, une limite. L’innocent est miraculeusement ce que les hommes de la vie moyenne sont par éclairs et dans l’instant d’un équilibre acrobatique. Certes une manière d’être innocente est difficile à concevoir, et nous sommes tout prêts à voir en elle une anomalie : c’est ainsi qu’une espèce d’ambiguïté enveloppe la personnalité du prince Mychkine, « l’idiot » de Dostoïevski. L’innocence n’est pas l’ignorance ; ni l’ignorance en général, qui est négativité et simple non-savoir, ni l’ignorance qui est un vide partitif, une interruption ou solution de continuité dans les connaissances, — car ce trou est un élément lacunaire au même titre que l’oubli ; ce trou est une distraction passagère, une petite inculture sans retentissement véritable sur la culture. L’ignorance qui est innocente, nous l’appellerions plutôt nescience : elle peut tenir compagnie à une science profonde ; elle est alors une sorte de gnose, quelque chose comme la docte ignorance des mystiques. L’innocent peut avoir une intuition du mystère ou une entrevision de la réalité sans posséder la science infuse ni les dons divinatoires qu’on lui attribue parfois et qui sont plutôt une spécialité charlatane. L’entrevision n’est pas la vision des visionnaires et des voyants ! Seule l’innocence vraie, celle qui est un régime spirituel de toute l’âme, mérite le nom de simplicité. Car l’innocence est simple, au sens où la simplicité exclut le dédoublement et le repliement de la conscience sur elle-même ; c’est l’heureuse transparence d’une âme qui s’oublie elle-même en sa chose. L’innocent est parfaitement délivré de lui-même ; il ignore ces retours  moroses de l’intérêt-propre qui rendent toute conscience clandestine, méchante et vaniteuse ; la secondarité réflexive que Bergson et Fénelon traquaient sans relâche, elle ne l’effleure même pas. Pas d’arrière-pensées derrière ce front lisse, pas de nuages sur cette candeur. L’innocent coïncide avec son objet en un grand mouvement de sympathie extra-lucide. Tel est le cas de cette sorte d’extase que Bergson appelle perception pure. La chasteté et la fraîcheur d’entrevision chez le peintre ne sont-elles pas extase à leur manière ? Aucune surcharge — souvenirs banals, associations d’idées, concepts verbaux, stéréotypes sociaux, schémas spaciaux - ne vient encombrer ni intercepter le regard du docte ignorant. Mais la conscience de soi habituée aux concepts maniables ignore le mouvement expansif de l’innocence ; par rétroversion soucieuse elle tourne vers l’arrière, c’est-à-dire vers soi, un élan qui devrait nous projeter vers l’avenir ou nous identifier au spectacle du monde… L’innocent, non seulement voit à travers l’opaque d’une vue qui semble radioscopique, mais il est lui-même transparent pour les autres ; non seulement il voit le vrai, mais il est lui-même la vérité elle-même ; lui qui ne se sert pas d’intermédiaire, étant en contact immédiat avec la réalité, il est lui-même notre intermédiaire auprès de celle-ci, il est en personne le médium de la médiation ; il est donc en quelque sorte le porte-parole de la vérité et le vecteur des forces cosmiques. C’est la vérité en chair et en os, comme eût dit Unamuno, qui parle par sa bouche. Narcisse, à qui le miroir renvoie sa propre image, s’éprend absurdement, circulairement d’un reflet de lui-même : déçu par la fausse altérité, par cet autre qui est lui-même, par cet aimé qui est l’amant, Narcisse s’enfonce toujours davantage dans la glu de son souci. Son Alter Ego est toujours Ego ! L’innocent, lui, rend à l’amour sa vocation transitive, au moi l’oubli de soi libérateur. Et nous, qui ne sommes pas innocents mais soucieux, nous lisons dans le regard absent de l’innocence la présence totale du monde ; oui, c’est la totale présence du monde qui dans ces yeux d’enfant nous regarde de son regard serein et limpide. [...]"
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, Quelque part dans l’inachevé, 1978)

E4.7.2.B_REF4_LIT P_Putting your mouth at the very source of Creation

CLOSE YOUR EYES AND PLACE YOUR MOUTH AT THE VERY SOURCE OF CREATION.
« Qu´est –ce que le Tao [...] Au-dessous de toutes formes, ce qui n´a pas de forme, ce qui voit sans yeux, ce qui guide sans savoir, l'ignorance qui est la suprême connaissance. Serait-il erroné d´appeler la Mère ce suc, cette saveur secrète des choses, ce goût de Cause, ce frisson d'authenticité, ce lait qui instruit de la Source ? Ah, nous sommes au milieu de la nature comme une portée de marcassins qui sucent une truie morte ! Que nous dit Lao Tzeu sinon de fermer les yeux et de mettre la bouche à la source même de la Création.» 
(Paul Claudel, Connaissance de l´Est)

E4.7.2.B_REF5_CUR A_Shitao_Contemlative Man

"LA RECEPTIVITE PRECEDE LA CONNAISSANCE"
“Outre mes réflexions, le travail que je dois effectuer consiste plutôt à creuser en moi la capacité à la receptivité. Seule une posture d'accueil – « être le ravin du monde », selon Laozi – et non de conquête, nous permettra, j'en suis persuadé, de recueillir, de la vie ouverte, la part du vrai. Prononçant ce mot, vrai, une interrogation me vient à l'esprit : Je me propose de réfléchir sur la beauté, fort bien ; de là à la pésenter comme la plus haute manifestation de l'univers crée, est-ce légitime ? Si nous nous appuyons sur la tradition platonicienne, dans le monde des Idées, n'est-ce pas le vrai ou la vérité qui doit occuper la première place ? Et immédiatement aprés, l'éminence ne doit-elle pas revenir au bien ou à la bonté ? Cette interrogation, combien légitime, doit en effet demeurer présente tout au long de notre réflexion. Il nous faudra, en développant notre penser sur le beau, tenter de la justifier au fur et à mesure par rapport aux notions de vérité et de bien.» 
(François Cheng, Cinq méditations sur la beauté, 2006)

"Vénérer la Réceptivité (chap, iv) En ce qui concerne la Réceptivité et la Connaissance, c’est la Réceptivité qui précède, et la Connaissance qui suit ; la Réceptivité qui serait postérieure à la Connaissance ne serait pas la véritable Réceptivité. Depuis l’Antiquité jusqu’à nos jours, les plus grands esprits se sont toujours servis de leurs connaissances pour exprimer leurs perceptions et se sont employés à intellectualiser leurs perceptions pour développer leurs connaissances. Lorsque pareille aptitude ne peut s’appliquer qu’à un problème particulier, c’est qu’elle ne repose encore que sur une réceptivité restreinte et une connaissance limitée ; il importe donc d’élargir et de développer celles-ci avant de pouvoir saisir la mesure de l’Unique Trait de Pinceau. Car l’Unique Trait de Pinceau, en effet, embrasse l’universalité des êtres ; la peinture résulte de la réception de l’Encre ; l’Encre de la réception du Pinceau ; le Pinceau de la réception de la main ; la main de la réception de l’esprit : tout comme dans le processus qui fait que le Ciel engendre ce que la Terre ensuite accomplit, ainsi tout est fruit d’une réception. Ainsi, le plus important pour l’Homme, c’est de savoir vénérer : car celui qui est incapable de vénérer les dons de ses perceptions se gaspille lui-même en pure perte, de même que celui qui a reçu le don de la peinture, mais néglige de recréer, se réduit à l’impuissance. O Réceptivité ! Dans la peinture, qu’on la vénère et qu’on la conserve, et qu’on la mette en œuvre de toutes ses forces, sans faille et sans trêve. Comme il est dit au Livre des Mutations : « À l’image de la marche rigoureuse et régulière du Cosmos, l’Homme de bien oeuvre par lui-même sans relâche », et c’est ainsi que véritablement l’on honorera la Réceptivité."
(Shitao cité par François Cheng dans Vide et plein Le langage pictural chinois, 1991)

E4.7.2.B_REF6_PH SIMONE WEIL DEFENDS THAT "TRUTH IN THOUGHT" – SPIRITUAL TRUTH - IS NOT ACCESSIBLE TO THE WILL BUT ONLY TO A PASSIVE, RECEPTIVE STATE OF INNER PURITY AND DETACHMENT.
"L'Attention et la volonté

[...] La volonté n’a de prise que sur quelques mouvements de quelques muscles, associés à la représentation du déplacement des objets proches. Je peux vouloir mettre ma main à plat sur la table. Si la pureté intérieure, ou l’inspiration, ou la vérité dans la pensée étaient nécessairement associées à des attitudes de ce genre, elles pourraient être objet de volonté. Comme il n’en est rien, nous ne pouvons que les implorer. Les implorer, c’est croire que nous avons un Père dans les cieux. Ou cesser de les désirer ? Quoi de pire ? La supplication intérieure est seule raisonnable, car elle évite de raidir des muscles qui n’ont rien à voir dans l’affaire. Quoi de plus sot que de raidir les muscles et serrer les mâchoires à propos de vertu, ou de poésie, ou de la solution d’un problème ? L’attention est tout autre chose ?

[...] L’attention, à son plus haut degré, est la même chose que la prière. Elle suppose la foi et l’amour.

[...] Mauvaise manière de chercher. Attention attachée à un problème. Encore un phénomène d’horreur du vide. On ne veut pas avoir perdu son effort. Acharnement à la chasse. Il ne faut pas vouloir trouver : comme dans le cas d’un dévouement excessif, on devient dépendant de l’objet de l’effort. On a besoin d’une récompense extérieure que parfois le hasard fournit et qu’on est prêt à recevoir au prix d’une déformation de la vérité. 

C’est seulement l’effort sans désir (non attaché à un objet) qui enferme infailliblement une récompense. 

Reculer devant l’objet qu’on poursuit. Seul ce qui est indirect est efficace.

[...] Il y a des efforts qui ont l’effet contraire du but recherché (exemple : dévotes aigries, faux ascétismes, certains dévouements, etc.). D’autres sont toujours utiles, même s’ils n’aboutissent pas. 

Comment distinguer ? 

Peut-être : les uns sont accompagnés de la négation (mensongère) de la misère intérieure. Les autres de l’attention continuellement concentrée sur la distance entre ce qu’on est et ce qu’on aime.

[...] L’attention est liée au désir. Non pas à la volonté, mais au désir. Ou plus exactement, au consentement. 

On libère en soi de l’énergie. Mais sans cesse elle s’attache de nouveau. Comment la libérer toute ? Il faut désirer que cela soit fait en nous. Le désirer vraiment. Simplement le désirer, non pas tenter de l’accomplir. Car toute tentative en ce sens est vaine et se paie cher. Dans une telle œuvre, tout ce que je nomme « je » doit être passif. L’attention seule, cette attention si pleine que le « je » disparaît, est requise de moi. Priver tout ce que je nomme « je » de la lumière de l’attention et la reporter sur l’inconcevable.

La capacité de chasser une fois pour toutes une pensée est la porte de l’éternité. L’infini dans un instant.

[...] Nous devons être indifférents au bien et au mal, mais, en étant indifférents, c’est-à-dire en projetant également sur l’un et sur l’autre la lumière de l’attention, le bien l’emporte par un phénomène automatique. C’est là la grâce essentielle. Et c’est la définition, le critérium du bien. 

Une inspiration divine opère infailliblement, irrésistiblement, si on n’en détourne pas l’attention, si on ne la refuse pas. Il n’y a pas un choix à faire en sa faveur, il suffit de ne pas refuser de reconnaître qu’elle est. 

L’attention tournée avec amour vers Dieu (ou, à un degré moindre, vers toute chose authentiquement belle) rend certaines choses impossibles. Telle est l’action non agissante de la prière dans l’âme. Il est des comportements qui voileraient cette attention s’ils se produisaient et que, réciproquement, cette attention rend impossibles. 

Dès qu’on a un point d’éternité dans l’âme, on n’a rien de plus à faire que de le préserver, car il s’accroît de lui-même, comme une graine. Il faut maintenir autour de lui une garde armée, immobile, et la nourrir de la contemplation des nombres, des rapports fixes et rigoureux.

On nourrit l’invariant qui est dans l’âme par la contemplation de l’invariant qui est dans le corps. 

On écrit comme on accouche ; on ne peut pas s’empêcher de faire l’effort suprême. Mais on agit aussi de même. Je n’ai pas à craindre de ne pas faire l’effort suprême. À condition seulement de ne pas me mentir et de faire attention. 

Le poète produit le beau par l’attention fixée sur du réel. De même l’acte d’amour. Savoir que cet homme, qui a faim et soif, existe vraiment autant que moi — cela suffit, le reste suit de lui-même. 

Les valeurs authentiques et pures de vrai, de beau et de bien dans l’activité d’un être humain se produisent par un seul et même acte, une certaine application à l’objet de la plénitude de l’attention. 

L’enseignement ne devrait avoir pour fin que de préparer la possibilité d’un tel acte par l’exercice de l’attention. 

Tous les autres avantages de l’instruction sont sans intérêt. 

Etudes et foi. La prière n’étant que l’attention sous sa forme pure et les études constituant une gymnastique de l’attention, chaque exercice scolaire doit être une réfraction de vie spirituelle. Il y faut une méthode. Une certaine manière de faire une version latine, une certaine manière de faire un problème de géométrie (et non pas n’importe quelle manière) constituent une gymnastique de l’attention propre à la rendre plus apte à la prière. 

Méthode pour comprendre les images, les symboles, etc. Non pas essayer de les interpréter, mais les regarder jusqu’à ce que la lumière jaillisse. 

D’une manière générale, méthode d’exercer l’intelligence, qui consiste à regarder. 

Application de cette méthode pour la discrimination du réel et de l’illusoire. Dans la perception sensible, si on n’est pas sûr de ce qu’on voit, on se déplace en regardant, et le réel apparaît. Dans la vie intérieure, le temps tient lieu d’espace. Avec le temps on est modifié et si, à travers les modifications, on garde le regard orienté vers la même chose, en fin de compte l’illusion se dissipe et le réel apparaît. La condition est que l’attention soit un regard et non un attachement.

[...] Solitude. En quoi donc en consiste le prix ? Car on est en présence de la simple matière (même le ciel, les étoiles, la lune, les arbres en fleur), de choses de moindre prix (peut-être) qu’un esprit humain. Le prix en consiste dans la possibilité supérieure d’attention. Si on pouvait être attentif au même degré en présence d’un être humain …

[...] La pureté est le pouvoir de contempler la souillure."
(Simone Weil, La Pesanteur et la Grâce , 1947)

E4.7.2.C. The Mystical Contact.
The actual event of Adaequatio at its highest level: "Pure Presence."

E4.7.2.CREF1_LIT

EL3.132. "THE TRUE WAY OF LOVE [...] IS TO START FROM SENSIBLE BEAUTIES AND TO GO UP UNCEASINGLY TOWARDS THIS SUPERNATURAL BEAUTY by passing as by steps from one beautiful body to two, from two to all, then from beautiful bodies to beautiful actions, then from beautiful actions to beautiful sciences, to end up from sciences to that science which is nothing else than the science of absolute beauty."
(Plato, The Banquet)
"IT IS IMPOSSIBLE to make any sense of it. All those who imagine that they understand something are limited. It is only when I say that everything is incomprehensible that I come as close as possible to understanding the only thing we are given to understand. [...]
I read a page of the great Plato. I don't understand anything anymore because, beyond the Platonic sentences written on this page, luminously divine of course, there is a more luminous, an enormous, blinding why that erases everything, cancels, destroys all meaning. Any particular understanding. When one has understood, one stops, one sticks to what one has understood. I do not understand. To understand is too little. To have understood is to be fixed or frozen. It is like stopping on a step, in the middle of a staircase, or with one foot in the void and the other on the endless staircase. But a simple, new why can make you start again, can de-petrify what is petrified and everything starts flowing again. How can one « understand »? We can't."
(Eugene Ionesco, Crumbs of Diary, 1967)

E1.7.D.2.1.a_REF1_PH.wE4.7.2.C.

PLOTINUS DESCRIBED A DIVINE PRINCIPLE, THE ONE, WHICH DIFFERED FROM TRADITIONAL CONCEPTS OF GOD. 
Unlike the personal God, Plotinus' One is an eternal source of existence, indifferent to individuals and unaware of itself. This divine entity is an outpouring of being, creating all that exists without asking love in return. Knowledge of the One transcends philosophical rationality and requires intuitive and mystical understanding, involving the participation of the soul in divine life.
"Neither the God of the philosophers and scholars: the First Principle, the One from which, according to Plotinus, everything emanates, is a harmonious form, a perfect and self-sufficient substance, imprisoned by its own divinity and forever separated from the world, like Aristotle's God; nor the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: The God of Plotinus, the eternal source of the gift of being (of being itself and not of "beings", that is, of things as they are), is a principle but not a person: he does not call the chosen one, he does not make an alliance with the one he chooses, whom he calls by name, he and all his descendants, he does not ask for love and does not want to be loved in return, he, exclusively, out of jealousy. Indifferent to all that is merely individual, participating only in the life of the Whole without ever becoming particularised in a material body, a singular soul, a determined idea, the One of Plotinus is the effusion that gives being, eternally fruitful and unconscious of itself, "beyond being" as well as beyond consciousness and concept. Unlike the divine for the Greeks, who could not love, who suffered no lack in himself and was self-sufficient and self-contained, Plotinus' God is love, not in the sense that he demands love, like the God of the Old Testament, from the creature he calls by name, but in the sense that he is superabundant grace, overflowing fullness, thus giving rise and time to the multiple existence that emanates from the One, like the rays of fire, the trickling of the spring or the branches of the trunk of the tree of life. The gratuitousness of the gift - we cannot account for existence, and "the rose is without a reason"; the perpetual creation of a world - that of ideas or intelligible forms, as well as that of sensitive or material forms - that would immediately fall back into nothingness if the divine gift did not eternally come to revive it; unconscious generation, generative fruition that gives birth to all that is, while always remaining in the infinite enjoyment of its fulfilment, in the infinite activity of its power.
Such a language necessarily takes us beyond the limits of philosophy as rational knowledge - reason being the mind left to itself, relying only on its own principles - as Plato, then Aristotle, but also the Epicurean and Stoic systems that followed them, had defined it. Plotinus' meditation, which revolves around the One, like the field of vision that expands from the blind spot, cannot demonstrate by concept the principle on which it is based. All knowledge is, in fact, knowledge of a specific object, and therefore requires that the subject be distinguished from the object, introducing a distance, a withdrawal, between the two concepts, without which the act of designating, and then defining, would be impossible. Reason can only recognise what it places before it (this is the literal meaning of the word "object") in order to impose its own categories on it and thus constitute it as an object of knowledge. The mind cannot act in this way towards the One, of which it is in a sense the creature and emanation, since it is in the One like an effusion of primary substance, traversed from side to side by the generative flow that brings it into existence. Rational knowledge, which assumes the distance necessary for objectification, must therefore be opposed here to intuitive knowledge, that is to say, immediate and non-demonstrative, the intimate and even very intimate experience of a divine and nourishing, almost maternal effusion that keeps us in the warmth of existence, and this without reason or purpose, through the perpetual and unreasonable flow of a grace without which nothing would be. Such an experience must be said to be mystical (the word comes from the initiation into the ancient mysteries to which Plotinus himself often refers), but by no means philosophical, in the sense that it is an invitation to a kind of participation of the created soul in the uncreated life that is in God, a transfiguration of the individual in the universal of which it is a part."
(Jacques Darriulat, Plotinus, Master of Wisdom, II - From the One to the Many, 2013)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Plotin/Sagesse/Sagesse2.html


E1.7.D.2.3.a_REF1_PH 

FOR PLOTINUS, THE SOUL CAN, ON RARE OCCASIONS, PARTICIPATE IN THE DIVINE LIFE THROUGH AN INTUITIVE AND FUSIONAL KNOWLEDGE, WITHOUT IMAGE OR REPRESENTATION, which requires a mystical to and fro between union and self-knowledge.
"In his Master's Life, which he has left us, Porphyry tells us that Plotinus was given to know such perfect bliss on several occasions: Following the path prescribed by Plato in the Symposium, he saw the God who has neither form nor essence, being beyond intelligence and the intelligible. It is this God that I myself have approached and with whom I have united only once, in my sixty-eighth year. Plotinus, for his part, "had the vision of the goal very close. For him, the end and the goal was intimate union with the God who is above all things. While I was with him [Porphyry remained with Plotinus for six years, from 263 to 268], he attained this goal four times, thanks to an ineffable act and not by force" (Life of Plotinus, § 23). Such ecstasy, in which the intellect is lost, goes beyond the limits of philosophy as defined by Plato and Aristotle. Far from recalling the power of conception within it, the soul of the initiate surrenders to the infinite that invades it and to the intuition that transfigures it, renouncing thought. The Socratic aporia aimed to provoke the concept, to shake the mind out of its torpor by adhering to the prevailing opinion or by naively believing in the sensible appearance. The Plotinian initiation, on the other hand, claims to transcend intelligence through a kind of intuitive fusion in which self-consciousness is abolished. Just as the One is beyond being, so the soul's communion with life, whose first principle is the Source, is beyond the "know thyself" that Plato had nevertheless placed at the foundation of all philosophical knowledge. [...]

The self-awareness of the mind, which Plato had made the very foundation of rationality, is annihilated in the soul that rises to the first principle. And while Aristotle defined the life of God as “thought of thought”, Plotinus, on the contrary, thinks of it as generative unconsciousness, a source devoid of thought as of consciousness from which Being eternally springs, that is to say, not created and determined things (in the manner of the god of Genesis), but Being itself, which means that all things that are, whatever their own being, also participate in what we call - rather enigmatically - “existence”. This is why ecstasy, which merges with the power that is in god, must abandon consciousness as well as intelligence, unworthy of the life of the first principle, which is beyond reason. [...]
It is thus possible for the soul to participate, on rare occasions, in the life that is in god, precisely because this life is also in it, which receives Being by emanation from the first source, and to unite with it in a fusion where consciousness is almost lost, reduced then to the immediate feeling of intuitive knowledge and incapable of mediating what it experiences through the sequence of concepts: “This identity [of the one who sees and what he sees] is, in a way, a grasping and a consciousness of the self, which must be careful not to stray from itself through an excessive desire for self-awareness” (V, 8, 11). All consciousness is in fact a doubling – like the two mirrors that the Platonic dialogue reciprocally places in abysses (First Alcibiades) – and therefore also division and separation: I can only conceive of what I place before me, and thus define as the object of my knowledge. Such a division – which is the condition of consciousness and like the critical distance that allows thought to perceive itself, to know itself – cannot take place in the One, in which everything merges into an ultimate principle that is “beyond Being”, that is to say, at the source from which Being itself comes. The fusional knowledge of the first principle is thus without image or representation, without thought or concept. Pour élever cette expérience à la dimension de la conscience, il faut donc en sortir, non toutefois pour s’en détourner, mais pour y revenir ensuite par un mouvement de va-et-vient qui rythme mystiquement l’extase plotinienne : « S’il écarte, bien qu’elle soit belle, cette image de lui-même uni au dieu, et qu’il parvient à être un avec l’esprit, sans plus se dédoubler, il est en même temps Un et Tout, avec ce dieu qui est présent dans le silence. Il est avec lui autant qu’il le peut et qu’il le veut. Mais si ensuite il se retourne pour devenir deux, il reste près du dieu, dans la mesure où il demeure pur, de sorte qu’il peut lui être présent de nouveau, si à nouveau il se retourne vers le dieu. Dans ce retournement, il gagne ceci : au début, il a conscience de lui-même, tant qu’il demeure différent du dieu ; mais lorsqu’il revient en hâte vers l’intérieur, il est dans un état de totalité et, laissant la conscience en arrière de crainte de rester différent du dieu, il est un, dans cet état transcendant (V, 8, 11)."
(Jacques Darriulat, Plotinus, Master of Wisdom, II - From the One to the Many, 2013)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Plotin/Sagesse/Sagesse2.html


E1.7.D.2.3.b_REF1_PH 

"WHICH IS TO SAY THAT THE GOD OF PLOTINUS IS NOT PURE INTELLIGENCE - LIKE THE GOD OF PLATO OR ARISTOTLE - BUT PURE PRESENCE, and that presence diminishes in intensity when consciousness, separating itself to become autonomous, sets up presence as its re-presentation (which means presence fallen and "bent" under the gaze of reflection). It is natural, then, that unlike the dialectical progression, which arrives gradually, that is to say, by following the articulations of reason, at the knowledge of its foundation, the knowledge of the divine, according to Plotinus, is achieved "suddenly" (exaiphnês), by the miracle of an encounter that cannot be explained by reason, in a kind of mystical marriage of the created with the uncreated: "If the soul has the good fortune to meet him, if he comes to her, even better: if he appears to her present, when she has turned away from present things [...] and suddenly sees him appear within her (for there is nothing between them and they are no longer two, but both are one: in fact, one can no longer distinguish him as long as he is there: the image of this is lovers and the beloved on earth who wish to merge together), at that moment the soul is no longer aware of her body or that she is in this body [...] Having sought him, when she has found him, the soul is no longer aware of her body or of her being in this body [...]....] Having sought it, when it is present, it goes to meet it, and it is He that it looks at instead of itself, and it does not have the leisure to see who it is that it looks at. As for the object of her vision, the seer, at that moment, neither sees it nor distinguishes it, and she does not realise that they are two, but has become in a different way and is no longer herself and to herself, but belongs entirely to what is above, and having become one, belongs to the One, as if she had made her centre coincide with the centre" (VI, 9, 10). The gaze of the seer is strangely confronted with the expansive power that emanates from the One: a gaze that does not see but, on the contrary, is lost in the infinity that absorbs it, a gaze that sees without seeing that it sees: "It is He whom the soul looks at instead of itself, and it does not have the leisure to see who it is". We can get an idea of this expanded view of transcendence by looking at the mosaics of Byzantium in the Justinian era, two centuries after Plotinus' text. [...The theory of vision has always been Plato's paradigm - if not the myth - of all knowledge: Just as the eyes of the body perceive material objects in the luminous environment, so the eyes of the soul perceive and define ideas (for example, geometric forms) in the mental light that bathes the interiority of the spirit, the spiritual cave in which the soul slumbers as long as it, fascinated by sensible objects, does not perceive this clarity that emanates from itself; And just as physical vision becomes aware of itself through the light of the sensible sun, so the mind perceives the Idea in the radiance of an "intelligible sun", the source of all spiritual life and the blind spot from which memory draws the Idea that comes to mind. Plotinus subjected this metaphysics of truth to a paradigm shift: according to the Neoplatonic thinker, it is not vision that is the visible image of the intelligible act of cognition, but touch. Indeed, vision presupposes this distance - we cannot see the end of our nose except through the mediation of a mirror placed in front of us - without which knowledge cannot be achieved, but through which, according to Plotinus, the unity of the first principle is also divided into the duality of subject and object, of seer and seen, of knower and known.

Touch, on the other hand, presupposes the abolition of distance, the establishment of contact between the concepts that speculative activity separates and opposes. All the more so since, in the perfect reciprocity of touch, it is not possible to determine who is object and who is subject, since each of the two is both touching and being touched. There is then no need for light as a mediator, which is necessary for the act of seeing: touch knows immediately, by contact, without having to go through the discursiveness of reason or the representation of the imagination. And if Plotinus still resorts to the metaphor of light, it is by attributing to it a kind of tactile sensitivity, so that the knowledge of the divine is analogous to the touch of light itself: "The soul runs around all truths, and yet here it flees from these truths, in which we have a part, as soon as it wants to speak and discourse, because to speak the discourse must go from term to term. Where everything is simple, how can one unfold a discourse? But all that is needed is a noetic touch [noerôs ephapsasthai: touch by intelligence]: when you touch, at the moment of touching you have neither the power nor the leisure to say anything; only afterwards will you make syllogisms about what you have touched [...]....] Enlightened, the soul possesses what it sought, and this is the true goal for the soul: the touch of this light [ephapsasthai phôtos] and the vision of this light by this light, not by another, the vision of that by which it sees. For that by which it has been illuminated is what it must contemplate, just as the sun is not seen by another light. So how can we achieve this? Cut away everything (aphele panta)" (V, III, 17)."
(Jacques Darriulat, Plotinus, Master of Wisdom, II - From the One to the Many, 2013)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Plotin/Sagesse/Sagesse2.html

E1.7.D.2.3.c_REF1_PH 

"AT THE POINT OF CONTACT WHERE THE I, IN ITS ASCENT, TOUCHES THE INFINITE THAT IS IN GOD, that is, the generative activity, the perpetual giving, whose first principle is the Source, it finds itself deified and as if drawn into a mystical dance, like the choreutes dancing in the circle of the orchestra around the coryphaeius who leads them: "He who has seen knows what I am saying, and how the soul lives another life, going towards the One and participating in it, so disposed now that it knows that it is there, like the choreletes dancing in a circle around the Coryphaeus of authentic life, and knowing that it needs nothing more, but that, on the contrary, it is necessary to divest oneself of everything and remain in Him alone, cutting off all that is superfluous around us, so that we can't wait to leave here and are irritated to be bound to anything else" (VI, 9, 8). The soul, liberated by ecstasy, becomes divine and, as if captured by the One, revolves around Him in a sacred dance: "When it knows that the centre is the origin of the circle, it will revolve around the centre from which it came; it will cling to it; it will gather towards that point towards which all souls should tend, but towards which only the souls of the gods tend eternally. In moving towards Him, souls are gods. For to be a god is to be united with the One" (VI, 9, 8). And if this perfect union or divinisation happens "suddenly" (exaiphnês), it is because it is accomplished outside of all time, outside of space as well as time, in the eternity of the superabundant life that emanates from the One. It is true that this eternity does not last long, the souls attached to the mortal body soon get tired (tiredness is perhaps what best distinguishes the created from the uncreated) (1), they soon turn away from the One and turn towards the many, they get lost in the labyrinth of the sensible as well as the intelligible, and once again live in exile from themselves, that is, from their principle".
(Jacques Darriulat, Plotinus, Master of Wisdom, II - From the One to the Many, 2013)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Plotin/Sagesse/Sagesse2.html

E1.7.D.2.2.d_REF1_PH 

"PRESENCE [...] What then is the relationship between the world of forms and the sensible world? If the former can be seen through the latter, if the vision of the mind can extend the vision of the eye, it is because there is continuity between the two worlds, because they are the same thing, but on two different levels. Plotinus strongly emphasizes this continuity: "How could this world exist if it were separate from the spiritual world?"
Plotinus strongly opposes the anthropomorphism of Plato's Timaeus, which is also taken up by the Gnostic sects. For him, the material world is not the work of a Creator who made it by reasoning and reflection:

"If we admit that our universe takes its being and its being as it is from another, are we then to believe that its Creator first reflected upon the earth in himself and thought that it should be in the center, then the water and the water on the earth, and all the other things in their respective order up to the sky, then all the animals and for them such and such forms specific to each, as many as there are now, and for each of them the inner parts and the outer parts, and then, after he had put all these things in order in himself, did he set to work? Such a "reflection" is not possible: where would it have come from, since he had not yet seen the things that would be the object of his reflection? And even if he had received the vision of these things from another, it would not have been possible for him to set to work with his hands and tools, as craftsmen do now. For the hands and feet come long after. The fact remains that all this was in an Other [the spiritual world]; and since, by virtue of the proximity that exists in being between realities, one in relation to the other, there is no intermediary, it is as if a trace and an image of that Other appeared instantly... 
You can give the reason why the earth is in the center of the universe and why it is spherical and why the ecliptic is as it is; but in the divine mind it was not because things had to be that way that it was decided, after deliberation, to make them that way, but because things are as they are, these things are also good. (V 8,7, 1-40.)" [...]

He dared, as Goethe said, to "believe in simplicity". For him, life is a formative activity, simple and immediate, irreducible to all our analyses, a totality that is there all at once, internal to itself, a form that forms itself, an immediate knowledge that effortlessly attains perfection. [In this Plotinian approach we find a critique of human reflection and reason analogous to the critique of reflection and consciousness provoked by the discovery of the levels of the Self. In both cases, the simplicity of life escapes the grasp of reflection. Human consciousness, which lives in duplication, calculation, and planning, believes that one can only find after one has searched, that one can only build by assembling parts, and that one can only achieve an end by taking the means to it. Everywhere it introduces mediation. The life that finds without seeking, that invents the whole before the parts, that is at once end and means, in a word, that is immediate and simple, is therefore ungraspable by reflection. To reach it, as to reach our pure self, we must leave reflection for contemplation."
(Pierre Hadot, Plotinus or the simplicity of vision, 1997)


E1.7.D.2.2.e_REF1_PH

ACCORDING TO PLOTINUS, LIFE AT ALL ITS LEVELS IS CONTEMPLATION. NATURE IS THE PRODUCT OF SILENT CONTEMPLATION, AND THE SOUL, THOUGH OFTEN DIVERTED TO ACTION, ALWAYS ASPIRES TO CONTEMPLATION. Spirit is an inner vision in which there is no longer any distinction between external and internal perception. 
"It is that life itself, on all its levels, is contemplation. A violent paradox - but how Plotinian! 
Nature itself, the principle of the life of bodies, is already contemplation: 

"And if someone asked it why it produces, and it consented to pay attention to the one who questioned it and was willing to answer, it would say: 'You should not have asked me, but rather intuitively grasped by remaining silent yourself, as I myself am silent and am not in the habit of speaking. "But what was there to understand?" "That what I produce while remaining silent is what I contemplate, an object of contemplation produced by my nature, and that it is fitting for me, who myself was produced by contemplation, that my nature should be in love with contemplation. And it is that which contemplates in me that produces what I contemplate, just as surveyors draw by contemplating. But I do not draw, I only contemplate, and the lines of the bodies are formed as if they came from me". (III 8, 4, 1.) [...]

Undoubtedly, the soul often abandons contemplation for reasoning, research, and action, but it is ultimately out of love for contemplation: 

"When their power of contemplation weakens, men come to produce action, which is a shadow of contemplation and reason. Because contemplation is no longer enough for them, because of the weakness of their souls, they can no longer sufficiently grasp the object of their contemplation, and therefore they are dissatisfied; then, because they still desire to see this object, they turn to action in order to see with their eyes what they can no longer see with their minds. What is certain is that when they produce, they also want to see, contemplate and perceive this object (III 8.4, 31.)". [...]

"If we were to compare the Spirit [with which the world of forms is identified] to a sphere that lives a multiple and varied life, or to a reality made up only of faces and radiant with all these living faces... by representing it in this way, we would be looking at it from the outside, like one person looking at another. But in fact, having become spirit itself, one must become vision itself. (VI 7, 15, 24.)"

There is no longer any distinction between external perception and internal perception. The level of reflection and perception has been transcended to reach that of intuition and contemplation. One then experiences that life is direct contemplation of oneself. [...]

"He liked to make offerings and would go around the temples on new moons and holidays. One day he asked Plotinus to go with him. Plotinus replied, "It is for the gods to come to me, not for me to go to them. In what sense he spoke these words so haughtily, we could not understand, and we did not dare to ask him. (V. P. 10, 33.)"

The small group of disciples seems appalled by these words, which show contempt for traditional forms of worship. But how can we not recognize in them Plotinus' sense of the divine presence? To find God, it is not necessary to go to the temples where he is said to dwell. It is not necessary to travel to reach his presence. But one must become a living temple in which the divine presence can manifest itself. [Or, having become able to walk with it, better still, having attained the Whole itself, you will no longer seek anything; or, having renounced it, you will turn away from it towards something else and you will fall back, no longer seeing what is present to you because you are looking towards something else. But if you are in the case of "you will no longer seek," how will you experience it? Should it not be said that you have entered the All and have not remained in any of its parts, and that you no longer say of yourself: "So far it is I (1)". Rejecting determination, you became Everything. And yet, even before that, you were everything, but because something was added to you in addition to everything, you became less than everything by that very addition. For this addition was not an addition belonging to the order of Everything (what would you add to that which is Everything?), but an addition that was an addition of non-being (2). Having become someone, and precisely by adding non-being, you are no longer the Whole, unless you reject non-being. So you expand yourself by rejecting everything that is other than the Whole, and if you reject that, the Whole will be present to you. But if it is present to you when you reject it, and if it does not appear to you when you remain with particular things, it is because the Whole does not need to come to be present: if it is not present, it is because you have distanced yourself. And if you have distanced yourself, it is not that you have distanced yourself from it - for it is always present - but that, while it is present, you have turned in the opposite direction".

Life is a presence that always warns us. It is pre-existence; it is always already there. How could this be better expressed than by repeating Pascal's famous thought: "You would not be looking for me if you had not already found me." 

Notes:
(1) Literally, "I am of such and such a determined magnitude,. 
(2) Spinoza's axiom (Letter to J. Jelles, in Spinoza, Œuvres complètes, Paris, Gallimard, Bibliothèque de la Pléiade, 1954, p. 1287), "Omnis determinatio negatio est" [To determine everything is to reduce it], is fully valid in the Plotinian universe.
(Pierre Hadot, Plotinus or the simplicity of vision, 1997)

"Pour Plotin, le Bien est véritablement l’Absolu, sans l’ombre d’une multiplicité même potentielle ou virtuelle, dans une totale absence de relations avec soi-même et avec les êtres qui émanent de lui. Le Bien n’est pas un objet supérieur, qui se situerait au-dessus des autres objets; il n’est pas un objet que l’on pourrait penser et dont on pourrait parler. Lorsque nous parlons de lui, c’est en fait de nous-mêmes que nous parlons, c’est-à-dire de notre relation à lui. Cela veut dire aussi que l’on ne peut pas vraiment coïncider avec lui, on ne peut que l’éprouver comme une pure Présence, qui nous envahit. [...]"
(Pierre Hadot, Plotin ou la simplicité du regard, 1997)

Voir la correspondance avec le rôle Dyonisiaque du coeur dans le théatre antique selon Nietzsche

Voir la correspondance avec la Fatigue (2/4) et (3/4)

E1.7.D.2.4_REF1_PH

"STRANGE PHILOSOPHY THAT LEADS TO THE ABANDONMENT OF PHILOSOPHY! The discourse of Plotinian meditation develops only to lead us to the silence into which the intellect must abandon itself, since here nothing can be said or even conceived. The true purpose of discourse, according to Plotinus, is paradoxically to bring us to the awareness of the unspeakable, and we learn to speak only in order to know what we must keep silent, which is the very source of all authentic speech, but which we can never chain to the order of our reasons: "When you speak his name or think of him, leave everything else; disregard everything; let him alone remain (monon auton). Seek nothing to add; but ask yourselves whether, in the thought you have of him, there is anything left which you have not yet put aside from him. For you may arrive at a principle of which it is no longer possible to say or conceive anything else; situated on the highest plane, he alone is truly free, because he is not a slave to himself; and he alone is truly himself, while each of the other beings is at once himself and something else" (VI, 8, 21, in fine). And Plotinus wrote again a little further on, and along the same lines: “If we see him, we will no longer dare to say that he is by accident, we will not even dare to utter a word: mental stupor (ekplageiê) would follow such audacity. As soon as we rush towards him, we cannot say where he is; he appears everywhere before the eyes of our soul; wherever it turns its gaze, it sees him, unless it abandons the divine to look elsewhere, and no longer thinks of him” (VI, 8, 19, l. 6-12).”
(Jacques Darriulat, Plotinus, Master of Wisdom, II - From the One to the Many, 2013)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Plotin/Sagesse/Sagesse2.htm

E1.7.D.2.5_REF1.1_PH 

PLOTINUS SUGGESTS THAT THE ASCENT TO THE ONE REQUIRES RIGOROUS DIALECTICAL REFLECTION, IN WHICH DISCURSIVE KNOWLEDGE GIVES WAY TO INTUITIVE AND FUSIONAL KNOWLEDGE, WITHOUT RENOUNCING INTELLIGENCE.
"But this dazzling richness is also, and necessarily, an increasing fall and decline: what emanates from the One cannot be the One itself, for then it would split and fall into multiplicity itself. The One cannot be confused with what it generates, and it can only generate lesser realities in which the intensity of existence progressively diminishes as they move away from the generating source. Thus, the expansion of divine energy eventually exhausts itself at the boundaries of creation and sinks into the nothingness of pure matter, like a light gradually dying in darkness. All beings that emanate from the One thus suffer from being separated from the principle that brought them into existence, and like Ulysses trying to return to Ithaca, they are tormented by nostalgia for their true home, striving to tear themselves away from the here and turn to the "there" from which they came. The descent, which emanates from the One and generates by emanation the totality of what is (by virtue of the nature of the One, which cannot be divided), thus corresponds to the loving ascent of the exiled souls, who, according to their degree of perfection, strive to rejoin the Father who begot them. Plotinus' universe is thus animated, like a great animal, by a dual movement of expansion and contraction, of diffusion (procession) and convergence (ascension), which gives it movement and life. Therefore, the soul that has reached the summit of its initiation cannot establish its abode in the Absolute of the First Principle: It must emerge from it, not only because of its impotence (fatigue distracts it from the divine, and the heaviness within it opposes the supreme grace that is in God), but also out of necessity, because the very movement of emanation compels the creature to tear itself away from the unconsciousness of ecstasy and turn to a self-aware science, the "know thyself" of discursive knowledge, the progressive development of Platonic dialectic. There is, according to Plotinus, a necessity specific to the human condition, which is also a necessity for philosophical reflection and the exercise of reason: against the Gnostics, who have the presumption to believe that the regenerated man can strip himself of all traces of this world, join God and become equal to him (they believe, writes Plotinus, that one escapes the human condition by flying close to God on the wings of dreams": II, 9, 9), Plotinus argues that we cannot completely escape our condition, and that the movement toward the One, which is a return to principle, is always, except in rare ecstasies, a difficult effort thwarted by the inertia inherent in all creatures. If we try too hard to be an angel, we would become a beast: philosophical wisdom and dialectical discipline are the necessary path that leads to that beyond discourse where the soul is lost in the One, in a non-reflective knowledge that is an amorous fusion and no longer a demonstration by concept. Plotinus, unlike the mystics, never asked us to economize on intelligence: in his view, the soul does not move toward God by renouncing reflection, but on the contrary through a very rigorous dialectical reasoning that leads to the point where discourse must give way to the ineffable, where discursive knowledge must be lost in an intuitive and fusional knowledge of the life that is in God. It is through the work of the concept that we rise to the unimaginable, and not through a rapture that would be given to us as a grace and would distinguish us from the rest of humanity. Even if philosophy, according to Plotinus, tends to its own limits, it remains philosophy and does not give up thinking: "To believe that one is already above intelligence is to fall below intelligence" (II, 9, 9, l. 51-52)".
(Jacques Darriulat, Plotinus, Master of Wisdom, II - From the One to the Many, 2013)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Plotin/Sagesse/Sagesse2.html


E4.7.2.C_REF2_CUR A_Gustave Van de Woestyne_Christ in the Dessert_1939

SUBDUED COLOR AND GESTURES GIVES THE WORK A MYSTIC DIMENSION. The figure of Christ in the desert—stripped of worldly context, hands wringing in contemplation seems to be in a state where the subject ceases to "grasp" truth intellectually and instead enters a state of vulnerable presence.
(Pierre Schindler)

E4.7.2.D. The Return to Form: Reconciling the mystical experience with the necessity of living and creating.
In order to transcend the intellect, we still use dialectic/form as a ladder. Still, the ultimate truth (Enchantment) cannot be fully captured in language but only experienced as certainty.

E4.7.2.D_REF1_LIT

EL3.121.B. "JE ME SUIS DIT QUE CELA ÉTAIT LA « VÉRITÉ », sans savoir comment définir cette vérité. Sans doute, aurais-je tenté de la définir, qu’elle se serait évanouie. [...]
Je me suis encore dit que si cet événement avait surgi, et puisque j’avais vécu cela, puisque je savais tout, plus jamais je ne serais malheureux car j’apprenais que l’on ne mourrait pas: Je n’avais plus qu'à me souvenir de ces instants pour vaincre tout souci et toute angoisse futurs. J’avais eu la révélation de l’essentiel, le reste était l'inessentiel. [...]
Je me demande si ce sentiment insolite, si cet étonnement sans réponse et presque sans question n’est pas réaction de ma conscience la plus profonde. En vérité, je ne le demande pas :  je sais que c’est bien cet étonnement qui est ma conscience la plus authentique. Je sais bien que la réponse est cette impossibilité même d’en donner une. La non-réponse est la meilleure réponse."
(Eugène Ionesco, Journal en miettes)

E1.6.B.3.2.c_REF1_LIT.wE4.7.2.D.

"THE STATE OF ENCHANTMENT IS ONE OF CERTAINTY. When enchanted, we neither believe nor doubt nor deny: we know, even if, as in the case of a false enchantment, our knowledge is self-deception.
All folk tales recognize that there are false enchantments as well as true ones. When we are truly enchanted we desire nothing for ourselves, only that the enchanting object or person shall continue to exist. When we are falsely enchanted, we desire either to possess the enchanting being or be possessed by it.
We are not free to choose by what we shall be enchanted, truly or falsely. In the case of a false enchantment, all we can do is take immediate flight before the spell really takes hold.
Recognizing idols for what they are does not break their enchantment.
All true enchantments fade in time. Sooner or later we must walk alone in faith. When this happens, we are tempted, either to deny our vision, to say that it must have been an illusion and, in consequence, grow hardhearted and cynical, or to make futile attempts to recover our vision by force, i.e., by alcohol or drugs.
A false enchantment can all too easily last a lifetime."
(W.H. Auden, A Certain World: A Commonplace Book, 1970)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.v_REF1_PH.wE4.7.2.D.

 PLATO ASSERTS THAT IT IS IMPOSSIBLE TO FULLY UNDERSTAND CERTAIN COMPLEX ISSUES THROUGH READING ALONE. TRUTH EMERGES FROM THE MIND AFTER LONG REFLECTION AND INTERACTION WITH THE PROBLEMS. He argues that only those with a natural affinity for virtue and wisdom can achieve this understanding, and that writings on complex subjects are likely to be misinterpreted by others or lead to erroneous conclusions. Plato concludes that the writings should not be taken too seriously because the true thoughts of the author are often not expressed.
"In any case, this is what I can say about all those who have written or will write and who claim to be knowledgeable about what is the subject of my concern, having been taught about it by me or by others, or having discovered it personally: it is impossible, in my opinion, that they have understood anything at all about it. As far as I am concerned, there is no work on such subjects, and there certainly will never be. In fact, there is no way to put it into formulas, as is done with other sciences, but it is when one has dealt with these problems for a long time, when one has lived with them, that the truth suddenly springs forth in the soul, like light springs forth from a spark, and then grows of its own accord. No doubt I know that if I had to explain them in writing or orally, I would be the best person to do it; but I also know that if the explanation were faulty, I would suffer more than anyone else. If I had believed that they could be written down and sufficiently expressed for the people, what finer achievement could I have accomplished in my life than to demonstrate a doctrine so beneficial to mankind and to bring to light for all the true nature of things? Now, I do not think that arguing about it, as they say, is good for people, except for an elite who only need a few hints to discover the truth for themselves. As for the others, they would either be filled with unjust contempt, which is unbecoming, or with a vain and foolish sense of self-importance because of the grandeur of the teachings they have received. Moreover, I intend to elaborate on this subject: perhaps some of the points I am dealing with will become clearer once I have explained myself. There is, in fact, a serious reason why we should not try to write anything on such subjects, a reason which I have often stated before, but which I feel I must repeat again.

[...] In a word, those who have no affinity with the object will not obtain the vision either by their ease of mind or by their memory, because they will not first take root in a foreign nature. - Thus, whether it be those who have no inclination for what is just and beautiful and are not in harmony with these virtues, however well they may otherwise be gifted to learn and retain, or those who, having a kindred soul, are averse to science and lacking in memory, none of them will ever learn the whole truth about virtue and vice that it is possible to know. In fact, it is necessary to learn both at the same time, the false as well as the true of the whole essence, at the cost of much work and time, as I said at the beginning. Only when names, definitions, perceptions of sight and impressions of the senses have been painstakingly rubbed together, when they have been discussed in benevolent discussions where envy dictates neither questions nor answers, does the light of wisdom and intelligence shine on the object studied with all the intensity that human powers can bear. Therefore, every serious man will take care not to deal with serious questions in writing, thus exposing his thoughts to the envy and lack of intelligence of the crowd. From this we must draw the simple conclusion that when we see a written composition, whether by a legislator on laws, or by anyone else on any subject, we can be sure that the author has not taken the matter seriously, if he himself is serious, and that his thoughts are confined to the most valuable part of the writer".
(Plato, Letter VII, Text established by Joseph Souilhé, 1926)

E4.7.3. Pure Attention as Prayer

E4.7.3.A. The Limits of the "Orderly House."
The tension between the human desire for logical order and the vast, ungraspable nature of reality. How reason, moral judgment, and "teleological" thinking—while beautiful—are ultimately limited abstractions that fragment the whole.

E4.7.3.A_REF1_PH

EL3.107. "TO TELL A STORY IS TO SAY: THIS IS THE IMPORTANT STORY. IT IS TO REDUCE THE SPREAD AND SIMULTANEITY OF EVERYTHING TO SOMETHING LINEAR, A PATH.

To be a moral human being is to pay, be obliged to pay, certain kinds of attention.

When we make moral judgments, we are not just saying that this is better than that. Even more fundamentally, we are saying that this is more important than that. It is to order the overwhelming spread and simultaneity of everything, at the price of ignoring or turning our backs on most of what is happening in the world.

The nature of moral judgments depends on our capacity for paying attention — a capacity that, inevitably, has its limits but whose limits can be stretched.

But perhaps the beginning of wisdom, and humility, is to acknowledge, and bow one’s head, before the thought, the devastating thought, of the simultaneity of everything, and the incapacity of our moral understanding — which is also the understanding of the novelist — to take this in."
(Susan Sontag, At the Same Time: Essays and Speeches)

E4.7.3.A_REF2_PH

EL3.121. "BOHM RAISES DOUBTS AS TO WHETHER ANY FORM OF THOUGHT CAN APPREHEND WHAT HE REFERS TO AS THE “UNLIMITED.” As the very nature of thought is to select limited abstractions from the world, it can never really approach the “ground of our being” — that which is unlimited. Yet at the same time, human beings have an intrinsic need to understand and relate to the “cosmic dimension” of existence. To address this apparent disjuncture in our experience, Bohm proposes that attention, unlike thought, is potentially unrestricted, and therefore capable of apprehending the subtle nature of the “unlimited.” While the language of such exploration is necessarily metaphorical and inferential, Bohm nonetheless insisted that sustained inquiry into the nature of consciousness and the “ground of being” is essential if we are to have some prospect of bringing an end to fragmentation in the world. It was his firm belief that this fragmentation is rooted in the incoherence of our thought processes, not in immutable laws of nature. He refused to place limitations on where the inquiry into this incoherence may lead, or to draw sharp distinctions between the individual, collective, and cosmic dimensions of humanity. In this respect, dialogue — always a testing ground for the limits of assumed knowledge — offers the possibility of an entirely new order of communication and relationship with ourselves, our fellows, and the world we inhabit."
(Lee Nichol Jemez Springs, Foreword  to David Bohm's On dialogue, 1996)

E4.7.3.A_REF3_PO

EL3.141. "THE WORLD I LIVE IN
I have refused to live 
locked in the orderly house of 
      reasons and proofs.
The world I live in and believe in 
is wider than that. And anyway, 
     what's wrong with Maybe?

You wouldn't believe what once or twice
I have seen. I'll just 
     tell you this: 
only if there are angels in your head will you 
     ever, possibly, see one."
(Mary Oliver, Felicity, 2015)

E4.7.3.A_REF4_PO

EL3.158. “INCANTATION
Human reason is beautiful and invincible.
No bars, no barbed wire, no pulping of books,
No sentence of banishment can prevail against it.
It establishes the universal ideas in language,
And guides our hand so we write Truth and Justice
With capital letters, lie and oppression with small.
It puts what should be above things as they are,
Is an enemy of despair and a friend of hope.
It does not know Jew from Greek or slave from master,
Giving us the estate of the world to manage.
It saves austere and transparent phrases
From the filthy discord of tortured words.
It says that everything is new under the sun,
Opens the congealed fist of the past.
Beautiful and very young are Philo-Sophia
And poetry, her ally in the service of the good.
As late as yesterday Nature celebrated their birth,
The news was brought to the mountains by a unicorn and an echo. 
Their friendship will be glorious, their time has no limit.
Their enemies have delivered themselves to destruction.”
(Czeslaw Milosz)

E4.7.3.A_REF5_LIT

EL3.145.A. THE FACTORS WE HAVE BEEN CONSIDERING AS “ANSWERS” SEEM TO BE MERELY SYMBOLS OR INDICES, RELATIONAL ASPECTS OF THINGS "The greatest fallacy in, or rather the greatest objection to, teleological thinking is in connection with the emotional content, the belief. People get to believing and even to professing the apparent answers thus arrived at, suffering mental constrictions by emotionally closing their minds to any of the further and possibly opposite “answers” which might otherwise be unearthed by honest effort — answers which, if faced realistically, would give rise to a struggle and to a possible rebirth which might place the whole problem in a new and more significant light. [...]
The non-teleological picture… goes beyond blame or cause. And the non-causal or non-blaming viewpoint… arises emergently from the union of two opposing viewpoints, such as those of physical and spiritual teleologies, especially if there is conflict as to causation between the two or within either. The new viewpoint very frequently sheds light over a larger picture, providing a key which may unlock levels not accessible to either of the teleological viewpoints. [...]

The factors we have been considering as “answers” seem to be merely symbols or indices, relational aspects of things — of which they are integral parts — not to be considered in terms of causes and effects. The truest reason for anything’s being so is that it is. This is actually and truly a reason, more valid and clearer than all the other separate reasons, or than any group of them short of the whole. Anything less than the whole forms part of the picture only, and the infinite whole is unknowable except by being it, by living into it.

A thing may be so “because” of a thousand and one reasons of greater or lesser importance… The separate reasons, no matter how valid, are only fragmentary parts of the picture. And the whole necessarily includes all that it impinges on as object and subject, in ripples fading with distance or depending upon the original intensity of the vortex."
(John Steinbeck,  The Log from the Sea of Cortez, 1940)

E4.7.3.A_REF5.1_LIT HE CONTINUES TO ASK “WHY” WITHOUT FIRST ADMITTING TO HIMSELF HIS COSMIC IDENTITY "No one thing ever merges gradually into anything else; the steps are discontinuous, but often so very minute as to seem truly continuous. If the investigation is carried deep enough, the factor in question, instead of being graphable as a continuous process, will be seen to function by discrete quanta with gaps or synapses between, as do quanta of energy, undulations of light. The apparently definitive answer occurs when causes and effects both arise on the same large plateau which is bounded a great way off by the steep rise which announces the next plateau. If the investigation is extended sufficiently, that distant rise will, however, inevitably be encountered; the answer which formerly seemed definitive now will be seen to be at least slightly inadequate and the picture will have to be enlarged so as to include the plateau next further out. Everything impinges on everything else, often into radically different systems, although in such cases faintly. We doubt very much if there are any truly “closed systems." [...]
Everything is potentially everywhere — the body is potentially cancerous, phthisic, strong to resist or weak to receive. In one swing of the balance the waiting life pounces in and takes possession and grows strong while our own individual chemistry is distorted past the point where it can maintain its balance. This we call dying, and by the process we do not give nor offer but are taken by a multiform life and used for its proliferation. These things are balanced. A man is potentially all things too, greedy and cruel, capable of great love or great hatred, of balanced or unbalanced so-called emotions. This is the way he is — one factor in a surge of striving. And he continues to ask “why” without first admitting to himself his cosmic identity."
(John Steinbeck,  The Log from the Sea of Cortez, 1940)

E4.7.3.A_REF5.2_LIT WE COULD BEGIN TO FEEL ITS NATURE BUT NOT ITS SIZE "The whole is necessarily everything, the whole world of fact and fancy, body and psyche, physical fact and spiritual truth, individual and collective, life and death, macrocosm and microcosm (the greatest quanta here, the greatest synapse between these two), conscious and unconscious, subject and object. The whole picture is portrayed by is, the deepest word of deep ultimate reality, not shallow or partial as reasons are, but deeper and participating… And all this against the hot beach on an Easter Sunday, with the passing day and the passing time. This little trip of ours was becoming a thing and a dual thing, with collecting and eating and sleeping merging with the thinking-speculating activity. Quality of sunlight, blueness and smoothness of water, boat engines, and ourselves were all parts of a larger whole and we could begin to feel its nature but not its size."
(John Steinbeck,  The Log from the Sea of Cortez, 1940)

E4.7.3.A_REF6_PH

E4.7.3.d. "COLLECTIVE INCOHERENCE" ARISES BECAUSE WE MISTAKE MENTAL "REPRESENTATIONS" (FUSED WITH MEMORY) FOR "TRUE PICTURES OF REALITY". Attention is the only remedy: we must "carefully attend" to the fact of representation.
"To illustrate one aspect of this generative pollution of thought, Bohm explores the manner in which perceptual input is fused with memory to produce representations that guide us in our moment-to-moment experience. The construction of these representations, which is both natural and necessary, is nonetheless a process that lies at the heart of collective incoherence. According to Bohm, the essential difficulty here is that we automatically assume that our representations are true pictures of reality, rather than relative guides for action that are based on reflexive, unexamined memories. Once we have assumed that the representations are fundamentally true, they “present” themselves as reality, and we have no option but to act accordingly. What is suggested is not that we attempt to alter the process of representation (which may be impossible), but that we carefully attend to the fact that any given representation— instinctively perceived as “reality”—may be somewhat less than real, or true."
(Lee Nichol Jemez Springs, Foreword  to David Bohm's On dialogue, 1996)

E4.7.3.B. The Art of Suspension: The active surrender of the intellect.
Suspending judgment, embracing uncertainty, quieting the will, and using ritual or wonder to bypass the critical ego.

E4.7.3.B_REF1_PH

L3.26.C. "APPRENEZ AU MOINS VOTRE IMPUISSANCE À CROIRE, puisque la raison vous y porte, et que néanmoins vous ne le pouvez. Travaillez donc, non pas à vous convaincre par l’augmentation des preuves de Dieu, mais par la diminution de vos passions. Vous voulez aller à la foi, et vous n’en savez pas le chemin; vous voulez vous guérir de l’infidélité, et vous en demandez le remède : apprenez de ceux qui ont été liés comme vous, et qui parient maintenant tout leur bien; ce sont gens qui savent ce chemin que vous voudriez suivre, et guéris d’un mal dont vous voulez guérir. Suivez la manière par où ils ont commencé : c’est en faisant tout comme s’ils croyaient, en prenant de l’eau bénite, en faisant dire des messes, etc. Naturellement même cela vous fait croire et vous abêtira. — « Mais c’est ce que je crains. »"
(Blaise Pascal, Pensées)

E4.7.3.B_REF3_LIT

EL3.33. A QUESTION IS REALLY ONE OF THE FORMS IN WHICH WONDER EXPRESSES ITSELF "Every human person is inevitably involved with two worlds: the world they carry within them and the world that is out there. All thinking, all writing, all action, all creation and all destruction is about that bridge between the two worlds. All thought is about putting a face on experience… One of the most exciting and energetic forms of thought is the question. I always think that the question is like a lantern. It illuminates new landscapes and new areas as it moves. Therefore, the question always assumes that there are many different dimensions to a thought that you are either blind to or that are not available to you. So a question is really one of the forms in which wonder expresses itself. One of the reasons that we wonder is because we are limited, and that limitation is one of the great gateways to wonder. […]
All thinking that is imbued with wonder is graceful and gracious thinking… And thought, if it’s not open to wonder, can be limiting, destructive and very, very dangerous."
(John O’Donohue, Walking on the pastures of wonder)

E4.7.3.B_REF2_PH PASCAL PROPOSE ICI UNE ASCESE : IL FAUT "DIMINUER LES PASSIONS" ET SOUMETTRE LE CORPS PAR DES RITUELS POUR FAIRE TAIRE L'ESPRIT CRITIQUE ET PERMETTRE A LA CERTITUDE DE LA FOI/DU CŒUR D'EMERGER.
"Apprenez au moins votre impuissance à croire, puisque la raison vous y porte, et que néanmoins vous ne le pouvez. Travaillez donc, non pas à vous convaincre par l’augmentation des preuves de Dieu, mais par la diminution de vos passions. Vous voulez aller à la foi, et vous n’en savez pas le chemin; vous voulez vous guérir de l’infidélité, et vous en demandez le remède : apprenez de ceux qui ont été liés comme vous, et qui parient maintenant tout leur bien; ce sont gens qui savent ce chemin que vous voudriez suivre, et guéris d’un mal dont vous voulez guérir. Suivez la manière par où ils ont commencé : c’est en faisant tout comme s’ils croyaient, en prenant de l’eau bénite, en faisant dire des messes, etc. Naturellement même cela vous fait croire et vous abêtira. — « Mais c’est ce que je crains. »
(Blaise Pascal, Pensées)

E4.7.3.B_REF4_PH "EN BREF, TOUTE LA QUESTION (ESSENTIELLE A LA PRATIQUE ZEN) ME SEMBLE SE RESUMER A CELLE DE L’USAGE DE NOTRE VOLONTE : COMMENT FAIRE POUR LACHER PRISE AU CŒUR DE L’ACTION (1) ? Si je devais tenter de repondre à cette question cruciale, je dîrais qu’il s’agit pour nous autres, occidentaux, de réintégrer la dimension psychique qui a présidé à l’essor du sport au début du XXe siècle en Europe, dimension qui ensuite, hélas, a non seulement été négligée mais encore contre-carrée par le sport de haute compétitIon et que, precisément, les grands champions réinvestissent malgré tout (et peut-être malgré eux ? ... ) avec le plus grand naturel et une élégante efficacité. Celle-ci me semble se rapporter à la notion de jeu, de gratuité dans l’effort : à l’esprit ludique en somme !
Note:
(1) Au sujet de la conception du moment opportun dans la pensée chinoise: «[...] si l’on intervient au bon moment, ce qui se trouve ainsi engagé, au sein du procès des choses, s’inscrivant alors dans un reseau de facteurs favorables, se voit porté de lui-même à se déployer, d’une façon naturelle, sans qu’on n’ait plus dès lors, à risquer ou à peiner, ou même simplement à se dépenser.»
François Jullien , Du temps, p. 56, éditions Grasset"
(Denis Grozdanovitch, De l´art de prendre la balle au bond)

E1.7.B.1.4.b_REF1_LIT.wE4.7.3.B.

"SUSPENDED JUDGMENTS

[...] We too - encouraged by these great individualists have a right to fall back upon whatever individuality may have been left to us; and, resting upon that, sinking into the soul of that, to defy all that public opinion and the voice of the majority may be able to do.

And we shall be wise also if we recognise, before it is too late, that what is most intrinsic and inalienable in ourselves is just that very portion of us which has nothing to do with our work in life, nothing to do with our duty to the community.

We shall be wise if we recognise, before it is too late, that the thing most sacred in us is that strange margin of unoccupied receptivity, upon which settle, in their flight over land and sea, the beautiful wild birds of unsolicited dreams.

We shall be wise if, before we die, we learn a little of the art of suspending our judgment - the art of "waiting upon the spirit."

For it is only when we have suspended our judgment; it is only when we have suspended our convictions, our principles, our ideals, our moralities, that "the still small voice" of the music of the universe, sad and sweet and terrible and tender, drifts in upon us, over the face of the waters of the soul.

The essence of us, the hidden reality of us, is too rare and delicate a thing to bear the crude weight of these sturdy opinions, these vigorous convictions, these social ardours, without growing dulled and hardened.

We all have to bear the burden of humanity; and the artists among us may be thankful that the predatory curse resting upon the rich is very seldom ours: but the burden of humanity must not be allowed to press all joy, all originality, all waywardness, all interest, all imagination out of our lives.

It is not for long, at best or worst, that we know what it is to be conscious of being living children of the human race upon this strange planet."
(John Cowper Powys, Suspended Judgments, 1916)


E1.7.B.1.4.b_REF1.1_LIT.wE4.7.3.B.

 POWYS SUGGESTS THAT TRUE REVELATIONS COME WHEN WE SUSPEND JUDGMENT AND CRITICISM, ALLOWING DEEPER, IMAGINATIVE INSIGHTS TO EMERGE FROM BEYOND THE REALMS OF HUMANITY AND NATURE.
"The days pass quickly, and the seasons and the years. From the graves of the darlings of our souls there comes a voice and a cry. A voice bidding us sink into our own true selves before we too are numbered with the dead; a cry bidding us sacrifice everything before we sacrifice the prerogative of our inmost identity, the right to feel and think and dream as persons born into a high inheritance, the inheritance of the mind that has the right to question all things and to hold fast what pleases it in defiance of opinion and logic and probability and argument.

For it is only when we suspend our judgments and leave arguing and criticising, that the quiet gods of the moonlit shores of the world murmur their secrets in our ears.

They come without our seeking for them, these rare intimations; without our seeking for them, and, sometimes, without our desiring them; but when they come they come as revelations of something deeper in us than any mere soul of humanity. They come from a region that is as far beyond humanity as it is beyond nature. They come from the fairy-land of that mysterious country wherein dwell the dreams and the fancies of those lonely ones among the sons of men who have been possessed by imagination. They come from the unknown land where those inhabit who are, as the Psalmist says, "free among the dead." They come from the land which we left when we were born, and to which we return when we die. And whether this is a land of nothingness and oblivion none knoweth; for none hath returned to tell us. Meanwhile we can imagine what we will; and we can suspend our last judgment until we ourselves are judged."
(John Cowper Powys, Suspended Judgments, 1916)


E4.7.3.B_REF5_PO

EL3.165. “UNCERTAINTY
It’s not a place,
but I am grateful to be in it,
where endings and known things
complicate,
and I, the judge I know myself to be,
go to review
the very heavy declarations
I so often lay down like law.
It’s not a place at all.
I just practice there, assemble
some beliefs, disturb
others and put the extras
into a pile for mosaics,
one of my big projects
for the future.”
(Lia Purpura, It shouldn’t have been beautiful, 2015)

E4.7.3.C. Epiphany and the Silence of the "Me."
When the noise of the self/ego is silenced, one encounters the "Unlimited," the "Is," and a form of Love that is Order.

E1.6.D.3.7.b.iv_REF1_PH.wE4.7.3.C.

 "V. ON BEING AWARE
The Question "WHAT SHALL WE DO ABOUT IT?" is only asked by those who do not understand the problem. If a problem can be solved at all, to understand it and to know what to do about it are the same thing. On the other hand, doing something about a problem which you do not understand is like trying to clear away darkness by thrusting it aside with your hands. When light is brought, the darkness vanishes at once. [...]

Light, here, means awareness-to be aware of life, of experience as it is at this moment, without any judgments or ideas about it. In other words, you have to see and feel what you are experiencing as it is, and not as it is named. This very simple "opening of the eyes" brings about the most extraordinary transformation of understanding and living, and shows that many of our most baffling problems are pure illusion. This may sound like an oversimplification because most people imagine themselves to be fully enough aware of the present already, but we shall see that this is far from true.¹ "

Note 1: The word "awareness" is used in the sense given to it by J. Krishnamurti, whose writings discuss this theme with extraordinary perception.

(Alan Watts, The wisdom of insecurity, 1951)

E4.7.3.C_REF1_PH. A_Wenshu Manjusri Goddess ; A_Jesus with sword coming out of his mouth, from an altar in Hildesheim, Germany_circa1430

AN EPIPHANY IS AN EXPERIENCE OF THE SUBLIME THAT OPENS AND EXPENDS THE BOUNDARIES OF OUR EGO.  
"An epiphany for James Joyce is an aesthetical experience too great for the beholder to bear. It exceeds the boundaries of normality - it has no practical application. It is an experience of the sublime that opens and expends the boundaries of our ego. Those experiences can be of beauty but also of awe. Epiphanies go past ethical judgements - the sublime can be terrible. The terror only is felt if you are clinging to you ego - when you open up and embrace and affirm reality, there is no more good and bad or beauty and horror. The passing of time conceals an eternal principle of truth which is reality in the present. The epiphany breaks the spell of time and gives us a realization of eternity. Religions use the imagery of a god coming at you with a sword to break the ego and shake you into realization of eternity (Jesus with a sword coming out of his mouth, the Wenshu Manjusri Goddess weaving a sword over his head) and as a means to open up our ego. The experience of eternity can't be expressed in language, but poetry. Poetry, by its rhythm and choice of words has the power of provoking epiphanies.
(Joseph Campbell, Masks of Eternity, The power of myth - Épisode 7 - Masks of Eternity - 34'- 43')

E4.7.3.C_REF2_PH  THE ACCUMULATION OF EXPERIENCE CREATES A "CENTER," A "THINKER," OR A "ME". PURE ATTENTION REQUIRES THE ABSENCE OF THIS CENTER: "AS SOON AS THERE IS A CENTER OF RECOGNITION... TRUTH IS NOT".
"Toute expérience sous-entend la mise en œuvre d'un processus de récognition. [...] Il y a identification d'un événement qui s'est déjà produit dans le passé ; l'expérience n'est donc jamais nouvelle. La vérité, elle, ne peut en aucun cas faire l'objet d'une expérience, c'est ce qui en fait toute la beauté; elle se renouvelle sans cesse, elle n'est jamais la redite d'un événement passé. L'événement, l'incident d'hier doit être intégralement oublié ou vécu, révolu, dépassé. Mais vouloir perpétuer cela sous forme d'une expérience que l'on va mesurer en terme d'accomplissement, ou vouloir faire partager ce fabuleux événement, dans le but d'impressionner ou de convaincre autrui… voilà qui paraît tout à fait stupide. [...] Cela veut dire qu'il y a nécessairement un centre, un penseur, un observateur qui retient, qui garde en lui l'événement révolu. La vérité, elle, ne relèvent en aucun cas de l'expérience. Dès lors qu'il existe un centre de reconnaissance qui n'est autre que le “moi” - le penseur -, dès lors, la vérité n'est point. Et si quelqu'un dit avoir fait l'expérience du réel, méfiez-vous de lui : refusez son autorité. [...]
Toute votre vie vous n'avez jamais rien connu d'autre que la pensée, vous lui avez attribué une importance démesurée, pourtant la pensé est toujours vieille, et jamais neuve, elle n'est que le prolongement du souvenir. Il suffit d'avoir vécu dans ce contexte pour constater l'évidence d'une certaine forme de continuité. Mais c'est une continuité sans vie, finie, révolue, caduque ; seul ce qui s'achève peut espérer un renouveau. Voilà pourquoi il est si important de comprendre la mort. Nous devons mourir à tout ce que nous connaissons. Avez-vous déjà essayé ? Se libérer du connu, se délivrer de ses souvenirs, ne fût-ce que quelques jours ; être libéré de ses plaisirs, sans le moindre argument, sans la moindre peur;  mourir à sa famille, à sa maison, à son nom ; devenir parfaitement anonyme. Seul celui qui est parfaitement anonyme et en état de non-violence, ignore la violence. Il faut donc mourir chaque jour, pas dans l'abstrait, mais de manière réelle et tangible. [...]"
(Krishnamurti, Cette lumière en nous, 1999)

E4.7.3.C_REF3_PH "LOVE IS OUTSIDE OF CAUSALITY AND IS ORDER": IT IS THE STATE ACHIEVED WHEN THE NOISE OF THOUGHT IS SUSPENDED.
"Découvrir et explorer est un des éléments de l’intelligence ; explorer la nature du faux, parce que dans la compréhension du faux, dans la révélation de ce qui est une illusion, se trouve la vérité, qui est intelligence.
L’intelligence a-t-elle une cause ? La pensée a une cause. On pense parce que l’on a des  expériences passées, une accumulation d’informations et de savoirs passés. Ce savoir n'est jamais complet, il va de paire avec  l'ignorance et c'est sur ce terrain du savoir avec ses ignorances, qu’est née la pensée. La pensée est forcément partielle, limitée, fragmentée, car elle est le fruit du savoir et le savoir ne peut jamais être complet. La pensée est obligatoirement incomplète, insuffisante, limitée. Et nous utilisons cette pensée, sans en voir ses limites ; nous vivons constamment en produisant des pensées et en adorant les choses que la pensée a créés. […]
L’amour a-t-il une cause ? Nous disons que l’intelligence n’a pas de cause, c’est l’intelligence, ce n’est pas votre intelligence ou mon intelligence. [...] Si l’on découvre que l'intelligence est la sécurité absolue, et que l’amour est en dehors de la causalité et qu’il est ordre, alors l’univers est ouvert – parce que l’univers est ordre."
(Krishnamurti, La flamme de l’attention, 1983)

E1.7.B.2.3.c_REF1_PH.wE4.7.3.C.

 "THERE SEEMS TO BE SOMETHING IN THE STRUCTURE OF THOUGHT in civilization which tends to claim that we are going to get to know everything, and control it all. But we should ask: is it in the nature of thought to be able to know everything —  since thought is abstraction, which inherently implies limitation? Or put differently: is the whole field of thought, experience, knowledge, tacit thought — is that field limited? A great deal of our culture would say that it is not limited. The assumption is that no matter what happens, by approaching it through thought, knowledge, and skill of application, we can deal with it. Now, I say that this assumption will go into implicit, tacit thought — and then it means that no matter what happens, you're going to think. That assumption is very dynamically active — it's a universal assumption, an assumption about "all." It is extremely powerful, with extremely great value, and it will "work." It will tend to take precedence over almost anything. You will find, therefore, that you are automatically thinking about everything, because the assumption is at work that thinking is not only possible, and at least potentially relevant, but that it's the only way.

I am proposing, however, that the field of thought is limited. I am also suggesting that there is the "unlimited," which contains the limited. This "unlimited" is not just in the direction of going to greater and greater distances out to the end of the universe; but much more importantly, it is also going into more and more subtlety. As we've seen, however, our attention tends to be limited by the tacit thoughts as to what has value, what's worth being attended to. If you don't attend to something, then you don't perceive it — it doesn't exist as far as you're concerned. But attention is not intrinsically restricted — it could widen out and go into any form. [...]

It may be that one of the brain's functions could be to be sensitive to more and more subtle levels of being; the brain could then function more as an antenna to pick up such levels, rather than as something that would be only the "initiator" of action. As long as the brain is following only its own internal goals, then it will be occupied; and that's necessary in certain contexts. But if we consider that it's also necessary to reach or contact the unlimited, then there must be a silence — a lack of occupation."
(David Bohm, On dialogue, 1996)

