E1.1. WHY IS IT SO DIFFICULT TO DEFINE HAPPINESS?

E1.1.A. IS HAPPINESS THE OPPOSITE OF UNHAPPINESS?
“Sadness in infusion
joy by effraction."
(Paul Lambda @LambdaPaul)

E1.1.A.1. IS HAPPINESS AN ACT OF IMAGINATION IN A MOMENT OF ABSENCE OF SUFFERING?
"The "natural" experience that is the basis of either Stoic or Epicurean independence is not work or servitude, it is pain. The happiness that one achieves in isolation and that one enjoys confined to private existence will never be anything but the famous "absence of pain", a definition on which all the variants of a coherent sensualism necessarily agree. Hedonism, for which only the sensations of the body are real, is only the most radical form of an apolitical, totally private way of life, a true implementation of Epicurus' motto: lathe biôsas kai mè politeuesthai ("to live hidden and not to care about the world"). 
Normally the absence of pain is nothing more than the necessary bodily condition for knowing the world; the body must not be irritated, it must not be turned in on itself by irritation, so that the senses can function normally, receive what is given to them. The absence of pain is usually "felt" only in the brief interval between suffering and non-suffering, and the sensation that corresponds to the sensualist concept of happiness is relief rather than absence of pain. The intensity of this sensation is not in doubt; in fact, it is equaled only by that of the sensation of pain itself. The mental effort required by philosophies that, for various reasons, want to 'liberate' us from the world is always an act of imagination in which the mere absence of pain is experienced and actualized as a sensation of relief."
(Hannah Arendt, The Crisis of Culture, 1954)

E1.1.A.2. HAPPINESS: A SUBJECTIVE, RELATIVE STATE, WHOSE VERY EXISTENCE CAN BE CONTESTED. But those who have experienced misfortune no longer have such naivety and know, at least by contrast, that happiness also exists.
"Happiness is neither satiation (the satisfaction of all our inclinations), nor bliss (permanent joy), nor beatitude (eternal joy). It presupposes duration, as Aristotle saw it ("a swallow does not make a spring, nor a single day happiness"), and therefore also fluctuations, ups and downs, interruptions, as in love, in the heart or in the soul... To be happy is not always to be joyful (who can be?), nor never to be joyful: it is to be able to be joyful, without the need for anything decisive to happen or change. The fact that it is only a possibility leaves room for hope and fear, for lack, for approximation... which distinguishes it from happiness. Happiness belongs to time: it is a state of everyday life. It is a subjective, relative state whose very existence can therefore be disputed. But those who have experienced unhappiness are no longer naive and know, at least by contrast, that happiness also exists. To confuse it with bliss is to deny it. To confuse it with bliss is to renounce it. The sins of the young and the philosophers. The wise are not so stupid. [The best definition is the simplest. What is happiness? The opposite of unhappiness. [On the other hand, what is happiness? Any period of time when joy is perceived, even after the fact, as immediately possible. You wake up in the morning: joy is there or it isn't (when I wake up, it's rarely there), but you know that it can come at any moment, that it will undoubtedly come, then go away, then come back... You are happy - more or less happy, that is, happy. Happiness is not an absolute (we are more or less happy), but how good it is! "
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.1.B. INSTEAD OF BEING OPPOSITES, ARE JOY AND SADNESS NOT MIXED?
This would make it difficult to achieve "pure happiness," even in moments of the highest exaltation. Pure happiness would be illusory, but joy mixed with disappointment would not be.
Happiness and unhappiness are twin brothers-is this a combination that excludes the absolute nature of either term, or is it an ambiguity that we should give up trying to clarify? Is the suffering associated with the joy we feel for the fleeting things we love inevitable?

E1.1.B.1. "HAPPINESS UNDOUBTEDLY ALWAYS INVOLVES SOME ANXIETY, SOME PASSION, A TOUCH OF PAIN THAT AWAKENS US TO OURSELVES."
(Alain, Propos sur le bonheur, 1908)

"[...] if you refuse to let your own suffering lie upon you even for an hour and if you constantly try to prevent and forestall all possible distress way ahead of time; if you experience suffering and displeasure as evil, hateful, worthy of annihilation, and as a
defect of existence. then it is clear that besides your religion of pity you also harbor another religion in your heart that is perhaps
the mother of the religion of pity: the religion 0/ comjortableness. How little you know of human happiness. you comfortable and benevolent people, for happiness and unhappiness are sisters and even twins that either grow up together or as in your case, remain small together. [...]"  
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Le gai savoir, La Gaya Scienza, Aphorism 338, 1882)

E1.1.B.1.1. "THE BITTERSWEET IS… AN AUTHENTIC AND ELEVATING RESPONSE TO THE PROBLEM OF BEING ALIVE in a deeply flawed yet stubbornly beautiful world. Most of all, bittersweetness shows us how to respond to pain: by acknowledging it, and attempting to turn it into art, the way the musicians do, or healing, or innovation, or anything else that nourishes the soul. If we don’t transform our sorrows and longings, we can end up inflicting them on others via abuse, domination, neglect. But if we realize that all humans know — or will know — loss and suffering, we can turn toward each other. 

C. S. Lewis called it the “inconsolable longing” for we know not what, or Sehnsucht, a German term based on the words das Sehnen (“the yearning”) and sucht (“an obsession or addiction”). Sehnsucht was the animating force of Lewis’s life and career. It was “that unnameable something, desire for which pierces us like a rapier at the smell of bonfire, the sound of wild ducks flying overhead, the title of The Well at the World’s End, the opening lines of ‘Kubla Khan,’ the morning cobwebs in late summer, or the noise of falling waves.” He’d felt it first as a young boy, when his brother brought him a toy garden in the form of an old biscuit tin filled with moss and flowers, and he was overcome by a joyous ache he couldn’t understand, though he would try for the rest of his life to put it into words, to find its source, to seek the company of kindred spirits who’d known the same wondrous “stabs of joy.

The place you suffer, in other words, is the same place you care profoundly — care enough to act." 
(Susan Cain, Bittersweet: How Sorrow and Longing Make Us Whole, 2022)

E1.1.B.1.2. JOY AND SADNESS ARE MIXED TOGETHER: The child throws his paper airplane and watches it glide beautifully - what joy! 
But soon the airplane crashes, its nose completely crushed, rendering it useless - what a disappointment!
Daniele Sigalot reminds us of the roller coaster of childhood emotions with his giant paper airplane with a broken nose, which embodies the alternating joy and sadness inherent in the ephemeral. Like this airplane, which turns from white paper to jet black before our eyes as it nose-dives and crashes, we often view the surprises that disrupt our plans with a gloomy eye, instead of welcoming the inevitable future of all things.

E1.1.B.1.3.  “MORNING, SUCH A BEAUTIFUL MORNING
Of a happy day that has come
The sun rose in the sky
And every color shone
Then the dream came back
To the heart
After this happy day
I don't know if there will be another day
It's our morning, so beautiful after all
Carnival morning
My heart sings
Joy has returned, so happy
The morning of this love”
(Luiz Bonfá, Morning of Carnaval)

"Manhã, tão bonita manhã
De um dia feliz que chegou
O sol no céu surgiu
E em cada cor brilhou
Voltou o sonho então
Ao coração
Depois deste dia feliz
Não sei se outro dia haverá
É nossa manhã, tão bela afinal
Manhã de carnaval
Canta o meu coração
A alegria voltou, tão feliz
A manhã desse amor"
(Luiz Bonfá, Manhã De Carnaval)

Listen to the transcription by Stephanie Johnes:
https://youtu.be/j7gji4gDjEk?si=HHvX8LJsT8qKwdzz

E1.1.B.1.4. WE HAD A FEELING THAT WAS A MIXTURE OF EXHILARATION AND UNHAPPINESS:
"Our enthusiasm and happiness reached a certain height, I would even say a certain intensity, in this bright, sun-drenched landscape. But we had a mixed feeling of exhilaration and unhappiness. As children we sometimes found ourselves crying in the middle of these races, I don't know if it was the fresh air or our slightly comical happiness that caused it. Perhaps our love of things lacked a precise focus, and this greenery, this poetry of the senses, heightened our joy without, how can I put it? Leaving us alone".
(Sandro Penna, Un peu de fièvre, 1973)

E1.1.B.1.5. "SEAGULLS ARE FLYING CLOSE TO THE GROUND.
They say this means it’s going to rain. 
But it’s not raining yet. Right now 
There are seagulls close to the ground 
Flying—that’s all.

Likewise, when there’s happiness,
They say sadness is on its way. 
Perhaps, but so what? If today
Is full of happiness, where
Does sadness ﬁt in?

It doesn’t. It belongs to tomorrow. 
When it comes, then I’ll be sad.
Today is pure and good. The future 
Doesn’t exist today. 
There’s a wall Between us and it.

Enjoy what you have, drunk on being! 
Leave the future in its place.
Poems, wine, women, ideals— 
Whatever you want, if it’s what is,
Is for you to enjoy.

Tomorrow, tomorrow...Be, tomorrow, 
What tomorrow brings you. For now
Accept, be ignorant, and believe. 
Keep close to the ground, but ﬂying, 
Like the seagull."
(Fernando Pessoa, 18 May 1934)

E1.1.B.1.5. ”THERE IS NO GREATER PARADISE
There is no greater paradise
Than simply being here.
The proof is in the agony
That willingly we bear.
A moment is beatitude;
A year, eternal grace;
A life, a window wide upon
The transcendental face.
Our gratitude's ubiquitous,
The stuff of every day,
The ground bass of an ecstasy
That never goes away.
And yet . . . and yet this wonder lies
Like grass beneath the snow:
Above we fear the brutal wind,
Eternal spring below.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E1.1.B.1.6. “BY THE PEONIES
The peonies bloom, white and pink.
And inside each, as in a fragrant bowl,
A swarm of tiny beetles have their conversation,
For the flower is given to them as their home.

Mother stands by the peony bed,
Reaches for one bloom, opens its petals,
And looks for a long time into peony lands,
Where one short instant equals a whole year.

Then lets the flower go. And what she thinks
She repeats aloud to the children and herself.
The wind sways the green leaves gently
And speckles of light flick across their faces.

The charms of the ordinariness soothe the threat of anxiety.”
(Czeslaw Milosz)

E1.7.B.2.3.h.wE1.1.B.

E1.1.B.2. "IF AMBIGUITY IS THAT WHICH CANNOT BE DECIDED, NOT BECAUSE OPPOSITES COEXIST, AS IN "MIXED," BUT BECAUSE OPPOSITES ARE NOT SUFFICIENTLY DISTINCT TO BE SEPARATED, then we can say that ambiguity is the "between" of their non-separation; or that the place of ambiguity is the in-between. Between 'joy' and 'sadness': the most original and therefore deepest emotion [...] cannot be divided between these opposing feelings. Not because it mixes them or oscillates between them, but because it does not yet give rise to their distinction. At the same time, however, this means recognizing that this place of the in-between is in itself a non-place; that it can only be conceived through the other than itself, that of which it is the in-between, and has no "in itself"; that it is therefore without any determination of its own, possesses nothing of its own, has no essence or "property": that it therefore eludes ontology. Strictly speaking, the in-between does not "exist. How can we say "something" about it, speak of it other than in negative terms?
(François Jullien, Chinese thought vs. pjhilosophy, 2015)

E1.1.B.3. "HAPPY TIMES. - A happy century is absolutely impossible, for the reason that men only want to have it, not to have it, and when happy days come, each individual learns to ask heaven for trouble and misery. The destiny of men is arranged for happy moments - every life has such moments - but not for happy times. Nevertheless, these times remain in the imagination of men as "beyond the mountains," as a legacy of their ancestors; for undoubtedly, since ancient times, this idea of a happy time has been borrowed from that state in which, after the violent tension of hunting and war, man abandons himself to rest, stretches out his limbs, and hears the wings of sleep rustling around him. By false reasoning and in accordance with this ancient custom, man imagines that even now, after whole periods of distress and sorrow, he will be able to enjoy this state of happiness to a degree and for a time proportional to his suffering. [...]"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human, Aphorism 471, 1878)

E1.1.B.4.  EVEN THE HIGHEST STATES OF MIND CANNOT REMAIN ON THE PLATEAU OF BLISS. Perhaps they stay there longer than others because they are not afraid of suffering?

"It is well to fly towards the light, even where there may be some fluttering and bruising of wings against the windowpanes, is it not?"  
(Elizabeth Barrett Browning, Love Letters of Elizabeth Barrett and Robert Browning)

E1.1.B.4.1. "ELEVATED MOODS.- It seems to me that most people simply do not believe in elevated moods, unless these last for moments only or at most a quarter of an hour--except for those few who know at firsthand the longer duration of elevated feelings. But to be a human being with one elevated feeling-to be a single great mood incarnate-that has hitherto been a mere dream and a delightful possibility; as yet history does not offer us any certain examples. Nevertheless history might one day give birth to such people, too-once a great many favorable preconditions have been created and determined that even the dice throws of the luckiest chance could not bring together today. What has so far entered our souls only now and then as an exception that made us shudder, might perhaps be the usual state for these future souls: a perpetual movement between high and low, the feeling of high and low. a continual ascent as on stairs and at the same time a sense of resting on clouds."  
(Friedrich Nietzsche, The Gay Science, Aphorism 288, 1882)

E1.1.B.4.2. BEATITUDE 
[...] Beatitude is real happiness, or true happiness, which would be eternal (truth is always eternal), complete (truth lacks nothing), and like another name for salvation. But don't dream too much about it. Beatitude is eternal, Spinoza explains; how can it begin? It is therefore vain to hope for it: no one attains it except by ceasing to wait for it. 
If joy consists in passing on to a greater perfection," writes Spinoza, "beatitude must consist in the fact that the soul itself is endowed with perfection" (Ethics, V, 33, scolie). But perfection is nothing other than reality (Eth., II, def. 6): beatitude would be the normal state of the soul, from which we are separated only by our illusions and lies. It is not the reward of virtue, but virtue itself (Eth., V, prop. 42). 
More simply, it is the happiness of the wise, or wisdom itself as happiness. Its content is joy, therefore love. Its object is truth, therefore everything. It is the true love of the true. 
The fact that we are incapable of inhabiting it does not prevent us from sometimes discovering that it inhabits us. 
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.1.B.5. WHAT IF THE REALIZATION THAT EVERYONE SUFFERS, and that we can dialogue about this difficulty of existence, were a path to joy - to an acceptance (can we do better than accept?) that episodes of suffering are part of a happy life?

"All real living hurts as well as fulfils. Happiness comes when we have lived and have a respite for sheer forgetting. Happiness, in the vulgar sense, is just a holiday experience. The life-long happiness lies in being used by life; hurt by life, driven and goaded by life, replenished and overjoyed with life, fighting for life’s sake. That is real happiness. In the undergoing, a large part of it is pain."
(D.H. Lawrence, The Boy in the Bush, 1924)

E1.1.B.5.1. "IT ASTONISHES ME SOMETIMES — NO, OFTEN — HOW EVERY PERSON I GET TO KNOW — EVERYONE, REGARDLESS OF EVERYTHING, BY WHICH I MEAN EVERYTHING — LIVES WITH SOME PROFOUND PERSONAL SORROW. Brother addicted. Mother murdered. Dad died in surgery. Rejected by their family. Cancer came back. Evicted. Fetus not okay. Everyone, regardless, always, of everything. Not to mention the existential sorrow we all might be afflicted with, which is that we, and what we love, will soon be annihilated. Which sounds more dramatic than it might. Let me just say dead. Is this, sorrow, of which our impending being no more might be the foundation, the great wilderness? Is sorrow the true wild? And if it is — and if we join them — your wild to mine — what’s that? For joining, too, is a kind of annihilation. What if we joined our sorrows, I’m saying. I’m saying: What if that is joy? [...]
Among the most beautiful things I’ve ever heard anyone say came from my student Bethany, talking about her pedagogical aspirations or ethos, how she wanted to be as a teacher, and what she wanted her classrooms to be: “What if we joined our wildernesses together?” Sit with that for a minute."
(Ross Gay, The book of Delights, 2019)
Tags: Orange

E1.1.B.5.2. "MEANING OF THE UNIVERSE

NOT TO ACCEPT AN EVENT IN THE WORLD IS TO WISH THAT THE WORLD DID NOT EXIST. That is within my power—for myself. If I wish it I obtain it. I am then an excrescence produced by the world.[...]

To wish that the world did not exist is to wish that I, just as I am, may be everything.

Would that the entire universe, from this pebble at my feet to the most distant stars, existed for me at every moment as much as
Agnès did for Arnolphe or his money-box did for Harpagon. If I choose, the world can belong to me like the treasure does to the miser.
But it is a treasure that does not increase.

This irreducible ‘I’ which is the irreducible basis of my suffering—I have to make this ‘I’ universal.[...]
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace , 1947)

E1.1.B.5.3. BUT BE CAREFUL NOT TO FALL INTO REALITY SHOW VOYEURISM!
"Stage-plays also carried me away, full of images of my miseries, and of fuel to my fire. Why is it, that man desires to be made sad, beholding doleful and tragical things, which yet himself would no means suffer? yet he desires as a spectator to feel sorrow at them, and this very sorrow is his pleasure. What is this but a miserable madness? for a man is the more affected with these actions, the less free he is from such affections. Howsoever, when he suffers in his own person, it uses to be styled misery: when he compassionates others, then it is mercy. But what sort of compassion is this for feigned and scenical passions? for the auditor is not called on to relieve, but only to grieve: and he applauds the actor of these fictions the more, the more he grieves. And if the calamities of those persons (whether of old times, or mere fiction) be so acted, that the spectator is not moved to tears, he goes away disgusted and criticising; but if he be moved to passion, he stays intent, and weeps for joy.

Are griefs then too loved? Verily all desire joy. Or whereas no man likes to be miserable, is he yet pleased to be merciful? which because it cannot be without passion, for this reason alone are passions loved? This also springs from that vein of friendship. But whither goes that vein? whither flows it? wherefore runs it into that torrent of pitch bubbling forth those monstrous tides of foul lustfulness, into which it is wilfully changed and transformed, being of its own will precipitated and corrupted from its heavenly clearness? Shall compassion then be put away? by no means. Be griefs then sometimes loved. But beware of
uncleanness, O my soul, under the guardianship of my God, the God of our fathers, who is to be praised and exalted above all for ever, beware of uncleanness. For I have not now ceased to pity; but then in the theatres I rejoiced with lovers when they wickedly enjoyed one another, although this was imaginary only in the play. And when they lost one another, as if very compassionate, I sorrowed with them, yet had my delight in both. But now I much more pity him that rejoiceth in his wickedness, than him who is thought to suffer hardship, by missing some pernicious pleasure, and the loss of some miserable felicity. This certainly is the truer mercy, but in it grief delights not. For though he that grieves for the miserable, be commended for his office of charity; yet had he, who is
genuinely compassionate, rather there were nothing for him to grieve for. For if good will be ill willed (which can never be), then may he, who truly and sincerely commiserates, wish there might be some miserable, that he might commiserate. Some sorrow may then be allowed, none loved. For thus dost Thou, O Lord God, who lovest souls far more purely than we, and hast more incorruptibly pity on them, yet are wounded with no sorrowfulness. And who is sufficient for these things?

But I, miserable, then loved to grieve, and sought out what to grieve at, when in another's and that feigned and personated misery, that acting best pleased me, and attracted me the most vehemently, which drew tears from me. What marvel that an unhappy sheep, straying from Thy flock, and impatient of Thy keeping, I became infected with a foul disease? And hence the love of griefs; not such as should sink deep into me; for I loved not to suffer, what I loved to look on; but such as upon hearing their fictions should lightly scratch the surface; upon which, as on envenomed nails, followed inflamed swelling, impostumes, and a
putrefied sore. My life being such, was it life, O my God?

And Thy faithful mercy hovered over me afar. Upon how grievous iniquities consumed I myself, pursuing a sacrilegious curiosity, that having forsaken Thee, it might bring me to the treacherous abyss, and the beguiling service of devils, to whom I sacrificed my evil actions, and in all these things Thou didst scourge me! I dared even, while Thy solemnities were celebrated within the walls of Thy Church, to desire, and to compass a business deserving death for its fruits, for which Thou scourgedst me with grievous punishments, though nothing to my fault, O Thou my exceeding mercy, my God, my refuge from those terrible destroyers, among whom I wandered with a stiff neck, withdrawing further from Thee, loving mine own ways, and not Thine; loving a vagrant liberty."
(Saint Augustin, Confessions, Book III, Chapter II)

E1.1.B.6. MUSICAL ILLUSTRATION: 
Philip Glass, String Quartet No. 4 "Buczak", first mouvment

Listen to it on YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HygZHu85FhA&feature=youtu.be

E1.1.C. AREN'T WE CONFUSING PLEASURE WITH HAPPINESS? 
Physical or mental pleasure - because it is transient, because it has a physiological limit, and because it is provoked by external causes - does not offer itself as a basis for lasting happiness. Our happiness is not the sum of our pleasures. 
The debauchees and the utilitarians disagree with these calls for moderation... while for Freud, who also identifies happiness with the "pleasure principle," all other strategies are imperfect if debauchery leads to more suffering. He offers us a somewhat bleak vision of a human being condemned to the pursuit of a life of pleasures that always leave us unsatisfied.

E1.1.C.1. FOR ARISTOTLE, WE TAKE PLEASURE FROM SOMETHING; WE NEVER IDENTIFY PLEASURE ITSELF. Pleasure is added to a given activity, while happiness is pursued for its own sake. An inordinate life of pleasure is the result of a bad education in early childhood. 
By repeating virtuous actions, we end up finding pleasure in the second nature we develop. Desire cannot be reasoned with, so it is habit that enables us to discover that true happiness lies in virtue. Ethical development begins and is accompanied by the discovery of pleasure. The first pleasures we experience are those of sensation, but the power of habit enables us to reduce our dependence on them.

E1.1.C.1.1. THE SOVEREIGN GOOD WOULD BE A CERTAIN PLEASURE, THAT OF A VIRTUOUS LIFE COMPOSED OF RIGHTEOUS ACTIONS AND UNHINDERED BY SUFFERING.
"With those who identify happiness with virtue or some one virtue our account is in harmony; for to virtue belongs virtuous activity. But it makes, perhaps, no small difference whether we place the chief good in possession or in use, in state of mind or in activity. For the state of mind may exist without producing any good result, as in a man who is asleep or in some other way quite inactive, but the activity cannot; for one who has the activity will of necessity be acting, and acting well. And as in the Olympic Games it is not the most beautiful and the strongest that are crowned but those who compete (for it is some of these that are victori-ous), so those who act win, and rightly win, the noble and good things in life.

Their life is also in itself pleasant. For pleasure is a state of soul, and to each man that which he is said to be a lover of is pleasant; e.g., not only is a horse pleasant to the lover of horses, and a spectacle to the lover of sights, but also in the same way just acts are pleasant to the lover of justice and in general virtuous acts to the lover of virtue. Now for most men their pleasures are in conflict with one another because these are not by nature pleasant, but the lovers of what is noble find pleasant the things that are by nature pleasant; and virtuous actions are such, so that these are pleasant for such men as well as in their own nature. Their life, therefore, has no further need of pleasure as a sort of adventitious charm, but has its pleasure in itself. For, besides what we have said, the man who does not rejoice in noble actions is not even good; since no one would call a man just who did not enjoy acting justly, nor any man liberal who did not enjoy liberal actions; and similarly in all other cases. If this is so, virtuous actions must be in themselves pleasant. But they are also good and noble, and have each of these at-tributes in the highest degree, since the good man judges well about these attributes; his judgement is such as we have described. Happiness then is the best, noblest, and most pleasant thing in the world, and these attributes are not severed"
(Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, circa 350 BC)

E1.1.B.1.2.wE1.1.C.1. 

E1.1.C.1.3. LEARNING TO FIND PLEASURE IN THE GOOD IS THE GOAL OF A HEALTHY UPBRINGING.
"The man who indulges in every pleasure and abstains from none becomes self-indulgent, while the man who shuns every pleasure, as boors do, be-comes in a way insensible; temperance and courage, then, are destroyed by excess and defect, and preserved by the mean. [...]
We must take as a sign of states of character the pleasure or pain that ensues on acts; for the man who abstains from bodily pleasures and delights in this very fact is temperate, while the man who is annoyed at it is self-indulgent, and he who stands his ground against things that are terrible and delights in this or at least is not pained is brave, while the man who is pained is a coward. For moral excellence is concerned with pleasures and pains; it is on account of the pleasure that we do bad things, and on account of the pain that we abstain from noble ones. Hence we ought to have been brought up in a particular way from our very youth, as Plato says, so as both to delight in and to be pained by the things that we ought; for this is the right education"
(Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, circa 350 BC)

Angelo di Marco, The sadist chases his victims by car, 1979 - Aristotle would have said he had a bad upbringing.

E1.1.C.1.3_REF1_PH  PHILOSOPHY OF EXCESS: ARISTOTLE AND PLATO, SHOULD WE BE PRUDENT?
One wonders whether there would be excess without a religious notion: the notion of hubris seems to have its origins in the transgression of something sacred and magical. Even rationalized in law, the term hubris retains something indefinable. It will be translated as "outrage"-in outrage there is more than an assault on a person's body, but a desire to humiliate for the sheer pleasure of superiority. 
It is hubris that possesses Achilles when he degrades Hector's body and refuses to return it for burial. 
As a political educator, Plato's reservation about Homer's work concerns the pernicious influence that episodes of transgression in the epic can have on human beings.
The imposition of superiority by force that characterizes hubris in Homer is antithetical to the aristocracy of knowledge and ethics that Plato advocates for the governance of the city. For Plato, everyone is capable of entering the circle of power of this epistemic aristocracy-not everyone will make it, but no one is prevented from doing so by blood. This quest for harmony seeks to eliminate excess and hubris. For Plato, it is eros that brings hubris to its highest degree, for sexual desire is the strongest. Unbridled sexual desire, beyond the limits set by the law, is the origin of the tyrant - for Eros has the ability to reorganize everything around him. If in Homer Achilles was the exemplar of hubris, in Plato he is the tyrant. In the face of the excesses of the barbarian, such as the Persian king in Aeschylus' play, the Greek represents moderation. 
For Aristotle, prudence (phrónisis) is to be distinguished from temperance (sophrosúnê) - the two terms share the root phro, which in the body corresponds to the diaphragm, the seat of the emotions in the Greek poetic tradition.
Prudence is both intellectual and practical: it guides political action - good deliberation to achieve the best ethical end, which is human happiness. It is practical wisdom. 
Temperance is an ethical virtue much closer to the body, while prudence is an intellectual virtue. Temperance is a quality of the faculty of desire. Because it is difficult to reason about, moderation is calibrated by education from childhood, by habit and repetition: we learn to desire the right amount.
"One way to understand the nature of prudence is to consider which people we call prudent. It is generally agreed that the characteristic of a prudent man is that he is able to consider correctly what is good and advantageous for himself, not in a partial point, but in a general way; what kinds of things, for example, lead to a happy life. A proof of this is that we call prudent those who are prudent in a given field, when they calculate correctly with a view to achieving a certain prize-worthy end, even in species where there is no question of art. From this it follows that, in a general sense, a prudent man is one who is capable of deliberation. But we never deliberate about things that cannot be otherwise than they are, nor about things that are impossible to accomplish. Consequently, prudence can be neither a science nor an art. Neither a science, because the object of action cannot be other than it is; nor an art, because the mode of action is other than that of production. The fact remains, then, that prudence is a disposition, accompanied by true rules, capable of acting in the sphere of what is good or bad for a man. (Aristotle)" 
(Anne Merker, in the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on October 10, 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/aristote-et-platon-faut-il-etre-prudent-4910100

E1.1.C.1.3_REF1.1_PH  "WISDOM 
[...] The Greeks distinguished between theoretical or contemplative wisdom (sophia) and practical wisdom (phronesis). But one can hardly exist without the other, or rather, true wisdom is the combination of the two. It can be recognized by a certain serenity, but even more by a certain joy, a certain freedom, a certain eternity (the wise man lives in the present: he feels and experiences, as Spinoza said, that he is eternal), a certain love... Of all the goods that wisdom provides for the happiness of life as a whole," said Epicurus, "friendship is by far the greatest" (Capitular Maxims, XXVII). Self-love, fear, lack, or lies no longer stand in the way. There is only the joy of knowing: there is only love and truth. That's why we all have our moments of wisdom, when love and truth are enough for us. And of folly, when they tear us apart or fail us. True wisdom must be disillusioned with itself, as we see in Ecclesiastes. It is no longer an ideal; it is a state, always approximate, always unstable (it is eternal, like love, only as long as it lasts), it is an experience, it is an act. It is not an absolute, despite the Stoics (we are more or less wise), but a maximum (as such relative): it is the maximum of happiness, in the maximum of lucidity. It depends on the situation of this or that person, on the abilities of this or that person (wisdom isn't the same in Auschwitz or Paris, for Etty Hillesum or Cavaillès) - in short, on the state of the world and of oneself. It's not an absolute; it's the way, always relative, of inhabiting reality, which is the only absolute in truth. This wisdom is worth more than all the books written about it, which run the risk of separating us from it. It's up to each of us to invent our own. "Montaigne said: "Even if we could learn from the knowledge of others, we can at least be wise only from our own wisdom" (Essais, 1, 25)."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.1.C.2. FOR MONTAIGNE, 'There is nothing so fine and legitimate as well and duly to play the man,' so that the expansion of the soul in joy is no less a defect than its withdrawal in pain. Montaigne is Aristotle's heir in this respect:
"Greatness of soul consists not so much in mounting and in pressing forward, as in knowing how to govern and circumscribe itself; it takes everything for great, that is enough, and demonstrates itself in preferring moderate to eminent things. There is nothing so fine and legitimate as well and duly to play the man; nor science so arduous as well and naturally to know how to live this life; and of all the infirmities we have, 'tis the most barbarous to despise our being.

Whoever has a mind to isolate his spirit, when the body is ill at ease, to preserve it from the contagion, let him by all means do it if he can: but otherwise let him on the contrary favour and assist it, and not refuse to participate of its natural pleasures with a conjugal complacency, bringing to it, if it be the wiser, moderation, lest by indiscretion they should get confounded with displeasure. Intemperance is the pest of pleasure; and temperance is not its scourge, but rather its seasoning. Euxodus, who therein established the sovereign good, and his companions, who set so high a value upon it, tasted it in its most charming sweetness, by the means of temperance, which in them was singular and exemplary.
I enjoin my soul to look upon pain and pleasure with an eye equally regulated:
"Eodem enim vitio est effusio animi in laetitia quo in dolore contractio,"
["For from the same imperfection arises the expansion of the mind in pleasure and its contraction in sorrow."
—Cicero, Tusc. Quaes., iv. 31.]
and equally firm; but the one gaily and the other severely, and so far as it is able, to be careful to extinguish the one as to extend the other. The judging rightly of good brings along with it the judging soundly of evil: pain has something of the inevitable in its tender beginnings, and pleasure something of the evitable in its excessive end."
(Montaigne, Essays, Of Experience, III, XIII)

E1.1.C.3. DIDEROT'S RAMEAU'S NEPHEW WOULD DISAGREE WITH ARISTOTLE AND MONTAIGNE: for him, those who neglect pleasure to the detriment of the "nobler virtues" don't know what they're losing - and it's a matter of individual disposition; we're not all made for virtue. For him, the philosopher has chosen virtue because he doesn't know how to enjoy life... although he expresses the doubt that if he had access to the philosopher's understanding, he might feel remorse... And Freud agrees that the life of the temperate is less intense - though he warns that "any extreme choice is punished by exposing the individual to the dangers inherent in the deficiency of a technique of life chosen to the exclusion of all others." Lacan also recognizes this "Catch 22" and warns that "the only thing one can be guilty of, at least from an analytic point of view, is to have given in to one's desire.
Nietzsche's advice to "regain a taste for one's own talents by exaggeratedly admiring and enjoying contrary talents" seems to us the wisest of all: allow yourself hubris in moderation!

E1.1.C.3.1. "DEBAUCHERY Intemperance in sexual matters. Always deplorable (because of intemperance, not because of sex), often regretted or envied. There would be nothing to blame the debauched for, said Epicurus, if they were happy (Capital Maxims, X). But if they were, would they need debauchery?
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

"DEBAUCHERY. - The mother of debauchery is not joy, but the absence of joy."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 77,  1878)

E1.1.C.3.1_REF1_CUR "THE WOLF OF WALL STREET: CINEMA OF EXCESS
Just because the Director Martin Scorcese refuses to condemn his main character Jordan Belfort, does it mean that by extension, he endorses him? Scorcese´s close ups and montage reveals the vulgarity of Belfort´s way of life and makes it more disorienting and repulsive than desirable."
(Nerdwriter film & art critic: the wolf of wall street)

Watch The Scene That Changes the Entire Meaning of The Wolf of Wall Street (The Film Tourist): https://youtu.be/6UcQxHYda54?si=CFchxv8Y6EFEv4Yl

E1.1.C.3.1_REF2_PH "THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE ENLIGHTENMENT FAILED TO THE EXTENT that, in the project of liberating desire from the laws that inhibit it, it plunged into a sadistic hell and thus provoked a reinforcement of the law that it claimed to abolish: "A certain philosophy - which immediately preceded that which is most closely related to the Freudian outcome, that which has come down to us in the nineteenth century - a certain philosophy, in the eighteenth century, had as its goal what might be called the naturalistic emancipation of desire. We could characterize this reflection, which was entirely practical, as that of the man of pleasure. The more theory, the more the work of social criticism, the more the sieve of experience, which tends to reduce obligation to precise functions in the social order, has called us to hope for the relativization of the imperative, antagonistic, and, to put it bluntly, contradictory character of moral experience, the more we have seen the truly pathological incidents of this experience actually increase. The naturalistic emancipation of desire has failed. We find ourselves before a man no less burdened with laws and duties than before the great critical experiment of so-called libertine thought" (Seminar VII, The Ethics of Psychoanalysis, 1959-60, Seuil, 1986).
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Listen to Madness, V - The Master, 2019)

E1.1.C.3.2. "HIM [The nephew]: [...] YOU BELIEVE THAT THE SAME HAPPINESS FITS ALL. WHAT A STRANGE VISION! Yours supposes a certain romantic turn of mind that we do not have, a singular soul, a particular taste. You adorn this oddity with the name of virtue; you call it philosophy. But are virtue, philosophy, made for everyone? It is for those who can. It is of help for those who can. Imagine the universe wise and philosophical; agree with me that it would be awefully sad. Here, long live philosophy; long live the wisdom of Solomon. Drink good wine, gorge yourself on delicious food; roll over on pretty women; rest in soft beds; except for that, the rest is mere vanity. [...] to cut it short, I don't accept your happiness, nor the happiness of some visionaries like you. 
ME [The philosopher]: I see, my dear, that you do not know what it is, and that you are not even fit to learn it. 
HIM [The nephew]: So much the better, damn; so much the better. It would make me die of hunger, boredom, and perhaps remorse." 
(Denis Diderot, Rameau's Nephew, 1805)

E1.1.C.3.2_REF1_TH  "Happiness, in the relative sense in which it is recognized as possible, is a problem of individual libidinal economy. There is no valid advice here that fits all; each one must try for himself how he can build his salvation. [...]
Any extreme decision will be penalized in that it will expose the individual to the dangers implied by the deficiency of a technique of life chosen to the exclusion of all others. Like the circumspect trader who avoids tying up all his capital in one place, wisdom will perhaps also advise against expecting all satisfaction from a single aspiration. [...]"
(Sigmund Freud, Civilization and its discontents, 1930)

E1.1.C.3.2_REF2_TH "ONE MAY THEREFORE HOPE TO BE FREED FROM A PART OF ONE'S SUFFERINGS BY INFLUENCING THE INSTINCTUAL IMPULSES. This type of defence against suffering is no longer brought to bear on the sensory apparatus; it seeks to master the internal sources of our needs. The extreme form of this is brought about by killing off the instincts, as is prescribed by the worldly wisdom of the East and practised byYoga. If it succeeds, then the subject has, it is true, given up all other activities as well—he has sacrificed his life; and, by another path, he has once more only achieved the happiness of quietness. We follow the same path when our aims are less extreme and we merely attempt to control our instinctual life. In that case, the controlling elements are the higher psychical agencies, which have subjected themselves to the reality principle. Here the aim of satisfaction is not by any means relinquished; but a certain amount of protection against suffering is secured, in that non-satisfaction is not so painfully felt in the case of instincts kept in dependence as in the case of uninhibited ones. As against this, there is an undeniable diminution in the potentialities of enjoyment. The feeling of happiness derived from the satisfaction of a wild instinctual impulse untamed by the ego is incomparably more intense than that derived from sating an instinct that has been tamed."
(Sigmund Freud, Civilization and its discontent, 1930)

E1.1.C.3.2_REF3_PH "WE KNOW THE ONLY PRINCIPLE WHICH SUMARIZES THE ETHICS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS : "I PROPOSE THAT THE ONLY THING ONE CAN BE GUILTY OF, AT LEAST IN THE ANALYTIC PERSPECTIVE, IS TO HAVE GIVEN IN ON ONE'S DESIRE". This "never give in to one's desire" is often interpreted in the sense of an unconditional imperative to enjoy oneself, in accord with the slogan that was inscribed on the walls in 1968: "Enjoy without limits". However, this is not at all what Lacan means. Enjoyment is not desire, it is even its exact opposite, since it equates to indifferentiation - there are no distinct elements within totality, otherwise totality would be divisible, and would therefore no longer be one, nor total as a consequence - in indifferentiation desire is annihilated. If desire is a vital tension, enjoyment on the contrary obeys to the death drive. Not to renounce desire, not to give in on one's desire, is therefore not to renounce the truth of one's desire, a truth that is precisely the object of the therapy. If there is an ethics of therapy, it is in this sense never to resignoneself to lying about the nature of one's desire, never renounce to recognize the origin and the structure of one's desire, never tell oneself fables for kids, whether it be the one [... ...] consecrated by conformism and the myth of conjugal happiness, or that, apparently more alternative, in truth just as gregarious, of the perpetual orgasm of an enjoyment that has become the object of profitable trade, the surplus value only showing itself today, in the market, always masked as forever-more-joy. What therapy offers to who agrees to embark in the adventure is by no means the lure of an endless and untroubled enjoyment, but the requirement of an uncompromising lucidity."
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Listen to madness, 6 - Desire)

E1.1.C.3.2_REF4_PH "THE SEMI-INTIMATE AND COMMUNAL NATURE OF TOILETS MAKE THEM IDEAL STAGES FOR A DIFFERENT TYPE OF DRAMA TO UNFOLD. Friendships are forged in the space between the cubicle and sink in moments of elation, and vulnerabilities surface when the body is finally overrun by excessive consumption. Like an anxiety dream come to life, there is a sobering mirroring of contemporary binge drinking culture and gender-based shaming presented in the work, but the judgemental tone is noticeably absent. There is danger here, which is uncomfortable, even distressing. By subverting the genre of morality tale, Mendick's work opens a space where our public and private faces can be encountered without prejudice."
(Curatorship: Jupiter Artland)

E1.1.C.3.2_REF5_MU AREN'T BLUES AND ROCK EXPLORING LANDS DEAR TO RAMEAU'S NEPHEW?
"Let's get lost in the heat of the city
Drop your morning whiskey, put your leather jacket on and say
Radio is dead, TV is shit, get up off your knees and play
Radio is dead, TV is shit, come on just give it away
All your life you wanted something more
Let's get drunk to the sound of rock 'n' roll
And take a
Hard blues shot
Hard blues shot
Hard blues shot
Hard blues shot
Your stupid lousy son thinks you're a fat ass boring man
He says you hit rock bottom every time you grab a bottle of booze
Radio is dead, TV is shit, get up off your knees and play
Radio is dead, TV is shit, come on just give it away
All this time you've been afraid to live
Let's find a place where you can lose your mind
And take a
Hard blues shot
Hard blues shot
Hard blues shot
Hard blues shot
Hard blues shot
Hard blues shot
Hard blues shot
Hard blues shot
Give me Hard blues, give me Hard blues shot
Give me Hard blues, give me Hard blues shot
Give me Hard blues, give me Hard blues shot
Give me Hard blues, give me Hard blues"
(Laura Cox Band - Hard Blues Shot)

Watch Laura Cox Band - Hard Blues Shot live: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MJo1r7d5xQk&list=PLKPZS5dBLaSHO2fEYZy3uelg260LSdET7

E1.1.C.3.2_REF6_MU AREN'T BLUES AND ROCK EXPLORING LANDS DEAR TO RAMEAU'S NEPHEW?
"At the back of sedans
You can guess
Monarchs and their figurines
Just a pair of demigods
Left to their own devices
They are producing offsprings
They make others envious
At the back of sedans
I'm the king of villains
To whom life smiles
Walking on water
Avoiding tolls
Never suffer
Just make the horses neigh
The horses of pleasure
Dare, dare Josephine
Dare, dare Josephine
Nothing stands in the way of the night
Nothing justifies
Wear out your shoes
Wear out the usurer
Be my muse
And let only sweet moments last
Only sweet moments last
And only us two
Dare, dare Josephine
Dare, dare Josephine
Nothing stands in the way of the night
Nothing justifies
Dare, dare
Dare, dare
Dare, dare Josephine
Dare, dare Josephine
Nothing stands in the way of the night
Nothing justifies”"
(Alain Bashung, Dare Josephine)

"À l'arrière des berlines
On devine
Des monarques et leurs figurines
Juste une paire de demi-dieux
Livrés à eux
Ils font des p'tits
Il font des envieux
À l'arrière des dauphines
Je suis le roi des scélérats
À qui sourit la vie
Marcher sur l'eau
Éviter les péages
Jamais souffrir
Juste faire hennir
Les chevaux du plaisir
Osez, osez Joséphine
Osez, osez Joséphine
Plus rien n's'oppose à la nuit
Rien ne justifie
Usez vos souliers
Usez l'usurier
Soyez ma muse
Et que ne durent que les moments doux
Durent que les moments doux
Et que ne doux
Osez, osez Joséphine
Osez, osez Joséphine
Plus rien n's'oppose à la nuit
Rien ne justifie
Osez, osez
Osez, osez
Osez, osez Joséphine
Osez, osez Joséphine
Plus rien n's'oppose à la nuit
Rien ne justifie"
(Alain Bashung, Osez Josephine)

Watch the video on Youtube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MaIDRUp2Luo&list=PLv38egXC2XXsOLObG3K9kU1BsE58JrGSS

E1.1.C.3.2_REF7_CUR L'INFINITE DU DESIR SEXUEL EST MERVEILLEUSEMENT DEPEINT DANS LE BALLET "BELLE" DE LA CHOREGRAPHE BRESILIENNE DEBORAH COLKER

Watch the video on Youtube:
https://youtu.be/osHgbCugnj4?si=qn1xmcX-HKlbGIII

E1.1.C.3.2_REF8_MU  AH! CAN WE BE HAPPY WHEN WE FORM OTHER WISHES?
Musical Illustration: Jean-Philippe Rameau, Les Indes galantes : Quatrième et nouvelle entrée : Les Sauvages : Air des Sauvages.

Lyrics:
"Zima, Adario

Peaceful forest
Our hearts are never troubled by vain desires
If they are sensitive
Fortune, it is not at the price of your favours

Wild chorus

Peaceful forest
Never a vain desire trouble our hearts here
If they are sensitive
Fortune, it is not at the price of your favors

Zima, Adario

In our retreats
Greatness, never come
To offer your false charms!
Heaven, you made them
For innocence and for peace
Let us enjoy in our asylums
Let's enjoy tranquil pleasures!
Ah! Can we be happy
When we form other wishes?”

"Zima, Adario

Forêt paisibles
Jamais un vain désir ne trouble ici nos coeurs
S'ils sont sensibles
Fortune, ce n'est pas au prix de tes faveurs

Choeur des sauvages

Forêt paisibles
Jamais un vain désir ne trouble ici nos coeurs
S'ils sont sensibles
Fortune, ce n'est pas au prix de tes faveurs

Zima, Adario

Dans nos retraites
Grandeur, ne viens jamais
Offrir de tes faux attraits!
Ciel, tu les as faites
Pour l'innoncence et pour la paix
Jouissons dans nos asiles
Jouissons des biens tranquilles!
Ah! Peut-on être heureux
Quand on forme d'autres voeux?"

Listen to l'Air des Sauvages on Youtube: https://youtu.be/2X8W83KJVIk?si=3HmRoPduAmtzG5LS

E1.1.C.3.3. PLEASURE WITHOUT CONSCIENCE IS ONE OF THE SEVEN SOCIAL SINS FOR MAHATMA GANDHI:
"Politics without principle
Wealth without toil
Pleasure without conscience
Knowledge without virtue
Commerce without morality
Science without humanity
Adoration without sacrifice"

"He Ram, he Ram" (Oh god, oh god) were the last words of Mahatma Gandhi, a leader of the Indian independence movement, as he lay dying, felled by an assassin's bullets on January 30, 1948. The screen-printed texts on the mirror are quotes from "Seven Social, Sins," a list Gandhi published in his weekly newspaper Young India in 1925 and which is carved on his tombstone. Jaar is known for projects that address sociopolitical issues such as war, genocide, and the impact of globalization around the world. "I wanted to construct bridges to link the almost fictitious reality of the art world with the realities of the real world," he once said."
(Curatorship, MomA, NYC)

E1.1.C.3.4. PLEASURE IN ITSELF CANNOT GIVE OUR EXISTENCE MEANING
"Let us imagine a man who has been sentenced to death and, a few hours before his execution, has been told he is free to decide on the menu for his last meal. The guard comes into his cell and asks him what he wants to eat, offers him all kinds of delicacies; but the man rejects all his suggestions. He thinks to himself that it is quite irrelevant whether he stuffs good food into the stomach of his organism or not, as in a few hours it will be a corpse. And even the feelings of pleasure that could still be felt in the organism’s cerebral ganglia seem pointless in view of the fact that in two hours they will be destroyed forever. But the whole of life stands in the face of death, and if this man had been right, then our whole lives would also be meaningless, were we only to strive for pleasure and nothing else — preferably the most pleasure and the highest degree of pleasure possible. Pleasure in itself cannot give our existence meaning; thus the lack of pleasure cannot take away meaning from life, which now seems obvious to us."
(Viktor Frankl,  Yes to Life: In Spite of Everything, 1946)

E1.6.B.3.7_REF2_PH.wE1.1.C.3.

E1.1.C.4. BENTHAM EQUATES PLEASURE AND HAPPINESS. He sees no difference between different kinds of pleasure and happiness - for him, "if the quantity of pleasure be the same, push-pin is as good as poetry". Mill after him makes a Platonic move making a distinction between different kinds of pleasures. He ranks pleasures from the arts and reason above physical pleasures, but can we justify this? Can people who say they enjoy "higher pleasures" share their experience with people who have not had the education to enjoy these?
(Happiness, In our time, Broadcast on BBC4 on Thu 24 Jan 2002)

Listen to the program on BBC4: https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p005489g

E1.1.C.4.1. "IT IS BETTER TO BE A HUMAN BEING DISSATISFIED THAN A PIG SATISFIED; better to be Socrates dissatisfied than a fool satisfied. And if the fool, or the pig, are a different opinion, it is because they only know their own side of the question."
(John Stuart Mill, Utilitarianism, 1863)

E1.1.C.5. THE TASK OF AVOIDING SUFFERING PUSHES THE TASK OF OBTAINING PLEASURE INTO THE BACKGROUND. To this end we count the strategies of avoiding the world, conquering and mastering it through technology, intoxication (alcohol & drugs) - all of which have their limits and drawbacks.
"It is no wonder if, under the pressure of these possibilities of suffering, men are accustomed to moderate their claims to happiness—-just as the pleasure principle itself, indeed, under the influence of the external world, changed into the more modest reality principle—, if a man thinks himself happy merely to have escaped unhappiness or to have survived his suffering, and if in general the task of avoiding suffering pushes that of obtaining pleasure into the background. Reflection shows that the accomplishment of this task can be attempted along very different paths; and all these paths have been recommended by the various schools of worldly wisdom and put into practice by men. An unrestricted satisfaction of every need presents itself as the most enticing method of conducting one's life, but it means putting enjoyment before caution, and soon brings its own punishment. The other methods, in which avoidance of unpleasure is the main purpose, are differentiated according to the source of unpleasure to which their attention is chiefly turned. Some of these methods are extreme and some moderate; some are one-sided and some attack the problem simultaneously at several points. Against the suffering which may come upon one from human relationships the readiest safeguard is voluntary isolation, keeping oneself aloof from other people. The happiness which can be achieved along this path is, as we see, the happiness of quietness. Against the dreaded external world one can only defend oneself by some kind of turning away from it, if one intends to solve the task by oneself. There is, indeed, another and better path: that of becoming a member of the human community, and, with the help of a technique guided by science, going over to the attack against nature and subjecting her to the human will. Then one is working with all for the good of all. But the most interesting methods of averting suffering are those which seek to influence our own organism. In the last analysis, all suffering is nothing else than sensation; it only exists in so far as we feel it, and we only feel it in consequence of certain ways in which our organism is regulated. The crudest, but also the most effective among these methods of influence is the chemical one—intoxication. I do not think that anyone completely understands its mechanism, but it is a fact that there are foreign substances which, when present in the blood or tissues, directly cause us pleasurable sensations; and they also so alter the conditions governing our sensibility that we become incapable of receiving unpleasurable impulses."
(Sigmund Freud, Civilization and its discontents, 1930)

E1.1.C.5.1. OTHER STRATEGIES FOR AVOIDING SUFFERING INCLUDE THE DISPLACEMENT OF LIBIDO THROUGH THE SUBLIMATION OF IMPULSES BY THE ARTIST AND THE INTELLECTUAL.This method is reserved for a small group of creators and artists, and by extension, the imaginary pleasure of the illusion of a work of art for non-artists.

AND ALSO "PROFESSIONAL ACTIVITY IS A SOURCE OF SPECIAL SATISFACTION if it is a freely chosen one—if, that is to say, by means of sublimation, it makes possible the use of existing inclinations, of persisting or constitutionally
reinforced instinctual impulses. And yet, as a path to happiness, work is not highly prized by men."

E1.6.C.2.3.d_REF1_TH.wE1.1.C.5.1.

E1.1.C.5.2. AND ASLO LOVE: "The weak side of this technique of living is easy to see; otherwise no human being would have thought of abandoning this path to happiness for any other. It is that we are never so defenceless against suffering as when we love, never so helplessly unhappy as when we have lost our loved object or its love. But this does not dispose of the technique of living based on the value of love as a means to happiness. There is much more to be said about it."

E1.6.A.1.1.b_REF3_TH.wE1.1.C.5.2.

E1.6.G.2.15.wE1.1.C.

E1.1.D. WHAT KIND OF HAPPINESS ARE WE TALKING ABOUT WHEN WE SAY WE'RE HAPPY OR UNHAPPY?
Happiness is a catch-all word that deserves to be dissected. Daniel Kahneman has shown how our assessment of our level of happiness varies depending on whether we:
1. reading the "temperature" of our happiness or sadness on the thermometer of moments lived (the "experiencing self"), or 
2. making a summary assessment of the past (the "remembering self"). 
These are two different measures of happiness, both valid because they correspond to different mental processes. 
Is it because they rarely coincide that happiness seems so elusive?

Listen to Daniel Kahneman on The riddle of experience and memory:
https://www.ted.com/talks/daniel_kahneman_the_riddle_of_experience_vs_memory?utm_campaign=tedspread&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=tedcomshare

E1.1.C.3.2_REF4_PH.wE1.1.D.

E1.1.D.2. "THERE IS A CLEAR CONTRAST BETWEEN THE EFFECTS OF INCOME ON EXPERIENCED WELL-BEING AND ON LIFE SATISFACTION. Higher income brings with it higher satisfaction, well beyond the point at which it ceases to have any positive effect on experience. The general conclusion is as clear for well-being as it was for colonoscopies: people's evaluations of their lives and their actual experience may be related, but they are also different. Life satisfaction is not a flawed measure of their experienced well-being, as I thought some years ago. It is something else entirely. "  
(Daniel Kahneman, Thinking Fast and Slow, 2011)

E1.1.D.2.1. "THE LINK BETWEEN HAPPINESS AND INCOME.
HIGHER NATIONAL INCOMES GO TOGETHER WITH HIGHER AVERAGE LIFE SATISFACTION.

If we compare life satisfaction reports from around the world at any given point in time, we immediately see that countries with higher average national incomes tend to have higher average life satisfaction scores. In other words, people in richer countries tend to report higher life satisfaction than people in poorer countries. The scatter plot here shows this.

Each dot in the visualization represents one country. The vertical position of the dots shows the national average self-reported life satisfaction in the Cantril Ladder (a scale ranging from 0-10 where 10 is the highest possible life satisfaction), while the horizontal position shows GDP per capita based on purchasing power parity (i.e., GDP per head after adjusting for inflation and cross-country price differences).

This correlation holds even if we control for other factors: Richer countries tend to have higher average self-reported life satisfaction than poorer countries that are comparable in terms of demographics and other measurable characteristics. You can read more about this in the World Happiness Report 2017, specifically the discussion in Chapter 2.

As we show below, income and happiness also tend to go together within countries and across time."
(World Happiness report, Updated happiness and life satisfaction, world data)

Access the dynamic chart on Self-reported life satisfaction vs. GDP per capita with data from 2011 to 2024:
https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/gdp-vs-happiness

Read more data on happiness and life satisfaction:
https://ourworldindata.org/happiness-and-life-satisfaction#the-link-between-happiness-and-income

E1.1.D.2.1_REF1_SOC "ECONOMIC GROWTH AND HAPPINESS
In the charts above, we show that there is robust evidence of a strong correlation between income and happiness across and within countries at fixed points in time. Here, we want to show that, while less strong, there is also a correlation between income and happiness across time. Or, put differently, as countries get richer, the population tends to report higher average life satisfaction.

The chart shown here uses data from the World Values Survey to plot the evolution of national average incomes and national average happiness over time. To be specific, this chart shows the share of people who say they are ‘very happy’ or ‘rather happy’ in the World Values Survey (vertical axis) against GDP per head (horizontal axis). Each country is drawn as a line joining the first and last available observations across all survey waves.9

As we can see, countries that experience economic growth also tend to experience happiness growth across waves in the World Values Survey. This is a correlation that holds after controlling for other factors that also change over time (in this chart from Stevenson and Wolfers (2008), you can see how changes in GDP per capita compare to changes in life satisfaction after accounting for changes in demographic composition and other variables).

An important point to note here is that economic growth and happiness growth tend to go together on average. Some countries, in some periods, experience economic growth without increasing happiness. The experience of the US in recent decades is a case in point. These instances may seem paradoxical given the evidence—we explore this question in the following section."
(World Happiness report, Updated Economic growth and happiness, world data)

Access the chart on Self-reported happiness vs income over time:
https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/gdp-vs-happiness

Read more data on Economic growth and happiness:
https://ourworldindata.org/happiness-and-life-satisfaction#economic-growth-and-happiness

E1.1.D.2.1_REF2_SOC "HIGHER PERSONAL INCOMES GO TOGETHER WITH HIGHER SELF-REPORTED LIFE SATISFACTION
Above; we point out that richer countries tend to be happier than poorer countries. Here, we show that the same tends to be true within countries: richer people within a country tend to be happier than poorer people in the same country. The visualizations here show us this by looking at happiness by income quintiles.

Firstly, we show each country in individual panels: within each panel is a connected scatter plot for a specific country. This means that for each country, we observe a line joining five points: each point marks the average income within an income quintile (horizontal axis) against the average self-reported life satisfaction of people at that income quintile (vertical axis).

What does this visualization tell us? We see that in all cases, lines are upward sloping: people in higher income quintiles tend to have higher average life satisfaction. Yet in some countries, the lines are steep and linear (e.g., in Costa Rica, richer people are happier than poorer people across the whole income distribution), while in some countries, the lines are less steep and non-linear (e.g., the richest group of people in the Dominican Republic is as happy as the second-richest group).

In a second visualization, we present the same data, but instead of plotting each country separately, showing all countries in one grid.
The resulting connected scatter plot may be messy, resembling a ‘spaghetti’ chart, but it is helpful to confirm the overall pattern: despite kinks here and there, lines are, by and large, upward-sloping."
(World Happiness report, Updated Self-reported life satisfaction and personal income, world data)

Access the charts on self-reported life satisfaction and personal income:
https://ourworldindata.org/happiness-and-life-satisfaction#higher-personal-incomes-go-together-with-higher-self-reported-life-satisfaction

E1.1.D.2.1_REF2.1_CUR AT WHAT INCOME LEVEL DOES MONEY STOP INCREASING HAPPINESS? 
Neguin, 22, pictured by his pool in a working-class neighborhood of Jaboatão dos Guararapes, PE, Brazil, has fought hard to build this bubble in his image. He earns €6,420/year as a dancer with the group Brega Funk MC Tróia (@mctroiaoficial). 
At what income level does money stop increasing happiness? The most recent studies conducted on the model proposed by Nobel Prize winner Daniel Kahneman in 2011 and updated in 2018 on the level of global life satisfaction situate at €83,000/year the individual income beyond which there is no longer any marginal increase in life satisfaction from earning more. Neguin still has room to grow...
The €83,000/year the individual income figure updated to 2025 is €104,210/year.
(Pierre Schindler)

E1.1.D.2.1_REF2.2_CUR "MEASURES OF WELL-BEING HAVE OFTEN BEEN FOUND TO RISE WITH LOG (INCOME). Kahneman and Deaton reported in 2010 an exception; a measure of emotional well-being (happiness) increased but then flattened somewhere between $60,000 and $90,000. In contrast, Killingsworth  observed a linear relation between happiness and log (income) in an experience-sampling study in 2021. We discovered in a joint reanalysis of the experience sampling data that the flattening pattern exists but is restricted to the least happy 20% of the population, and that complementary nonlinearities contribute to the overall linear-log relationship between happiness and income. We trace the discrepant results to the authors’ reliance on standard practices and assumptions of data analysis that should be questioned more often, although they are standard in social science.[...]

The correlation between income and well-being is much discussed, both by the public and by social scientists and has been the focus of considerable research. Yet is important to note that the relationship is weak, even if statistically robust. The correlation between average happiness and log (income) is 0.09 in the experience sampling data, for example, and the difference between the medians of happiness at household incomes of $15,000 and $250,000 is about five points on a 100-point scale. The flattening and accelerating patterns are even smaller modulations of a small effect. However, the emotional effects of other circumstances are also small. KD reported that the effect of an approximately fourfold difference in income is about equal to the effect of being a caregiver, twice as large as the effect of being married, about equal to the effect of a weekend, and less than a third as large as the effect of a headache."
(Matthew A. Killingsworth, Daniel Kahneman and Barbara Mellers, Income and emotional well-being: A conflict resolved)

Read the full article: https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.2208661120

E1.1.D.2.1_REF2.3_CUR HOW MUCH DO YOU NEED TO BE HAPPY?
"A US financial services company (Empower) conducted a national study on how much $ you have to have/earn to be happy and segmented the results by generation, here's what they came up with:

From Boomers (1945-1964) to Generation X (1965-1979), we're stable: the (median) annual income for happiness is around $126,000/year. But for Millenials (the current 30-45 year olds), the generation that is/will be at the helm, things explode: the aspirational income is 4x higher, over $500,000 per year. Porsche Cayennes and Cancun vacations!

... And we're almost tempted to tell them, "Enjoy it!" because it's not going to be easy to get their kids in the car to take them to the airport! According to the same study, for the new generation (Gen Z, born since 2000) it's back to stoicism (if you can call it that), their target income is $128,000, 4x less than the generation before them, with aspirations equal to those of their grandparents! A model change?"
(TTSO, 11/27/2023 based on the article Money brings happiness, according to the majority of Americans - published in Les Echos on 11/24/2023)

Read the full findings fo the study: https://www.empower.com/the-currency/money/research-financial-happiness

E1.1.D.2.1_REF2.4_LIT MORGAN HOUSEL ARGUES THAT THE MOST POWERFUL PATH TO WEALTH IS NOT HIGH INCOME OR INVESTMENT RETURNS BUT A HIGH SAVINGS RATE, WHICH IS BEST ACHIEVED BY DESIRING LESS THROUGH HUMILITY, AS THE TRUE AND MOST VALUABLE RETURN ON SAVINGS IS THE FLEXIBILITY AND CONTROL IT GRANTS OVER YOUR TIME—THE ULTIMATE COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGE IN THE MODERN WORLD.

“Investment returns can make you rich. But whether an investing strategy will work, and how long it will work for, and whether markets will cooperate, is always in doubt. Results are shrouded in uncertainty.
Personal savings and frugality—ﬁnance’s conservation and eﬃciency—are parts of the money equation that are more in your control and have a 100% chance of being as eﬀective in the future as they are today.

If you view building wealth as something that will require more money or big investment returns, you may become as pessimistic as the energy doomers were in the 1970s. The path forward looks hard and out of your control.
If you view it as powered by your own frugality and eﬃciency, the destiny is clearer.
Wealth is just the accumulated leftovers after you spend what you take in. And since you can build wealth without a high income, but have no chance of building wealth without a high savings rate, it’s clear which one matters more.
More importantly, the value of wealth is relative to what you need.
Say you and I have the same net worth.
And say you’re a better investor than me. I can earn 8%annual returns and you can earn 12% annual returns.
But I’m more eﬃcient with my money. Let’s say I need half as much money to be happy while your lifestyle compounds as fast as your assets.
I’m better oﬀ than you are, despite being a worse investor. I’m getting more beneﬁt from my investments despite lower returns.
The same is true for incomes. Learning to be happy with less money creates a gap between what you have and what you want—similar to the gap you get from growing your paycheck, but easier and more in your control.

A high savings rate means having lower expenses than you otherwise could, and having lower expenses means your savings go farther than they would if you spent more.
Think about this in the context of how much time and eﬀort goes into achieving 0.1% of annual investment outperformance—millions of hours of research, tens of billions of dollars of eﬀort from professionals—and it’s easy to see what’s potentially more important or worth chasing.
There are professional investors who grind 80 hours a week to add a tenth of a percentage point to their returns when there are two or three full percentage points of lifestyle bloat in their ﬁnances that can be exploited with less eﬀort.
Big investment returns and fat paychecks are amazing when they can be achieved, and some can achieve them. But the fact that there’s so much eﬀort put into one side of the ﬁnance equation and so little put into the other is an opportunity for most people.
Past a certain level of income, what you need is just what sits below your ego.
Everyone needs the basics. Once they’re covered there’s another level of comfortable basics, and past that there’s basics that are both comfortable, entertaining, and enlightening.
But spending beyond a pretty low level of materialism is mostly a reﬂection of ego approaching income, a way to spend money to show people that you have (or had) money.

Think of it like this, and one of the most powerful ways to increase your savings isn’t to raise your income. It’s to raise your humility.
When you deﬁne savings as the gap between your ego and your income you realize why many people with decent incomes save so little. It’s a daily struggle against instincts to extend your peacock feathers to their outermost limits and keep up with others doing the same.
People with enduring personal ﬁnance success—not necessarily those with high incomes—tend to have a propensity to not give a damn what others think about them.
So people’s ability to save is more in their control than they might think.
Savings can be created by spending less.
You can spend less if you desire less.
And you will desire less if you care less about what others think of you.
As I argue often in this book, money relies more on psychology than ﬁnance.
And you don’t need a speciﬁc reason to save.
Some people save money for a downpayment on a house, or a new car, or for retirement.
That’s great, of course.
But saving does not require a goal of purchasing something speciﬁc.
You can save just for saving’s sake. And indeed you should. Everyone should.
Only saving for a speciﬁc goal makes sense in a predictable world. But ours isn’t. Saving is a hedge against life’s inevitable ability to surprise the hell out of you at the worst possible moment.
Another beneﬁt of savings that isn’t attached to a spending goal is what we discussed in chapter 7: gaining control over your time.
Everyone knows the tangible stuﬀ money buys. The intangible stuﬀ is harder to wrap your head around, so it tends to go unnoticed. But the intangible beneﬁts of money can be far more valuable and capable of increasing your happiness than the tangible things that are obvious targets of our savings.
Savings without a spending goal gives you options and ﬂexibility, the ability to wait and the opportunity to pounce. It gives you time to think. It lets you change course on your own terms.
Every bit of savings is like taking a point in the future that would have been owned by someone else and giving it back to yourself.

That ﬂexibility and control over your time is an unseen return on wealth.
What is the return on cash in the bank that gives you the option of changing careers, or retiring early, or freedom from worry?
I’d say it’s incalculable.
It’s incalculable in two ways. It’s so large and important that we can’t put a price on it. But it’s also literally incalculable—we can’t measure it like we can measure interest rates—and what we can’t measure we tend to overlook.
When you don’t have control over your time, you’re forced to accept whatever bad luck is thrown your way. But if you have ﬂexibility you have the time to wait for no-brainer opportunities to fall in your lap. This is a hidden return on your savings.
Savings in the bank that earn 0% interest might actually generate an extraordinary return if they give you the ﬂexibility to take a job with a lower salary but more purpose, or wait for investment opportunities that come when those without ﬂexibility turn desperate.
And that hidden return is becoming more important.
The world used to be hyper-local. Just over 100 years ago 75% of Americans had neither telephones nor regular mail service, according to historian Robert Gordon. That made competition hyper-local. A worker with just average intelligence might be the best in their town, and they got treated like the best because they didn’t have to compete with the smarter worker in another town.
That’s now changed.
A hyper-connected world means the talent pool you compete in has gone from hundreds or thousands spanning your town to millions or billions spanning the globe. This is especially true for jobs that rely on working with your head versus your muscles: teaching, marketing, analysis, consulting, accounting, programming, journalism, and even medicine increasingly compete in global talent pools. More ﬁelds will fall into this category as digitization erases global boundaries—as “software eats the world,” as venture capitalist Marc Andreesen puts it.
A question you should ask as the range of your competition expands is, “How do I stand out?”
“I’m smart” is increasingly a bad answer to that question, because there are a lot of smart people in the world. Almost 600 people ace the SATs each year. Another 7,000 come within a handful of points. In a winner-take-all and globalized world these kinds of people are increasingly your direct competitors.
Intelligence is not a reliable advantage in a world that’s become as connected as ours has.
But ﬂexibility is.
In a world where intelligence is hyper-competitive and many previous technical skills have become automated, competitive advantages tilt toward nuanced and soft skills—like communication, empathy, and, perhaps most of all, ﬂexibility.
If you have ﬂexibility you can wait for good opportunities, both in your career and for your investments. You’ll have a better chance of being able to learn a new skill when it’s necessary. You’ll feel less urgency to chase competitors who can do things you can’t, and have more leeway to ﬁnd your passion and your niche at your own pace. You can ﬁnd a new routine, a slower pace, and think about life with a diﬀerent set of assumptions. The ability to do those things when most others can’t is one of the few things that will set you apart in a world where intelligence is no longer a sustainable advantage.
Having more control over your time and options is becoming one of the most valuable currencies in the world.
That’s why more people can, and more people should, save money.”
(Morgan Housel, The Psychology of Money, 2020)

E1.6.B.3.6_REF3_LIT.wE1.1.D.2.1_REF2_SOC

E1.1.D.2.1_REF3_SOC "IS ‘LIFE SATISFACTION’ THE SAME AS ‘HAPPINESS’?
In this entry we discuss data and empirical research on happiness and life satisfaction. However, it is important to bear in mind that “life satisfaction” and “happiness” are not really synonyms. And this is of course reflected in the data, since self-reported measures of these two variables come from asking different kinds of questions.

The World Value Survey asks directly about happiness: “Taking all things together, would you say you are (i) Very happy, (ii) Rather happy, (iii) Not very happy, (iv) Not at all happy, (v) Don’t know.”

The Gallup World Poll, on the other hand, uses the Cantril Ladder question and asks respondents to evaluate their life: “Please imagine a ladder, with steps numbered from 0 at the bottom to 10 at the top. The top of the ladder represents the best possible life for you and the bottom of the ladder represents the worst possible life for you. On which step of the ladder would you say you personally feel you stand at this time?”

As the following scatter plot shows, these two measures are clearly closely related (countries that score high in one measure also tend to score high in the other), yet they are not identical (there is substantial dispersion, with many countries sharing the same score in one variable but diverging in the other).

The differences in responses to questions inquiring about life satisfaction and happiness are consistent with the idea that subjective well-being has two sides: an experiential or emotional side, and an evaluative or cognitive side. Of course, the limits between emotional and cognitive aspects of well-being are blurred in our minds; so in practice both kinds of questions measure both aspects to some degree. Indeed, social scientists often construct ‘subjective well-being indexes’ where they simply average out results from various types of questions."
(World data, Is ‘life satisfaction’ the same as ‘happiness’?)

Read it on World data: https://ourworldindata.org/happiness-and-life-satisfaction#is-life-satisfaction-the-same-as-happiness

Access the graph Happiness vs life satisfaction, 2022:
https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/happiness-wvs-vs-gallup

E1.1.D.2.1_REF4_SOC “EMOTIONAL WELLBEING […]
Just as we can ask people to evaluate their own lives, we can also ask them about their emotional experiences. The Gallup World Poll, in addition to its life evaluation question, asks people about the emotions and feelings that they experienced the day before the survey, asking about worry, stress, sadness, depression, happiness, anger, and pain. It turns out that national average responses to these questions are quite different from national averages of life evaluation.
The global map of happiness, which plots national income against the fraction of the population who report that they experienced happiness during a lot of the day yesterday. This map is quite different from the map of life evaluation.”
(Angus Deaton, The great escape - Health, Wealth, and the Origins of Inequality, 2013)

“Further reinforcing that 2023 was a better year for the world’s emotional health, on a global level, negative emotions declined for the first time since 2014.
Gallup asked adults in 142 countries and areas if they had five different negative experiences on the day before the survey. Four in 10 adults said they experienced a lot of worry (40%), slightly over a third experienced a lot of stress (37%), and three in 10 experienced a lot of physical pain (30%). More than one in four experienced sadness (26%), and just over one in five experienced anger (22%).
In 2023, all negative emotions took a downturn — which is good news. But the bad news is that they all remain higher than they were a decade ago.
Stress declined three points last year to levels more typically observed before the pandemic. Worry and sadness each dropped one point, also bringing them more in line with earlier measures. The percentage of adults worldwide who experienced pain dropped two points, and the percentage experiencing anger dropped one point.
Gallup compiles the “yes” responses from these five questions into a Negative Experience Index score for each country. Between 2022 and 2023, the world’s overall score dropped two points to 31, which was the same as the score in 2019 but still higher than in all years before that.
Because of their large populations, declines in 2023 in the scores in China (down five points) and India (down four points) factor into the global decline, but they do not account for all of it. Without China and India included, the Negative Experience Index would be 32.”
(Gallup Global Emotions report 2024)
“The limited relationship between income and experienced happiness holds true within the United States too. Poverty generates misery, but beyond a certain point (about $70,000 a year [about $97,000 in 2024 US dollars]), additional money does nothing to improve happiness, even though those with more money report that they have better lives. For happiness money matters only up to a point. This is useful to know, if only because the experience of happiness is a positive one that makes life better. But it makes happiness a poor measure of overall wellbeing, because there are many places in the world where people manage to find happiness even in the midst of poor health and material poverty; life evaluation measures are much better measures of overall wellbeing. […]
Life evaluation and happiness (or other emotions) paint different pictures of the world. Which is correct? This is a sensible question only if we expect such measures to yield a single measure of overall wellbeing, something that is a goal of much of the happiness literature. But this is not the right way to think about wellbeing. It is good to be happy, it is not good to be worried or to be angry, and it is good to think that your life is going well. But these feelings are not the same thing, and all are consistent with good or bad outcomes in other aspects of wellbeing, such as income and physical and mental health. There is no magic question that provides a touchstone for judging wellbeing. Even if people carried a personal “hedonimeter,” which, like a wristwatch, would register happiness at every moment, there is no reason to suppose that the reading on the hedonimeter would be useful for assessing the goodness in their lives.”
(Angus Deaton, The great escape - Health, Wealth, and the Origins of Inequality, 2013)

Access the full Gallup Global Emotions report 2024: https://www.gallup.com/analytics/349280/gallup-global-emotions-report.aspx

E1.1.D.2.2. ALL THE ARGUMENTS WHICH ARE BROUGHT TO REPRESENT POVERTY AS NO EVIL, SHOW IT TO BE EVIDENTLY A GREAT EVIL. YOU NEVER FIND PEOPLE LABORING TO CONVINCE YOU THAT YOU MAY LIVE VERY HAPPILY UPON A PLENTIFUL FORTUNE.
"Rousseau’s treatise on the inequality of mankind was at this time a fashionable topick. It gave rise to an observation by Mr. Dempster, that the advantages of fortune and rank were nothing to a wise man, who ought to value only merit. JOHNSON. ‘ If man were a savage, living in the woods by himself, this might be true ; but in civilized society we all depend upon each other, and our happiness is very much owing to the good opinion of mankind. Now, Sir, in civilized society, external advantages make us more respected. A man with a good coat upon his back meets with a better reception than he who has a bad one. Sir, you may analyse this, and say what is there in it ? But that will avail you nothing, for it is a part of a general system. Pound St. Paul’s Church into atoms, and consider any single atom ; it is, to be sure, good for nothing : but, put all these atoms together, and you have St. Paul’s Church. So it is with human felicity, which is made up of many ingredients, each of which may be shewn to be very insignificant. In civilized society, personal merit will not serve you so much as money will. Sir, you may make the experiment. Go into the street, and give one man a lecture on morality, and another a shilling, and see which will respect you most. If you wish only to support nature, Sir William Petty fixes your allowance at three pounds a year ; but as times are much altered, let us call it six pounds. This sum will fill your belly, shelter you from the weather, and even get you a strong lasting coat, supposing it to be made of good bull’s hide. Now, Sir, all beyond this is artificial, and is desired in order to obtain a greater degree of respect from our fellow-creatures. And, Sir, if six hundred pounds a year procure a man more consequence, and, of course, more happiness than six pounds a year, the same proportion will hold as to six thousand, and so on as far as opulence can be carried. Perhaps he who has a large fortune may not be so happy as he who has a small one ; but that must proceed from other causes than from his having the large fortune : for, cœteris paribus, he who is rich in a civilized society, must be happier than he who is poor ; as riches, if properly used, (and it is a man’s own fault if they are not,) must be productive of the highest advantages. Money, to be sure, of itself is of no use ; for its only use is to part with it. Rousseau, and all those who deal in paradoxes, are led away by a childish desire of novelty. When I was a boy, I used always to choose the wrong side of a debate, because most ingenious things, that is to say, most new things, could be said upon it. Sir, there is nothing for which you may not muster up more plausible arguments, than those which are urged against wealth and other external advantages. Why, now, there is stealing ; why should it be thought a crime ? When we consider by what unjust methods property has been often acquired, and that what was unjustly got it must be unjust to keep, where is the harm in one man’s taking the property of another from him ? Besides, Sir, when we consider the bad use that many people make of their property, and how much better use the thief may make of it, it may be defended as a very allowable practice. Yet, Sir, the experience of mankind has discovered stealing to be so very bad a thing, that they make no scruple to hang a man for it. When I was running about this town a very poor fellow, I was a great arguer for the advantages of poverty ; but I was, at the same time, very sorry to be poor. Sir, all the arguments which are brought to represent poverty as no evil, show it to be evidently a great evil. You never find people laboring to convince you that you may live very happily upon a plentiful fortune.— So you hear people talking how miserable a King must be ; and yet they all wish to be in his place.’ "
(Boswell’s Life of Johnson, revised third edition 1799, first published in 1791)

E1.1.D.2.3. “POSSESSION POSSESSES.—Only up to a certain point does possession make men feel freer and more independent; one step farther, and possession becomes lord, the possessor a slave. The latter must sacrifice his time, his thoughts to the former, and feels himself compelled to an intercourse, nailed to a spot, incorporated with the State—perhaps quite in conflict with his real and essential needs.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 317, 1878)

E1.1.D.3. ADVOCATES OF THE "EXPERIENCING SELF"

E1.1.D.3.1.  ADVOCATES OF THE "EXPERIENCING SELF": THESE LINES BY EMILY DICKINSON REMIND US THAT THE REASONING OF THE "REMEMBERING SELF" devalues many of the joys intensely experienced by the "experiencing self".

"Did life's penurious length
Italicize its sweetness,
The men that daily live
Would stand so deep in joy
That it would clog the cogs
Of that revolving reason
Whose esoteric belt
Protects our sanity." 
(Emily Dickinson)

The meditation of the thinking statue is indifferent to the fleeting kiss to which the couple surrenders. We surrender to the sweetness of life and then forget it - if we could keep the intensity of life's greatest pleasures constantly in mind, would we go mad, as Emily Dickinson's poem suggests?

E1.1.D.3.2.  ADVOCATES OF THE "EXPERIENCING SELF": IT COMFORTS ME THAT ENDINGS ARE THUS FORMALLY UNAPPEALING TO ME — THAT MORE THAN BEGINNING OR ENDING, I ENJOY CONTINUING.
"Perhaps all anxiety might derive from a fixation on moments — an inability to accept life as ongoing. [...]
The best thing about time passing is the privilege of running out of it, of watching the wave of mortality break over me and everyone I know. No more time, no more potential. The privilege of ruling things out. Finishing. Knowing I’m finished. And knowing time will go on without me.
Look at me, dancing my little dance for a few moments against the background of eternity. [...]
How ridiculous to believe myself powerful enough to stop time just by thinking. […]
Often I believe I’m working toward a result, but always, once I reach the result, I realize all the pleasure was in planning and executing the path to that result.
It comforts me that endings are thus formally unappealing to me — that more than beginning or ending, I enjoy continuing. [...]
Time punishes us by taking everything, but it also saves us — by taking everything."
(Sarah Manguso, Ongoingness: The End of a Diary)

E1.1.D.3.3. ADVOCATES OF THE "EXPERIENCING SELF": STOICISTS STRIVE TO IGNORE THE “REMEMBERING SELF”.
"In a sentiment Montaigne would echo sixteen centuries later in his assertion that “to lament that we shall not be alive a hundred years hence, is the same folly as to be sorry we were not alive a hundred years ago,” Marcus Aurelius rebukes our pathological dread of death by demonstrating how it ejects us from the only arena on which life plays out — the present. Long before Rilke made the countercultural, almost counterbiological observation that “death is our friend precisely because it brings us into absolute and passionate presence with all that is here, that is natural, that is love” [...]"
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings, Marcus Aurelius on Embracing Mortality and the Key to Living with Presence)

"Even if you’re going to live three thousand more years, or ten times that, remember: you cannot lose another life than the one you’re living now, or live another one than the one you’re losing. The longest amounts to the same as the shortest. The present is the same for everyone; its loss is the same for everyone; and it should be clear that a brief instant is all that is lost. For you can’t lose either the past or the future; how could you lose what you don’t have?
Remember [...] that the longest-lived and those who will die soonest lose the same thing. The present is all that they can give up, since that is all you have, and what you do not have, you cannot lose."
(Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, Book II)

Read it in The Marginalian:
https://www.themarginalian.org/2019/05/20/marcus-aurelius-meditations-mortality-presence/?mc_cid=8f44637385&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E1.1.D.3.4. ADVOCATES OF THE "EXPERIENCING SELF": MARIE HAS THE FREEDOM TO REINVENT HERSELF AT ANY TIME, EVEN WHEN ALL SEEMS LOST.
In the 2012 film Another Woman's Life, directed by Sylvie Testud, the Experiencing Self (Marie) and the Remembering Self (her husband Pierre) are illustrated.
Marie has the freedom to reinvent herself at any time, even when all seems lost. She is able to change because she brings the energy of youth to the present; she is free from the constraints of history and routine.

Watch the trailer on YouTube: https://youtu.be/oyT61n0v_Dg?si=4Sv3nlqdwhhQHPt-.

E1.1.D.4. ADVOCATES OF THE "REMEMBERING SELF"

E1.1.D.4.1. ADVOCATES OF THE "REMEMBERING SELF": THIS AIRLINE ALLOWS YOU TO GO BACK ON VACATION IF YOU RETURN FROM YOUR TRIP AND FIND THAT YOUR PHOTOS ARE A DISASTER, because there's nothing worse than coming back from a vacation with bad pictures... really? It's a total devaluation of the "experiencing self" in favor of the "remembering self".

Watch the ad #VeryBadPic by Transavia:
https://youtu.be/quSCj7A8T7o?si=qPdNwlPAeNFuHd44

E1.1.D.4.2. ADVOCATES OF THE "REMEMBERING SELF": BERTRAND RUSSELL IS AN ADVOCATE OF THE 'REMEMBERING SELF,' in this passage, arguing that "the habit of looking at life as a whole is indispensable to wisdom and true morality. Can't we disagree with him by arguing that any goal we set for our lives is arbitrary, and that a life that adapts to becoming by diminishing the importance of the achievements of the ego and preferring the whole of the world is more likely to live in a state of contentment and wonder?

"Human beings differ profoundly in regard to the tendency to regard their lives as a whole: To some men it is natural to do so, and essential to happiness to be able to do so with some satisfaction. To others life is a series of detached incidents without directed movement and without unity. I think the former sort are more likely to achieve happiness than the latter, since they will gradually build up those circumstances from which they can derive contentment and self-respect, whereas the others will be blown about by the winds of circumstance now this way, now that, without ever arriving at any haven. The habit of viewing life as a whole is an essential part both of wisdom and of true morality, and is one of the things which ought to be encouraged in education. Consistent purpose is not enough to make life happy, but it is an almost indispensable condition of a happy life. And consistent purpose embodies itself mainly in work."
(Bertrand Russell, La conqueête du bonheur, 1962)

E1.1.D.4.3. ADVOCATES OF THE "REMEMBERING SELF": "CARPE DIEM 
It's a Latin phrase by Horace that translates as "Seize the day. In our hedonistic, desirous age, this is considered the epitome of wisdom. We should live in the moment, enjoy the present, take pleasure as it comes... And I don't deny that there is a kind of minimal wisdom in that. But it's far from believing that farniente and gastronomy can take the place of philosophy. [...] Live in the moment? No one can. Live in the present? It's the only way, because there's nothing else. But the present is not a moment: it's a duration that, as Epicurus pointed out, cannot be inhabited humanly without a conscious relationship with the past and the future. Enjoyment? As much as possible. But that doesn't tell us what to do with our life when it's not pleasant, when pain or anguish sweeps us away, when pleasure is postponed or impossible... Who can believe that sensuality, however delicious, is sufficient for wisdom? Seize the day, then, but don't give up on action, nor on duration, nor on those spiritual pleasures that Epicurus called "immortal goods" at the end of his Letter to Meneca. For they are concerned only with the true, which does not die. Carpe aeternitatem."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.1.D.4.3_REF1_CUR ADVOCATES OF THE "REMEMBERING SELF": "ROBERT REED CONSIDERED THIS PAINTING A LANDSCAPE. In it, a clearly defined rectangle of exposed canvas draws the viewer's eye on to the middle of the painting. Bold purple strokes of paint jostle at the rectangle’s sides. The work is part of Reed’s Plum Nellie series, which was exhibited in his solo show at the Whitney in 1973. In addition to referencing its color palette, the title recalls the southern expression “Plum Nelly”. Teed remembers the phrase to mean” damn near”, suggesting that his relationship to abstraction is as much about the process of getting there as it is about arriving at the destination."
(Whitney Museum, NY curator´s review, 2019)

E1.1.D.4.4. ADVOCATES OF THE "REMEMBERING SELF": HAPPINESS, ACCORDING TO ARISTOTLE - AND ECHOED BY HEIDEGGER - IS THAT OF THE "REMEMBERING SELF", not the "experiencing self". For them, happiness is a review of life and can only be judged after death - for if you have a terrible death, you cannot say you have had a good life. 
Once again, Nietzsche seems to be making a common-sense point: "It doesn't matter how you die".

"HAPPINESS REQUIRES, AS WE SAID, NOT ONLY COMPLETE VIRTUE BUT ALSO A COMPLETE LIFE, since many changes occur in life, and all manner of chances, and the most prosperous may fall into great misfortunes in old age, as is told of Priam in the Trojan Cycle, and one who has experienced such chances and has ended wretchedly no one calls happy [...]
When then should we not say that he is happy who is active in accordance with complete virtue and is sufficiently equipped with exter-nal goods, not for some chance period but throughout a complete life?
Or must we add and who is destined to live thus and die as befits his life? Certainly the future is obscure to us, while happiness, we claim, is an end and something in every way final. If so, we shall call happy those among living men in whom these conditions are, and are to be, ful-filled but happy men."
(Aristotle, Nichomachean Ethics, circa 350 BC)

Hope 
For Heidegger, hope is both inescapable and impossible for we are always oriented towards the future that we can't control or forsee. We, as humans, are always incomplete in the now and striving towards a wholeness of life that will only be there when all our decisions have been made, once we are able to survey our lives from the end -  ironically we will be dead by then! 
(Hope, program brodcast on BBC4 on Thu 22 Nov 2018)

Listen to the program: https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/m00017vl

E1.1.D.4.4_REF1_PH ADVOCATES OF THE "REMEMBERING SELF": "TO BE HAPPY, ETYMOLOGICALLY, IS TO BE LUCKY. This says a lot about happiness, not because happiness is enough, but because happiness is not possible without happiness. For every human being there is what he can bear and what he cannot. Whether or not he encounters that which makes happiness impossible before he dies is at least as much a matter of chance as of virtue. 
Are you happy? First of all, there's nothing that can stop you, nothing that's stronger than you. And how could you be stronger than anything?" 
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.1.D.4.4_REF2_PH ADVOCATES OF THE "REMEMBERING SELF": "HOW ONE DIES IS INDIFFERENT.—The whole way in which a man thinks of death during the prime of his life and strength is very expressive and significant for what we call his character. But the hour of death itself, his behaviour on the death-bed, is almost indifferent. The exhaustion of waning life, especially when old people die, the irregular or insufficient nourishment of the brain during this last period, the occasionally violent pain, the novel and untried nature of the whole position, and only too often the ebb and flow of superstitious impressions and fears, as if dying were of much consequence and meant the crossing of bridges of the most terrible kind—all this forbids our using death as a testimony concerning the living. Nor is it true that the dying man is generally more honest than the living. On the contrary, through the solemn attitude of the bystanders, the repressed or flowing streams of tears and emotions, every one is inveigled into a comedy of vanity, now conscious, now unconscious. The serious way in which every dying man is treated must have been to many a poor despised devil the highest joy of his whole life and a sort of compensation and repayment for many privations."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 88, 1878)

E1.1.D.4.4_REF3_PO “A FELICITOUS LIFE
His old age fell on years of abundant harvest.
There were no earthquakes, droughts or floods.
It seemed as if the turning of the seasons gained in constancy,
Stars waxed strong and the sun increased its might.
Even in remote provinces no war was waged.
Generations grew up friendly to fellow men.
The rational nature of man was not a subject of derision.

It was bitter to say farewell to the earth so renewed.
He was envious and ashamed of his doubt,
Content that his lacerated memory would vanish with him.

Two days after his death a hurricane razed the coasts.
Smoke came from volcanoes inactive for a hundred years.
Lava sprawled over forests, vineyards, and towns.
And war began with a battle on the islands.”
(Czeslaw Milosz)

Illustration: Frederik II's War Book
Frederik II's War Book from 1578 contains seven books about aspects of the art of war which, according to the text of the book, is knowledge to which all are not to have access. The book has only been printed in this one copy, which underlines the secretiveness concerning its contents. Frederik II passed the book on to his son, Christian IV, who used it and wrote comments in it. Visually, the book is a magnificent work, printed in a large format, beautifully bound and rich in hand-coloured illustrations.

E1.1.D.4.5. ADVOCATES OF THE "REMEMBERING SELF": URSULA LE GUIN OFFERS US AN ARGUMENT FOR VALUING A LIFE IN TERMS OF DURATION – AS THE "REMEMBERING SELF" DOES - but offers us a very different existential perspective: the world is more beautiful seen as a whole than in its parts, and in eternity than in the moment. Knowing this, are we able to expand our perspective in space and time without losing the ability to be present in the here and now?

"Fulfillment… is a function of time. The search for pleasure is circular, repetitive, atemporal. The variety seeking of the spectator, the thrill hunter, the sexually promiscuous, always ends in the same place. It has an end. It comes to the end and has to start over. It is not a journey and return, but a closed cycle, a locked room, a cell.
Outside the locked room is the landscape of time, in which the spirit may, with luck and courage, construct the fragile, makeshift, improbable roads and cities of fidelity: a landscape inhabitable by human beings.
It is not until an act occurs within the landscape of the past and the future that it is a human act. Loyalty, which asserts the continuity of past and future, binding time into a whole, is the root of human strength; there is no good to be done without it. [...]
The thing about working with time, instead of against it, …is that it is not wasted. Even pain counts. [...]
If you can see a thing whole… it seems that it’s always beautiful. Planets, lives. . . . But close up, a world’s all dirt and rocks. And day to day, life’s a hard job, you get tired, you lose the pattern. You need distance, interval. The way to see how beautiful the earth is, is to see it as the moon. The way to see how beautiful life is, is from the vantage point of death."
(Ursula K. Le Guin, The Dispossessed: An Ambiguous Utopia, 1974)

In this installation, Waltercio Caldas invites us to look back at a sum of past moments that we have let slip away and that, when added together, form an edifice.

E1.1.D.4.5_REF1_CUR ADVOCATES OF THE "REMEMBERING SELF": FILMS USE TIME TO REPRESENT TIME THANKS TO EDITING. The cuts imply a shift of time that we accept in the same way the single shot standardly represents the duration of the scene. The passing of time can be represented in films by the passing of time (long scenes), but the condensation of time is nevertheless immense. Disrrupting this convention, The Clock is a 24h-long movie which narrative is to depict the passing of time by the pasting together of scenes from others films that show - often inadvertently caught by the camera's travelling - a clock exactly sincronized with the time it is in the place and time zone where the viewers are watching the film. Other than this thread, the succession of scenes make no sense and are all disconnected. This reminds us of Ursula K. Le Guin words in The Dispossessed (1974) : « Outside the locked room is the landscape of time, in which the spirit may, with luck and courage, construct the fragile, makeshift, improbable roads and cities of fidelity: a landscape inhabitable by human beings. It is not until an act occurs within the landscape of the past and the future that it is a human act. Loyalty, which asserts the continuity of past and future, binding time into a whole, is the root of human strength; there is no good to be done without it. [...]
The thing about working with time, instead of against it, …is that it is not wasted. Even pain counts. [...] If you can see a thing whole… it seems that it’s always beautiful. Planets, lives. . . . But close up, a world’s all dirt and rocks. And day to day, life’s a hard job, you get tired, you lose the pattern. You need distance, interval. The way to see how beautiful the earth is, is to see it as the moon. The way to see how beautiful life is, is from the vantage point of death. »

E1.1.D.4.6. ADVOCATES OF THE "REMEMBERING SELF": THREE REASONS TO WATCH BLUE, a film by  Kieślowski Krzysztof: 
https://youtu.be/cVaqLZmMf-k?si=zRc19AUFoGUjfevA

"Odd as it may seem, I am my remembering self, and the experiencing self, who does my living, is like a stranger to me." 
(Daniel Kahneman)
Julie (Juliette Binoche)'s husband and daughter are killed in a car accident. She lives as a surviver in seclusion,prisonner of her "remembering self" until her "experiencing self" calls her back to live in the present.

E1.1.D.4.7. ADVOCATES OF THE "REMEMBERING SELF": IN VAIN, DEATH TUGS AT THE KNOB OF THE INVISIBLE DOOR. AS FAR AS YOU’VE COME CAN’T BE UNDONE.
"On Death, without Exaggeration

It can’t take a joke,
find a star, make a bridge.
It knows nothing about weaving, mining, farming,
building ships, or baking cakes.

In our planning for tomorrow,
it has the final word,
which is always beside the point.

It can’t even get the things done
that are part of its trade:
dig a grave,
make a coffin,
clean up after itself.

Preoccupied with killing,
it does the job awkwardly,
without system or skill.
As though each of us were its first kill.

Oh, it has its triumphs,
but look at its countless defeats,
missed blows,
and repeat attempts!

Sometimes it isn’t strong enough
to swat a fly from the air.
Many are the caterpillars
that have outcrawled it.

All those bulbs, pods,
tentacles, fins, tracheae,
nuptial plumage, and winter fur
show that it has fallen behind
with its halfhearted work.

Ill will won’t help
and even our lending a hand with wars and coups d’etat
is so far not enough.

Hearts beat inside eggs.
Babies’ skeletons grow.
Seeds, hard at work, sprout their first tiny pair of leaves
and sometimes even tall trees fall away.

Whoever claims that it’s omnipotent
is himself living proof
that it’s not.

There’s no life
that couldn’t be immortal
if only for a moment.

Death
always arrives by that very moment too late.

In vain it tugs at the knob
of the invisible door.
As far as you’ve come
can’t be undone."
(Wislawa Szymborska, 1986)

Georg Baselitz, Zero end, 2013 & Gustav Klimt, Death and life, 1910-11... From birth to death with only zeros in between? Let's put death back in its due place!

E1.1.D.4.8. ADVOCATES OF THE "REMEMBERING SELF": USUALLY, TO BE SURE, MAN CONSIDERS ONLY THE SUBBTLE FIELD OF TRANSITORINESS AND OVERLOOKS THE FULL GRANARIES OF THE PAST, WHEREIN HE HAD SALVAGED ONCE AND FOR ALL HIS DEEDS, HIS JOYS AND ALSO HIS SUFFERINGS. Nothing can be undone, and nothing can be done away with. I should say having been is the surest kind of being.

"LIFE'S TRANSITORINESS

Those things which seem to take meaning away from human life include not only suffering but dying  as well. I never tire of saying that the only really transitory aspects of life are the potentialities; but as soon as they are actualized, they are rendered realities at that very moment; they are saved and delivered into the past, wherein they are rescued and preserved from transitoriness. For, in the past, nothing is irretrievably lost but everything irrevocably stored.

Thus, the transitoriness of our existence in no way makes it meaningless. But it does constitute our responsibleness; for everything hinges upon our realizing the essentially transitory possibilities. Man constantly makes his choice concerning the mass of present potentialities; which of these will be condemned to nonbeing and which will be actualized? Which choice will be made an actuality once and forever, an immortal "footprint in the sands of time"? At any moment, man must decide, for better or for worse, what will be the monument of his existence.

Usually, to be sure, man considers only the stubble field of transitoriness and overlooks the full granaries of the past, wherein he had salvaged once and for all his deeds, his joys and also his sufferings. Nothing can be undone, and nothing can be done away with. I should say having been is the surest kind of being.

Logotherapy, keeping in mind the essential transitoriness ,, of human existence, is not pessimistic but rather activistic. To express this point figuratively we might say: The pessimist resembles a man who observes with fear and sadness that his wall calendar, from which he daily tears a sheet, grows thinner with each passing day. On the other hand, the person who attacks the problems of life actively is like a man who removes each successive leaf from his calendar and files it neatly and carefully away with its predecessors, after first having jotted down a few diary notes on the back. He can reflect with pride and joy on all the richness set down in these notes, on all the life he has
already lived to the fullest. What will it matter to him if he notices that he is growing old? Has he any reason to envy the young people whom he sees, or wax nostalgic over his own lost youth? What reasons has he to envy a young person? For the possibilities that a young person has, the future which is in store for him? "No, thank you," he will think. "Instead of possibilities, I have realities in my past, not only the reality of work done and of love loved, but of sufferings bravely suffered.
These sufferings are even the things of which I am most proud, though these are things which cannot inspire envy."
(Viktor Frankl, Man's search for meaning, 1959)

E1.1.D.5. SOMETIMES THE "REMEMBERING SELF" REWORKS OUR MEMORIES TO OUR ADVANTAGE to improve the "story" of our life. Can this help to make a life, seen as a whole, more beautiful than its parts?

My destiny would then be the seemingly necessary story that the "remembering self" has constructed against a background of chance.
For Albert Camus, destiny is the form that hindsight gives to contingency. When we say: "It was my destiny," we might say that this destiny is in fact the seemingly inevitable story that the "remembering self" has constructed against a backdrop of chance events. Memory gives meaning to our actions.

E1.1.D.5.1. IN THE ANIMATED PICTURE INSIDE OUT (Pete Docter, Ronaldo Del Carmen, 2015) by replaying one of Ridley's core memory, when she got very sad as a kid after a hochey game but was consoled by her parents, Joy realizes that the memory - which is a happy one - was actually constructed on a sad incident. 
Another way the animated pictures illustrates how the "historical self" can reinterpret experiences is how all the way through, when Sadness touches a happy memory, it colors it with sadness.
(Pierre Schindler)

E1.1.D.6. THE "REMEMBERING SELF," WHICH EVALUATES HAPPINESS IN E1.1.D.6. TERMS OF A LIFE REVIEW RATHER THAN TAKING THE TEMPERATURE OF THE MOMENT, helps explain the difficulty we have in defining a satiation threshold. 
Could it also be the origin of envy? Envy would be the manifestation of the "remembering self," which compares our situation with that of our neighbor - or with the goals we have set for ourselves. In the latter case, we construct envy in relation to the goals we set for ourselves and didn't achieve, in other words, regret.

E1.1.D.6.1. THE FEELING OF SATIATION DOESN'T SURVIVE THE COMPARISON of our situation with that of others or their judgment of our desires.

We need to ask ourselves where our motivation to perform comes from: is it fueled by our own desire or that of others?

“John Bogle, the Vanguard founder who passed away in 2019, once told a story about money that highlights something we don’t think about enough:
At a party given by a billionaire on Shelter Island, Kurt Vonnegut informs his pal, Joseph Heller, that their host, a hedge fund manager, had made more money in a single day than Heller had earned from his wildly popular novel Catch-22 over its whole history. Heller responds, “Yes, but I have something he will never have … enough.”
Enough. I was stunned by the simple eloquence of that word—stunned for two reasons: ﬁrst, because I have been given so much in my own life and, second, because Joseph Heller couldn’t have been more accurate.
For a critical element of our society, including many of the wealthiest and most powerful among us, there seems to be no limit today on what enough entails.”
(Morgan Housel, The Psychology of Money, 2020)

E1.1.D.6.1.a. "JALOUSY AND ITS NOBLER SISTER.—Where equality is really recognised and permanently established, we see the rise of that propensity that is generally considered immoral, and would scarcely be conceivable in a state of nature—envy. The envious man is susceptible to every sign of individual superiority to the common herd, and wishes to depress every one once more to the level—or raise himself to the superior plane. Hence arise two different modes of action, which Hesiod designated good and bad Eris. In the same way, in a condition of equality there arises indignation if A. is prosperous above and B. unfortunate beneath their deserts and equality. These latter, however, are emotions of nobler natures. They feel the want of justice and equity in things that are independent of the arbitrary choice of men—or, in other words, they desire the equality recognised by man to be recognised as well by Nature and chance. They are angry that men of equal merits should not have equal fortune."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All too Human III, Aphorism 29, 1878)

E1.1.D.6.1.a_FER1_CUR "FRANCELINE DE VEUGELEIR WAS BORN IN WERVIK IN 1938. SHE HAS SPENT HER ENTIRE LIFE WISHING THAT SHE HAD NEVER BEEN BORN. She always thinks that she is worse off compared to other people. She can deliver long tirades about how, in a restaurant, the service she received was below the standard given to her fellow diners.
She is hated by many, which suits her perfectly, because then she can hate them back with even greater ferocity. This paranoia makes life very hard for her nearest and dearest, It is not clear why she sits in a wheelchair, as there has been no medical diagnosis that justifies the use of such a contraption. But Franceline is resolute in her anger and moans constantly about the pain in her knees that makes it impossible for her to walk. Franceline De Veugeleir drives everyone to despair with her complaints, but it doesn't look as though the world will be relieved of her presence any time soon."
(From the catalog of the Belgian pavillon, Venice Biennale, 2019)

E1.1.D.6.1.b. "OF HUMAN BONDAGE, OR THE STRENGTH OF THE EMOTIONS.

PRÉFACE
[...] But, before I begin, it would be well to make a few prefatory observations on perfection and imperfection, good and evil.
When a man has purposed to make a given thing, and has brought it to perfection, his work will be pronounced perfect, not only by himself, but by everyone who rightly knows, or thinks that he knows, the intention and aim of its author. For instance, suppose anyone sees a work (which I assume to be not yet completed), and knows that the aim of the author of that work is to build a house, he will call the work imperfect ; he will, on the other hand, call it perfect, as soon as he sees that it is carried through to the end, which its author had purposed for it. But if a man sees a work, the like whereof he has never seen before, and if he knows not the intention of the artificer, he plainly cannot know, whether that work be perfect or imperfect. Such seems to be the primary meaning of these terms. But, after men began to form general ideas, to think out types of houses, buildings, towers, &c., and to prefer certain types to others, it came about, that each man called perfect that which he saw agree with the general idea he had formed of the thing in question, and called imperfect that which he saw agree less with his own preconceived type, even though it had evidently been completed in accordance with the idea of its artificer.."
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics, IV)

Read the Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en

Jules Brunfaut, Hotel Hannon, 1904 / Victor Horta, Hotel Tassel Horta, 1893 / Ernest Delune, 6 rue du lac, 1904 / Paul Hankar, Flower shop, 1893 - Perfect architecture?

E1.1.D.6.1.c. "IS THERE A HUMAN NATURE THAT CAN BE SATISFIED, "NATURAL AND NECESSARY DESIRES" whose satisfaction would guarantee absolute well-being? "Since our needs are social in origin, they are by nature relative," Marx argues. This is confirmed today by economists who, in studying the relationship between economic growth and feelings of happiness, have tried in vain to identify a "saturation threshold," that is, the level of income above which an increase in purchasing power would no longer affect declared well-being. Marx illustrates this point with the image of a family fortunate enough to have a roof over their heads, who see a palace rising all around them; the poison of comparison and envy, which economic growth cannot remedy, insinuates itself irresistibly into the hearts of the house's inhabitants: "No matter how high it rises into the sky, as civilization progresses, its inhabitants will feel more and more uncomfortable, more and more dissatisfied, more and more cramped within its four walls, because it will always remain small while the neighboring palace grows in equal or greater proportions. "Even if, as Marx suggests, capitalism were to generate a continuous increase in wealth from which wage-earners would benefit by "trickling down," well-being would necessarily suffer from the inevitable increase in luxury and inequality. Since our desires are relative, so is our well-being, so that a substantial increase in purchasing power cannot guarantee social satisfaction and peace.
(Eric Deschavanne, TimeToPhilo, 12/13/2018)

E1.1.D.6.1.d. WHY YOU DON'T NEED TO BE EXCEPTIONAL
"Transcript:
0:00 
It’s a rather simple question that quickly gets to the core of someone’s sense of well-being
0:10
and legitimacy: did your childhood leave you feeling that you were - on balance - OK as
0:15
you were, or did you somewhere along the way derive an impression that you needed to be
0:21
extraordinary in order to deserve a place on the earth? And, to raise an associated
0:27
question: are you therefore now relaxed about your status - or else either a manic overachiever
0:33
or filled with shame at your so-called mediocrity?
0:38
Around twenty percent of us will be in the uncomfortable cohort, alternately refusing
0:43
to believe that anything could ever be enough or cursing ourselves as ‘failures’ (by
0:48
which we in essence mean that we have not managed to beat insane statistical odds).
0:53
At school, we probably worked very hard, not because we were drawn to the topics, but because
0:58
we felt compelled for reasons that were - at the time - not entirely clear; we just knew
1:03
we had to come close at the top of the class and revise every evening. We may not be exceptional
1:09
right now, but we are seldom without an acute sense of pressure to be so.
1:15
In childhood, the story might have gone like this. A parent needed us to be special - by
1:20
virtue of intelligence, looks or popularity - in order to shore up a floundering sense
1:26
of their own self. The child needed to achieve and could not, therefore, just be; their own
1:33
motives and tastes were not to be part of the picture. The parent was - privately - in
1:38
pain, unable to value themselves, battling an unnamed depression, furious with the course
1:44
of their own lives, perhaps covertly tortured by their spouse. And the child’s mission,
1:50
for which there was no option but to volunteer, was to make it all somehow better.
1:56
It seems odd to look at achievement through this lens, not as the thing the newspapers
2:01
tell us it is, but - very often - as a species of mental illness. Those who put up the skyscrapers,
2:08
write the bestselling books, perform on stage, or make partner may, in fact, be the unwell
2:14
ones. Whereas the characters who - without agony - can bear an ordinary life, the so-called
2:20
contented ‘mediocrities’, may in fact be the emotional superstars, the aristocrats
2:26
of the spirit, the captains of the heart. The world divides into the privileged who
2:33
can be ordinary and the damned compelled to be remarkable.
2:38
The best possible outcome for the latter is to have a breakdown. Suddenly, after years
2:44
of achievement, they can - if they are lucky - no longer get out bed. They fall into a
2:49
profound depression. They develop all-consuming social anxiety. They refuse to eat. They babble
2:55
incoherently. They in some way poke a very large stick in the wheels of day-to-day life
3:00
and are allowed to stay home for a while. A breakdown is not merely a random piece of
3:06
madness or malfunction, it can be a very real – albeit inarticulate and inconvenient – bid
3:13
for health. It is an attempt by one part of our minds to force the other into a process
3:18
of growth, self-understanding and self-development which it has hitherto been too cowed to undertake.
3:25
If we can put it paradoxically, it is an attempt to jumpstart a process of getting well, properly
3:31
well, through a stage of falling very ill.
3:36
In an apparently ill state, we might cleverly be seeking to destroy all the building blocks
3:41
of our previous driven yet unhappy careers. We may be trying to reduce our commitments
3:47
and our outgoings. We may be trying to throw off the cruel absurdity of others’ expectations.
3:53
Our societies - that are often unwell at a collective and not just an individual level
3:59
- are predictably lacking in inspiring images of good enough ordinary lives. They tend to
4:07
associate these with being a loser. We imagine that a quiet life is something that only a
4:13
failed person without options would ever seek. We relentlessly identify goodness with being
4:19
at the centre, in the metropolis, on the stage. We don’t like autumn mellowness or the peace
4:25
that comes once we are past the meridian of our hopes. But there is, of course, no center,
4:32
or rather the centre is oneself.
4:35
Occasionally an artist will make things that bring such bathetic wisdom home. Here is Montaigne,
4:41
capturing the point in the third volume of his Essays, written a few years before his
4:45
death towards the end of the sixteenth century: "Storming a breach, conducting an embassy,
4:50
ruling a nation are glittering deeds. Rebuking, laughing, buying, selling, loving, hating
4:57
and living together gently and justly with your household - and with yourself - not getting
5:03
slack nor belying yourself, is something more remarkable, more rare and more difficult.
5:09
Whatever people may say, such secluded lives sustain in that way duties which are at least
5:15
as hard and as tense as those of other lives."
5:20
In the late 1650s, the Dutch artist Johannes Vermeer painted a picture called The Little
5:25
Street, that continues to challenge our value system to this day.
5:30
Perhaps success might - after all - be nothing more than a quiet afternoon with the children,
5:35
at home, in a modest street. You catch a similar point in certain stories by Chekhov or Raymond
5:40
Carver, in Bob Dylan’s Time out of Mind, in Thomas Jones’s study of A Wall in Naples
5:46
(1782) and in the films of Eric Rohmer, in particular Le Rayon Vert (1982).
5:51
Most movies, adverts, songs and articles, however, do not tend to go this way, they
5:56
continually explain to us the appeal of other things: sports cars, tropical island holidays,
6:02
fame, an exalted destiny, first-class air travel and being very busy. The attractions
6:08
are sometimes perfectly real. But the cumulative effect is to instill in us the idea that our
6:14
own lives must be close to worthless.
6:18
And yet there may be immense skill, joy and nobility involved in what we are up to: in
6:23
bringing up a child to be reasonably independent and balanced; in maintaining a good-enough
6:29
relationship with a partner over many years despite areas of extreme difficulty; in keeping
6:34
a home in reasonable order; in getting a lot of early nights; in doing a not very exciting
6:40
or well-paid job responsibly and cheerfully; in listening properly to other people and,
6:46
in general, in not succumbing to madness or rage at the paradox and compromises involved
6:52
in being alive.
6:54
There is already a treasury to appreciate in our circumstances when we learn to see
6:59
these without prejudice or self-hatred. As we may discover once we are beyond others’
7:05
expectations, life’s true luxuries might comprise nothing more or less than simplicity,
7:12
quiet, friendship based on vulnerability, creativity without an audience, love without
7:18
too much hope or despair, hot baths and dried fruits, walnuts
7:23
and dark chocolate.
7:28
The School of Life is coming to New York from the 4th to the 6th of October for a three-day conference.
7:35
Where you'll have the chance to meet other like-minded individuals and embark on a journey of genuine self-discovery and self-transformation. We hope to see you there."
(The School of Life)

Watch the animation on Youtube: https://youtu.be/pvgfucVF5cU

E1.1.D.6.2. IT SEEMS THAT SETTING OVERLY AMBITIOUS GOALS IS A RECIPE FOR A LIFE OF REGRET.

The goals that people set for themselves are so important to what they do and how they feel about it that an exclusive focus on experienced well-being is not tenable.

However, an ambitious goal can limit our ability to be available to the opportunities that come our way (the full exercise of the "exeprience self"). 
We can also set a goal as a bulwark against the unknown, with the same result of blinding us to opportunities.

It is countercultural to defend that "human beings do not find their essence through fulfillment or eventual arrival, but by staying close to the way they like to travel, to the way they hold the conversation between the ground on which they stand and the horizon to which they go."

On the other hand, setting limits to our expectations may be a prerequisite for experiencing true satisfaction and overcoming the feeling that "this isn't what I thought it would be."

E1.1.D.6.2.a. THE GOALS THAT PEOPLE SET FOR THEMSELVES ARE SO IMPORTANT to what they do and how they feel about it that an exclusive focus on experienced well-being is not tenable.

E1.1.D.6.2.a_REF1_PSI "GOALS MAKE A LARGE DIFFERENCE. [...] The people who wanted money and got it were significantly more satisfied than average; those who wanted money and didn’t get it were significantly more dissatisfied. The same principle applies to other goals — one recipe for a dissatisfied adulthood is setting goals that are especially difficult to attain. Measured by life satisfaction 20 years later, the least promising goal that a young person could have was “becoming accomplished in a performing art.” Teenagers’ goals influence what happens to them, where they end up, and how satisfied they are. 
In part because of these findings I have changed my mind about the definition of well-being. The goals that people set for themselves are so important to what they do and how they feel about it that an exclusive focus on experienced well-being is not tenable. We cannot hold a concept of well-being that ignores what people want. On the other hand, it is also true that a concept of well-being that ignores how people feel as they live and focuses only on how they feel when they think about their life is also untenable. We must accept the complexities of a hybrid view, in which the well-being of both selves is considered."
(Daniel Kahneman, Thinking Fast and Slow, 2011)

E1.1.D.6.2.a_REF1.1_PSI IN THIS VIDEO, WE SEE MARIANNA, A YOUNG PRE-TEEN GIRL IN A PINK TUTU, IN A MONOCHROMATIC PINK DANCE STUDIO, REHEARSING A CLASSICAL BALLET SEQUENCE over and over again, each time being corrected by her teacher, who is never satisfied. Marianna's face shows both her desire to do well and her frustration at not being able to. The choice of a monochromatic pink color palette for the room helps the viewer realize that all this effort only makes sense in this bubble that has no connection to "real life"-yet for Marianna, at this moment, it seems to be her whole life-with an intensity that perhaps only children are capable of.
(Pierre Schindler)

E1.1.D.6.2.a_REF2_LIT SO FAR AS HAPPINESS IS CONCERNED IT MATTERS VERY LITTLE WHAT ONE WANTS; THE MAIN THING IS THAT ONE SHOULD GET IT.
"In a community with energies constantly flowing through it, every road leads to a good goal, if one does not spend too much time hesitating and thinking it over. The targets are set up at a short distance, but life is short too, and in this way one gets a maximum of achievement out of it. And man needs no more for his happiness; for what one achieves is what moulds the spirit, whereas what one wants, without fulfilment, only warps it. So far as happiness is concerned it matters very little what one wants; the main thing is that one should get it."
(Robert Musil, The Man Without Qualities, Vol. 1, 1930)

E1.1.D.6.2.a_REF3_PH THE “GOAL” IS THE OBJECTIVE OF THE “REMEMBERING SELF,” THE “END” IS THAT OF THE “EXPERIENCING SELF.”

"GOAL [vs. END]
What we strive for, what we pursue, what we want to achieve or obtain. 
The Stoics distinguished between the end (telos) and the goal (skopos). The goal is external to the action: it is, for example, the target at which the archer aims. The end is internal: it is not a question of hitting the target (it does not depend on us: a sudden gust of wind can cause the arrow to deviate), but of aiming at it correctly. The goal is always to come; the end is always present. The goal is the object of hope; the end, of will. 
The wise act without purpose (what the Orientals call "detachment from the fruit of the act"), but not without end. And they achieve the goal all the better because they do not care about achieving it. 
Action is enough for them.
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.1.D.6.2.a_REF4_PH WE CAN ALSO LOSE SIGHT OF THE ULTIMATE GOAL while remaining trapped in the method we have outlined to achieve it. The world then loses its meaning, everything becomes a means to an end - which we have lost sight of.

E1.1.D.6.2.a_REF4.1_PH "FORGETTING OUR PURPOSE. —In a journey we commonly forget its goal. Almost every vocation is chosen and entered upon as means to an end, but is continued as the ultimate end. Forgetting our purpose is the most frequent form of folly."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humna, All Too Human II, Aphorsim 206, 1878)

"DESTINATION AND PATHS. Many people are obstinate about the path once it is taken, few people about the destination."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human, Aphorsim 494, 1878)

E1.1.D.6.2.a_REF4.2_PH INSTRUMENTALITY AND HOMO FABER. The perplexity of utilitarianism is that it gets caught in the unending chain of means and ends without ever arriving at some principle which could justify the category of means and end, that is, of utility itself. The "in order to" has become the content of the "for the sake of"; in other words, utility established as meaning generates meaninglessness.

"The implements and tools of homo faber, from which the most fundamental experience of instrumentality arises, determine all work and fabrication. Here it is indeed true that the end justifies the means; it does more, it produces and organizes them. The end justifies the violence done to nature to win the material, as the wood justifies killing the tree and the table justifies destroying the wood. Because of the end product, tools are designed and implements invented, and the same end product organizes the work process itself, decides about the needed specialists, the measure of co-operation, the number of assistants, etc. During the work process, everything is judged in terms of suitability and usefulness for the desired end, and for nothing else.
The same standards of means and end apply to the product itself. Though it is an end with respect to the means by which it was produced and is the end of the fabrication process, it never becomes, so to speak, an end in itself, at least not as long as it remains an object for use. The chair which is the end of carpentering can show its usefulness only by again becoming a means, either as a thing whose durability permits its use as a means for comfortable living or as a means of exchange. The trouble with the utility standard inherent in the very activity of fabrication is that the relationship between means and end on which it relies is very much like a chain whose every end can serve again as a means in some other context. In other words, in a strictly utilitarian world, allends are bound to be of short duration and to be transformed into means for some further ends.
This perplexity, inherent in all consistent utilitarianism, the philosophy of homo faber par excellence, can be diagnosed theoretically as an innate incapacity to understand the distinction between utility and meaningfulness, which we express linguistically by distinguishing between "in order to" and "for the sake of." Thus the ideal of usefulness permeating a society of craftsmen-— like the ideal of comfort in a society of laborers or the ideal of acquisition ruling commercial societies—is actually no longer a matter of utility but of meaning. It is "for the sake of" usefulness in general that homo faber judges and does everything in terms of "in order to." The ideal of usefulness itself, like the ideals of other societies, can no longer be conceived as something needed in order to have something else; it simply defies questioning about its own use. Obviously there is no answer to the question which Lessing once put to the utilitarian philosophers of his time: "And what is the use of use?" The perplexity of utilitarianism is that it gets caught in the unending chain of means and ends without ever arriving at some principle which could justify the category of means and end, that is, of utility itself. The "in order to" has become the content of the "for the sake of"; in other words, utility established as meaning generates meaninglessness."
(Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition, 1954)

E1.1.D.6.2.a_REF4.3_PH THE TRAGEDY IS THAT IN THE MOMENT HOMO FABER SEEMS TO HAVE FOUND FULFILMENT IN TERMS OF HIS OWN ACTIVITY, HE BEGINS TO DEGRADE THE WORLD OF THINGS, the end and end product of his own mind and hands; if man the user is the highest end, "the measure of all things," then not only nature, treated by homo faber as the almost "worthless material" upon which to work, but the "valuable" things themselves have become mere means, losing thereby their own intrinsic "value."

"Within the category of means and end, and among the experiences of instrumentality which rules over the whole world of use objects and utility, there is no way to end the chain of means and ends and prevent all ends from eventually being used again as means, except to declare that one thing or another is "an end in itself." In the world of homo faber, where everything must be of some use, that is, must lend itself as an instrument to achieve something else, meaning itself can appear only as an end, as an "end in itself" which actually is either a tautology applying to all ends or a contradiction in terms. For an end, once it is attained, ceases to be an end and loses its capacity to guide and justify the choice of means, to organize and produce them. It has now become an object among objects, that is, it has been added to the huge arsenal of the given from which homo faber selects freely his means
to pursue his ends. Meaning, on the contrary, must be permanent and lose nothing of its character, whether it is achieved or, rather, found by man or fails man and is missed by him. Homo faber, in so far as he is nothing but a fabricator and thinks in no terms but those of means and ends which arise directly out of his work activity, is just as incapable of understanding meaning as the animal laborcms is incapable of understanding instrumentality. And just as the implements and tools homo faber uses to erect the world become
for the animal laborans the world itself, thus the meaningfulness of this world, which actually is beyond the reach of homo faber, becomes for him the paradoxical "end in itself."
The only way out of the dilemma of meaninglessness in all strictly utilitarian philosophy is to turn away from the objective world of use things and fall back upon the subjectivity of use itself. Only in a strictly anthropocentric world, where the user, that is, man himself, becomes the ultimate end which puts a stop to the unending chain of ends and means, can utility as such acquire the dignity of meaningfulness. Yet the tragedy is that in the moment homo faber seems to have found fulfilment in terms of his own activity, he begins to degrade the world of things, the end and end product of his own mind and hands; if man the user is the highest end, "the measure of all things," then not only nature, treated by homo faber as the almost "worthless material" upon which to work, but the "valuable" things themselves have become mere means, losing thereby their own intrinsic "value."
(Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition, 1954)

E1.1.D.6.2.a_REF4.4_PH TODAY, PEOPLE WHO TEND TO SEE HOPE AS A VIRTUE tend to see it as a special kind of positive thinking and planning. A way to escape the limitations we set for ourselves through limiting goals?

E1.1.D.6.2.a_REF5_PH HAPPINESS DOES NOT REALLY DEPEND ON OBJECTIVE CONDITIONS OF EITHER WEALTH, HEALTH OR EVEN COMMUNITY. RATHER, IT DEPENDS ON THE CORRELATION BETWEEN OBJECTIVE CONDITIONS AND SUBJECTIVE EXPECTATIONS.
“Family and community seem to have more impact on our happiness than money

and health. People with strong families who live in tight-knit and supportive communities are significantly happier than people whose families are dysfunctional and who have never found (or never sought) a community to be

part of. Marriage is particularly important. Repeated studies have found that there is a very close correlation between good marriages and high subjective well-being, and between bad marriages and misery. This holds true irrespective of economic or even physical conditions. An impecunious invalid surrounded by a loving spouse, a devoted family and a warm community may well feel better than an alienated billionaire, provided that the invalid’s poverty is not too severe and that his illness is not degenerative or painful.

This raises the possibility that the immense improvement in material conditions over the last two centuries was o set by the collapse of the family and the community. If so, the average person might well be no happier today than in 1800. Even the freedom we value so highly may be working against us. We can choose our spouses, friends and neighbours, but they can choose to leave us. With the individual wielding unprecedented power to decide her own path in life, we nd it ever harder to make commitments. We thus live in an increasingly lonely world of unravelling communities and families.

But the most important finding of all is that happiness does not really depend on objective conditions of either wealth, health or even community. Rather, it depends on the correlation between objective conditions and subjective expectations. If you want a bullock-cart and get a bullock-cart, you are content. If you want a brand-new Ferrari and get only a second-hand Fiat you feel deprived.

This is why winning the lottery has, over time, the same impact on people’s happiness as a debilitating car accident. When things improve, expectations balloon, and consequently even dramatic improvements in objective conditions can leave us dissatisfied. When things deteriorate, expectations shrink, and consequently even a severe illness might leave you pretty much as happy as you were before.

You might say that we didn’t need a bunch of psychologists and their questionnaires to discover this. Prophets, poets and philosophers realised thousands of years ago that being satisfied with what you already have is far more important than getting more of what you want. Still, it’s nice when modern research – bolstered by lots of numbers and charts –reaches the same conclusions the ancients did.

The crucial importance of human expectations has far-reaching implications for understanding the history of happiness. If happiness depended only on objective conditions such as wealth, health and social relations, it would have been relatively easy to investigate its history. The finding that it depends on subjective expectations makes the task of historians far harder. We moderns have an arsenal of tranquillisers and painkillers at our disposal, but our expectations of ease and pleasure, and our intolerance of inconvenience and discomfort, have increased to

such an extent that we may well suffer from pain more than our ancestors ever did. It’s hard to accept this line of thinking. The problem is a fallacy of reasoning embedded deep in our psyches. When we try to guess or imagine how happy other people are now, or how people in the past were, we inevitably imagine ourselves in their shoes. But that won’t work because it pastes our expectations on to the material conditions of others. In modern affluent societies it is customary to take a shower and change your clothes every day. Medieval peasants went without washing for months on end, and hardly ever changed their clothes. The very thought of living like that, filthy and reeking to the bone, is abhorrent to us. Yet medieval peasants seem not to have minded. They were used to the feel and smell of a long-unlaundered shirt. It’s not that they wanted a change of clothes but couldn’t get it – they had what they wanted. So, at least as far as clothing goes, they were content That’s not so surprising, when you think of it. After all, our chimpanzee cousins seldom wash and never change their clothes. Nor are we disgusted by the fact that our pet dogs and cats don’t shower or change their coats daily. We pat, hug and kiss them all the same. Small children in affluent societies often dislike showering, and it takes them years of education and parental discipline to adopt this supposedly attractive custom. It is all a matter of expectations.

If happiness is determined by expectations, then two pillars of our society –

mass media and the advertising industry – may unwittingly be depleting the globe’s reservoirs of contentment. If you were an eighteen-year-old youth in a small village 5,000 years ago you’d probably think you were good-looking because there were only fifty other men in your village and most of them were either old, scarred and wrinkled, or still little kids. But if you are a teenager today you are a lot more likely to feel inadequate. Even if the other guys at school are an ugly lot, you don’t measure yourself against them but against the movie stars, athletes and supermodels you see all day on television, Facebook and giant billboards.”
(Yuval Noah Harari, Sapiens, A Brief History of Humankind, 2011)

E1.1.D.6.2.a_REF6_PH “REAL ENJOYMENT CONSISTS NOT IN WHAT ONE ENJOYS BUT IN THE IDEA. If I had in my service a submissive jinni who, when I asked for a glass of water, would bring me the world's most expensive wines, deliciously blended, in a goblet, I would dismiss him until he learned that the enjoyment consists not in what I enjoy but in getting my own way.”
(Søren Kierkegaard, Either or, part 1, 1843)

E1.1.D.6.2.a_REF7_PH “THE ROAD AHEAD IS
LIKE THE ROAD BEHIND
The road ahead is like the road behind.
The dreams achieved revise the dreams to come.
Mind shapes world, and new-shaped world shapes
mind,
As what you are steps back from what you've done.
The deeper you resides in its own space,
Sheltered like a yolk from wind and tide,
Filled with unimaginable grace
To wander through the paradise inside.
Ambitious girl! Become what dream you will,
And sail across each dark, forbidding sea.
Within, the fawn will graze sweet meadows still,
Untouched by all the phantoms you will be.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E1.3.D.8.2_REF3_PH.wE1.1.D.6.2.a.

E1.1.D.6.2.b. AN AMBITIOUS GOAL CAN LIMIT OUR ABILITY TO BE AVAILABLE TO THE OPPORTUNITIES THAT COME OUR WAY (the full exercise of the "exeprience self"). 
We can also set a goal as a bulwark against the unknown, with the same result of blinding us to opportunities.

E1.1.D.6.2.b_REF1_PH THE JOY WE DERIVE FROM ACHIEVING A GOAL is "a joy that was waiting to be realized" and therefore disappears with the completion of the task, whereas the joy of living is "present and complete."

"I must add this third argument, borrowed from Spinoza, that there is more 'perfection' - that is, of reality - in the joy of living than in specific joys: the former is present and complete, the latter virtual and awaiting its own completeness, not to say its own content. That is why, in my opinion, all perfect joy consists in the joy of living, and in it alone".
(Clément Rosset, The Major Force, 1983)

E1.1.D.6.2.b_REF1.1_PH AN UNDUE CULTIVATION OF THE WILL AT THE EXPENSE OF THE SENSES AND THE INTELLECT
"All the quieter pleasures have been abandoned. Some American students took me walking in the spring through a wood on the borders of their campus; it was filled with exquisite wild flowers, but not one of my guides knew the name of even one of them. What use would such knowledge be? It could not add to anybody’s income.
The trouble does not lie simply with the individual, nor can a single individual prevent it in his own isolated case. The trouble arises from the generally received philosophy of life, according to which life is a contest, a competition, in which respect is to be accorded to the victor. This view leads to an undue cultivation of the will at the expense of the senses and the intellect. [...]"
(Bertrand Russell, The Conquest of Happiness, 1962)

E1.1.D.6.2.b_REF1.2_LIT "AMBITIOUS PEOPLE ARE FORCED—AS ONE LEARNS FROM READING THEIR LIVES—TO CUT DOWN RIGIDLY UPON THEIR CONTEMPLATIVE TENDENCIES, to harden themselves against their momentary sensations. I lived for sensations; and have always, in my deepest heart regarded such a life as the only adequate return we can make to Nature for giving us birth!
Human sensations are Nature’s self-expression. They are the earth’s awareness of herself. They are like the blossoming of flowers—the only way in which the rooted life of the organism can realize itself and be itself."
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber, p. 237-238)

E1.1.D.6.2.b_REF1.3_PSI WHAT'S THE SECRET TO SUCCESS? Be nicer to yourself. Stanford researcher Emma Seppälä says the evidence suggests it is happiness that leads to success, not the other way round.

Read the article: https://www.weforum.org/stories/2016/02/whats-the-secret-to-success-be-nicer-to-yourself/

E1.1.D.6.2.b_REF1.4_PH "ONE SHOULD NOT PLAN ANYTHING for the long term, or at least not with the intention of becoming passionately attached to seeing it through to the end."
(Montaigne, Essays, I, XIX)

E1.6.B.1.5_REF3.1_PH.wE1.1.D.6.2.b.

E1.1.D.6.2.b_REF2_PH GOALS SHIELD US FROM THE UNCERTAINTY OF LIVING IN THE PRESENT
"What motivates our investment in goals and planning for the future, much of the time, isn’t any sober recognition of the virtues of preparation and looking ahead. Rather, it’s something much more emotional: how deeply uncomfortable we are made by feelings of uncertainty. Faced with the anxiety of not knowing what the future holds, we invest ever more fiercely in our preferred vision of that future — not because it will help us achieve it, but because it helps rid us of feelings of uncertainty in the present. [...]
Uncertainty is where things happen. It is where the opportunities — for success, for happiness, for really living — are waiting."
(Oliver Burkeman, The Antidote: Happiness for People Who Can’t Stand Positive Thinking)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2014/02/05/oliver-burkeman-antidote-plans-uncertainty/

E1.1.D.6.2.b_REF3_PH "IF YOU'RE HAVING TROUBLE GETTING STARTED, SHORTEN THE DISTANCE BETWEEN WHERE YOU ARE AND WHERE YOU FOCUS.

Climbing Everest might be the ultimate goal, but people often talk themselves out of starting because the distance from where they are to where they want to go seems impossibly big.

Keep the goal but change the focus to the next step.

You can't reach the top if you don't start."
(Shane Parrish, Farnam Street, Brain food)

E1.1.D.6.2.b_REF3.1_PH “A COMMON WAY OF APPROACHING EFFICIENCY, WHICH WAS DEVELOPED EXTENSIVELY IN GREEK PHILOSOPHY, IS TO CONCEIVE OF AN IDEAL FORM (eidos), representing an ideal state, which is then turned into a plan, set as a goal (telos), and used as a model and paradigm (as described exemplarily by Plato). This even applies to war: in his marches as in battle, a general is more or less skilled, Plato tells us, “depending on whether or not he is a geometer”—geometry being, in the West, the model of models (and mathematics the language in which this model is written). This brings together the two queens of faculties in European psychology: on the one hand, understanding, which conceives “with a view to the best” (the ideal form), and on the other, the will, which then invests itself in bringing this best into being, with all that this “bringing into being” may involve in terms of force. This has given rise to the relationship between theory and practice, which is so common that we hardly question it, even if we always fear some loss of [execution] at the stage of “action” with regard to theory and the projected model.”
(François Jullien, The Silent Transformations, 2009)

E1.1.D.6.2.b_REF4_PH LET'S LEARN TO FAIL BETTER, TO ACCEPT OUR OWN FRAGILITY, OUR OWN HUMANITY.
"Samuel Beckett: 'I've tried that before. I failed. It does not matter. Try again. Fail again. Fail better.
Beckett isn't just telling us to accept failure in order to succeed; he's inviting us to fully embrace the deeper meaning of failure in order to enter into the very dynamic of our lives. You may accept that failure is part of life, but you have one objection: sometimes it hurts. You had friends over for dinner yesterday and your cake tasted a little burnt and you feel bad about it. Let's examine what happens. Your first reaction is to respond with anger: it's your oven's fault for not working properly, or your children's fault for always asking you for things at the wrong time, or you conclude that you're a bad cook anyway. These approaches are unfortunate; today we put a lot of emphasis on success, but we don't learn to work with the fact that things don't always go our way. Instead of reacting with anger or despair, feel that you are hurt, that you are in pain - this is a better way to fail: by facing your own fragility, your own humanity. Can you allow yourself to feel what you feel, can you accept that things don't always go the way you want them to?
(Fabrice Midal, 3 minutes of philosophy to becomehuman again)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/3-minutes-de-philosophie-pour-redevenir-humain/samuel-beckett-deja-essaye-deja-echoue-peu-importe-essaie-encore-echoue-encore-echoue-mieux-9497066

E1.1.D.6.2.b_REF4.1_PH "I CAN ONLY THINK SERIOUSLY OF TRYING TO LIVE UP TO AN IDEAL, TO IMPROVE MYSELF, IF I AM SPLIT IN TWO PIECES. There must be a good “I” who is going to improve the bad “me.” “I,” who has the best intentions, will go to work on wayward “me,” and the tussle between the two will very much stress the difference between them. Consequently “I” will feel more separate than ever, and so merely increase the lonely and cut-off feelings which make “me” behave so badly."
(Alan Watts, The Wisdom of Insecurity: A Message for an Age of Anxiety, 1951)

E1.1.D.6.2.b_REF4.2_PH « NOTHING IS ENOUGH ! » How often are we advised to set a goal which we cannot achieve and which is beyond our strength, so that we might at least attain what our strength can yield under the highest pressure. But is it so desirable ? Don't the best achievements take on something exaggerated and circumvented, precisely because there is too much tension in them ? Doesn't a dark veil of failure spread over a world where you always see wrestling athletes, huge endeavors and nowhere a crowned winner - happy with his victory ?"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Aurore, Aphorism 559, 1881)

E1.1.D.6.2.b_REF5_PH JOY IS FROWNED UPON: OUR CONTEMPORARIES TEND TO CONFUSE IT WITH LAZINESS, INACTION, AND LACK OF AMBITION.
"WITHOUT MELODY. - There are men in whom a constant repose within themselves and a harmonious disposition of all their faculties are so habitual that any activity toward a goal is repugnant to them. They resemble music composed only of long, harmonious chords, without ever showing the beginning of a melodic and connected movement. Any movement communicated from the outside serves only to restore the skiff to a new equilibrium on the sea of harmonic consonance. Modern people are accustomed to feel extreme impatience when they encounter such natures, which produce nothing that can be called anything. But in certain special dispositions, their appearance provokes this extraordinary question: What is the point of melody? Why is it not enough for us that our lives are peacefully reflected in a deep lake? The Middle Ages were richer in such natures than ours. How rare it is to meet a person who can live in such a way, in constant peace and happiness with himself, even in the midst of a crowd, and say, as Goethe did: "The best is the deep tranquility in which I live and grow in relation to the world, gaining what it cannot take from me by fire or sword!" [...]"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human, Aphorism 626,  1878)

E1.1.E.1.3.wE1.1.D.6.2.

E1.1.D.6.2.b_REF6.1_PH "BETWEEN (VS BEYOND) [...] 
So, should we not be afraid to finally reverse the perspective under this oblique incitement (invitation); should we not be afraid to return to prejudices that may have been too hastily sealed by philosophy? Let us no longer consider the in-between as something that, left without a concept and limited to the separation of extremes, would be worth no more than an interval that is easily bridged in thought and immediately recognized as less intense. Let us no longer see it as that relative which, because of its indeterminacy, is condemned at least to "being," while the two extremes, alone determined (as eidetic), would touch the absolute. Let us rather take these two edges, dotted on the left, but whose radical nature we know is so easy to accentuate, as merely the support of that between where everything finally happens and, first of all, that continuous transition which is the breath of life. Life and death, which strike us by their occurrence, "are," strictly speaking, only to make this present and boundless in-between appear, but it alone exists. Would it be too much to think that the reversal that values this discreet in-between, to the detriment of the dramatic fanfare of the extremes, is silently signaling itself to us as one of the great contemporary ideological mutations: a new value of "holding the in-between" or of the in-between (maintaining the world, language, health, etc.)? We would have understood, in short, that clarity no longer comes from crossing the boundary (or that it should be "blurred," as Laozi advises in §4); that it is no longer in the extreme - at the end - that truth is hidden, as if it had to be pursued there in its entrenchment. And this is undoubtedly what would initially distance us from metaphysics and its "beyond," meta, leading to accentuation through transcendence.
It is true that this "beyond" has had its theoretical fruitfulness in the deployment of an operational plan of thought. By promoting, beyond the diversity of the sensible, the unity of the intelligible or of the concept (kata mian idean, says Plato); or, beyond the trial and error of experience, the perfection of a model conceived in the Absolute, this other plane, projected outside the world, ektos tou kosmou, made it possible to engage a capacity for abstraction that ensured the initiative of the mind and whose power over the world, in turn, through science, has since proved immense: A knowledge was born in Europe which, in a few centuries, transformed the planet through technology. What is more (and what is more important), Plato was able to go beyond this ideal, linking it to the power of Eros and transforming it into an ideal rooted in the deepest desires and mobilizing our will: just as this ideal could be the driving force behind science (classical physics), this ideal was the driving force behind ethics and politics - it made possible, in particular, the thinking behind the Revolution, the height of theory and progress. One would therefore have to be blind, blind in a way that is merely the reversal of the previous position, not to see what this break between a "beyond" and what has fallen back into the "here" has made possible (and, consequently, how fruitful dualism has been). That this break was a coup de grâce, and even that it came at a cost that we are only beginning to measure, in no way detracts from its validity. "Validity" here partializes its truth: For it is also time to recognize, by renouncing it, by leaving Europe, that such a division of the world, as inventive as it is, far from being a banal necessity encountered by every mind in its development, necessarily contains arbitrariness (or that it is one possibility among others); and that we can (must) now combine its resources with others that it has not yet discovered, and whose concept of the in-between seems to me to serve as a unifying concept; thus offering itself as a mirror in which this concept of the beyond comes to reflect its unthought.
"In-between", "beyond": we must not overlook the conceptual power of prepositions. Ahead of concepts - which are resultative and stabilizing - it is prepositions that construct thought. In Greek, "with a view to" expresses the goal, or "by means of" expresses the cause, functionally structuring thought before abstract terms give it a clear representation. But while the range of prepositions in Chinese is much narrower than in our languages (which is also why Chinese thought constructs less), "between" enjoys a privileged function justified by its spelling: the two opposing door panels forming polarity 門, between which a ray of moonlight 月 (in a later spelling, that of the sun 日) slips through. This is what the ideogram jian 間 shows us (and makes us think): instead of the door being opaque and blocking the way, there remains a space between the two that allows wind, life, and light to pass through indefinitely. Even what we perhaps too broadly call the world is not the "space between heaven and earth" tian di zhi jian, says Laozi (§5), "comparable to a great bellows"? "Empty, it is not flat": this emptiness is not a lack; and the more it is moved, the more it appears: the space between (the walls of the bellows) is that of activity. Or perhaps the Chinese painter does not paint a given state, as we know, but "between there is/there is not".
It is still necessary to see what this preposition "between", which becomes a proposition for thought, can articulate in different ways and therefore mean differently. For when such a "between", metaxu, is introduced into Greek thought, it is mainly to serve as a mediator: between ignorance and knowledge, such is the "between" of "opinion", doxa, in Plato [...].
From a logical point of view, this "in-between" is excluded by law as a third and middle term between contradictions, Aristotle thus walled up the opposites in their ontological separation and prohibited any ambiguity. Or, if this "in-between" must nevertheless intervene in order to allow us to conceive of change in the imperfect world of "physics", this intermediary "necessarily consists only of its opposites": it still has no "in itself", no being or nature of its own.
This is evidenced by the fact that Aristotle is unable to conceive of the middle note in music or gray among colors (cf. Physics, V, 224 b). This middle tone, he continues, "is low in relation to the high and high in relation to the low," without being able to conceive of such an "in-between" of transition and passage; and, similarly, gray "is black in relation to white and white in relation to black. If, then, change proceeds from the "between" or the intermediate, it is because the latter nevertheless reproduces for itself, in a minor mode, the status of the extreme, serving once again as the opposite of one or the other of the opposites; or, as Aristotle sums it up, "this intermediate is in a certain way the extremes" (to metaxu ta akra), also delimiting and relaying one or the other. For Aristotle, then, "gray" is not gray, that is, a color in which one, turning into the other, is no longer either one or the other: a color in which white and black, merging together, lose their demarcation; which is neither divisible nor characterizable-"indecisive," as Verlaine said. But it is alternately, but unwaveringly, "white in relation to black and black in relation to white. The in-between is a middle term, therefore also a term, also a terminus. It interrupts change in the middle and breaks it up, constituting itself as both the arrival and departure point of change, but it does not allow us to better understand how the transition works through it".
(François Jullien, Chinese Thought vs Philosophy, 2015)

E1.1.D.6.2.b_REF7_PH WE ARE PRONE TO ANGER TO THE EXTENT THAT WE FEEL INSECURE OR LACKING CONTROL WITH RESPECT TO THE ASPECT OF OUR GOALS THAT HAS BEEN ASSAILED
"Anger is not always, but very often, about status-injury. And status-injury has a narcissistic flavor: rather than focusing on the wrongfulness of the act as such, a focus that might lead to concern for wrongful acts of the same type more generally, the status-angry person focuses obsessively on herself and her standing vis-à-vis others. […]
We are prone to anger to the extent that we feel insecure or lacking control with respect to the aspect of our goals that has been assailed — and to the extent that we expect or desire control. Anger aims at restoring lost control and often achieves at least an illusion of it. To the extent that a culture encourages people to feel vulnerable to affront and down-ranking in a wide variety of situations, it encourages the roots of status-focused anger."
(Martha Nussbaum, Anger and Forgiveness: Resentment, Generosity, Justice)

“Unspoken expectations are premeditated resentments.”
(Neil Strauss)

E1.1.D.6.2.b_REF8_PH IT IS ONLY EFFORT WITHOUT DESIRE (NOT ATTACHED TO AN OBJECT) WHICH INFALLIBLY CONTAINS A REWARD.

"ATTENTION AND WILL

[...] The wrong way of seeking. The attention fixed on a problem. Another phenomenon due to horror of the void. We do not want to have lost our labour. The heat of the chase. We must not want to find: as in the case of an excessive devotion, we become dependent on the object of our efforts. We need an outward reward which chance sometimes provides and which we are ready to accept at the price of a deformation of the truth.

It is only effort without desire (not attached to an object) which infallibly contains a reward.

To draw back before the object we are pursuing. Only an indirect method is effective. We do nothing if we have not first drawn back.

[...] There are some kinds of effort which defeat their own object (example: the soured disposition of certain pious females, false asceticism, certain sorts of self-devotion, etc.). Others are always useful, even if they do not meet with success.

How are we to distinguish between them?

Perhaps in this way: some efforts are always accompanied by the (false) negation of our inner wretchedness; with others the attention is continually concentrated on the distance there is between what we are and what we love."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace , 1947)

E1.1.D.6.2.b_REF9_PH "THE METHOD PRESUPPOSES A WILLINGNESS TO THINK, A "PREMEDITATED DECISION". IN FACT, A MEANS TO PREVENT US FROM GOING TO A CERTAIN PLACE, or to keep open the possibility of leaving it (the thread in the labyrinth). In fact, in the so-called human sciences - including positive semiology - method means: 
1) A step towards a goal, a protocol of operations to obtain a result; for example: a method of deciphering, explaining, or exhaustively describing.
2) The idea of a straight path (to a goal). Paradoxically, however, the straight path refers to places where the subject does not actually want to go: it fetishizes the goal as a place, excluding other places, and the method becomes subordinate to a generality, a morality (Kierkegaardian equation).
3) The subject, for example, gives up what he does not know about himself, his irreducible nature, his strength (not to mention his unconscious)".
(Roland Barthes, How to Live Together, Lectures at the Collège de France, 1976-1977)

E1.1.D.6.2.b_REF10_PH "THE CULT OF THE OBSTACLE DRIVES HUMAN BEINGS FROM THEIR HUMAN CONDITION TOWARD WHAT IS MOST AGAINST THEM, toward what hurts them the most, toward the non-human, toward the inert, toward the mineral, toward death … toward everything that goes against love, against spirit.”
(René Girard, All desire is a desire of being)

E1.1.D.6.2.c. HUMAN BEINGS DO NOT FIND THEIR ESSENCE THROUGH FULFILLMENT OR EVENTUAL ARRIVAL but by staying close to the way they like to travel.
"CLOSE

is what we almost always are: close to happiness, close to another, close to leaving, close to tears, close to God, close to losing faith, close to being done, close to saying something or close to success, and even, with the greatest sense of satisfaction, close to giving the whole thing up.

Our human essence lies not in arrival, but in being almost there: we are creatures who are on the way, our journey a series of impending anticipated arrivals. We live by unconsciously measuring the inverse distances of our proximity: an intimacy calibrated by the vulnerability we feel in giving up our sense of separation.

To go beyond our normal identities and become closer than close is to lose our sense of self in temporary joy, a form of arrival that only opens us to deeper forms of intimacy that blur our fixed, controlling, surface identities.

To consciously become close is a courageous form of unilateral disarmament, a chancing of our arm and our love, a willingness to hazard our affections and an unconscious declaration that we might be equal to the inevitable loss that the vulnerability of being close will bring.

Human beings do not find their essence through fulfilment or eventual arrival but by staying close to the way they like to travel, to the way they hold the conversation between the ground on which they stand and the horizon to which they go. We are, in effect, always close, always close to the ultimate secret: that we are more real in our simple wish to find a way than any destination we could reach; the step between not understanding that and understanding that is as close as we get to happiness."
(David Whyte, Consolations, The Solace, Nourishment and Underlying Meaning of Everyday Words, 2015)

E1.1.D.6.2.c_REF1_PH THE CONCEPTION OF WORKS AND DESIRE FOR RESULTS AS A MOTIVE FOR ACTION - WORK AS A MEANS OF SATISFYING DESIRE -IS THE BONDAGE OF THE IGNORANT.
"What [The Philosophy of The Gita] teaches is primarily a practical system of yoga, and it introduces metaphysical ideas only to explain this practical system.

You shy away from the results of your actions, you desire other results, and you stray from your true path in life because it does not lead you there. But this conception of works and their results-desire for results as a motive for action, work as a means of satisfying desire-is the bondage of the ignorant, who know neither what works are, nor their true source, nor their true purpose, nor their high utility. 

40 . – On this path effort never goes to waste, and there is no failure. Even a little effort toward spiritual awareness will protect you from the greatest fear.

My yoga, the Divine Teacher said, will free you from great fear, and even a little of this yoga will bring you liberation. Once you set out on this path, you will see that no step is wasted; each of your smallest movements will be a gain; you will find no obstacle to frustrate your progress. A bold and absolute promise, a promise to which the hesitant and fearful mind, besieged and stumbling on every path, cannot easily give its full confidence."
(The  Bhagavad Gitâ, 2nd century BC - Commented by Aurobindo)

E1.1.D.6.2.c_REF2_PH HAVE YOU HEARD THAT IT WAS GOOD TO GAIN THE DAY?
I ALSO SAY IT IS GOOD TO FALL, BATTLES ARE LOST IN THE SAME SPIRIT IN WHICH THEY ARE WON.

"With music strong i come, with my cornets and my drums,
I play not marches for accepted victors only, I play marches for conquer’d and slain persons.

Have you heard that it was good to gain the day?
I also say it is good to fall, battles are lost in the same spirit in which they are won.

I beat and pound for the dead,
I blow through my embouchures my loudest and gayest for them.

Vivas to those who have fail’d!
And to those whose war-vessels sank in the sea!
And to those themselves who sank in the sea!
And to all generals that lost engagements, and all overcome heroes!
And the numberless unknown heroes equal to the greatest heroes known!"
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

Musical illustration: Fanfare Ciocarlia - Moliendo Cafe
Listen to it on Youtube: https://youtu.be/QiHmiZQNgL4?si=onJ90CMgIHqyz5J1

E1.6.B.2.7.c_REF1_PH.wE1.1.D.6.2.c.

E1.1.D.6.2.d. ON THE OTHER HAND, SETTING LIMITS TO OUR EXPECTATIONS may be a prerequisite for experiencing true satisfaction and overcoming the feeling that "this isn't what I thought it would be."

E1.1.D.6.2.d_REF1_PH MADAME DE SÉVIGNÉ: "YOU ONLY HAVE TO BE IN SPAIN TO LOSE THE DESIRE TO BUILD CASTLES THERE".
Building castles in Spain is an expression that dates back to the 13th century. It has become a metaphor for something that is considered impossible; we all dream of things that would make us happy, but which, by cutting us off from reality, only make us more unhappy. This attitude is similar to the belief that there is some kind of all-powerful nanny, a cosmic nanny, who could come and take care of us, protect us, and solve all our problems.
Madame de Sévigné's great wisdom is to reveal the structure of the illusion: there are no castles in Spain; once you've seen that, you're free. The whole problem lies in believing in this mirage, because then we really believe that this lack is the cause of our insecurity; this pseudo-infinity that we seek leads us to destroy everything - first and foremost the earth - without fulfilling us in any way, but only increasing our anxiety. 
But how can you distinguish your desire to change, to transform, to grow and to learn from this illusion? To find out, go on a trip and make the effort not just to go for the sake of going, but to try to determine what would make the trip a success for you. We don't usually take the time to determine what we want to experience. We feel like we have to do everything, and we come back feeling like it all went by too fast. But what would fulfill you? Seeing a work of art? An unexpected encounter? Reconnecting with a friend?

Walking in nature? Accepting to do nothing? Deciding on the scope of your journey is enough to completely change the experience you will have and allow you to find true satisfaction. To be fulfilled, our journey must have what philosophers call a purpose, that is, a direction and an end. Yes, setting a limit, far from limiting us, is what can make us truly happy.
(Fabrice Midal, 3 minutes of philosophy to become human again, broadcast on France Culture on 8/15/2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/3-minutes-de-philosophie-pour-redevenir-humain/madame-de-sevigne-il-ny-a-qua-etre-en-espagne-pour-navoir-plus-envie-dy-batir-des-chateaux

E1.1.D.6.2.d_REF2_PH “A DEADLINE IS NEGATIVE INSPIRATION. STILL, IT'S BETTER THAN NO INSPIRATION AT ALL.”
(Rita Mae Brown)

I_Re
E1.1.D.7. DOES THE SECOND FOUNDATION PROPOSED BY ROBERT MISRAHI as a possibility for happiness allow us to reconcile the "experiencing self" and the "remembering self" by intertwining the two temporalities to make them one?

E1.4.B.wE1.1.D.7.

E1.1.E. TO WHAT EXTENT DOES HAPPINESS DEPEND ON US?
Does unhappiness depend on where we draw the line between the inner and the outer? Does this blurring contribute to making the concept of happiness elusive?

"Happiness, said M..., is not an easy thing. It is very difficult to find in ourselves, and impossible to find elsewhere."
(Chamfort, Maxims and Thoughts, Characters and Anecdotes)

E1.1.E.1. NOTHING ON THE OUTSIDE CAN TAKE ANYTHING AWAY FROM YOU OR DISTURB YOU, AS LONG AS YOU DON'T ALLOW YOURSELF TO BE DISTURBED, RIGHT?

E1.1.E.1.1. WHAT MATTERS IS THE STATE YOU ARE IN AND NOT YOUR DESTINATION
"A boat is better balanced when its cargo is properly wedged. But if it rolls to the side, it will make that side sink faster. Everything you do, you do it against you, and you hurt yourself just by moving since you are displacing a sick person. But once you get rid of this sickness, you will find any change of scenery to be pleasing. Should you be exiled to the end of the world, to the lost corner of barbarian countries, that place will be hospitable to you all the same. What matters is the state you are in and not your destination."
(Seneca, Letters to Lucilius)

E1.1.E.1.2. A MAN GIVES TO HIS SURROUNDINGS THE PLEASURE AND CHARM THAT SPRING, AS IF FROM A SPRING, FROM HIS OWN PERSONALITY.
"Clothes seem to warm people. Obviously, it is not because they are warm and provide heat: in themselves, all clothes are cold-which is why people with fevers constantly change their clothes. Heat is dissipated by the human body. Clothing, by clinging to the body, holds it, encloses it, traps it, and returns it to the body without allowing it to disperse in all directions. Applied to the things of life, the same phenomenon leads most people into error: they imagine that if they build a big house around themselves and gather many slaves and riches, they will live comfortably. But living comfortably and happily does not come from outside! It is the opposite! A man gives to his surroundings the pleasure and charm that spring, as if from a spring, from his own personality."
(Plutarch, Vice and Virtue)

E1.1.E.1.3. THE WEST HAS FAVORED THE THOUGHT OF THE ABSOLUTE, OF THE « BEYOND » TO THE DETRIMENT OF THE PROCESSUAL THINKING THAT UNDERLIES CHINESE THOUGHT
As François Jullien discusses in Chinese Thought in relation to philosophy (2015), the West has favored the thought of the absolute, of the « beyond » to the detriment of the processual thinking that underlies Chinese thought that of the « between ». Without denying the achievements of the thought of the beyond (sciences, political revolution, etc.), processual thinking offers a resource rarely developed in the West: an « in-between »  which is not necessarily composed of its opposites. The closest concept to the « in-between » for Westerners would be the « intermediary » which is not equivalent: « The intermediary is a middle term. It interrupts change halfway and decomposes it by constituting itself as a starting point as well as an end point for change, but does not proportionate a better understanding of how transformation between stages happens. » "

E1.1.E.1.4. ARISTOTLE'S GOLDEN MEAN
"Those who say that the victim on the rack or the man who falls into great misfortunes is happy if he is good, are, whether they mean to or not, talking nonsense. Now because we need fortune as well as other things, some people think good fortune the same thing as happiness; but it is not that, for even good fortune itself when in excess is an impediment, and perhaps should then be no longer called good fortune; for its limit is fixed by reference to happiness."
(Aristote, L’Éthique à Nicomaque)

E1.1.E.1.5. THE TWO THEMES - MISFORTUNE AND TRAGIC - ARE INEXTRICABLY UNITED BY A RELATIONSHIP OF EXCLUSIVITY IF EXISTENCE IS TRAGIC, THERE IS NO MISFORTUNE.
"In general, the idea of ​​exteriority is perhaps the anti-tragic theme per excellence, just as it is the fundamental theme of paranoia ('they' have driven me to perdition) [...]: what is tragic being [...] what comes from outside. This insures, because of tragedy's exteriority, the non-tragic character of someone who can only be struck by tragic fate by accident. The tragic being a floating mist around the sphere of the rational world (idea of ​​irrationality), that is to say a fatal power coming to stop a human determinism which, without this external interference, would in itself be healthy, normal, harmonious (idea of ​​destiny). In any case, something which is not primal, but which intervenes and disrupts: otherness in person, the enemy; An elementary fantasy which, from Rousseau until today, has been the origin of everything perfectly mediocre, or completely mad, that has been conceived of in matters of philosophy. The paranoid figures of the 'fault of others' or of 'the fault of God' are only variations, among some, of the original theme of attributing the tragic character of what exists to an 'elsewhere' in relation to existence. 'Elsewhere' which sums up quite precisely both the ignorance of the tragic and the refusal to recognise where the idea of 'misfortune' originates from. Because the two themes - misfortune and tragic - are inextricably united by a relationship of exclusivity if existence is tragic, there is no misfortune."
(Clément Rosset, Logic of the worst, 1971)

E1.1.E.1.5_REF1_CUR IS THE IMPLACABLE FIGURE AN ANGEL OR A DEMON?  Is this a representation of fate that Maria Martins offers us? With its fluidity, it seems capable of jumping out of nowhere in the blink of an eye, propelled by its muscular body, to surprise us everywhere and land abruptly where we least expect it. Clément Rosset tells us that it is only a ghost - there are no muscular angels or demons to ruin our lives... or save them. There are only our actions, woven against a background of chance:

"The paranoid figures of blaming others or blaming God are just variations, among others, on the original theme of attributing the tragic nature of what exists to an 'elsewhere' in relation to existence. Elsewhere' accurately sums up both the ignorance of tragedy and the recognition of the place where the idea of 'unhappiness' originates. For the two subjects - misfortune and tragedy - are inextricably linked by a relationship of exclusivity: if there is tragedy, there is no misfortune.
(Clément Rosset, Logic of the Worst, 1971)

E1.1.E.2. "TIS NOTHING GOOD OR BAD
BUT THINKING MAKES IT SO."
(William Shakespear)

E1.1.E.2.1. DANIEL GILBERT'S RESEARCH SHOWS HOW WE SYNTHESIZE HAPPINESS IN ORDER TO CHANGE OUR PREFERENCES TOWARDS THE THINGS WE GET IN LIFE, while diminishing unconsciously our desire for what we don't get. To a point where it is easier to be happy with less choice than with a large choice among which to make up our mind. Despite the evidence, many people do not know this and if they can, will choose the settings in life where they can change their minds (contracts or courses you can opt out of).
All things are not equal and it makes sense to have preferences, but we should understand that we systematically over rate the impact of our preferences on our happiness. This is because we have the ability to manufacture the commodity that we are constantly chasing, that is happiness.

Watch Daniel Gilbert's TED talk, The surprising science of happiness:
https://www.ted.com/talks/dan_gilbert_the_surprising_science_of_happiness?utm_campaign=tedspread&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=tedcomshare

E1.1.E.2.1_REF1_PSI DANIEL GILBERT'S TED TALK, THE SURPRISING SCIENCE OF HAPPINESS - TRANSCRIPT
"When you have 21 minutes to speak, two million years seems like a really long time. But evolutionarily, two million years is nothing. And yet, in two million years, the human brain has nearly tripled in mass, going from the one-and-a-quarter-pound brain of our ancestor here, Habilis, to the almost three-pound meatloaf everybody here has between their ears. What is it about a big brain that nature was so eager for every one of us to have one?

00:35
Well, it turns out when brains triple in size, they don't just get three times bigger; they gain new structures. And one of the main reasons our brain got so big is because it got a new part, called the "frontal lobe," particularly, a part called the "prefrontal cortex." What does a prefrontal cortex do for you that should justify the entire architectural overhaul of the human skull in the blink of evolutionary time?

00:59
Well, it turns out the prefrontal cortex does lots of things, but one of the most important things it does is it's an experience simulator. Pilots practice in flight simulators so that they don't make real mistakes in planes. Human beings have this marvelous adaptation that they can actually have experiences in their heads before they try them out in real life. This is a trick that none of our ancestors could do, and that no other animal can do quite like we can. It's a marvelous adaptation. It's up there with opposable thumbs and standing upright and language as one of the things that got our species out of the trees and into the shopping mall.

01:38
(Laughter)

01:40
All of you have done this. Ben and Jerry's doesn't have "liver and onion" ice cream, and it's not because they whipped some up, tried it and went, "Yuck!" It's because, without leaving your armchair, you can simulate that flavor and say "yuck" before you make it.

01:59
Let's see how your experience simulators are working. Let's just run a quick diagnostic before I proceed with the rest of the talk. Here's two different futures that I invite you to contemplate. You can try to simulate them and tell me which one you think you might prefer. One of them is winning the lottery. This is about 314 million dollars. And the other is becoming paraplegic.

02:22
(Laughter)

02:23
Just give it a moment of thought. You probably don't feel like you need a moment of thought.

02:27
Interestingly, there are data on these two groups of people, data on how happy they are. And this is exactly what you expected, isn't it? But these aren't the data. I made these up!

02:39

footnote
footnote
These are the data. You failed the pop quiz, and you're hardly five minutes into the lecture. Because the fact is that a year after losing the use of their legs and a year after winning the lotto, lottery winners and paraplegics are equally happy with their lives.

02:56

footnote
footnote
Don't feel too bad about failing the first pop quiz, because everybody fails all of the pop quizzes all of the time. The research that my laboratory has been doing, that economists and psychologists around the country have been doing, has revealed something really quite startling to us, something we call the "impact bias," which is the tendency for the simulator to work badly, for the simulator to make you believe that different outcomes are more different than, in fact, they really are.

03:24
From field studies to laboratory studies, we see that winning or losing an election, gaining or losing a romantic partner, getting or not getting a promotion, passing or not passing a college test, on and on, have far less impact, less intensity and much less duration than people expect them to have. A recent study -- this almost floors me -- a recent study showing how major life traumas affect people suggests that if it happened over three months ago, with only a few exceptions, it has no impact whatsoever on your happiness. Why? Because happiness can be synthesized. Sir Thomas Brown wrote in 1642, "I am the happiest man alive. I have that in me that can convert poverty to riches, adversity to prosperity. I am more invulnerable than Achilles; fortune hath not one place to hit me." What kind of remarkable machinery does this guy have in his head?

04:26
Well, it turns out it's precisely the same remarkable machinery that all of us have. Human beings have something that we might think of as a "psychological immune system," a system of cognitive processes, largely nonconscious cognitive processes, that help them change their views of the world, so that they can feel better about the worlds in which they find themselves. Like Sir Thomas, you have this machine. Unlike Sir Thomas, you seem not to know it.

04:56
We synthesize happiness, but we think happiness is a thing to be found. Now, you don't need me to give you too many examples of people synthesizing happiness, I suspect, though I'm going to show you some experimental evidence. You don't have to look very far for evidence. I took a copy of the "New York Times" and tried to find some instances of people synthesizing happiness. Here are three guys synthesizing happiness. "I'm better off physically, financially, mentally ..." "I don't have one minute's regret. It was a glorious experience." "I believe it turned out for the best."

05:27
Who are these characters who are so damn happy? The first one is Jim Wright. Some of you are old enough to remember: he was the chairman of the House of Representatives, and he resigned in disgrace when this young Republican named Newt Gingrich found out about a shady book deal that he had done. He lost everything. The most powerful Democrat in the country lost everything: he lost his money, he lost his power. What does he have to say all these years later about it? "I am so much better off physically, financially, mentally and in almost every other way." What other way would there be to be better off? Vegetably? Minerally? Animally? He's pretty much covered them there.

06:00
Moreese Bickham is somebody you've never heard of. Moreese Bickham uttered these words upon being released. He was 78 years old. He'd spent 37 years in Louisiana State Penitentiary for a crime he didn't commit. He was ultimately [released for good behavior halfway through his sentence.] What did he have to say about his experience? "I don't have one minute's regret. It was a glorious experience." Glorious! This guy's not saying, "There were some nice guys. They had a gym." "Glorious" -- a word we usually reserve for something like a religious experience.

06:29
Harry S. Langerman uttered these words. He's somebody you might have known but didn't, because in 1949, he read a little article in the paper about a hamburger stand owned by these two brothers named McDonald. And he thought, "That's a really neat idea!" So he went to find them. They said, "We can give you a franchise on this for 3,000 bucks." Harry went back to New York, asked his brother, an investment banker, to loan him 3,000 dollars, and his brother's immortal words were, "You idiot, nobody eats hamburgers." He wouldn't lend him the money. Of course, six months later, Ray Kroc had exactly the same idea. It turns out, people do eat hamburgers, and Ray Kroc, for a while, became the richest man in America.

07:05
And then, finally, some of you recognize this young photo of Pete Best, who was the original drummer for the Beatles, until they, you know, sent him out on an errand and snuck away and picked up Ringo on a tour. Well, in 1994, when Pete Best was interviewed -- yes, he's still a drummer; yes, he's a studio musician -- he had this to say: "I'm happier than I would have been with the Beatles."

07:26
OK, there's something important to be learned from these people, and it is the secret of happiness. Here it is, finally to be revealed. First: accrue wealth, power and prestige, then lose it.

07:40
Second: spend as much of your life in prison as you possibly can.

07:45
Third: make somebody else really, really rich. And finally: never, ever join the Beatles.

07:51
(Laughter) Yeah, right. Because when people synthesize happiness, as these gentlemen seem to have done, we all smile at them, but we kind of roll our eyes and say, "Yeah, right, you never really wanted the job." "Oh yeah, right -- you really didn't have that much in common with her, and you figured that out just about the time she threw the engagement ring in your face." We smirk, because we believe that synthetic happiness is not of the same quality as what we might call "natural happiness."

08:19
What are these terms? Natural happiness is what we get when we get what we wanted, and synthetic happiness is what we make when we don't get what we wanted. And in our society, we have a strong belief that synthetic happiness is of an inferior kind.

08:35
Why do we have that belief? Well, it's very simple. What kind of economic engine would keep churning if we believed that not getting what we want could make us just as happy as getting it? With all apologies to my friend Matthieu Ricard, a shopping mall full of Zen monks is not going to be particularly profitable, because they don't want stuff enough.

09:00
I want to suggest to you that synthetic happiness is every bit as real and enduring as the kind of happiness you stumble upon when you get exactly what you were aiming for. Now, I'm a scientist, so I'm going to do this not with rhetoric, but by marinating you in a little bit of data.

09:16
Let me first show you an experimental paradigm that's used to demonstrate the synthesis of happiness among regular old folks. This isn't mine, it's a 50-year-old paradigm called the "free choice paradigm." It's very simple. You bring in, say, six objects, and you ask a subject to rank them from the most to the least liked. In this case, because this experiment uses them, these are Monet prints. Everybody ranks these Monet prints from the one they like the most to the one they like the least. Now we give you a choice: "We happen to have some extra prints in the closet. We're going to give you one as your prize to take home. We happen to have number three and number four," we tell the subject. This is a bit of a difficult choice, because neither one is preferred strongly to the other, but naturally, people tend to pick number three, because they liked it a little better than number four.

10:05
Sometime later -- it could be 15 minutes, it could be 15 days -- the same stimuli are put before the subject, and the subject is asked to re-rank the stimuli. "Tell us how much you like them now." What happens? Watch as happiness is synthesized. This is the result that's been replicated over and over again. You're watching happiness be synthesized. Would you like to see it again? Happiness! "The one I got is really better than I thought! That other one I didn't get sucks!" That's the synthesis of happiness.

10:36
Now, what's the right response to that? "Yeah, right!" Now, here's the experiment we did, and I hope this is going to convince you that "Yeah, right!" was not the right response.

10:47
We did this experiment with a group of patients who had anterograde amnesia. These are hospitalized patients. Most of them have Korsakoff syndrome, a polyneuritic psychosis. They drank way too much, and they can't make new memories. They remember their childhood, but if you walk in and introduce yourself and then leave the room, when you come back, they don't know who you are.

11:09
We took our Monet prints to the hospital. And we asked these patients to rank them from the one they liked the most to the one they liked the least. We then gave them the choice between number three and number four. Like everybody else, they said, "Gee, thanks Doc! That's great! I could use a new print. I'll take number three." We explained we would have number three mailed to them. We gathered up our materials, and we went out of the room and counted to a half hour.

11:38
Back into the room, we say, "Hi, we're back." The patients, bless them, say, "Ah, Doc, I'm sorry, I've got a memory problem; that's why I'm here. If I've met you before, I don't remember." "Really, Jim, you don't remember? I was just here with the Monet prints?" "Sorry, Doc, I just don't have a clue." "No problem, Jim. All I want you to do is rank these for me, from the one you like the most to the one you like the least."

12:03
What do they do? Well, let's first check and make sure they're really amnesiac. We ask these amnesiac patients to tell us which one they own, which one they chose last time, which one is theirs. And what we find is, amnesiac patients just guess. These are normal controls, where if I did this with you, all of you would know which print you chose. But if I do this with amnesiac patients, they don't have a clue. They can't pick their print out of a lineup.

12:30
Here's what normal controls do: they synthesize happiness. Right? This is the change in liking score, the change from the first time they ranked to the second time they ranked. Normal controls show -- that was the magic I showed you; now I'm showing it to you in graphical form -- "The one I own is better than I thought. The one I didn't own, the one I left behind, is not as good as I thought." Amnesiacs do exactly the same thing. Think about this result.

12:56
These people like better the one they own, but they don't know they own it. "Yeah, right" is not the right response! What these people did when they synthesized happiness is they really, truly changed their affective, hedonic, aesthetic reactions to that poster. They're not just saying it because they own it, because they don't know they own it.

13:24
When psychologists show you bars, you know that they are showing you averages of lots of people. And yet, all of us have this psychological immune system, this capacity to synthesize happiness, but some of us do this trick better than others. And some situations allow anybody to do it more effectively than other situations do. It turns out that freedom, the ability to make up your mind and change your mind, is the friend of natural happiness, because it allows you to choose among all those delicious futures and find the one that you would most enjoy. But freedom to choose, to change and make up your mind, is the enemy of synthetic happiness, and I'm going to show you why.

14:09
Dilbert already knows, of course. "Dogbert's tech support. How may I abuse you?" "My printer prints a blank page after every document." "Why complain about getting free paper?" "Free? Aren't you just giving me my own paper?" "Look at the quality of the free paper compared to your lousy regular paper! Only a fool or a liar would say that they look the same!" "Now that you mention it, it does seem a little silkier!" "What are you doing?" "I'm helping people accept the things they cannot change." Indeed.

14:35
The psychological immune system works best when we are totally stuck, when we are trapped. This is the difference between dating and marriage. You go out on a date with a guy, and he picks his nose; you don't go out on another date. You're married to a guy and he picks his nose? He has a heart of gold. Don't touch the fruitcake! You find a way to be happy with what's happened.

14:56
Now, what I want to show you is that people don't know this about themselves, and not knowing this can work to our supreme disadvantage.

15:05
Here's an experiment we did at Harvard. We created a black-and-white photography course, and we allowed students to come in and learn how to use a darkroom. So we gave them cameras, they went around campus, they took 12 pictures of their favorite professors and their dorm room and their dog, and all the other things they wanted to have Harvard memories of. They bring us the camera, we make up a contact sheet, they figure out which are the two best pictures. We now spend six hours teaching them about darkrooms, and they blow two of them up. They have two gorgeous 8 x 10 glossies of meaningful things to them, and we say, "Which one would you like to give up?" "I have to give one up?" "Yes, we need one as evidence of the class project. So you have to give me one. You have to make a choice. You get to keep one, and I get to keep one."

15:48
Now, there are two conditions in this experiment. In one case, the students are told, "But you know, if you want to change your mind, I'll always have the other one here, and in the next four days, before I actually mail it to headquarters" -- yeah, "headquarters" --

16:05
"I'll be glad to swap it out with you. In fact, I'll come to your dorm room, just give me an email. Better yet, I'll check with you. You ever want to change your mind, it's totally returnable." The other half of the students are told exactly the opposite: "Make your choice, and by the way, the mail is going out, gosh, in two minutes, to England. Your picture will be winging its way over the Atlantic. You will never see it again." Half of the students in each of these conditions are asked to make predictions about how much they're going to come to like the picture that they keep and the picture they leave behind. Other students are just sent back to their little dorm rooms and they are measured over the next three to six days on their satisfaction with the pictures. Look at what we find.

16:46
First of all, here's what students think is going to happen. They think they're going to maybe come to like the picture they chose a little more than the one they left behind. But these are not statistically significant differences. It's a very small increase, and it doesn't much matter whether they were in the reversible or irreversible condition.

17:06
Wrong-o. Bad simulators. Because here's what's really happening. Both right before the swap and five days later, people who are stuck with that picture, who have no choice, who can never change their mind, like it a lot. And people who are deliberating -- "Should I return it? Have I gotten the right one? Maybe this isn't the good one. Maybe I left the good one?" -- have killed themselves. They don't like their picture. In fact, even after the opportunity to swap has expired, they still don't like their picture. Why? Because the [reversible] condition is not conducive to the synthesis of happiness.

17:43
So here's the final piece of this experiment. We bring in a whole new group of naive Harvard students and we say, "You know, we're doing a photography course, and we can do it one of two ways. We could do it so that when you take the two pictures, you'd have four days to change your mind, or we're doing another course where you take the two pictures and you make up your mind right away and you can never change it. Which course would you like to be in?" Duh! Sixty-six percent of the students, two-thirds, prefer to be in the course where they have the opportunity to change their mind. Hello? Sixty-six percent of the students choose to be in the course in which they will ultimately be deeply dissatisfied with the picture --

18:23
because they do not know the conditions under which synthetic happiness grows.

18:30
The Bard said everything best, of course, and he's making my point here but he's making it hyperbolically: "'Tis nothing good or bad But thinking makes it so." It's nice poetry, but that can't exactly be right. Is there really nothing good or bad? Is it really the case that gall bladder surgery and a trip to Paris are just the same thing?

18:52
That seems like a one-question IQ test. They can't be exactly the same.

18:58
In more turgid prose, but closer to the truth, was the father of modern capitalism, Adam Smith, and he said this. This is worth contemplating: "The great source of both the misery and disorders of human life seems to arise from overrating the difference between one permanent situation and another. Some of these situations may, no doubt, deserve to be preferred to others, but none of them can deserve to be pursued with that passionate ardor which drives us to violate the rules either of prudence or of justice, or to corrupt the future tranquility of our minds, either by shame from the remembrance of our own folly, or by remorse for the horror of our own injustice." In other words: yes, some things are better than others.

19:46
We should have preferences that lead us into one future over another. But when those preferences drive us too hard and too fast because we have overrated the difference between these futures, we are at risk. When our ambition is bounded, it leads us to work joyfully. When our ambition is unbounded, it leads us to lie, to cheat, to steal, to hurt others, to sacrifice things of real value. When our fears are bounded, we're prudent, we're cautious, we're thoughtful. When our fears are unbounded and overblown, we're reckless, and we're cowardly.

20:26
The lesson I want to leave you with, from these data, is that our longings and our worries are both to some degree overblown, because we have within us the capacity to manufacture the very commodity we are constantly chasing when we choose experience.

20:44
Thank you. (Applause)"

E1.1.E.2.2. DO PEOPLE TEND TO ADAPT TO COMMON LIFE EVENTS BY CONVERGING BACK TO A BASELINE LEVEL OF HAPPINESS?
"HOW DO COMMON LIFE EVENTS AFFECT HAPPINESS?
Do people tend to adapt to common life events by converging back to a baseline level of happiness?

Clark et al. (2008)16 use data from the German Socio-Economic Panel to identify groups of people experiencing significant life and labour market events, and trace how these events affect the evolution of their life satisfaction. The following visualization shows an overview of their main findings. In each individual chart, the red lines mark the estimated effect of a different event at a given point in time (with ‘whiskers’ marking the range of confidence of each estimate).

In all cases the results are split by gender, and time is labeled so that 0 marks the point when the corresponding event took place (with negative and positive values denoting years before and after the event). All estimates control for individual characteristics, so the figures show the effect of the event after controlling for other factors (e.g. income, etc.).

The first point to note is that most events denote the evolution of a latent situation: People grow unhappy in the period building up to a divorce, while they grow happy in the period building up to a marriage.

The second point is that single life events do tend to affect happiness in the short run, but people often adapt to changes. Of course, there are clear differences in the extent to which people adapt. In the case of divorce, life satisfaction first drops, then goes up and stays high. For unemployment, there is a negative shock both in the short and long-run, notably among men. And for marriage, life satisfaction builds up before, and fades out after the wedding.

In general, the evidence suggests that adaptation is an important feature of well-being. Many common but important life events have a modest long-term impact on self-reported happiness. Yet adaptation to some events, such as long-term unemployment, is neither perfect nor immediate."

Read the report on How do common life events affect happiness in The world in data:
https://ourworldindata.org/happiness-and-life-satisfaction#how-do-common-life-events-affect-happiness


E1.5.B.8.1_REF2_SOC.wE1.1.E.2.2.

E1.1.F. DOES HAPPINESS HAVE A DIFFERENT MEANING DEPENDING ON LANGUAGE AND CULTURE?

E1.1.F.1. "ANOTHER COMMON PROBLEM WITH HAPPINESS SURVEYS, SAYS HSU, IS THAT THEY ARE HEAVILY INFLUENCED BY WESTERN SOCIAL SCIENCE and particularly economics, which has a relatively individualistic and utilitarian view of human life. For Americans especially, the idea of the pursuit of happiness — enshrined in the Declaration of Independence — is often related to personal liberty and individualism.
Western-made surveys tend to ask about the individual person in isolation, and ignore their relationships — even as more and more research today suggests that social relationships are one of the most important factors in a person's well-being.
Hsu mentions Pew’s poll, which asks people to picture their position on a 10-step “ladder of life,” in which the bottom step represents the worst possible life for them and the top rung is their best possible life.
“It doesn’t make sense and it’s very individualistic, because you’re alone on this ladder!" Hsu says of the survey. "Where are all your people?"
The Western approach may not necessarily do a good job of capturing happiness in China — and other countries — where the collective concerns of a family often outrank individual ones. So Hsu’s surveys have focused much more on social relations — asking people who they ate dinner with last night, whether it was fun, and who they have given money to in the past month.
The research suggests that family is extremely important to happiness in China — even for young Chinese, whose consumerist tendencies and urban lives look similar to those in the West in other respects."
(World Economic Forum, What do people mean when they say they're happy? It depends where you live, Feb 8, 2016)

Read the full article: https://www.weforum.org/stories/2016/02/what-do-people-mean-when-they-say-they-re-happy-it-depends-where-you-live/

E1.1.F.2. "HOW MUCH DOES LANGUAGE MATTER FOR CROSS-COUNTRY COMPARISONS OF HAPPINESS?
Linguistic differences are often seen as a major obstacle for making cross-country comparisons of happiness. However, there is evidence suggesting that comparability issues, at least in respect to language, are less problematic than many people think.
Studies have shown, for example, that in interviews in which respondents are shown pictures or videos of other individuals, respondents can broadly identify whether the individual shown to them was happy or sad; and this is also true when respondents were asked to predict the evaluations of individuals from other cultural communities. (For evidence of this see Sandvik et al., 1993; Diener and Lucas, 1999).29
Studies have also shown that ‘indigenous emotions’ across cultures (i.e. feelings that are unique in that they do not have equivalents in the English language) are not experienced any more frequently or differently than common translated emotions. (See Scollon et al. 2005).30
The conclusion, therefore, seems to be that there is some basic understanding among humans about what it means to be ‘happy’. Survey-based measures of self-reported life satisfaction are informative about cross-country differences, even if these comparisons are obviously noisy."
(The World In Data, Happiness and Life Satisfaction)

Read it in the Happiness and Life Satisfaction study:
https://ourworldindata.org/happiness-and-life-satisfaction#how-much-does-language-matter-for-cross-country-comparisons-of-happiness

E1.1.F.3. "DENMARK IS OFTEN RANKED AMONG THE WORLD'S HAPPIEST COUNTRIES — which is something of a mystery to those who have lived among the relatively solemn Danes. Some researchers say the reason is that happiness in Danish is often translated as lykke — a term that can describe a kind of everyday well-being that might be brought on by a nice cup of coffee or a slice of bread with cheese. Others argue that the Danish results might be due in part to a cultural reluctance to burden strangers with their troubles.
Other studies suggests that German, French, Polish and Russian speakers use their equivalent terms for "happy" or "happiness" to refer to a state that's much rarer than English or Danish terms. Still other research argues that, in many languages, the term for "happy" involves a much stronger role for luck or fortune than it does in modern English — closer to what "happy" meant in English several centuries ago.
In Chinese, there are actually several different terms for happiness, each of which have a slightly different meaning.
Hsu and her colleagues are carrying out their own happiness survey in China, with the hope of learning how to better measure happiness not just in China, but in other countries, as well. Their survey focuses on three dimensions of happiness — a good mood, a good life and a sense of whether one’s life has meaning.
Hsu breaks those meanings down in the diagram below, which shows that the English words "happy" and "happiness" encompass just part of those definitions. On the right, she maps one of the Chinese words for happiness, xingfu. Unlike the English translation of happiness, xingfu refers not to a good mood, but a good life, as well as a life with meaning.
In Chinese, each of these three kinds of happiness can actually be translated as a different word, says Hsu — xingfu for a good life, you yiyifor meaning and kuaile for a good mood. By using those three words to ask different questions, researchers may be able to measure dimensions of happiness in Chinese that are often brushed over in English."
(World Economic Forum, What do people mean when they say they're happy? It depends where you live, Feb 8, 2016)

Read the full article: https://www.weforum.org/stories/2016/02/what-do-people-mean-when-they-say-they-re-happy-it-depends-where-you-live/

E1.1.F.1.4. "THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CULTURE AND LIFE SATISFACTION
Comparisons of happiness among countries suggest that culture and history shared by people in a given society matter for self-reported life satisfaction. For example, as the chart below shows, culturally and historically similar Latin American countries have a higher subjective well-being than other countries with comparable levels of economic development. (This chart plots self-reported life satisfaction as measured in the 10-point Cantril ladder in the vertical axis, against GDP per capita in the horizontal axis).
Latin America is not a special case in this respect. Ex-communist countries, for example, tend to have lower subjective well-being than other countries with comparable characteristics and levels of economic development.
Academic studies in positive psychology discuss other patterns. Diener and Suh (2002) write: “In recent years cultural differences in subjective well-being have been explored, with a realization that there are profound differences in what makes people happy. Self-esteem, for example, is less strongly associated with life satisfaction, and extraversion is less strongly associated with pleasant affect in collectivist cultures than in individualist cultures”.19
To our knowledge, there are no rigorous studies exploring the causal mechanisms linking culture and happiness. However, it seems natural to expect that cultural factors shape the way people collectively understand happiness and the meaning of life."
(The World In Data, Happiness and Life Satisfaction)

Read it in the Happiness and Life Satisfaction study:
https://ourworldindata.org/happiness-and-life-satisfaction#culture-and-life-satisfaction

E1.1.F.5. THE PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS VARIES FROM CULTURE TO CULTURE-and depending on whether an individual adheres to the dominant culture from which he or she comes.
In cultures that adhere to Christian religions, there is a culture of suffering: humans are sinners since the Fall and must redeem themselves through virtue (Catholicism) and work (Protestantism).
A culture dominated by a political ideal must be achieved without concern for happiness (the Republic in the French Revolution, the Cultural Revolution under Mao, etc.). Twentieth-century American culture restored the pursuit of happiness as the goal of individual existence.
In the West, however, our era still bears traces of a distrust of happiness.
(Pierre Schindler)

E1.1.F.5.1. "HAPPINESS IS NOT THE ONLY GOAL IN LIFE, BUT FOR MANY PEOPLE, IT IS THE MOST IMPORTANT ONE (e.g., Benjamin et al. 2012). For example, in a recent survey, thousands of people across nine nations were asked whether they would prefer a happy life, a meaningful life, or a psychologically rich life, filled with novelty and variety (Oishi et al. 2020). In every nation, from India and Angola to the United States and Norway, the majority of people chose a happy life."
(Dunigan Folk and Elizabeth Dunn, How Can People Become Happier? A Systematic Review of Preregistered Experiments, 2023)

Read the full article: https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.1146/annurev-psych-022423-030818#abstractSection

E1.1.F.5.2. "THIS PAINTING WAS ORIGINALLY CALLED ADAM AND EVE. Today we know it as Metabolism (1899). In the center we can see the Tree of Life. Behind the couple there is a mysterious forest. This was part of his project called the Frieze of Life, and he considered this composition as one of his most important paintings. Munch carved a frame surrounding the painting; in the lower part there is a representation of the roots of the tree, a human and an animal skull. On the upper part we can see a depiction of the New Jerusalem where life begins again."
(Batia Cohen, #art.history.onthego)

E1.1.F.5.3. "JOY IS NOT A CONCEPT, NOR INDEED A WORD, THAT WE ARE ENTIRELY COMFORTABLE WITH, IN THE PRESENT AGE. The idea seems out of step with a time whose characteristic notes are mordant and mocking, and whose preferred emotion is irony. Joy hints at an unrestrained enthusiasm which may be thought uncool… It reeks of the Romantic movement. Yet it is there. Being unfashionable has no effect on its existence… What it denotes is a happiness with an overtone of something more, which we might term an elevated or, indeed, a spiritual quality."
(Michael McCarthy, The Moth Snowstorm: Nature and Joy, 2015)

E1.1.F.5.3_REF1_LIT THE FASHIONABLE INTELLECTUAL ATTITUDES OF "IRONY AND PITY” 

“He climbed into bed and pulled the sheet up to his chin.

“Try and argue me into getting up.”

I went on looking for the tackle and putting it all together in the
tackle-bag.

“Aren’t you interested?” Bill asked.

“I’m going down and eat.”

“Eat? Why didn’t you say eat? I thought you just wanted me to get up for
fun. Eat? Fine. Now you’re reasonable. You go out and dig some more
worms and I’ll be right down.”

“Oh, go to hell!”

“Work for the good of all.” Bill stepped into his underclothes. “Show
irony and pity.”

I started out of the room with the tackle-bag, the nets, and the
rod-case.

“Hey! come back!”

I put my head in the door.

“Aren’t you going to show a little irony and pity?”

I thumbed my nose.

“That’s not irony.”

As I went down-stairs I heard Bill singing, “Irony and Pity. When you’re
feeling . . . Oh, Give them Irony and Give them Pity. Oh, give them
Irony. When they’re feeling . . . Just a little irony. Just a little
pity . . .” He kept on singing until he came down-stairs. The tune was:
“The Bells are Ringing for Me and my Gal.” I was reading a week-old
Spanish paper.

“What’s all this irony and pity?”

“What? Don’t you know about Irony and Pity?”

“No. Who got it up?”

“Everybody. They’re mad about it in New York. It’s just like the
Fratellinis used to be.”

The girl came in with the coffee and buttered toast. Or, rather, it was
bread toasted and buttered.

“Ask her if she’s got any jam,” Bill said. “Be ironical with her.”

“Have you got any jam?”

“That’s not ironical. I wish I could talk Spanish.”

The coffee was good and we drank it out of big bowls. The girl brought
in a glass dish of raspberry jam.

“Thank you.”

“Hey! that’s not the way,” Bill said. “Say something ironical. Make some
crack about Primo de Rivera.”

“I could ask her what kind of a jam they think they’ve gotten into in
the Riff.”

“Poor,” said Bill. “Very poor. You can’t do it. That’s all. You don’t
understand irony. You have no pity. Say something pitiful.”

“Robert Cohn.”

“Not so bad. That’s better. Now why is Cohn pitiful? Be ironic.”

He took a big gulp of coffee.

“Aw, hell!” I said. “It’s too early in the morning.”

“There you go. And you claim you want to be a writer, too. You’re only a
newspaper man. An expatriated newspaper man. You ought to be ironical
the minute you get out of bed. You ought to wake up with your mouth full
of pity.”

“Go on,” I said. “Who did you get this stuff from?”

“Everybody. Don’t you read? Don’t you ever see anybody?”
(Ernest Hemingway, The Sun Also Rises, 1926)

E1.1.G. CAN ‘HAPPINESS’ REALLY BE MEASURED?

E1.1.G.1. "CAN ‘HAPPINESS’ REALLY BE MEASURED?
The most natural way to attempt to measure subjective well-being is to ask people what they think and feel. Indeed, this is the most common approach.
In practice, social scientists tend to rely on questions inquiring directly about happiness, or on questions inquiring about life satisfaction. The former tend to measure the experiential or emotional aspects of well-being (e.g. “I feel very happy”), while the latter tend to measure the evaluative or cognitive aspects of well-being (e.g. “I think I lead a very positive life”).
Self-reports about happiness and life satisfaction are known to correlate with things that people typically associate with contentment, such as cheerfulness and smiling. (In this scatter plot you can see that countries where people have higher self-reported life satisfaction are also countries where people tend to smile more).
Experimental psychologists have also shown that self reports of well-being from surveys turn out to correlate with activity in the parts of the brain associated with pleasure and satisfaction. And various surveys have confirmed that people who say they are happy also tend to sleep better and express positive emotions verbally more frequently.
The following table, adapted from Kahneman and Krueger (2006), provides a list of the variables that researchers have found to be related to self-reported happiness and life satisfaction.

Correlates of high life satisfaction and happiness:
- Smiling frequency
- Smiling with the eyes ("unfakeable smile")
- Ratings of one's happiness made by friends
- Frequent verbal expressions of positive emotions
- Sociability and extraversion
- Sleep quality
- Happiness of close relatives
- Self-reported health
- High income, and high income rank in a reference group
- Active involvement in religion
- Recent positive changes of circumstances (increased income, marriage)

The main conclusion from the evidence is that survey-based measures of happiness and life satisfaction do provide a reasonably consistent and reliable picture of subjective well-being."
(The World In Data, Happiness and Life Satisfaction)

Acces the graph: https://assets.ourworldindata.org/uploads/2017/04/Life-Satisfaction-vs-Laugh-Gallup.png

E1.1.G.2. WE ARE BETTER AT GUESSING THE HAPPINESS OF PEOPLE WE KNOW THAN THE AVERAGE HAPPINESS OF THE SOCIETY WE LIVE IN
"(Mis)perceptions about the happiness of others.
We tend to underestimate the average happiness of people around us. The following visualization shows this for countries around the world, using data from Ipsos’ Perils of Perception — a cross-country survey asking people to guess what others have answered to the happiness question in the World Value Survey.
The horizontal axis in the chart below shows the actual share of people who said they are « Very Happy » or « Rather Happy » in the World Value Survey; the vertical axis shows the average guess of the same number (i.e. the average guess that respondents made of the share of people reporting to be « Very Happy » or « Rather Happy » in their country).
If respondents would have guessed the correct share, all observations would fall on the red 45-degree line. But as we can see, all countries are significantly below the 45-degree line. In other words, people in every country underestimated the self-reported happiness of other people. The most extreme deviations are in Asia—South Koreans tend to think that 24% of people report being happy, when in reality 90% do.
The highest guesses in this sample (Canada and Norway) are 60%. This is lower than the lowest actual value of self-reported happiness in any country in the sample (corresponding to Hungary at 69%)."
(Our world in Data)

E1.1.G.3. “SCHOLARS BEGAN TO STUDY THE HISTORY OF HAPPINESS ONLY A FEW YEARS AGO, AND WE ARE STILL FORMULATING INITIAL HYPOTHESES and searching for appropriate research methods. It’s much too early to adopt rigid conclusions and end a debate that’s hardly yet begun. What is important is to get to know as many different approaches as possible and to ask the right questions.
Most history books focus on the ideas of great thinkers, the bravery of warriors, the charity of saints and the creativity of artists. They have much to tell about the weaving and unravelling of social structures, about the rise and fall of empires, about the discovery and spread of technologies. Yet they say nothing about how all this influenced the happiness and suffering of individuals. This is the biggest lacuna in our understanding of history. We had better start ﬁlling it.”
(Yuval Noah Harari, Sapiens, A Brief History of Humankind, 2011)
