E1.3.A. IS HAPPINESS FOUND IN THE WAITING?

We often find ourselves waiting for future events rather than rejoicing in the present. Could happiness lie in this anticipation? The expectation of an event—whether we actively work towards it or not—can be a wellspring of joy. Thus, the pursuit of happiness might be justified, not for its ability to create lasting contentment, but for the joy it brings during the chase.

However, this argument loses strength when we consider the frequent disappointment we face upon reaching our goal. Can we break free from this endless cycle of waiting? Should we reshape our desires? Are there mental exercises to help us overcome this constant anticipation?

Ultimately, finding happiness in waiting might be a form of escapism and a dead end for lasting joy. Yet, we must acknowledge that there's genuine pleasure in anticipation when it heightens our self-awareness and reaffirms our desires.

E1.3.A.1. IF HAPPINESS WERE ONLY IN WAITING, ONE SHOULD STRIVE TO PROLONG THE PROCESS THAT LEADS US THERE — even if it were a "path of suffering" — for this path of waiting is, in fact, happiness itself.

"Why do intelligent people spend their time accumulating possessions rather than enjoying what they already have? Is it because they're following social norms? Or is it because hope itself is pleasurable?"
(Aristotle, Problem XXX)

E1.3.A.1.1. "HE ASSERTED THAT THE PRESENT WAS NEVER A HAPPY STATE TO ANY HUMAN BEING; but that, as every part of life, of which we are conscious, was at some point of time a period yet to come, in which felicity was expected, there was some happiness produced by hope. Being pressed upon this subject, and asked if he really was of opinion, that though, in general, happiness was very rare in human life, a man was not sometimes happy in the moment that was present, he answered, ‘Never, but when he is drunk.’"
(James Boswell, Boswell’s Life of Johnson, 1791)

E1.3.A.1.2. “MAKING PLANS. - Making plans and resolutions brings many pleasant feelings; and he who has the strength to be, throughout his life, nothing but a maker of plans would be a very happy man: but he will occasionally have to let himself rest from this activity by executing a plan - and then will come for him anger and disillusionment.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, Too Human II, Aphorism 85, 1878)

E1.3.A.1.2_REF1_PH  "PRETENDING THAT WHAT THEY MOST ARDENTLY WISH IS TO EXTRICATE THEMSELVES FROM THE CRUEL DIFFICULTIES IN WHICH THEY FIND THEMSELVES, what they really adore is to make everything difficult, obscure and capable of realization only in a distant future. That their difficulties are of their own making is the last thing they will admit usually."
(Henry Miller, The books in my life, 1969)

E1.3.A.1.2_REF2_LIT ONLY MADMEN, DERANGED PEOPLE, PEOPLE WITH FIXED IDEAS CAN PERSEVERE FOR LONG IN THE FIRE OF THE ECSTATIC SOUL "Ideals and morality are the best means of filling the big hole that one calls the soul. [...]
God knows—as has already been said—what a soul is anyway! There can be no doubt whatsoever that the burning wish to hearken to it alone leaves one with an immeasurable field open for action, a thorough state of anarchy, and we have examples of so to speak chemically pure souls com mitting downright crimes. On the other hand, as soon as a soul has morality or religion, philosophy, and intensive bourgeois education and ideals in the realms of duty and of the beautiful, it is endowed with a system of regulations, conditions and directives for operation, which it has to fill out before it is entitled to think of itself as a respectable soul, and its heat, like that of a blast-furnace, is conducted into beautiful squares of sand. What remains then is fundamentally only logical problems of interpretation, of the kind as to whether an action comes under this or that commandment; and the soul presents the tranquil panorama of a battlefield after the battle, where the dead lie quiet and one can at once observe where a scrap of life yet stirs or groans. And so man makes this transition as fast as he can. If he is tormented by religious doubts, as occasionally happens in youth, he goes straight over to the persecution of unbelievers; if love deranges him, he turns it into marriage; and if any other enthusiasm overwhelms him, he disentangles himself from the impossibility of living perpetually in the fire of it by beginning to live for that fire. That is, instead of filling the many moments of his day, each of which needs a content and an impetus, with his ideal state, he fills them with the activity for the sake of his ideal state, in other words, with the many means to the end, the hindrances and incidents that are a sure guarantee that he never need reach it. For only fools, the mentally deranged, and people with idée fixes, can endure unceasingly in the fire of the soul’s rapture. A sane man must content himself with declaring that life would not seem worth living without a flake of that mysterious fire."
(Robert Musil, The Man Without Qualities, Volume 1, 1930)

E1.3.D.1.6_REF2_PO “ONLY MADMEN, DERANGED PEOPLE, PEOPLE WITH FIXED IDEAS CAN PERSEVERE FOR LONG IN THE FIRE OF THE ECSTATIC SOUL” - AND ANIMALS TOO?

"WHAT GORGEOUS THING

I do not know what gorgeous thing 
the bluebird keeps saying, 
his voice easing out of his throat, 
beak, body into the pink air 
of the early morning. I like it 
whatever it is. Sometimes 
it seems the only thing in the world 
that is without dark thoughts. 
Sometimes it seems the only thing 
in the world that is without 
questions that can't and probably 
never will be answered, the 
only thing that is entirely content 
with the pink, then clear white 
morning and, gratefully, says so."
(Mary Oliver, Blue horses, 2014)

E1.3.A.1.2_REF3_LIT "THOSE WHO PREFER THEIR PRINCIPLES OVER THEIR HAPPINESS, they refuse to be happy outside the conditions they seem to have attached to their happiness. If they are happy by surprise, they find themselves disabled, unhappy to be deprived of their unhappiness."
(Albert Camus, Notebooks, 1951-1959)

E1.3.A.1.2_REF4_PO “THE SCAFFOLD

The time I’ve spent dreaming—
Years and years of my life!
Ah, how much of my past
Was only the false life
Of a future I imagined!

Here on the bank of the river
I grow calm for no reason.
Its empty ﬂowing mirrors,
Cold and anonymous,
The life I’ve lived in vain.

How little hope ever attains! 
What longing is worth the wait? 
Any child’s ball
Rises higher than my hope, 
Rolls farther than my longing.

Waves of the river, so slight 
That you aren’t even waves,
The hours, days and years
Pass quickly—mere grass or snow 
Which die by the same sun.

I spent all I didn’t have.
I’m older than I am.
The illusion that kept me going
Was a queen only on stage:
Once undressed, her reign was over.

Soft sound of these slow waters 
Aching for shores you’ve passed, 
How drowsy are the memories
Of misty hopes! What dreams
All dreaming and life amount to!

What did I make of my life?
I found myself when already lost. 
Impatient, I let myself be,
As I might let a lunatic go on 
Believing what I’d proved was wrong.

Dead sound of these gentle waters 
That ﬂow because they must,
Take not only my memories
But also my dead hopes—
Dead, because they must die.

I’m already my future corpse.
Only a dream links me to myself— 
The hazy and belated dream
Of what I should have been—a wall 
Around my abandoned garden.

Take me, passing waves,
To the oblivion of the sea!
Bequeath me to what I won’t be— 
I, who raised a scaffold
Around the house I never built.”
(Fernando Pessoa, 29 August 1924)

E1.3.A.1.3. DON'T THE MASTERS OF EXPECTATION, BEING NO FOOLS, POSTPONE THE END OF THEIR JOURNEY PRECISELY BECAUSE THEY KNOW DISAPPOINTMENT AWAITS THEM? As Spinoza demonstrates, fear underlies all expectations.
"PROPOSITION 47
Emotions of hope and fear cannot be in themselves good.

PROOF
Emotions of hope and fear cannot exist without pain. For fear is pain  [...] , and hope [...] cannot exist without fear ; therefore  [...]  these emotions cannot be good in themselves, but only in so far as they can restrain excessive pleasure  [...].

NOTE
We may add, that these emotions show defective knowledge and an absence of power in the mind ; for the same reason confidence, despair, joy, and disappointment are signs of a want of mental power. For although confidence and joy are pleasurable emotions, they nevertheless imply a preceding pain, namely, hope and fear. Wherefore the more we endeavour to be guided by reason, the less do we depend on hope ; we endeavour to free ourselves from fear, and, as far as we can, to dominate fortune, directing our actions by the sure counsels of wisdom."
(Baruch Spinoza, The Ethics, Part 4)

Read the Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.3.A.1.3_REF1_PH "PROPOSITION 47
Emotions of hope and fear cannot be in themselves good.

PROOF
Emotions of hope and fear cannot exist without pain. For fear is pain [...], and hope [...] cannot exist without fear ; therefore [...] these emotions cannot be good in themselves, but only in so far as they can restrain excessive pleasure [...].

NOTE
We may add, that these emotions show defective knowledge and an absence of power in the mind ; for the same reason confidence, despair, joy, and disappointment are signs of a want of mental power. For although confidence and joy are pleasurable emotions, they nevertheless imply a preceding pain, namely, hope and fear. Wherefore the more we endeavour to be guided by reason, the less do we depend on hope ; we endeavour to free ourselves from fear, and, as far as we can, to dominate fortune, directing our actions by the sure counsels of wisdom."
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics, Part 4)

Read the Ethic online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.3.A.2. ACCORDING TO NICOLAS GRIMALDI, WAITING IS THE FABRIC OF CONSCIOUSNESS ITSELF. The present is elusive because consciousness' very nature is to wait. Life is reflected in consciousness and life is becoming/propensity; life is therefore reflected in waiting and we never hold on to the present because the attention we give to the future distracts us from the present. The present hurts us because it takes away an expectation which conclusion constantly eludes us.
Inherent to waiting is the sense of a condition where we would have nothing more to expect. When you don't have anything more to expect you have access to the infinite - the absolute, to which nothing can be added; it is also death: to wait is to live on the background of one's own death, of eternity, of the supernatural. As you wait; your conscience becomes religious.

E1.3.A.2.1. "EVERYTHING WE KNOW SEEMS LIMITED, [...] WE ALWAYS EXPECT SOMETHING ELSE. [...] Life is spent waiting for who knows what, which would be so intense, so dense, so overwhelming that there would be nothing left to wait for".
(Nicolas Grimaldi, Ordinary madness, 2009)
Tags: Orange

E1.3.A.2.1_REF1_PH ACCORDING TO NICOLAS GRIMALDI, IN WHAT SITUATIONS DO WE HAVE NOTHING TO LOOK FORWARD TO?

- The trance of love is so saturated that it leaves nothing to look forward to.

- The appeal of music lies in the alternation between memory and the satisfaction of having nothing more to look forward to. It is the memory/presence of the past in the present that makes the tension of music possible.

- Films
"With our expectations as habitually postponed as they are disappointed, films bring us the lively vitality of adventures and the reassuring relaxation of their end. For the transitivity of our expectation is twofold. It only makes sense if two conditions are met. The first is that something happens, which is all the more unexpected because it's always new. That is the flow of events. This is adventure. Just as emptiness awaits for fullness, the second condition is that our expectation must be filled or fulfilled by something that leaves nothing more to wait for. That's what we call happiness in the movies.
(Nicolas Grimaldi, An ordinary madness, 2009)

E1.3.A.2.1_REF1.1_PH NICOLAS GRIMALDI TELLS US THAT MUSIC OFFERS US A REFUGE WHERE THERE'S NOTHING TO WAIT FOR. Beyond the reminiscence and permanence of the past in the present offered by musical variation on a repeated theme, doesn't music offer us liberation from expectation in another way?

It completely fills our attention span, fully satisfies us in the present - and, thanks to variation, also offers us surprise. This theme, enchanting in itself, has even more to offer. The unfolding of the music destroys expectation through the surprise of variation. In this sense, it educates our perception and shows us that enchantment is possible if we develop our capacity to pay attention to reality.

E1.3.C.2 _REF4.4_PH.wE1.3.A.2.1_REF1.1_PH

E1.3.A.2.1_REF2_CUR IN THE PAINTING, "OFFICE IN A SMALL CITY," the employee looks up from his work to enter into contemplation. Is this a rare moment for an American as John Cowper Powys states:"Seeking he knows not what, he rushes about in ever-improving automobiles, drugging himself, distracting himself, exhausting himself, in a blind sub-conscious struggle to find that psychic-sensuous Absolute of human satisfaction which the basic conditions of his life deny him." [...]
"What the American cannot grasp, and what gives him a vertiginous and ghastly sense of a yawning gulf, is the planetary law of Nature that all human action is only a means to contemplation."  
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934)

E1.3.A.2.1_REF3_PH THE SOLUTION: LIVE IN THE PRESENT. NICOLAS GRIMALDI, HOWEVER, SUGGESTS THIS MAY BE IMPOSSIBLE. 
"Without us beeing aware of it, our secret hope for the ultimate - always waiting for what would leave nothing more to wait for -  is also always the secret of our disappointment. Surreptitiously, we imagine that the hardwork of the quest and of waiting will come to an end with the exultant plenitude of some immediacy. When what we had so much waited for finally happens: [...] it is still a mediation. By a kind of sarcastic alternative that Schopenhauer had perfectly characterized, we either experience the mortifying experience of immediacy in boredom while dreaming of something else, or we experience mediation in expectation, worry and effort, dreaming of finally getting perfection. We either do not know what we want, and are disappointed by the absence of taste of everything. Or we despair, and are disappointed that we never get what we expected.
The present could therefore only be curred of its ordinary inconsistency which disappoints us by being removed from the mediations of temporality. Without a past which anticipates and prepares it, without a foreseeable future for which it must prepare in turn, the only present that does not disappoint us has the vivacity and suddenness of a miracle. There is no dense presence except that of surprise."
(Nicolas Grimaldi, Brief treatise on disenchantment, 1998)

E1.3.A.2.1_REF4_CUR IN BOYHOOD, MASON JR.'S MOTHER DID NOT INHERIT HIS FATHER'S ABILITY OF WONDER. In a dialogue between Mason Jr and his mother as he leaves home for college, she tells him: “I just thought there would be more”.

If we're always waiting for something else, we can't taste happiness. A perfect moment would be a moment fulfilled in one's interiority, no longer threatened by externalities. A moment that, as Nicolas Grimaldi puts it, leaves nothing else to wait for.

E1.3.A.2.2. "COULD WE DESIRE ANYTHING WITHOUT IMAGINING IT, WITHOUT REPRESENTING ITS POSSIBILITY, WITHOUT PERCEIVING ITS DELAY AND THUS EXPERIENCING TIME? On the other hand, isn't it enough to imagine, to desire, to consider the infinity of possibilities, to immediately experience the limits, the scarcity and the precariousness of the present? Imagination, possibility, desire and time are four figures in the same metaphysical paradox: the obsessive specter of the unreal in reality and of nothingness in being.
(Nicolas Grimaldi, A brief treatise on disenchantment, 1998)

E1.3.A.2.2.a. ESCAPE FROM REALITY, BUT WHERE TO? If, on the one hand, reality doesn't satisfy us, we are well aware that our strategies for avoiding it are shaky, like the precarious "escape plan" proposed by Gustavo Speridão.

E1.3.A.2.2.b. TO COUNTERACT THE FEELING OF NOTHINGNESS felt by the gambler at the end of the horse race, this PMU campaign places the wager in a historical dynamic that seems to give it meaning...clever, but manipulative!

Watch the ad on Youtube/ https://youtu.be/W5Z7esEVqLA

E1.3.A.2.2.c. "ADAM KNEW THAT HE WAS HAPPY BUT HE DID NOT FEEL IT. [...] One can neither conceive, imagine or desire something more than infinity. Adam lived face to face with the infinite. Not this undifferentiated, indeterminable, unrepresentable infinity, which is that of being in general. Adam lived in the presence of The Infinite Being, so infinitely simple that each of his infinite perfections expressed the infinity of the whole. God exceeded all possible understanding, always offering more to discover and to marvel at, as more was discovered. The presence of God therefore should have taken away all possible meaning for innovation, adventure, desire as well as for any expectation, yet Adam was tempted.
This would not have been possible if he had been fulfilled with the infinite satisfaction of an infinite presence. Therefore, here is the lesson of the myth [...]: even the presence of the infinitely infinite is not what one might expect. Since even the presence of God may have lacked in intensity, fullness, consistency and density, it is quite clear that it is not the present which is in itself deficient in that it lacks of something that we desire, but conscience which in itself feels like incompleteness and awkwardness. Consciousness therefore does not feel the present as inconsistent because it is disappointed not to find what it expected in it, but because expectation is its very essence."
(Nicolas Grimaldi, Brief treatise on disenchantment, 1998)

E1.3.A.2.2.d. BUT DON'T CONDEMN IMAGINATION BY CONFUSING IT WITH ENDLESS WAITING. SIMULATING OUR FUTURE THROUGH IMAGINATION CAN HELP US DEFINE PATHS THAT LEAD TO JOY.

E1.4.C.wE1.3.A.2.2.

E1.3.A.2.3. "OSCILLATION

IMAGE AND ETYMOLOGIES [...].

Gide. His biographer makes him a specialist in hesitation: Café or Nescafé (decaffeinated)? [...]
The difficulty he has in making up his mind is really incredible. It's not so much the choice that seems difficult to him, but the fact that this choice risks depriving him of the most pleasant, the unexpected (1946) → in a way the agony of the hedonist: a logic of flirtation, of adventure (adventure: the pleasant unexpected: "relatable"): to be studied: expectation of the new".
(Roland Barthes,  Neutrality, Lectures at the Collège de France, 1977-1978)

E1.3.A.3. FOR SCHOPENHAUER, MAN'S REALITY IS IN INFINITE WAITING: this reality is inscribed in the will to live, which is at odds with happiness: "aimless striving, nothingness, absence of end".
"WILL TO LIVE 
Schopenhauer's main concept, which he described as "a blind and irresistible force", one and universal (and therefore impersonal), both free and necessary, absurd and indestructible. It is the undifferentiated essence of all being, the true "thing-in-itself", like a cosmic force, but of which the world we know, or the individuals we think we are, are merely phenomena or representations. What does this power want? It wants itself: to want and to live, and the two are one and the same. No external goal, and therefore no chance of achieving it: "Every particular act has a purpose; the will itself has none. [The absence of any goal or limit is essential to the will itself, which is a never-ending effort. The will to live imposes itself everywhere as an eternal striving, all the more insane because it strives for nothing ("aimless striving," writes Schopenhauer, "nothingness, absence of end"). [...]
The will to live, because it knows neither rest nor cessation, condemns us constantly to dissatisfaction or disappointment. It is "aimless": how can it reach its goal? It is "boundless": how can it stop? "Desperate thought," writes Schopenhauer. What could be more futile than an "endless effort" (for the will to live) or with no other end than death (for the individual)? Like the Buddha, Schopenhauer teaches that "suffering is the basis of all life". All satisfaction is fleeting: "Never a true goal, never final satisfaction, nowhere a place of rest!" Happiness? It's just a dream, impossible to realise. All we are entitled to is an endless alternation of suffering and boredom [...].
Schopenhauer's will to live is more or less the counterpart of Spinozism's conatus (but less individualised), Nietzsche's will to power (plus pessimism), Bergson's élan vital (minus optimism), and even Freud's libido (which tends less towards pleasure than towards life itself, however painful it may be). The only wisdom, for Schopenhauer, is to free oneself from this blind will to live: not through suicide, which remains its prisoner ("He who kills himself wants to live; he is only dissatisfied with the conditions under which life has been granted to him"), but through art (which liberates less than it soothes or comforts), asceticism or holiness. One might think that it would be easier to love life in spite of everything; but that's what Schopenhauer never achieved or agreed to".
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.3.A.3_REF1_PH "FOR SCHOPENHAUER, AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE ALLOWS ME TO CEASE BEING AN AGENT OF DESIRE AND INSTEADVTO BECOME A SPECTATOR, THUS CEASING TO SUFFER THROUGH CONTEMPLATION.
One can admire and benefit from the irrationalist thinking that brings Schopenhauer's intellectualism to its knees, without subscribing to (and even being disturbed by) its pessimistic conclusion. This is the man for whom intuition counts before intellect, for whom desire comes before intelligence, will before representation - very close to Bergson in this sense. Both are philosophers of wonder at existence - which for Schopenhauer has no cause. For Schopenhauer, wisdom means accepting the sadness that comes with existence and not suffering too much - whereas Clément Rosset (like Spinoza) builds a philosophy of joy on the diagnosis of the absurdity of existence. The tragic diagnosis that would give rise to despair is the same as that of Schopenhauer or Cioran, but the conclusion is quite different: life is still joy.
For the pessimist, even if there were a God and an afterlife, despair would persist because we are insignificant in terms of time and space. As Clément Rosset points out in Force Majeure, for the pessimist, the eternity of life after death merely prolongs man's insignificance in terms of time and space, beyond the duration of this life: 'Wouldn't that be worse for the pessimist, an eternity of suffering and boredom!'"
(Clément Rosset in À voie nue, broadcast on France Culture on 05/13/2018)

Listen to the podcast: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/a-voix-nue/clement-rosset-c-est-tres-simple-de-vivre-quand-on-n-est-pas-instruit-du-tout-4834987

E1.3.A.3_REF2_PH DIVERSION AS A STRATEGY?
"Diversion is the opposite of what our psychiatrists today call rumination. It's less a weakness than a strategy, less an attempt to forget our nothingness, as in Pascal, than a legitimate refusal to be overwhelmed by it. An art of evasion and hygiene. Let's say it's a lucid form of entertainment: it's a refusal to take the tragic seriously".
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

"We are less bored than our ancestors were, but we are more afraid of boredom. We have come to know, or rather to believe, that boredom is not part of the natural lot of man, but can be avoided by a sufficiently vigorous pursuit of excitement."
(Bertrand Russell, The Conquest of Happiness, 1962)

E1.3.A.3_REF3_CUR "THE BODIES REVEALED BY FRANCIS BACON DO NOT INSPIRE DESIRE - was he disgusted by them? He saw in reality an extraordinary violence: 'When talking about the violence of paint, it's nothing to do with the violence of war. It's to do with an attempt to remake the violence of reality itself... the violence of suggestions within the image which can only be conveyed through paint.' Is this violence in reality, or was it in his gaze, his psyche marked by a hard life of rejection (his family's non-recognition of his sexual preference, for example)?

This reminds us of Schopenhauer, for whom desire is, by its very nature, suffering, because satisfaction quickly leads to satiation and the realisation that 'the goal was illusory; possession robs it of its attraction'."
(Pierre Schndler)

E1.3.A.3_REF4_PH IS THE GLASS HALF FULL OR HALF EMPTY?
"if you see the glass [half] empty, cry into it".
Eva Bester @evabester

E1.3.A.3_REF5_PH "EVERY TIME YOU DO SOMETHING IT IS BECAUSE YOU HOPE THAT WHAT YOU DO WILL SUCCEED, OTHERWISE YOU WOULD NOT BOTHER. HOPE IS IMPOSSIBLE TO ERADICATE SO LONG AS YOU ARE AN AGENT.
That is what Schopenhauer concludes:  you cannot escape willing yourself for it has to be drawn out of you either:
1. by suffering to a point when the will to live is killed in you or;
2. by the realization that your own perspective is limited and that you can expand it -  in which case, you realize your joy is someone else's suffering, so that the will ceases to will."
(Hope, In our time, broadcasted on BBC4 on 11/22/2018)

E1.3.D.8.2.wE1.3.A.3_REF5_PH

E1.3.A.4. ARE THERE MENTAL EXERCISES TO CURE US OF ENDLESS WAITING?

E1.3.A.4.1. EPICURUS ENCOURAGES US TO "WORK" ON OUR DESIRES TO ACHIEVE GREATER HAPPINESS. HE ADVISES DETACHING OURSELVES FROM UNNATURAL AND UNNECESSARY DESIRES, AS THESE LEAD TO UNHAPPINESS. A happy life, according to Epicurus, is founded on satisfying natural and necessary desires—occasionally including natural but unnecessary desires (during festivities, for instance), provided they don't create dependencies. Following Epicurus, numerous thinkers (such as Tocqueville, Adorno, Lacan, Fromm, and Foucault) have explored how society shapes our desires. Can their insights help us overcome consumerism?

E1.3.A.4.1.a. INDIFFERENCE WILL BE AN ART AGAINST THE ILLUSION OF NEED - WHICH IS ALWAYS SOCIAL BY DEFINITION “The absence of relationship between gods and men is the first word of the Maxims, as it is the first of the Letter to Menecaeus. We must give it its full scope.
“The being who is happy and immortal does not himself, or cause anyone else, any pain. He does not get angry or begrudge anything: these feelings are marks of weakness” (Maximus I) Epicurus allows himself the luxury of positing gods who serve no purpose [...].
Now, since the bond is not in things but in the ideas that men have of them and in the relationships they have with one another, indifference is the political crowning achievement and civic expression of atomistic irreligion. [...]
In fact, the indifference of the wise man has nothing to do with the reasonable abandonment of the Stoic in the face of the disproportionate power of Tyche [the Greek goddess of luck, fortune and chance]. Where the Stoic aims for the most complete possible mastery of all that depends on himself, the Epicurean tends, on the contrary, to free himself as far as possible from rational servitude. This is particularly clear in Maxim XIV: “Since the tranquility that can be obtained by means of other men does not go up to a certain point, there is an art to obtaining a perfect one for oneself: it is to simplify one's needs, to free oneself from many things”. The repeated invitation to independence cannot be understood as an echo of ethical naturalism. On the contrary, indifference will be an art against the illusion of need - which is always social by definition”
(Guillaume Badoual, alain Chareyre-Méjan, Charles Floren, Elsa Grasso and Guillaume Pigeard de Gurbert (Collective), Epicurus or straightforward happiness, 1993)

E1.3.A.4.1.a_REF1_PH "FOR WHEN HE [EPICURUS] SAW
THAT MORTALS HAD BY NOW ATTAINED WELLNIGH ALL THINGS
WHICH THEIR NEEDS CRAVE FOR SUBSISTENCE,
and that, as far as they could, their life was established in safety,
that men abounded in power through wealth
and honours and renown, and were haughty
in the good name of their children,
and yet not one of them for all that had at home
heart less anguished, but with torture of mind
lived a fretful life without any respite,
and was constrained to rage with savage complaining,
he then did understand
that it was the vessel itself
which wrought the disease,
and that by its disease all things were corrupted within,
what soever came into it gathered from without,
in part because he saw that it was leaking
and full of holes, so that by no means
could it ever be filled;
in part because he perceived that it tainted
as with a foul savour all things within it,
which it had taken in."
(Lucretius, On the Nature of Things, VI, 8-25)

E1.3.A.4.1.b. ALREADY TOCQUEVILLE, WARNED US: "MATERIALISM IS A DANGEROUS DISEASE OF THE HUMAN MIND IN ALL NATIONS; but it is especially to be feared in a democratic people, because it combines wonderfully with the vice of the heart which is most familiar to these peoples."
In the 1960s, capitalism, which had begun as a form of asceticism, promoted consumerism through advertising and triggered an endless pursuit of happiness. Has this culture in which we are immersed strengthened desire's grip on Western populations in recent decades? Does it impose a "duty to be happy"? Now that a growing number of people are free from religion's influence, and for those living in democracies, we have become our own worst enemy in the pursuit of happiness. Are we unhappy because we fail to achieve happiness according to the standard model proposed by consumer society?

E1.3.A.4.1.b_REF1_PH ON EVERYONE IS PREOCCUPIED WITH THEIR OWN PLEASURES, SO AS TO BETTER FORGET THE EFFORT INVOLVED IN THE SEARCH FOR PLENITUDE. But, as Michel Foucault perfectly points out, democracy produces democratic individuals who have less and less taste for true discourse and self-concern, in the Platonic sense of the term. We are in a parody of the taste for truth and self-care. On the one hand, everyone is preoccupied with their own pleasures, so as to better forget the effort involved in the search for plenitude. On the other hand, everyone envies access to this pleasure, which they rightly consider unequal. Inequality redoubles our desire and resentment to experience such pleasures, and gives us the perfect alibi for avoiding true self-care. [...]

A similar description can be found in Tocqueville, forming Act II of democratization, or the age of the first great betrayal of principles: “Materialism is in all nations a dangerous disease of the human spirit; but it is especially to be feared in a democratic people, because it combines wonderfully with the vice of the heart which is most familiar to these peoples.” Tocqueville combines this pursuit of pleasure or material well-being, or the derangement of desires, with the end of transcendence: “In centuries of incredulity, it is always to be feared that men will not ceaselessly surrender themselves to the daily chance of their desires, and that, renouncing entirely what can only be acquired with long efforts, they will not create anything great, peaceful and lasting. [...] When everyone is constantly trying to change places, when immense competition is open to all, when wealth accumulates and dissipates in a few moments amid the tumult of democracy, the idea of sudden and easy fortune, of great goods easily acquired and lost, the image of chance, in all its forms, presents itself to the human mind. The instability of the social state encourages the natural instability of desires. In the midst of these perpetual fluctuations of fortune, the present grows; it hides the fading future, and men want to think only of tomorrow.”

From this observation he draws a definition of the role that a kind of moderate courageous person could play: 'The moralist must learn to defend himself in the spirit of his century and his country. Let him strive every day to show his contemporaries that, in the midst of the perpetual motion that surrounds them, it is easier than they suppose to conceive and carry out long undertakings. Let them see that, although the face of humanity has changed, the methods by which men can secure the prosperity of this world have remained the same, and that, among democratic peoples, as elsewhere, it is only by resisting a thousand small, particular passions of daily life that we can succeed in satisfying the general passion for happiness that torments us'. Without aiming for utopia, Tocqueville remains optimistic about the possibility of a democratic morality and an untainted access to happiness. Behind his description of the moralist, we can read a kind of Socrates, more prepared, more experienced in democratic behavior, i.e., more able to make his interlocutors hear the need for self-care without knowing the price it costs. But like Socrates, Tocqueville seems to prefer philosophical courage to political courage, or at least to believe in its superior efficacy. 'This apparent explanation,' Foucault writes, 'is the malfunctioning of democratic courage, or, more generally, of political courage; it's the inability, when dealing with political institutions, to play the courageous role properly, to play it fully, to play it to the end. Why is that? Simply because of the danger involved. [If I had devoted myself to politics long ago, I would have died long ago' [...] And Socrates adds: "Oh, do not be angry when I tell you truths [...]: there is no man who can avoid perishing if, for noble reasons, he generously opposes either you or any other popular assembly, and 'if he sets out to prevent injustices and illegalities in his city.' If we pass quickly over this text, the message is clear: I didn't go into politics, why? Because if I had come forward to speak to you, to tell you the truth, you would have had me perish, like all those who generously want to prevent injustices and illegalities in their city.
(Cynthia Fleury, The End of Courage, 2010)

E1.3.A.4.1.c. "A PART OF THE WORLD HAS TURNED RESOLUTELY TO THE SERVICE OF GOODS, REJECTING EVERYTHING THAT CONCERNS MAN'S RELATIONSHIP TO DESIRE. The only thing that can be said is that they don't seem to realize that by formulating things this way, they are merely perpetuating the eternal tradition of power—namely: "Keep on working, and as for your desire, you'll have to come back later." But who cares?"
(Jacques Lacan, Seminar VII, The Ethics of Psychoanalysis, July 6, 1960)

"The message of all masters and all tyrants—whatever aspiration for freedom inspired the revolutionary uprising that brought them to power—can be summed up thus, once the crisis has passed and the time has come for the restoration of order: "Go back to work and give up your desire."
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Listening to Madness, V- The Master, 2019)

E1.3.A.4.1.d. THEODOR ADORNO
(The School of life )

Watch it on YouTube :
https://youtu.be/4YGnPgtWhsw

E1.5.D.1.3.c_REF2.1_PH.wE1.3.A.4.1.

E1.3.A.4.1.e. DEICHKIND, RICHTIG GUTES ZEUG [REAL GOOD STUFF], 2019

Such strangely refined aesthetic and such creativity! It's hard to formulate a critique of  consumerism with more panache and humor! I absolutely need the huge backpack to do my shopping!

Watch the 2'50" video on Vimeo: https://vimeo.com/332745222

E1.3.A.4.1.e_REF1_CUR "THE ARTIST WAS INSPIRED BY ADVERTISING BILLBOARDS HE SAW IN PANAMA, which feature women's faces hat have been smoothed out to the point of rasing their personality. As a film maker would lo, he zoomed on this face so close that it is partially cut out and incomplete. 
By moving his "paintbrush camera" so close he treats this female face as if it was an object. which is precisely the purpose of advertising, in articular when selling beauty products. This approach renders the face empty, almost dead, and.	especially because it is not contextualized. 
But by zooming this way, the artist also highlights the gaze of this woman who has been so objectified that she doesn't even have a name. just a letter, K. And her gaze is very expressive, ri as if she tried to exist beyond the image and the commercial profit that is sought through her. She seems defiant, aware that she is exploited md ready to stand up as she looks far ahead, maybe towards a future where women will not be treated as objects. 
The treatment is smooth, flat, and the pastel colors highlight the contrast between the artificial aspect of advertising imagery and the humanity of all women. K's mouth is shut, but she smiles discreetly and her silence speaks volumes."
(Caroline Bourgeois, from the catalogue of the La Pelle / Luc Tuymans exhibition at Palazzo Grassi, Venice, 2019)

E1.3.A.4.1.e_REF2_PH CRITIQUE DU MATÉRIALISME, Edward Hopper, painting time that stretches out

Drugstore, 1927: By painting a display of laxatives, Hopper makes us think about the multiplier effect of consumerism.

Gas, 1940: Is the subject of this painting oil or the gas station attendant? Perhaps Hopper is interested in the symbol of Pegasus, who in mythology gave birth to a fountain from which the muses came to drink. Pegasus, under the yoke of materialistic society, has become the symbol of the mobile oil company. The oil that lubricates cars is the subject of a new mythology in the USA. 

Automat, 1927: Automat is the name given to the vending machines installed in restaurants in Hopper's time. It shows how society can dehumanize the individual in the name of the triumph of technology.

New York Movie, 1939: Like the other paintings about entertainment (The Sheridan Theatre, 1937; Two on the Aisle, 1927; First Row Orchestra, 1951; Intermission, 1963), it shows an empty stage, a hollow entertainment to fill the void. In the half-light, is the New York movie usher a Eurydice waiting to return to the light?
(Didier Ottinger on Les chemins de la philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 20/12/2018)

Listen to the podcast: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/edward-hopper-peindre-le-temps-qui-s-etire-2566341

E1.3.A.4.1.e_REF3_CUR "THE VITRINES [Show Cases], led to the series of "Store Fronts," which Christo principally developed in the United States, with the exception of these two Store Fronts, built to scale in France, as well as a few smaller-scale projects. The first storefronts were realized with recycled material. Subsequently. their elaboration became more sophisticated, with Christo giving them a minimalist appearance that reflected the work of American artists of the time, while simultaneously contrasting this with a critical, offbeat approach. These monumental realizations function according to the same principle as the first Show Cases: transparent walls are covered with paper or fabric, then enhanced by an internal light source."
(Curatorship: Centre Pompidou)

E1.3.A.4.1.e_REF4_CUR WE MUST PRACTICE ACTIVE VIGILANCE TO CHALLENGE THE MANIPULATIONS OF CONSUMER SOCIETY. Understanding its mechanisms helps free us from conditioning, rather than ignoring them and assuming we're immune.

On Fuse, we often illustrate ideas with advertisements, offering a dual perspective: 1) we highlight references to concepts also—and more profoundly—explored in the humanities, and 2) we remind ourselves that advertising, even when invoking noble concepts, ultimately aims to sell.

E1.3.A.4.1.e_REF4.1_CUR ORANGINA: CONSUMPTION MAKES YOUR WISHES COME TRUE

Watch the ad on Youtube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LbuKQq1Vi9s

E1.3.A.4.1.e_REF4.2_CUR FREDI CASCO DENOUNCES THE DECOMPOSITION OF A SEIN DESIRE that hides beneath the Coca-Cola brand: he paints the logo by juxtaposing pieces of bone, meat and worms.

E1.3.A.4.1.e_REF4.3_CUR ARE WE PREPARING A WORLD OF WASTE FOR THE NEXT GENERATIONS?

E1.3.A.4.1.e_REF5_CUR Deichkind, Richtig Gutes Zeug [Really good stuff], 2019

What strangely refined aesthetics and creativity! It's hard to critique consumerism with more panache and humor! I absolutely must have this huge backpack for my shopping!

Watch the 2'50” video on Vimeo: https://vimeo.com/332745222

E1.3.A.4.2. WILL YOU EVER BE ABLE TO TASTE THE DISPOSITION THAT LEADS YOU TO LOVE AND CHERISH? "Will you ever be, O my soul, good, simple, one, naked and more apparent than the body that surrounds you? Will you ever be able to taste the disposition that leads you to love and cherish? Will you ever be satisfied, without need, without desire, without having to expect your pleasure from what is animate or inanimate; without having, to make it last longer, to expect your pleasure from time, from a place, from a country, from a more favorable air, and from a better understanding between men? But will you be satisfied with your present condition, will you rejoice in all that is happening to you now, will you convince yourself that everything is good for you, that everything comes to you from the gods, and all that it pleases them to send to you, and all that they will have to assign to you for the salvation of the perfect being, good, just, beautiful, who creates all, holds all, contains and understands all that dissolves to give birth to other similar things? Will you ever be such that you can live in the company of gods and men without complaining about them and without giving them cause to accuse you?
(Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, Book X, I, 180)

E1.3.A.4.2_REF1_PH “LEARNING TO WAIT […]
Perplexity is an appropriate response to this ground whose groundlessness is like an abyss from which all things spring forth. But to call this ground the “Sublime” or “One Mind,” “Emptiness,” or “God” is to risk being ensnared once more by Mara. For rather than resting in the boundless unknown that animates perplexity, we return to the safe bounds of a concept that we believe we understand. Instead of embracing the ineffability of our existence, we scramble for the consolation of a manageable religious or philosophical idea. One must be prepared to relinquish even the minimal consolation of a “groundless ground.”
You just wait in the abyss of perplexity without expecting anything. You open yourself to the uncanniness of what unfolds without construing it as this or that. You abandon any notion of a result of such practice. In exhorting his followers to “kill Buddha,” Lin-chi insists that we rid the mind of every image or idea we have ever had of awakening. “If you seek Buddha,” he declares, “you’ll be held in the grip of the Buddha-Mara.” However noble, refined, and erudite one’s idea of Buddha, it can never be more than a collage of memories and concepts drawn from your own and others’ past experience. It encloses you in the realm of what is already known.
Instead of settling into a calm awareness of the effortless unfolding of experience, part of us strives to be already one step ahead of ourselves. Mara is impatient. He is never content to sit still and wait. His goal is always to be elsewhere. Like a print which is slightly out of register, our wraithlike double strains to slip off into an alternative world. The unease of such restlessness lies in this rebellious longing to be elsewhere when it is impossible to be anywhere but here. In making a concerted effort to remain here by returning again and again to the present moment, it is as though we are deliberately provoking the devil. 
The forces that Mara summons to strike back are sensual desire, ill-will, restlessness, torpor, and doubt. These hindrances “lead away from nirvana” by destroying the calm, focused awareness of what is unfolding here and now. One moment we are mindfully attending to the breath or asking “What is this thing?” only in the next to be besieged by an erotic fantasy or a furious resentment. Or our equanimity is rattled by a visceral anxiety; or we slump into a mire of lethargy; or niggling doubts resurface to mock our convictions and aims. Once possessed by these demons, the mind quickly loses its natural suppleness and radiancy and becomes brittle, dull, and unfocused. Buddha describes such hindrances as “encirclers of the mind,” comparing them to giant creepers that bind themselves round other trees, making their hosts “bent, twisted and split.” Once more we find ourselves enclosed in Mara’s snare.
Just as a waiter attends to the needs of those at the table he serves, so one waits with unknowing astonishment at the quixotic play of life. In subordinating his own wants to those of the customer, a waiter abandons any expectation of what he may be next called to do. Constantly alert and ready to respond, the oddest request does not faze him. He neither ignores those he serves nor appears at the wrong time. He is invisible but always there when needed. Likewise, in asking “What is this thing?” one does not strain ahead of oneself in anticipation of a result. One waits at ease for a response one cannot foresee and that might never come. The most one can “do” is remain optimally receptive and alert.
We hate waiting. […] Instead of regarding it either as an affront to one’s dignity or a waste of time, waiting can be seen as a cipher of nirvana. Since life is ultimately a situation over which we have no control, waiting is a response that accords with its fleeting and unreliable nature. The practice of waiting is to learn how to rest in the nirvanic ease of contingent things. Yet waiting is not passive inaction any more than emptiness is nothingness. As an alert stillness that cradles perplexity, it is the ground from which we can respond in unpredictable ways to life’s unfolding and the inevitable encounter with others.”
(Stephen Batchelor, Living with the Devil, 2004)

E1.3.A.4.3. "I KNOW NOT ANYTHING MORE PLEASANT, OR MORE INSTRUCTIVE, THAN TO COMPARE EXPERIENCE WITH EXPECTATION, or to register from time to time the difference between idea and reality. It is by this kind of observation that we grow daily less liable to be disappointed. You, who are very capable of anticipating futurity, and raising phantoms before your own eyes, must often have imagined to yourself an academical life, and have conceived what would be the manners, the views, and the conversation, of men devoted to letters ; how they would choose their companions, how they would direct their studies, and how they would regulate their lives. Let me know what you expected, and what you have found. At least record it to yourself before custom has reconciled you to the scenes before you, and the disparity of your discoveries to your hopes has vanished from your mind. It is a rule never to be forgotten, that whatever strikes strongly, should be described while the first impression remains fresh upon the mind."
(James Boswell, Boswell’s Life of Johnson, 1791)

E1.3.A.4.3_REF1_CUR OFTEN THE EXPERIENCE IS VERY DIFFERENT FROM WHAT WE EXPECTED. Sometimes it's disappointing because we expected something else; sometimes we're pleasantly surprised. Claudio Tozzi allows us to experience the second type of surprise, the pleasant one, and in order to delay our satisfaction - and perhaps encourage us to reflect on the mechanism of expectation - he uses an original stratagem: From a distance, we see a booth with the tempting slogan "See the nude". But on the stand, all we see is a shiny metal cylinder and scribbles on the surface where it's laid out. When we get closer, however, the installation fulfills its promise: when viewed from close up, the curvature of the metal cylinder's surface reorganizes the scribbles and reflects the image of a naked woman on its surface.

E1.3.A.4.4. IS AWARENESS OF THE WAITING MECHANISM SUFFICIENT TO FREE US FROM IT? WE MAY NEED TO EXPLORE ALTERNATIVE STRATEGIES.
"ON DUTY [...]

Mission: to be where one is.
Even in this grotesque and
stiff role - I am the precise place
where genesis perfects itself. [...]

But to be where one is. And wait.
I am anxious, stubborn and confused.
Future events, they already exist!
I feel it. [...]"
(Tomas Tranströmer, Paths - Stigar, 1973)

E1.3.A.4.5. "AVOIDING THINKING ABOUT BETTER FUTURES
When the iPhone 13 was released in the United States, it sold out in a matter of hours (Swingle 2021). Is it possible that people's obsessions with the latest and greatest upcoming technology can cause them to enjoy their current models less? Across three studies, O'Brien (2022) tested whether knowing about an upcoming product upgrade dampens the enjoyment people gain from the current version. In one study, MTurkers played a novel video game; some participants simply saw a flyer for the video game they were about to play, while others saw a flyer for a forthcoming version of this game or for an unrelated forthcoming video game (n’s ≈ 269). Participants enjoyed playing the game significantly more when they were not made aware of the newer, better version of the game. The author successfully replicated this pattern in two additional studies examining enjoyment of a virtual reality game (n’s ≈ 104) and an immersive virtual city tour (n’s ≈ 244).

In sum, this single set of studies provides evidence for the hypothesis that remaining in the dark about exciting future technologies may help us enjoy the present versions more—though it remains to be seen whether this strategy can be harnessed in everyday life."
(Dunigan Folk and Elizabeth Dunn, How Can People Become Happier? A Systematic Review of Preregistered Experiments, 2023)

Read the full article: https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.1146/annurev-psych-022423-030818#abstractSection

E1.3.A.4.6. "TO BECOME INTIMATE IS TO BECOME VULNERABLE NOT ONLY TO WHAT I WANT AND DESIRE IN MY LIFE, BUT TO THE FEAR I HAVE OF MY DESIRE BEING MET.
“This is the paradox of longing: Because longing can be an addiction, because no active addict ever wants to give up their addiction — or can without a great deal of suffering — it can be terrifying and almost unbearably vulnerable to surrender to an intimacy so amply fulfilling that it leaves nothing to long for. And yet in that vulnerability lies our power and our freedom to transform a relationship from a tether of dependency into a slender cord of grace.”
(Maria Popova commenting on a passage form David Whyte’s Consolations II, in the Marginalian, 2024)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2024/12/03/david-whyte-consolations-intimacy/?mc_cid=9bee2e7557&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E1.3.A.4.6.a INTIMACY IS THE ART AND PRACTISE OF LIVING FROM THE INSIDE OUT. “Intimacy is presence magnified by our vulnerability, magnified by increasing proximity to the fear that underlies that vulnerability. Intimacy and the vulnerabilities of intimacy are our constant, invisible companions, yet companions who are always wishing to make themselves visible and touchable to us, always emerging from some deep interior, to ruffle and disturb the calm surface of our well apportioned lives. Intimacy is a living force, inviting me simultaneously from the inside as much as the outside. Something calling from within that wants to meet something calling in recognition from without. Intimacy is the art and practise of living from the inside out. […]
Our need and our fear of intimacy is felt through an ever present almost volcanic force emerging from some unknown origin inside us, exhibiting to all and sundry, our previously hidden unspoken desires, flowing out against all efforts to the contrary, through our unconscious and conscious behaviours. […]
To become intimate is to become vulnerable not only to what I want and desire in my life, but to the fear I have of my desire being met. […]
Intimacy cannot occur without a robust sense of vulnerability, and is tied to the sense of being pulled along in the gravitational field of any newly felt openness. In that new openness we feel as if we are pulled through the very doorway of our needs for something we desire deeply but cannot fully identify, partly because what we are about to identify is intimately connected with our own ability or inability to love. […]
Intimacy is intimately related to our sense of having been wounded, and the startling intuition that my way forward into life, or into another person’s life will be through the very doorway of the wound itself. Intimacy invites me to learn to trust the way being wounded has actually made me more available, more compassionate and possibly more intimate with the world, by being opened in ways I never realised it was possible to be open… Intimacy is always calibrated by the letting go of or the taking on of fear. Almost always our fear is experienced as an intimate invitation to understand and feel fully our particular form of woundedness.”
(David Whyte, Consolations II, 2024)


E1.5.F.7_REF1_PH.wE1.3.A.4.

E1.3.A.5. SØREN KIERKEGAARD WARNS US ABOUT LIVING OUTSIDE THE PRESENT MOMENT, STATING, "ONLY HE WHO IS PRESENT TO HIMSELF IS HAPPY.” A memory of a past situation we know we can't recreate becomes a source of sadness. A future hope that might come true brings joy, while a hope we know is impossible leads to sadness.

E1.3.A.5_REF1_PH "THE UNHAPPY ONE IS ABSENT. BUT ONE IS ABSENT WHEN LIVING IN THE PAST OR LIVING IN THE FUTURE. The form of expression is important, for it is evident, as philology also teaches us, that there is a tense that expresses present in the past, and a tense that expresses presence in the future; but the same science also teaches us that there is a pluperfect tense in which there is no present, as well as a future perfect tense with the same characteristics. These are the hoping and remembering individuals. Inasmuch as they are only hoping or only remembering, these are indeed in a sense unhappy individuals, if otherwise it is only the person who is present to himself that is happy. However, one cannot strictly call an individual unhappy who is present in hope or in memory. For what one must note here is that he is still present to himself in one of these. From which we also see that a single blow, be it ever so heavy, cannot make a person the unhappiest. For one blow can either deprive him of hope, still leaving him present in memory, or of memory, leaving him present in hope."
(Søren Kierkegaard, Either/Or: A Fragment of Life, 1843)

E1.3.A.5_REF1.1_PH "CONSIDER FIRST THE HOPING INDIVIDUAL. WHEN, AS A HOPING INDIVIDUAL (AND OF COURSE TO THAT EXTENT UNHAPPY), HE IS NOT PRESENT TO HIMSELF, HE BECOMES UNHAPPY IN A STRICTER SENSE. An individual who hopes for an eternal life is, indeed, in a certain sense an unhappy individual to the extent that he renounces the present, but nevertheless is strictly not unhappy, because he is present to himself in the hope and does not come in conflict with the particular moments of finitude. But if he cannot become present to himself in hope, but loses his hope, hopes again, and so on, then he is absent from himself not just in the present but also in the future, and we have a type of the unhappy. Though the hoping individual does not hope for something that has no reality for him, he hopes for something he himself knows cannot be realized. For when an individual loses hope, and instead of becoming a remembering individual, wants to remain a hoping one, then we get this form.
Similarly if we consider the remembering individual. If he finds himself present in the past, strictly he is not unhappy; but if he cannot do that but remains constantly absent from himself in a past, then we have a form of the unhappy.
Memory is pre-eminently the real element of the unhappy, as is natural seeing the past has the remarkable characteristic that it is gone, the future that it is yet to come; and one can therefore say in a sense that the future is nearer the present than is the past. That future, for the hoping individual to be present in it must be real, or rather must acquire reality for him. The past, for the remembering individual to be present in it, must have had reality for him. But when the hoping individual would have a future which can have no reality for him, or the remembering individual remember a past which had had no reality for him, then we have the genuinely unhappy individuals. Unhappy individuals who hope never have the same pain as those who remember. Hoping individuals always have a more gratifying disappointment. The unhappiest one will always, therefore, be found among the unhappy rememberers."
(Søren Kierkegaard, Either/Or: A Fragment of Life, 1843)

E1.3.A.6. FINDING HAPPINESS IN WAITING MIGHT BE A FORM OF ESCAPISM and a dead end for lasting joy. Yet, we must acknowledge that there's genuine pleasure in anticipation when it heightens our self-awareness and reaffirms our desires.

E1.3.A.6_REF1_CUR FROM A DISTANCE IN THE EXHIBITION, WE SEE A PHOTOGRAPH OF A SUNSET. It almost looks like a window in the museum wall, allowing us to contemplate this moment that always radiates peace. In front of a sunset, we wait without waiting. We wait for the sun to set, but we're not impatient for it to disappear; on the contrary, we appreciate every moment of the disappearing movement.
As we get closer to the work, we realize that there's something written in the middle of the picture. You have to get close enough to read it: "What we did was stand around and wait for something to happen". Then we realize that the sunset is a metaphor for presence in the world, which everyone has already experienced. Can we live more often in joyful contemplation - instead of being absent from the present, waiting for something else to happen?

E1.3.A.6_REF1.1_MU MUSICAL ILLUSTRATION : REYNALDO HAHN, L'HEURE EXQUISE

Listen to it on YouTube: https://youtu.be/nU-GhfeWSP8

E1.3.A.6_REF2_PH I WOULD SAY THAT LIFE ITSELF IS CONSTANTLY SEEKING OUT ALIENATION "Living beings devoid of initiative, curiosity and imagination have to compete for the ecological niches they occupy; those who, on the contrary, exercise their initiative have at their disposal the ecological niches they invent. And the interesting thing is that, from the outset, ecological niches are built by living beings. I'd like to make a brief comment on this subject: in my opinion, we talk far too much about “alienation”. I would say that life itself is constantly seeking out alienation. It constantly tears itself away from its natural ecological niche, rushing into the adventure of a new environment. When the gene invents a membrane or when we put on a coat, it's a phenomenon of alienation from nakedness. I regard talk of alienation as dangerous and ridiculous. Quite simply, it's about the adventure of a living being seeking out a new, foreign environment, and taking the risk. This plays a vital role in evolution towards a higher stage, but it does not entirely explain evolution towards this stage; it is an element that plays a decisive role in it. [...]
Every single living being seeks a better world, or at least seeks to stop or slow down its movement where the world is better. And this extends from the amoeba to us. Our desire, our hope, our utopia is always the discovery of an ideal world. In a way, it's inscribed in us by Darwinian selection. And we mustn't ignore this. It's simply not true that we are 'shaped' by the environment. We seek out an environment and actively shape it. [...] We constantly seek to reform and modify our immediate environment, our more distant environment and, finally, the whole world. Our will thus plays a key role in the course of history. [...] We are seeking beings; life is skeptical - from the Greek to examine, to seek - from the outset. It is never quite satisfied with the conditions it finds itself in. And it is daring in its adventures.”
(Karl Popper, The Future is Open, 1983)

E1.3.A.6_REF2.1_CUR JENNY HOLZER CHALLENGES THE PASSERBY BY DECLARING THAT ALIENATION PRODUCES EITHER ECCENTRICS OR REVOLUTIONARIES. This recalls Karl Popper's view that living beings shape their environment by carving out niches under the pressure of survival: "It is simply not true that we are 'shaped' by the environment. We seek an environment and we actively shape it. [...] We are constantly trying to reform and modify our immediate environment, our more distant environment, and ultimately the whole world. Our will thus plays a key role in the course of history. [...] We are searching beings, and life is skeptical - from the Greek, to examine, to seek - from the very beginning. It is never completely satisfied with the conditions in which it finds itself. And it is bold in its adventures." *
Karl Popper deduces from the study of the living world that lack of freedom stimulates human creativity and can be positive in this sense; Jenny Holzer, on the other hand, makes us aware of the suffering associated with alienation.
* (Karl Popper, The Future is Open, 1983)

 E1.3.A.6_REF2.2_CUR "THIS PAINTING EVOKES A KEY EPISODE IN PSYCHE'S LIFE. As she seeks to reconquer Eros (the god of love), Aphrodite imposes many challenges on her. As a final task, she asks Psyche to deposit a fragment of Persephone's beauty in a golden box and then forbids Psyche to open it. The latter manages to accomplish this task, but succumbing to her curiosity and hoping to be able to use this fragment to win back Eros, she opens the box and is plunged in a deep sleep similar to death, from which Eros will save her by throwing his arrows at her."
(Wikipedia)

"Living beings devoid of initiative, curiosity, imagination must compete for occupied ecological niches; those who, on the contrary, exercise their spirit of initiative have at their disposal the ecological niches they invent. The interesting thing is that from the start ecological niches are built by living beings. I would also like to make a small remark on this subject: in my opinion there is too much talk of « alienation ». I would say that life itself is constantly seeking alienation. It is constantly tearing itself away from its natural ecological niche by rushing into the adventure of a new environment. When the gene invents a membrane or when we put on a coat, it is a phenomenon of alienation from nudity. I consider the discourse on alienation to be a dangerous and ridiculous discourse. It is quite simply the adventure of the living which seeks a new and foreign setting, assumes the risk and throws itself in it."
(Karl Popper, The Future is Open, 1983)

E1.3.A.6_REF2.3_PH ROBERT WRIGHT ON WHY BUDDHISM IS TRUE
"What has often been translated as the suffering evoked by the Buddha can actually be translated as "dissatisfaction" - which is consistent with the law of evolution (see Darwin and Popper on alienation as an incentive to innovation). It would be the human condition, according to Buddhism, to experience dissatisfaction - but practice would enable us to welcome our desires without despair.
(Robert Wright on Why Buddhism is True, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: http://philosophybites.com/2018/05/robert-wright-on-why-buddhism-is-true.html

E1.3.A.6_REF3_PH WAITING COULD BE A SPACE THAT OPENS UP FOR THE CONTEMPLATION OF OUR DESIRE. If boredom rushes into this space, it might signal that our love for reality is too weak (or ill) and that we've failed to recognize our true desire. If mimetic desire rushes in instead, it's because we've fallen for the illusion of need—which is always social, as Epicurus tells us. We must then seek out the desire that is uniquely our own.
(Pierre Schindler)

E1.4.C.5.wE1.3.A.

E1.3.A.7. TAOIST THOUGHT: AN ALTERNATIVE TO THE DESIRE-BOREDOM CYCLE—THE IN-BETWEEN
François Jullien proposes that ambiguity is the in-between of unresolved opposites. It eludes ontology because the in-between doesn't "exist." The Greeks, focused on opposites, overlooked this in-between. The ethical consequence? A dilemma between insatiable desire and boring satiety. Socrates and Callicles exemplify this conflict. Trapped in the empty/full dichotomy, the Greeks failed to consider the space between desire and satiety. This impasse led them to conceive of an "other" life.

Plato may have created metaphysics because he couldn't conceptualize the in-between. The Zhuangzi offers an alternative: "Pour without filling, draw without exhausting." The Tao is this indefinite in-between where one can "evolve." This thinking resolves the Greek antagonism through the logic of transition, akin to breathing. Taoism encourages us to avoid extremes, to dwell in the in-between of activity—thus escaping the desire/satiety dilemma.
(Pierre Schindler)

E1.3.A.7. TAO OFFERS AN ALTERNATIVE TO THE DESIRE-BOREDOM OSCILLATION: THE IN-BETWEEN
François Jullien suggests that ambiguity is the in-between of undecided opposites. It escapes ontology because the in-between does not "exist. The Greeks, fixated on opposites, neglected this in-between. The ethical consequence: the dilemma between insatiable desire and dull satiation. Socrates and Callicles illustrate this conflict. The Greeks didn't think through the in-between of desire and satiation, stuck in the empty/full alternative. This impasse led them to the idea of "another" life.

Plato is said to have created metaphysics because he could not think through the in-between. The Zhuangzi proposes an alternative: "Pouring without filling, drawing without exhausting. The Tao is that indeterminate in-between where we can "evolve. This way of thinking unravels the Greek antagonism through the logic of transition, like breathing. Taoism invites us to avoid extremes, to remain in the in-between of activity, thus escaping the dilemma of desire/satiety.
(Pierre Schindler)

E1.3.A.7_REF1_PH TAOISM OFFERS AN ALTERNATIVE TO THE DESIRE-BOREDOM OSCILLATION: THE IN-BETWEEN.

"BETWEEN (VS. BEYOND)

Ambiguity is that which cannot be decided—not because opposites coexist within it, as in a "mixture," but because these opposites lack clear boundaries. We might say that ambiguity is the "in-between" of their non-separation, or that the space of ambiguity itself is this "in-between." Consider the emotions of joy and sadness: the most profound feelings, such as those evoked by a landscape, resist division into these opposing states. This isn't because they blend or oscillate between the two, but because they don't give rise to such distinctions at all.

However, we must acknowledge that this in-between space is, paradoxically, a non-space. It can only be conceived in relation to what it's between, possessing no inherent qualities. It has no determination, essence, or "property" of its own, thus eluding ontological grasp. In the strictest sense, the in-between doesn't exist. How, then, can we speak of it except in negative terms?
This is why the Greeks, with their eyes fixed on opposites, [...] which alone are determined, which alone are defined in marked features, in terms of "being," did not recognize any capacity for the "in-between," inconsistent as it appears; and consequently did not conceive of it. They have thought of it only in terms of its boundaries, and these alone are qualified. Thus they have thought of presence or absence, the one forming an alternative with the other and contradicting it; or either emptiness or fullness, lack or satisfaction - but they have neglected the in-between, or the middle, which escapes characterization. What, then, is the ethical consequence, a priori tragic, of trapping life in this dilemma? Either, says Socrates (Gorgias, 492), life is seen as a leaky barrel that never stops leaking and into which we are condemned to keep pouring in order to satisfy this unfulfillable desire: we then live under the constant pressure of desire without ever satisfying it. Or we can plug the hole of desire, and the barrel will be full, with no more to pour into it: we'll finally live in peace, liberated, free from need and satisfied. In this last state, in this perfect rest, we're no longer alive, Callicles rebels, we lack the desire that makes us stand up, that makes us passionate, and we're reduced to the state of 'stone, no longer striving. But in the other state, replies Socrates, always pouring without ever saving, never satiated, we live no more than the miserable life of a 'plover,' a bird that immediately evacuates what it has just ingested.... Strangely enough, but as a logical consequence of ontology, the Greeks thought of nothing but these opposites: either emptying or filling. But they didn't think of the space between desire and satiation; they didn't deploy a median time of our experience-between the screaming emptiness on the one hand and the satiated fullness on the other. They have held our existences, and philosophy in their wake, in the cruelly tightening grip of desire, which, once fulfilled, becomes disgust: either desire makes us suffer from its lack, or satiation wearies us and turns into disappointment. Hence the difficulty of getting out of this contradiction, which Pascal would see as our 'condition': either we still desire, so we're still suffering; or our desires are satisfied, but we're bored. Or, as Augustine once put it: 'If I say you will not be satisfied, it means you will be hungry; if I say you will be satisfied, I fear your disgust.' And so, unable to see a way out of this dilemma, unable to escape this vicious circle of either lack or lack of desire, the Greeks, or at least 'Platonism,' were unable to see any consistency in this life; and had to postpone 'life' to 'another' life. - But does the idea of paradise itself escape this conundrum?


In other words, I no longer believe that it was through asceticism and renunciation, his desire having been corrupted, as Nietzscheanism would have it, that Plato, the handsome, proud aristocrat, shifted his thinking to the 'out there,' ekei, splitting the world and fleeing the here and now. But rather for lack of a tool: the thought of the in-between, which in his eyes could not find anything to hold on to, could only be a matter of mixing or 'blending,' of blurring identities, of confusing them, of disentangling them, of 'saving oneself' from them. [...]
Unable to think of the "in-between", the metaxu, they had to think of the meta of 'meta-physics'. This is where they feel comfortable and where we can build. [...]
Now, a formula from Zhuangzi is enough to protect us from this mirage of the tranquil state reached in the 'beyond' [...]. It protects us from the brutal light of the antipodes. It discreetly pushes us out of this rut and keeps us in an endless in-between. 'Pour without ever filling, draw without ever exhausting,' says one conceptual figure to another, 'obscure authenticity' (if it is ever possible to translate this evasiveness of substance) to 'fruitful wind' (Zhuangzi, ch. 12). Because the Tao is 'without demarcation,' that which stands out, emerges, and 'shines' is not the Tao; and similarly, "the word that distinguishes does not reach'. In other words, the most distinctive is also the most arbitrary. The Tao, the 'Way', on the other hand, is that in-between, which does not allow itself to be defined on either side, but which never ceases to allow passage: where we can therefore 'evolve' at ease. [...]

To evolve (you in Chinese) is the verb that means precisely - by eliminating extremes and no longer assuming a beginning or an end - a departure or a destination, a variation in between, without fixation or focus, renewing itself by alternation and not exhausting itself. The sage 'evolves' in the Tao, it is said, 'like a fish in water.'
So, if we continue the tripartite exchange, if we allow this other voice to shine through in that tense, unfinished dialogue between Socrates and Callicles - one of the most violent on the Greek stage - the Taoist thinker, by the very sweep of his formula, loosens this alternative, undoes or rather relaxes this antagonism: of the barrel full to the brim that finally frees us from desire, or of the pierced barrel that constantly rekindles it. To pour but not to fill, to draw but not to exhaust, through the alternation of weight produced by the sentence, one verb responding to the other and both holding back from the end - this formula is enough to make us understand the logic of transition, but isn't it already, more elementarily, that of breathing, which keeps us alive? For in its constant exchange, in which one stage already calls for the next and protects against the unsustainable, disjunctive states of complete emptiness and fullness, isn't breathing what actually exists in the in-between of activity - the tension that regenerates? The in-between that Chinese thought prioritized is the most resolute argument against being stuck in one or the other of the opposing positions of all-consuming activity or inert rest. Greek philosophy, as we can see, gave priority to visual perception, to distinguishing, assigning and constructing the object, but not to breathing (because it was too rooted in the vital, not cerebral enough?). 'Let's not give in to the fascination of the extreme,' says the Taoist, 'as if we could finally discover the truth in it' (or, if it remains tied to the extreme, then let's challenge the truth). In other words, let's not naively believe that we can gain knowledge by touching the end. Neither that of emptiness, which calls for relentless pouring, nor that of fullness, which is as restful as if we were dead. Let's avoid the critical stage, on either side, and leave some 'leaway' or reserve - the bottomless bottom of the Tao - on both sides. By staying within the limit, by not tipping over into one or the other determination, by neither 'leaving' nor 'sticking', bu ji bu li, as the Chinese wonderfully (and so simply) put it, i.e. By not 'getting stuck' and by not depriving yourself, but by illuminating this in-between of activity, you'll avoid hypostasizing one or the other as an alternative: both the greedy hunger of desire (Callicles) and the satiety of rest (Socrates); you'll escape the pain of deprivation as well as the disgust of fulfillment."
(François Jullien, Chinese Thought versus Philosophy, 2015)

E1.3.A.8. “HOW TO WAIT BETTER: THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MISSING AND WITHSTANDING ABSENCE.
With its fusion of frustration and hope, waiting is one of the most singularly maddening human experiences, and one of the great arts of living. To wait for something is to value it, to want it, to yearn for it, but to face its absence, its attainment forestalled by time and circumstance. All true waiting — which is different from abstinence, delayed gratification, and other forms of self-discipline — has an element of helplessness to it and is therefore training ground for mastering the vital, incredibly difficult balance of control and surrender that gives shape to our entire lives.

Because, as Tom Waits so unforgettably observed, the way we do anything is the way we do everything, our style of waiting is a miniature of our style of living: There is impatient and petulant waiting; there is waiting with the humility that while we may be worthy of the object of our hope, we are not entitled to it or to the mercies of time; there is waiting with an open heart and a willingness to be surprised, for the wait itself may reveal something we did not yet know about ourselves that might change our desire for the awaited outcome. (“I said to my soul, be still and wait without hope,” T.S. Eliot wrote knowing this, “for hope would be hope for the wrong thing.”)
At its core, waiting is a frustrated relationship between desire and time — a surplus of desire with no temporal agency over its fulfillment. In that sense, it is the opposite of boredom — another singularly maddening experience, marked by total temporal agency hollowed of desire.”
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2024/08/27/adam-phillips-better-waiting/?mc_cid=9d078af8ad&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E1.3.A.8_REF1_PSI WHEN YOU ARE WAITING FOR SOMEONE YOU ARE LOOKING FORWARD TO SEEING, CAN YOU DO ANYTHING OTHER THAN WAIT? 
“The child experiences the mother’s absence as a withholding of something that could be given. The mother forbears to come into presence, and the child can’t help but react, respond, mobilize something in or of himself to manage the withdrawal in the first instance, often rage. Everything depends in this developmental story on how mother and child deal with the absences. It is in one sense a matter of time, of how long the wait is before the mother reappears. “It is a matter,” Winnicott writes in *Playing and Reality*, “of days, or hours, or minutes. Before the limit is reached the mother is still alive; after this limit has been overstepped the mother is dead.” That is to say it feels to the child that the mother he has in his mind has died; and/or he has killed her in his mind out of rage at her absence. In this story it is all about what happens in the absence — what Winnicott calls the “gap” — and, more pragmatically, what can be done in, or with, the gap. […]
When you are waiting for someone you are looking forward to seeing, can you do anything other than wait? And can you enjoy them when they finally arrive? How you wait is who you are, and everything depends on your sense of an ending.”
(Adam Phillips, On Getting Better, 2021)

E1.3.B. DESIRING NOTHING BUT REALITY?
Upon reflection, it appears that a prerequisite for joy is to embrace existence as it is—with all its flaws—in the present moment, and to cease yearning for anything beyond what's real.

E1.3.B.1. NIETZSCHE IDENTIFIES THE FUTILITY OF DESIRE THAT EXHAUSTS ITSELF SEEKING AN UNATTAINABLE OBJECT, AS WE TIRE OF EVERYTHING — EVEN OF OURSELVES.
Nietzsche's work presents the concept of "wisdom of love" in contrast to "love of wisdom." He argues that it's too easy to maintain a perpetually frustrated relationship with wisdom. Instead, we should embrace love now, despite imperfection.

E1.3.B.1.1. THIS PHOTO TAKEN FROM THE LIBRARY OF LOVE — a collection of artists' books on love featuring 200 artists' work — highlights a loving gesture that acknowledges reality's imperfections. It reminds us of Nietzsche's view that the wisdom of love surpasses the love of wisdom. Pursuing wisdom in a state of constant frustration is futile; we must love now, imperfections and all. Cristina Suzuki illustrates this by describing a simple act as a loving gesture towards reality: placing a wedge under a wobbly furniture leg to live harmoniously with imperfection.

E1.5.E.2.2_REF2_PH.wE1.3.B.1.

E1.3.B.1.2. "THE WISE MAN IS THE ONE WHO DOESN'T NEED TO LIE TO HIMSELF, TELL HIMSELF STORIES, OR EVEN BE LUCKY TO BE HAPPY. It's as if he's self-sufficient; that's why he's free. But the truth is, he's got enough of everything, or anything is enough for him. This distinguishes him from the ignorant, for whom everything is never enough. The ignorant wants to take, to possess, to keep, whereas the wise man is content to know, to taste (sapere, from which sapiens comes, means "to have taste"), to enjoy, and to rejoice. He's less a scholar than a connoisseur. Less an expert than an amateur (in the double sense of the word: one who loves, one who does not make a profession of it). Less an owner than a free man (the jivan mukta of the Orient: the living free man). The wise man is without master, but also without dominion, if not over himself, without church, without belonging, without ties, without attachments (what he loves, he neither possesses nor is possessed by). Even his happiness does not belong to him: it is only a gust of joy in the great wind of the world. He is deprived of himself and everything. Maybe that's why he's happy: because he no longer needs to be. And wise: because he no longer believes in wisdom.
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.3.B.1.2_REF1_PH "WISDOM 
IT'S ONLY AN IDEAL, FROM WHICH IT'S ALSO IMPORTANT TO FREE ONESELF. WISDOM DOESN'T EXIST (THERE IS NO IDEAL); THERE ARE ONLY WISE PEOPLE, AND THEY ARE ALL DIFFERENT, AND NONE OF THEM BELIEVE IN WISDOM. 
A successful life? That can only be decided after it's over, and what's the point? The truly wise man doesn't care about achieving anything: his life is no more or less important to him than anyone else's. He is content to live it, and he finds in it a sufficient satisfaction, which is the only true wisdom. 'For me, I love life,' Montaigne said. That's why he was wise, because he didn't wait for life to be lovable (easy, pleasant, successful...) before he loved it. A question of temperament? A question of doctrine? Probably a little of both. We are more or less gifted for life or wisdom; those who are less gifted need to philosophize more, that's my lot. But no one is absolutely or completely wise: everyone needs to philosophize, if only to free himself from philosophy itself, as well as from wisdom. Wisdom can only be attained by ceasing to believe in it. The wisest man in the world, a clot or a virus is enough to drive him mad. A sorrow greater than his wisdom is enough to make him unhappy. He knows this and accepts it in advance. His failures are no less true than his successes. Why should they be less wise? Wisdom, true wisdom, is not an all-risk insurance policy, nor a panacea, nor a work of art. It's about resting, joyfully and freely, in the truth. A knowledge? That is indeed the meaning of the word, both Greek (sophia) and Latin (sapientia). But it's a very special kind of knowing. 'Wisdom can be neither a science nor a technique,' said Aristotle; it is less about what is true or effective than about what is good, for oneself and for others. Is it knowledge? Perhaps it is. But it's knowledge about life, a way of life."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.3.B.1.2_REF1.1_PH "WISDOM [...]
THE GREEKS DISTINGUISHED BETWEEN THEORETICAL OR CONTEMPLATIVE WISDOM (SOPHIA) AND PRACTICAL WISDOM (PHRONESIS). But one is hardly possible without the other, or rather true wisdom would be the combination of the two. It can be recognized by a certain serenity, but even more by a certain joy, a certain freedom, a certain eternity (the wise man lives in the present: he feels and experiences, as Spinoza said, that he is eternal), a certain love... Of all the goods that wisdom provides for the happiness of life as a whole," said Epicurus, "friendship is by far the greatest" (Capitular Maxims, XXVII). Self-love, fear, absence or lies no longer stand in the way. There is only the joy of knowing: there is only love and truth. That's why we all have our moments of wisdom, when love and truth are enough for us. And of folly, when they tear us apart or fail us. True wisdom must be disillusioned with itself, as we see in Ecclesiastes. It is no longer an ideal; it is a state, always approximate, always unstable (it is eternal, like love, only as long as it lasts), it is an experience, it is an act. It is not an absolute, despite the Stoics (we are more or less wise), but a maximum (as such relative): it is the maximum of happiness, in the maximum of lucidity. It depends on the situation of this or that person, on the abilities of this or that person (wisdom isn't the same in Auschwitz or Paris, for Etty Hillesum or Cavaillès) - in short, on the state of the world and of oneself. It's not an absolute; it's the way, always relative, of inhabiting reality, which is the only true absolute. This wisdom is worth more than all the books written about it, which run the risk of separating us from it. It's up to each of us to invent our own. Montaigne said: "Even if we can learn from the knowledge of others, we can be wise only from our own wisdom" (Essais, 1, 25).
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.3.B.1.2_REF1.2_PH “THE MARK OF A NOBLE SOUL.—A noble soul is not that which is capable of the highest flights, but that which rises little and falls little, living always in a free and bright atmosphere and altitude.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 397, 1878)

E1.3.B.1.2_REF2_PO “LIVE, YOU SAY, IN THE PRESENT.
Live only in the present.

But I don’t want the present, I want reality.
I want the things that exist, not the time that measures them.

What is the present?
It’s something in relation to the past and the future.
It’s something that exists by virtue of other things existing. I want only reality, the things themselves, without any
     present.
I don’t want to include time in my awareness of what exists. I don’t want to think of things as being in the present; I want
     to think of them as things.
I don’t want to separate them from themselves, calling them
     present.

I shouldn’t even call them real. 
I shouldn’t call them anything.

I should see them, just see them,
See them until I can no longer think about them,
See them without time or space,
See with no need of anything besides what I’m seeing. 
This is the science of seeing, which is no science at all.”
(Fernando Pessoa, 19 July 1920 - signed as Albert Caeiro)

E1.6.A.1.9_REF17_PO.wE1.3.B.1. 

E1.3.B.1.3. "CHILDREN'S HEAVEN. - The happiness of children is as much a myth as the happiness of the Hyperboreans spoken of by the Greeks. If happiness really dwells on earth," said the Greeks, "it must surely be as far away from us as possible, perhaps over there, at the ends of the earth. People of a certain age think the same way: if man can really be happy, it must surely be as far away from our age as possible, at the limits and beginnings of life. For some, through the veil of this myth, the appearance of the child is the greatest joy they can have: he himself enters the courts of heaven when he says: "Let the little children come to me, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. In one way or another, the myth of the children's heaven has currency wherever in the modern world there is anything like sentimentality.
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, Too Human III, Aphorism 265, 1878)

E1.3.B.1.3.a. NIETZSCHE WOULD PROBABLY HAVE JUDGED THIS PASSAGE BY JOHN BANVILLE TO BE A FANTASY OF CHILDHOOD RECREATED BY A SENTIMENTAL ADULT.
“Happiness was something else in my childhood. Back then it was practically a simple matter of accumulation, of taking things - new experiences, new emotions - and applying them like tiles to the walls of what would one day become the beautifully finished pavilion of my being. And disbelief, too, was responsible for much of the happiness. I'm talking about the euphoric inability to fully believe in the simple luck I had.”
(John Banville, The Sea)

E1.3.B.2. IN CAMUS' WORK, THERE IS NO "NO" WITHOUT A PRIOR "YES." HE CONCLUDES THAT MAN'S REVOLT AGAINST HIS CONDITION IS POSSIBLE BECAUSE HE HAS PREVIOUSLY AFFIRMED LIFE. THIS APPROACH HELPS CAMUS AVOID THE PITFALL OF REVOLUTION.

We are in love with a perishable truth. In "Nuptials at Tipasa," he writes: "What use have I for a truth that is not to my measure?"

E1.3.B.2_REF1_PH UNDER THE SIGN OF THE SUN: CAMUS' PHILOSOPHY ARTICULATES THE TENSION BETWEEN THE LOVE OF LIVING AND THE DESPAIR OF LIVING, UNDERLINING THE IMPORTANCE OF MAINTAINING THIS BALANCE FOR AN AUTHENTIC, ETHICAL EXISTENCE.
“From Nuptials to The Stranger, the sun is transformed from a luminous metaphor to that of death. Over this period, Camus became aware of what the world was like. He learned that misfortune exists, that life is tragic. From then on, the sun could no longer be just a sign of joy. The Stranger is part of the cycle of the Absurd, which is not Camus' last word, since he had already thought of the next cycle of writing, which would be the Revolt: the love of living does not exclude the despair of living. This tension is constitutive of human life. You don't want to lock yourself into either love or despair; you have to live as a pendulum. In the first case, we risk losing all lucidity; in the second, we condemn ourselves to sterility. It's an ethical duty to maintain the tension between the two poles, as he develops in The Rebel. Despair stems from our finitude, and also from the fact that we can never quite live up to what life or beauty has to offer. We need to turn it into something that will give us an even greater love of life.
See the extract from the preface to Betwixt and Between, written in 1937, in which Camus takes stock of his philosophy: “Poverty... stupidity”. The tension between love and despair was already present in Betwixt and Between. It's surprising that Camus says: 'to correct a natural indifference, I was placed halfway between misery and the sun'; What is this indifference to be corrected? Is it the trace of his strange mother's indifference, which he had to work on after childhood? The older he gets, the more he discovers his mother's dignity, despite her crushing condition (deaf, illiterate, poor), as well as her courage and tenderness that were never expressed.
He also works on his 'excessiveness'. He is not someone who is satisfied with what he is. He wrote: 'you must learn to be born to others' - for Camus, we need to found our ethics, and it's in destitution that we see what's essential. In the preface to Betwixt and Betweent, he wrote that he understood the meaning of life in poverty.
Of his father, whom he never knew, he remembers the sentence he uttered during the Moroccan war, restraining violent action out of vengeance against the other side: “A man can be restrained”.
Camus defined himself as an artist in reaction to the 19th-century sacralization of the artist as a being inspired by the gods. For Camus, the artist can never be silent, and must understand everything - in the sense of entering into the mystery - putting it into context. 'The sun taught me that history is not everything' - existence finds its completeness beyond politics. 'Art is not everything for me, at least not as a means' - he says in his notebooks in 1935; would he say it again in his Nobel Prize acceptance speech in Sweden, in which art is also an answer?
The meditation on death, also present in Nuptials in Tipasa, is not there to extinguish everything, but on the contrary to enhance life, to celebrate it more: If I think I have so much happiness swimming in the light, it's because I have a body and I'm mortal. There's no love of living without despair of living; it's thanks to this body that I'm in communion with the world and with others.
Philosophy doesn't come first, you have to live first. “Live Tipasa, write Tipasa, think” - live first, write and think later: Camus theorizes his existence in a second stage. 
'Lucidity is the wound closest to the sun', writes René Char, whom Camus defines as ‘essential’.
The last lines he wrote in the manuscript of The First Man before his accident: 'A pure passion for living, confronted with total death, felt today life, youth, beings slipping away from him, without being able to save them in any way, and abandoned only to the blind hope that this obscure force which for so many years had lifted him above the days, nourished him without measure, equal to the harshest of circumstances, would also provide him, and with the same tireless generosity as it had given him his reasons for living, reasons to grow old and die without revolt.' 
It's not the meaning of life, but reasons for living.
He also writes: 'We'll have to resign ourselves to dying obscure to ourselves.'"
(Agnès Spiquel on Les chemins de la philosophie, France Culture, 06/26/2019)

Listen to the podcast: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/sous-le-soleil-34-camus-sous-le-signe-du-soleil

E1.3.B.2_REF1.1_PH "CAMUS WROTE: “'IN THE MIDDLE OF WINTER, I DISCOVERED WITHIN MYSELF AN INVINCIBLE SUMMER'.
Our usual idea is that summer follows winter, joy follows sorrow, good weather follows rain, you're feeling bad... don't worry, one day it'll get better. That's what the usual wisdom tells us; basically, we need to learn to put everything into perspective. I think that's not good enough - what Camus invites us to do is open up a whole new perspective: to learn to recognize, in the very midst of winter, in the midst of what seems frozen and lifeless, the dazzling emergence of summer. 
We are rarely told about this possibility: discovering that there are no happy or unhappy events in themselves, but that in each of them, in each moment of our lives, there is a deeper dimension. This is what great literature is all about. I had this experience when my grandmother, whom I loved dearly, died. She was a very old lady at the time, and we all knew that the end was approaching. One morning, my aunt called to warn me that Grandma was living out her final hours. I arrived at the hospital, and the family was there, talking in hushed tones in the corridor. The situation was heavy - every time a family member entered the room, they did so with a somber step and leaved overwhelmed. I, too, entered the room apprehensively, taking the time to sit down and stand there with my grandmother. To my own surprise, what I experience is the kindness of my grandmother, who has accompanied me throughout my childhood. I stayed in the room all day, bathed in a deep, poignant peace with the feeling that I was supporting her through her ordeal. Of course I was very sad that my grandmother was dying, but in the midst of that winter I could feel the beauty of the love in which she had never ceased to bathe me, I could feel that this love was even appearing with a particularly poignant intensity. That moment was one of the most important in my life, and it gave me a strength and confidence that I still carry with me today. But how do you make this discovery on a daily basis? It's not just a question of finding a ray of sunshine in the middle of winter, but of discovering an invincible summer that will never desapear again, a summer that without being able to mask or replace winter, remains there within us. Like a forgotten friend - this forgotten friend lives in your very being, in your heart, in your chest, in every cell of your body. He's the memory of everything you've learned in life; he's the love your grandmother or anyone else gave you. Now you can reach out to it: you were my first ally, and I want to make a pact of friendship, peace and trust with you. I entrust myself to you in complete confidence, I entrust myself to that part of me which is greater than myself.”
(Fabrice Midal, 3 minutes of philosophy to become human again)

Listen to the podcast: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/3-minutes-de-philosophie-pour-redevenir-humain/deja-essaye-deja-echoue-peu-importe-essaie-encore-echoue-encore-echoue-mieux-resolution-de-samuel

E1.3.B.2_REF1.2_PH "THIS WORLD IS RADIANT WITH BEAUTY. THIS WORLD IS ALSO CAPABLE OF BONE-CHILLING BRUTALITY and the small, corrosive daily cruelties that salt our days with sorrow. For a sensitive person to live with the duality, to keep the light aflame without turning away from the darkness that needs illumination, may be the most difficult thing in life — and the most rewarding."
(Maria Popova)

E1.3.B.2_REF2_PH "REVOLT 
Resolute or violent opposition: refusal to obey, submission, resignation. The word is used above all, and increasingly, to denote an individual attitude (for collective revolts, we'd rather speak of riots, uprisings, revolutions...). This is because Camus visited the concept. What is a rebel? A man who says no. But if he refuses, he doesn't give up: he is also a man who says yes, from his first movement" (The Rebel, I). Yes to what? To his rebellion, to his struggle, to the values that underpin it or spring from it. The rebel, in the etymological sense, makes a U-turn. 'He has walked under the master's whip. Now he's facing it' (ibid.). This 'passionate affirmation' distinguishes revolt from resentment: 'Apparently negative because it creates nothing, revolt is profoundly positive because it reveals what is always to be defended in man' (ibid.). Here we emerge from solitude: revolt is 'a commonplace that establishes the first value of all human beings. I rebel, therefore we are' (ibid.). It's the way out of nihilism. It's where we come out of rebellion, or rather, it's where, without coming out of it, we include it in a greater whole, which is life, in a higher value, which is love. Rebellion is 'the very movement of life'; it is 'love and fruitfulness, or it is nothing' (ibid., V). 'Man is the only creature who refuses to be what he is' (ibid, Introduction). We must at least accept this. So revolt is only a passage, between the absurd and love, between no and yes. That's why we have to enter it, because 'the absurd is only a starting point' (ibid.). That's why you can't get out of it completely. It's like a ternary rhythm. First the world's no to man (the absurd); then man's no to the world (revolt); finally the great yes of wisdom or love ('all is well' in Sisyphus). But this yes does not cancel any of the two nos that precede and prepare it. It prolongs them. It accepts them. This is true of the absurd, which is only a starting point, but which remains undented (wisdom is neither justification nor hermeneutics). This is even more true of revolt. To say yes to everything, which is the only wisdom, is also to say yes to the no of revolt and of man".
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.3.B.2_REF3_PH REVOLT IS A MAD GENEROSITY THAT GIVES EVERYTHING TO THE PRESENT, REFUSING INJUSTICE AND EMBRACING LIFE IN ALL ITS FULLNESS, CHOOSING HUMANITY AND FAITHFUL EARTH OVER DIVINITY, AND FINDING IN THIS STRUGGLE A STRANGE JOY THAT HELPS ONE LIVE AND DIE.
"This insane generosity is the generosity of rebellion, which unhesitatingly gives the strength of its love and without a moment's delay refuses injustice. Its merit lies in making no calculations, distributing everything it possesses to life and to living men. It is thus that it is prodigal in its gifts to men to come. Real generosity toward the future lies in giving all to the present. Rebellion proves in this way that it is the very movement of life and that it cannot be denied without renouncing life. Its purest outburst, on each occasion, gives birth to existence. Thus it is love and fecundity or it is nothing at all. Revolution without honor, calculated revolution which, in preferring an abstract concept of man to a man of flesh and blood, denies existence as many times as is necessary, puts resentment in the place of love.[...]

The only original rule of life today: to learn to live and to die, and, in order to be a man, to refuse to be a god.

At this meridian of thought, the rebel thus rejects divinity in order to share in the struggles and destiny of all men. We shall choose Ithaca, the faithful land, frugal and audacious thought, lucid action, and the generosity of the man who understands. In the light, the earth remains our first and our last love. Our brothers are breathing under the same sky as we; justice is a living thing. Now is born that strange joy which helps one live and die, and which we shall never again postpone to a later time. On the sorrowing earth it is the unresting thorn, the bitter brew, the harsh wind off the sea, the old and the new dawn."
(Albert Camus, L´homme révolté)

E1.7.D.6.19.b.wE1.3.B.2

E1.3.B.3. THE MODALITY THROUGH WHICH PROUST EXPERIENCES THE JOY OF REALITY WITH THE MEMORY OF THE MADELEINE IS FIRMLY ANCHORED IN THE PRESENT, AS CLEMENT ROSSET SUGGESTS.
"This does not mean that reality can only be perceived through memory. The access of reality to consciousness, which occurs after the fact, is not a memory. It is the real that comes to consciousness, rather than returning to it: not insofar as it is past, but insofar as it is real, and even if its reality thus manifests itself only through a gap between the then real and its present perception. In such "returns from the past," which are actually arrivals of the real, it is not the past that returns, but the real that appears. 
Proust's famous descriptions provide an eloquent and ambiguous illustration here. In three key moments of In Search for Lost Time, the narrator associates the arrival of an indescribable happiness with the return of the past to consciousness: when he recognizes in the perfume of a "madeleine" dipped in tea the taste of certain moments of his childhood in Combray [...].
This key passage in Le Temps retrouvé sums up what was closest to Proust's heart, at least philosophically: I am happy when I experience something that, being related to the past as well as to the present, has nothing to do with the present that is passing - and therefore has nothing to do with the present and its poverty (Baudelaire would add: with reality and its banality). 
Proust's error here is not so much the privileging of the imagination at the expense of the appearance of reality, a privileging he himself explicitly acknowledges: 
"So often in the course of my life, reality had disappointed me because, at the moment I perceived it, my imagination, which was my only organ for the enjoyment of beauty, could not apply itself to it, by virtue of the inescapable law that one can only imagine what is absent" - but to take as memory the simple appearance of reality, its "revelation," to take as second representation what is in fact first representation. Proustian "reminiscence" is not a memory for the simple reason that it does not reproduce an image. A memory repeats a representation, which is why it can, in a pinch, constitute a "re-presentation." But Proust's memories are nothing of the sort. Proust's memory remembers nothing, precisely because it is - and this is where its interest lies - the first "representation" of the real, that is, its inaugural presentation, which signals the emergence of a certain real on the surface of consciousness. [...] 
It's a pity that Proust, so attentive to this emergence of the real on the surface of consciousness, thought he had to dismiss it as soon as it was born, and based the intimacy of his happiness on his ability to evacuate it.
(Clément Rosset, The Real Treatise on Idiocy, 1977)

E1.3.B.3.1. “TRANSFORM EVERY PHENOMENON INTO AS MANY ENIGMAS OF HAPPINESS OR GAIETY”.
(Marcel Proust)

E1.3.B.3.2. THE EXERCISE OF MEMORY TESTIFIES TO EXISTENCE AND ITS PREROGATIVE. "One is entitled to wonder about the origin of such a keen interest in a past that is generally felt in the form of indifference, if not vague annoyance, when it was present. This fastidiousness of memory can only be interpreted as a sign of recognition, in both senses of the word, of existence as such, of the interest inherent in every existence. The exercise of memory thus testifies to existence and its prerogative, even if it only becomes aware of this after the fact: its mania for exactitude, for conformity with past reality, the belated admission that "things that exist are important," to borrow a word from Claudel in Le Pain dur."
(Clément Rosset, Force majeure, 1983)

E1.3.B.3.3. NICOLAS GRIMALDI SHARES CLEMENT ROSSET'S ANALYSIS: PROUST REMEMBERS WHAT HE EXPERIENCED THROUGH INVOLUNTARY RECOLLECTIONS, BECAUSE AT THE MOMENT OF EXPERIENCING THESE MOMENTS, EXPECTATION DISTRACTED HIM FROM THE PRESENT. Of waiting, there can be no memory. Proust's involuntary memories are more intensely experienced through recollection than when they were experienced in the present. They are of the order of re-presentation.

E1.3.B.4. A JOY TAKEN MORE FROM THE FACT THAT EXISTENCE IN GENERAL EXISTS RATHER THAN FROM THE FACT OF ONE'S PERSONAL EXISTENCE

E1.3.B.4_REF1_PH “THE EMOTION OF A MAN WHO HAD PREPARED FOR THE EVENTUALITY OF SOME HAPPINESS AND SUDDENLY FINDS HIMSELF CONFRONTED WITH SOMETHING VERY DIFFERENT AND ALSO MORE INTENSE: Not only is his satisfaction not imperfect, but still it outweighs any forecast in perfection. I would happily say that the sculptor's chisel caught the racer's gaze at the precise moment when the latter ceases to think of his happiness at having won to think of something totally different: to the general joy which consists in living, in realizing that the world exists and that one is part of it. [...] The joy in question here is in no way distinguished from the joy of being alive, from the simple pleasure of existing (even if the analysis of this pleasure reveals a rather complex rejoicing: a pleasure rather taken from the fact that there is existence in general than from the fact of one's personal existence)."
(Clément Rosset, The Major Force, 1983)

E1.3.B.4_REF2_PO "I KNOW, YOU NEVER INTENDED TO BE IN THIS WORLD.
But you’re in it all the same.

So why not get started immediately.

I mean, belonging to it.
There is so much to admire, to weep over.

And to write music or poems about.

Bless the feet that take you to and fro.
Bless the eyes and the listening ears.
Bless the tongue, the marvel of taste.
Bless touching.

You could live a hundred years, it’s happened.
Or not.
I am speaking from the fortunate platform
of many years,
none of which, I think, I ever wasted.
Do you need a prod?
Do you need a little darkness to get you going?
Let me be as urgent as a knife, then,
and remind you of Keats,
so single of purpose and thinking, for a while,
he had a lifetime."
(Mary Oliver, The Fourth Sign of the Zodiac, part 3, 2014)

E1.5.E.2.wE1.3.B.4.

E1.5.B.1.3.c_REF1_PH.wE1.3.B.4.

E1.3.B.5. ISN'T ROUSSEAU'S WITHDRAWAL FROM THE WORLD DISGUISED AS A HAPPY ENDING? "Meditating on the dispositions of my soul, in every situation of life which I have passed through, I am extremely surprised at the disproportion I perceive between the different combinations of my destiny, and the habitual conceptions of good and evil with which they have affected me. The several intervals of my short-lived prosperity have scarcely left one permanent agreeable remembrance of the manner in which I enjoyed, them; while, on the contrary, during the greatest miseries of my life, I constantly experienced the most tender sentiments, which, though affecting, were delicious; these, shedding a salutary balm on the sorrows of my wounded heart, seemed to convert grief into enjoyment, and the amiable remembrance of those pleasing sensations, frequently returns, unaccompanied by those sorrows that formerly attended them. It appears to me that I have given more into the pleasure of my existence, and more truly lived, when the peculiarity of my fate had concentrated all my feelings, as it were, about my own heart, than when they evaporated outwardly, in pursuit of those objects which merit so little in themselves, yet constitute the whole felicity of those we think most happy.

When all was right around me, when I was content with everything, and satisfied with the sphere I was to occupy, I filled it with my affections, while my expansive soul, extending itself to other objects, was perpetually attracted by a thousand different inclinations, and by amiable attachments, which continually employed my heart: in these situations I forgot myself in some measure, thinking principally on what was foreign to me, and experiencing in the continual agitation of my feelings, all the vicissitude of earthly things. This exquisite sensibility left me neither inward peace, nor outward repose; happy in appearance only, I had not a single sentiment that could have borne the proof of reflection, or with which I could truly have been content. Never was I perfectly satisfied either with others or myself; the tumult of the world made me giddy, solitude wearied me, I perpetually wished for a change of situation, and met with happiness in none. Meantime, I was entertained well, and caressed everywhere; I had not a single enemy, none who bore me ill-will, none that were envious, everyone sought to oblige me, and I frequently had it in my power to oblige others. Without wealth, employment, or flatterers; without any display or reputation of particular talents, I enjoyed every advantage that could have resulted from them all, and saw no one in a situation which I thought preferable to my own. What then was wanting to make me happy? I cannot answer this; but I am fully sensible I was not so. What additional misfortune is wanting at this time to make me the most miserable of mankind? Nothing that human malice can add; yet in this deplorable situation, I would not change my being and destiny with the most fortunate among my persecutors; but would rather be myself in the midst of these misfortunes, than any of those who figure in all the glare of prosperity. Cut off from every connection, my soul must nourish itself on its own substance; but she is not exhausted, though I ruminate on a void, if I may be allowed the expression, my clouded imagination and faded ideas no longer furnishing sufficient aliment to my heart, while my soul dimmed and obstructed by the weakness of its bodily organs, sinks daily under the weight of them, having no longer strength sufficient to free itself, and dart as heretofore from its aged and feeble covering.

This entering into ourselves, is what we are naturally forced to by adversity, and this, perhaps, renders it so insupportable to the generality of mankind: for my part (who have only weaknesses to reproach myself with) I easily find consolation, for never did premeditated evil approach my heart [...]

It is in this deplorable situation, after long and dreadful agonies, that, instead of despair, which seemed my inevitable portion forever, I once more found serenity, tranquillity, peace, and even happiness; since each day of my life I recall the occupations of the preceding one with pleasure, and desire no variation for tomorrow.

From whence proceeds this difference? From one single circumstance, which is, that I have learned to bear the yoke of necessity without murmuring. Formerly, I was attached to a thousand things, all which connections have been rent asunder successively, and I am reduced to depend on myself, and adopt my own plan for happiness. Now that I am pressed on all sides, I maintain my equilibrium, because, no longer attached to anything, I depend on myself alone."
(Jean-Jacques Rousseau , The Reveries of the Solitary Walker, Eight walk, an anonymous translation to English, published in 1796)

E1.3.C. FULLY EMBRACING REALITY AS A PRODUCT OF CHANCE
An unconditional acceptance of reality rejects the comforting notion of a purposeful nature. Instead, it embraces a universe born of randomness—one where our joy must flourish despite the absence of inherent meaning.

E1.3.C.1. THE UNCONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF THE EXISTING ORDER: This is the amor fati of the Stoics upon which Christian logic has built its doctrine. Is Stoic resignation a path only if one eventually leaves it? Can this philosophy be wise only at its limit, as it tends toward affirmation?

Watch the animation by Massimo Pigliucci, TedEd - The philosophy of Stoicism:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R9OCA6UFE-0

E1.3.C.1.1. STOICISM GUIDES US IN SELF-IMPROVEMENT, TEACHING US TO DESIRE ONLY WHAT WE CAN CONTROL — our judgments, perceptions, and aversions. For elements beyond our control — such as our bodies, power, wealth, and recognition — we learn to accept and align with the natural order.

E1.3.C.1.1.a. "HUMAN LIFE.
Duration: momentary. Nature: changeable. Perception: dim. Condition of Body: decaying. Soul: spinning around. Fortune: unpredictable. Lasting Fame: uncertain. Sum Up: The body and its parts are a river, the soul a dream and mist, life is warfare and a journey far from home, lasting reputation is oblivion.
Then what can guide us?
Only philosophy.
Which means making sure that the power within stays safe and free from assault, superior to pleasure and pain, doing nothing randomly or dishonestly and with imposture, not dependent on anyone else’s doing something or not doing it. And making sure that it accepts what happens and what it is dealt as coming from the same place it came from. And above all, that it accepts death in a cheerful spirit, as nothing but the dissolution of the elements from which each living thing is composed. If it doesn’t hurt the individual elements to change continually into one another, why are people afraid of all of them changing and separating? It’s a natural thing. And nothing natural is evil."
(Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, Book II)

E1.3.C.1.1.a.i. THE STOICS' "SPIRITUAL EXERCISES" EXEMPLIFY HOW PHILOSOPHY CAN BE A DISCIPLINE that begins with mental gymnastics, creates habits, and ultimately transforms both body and mind (aren't they one and the same?)

E1.3.C.1.1.a.i_REF1_PH IT’S MY ROTTEN LUCK THAT THIS HAS HAPPENED TO ME "Be like a headland: the waves beat against it continuously, but it stands fast and around it the boiling water dies down. « It’s my rotten luck that this has happened to me ». On the contrary, « It’s my good luck that, although this has happened to me, I still feel no distress, since I’m unbruised by the present and unconcerned about the future ». What happened could have happened to anyone, but not everyone could have carried on without letting it distress him. So why regard the incident as a piece of bad luck rather than seeing your avoidance of distress as a piece of good luck? Do you generally describe a person as unlucky when his nature worked well? Or do you count it as a malfunction of a person’s nature when it succeeds in securing the outcome it wanted? [...]
Can what happened to you stop you from being fair, high-minded, moderate, conscientious, unhasty, honest, moral, self-reliant, and so on — from possessing all the qualities that, when present, enable a man’s nature to be fulfilled? So then, whenever something happens that might cause you distress, remember to rely on this principle: this is not bad luck, but bearing it valiantly is good luck."
(Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, Book IV, XLIX, 180)

E1.3.C.1.1.a.i_REF2_PH "FORTUNE … FALLS HEAVILY ON THOSE TO WHOM SHE IS UNEXPECTED; the man who is always expecting her easily withstands her. For an enemy’s arrival too scatters those whom it catches off guard; but those who have prepared in advance for the coming conflict, being properly drawn up and equipped, easily withstand the first onslaught, which is the most violent. Never have I trusted Fortune, even when she seemed to offer peace. All those blessings which she kindly bestowed on me — money, public office, influence — I relegated to a place whence she could claim them back without bothering me. I kept a wide gap between them and me, with the result that she has taken them away, not torn them away. [...]
No man has been shattered by the blows of Fortune unless he was first deceived by her favours. Those who loved her gifts as if they were their own forever, who wanted to be admired on account of them, are laid low and grieve when the false and transient pleasures desert their vain and childish minds, ignorant of every stable pleasure. But the man who is not puffed up in good times does not collapse either when they change. His fortitude is already tested and he maintains a mind unconquered in the face of either condition: for in the midst of prosperity he has tried his own strength against adversity."
(Seneca, Consolation to Helvia - his mother)

E1.3.C.1.1.a.i_REF3_PH JE CROIS QU'UNE PENSÉE CONSCIENTE PEUT PÉNÉTRER L'INCONSCIENT SI ELLE EST INTENSÉMENT CULTIVÉE. "There has been a great deal of study by psychologists of the operation of the unconscious upon the conscious, but much less of the operation of the conscious upon the unconscious. Yet the latter is of vast importance in the subject of mental hygiene, and must be understood if rational convictions are ever to operate in the realm of the unconscious. This applies in particular in the matter of worry. It is easy though to tell oneself that such a misfortune would not be so very terrible if it happened, but so long as this remains merely a conscious conviction it will not operate in the watches of the night, or prevent the occurrence of nightmares. My own belief is that a conscious thought can be planted into the unconscious if a sufficient amount of vigour and intensity is pot into it. Most of the unconscious consists of what were once highly emotional conscious thoughts, which have now become buried. It is possible to do this process of burying deliberately, and in this way the  unconscious can be led to do a lot of useful work. I have found, for example, that if I have to write upon some rather difficult topic the best plan is to think about it with very great intensity - the greatest intensity of which I am capable - for a few hours or days, and at the end of that time give orders, so to speak, that the work is to proceed underground. After some months I return consciously to the topic and find that the work has been done. Before I had discovered this technique, I used to spend the intervening months worrying because I was making no progress; I arrived at the solution none the sooner for this worry, and the intervening months
were wasted, whereas now I can devote them to other pursuits. A process in many ways analogous can be adopted with regard to anxieties. When some misfortune threatens, consider seriously and deliberately what is the very worst that could possibly happen. Having looked this possible misfortune in the face, give yourself sound reasons for thinking that after all it would be no such very terrible disaster. Such reasons always exist, since at the worst nothing that happens to oneself has any cosmic importance. When you have looked for some time steadily at the worst possibility and have said to yourself with real conviction, ‘Well, after all, that would not matter so very much’, you will find that your worry diminishes to a quite extraordinary extent. It may be necessary to repeat the process a few times, but in the end, if you have shirked nothing in facing the worst possible issue, you will find that your worry disappears altogether, and is replaced by a kind of exhilaration.[...]"
(Bertrand Russell, The conquest of happiness, 1962)

E1.3.C.1.1.a.i_REF4_PH "THE MEDITATIONS BY MARCUS AURELIUS ARE AN EXERCISE IN SELF-IMPROVEMENT with a specific goal and precise tools. Through repetition, they provoke a series of consequences or demonstrations in the soul. This isn't meditation—it's physical work on the soul, akin to repeating a movement to strengthen a muscle. The soul, being a physical breath, can adopt certain dispositions based on the work imposed upon it. As Marcus Aurelius reminds himself, 'What am I seekink? This or that voluntary disposition'"

E1.3.C.1.1.a.i_REF4.1_PH "THE MARK OF STOICISM IS TO BE OPTIMISTIC AS A MATTER OF PRINCIPLE. WE HAVE ABSOLUTE CONTROL OVER OUR REPRESENTATIONS. There is no evil except moral suffering. As long as we have not committed injustice ourselves, we must consider that we have not suffered evil. Make your soul an impregnable citadel. Marcus Aurelius adds that we can turn any obstacle into a new course of action." For Stoics, the world is a cosmic city in which we all participate, and we are all capable of understanding the same reasoning. Listening to others is a prerequisite for correcting fellow citizens' erroneous beliefs that underpin their actions. For the Stoics, man is by definition a rational being open to propositions that may be true or false. The soul's guiding principle is reason, or daimon. I am intelligence, and the only good that exists is the right disposition of that intelligence. Daimon is divine because reason—logos—is God insofar as it orders the world and gives it its properties. For Seneca, reason is a spark of divinity within us. Logos, or nature, is a disturbing echo in Spinoza. "No one is willingly evil": While Plato believed that seeing the good was enough to do it without involving the will, Marcus Aurelius recognized the resistance we have to acting virtuously, even when we know what virtue is. Stoicism is a practice that uses language to free us from these resistances by identifying them and transforming obstacles into new paths. It changes our approach to reality. The Pensées are an exercise in self-work with a specific goal and precise tools that, through repetition, provoke a series of consequences or demonstrations in the soul. It is not a meditation exercise; it is physical work on the soul. It is like repeating a movement to work a muscle. The soul is a physical entity that can take on a certain disposition depending on the work imposed on it:
1. Reduction to insignificance: For example, when we wage war, it is like a spider catching a fly. This puts things into perspective on a cosmic scale and counteracts the subjective delusion that makes life unbearable.
2. The use of short aphorisms that shake our souls with their impact;
3. Defining things and dividing concepts by breaking them down into their constituent parts to see their essence.
Marcus Aurelius contrasts philosophy, the content of thought weighed down by limiting principles, with rhetoric, the form of persuasive expression. Rhetoric is never an end in itself. The goal is to be happy, which Xenon says is a peaceful life, and this can only be achieved through the acquisition of virtue, a disposition of the soul to do good. Spreading goodness through action means setting an example of virtue for others to follow in order to create a community of minds because harmony of the soul is meaningless without harmony in the world. The goal is not to create oneself because one's identity is important, but rather to become a rational being that does good (the "I" in Pensées pour moi-même) because it contributes to cosmic harmony. This is a philosophical, political, and ethical duty because these spheres are permeable. The tranquility of wisdom is a difficult goal, and the Pensées are a workbook for achieving it. This goal is difficult because it is not a matter of withdrawing from the world; rather, it is a matter of holding all the threads of life at the same time (being an emperor and a philosopher at the same time, according to Marcus Aurelius)."
(Christelle Veillard on the radio program The Stoics or the Art of Evasion, broadcast on Les chemins de la philosophie on France Culture on March 25, 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/le-stoicisme-ou-l-art-de-l-esquive-7842506

E1.3.C.1.1.a.i_REF4.2_PO “THERE IS NO JAIL FOR THE SOUL
There is no jail for the soul,
Which everywhere is free.
One might as well secure the sky
Or chain the open sea.

The body may in bondage sit
Or on a golden throne.
It matters little to the soul,
Whose fate is all its own.

The soul is sovereign in the self,
And ever free to choose.
Without, one may be forced to crawl;
Within, one can refuse.

Without, one can be flayed alive,
But none can touch the soul,
Which, willing only what is good,
Emerges sane and whole.
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E1.3.C.1.1.a.i_REF5_PH MONTAIGNE HAS THE SOLUTION AGAINST NIGHT TIME ANGUISH:
Instructing myself betimes to constrain my life, and fit it for
a new state. The true liberty is to be able to do what a man will with himself: "Potentissimus. Potentissimus est qui se habet in potestate [He is most potent who is master of himself."—Seneca, Ep., 94.].»
(Montaigne, Essays, Part III, About Physionomy, Chapter XII)

E1.3.C.1.1.a.ii. IN OUR QUEST TO ABSOLUTELY CONTROL OUR EMOTIONS, don't we risk missing out on a vital part of life?
The virtuous middle ground: Can we guide our emotions without tension?

E1.3.C.1.1.a.ii_REF1_PH CATHERINE WILSON ON EPICUREANISM "The appeal of Stoicism today (as opposed to Epicureanism) can be explained by the high value we place on the ability to control (our lives, our emotions, etc.). In this sense, isn't Stoicism a false way of accepting reality? The Stoic says that we have to learn to accept suffering because it's part of life and we have to brace ourselves - control our reaction. The Epicurean also acknowledges the inevitability of suffering, but welcomes it and sees it in others with greater empathy and recognizes the emotions it provokes. A revival of Epicureanism would therefore depend on a relaxation of the value of "control"."
(Catherine Wilson on Epicureanism, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: http://philosophybites.com/2016/05/catherine-wilson-on-epicureanism.html

E1.3.C.1.1.a.ii_REF2_PH “FEELING HELPLESS AND CONFUSED IN THE FACE OF RANDOM, UNPATTERNED EVENTS, we seek to order them and, in so doing, gain a sense of control over them,” the great psychiatrist Irvin D. Yalom wrote in his magnificent meditation on uncertainty and our search for meaning. But as our terror of losing control compels us to grasp for order and certainty, we all too often end up creating patterns that ultimately don’t serve us, then repeat those patterns under the illusion of control. These patterns of belief — about who we are, about who others are, about how the world works — come to shape our behavior, which in turn shapes our reality, creating a loop that calls to mind physicist David Bohm’s enduring wisdom: “Reality is what we take to be true. What we take to be true is what we believe… What we believe determines what we take to be true.”"
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings)

E1.3.C.1.1.a.ii_REF3_PH ACCORDING TO THE STOICS, WE CAN ESCAPE OUR PASSIONS' TYRANNY THROUGH THE PRACTICE OF SPIRITUAL EXERCISES, whereas for Spinoza « we are not a state within a state » and cannot disarm desire by sheer will. While in both thought models, understanding allows us to escape being teared apart by our passions, for Spinoza understanding is not enough. Knowledge needs to be « experienced » as a meditation that allows us to become aware that desire and the common goods of human life are not an end in themselves. This meditation on lived experience makes it possible to establish a hard core that underlies the search for these common goods without being blinded by their representation: We thus no longer see human interactions as the search for honors and power, the search for the means of living as the search for fortune, the search for health as the search for libido. For Spinoza, a partial letting-go may be a consequence of the philosophical process, but it is not a goal in itself.

E1.5.D.3.wE1.3.C.1.1.a.ii_REF3_PH

E1.3.C.1.1.a_REF1_PH IT IS THROUGH THE FORCE OF PHILOSOPHY THAT ONE BECOMES A PHILOSOPHER "The 'spiritual exercises' (a phrase coined by Pierre Hadot to characterize the Stoic exercises of reflection and preparation) are exercises in moral perfection: Philosophy is an asceticism, not a mere theory, which should enable us to live better.
To live in accordance with nature is a maxim interpreted by the Stoic school as living in accordance with the nature of the universe and also with one's own nature as a human being (i.e., in accordance with reason). For Marcus Aurelius, it's both. It's a position in line with the pseudo-Stoicism of amor fati, a formula coined by Nietzsche - but with one important difference - Nietzsche adds to conformity with nature the injunction to love it.
"The duration of human life: a flicker. Its substance: elusive. Sensation: obscure. The body as a whole: quickly rotting. The soul: a whirlpool. Fate: difficult to predict. Reputation: uncertain. In summary, the things of the body flow like a river. The things of the soul are but dreams and smoke. Life is a war and a foreign sojourn, the glory left behind, oblivion. What can make us endure it? Only one thing: philosophy. It consists in protecting one's inner demon from outrages, in being innocent, in being superior to pleasure and pain, in leaving nothing to chance, in accepting events and fate, and above all in waiting for a death that is favorable to thought, since it is nothing but the dissolution of the elements of which every living thing is composed. But if there's nothing to fear, why should we fear change and total dissolution, for this is in accordance with nature. No evil is in harmony with nature.
It is through the force of philosophy that one becomes a philosopher..."
(Jean-Baptiste Gourinat on Les chemins de la philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 3/27/2019)

Listen to the podcast: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/comment-se-preparer-a-mourir-3129485

E1.3.C.1.1.b. RETROUVONS ICI UN MONTAIGNE STOÏCIEN:
"Chascun est bien ou mal, selon qu'il s'en trouve. Non de qui on le croid, mais qui le croid de soy, est content : et en cella seul la creance se donne essence et verité.
La fortune ne nous fait ny bien ny mal : elle nous en offre seulement la matiere et la semence : laquelle nostre ame, plus puissante qu'elle, tourne et applique comme il luy plaist : seule cause et maistresse de sa condition heureuse ou malheureuse.
Les accessions externes prennent saveur et couleur de l'interne constitution : comme les accoustremens nous eschauffent non de leur chaleur, mais de la nostre, laquelle ils sont propres à couver et nourrir : qui en abrieroit un corps froid, il en tireroit mesme service pour la froideur : ainsi se conserve la neige et la glace."
(Montaigne, Les Essais, Que le goust des biens et des maux despend en bonne partie de l'opinion que nous en avons, I, XL)

E1.3.C.1.1.c. THE STOIC POSITION FORMS THE THIRD MAXIM OF DESCARTES' PROVISIONAL MORALITY in his "Discourse on the Method." This logic holds only if one believes, as Descartes did, that we can change our desires through philosophical self-work.

E1.3.C.1.1.c_REF1_PH "MY THIRD MAXIM WAS ALWAYS TO TRY TO CONQUER MYSELF RATHER THAN FORTUNE, AND TO CHANGE MY DESIRES RATHER THAN THE ORDER OF THE WORLD, and generally to accustom myself to believing that there is nothing that is completely within our power except our thoughts, so that, after we have done our best regarding things external to us, everything that is lacking for us to succeed is, from our point of view, absolutely impossible. And this alone  seemed to me sufficient to prevent me in the future from desiring anything but what I was to acquire, and thus to make me contented. For, our will tending by nature to desire only what our understanding represents to it as somehow possible, it is certain that, if we consider all the goods that are outside us as equally beyond our power, we will have no more regrets about lacking those that seem owed to us as our birthright when we are deprived of them through no fault of our own, than we have in not possessing the kingdoms of China or Mexico, and that, making a virtue of necessity, as they say, we shall no more desire to be healthy if we are sick, or to be free if we are in prison, than we now do to have a body made of a material as incorruptible as diamonds, or wings to fly like birds. But I admit that long exercise is needed as well as frequently repeated meditation, in order to become accustomed to looking at everything from this point of view; and I believe that it is principally in this that the secret of those philosophers consists, who in earlier times were able to free themselves from fortune's domination and who, despite sorrows and poverty, could rival their gods in happiness. For occupying themselves ceaselessly with considering the limits prescribed to them by nature, they so perfectly persuaded themselves that nothing was in their power but their thoughts, that this alone was sufficient to prevent them from having any affection for other things, and they controlled their thoughts so absolutely that in this they had some reason for reckoning themselves richer, more powerful, freer, and happier than any other men who, not having this philosophy, never thus controlled everything they wished to control, however favored by nature and fortune they might be."
(René Descartes, Discours on method, 1637)

E1.3.C.1.1.d. EVERYTHING, WITHOUT EXCEPTION, JOYS AND SORROWS ALIKE, MUST BE WELCOMED WITH THE SAME INNER ATTITUDE OF LOVE AND GRATITUDE. "It is from there that the Stoic conception of amor fati, love of the order of the world, regarded by them as the supreme virtue, is derived. The order of the world is to be loved because it is pure obedience to God. Whatever this universe accords us or inflicts on us, it does so exclusively out of obedience. [...]
All that happens to us throughout the course of our life, having been brought about by the total obedience of this universe to God, places us in contact with the absolute good formed by the divine will; in virtue of this,
everything, without any exception, joys and sorrows alike, ought to be welcomed with the same inward attitude of love and thankfulness."
(Simone Weil, The need for roots, 1943)

E1.3.C.1.1.d_REF1_CUR THE LIBRARY OF LOVE IS A COLLECTION OF ARTISTS' BOOKS. At first glance, the theme of hunting for survival—in accordance with nature's law—may seem an odd choice to illustrate love. However, this selection becomes clearer when paired with Simone Weil's words: "Whatever this universe grants us or inflicts upon us, it does so exclusively through obedience." One might, like Weil, believe in a divine intention behind creation and natural laws, or be agnostic and view these laws as chance occurrences. Either way, it doesn't diminish our ability to love the world and find joy in its enchantment, even when that enchantment includes suffering.

E1.3.C.1.1.d_REF2_PH "IN THE CHRISTIAN MYTH, NATURE IS DESTITUTE. The good is beyond nature. In Buddhism, however, nature is a revelation of the divine. Consequently, Buddhism affirms that the world is sacred-the world with its joys and sorrows. If the divine is everywhere, then eternity is now."
(Joseph Campbell, The power of myth, interview, Épisode 2 - The Message of the Myth - 23'30"-27'30")

E1.3.C.1.1.d_REF3_PH “GOOD PLOUGHLAND.—All rejection and negation betoken a deficiency in fertility. If we were good ploughland, we should allow nothing to be unused or lost, and in every thing, event, or person we should welcome manure, rain, or sunshine.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 332, 1878)

E1.3.C.1.2. STOICISM IS THE TYRANNY OF SELF. Nietzsche denounces the Stoic "comedy": "You demand nature conform to the Portico, ensuring no existence but in your image—an eternal, grandiose glorification of Stoicism. With your love of truth, you stubbornly force yourself, with hypnotic fixity, to see nature falsely—in a Stoic way—until you lose the ability to see it otherwise. Some abysmal presumption leads you to embrace the mad hope that by tyrannizing yourselves—for Stoicism is self-tyranny—you can shape all existence."

E1.3.C.1.2_REF1_PH "SO YOU WANT TO LIVE “ACCORDING TO NATURE?” OH, YOU NOBLE STOICS, WHAT A FRAUD IS IN THIS PHRASE! Imagine something like nature, profligate without measure, indifferent without measure, without purpose and regard, without mercy and justice, fertile and barren and uncertain at the same time, think of indifference itself as power – how could you live according to this indifference? Living – isn’t that wanting specifically to be something other than this nature? Isn’t living assessing, preferring, being unfair, being limited, wanting to be different? And assuming your imperative to “live according to nature” basically amounts to “living according to life” – well how could you not? Why make a principle out of what you yourselves are and must be? – But in fact, something quite different is going on: while pretending with delight to read the canon of your law in nature, you want the opposite, you strange actors and self-deceivers! Your pride wants to dictate and annex your morals and ideals onto nature – yes, nature itself –, you demand that it be nature “according to Stoa” and you want to make all existence exist in your own image alone – as a huge eternal glorification and universalization of Stoicism! For all your love of truth, you have forced yourselves so long, so persistently, and with such hypnotic rigidity to have a false, namely Stoic, view of nature, that you can no longer see it any other way, – and some abysmal piece of arrogance finally gives you the madhouse hope that because you know how to tyrannize yourselves – Stoicism is self-tyranny –, nature lets itself be tyrannized as well: because isn’t the Stoic a piece of nature? . . . But this is an old, eternal story: what happened back then with the Stoics still happens today, just as soon as a philosophy begins believing in itself. It always creates the world in its own image, it cannot do otherwise; philosophy is this tyrannical drive itself, the most spiritual will to power, to the “creation of the world,” to the causa prima."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Beyond good and evil, Aphorism 9, 1886)

E1.3.C.1.3. IS STOIC RESIGNATION A PATH WORTH TAKING ONLY IF WE INTEND TO LEAVE IT? Does all resignation inevitably stem from despair? Could this philosophy be considered wise only at its limits—when it leans towards affirmation, buoyed by an unshakeable hope?

E1.3.C.1.3_REF1_PH "RESIGNATION 
IT IS TO GIVE UP THE SATISFACTION OF A DESIRE, WHICH NEVERTHELESS REMAINS. It is no longer revolt, which says no, nor is it quite acceptance, which says yes. Resignation would rather say « yes but », or « yes in spite of everything », or « too bad », but without quite believing in it. It is like an unfinished, perhaps unfinishable mourning process, which accepts itself as such. It is not wisdom, for lack of joy. It is not - or no longer - unhappiness. It is a kind of dull and comfortable in-between. A double trap. A double failure. Too comfortable to want to get out of it. Too dull for us to enjoy remaining that way. Resignation is often the state of old people, or of those who have grown old before their time. One understands that it displeases. « This word resignation irritates me, said George Sand; in the idea that I have of it, rightly or wrongly, it is a kind of laziness which wants to avoid the inexorable logic of misfortune » (History of my life, X). But it can't do so, or only by habit and renunciation. It is not victory; it is desistance. So it is necessary, sometimes, and insufficient, always. It is like a minimal wisdom, for those incapable of reaching the real thing. Its formula seems to be found, surprisingly, in Gide's Les Nourritures terrestres: « Where you cannot say so much for the better, say so much for the worse. In that attitude lies great promises of happiness ». This is probably an exaggeration, or it presupposes a prior happiness, or an ultimate wisdom, which is no longer resignation but full and complete acceptance. Besides, resignation is only a moment. It is only really worthwhile for those who do not resign themselves to it, or who go beyond it. It is a path only on the condition that one grow out of it."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.3.C.1.3_REF1.1_PH "RESIGNATION IS OF TWO SORTS, ONE ROOTED IN DESPAIR, THE OTHER IN UNCONQUERABLE HOPE. The first is bad; the second is good. The man who has suffered such fundamental defeat that he has given up hope of serious achievement may learn the resignation of despair, and, if he does, he will abandon all serious activity. He may camouflage his despair by religious phrases, or by the doctrine thatcontemplation is the true end of man, but whatever disguise he may adopt to conceal his inward defeat, he will remain essentially useless and fundamentally unhappy. The man whose resignation is based on unconquerable hope acts in quite a different way. Hope which is to be unconquerable must be large and impersonal. Whatever my personal activities, I may be defeated by death, or by certain kinds of diseases; I may be overcome by my enemies; I may find that I have embarked upon an unwise course which cannot lead to success. In a thousand ways the failure of purely personal hopes may by unavoidable, but if personal aims have been part of larger hopes for humanity, there is not the same utter defeat when failure comes."
(Bertrand Russell, The conquest of happiness, 1930)

E1.3.C.1.3_REF2_PH WHAT THE TRAGIC PHILOSOPHER DOESN'T 'UNDERSTAND' IS THAT THERE CAN BE A DESIRE FOR SOMETHING CALLED 'NECESSITY' "The idea of necessity, which is neither a demonstrable concept nor a demonstrable vision, constitutes, in the eyes of the tragic thinker, a feeling more akin to a need than to a "conviction of the heart. What the tragic philosopher does not 'understand' is not that other philosophers are too quick to conclude from their desire for being (affirming necessity from the feeling of lack), but rather that there can be a desire for this something called 'necessity'. [...] Against this desire for the necessary, the tragic thinker will oppose his own feeling, which is a desire for unconditional affirmation. There is indeed an antinomy between approval and justification, just as there is between chance and necessity, and for the same reasons. To approve is to deny that 'what exists' must be justified by reason: such justification is potentially negating (to approve only on the condition of justification). For the tragic thinker who affirms chance, the desire for order inherent in the sentiment of necessity is a negating desire, symptomatic of an inability to approve. A fundamental problem of philosophical sensibility, perhaps even of human sensibility in general, once explored by Nietzsche, and one in which the idea of chance - depending on whether it is rejected or affirmed - seems to play a decisive role in the end, beyond any analysis of resentment and guilty conscience".
(Clément Rosset, The Logic of the Worst, 1971)

E1.3.C.1.3_REF3_PH FRANÇOIS JULLIEN SUGGESTS THAT WHILE STOICISM SOUGHT TO RECONNECT WITH WISDOM, IT ACTUALLY INTENSIFIED THE DEMAND FOR LOGICAL COHERENCE WITH NATURE, IMPOSING A MORAL FORCE ON LIFE. This approach resulted in a philosophy that prioritizes consistency and unity, potentially at the expense of the dynamic and ever-changing nature of life. 
"If, then, philosophy, with the Greeks, assimilated itself to knowledge (abandoning 'wisdom' for 'science,' sophia for episteme), fixated itself on truth (as the adequacy of thing and spirit), and thus abandoned life, it did so not out of contempt or rejection of life: for it would have developed, through asceticism, a bad disposition against life, as Nietzsche put it. But she found herself bound to it by the logical bias of chance. It did not choose to abandon life, but because life, even in its metabolism, never ceases to decoincide with itself, as Plato saw so well, it had to denounce this inability of life to be and, for that, to coincide in an essence: it had to think the 'true' life [...] by transferring it to Being and the divine 'beyond', detached from the here and now. Meta-physics - the abandonment of the impossible coincidence of life for the stability of being, with which alone truth can coincide and find its identity - was the construction demanded by the mind. [...]

It's true that one might think that Stoicism, by virtue of the reaction from which it sprang, had already escaped this abstraction: since it supposedly revived wisdom and responded in times of need to the urgent question of 'how to live,' since it also dissociated itself from the thought of Being, which had become detached from life, and sought instead to embrace the logic immanent in life. On the contrary, Stoicism pushed this logical demand for chance to the extreme, thereby accentuating the great imposition of morality on life. For it is no longer simply a matter of approaching and touching (the solid foundation of being, haptein), as Plato conceived it; it is a matter of 'coinciding with' ('nature', homologein), i.e. of constantly accepting the inner adequacy of the world's self-development and showing oneself to be in solidarity with its logic. Once it has been established that all beings are part of the same process of growth (as signified by "nature", phusis), and that this process itself possesses its own rational law of sequence and organization (in which there is indeed 'logic'), it is also legitimate that, in order to coincide with this coherence, not to betray the "cohesion" that makes up the world, but rather to adhere to it, Stoicism can only be, on a daily basis, a coercive training that forces individual affects to submit to the interest of the whole; and therefore, in the name of immanence, its morality can only be expressed in the imperative. Since the ego must act only by bringing its reason into accord with the reason of the universal nature which 'governs the whole' [...], the discipline of desire will consist in refusing to desire anything other than what the nature of the whole wants, and consequently in making every effort to agree joyfully (adsentior, says Seneca) to everything that happens to me, including evil;  and even - supreme coercion - to make such a virtue my only happiness.
Stoicism, taken as a whole (and the very nature of Stoicism is that it can only be taken as a whole), is nothing but a great coincidence machine. [...]

Thought [for the Stoics], therefore, always passes from the same to the same, and is only grasped as a whole and at once, tota simul. Since each part is adapted to the other (nihil est aptius, says Cicero), since there is 'mutual implication' between the elements, since the same necessity pervades and organizes everything, since the same logic extends from tendency to reason, and since there is not the slightest possible discontinuity, it is true that the point of departure should coincide with the point of arrival: that there is no longer, strictly speaking, consequence, but consonance; that there is no longer succession, but always cohesion. In this system, thought doesn't move forward; it can (and must) only go around in circles, confirming and confirming itself; it can only repeat and imprint itself further. It can only be repeated over and over again, the better to constrain the emotions and convince the mind. This construction of Coincidence is a great monument that will remain unchanged through the ages, for what can be added to it? But it is a tomb for life, through its blocade of life, which never ceases to escape and deconcentrate from itself - in order to stay alive.
For such a coincidence to be possible, there must be something sufficiently circumscribed and delimited 'with which' the coincidence can take place. But isn't it precisely the arbitrariness of any system of coincidence, at least in relation to life, to proceed with this division that determines such a vis-à-vis? And first of all, what is this 'I' that would be subject to coincidence? Stoicism endeavored to 'circumscribe' (perigraphein) this coinciding self, isolating it not only from the others, but also from the past self and the future self, from the involuntary emotions resulting from perceived impressions, and also from the continuous flow of events in which this self is swept along. And all this in order to detach from it a pure, truly 'mine' self, alien to everything that influences it, and which, as a 'hegemonic' principle, would be my inner acropolis. But hasn't this self, which has isolated itself so well in order to set itself up as a pure instance of coincidence, which has emptied itself of everything that would be other, in order to belong to itself in its own right, closed itself off in itself, in its inner self, to the point of no longer being able to interact? As a result, does it still retain enough of the idea of a relationship with the 'other' to actually desire coincidence?
Would such a 'self' allow itself to be forcibly extracted from all the 'circumstances' that affect it, and with what could it coincide? [...]
Rather, the peculiarity of the living world is that nothing in its flux and flare, in its flight, allows itself to be sufficiently separated and determined to serve as a concept for any possible adequacy. [...]
We can pray to God, we can fear him, we can worship him, but in relation to 'nature', even if we deify it, we can only wish to support the internal logic of its dynamism, in other words, to agree with it. To elevate it to the status of a great subject, to set it up as the support, even the only support, of reference, to make it the source of adequacy and even of all possible adequacy, and thus to assimilate it to reason, is the hallmark of classical thought and its foundation. In this sense, Spinoza still belongs to this pre-separation thought. 'Agreeing in nature,' convenire natura, is at the heart of his thought, which, as in Stoicism, is based on a generalized equivalence: God is nature (sive), which is also reason - the strength of ethics, as we shall have to show one day, is that it has been able to distribute so well, under its logical apparatus, and almost conceal this great coercion of wisdom."
(François Jullien, De-coïncidence, Where art and existence come from, 2017)

E1.7.C.3.1.d_REF2_PO.wE1.3.C.1.3.

E1.3.C.1.3_REF4_PH "BEYOND CALMING THOUGHTS: ENLIGHTENING THOUGHTS 'THREE GOOD THINGS' - Greatness, tranquility, and sunlight - these three things encompass everything a thinker can desire and demand of himself: his hopes and duties, his claims to the intellectual and moral realm, I might even say his daily way of life and the orientation of the place where he lives. To these three things correspond first thoughts that elevate, then thoughts that soothe, third thoughts that enlighten - but fourth thoughts that participate in these three qualities, thoughts in which all that is earthly is transfigured: this is the realm in which the great trinity of joy reigns."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, Too Human III, Aphorism 332, 1878)

E1.3.C.1.3_REF5_PO “NOT JUST THOSE WHO ENVY AND HATE US
LIMIT AND OPPRESS US; THOSE WHO LOVE US
Limit us no less.
May the Gods grant me, stripped of all
Affections, the cold freedom of the heights
Of nothingness. Wanting little,
A man has everything. Wanting nothing,
He’s free. Not having and not desiring,
He’s equal, though man, to the Gods.”
(Fernando Pessoa, 1 November 1930)

“OF THE GODS I ASK ONLY TO BE IGNORED.
Without good or bad luck, I’ll be free,
Like the wind that’s the life
Of the air, which is nothing.
Hatred and love both seek us out;
Both oppress us, each in its own way.
Those to whom the gods
Grant nothing are free.”
(Fernando Pessoa, A Little Larger Than the Entire Universe Selected Poems)

E1.3.C.2. A SECULAR READING OF AMOR FATI WOULD NOT INTERPRET IT AS RESIGNATION, BUT RATHER AS AN UNCONDITIONAL ACCEPTANCE OF CHANCE DEVOID OF INTENTION. This perspective is proposed by Friedrich Nietzsche in his analysis of humanity's tragic destiny throughout his work, by Albert Camus in "The Myth of Sisyphus," and by Clément Rosset in "The Logic of the Worst." These ideas stem from a tradition predating the “separation of nature and existence” found in Homer's Iliad—with an added dimension of joy. As Stephen Hawking proposes, a universe arising spontaneously from nothingness, without cause, opens up possibilities for wonder and delight.

E1.3.C.2.1. CLÉMENT ROSSET'S UNCONDITIONAL ASSERTION OF CHANCE. 

E1.3.C.2.1_REF1_PH THERE ARE TWO CONTRADICTORY WAYS OF BEING INDIFFERENT: ONE IS TO EXPECT CHANCE WITH CERTAINTY, SINCE EVERYTHING IS CHANCE; THE OTHER IS TO EXPECT NOTHING, SINCE EVERYTHING IS CHANCE. THE INDIFFERENCE OF CELEBRATION, AS OPPOSED TO THE INDIFFERENCE OF BOREDOM. "Pascal, an advocate but an enemy of chance - that is, in a deeper sense, an advocate of a lost nature that he would like to recover - proposed, according to his own logic, a non-celebratory attitude: to live without taking any "part" or "taste" in life.
But here we must distinguish between two different forms of indifference. In fact, there are two contradictory ways of being indifferent: one is to expect chance with certainty, since everything is chance; the other is to expect nothing, since everything is chance. The indifference of celebration, as opposed to the indifference of boredom. Everything here depends on what we value, what we want to happen: if it's being, the world is monotonous, being never happens; if it's chance, the world is a party, chance always happens. The world of celebration is a world of exceptions; the world of boredom is a monotonous world, whose principle of monotony does not derive from a difference in the representation of the world, but from a reversal of expectations: since nothing is the rule, everything becomes similarly exceptional - a thought whose monotony presupposes a sensitized expectation, not to the constant arrival of novelties, but to the vision, through these differences, of the same lack of rules".
(Clément Rosset, The Logic of the Worst, 1971)

E1.3.C.2.1_REF1.1_PH "JOY IN NONSENSE. How can men take joy in nonsense? They do so, wherever there is laughter-in fact, one can almost say that wherever there is happiness there is joy in nonsense. It gives us pleasure to turn experience into its opposite, to turn purposefulness into purposelessness, necessity into arbitrariness, in such a way that the process does no harm and is performed simply out of high spirits. For it frees us momentarily from the forces of necessity, purposefulness, and experience, in which we usually see our merciless masters. We can laugh and play when the expected (which usually frightens us and makes us tense) is discharged without doing harm. It is the slaves' joy at the Saturnalia"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, All Too Humain, Aphorism 213, 1878)

E1.3.C.2.1_REF2_PH "TRAGIC PHILOSOPHY REGARDS APPROBATION (AND ITS OPPOSITE, SUICIDE) AS THE ONLY ACT WHOSE POSSIBILITY IS LEFT TO THE SUBJECT OF THE ACTION, THE HUMAN BEING - THAT IS, AS THE ONLY FORM OF "ACTION". [...]

Pascal's image takes on its deepest meaning here, because it is the most tragic: man is embarked, in the sense that he is, like a passenger on a long-distance airliner, without possible access to any of the controls. All he can "do" is decide whether or not to be part of the journey, to accept it (which means global approval) or to reject it (which means global disapproval, i.e. suicide). [...]

Most people are content to live without ever taking action, postponing the only form of action recognized by tragic thought. From a tragic perspective, then, only the suicidal and the unconditionally affirmative will have 'acted' in their lives."
(Clément Rosset, The Logic of the Worst, 1971)

E1.3.C.2.1_REF3_PH TRAGIC LAUGHTER IS TAKING PLEASURE IN CHANCE AND CELEBRATING ITS OCCURRENCE. "What makes tragic laughter possible, manifesting a destructive pleasure indifferent to the nature of what is destroyed, is obviously the idea of chance; more precisely, the ability to recognize chance as the anti-principle of all that exists. Only such a recognition makes possible both the vision of an uncompensated disappearance (an emptiness that refers to no fullness) and the pleasure at the spectacle of such a disappearance (which manifests itself precisely in laughter). Tragic laughter, that is, laughter that takes pleasure in chance and celebrates its occurrence through laughter, is therefore completely alien to the universe of meanings, significations, and counter-significations that can be staged [by those who reject chance]: indifference to meaning, but also to nonsense, which is enough to distinguish it profoundly from all other forms of laughter.

Herein lies the great weakness of Stoic and cynical humor, as well as of nonsense humor and Zen humor, as praised by G. Deleuze throughout his Logic of Meaning: that they are conditioned by a demand for order that is considered obvious and necessary in the case of those we are willing to play the joke on. In other words, to be effective only by way of retaliation, they need the interrogation of a third party, an external intervention, to 'show' the substance of their laughter.
(Clément Rosset, The Logic of the Worst, 1971)

E1.3.C.2.1_REF3.1_PH “EXTERMINATING LAUGHTER 
We're going to have to distinguish between two major forms of laughter: one that provides the expected from its laughter; the other that dispenses with it - hence the honest nature of the former, and the scandalous nature of the latter. The former, which finds in irony one of its most common fields of exercise, can be considered as a laugh that “goes a long way”. Long laughter, whose effectiveness is not exhausted by the comic effect, and which extends into the consequences implicitly attached to laughter: the destruction here is compensated for by the a contrario approval of the principles that contributed to the setting up of a comic aggression. Not only did we laugh, but we were right to laugh: in this reason we discover a stable instance that survives the wreckage of what it has just swallowed up. In this way, the ironist, for example, can destroy anything he likes to destroy, but only on condition that he makes clear the ideas in whose name he is acting, the principles on which he bases his executions: he can bring out the grotesque, but in the name of the reasonable; the scandalous, in the name of the tolerable; the nonsensical, in the name of a certain sense. The second kind of laughter, more usually expressed in the form of humor, can be considered, on the other hand, as laughter that runs out of steam: once the comic effect has passed - if, at least, it has succeeded in having an effect - nothing comes to mind that could justify the laughter, offer intellectual consumption any insight into the meaning and scope of the destruction. Short-sighted laughter, therefore, which opens up no perspective, which takes away without giving anything in exchange, and which will often seem frivolous and without scope: from attacking everything indiscriminately, without taking the trouble to organize its attacks into systems that would enable one to spot in them a certain number of themes attacked and, by consequence, a certain number of themes defended, it will often seem, to its contemporaries more particularly focused on this or that target, to be attacking nothing. So it often takes a considerable amount of time to measure its corrosive effectiveness. And yet, with the benefit of hindsight, it appears to be far more deadly than “long laughter”. Only short laughter is, in a way, long-range: in both a chronological and philosophical sense. Chronological: because laughter requires no reference to truths or values that are destined to disappear over time. Philosophical: because it constitutes a more violent assault on any “meaning” than that of long laughter, in that it refuses from the outset any interpretation of the destruction, i.e. any reinvestment of the destroyed meanings in other, less exposed terrain. [...]

What makes tragic laughter possible, manifesting a destructive pleasure indifferent to the nature of what is destroyed, is obviously the idea of chance; more precisely, the ability to recognize chance as the anti-principle of all that exists. Only such a recognition makes possible both the vision of an uncompensated disappearance (an emptiness that refers to no fullness) and the pleasure at the spectacle of such a disappearance (which manifests itself precisely in laughter). Tragic laughter, that is, laughter that takes pleasure in chance and celebrates its occurrence through laughter, is therefore completely alien to the universe of meanings, significations, and counter-significations that can be staged [by those who reject chance]: indifference to meaning, but also to nonsense, which is enough to distinguish it profoundly from all other forms of laughter.

Herein lies the great weakness of Stoic and cynical humor, as well as of nonsense humor and Zen humor, as praised by G. Deleuze throughout his Logic of Meaning: that they are conditioned by a demand for order that is considered obvious and necessary in the case of those we are willing to play the joke on. In other words, to be effective only by way of retaliation, they need the interrogation of a third party, an external intervention, to 'show' the substance of their laughter.

If we never question Diogenes the Cynic or Chrysippus the Stoic, they'll never be able to demonstrate humor. Generally speaking, the weakness of such humor, like that of the laughter described by Kant, stems from the fact that it is a function of an expectation: the role of the third-party questioner, in the case of the Cynics and Stoics, being the symbol of a more fundamental necessity, which is, in the humorist himself, the presence of a prior demand for meaning, indispensable to the appearance of the laughable. Here, the laughable will always be secondary to the initial intuition of a certain laughter, or a certain meaning; moreover, it will have to rely on a certain complicity on the part of others, on the hypothesis of a sensus communis that ultimately joins up with the idea of human 'nature'. The weakness of this laughter can be seen on two levels. In the first place, such laughter is incapable of accessing the thought of chance, and demonstrates in the most obvious way the reasons why it is incapable of doing so: since it declares itself laughing at the thought that order could be a problem, which means that order is that from which only there can be, by way of contrariety, the possibility of the bizarre. In other words, anyone who, when imagining disorder, can only imagine the opposite of order, is admitting that he is, and always will be, unaware of the notions of chance and chaos. Secondly, laughing at the contrarieties of meaning doesn't so much mean ruining meaning as affirming it in extremis and a contrario: as can be seen in many manifestations of Anglo-Saxon nonsense, a model of moral respectability, which often ends up implicitly celebrating an established order, by the very fact that its opposite - nonsense - is deemed hilarious and unthinkable. Hence the remarkable harmlessness of this laughter, which is entertained by nonsense only insofar as it takes nonsense out of the loop, i.e., out of meaning, and ultimately out of seriousness: from the moment it opposes meaning and seriousness, laughter can only provide second-hand disorder, which will moreover often be an alibi.”
(Clément Rosset, Logic of the worse, 1971)

E1.3.C.2.1_REF4_PH AS LONG AS THERE IS NON-TRAGIC HOPE, THERE IS NO HAPPINESS
"HOPE. Pandora brought the jar with the evils and opened it. It was the gods' gift to man, on the outside a beautiful, enticing gift, called the "lucky jar." Then all the evils, those lively, winged beings, flew out of it. Since that time, they roam around and do harm to men by day and night. One single evil had not yet slipped out of the jar. As Zeus had wished, Pandora slammed the top down and it remained inside. So now man has the lucky jar in his house forever and thinks the world of the treasure. It is at his service; he reaches for it when he fancies it. For he does not know that that jar which Pandora brought was the jar of evils, and he takes the remaining evil for the greatest worldly good--it is hope, for Zeus did not want man to throw his life away, no matter how much the other evils might torment him, but rather to go on letting himself be tormented anew. To that end, he gives man hope. In truth, it is the most evil of evils because it prolongs man's torment. [...]"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, All Too Humain, Aphorism 71,  1878)

E1.3.C.2_REF1_PH DESPAIR (WISDOM OF - )
“I TAKE THE WORD IN A DIFFERENT SENSE: TO DESIGNATE THE ABSENCE, AT LEAST MOMENTARY, OF ALL HOPE, IN OTHER WORDS, OF ALL DESIRE FOR WHAT IS NOT, FOR WHAT WE DO NOT KNOW OR FOR WHAT DOES NOT DEPEND ON US. A state of exception, then, but not without examples. Not because we no longer desire anything - we'd be dead - but because we only desire what is, what we know, what we do. Moments of plenitude: when love, knowledge and action are enough! Moments of serenity. 'There is no hope without fear, nor fear without hope', writes Spinoza (Eth., III, 50, scolie, and def. 13 of affects, explanation). Who can hope for health without fearing illness? Who can hope for victory without fearing defeat? But then serenity, which is the absence of fear, is also the absence of hope. It's a Stoic theme before it's a Spinozist one: the wise man, said Seneca, 'ignores hope and fear' (On the constancy of the wise man, 9). We must therefore 'unlearn to hope', as he said, in order to 'learn to want'. Wisdom of action: wisdom in action. Wisdom of reason: wisdom in truth. Is this just an ideal? Of course it is. But at least we can come close. Spinoza again: 'The more we strive to live under the guidance of reason, the more we strive to make ourselves less dependent on hope and free ourselves from fear' (Eth., IV, 47, scolie). Hence what I have called, to press where it hurts, a 'wisdom of despair'. It's the opposite of faith (which desires what is not, or what it doesn't know). It's the opposite of hope (which desires what isn't or doesn't depend on us). That's why it's the opposite of religion. 'The opposite of despairing is believing', wrote Kierkegaard. You can also turn it around: The opposite of believing is despairing. 
This despair should not be confused with nihilism or inaction. It is not hope that makes us act, but will. It's not hope that makes us live, but love. Look at the Stoics or Spinoza, or, in the East, the Buddha, Krishnamurti or Prajnânpad. The wisdom of pure attention, of righteous action, of lucid acceptance of what is - which alone enables us to confront it without hatred, and to transform it if we can.
'No action,' I'm sometimes told, 'without desire and project.' I agree. But where have you seen that all desire is hope? Sexuality proves the contrary. And that planning and hoping are one and the same thing? Politics, when lucid, proves the opposite. We only hope for what doesn't depend on us; we only project what does. Statesmen know this. It's not a question of selling a dream, as demagogues do, but of forging a will. [...]
'But what about us,' you may ask, 'who are not wise men?' For us, hope continues, and so does fear (or fear, and so does hope)... We have to accept it first, and try to free ourselves from it at least a little. This involves a long process of disillusionment, often painful (hope is the first thing you have to lose in order to free yourself from it), sometimes joyful, invigorating, jubilant (what a joy it is to finally see things as they always have to be seen). It's like a never-ending generalized mourning process, which tends towards joy, as we see in Freud, or feeds on it. That's what authorized me to speak of a cheerful despair. Why should believers have a monopoly on joy? Why should we have to hope to rejoice? That there is, if God does not exist, something despairing in the human condition, is a kind of self-evident fact, since we grow old, since we suffer, since we die. But this self-evident fact has never prevented us from enjoying the present, or acting, or being happy. Quite the opposite is true. How many believers have only waited for happiness after death, or found it here below, as Pascal confessed, 'in the hope of another life'? And how many atheists, on the other hand, know how to enjoy life and its pleasures, how many know how to love it joyfully and desperately, not for what it promised, but for what it is? See Nietzsche, Camus, Rosset. Tragic wisdom: the wisdom of happiness and despair. The two can and must go together. We only hope for what we don't have: the hope of happiness separates us from it. Whereas the person who is fully happy, insofar as we are able, has nothing left to hope for, not even that his happiness will continue (if he hopes it will last, he fears that it will cease: his happiness is already behind him). [...]
Whether we are capable of this, I doubt very much. But it does at least point us in the direction of action rather than hope, of love rather than faith - of desire in action rather than expectation. To live desperately, in the sense in which I use the word, is to live in the present (not in the moment, which is impossible), and this is the truth of living. 
Is it anything other than an ideal? Yes, because at times, we do experience it: in sexuality, contemplation, knowledge or action, for example, when we desire only what is, what we know, what we do or what depends on us. Sometimes, it's of such fullness that there's nothing left, indeed, to hope for - because there's only the present, only reality, only truth, only the whole. These are rare experiences, but they're unforgettable. Experiences of eternity, Spinoza would say, of the kind, as Proust said, that render the idea of death indifferent.”
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.3.C.2_REF1.1_PH "HOPE IS A CERTAIN KIND OF DESIRE: A DESIRE FOR SOMETHING WE DO NOT HAVE OR THAT DOES NOT EXIST. To hope is to desire without enjoyment. It is also to desire without knowing if the desire will be satisfied. Finally, it is to desire without power, as the satisfaction of the desire does not depend on us. Hope is therefore opposed to will, rational foresight, and love. Will is a desire whose satisfaction depends on us. Rational foresight is when the future is the subject of knowledge or probability calculations. Love is when we desire what is or what we enjoy. This points the way forward: Do not deny yourself hope. Rather, learn to want, to know, and to love.
Hope mainly focuses on the future because it is the object of desire that is most often beyond our enjoyment, knowledge, and action. The past is better known. The present is more accessible. This does not prevent us from hoping for what was ("I hope I didn't hurt him") or what is ("I hope he's recovered"). All we need is to desire something, for it not to depend on us, and for us to be ignorant of what it is. Temporal orientation is less essential to hope than powerlessness and ignorance; no one hopes for what they know or can do. Hope is a sign of weakness. How can it be a virtue? It is the easiest and weakest desire. [...]
"An inconstant joy, born of the idea of something future or past, the outcome of which we doubt to some extent." According to a famous formula in Ethics, "there is no hope without fear, nor fear without hope" (III, 50, scholium, and def. 13 of the affects, explanation). The same doubt necessary for both means they can only exist together. To hope is to fear disappointment, and to fear is to hope for reassurance. If serenity excludes fear, it also excludes hope. I call this cheerful despair, but Spinoza, wiser than I, calls it wisdom or bliss. This theme is Stoic before it is Spinozist: "You will cease to fear," said Hecaton, "if you have ceased to hope." It is also cynical: "Only he who has neither hope nor fear is free," said Demonax. The wise man hopes for nothing; he has ceased to be afraid. He fears nothing because he has ceased to hope for anything. Because he has no desires? On the contrary, it is because he desires only what is—this is no longer hope, but love—or what he can do—this is no longer hope, but will.
One might say that this wisdom is beyond our reach and that hope will always exist alongside weakness, ignorance, and fear. No doubt. Therefore, as I have often said, it is useless to try to rid oneself of all hope; that would make wisdom a new hope, which would immediately separate us from it. Instead, let us develop our power, freedom, and joy. Let us learn to know, act, and love!"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.3.C.2_REF2_PH EXISTENCE IS INNOCENT: HOW CAN WE BLAME IT? "Heraclitus looked deeply: he saw no punishment for multiplicity, no atonement for becoming, no guilt in existence. He saw nothing negative in becoming, but rather its opposite - the double affirmation of becoming and the being of becoming, in essence the justification of being. [...]
There is no being beyond becoming, no unity beyond multiplicity; neither multiplicity nor becoming are mere appearances or illusions. But neither are there multiple, eternal realities that would in turn serve as essences beyond appearance. The multiple is the inseparable manifestation, the essential metamorphosis, the constant symptom of the unique. Multiplicity affirms unity; becoming affirms being".

E1.3.C.2_REF2.1_PH "EXISTENCE AND INNOCENCE [...]
Heraclitus denied the duality of worlds, "he denied being itself'. Moreover he made an affirmation of becoming. We have to reflect for a long time to understand what it means to make an affirmation of becoming. In the first place it is doubtless to say that there is only becoming. No doubt it is also to affirm becoming. But we also affirm the being of becoming, we say that becoming affirms being or that being is affirmed in becoming. Heraclitus has two thoughts which are like ciphers: according to one there is no being, everything is becoming; according to the other, being is the being of becoming as such. A working thought which affirms becoming and a contemplative thought which affirms the being of becoming. These two ways of thinking are inseparable, they are the thought of a single element, as Fire and Dike, as Physis and Logos. For there is no being beyond becoming, nothing beyond multiplicity; neither multiplicity nor becoming are appearances or illusions. But neither are there multiple or eternal realities which would be, in turn, like essences beyond appearance. Multiplicity is the inseparable manifestation, essential transformation and constant symptom of unity. Multiplicity is the affirmation of unity; becoming is the affirmation of being. The affirmation of becoming is itself being, the affirmation of multiplicity is itself one. Multiple affirmation is the way in which the one affirms itself. "The one is the many, unity is multiplicity." And indeed, how would multiplicity come forth from unity and how would it continue to come forth from it after an eternity of time if unity was not actually affirmed in multiplicity? "If Heraclitus only perceives a single element it is nevertheless, in a sense, diametrically opposed to that of Parmenides (or of Anaximander). . . The unique must be affirmed in generation and destruction." Heraclitus had taken a deep look, he had seen no chastisement of multiplicity, no expiation of becoming, no culpability of existence. He saw no negativity in becoming, he saw precisely the opposite: the double affirmation of becoming and of the being of becoming - in short the justification of being. Heraclitus is obscure because he leads us to the threshold of the obscure: what is the being of becoming? What is the being inseparable from that which is becoming? Return is the being of that which becomes. Return is the being of becoming itself, the being which is affirmed in becoming. The eternal return as law of becoming, as justice and as being."
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche et la philosophie, 1962)

E1.3.C.2_REF2.2_PH THE STRUGGLE OF THE INNUMERABLE IS PURE JUSTICE! AND BESIDES, THE ONE IS THE MULTIPLE. "It follows that existence is not responsible or even blameworthy. Heraclitus went as far as proclaiming "the struggle of the many is pure justice itself! In fact the one is the many!". The correlation of many and one, of becoming and being forms a game. Affirming becoming and affirming the being of becoming are the two moments of a game which are compounded with a third term, the player, the artist or the child. The player-artist-child, Zeus-child: Dionysus, who the myth presents to us surrounded by bis divine toys. The player temporarily abandons himself to life and temporarily fixes his gaze upon it; the artist places himself provisionally in his work and provisionally above it; the child plays, withdraws from the game and returns to it. In this game of becoming, the being of becoming also plays the game with itself; the aeon (time), says Heraclitus, is a child who plays, plays at draughts. The being of becoming, the eternal return, is the second moment of the game, but also the third term, identical to the two moments and valid for the whole. For the eternal return is the distinct return of the outward movement, the distinct contemplation of the action, but also the return of the outward movement itself and the return of the action; at once moment and cycle of time. We must understand the secret of Heraclitus interpretation; he opposes the instinct of the game to hubris; "It is not guilty pride but the ceaselessly reawoken instinct of the game which calls forth new worlds." Not a theodicy but a cosmodicy, not a sum of injustices to be expiated but justice as the law of this world; not hubris but play, innocence. "That dangerous word hubris is indeed the touchstone for every eraclitean. Here he must show whether he has understood or failed to recognise his master""
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche et la philosophie, 1962)

E1.3.C.2_REF3_PH THE JOYFUL AFFIRMATION OF EXISTENCE RECONNECTS WITH THE TIME "BEFORE THE SEPARATION OF NATURE AND EXISTENCE" - WITH JOY ON TOP. "Where are the good guys in the Iliad? Where are the bad guys? We see only men in pain - warriors in battle, triumphing or succumbing. The demands of justice make only a whisper of tears and complaints at the marble knee of necessity. The passion of justice expresses itself only in this mourning of justice, which demands silence. To condemn or absolve violence would be to condemn or absolve life itself. And life in the Iliad (as in the Bible and in War and Peace) is essentially that which does not allow itself to be assessed, measured, condemned or justified by the living. It judges itself only in its awareness of its indescribability. This acceptance without internal stiffening, consubstantial with existence, is far removed from the Stoic parades.
The daughter of bitterness, the philosophy of the Iliad banishes resentment. It precedes the separation of nature and existence. Here the whole is not a collection of pieces broken apart and put back together by reason, but the active principle of the mutual penetration of all its constituent parts. The unfolding of the inevitable takes place simultaneously in the human heart and in the cosmos. The eternal blindness of history is countered by the creative lucidity of the poet, who names for future generations heroes more divine than gods, more human than humans."
(Rachel Bespaloff, On the Iliad, 1943)

E1.3.C.2_REF3.1_CUR MEDITATE AND REFLECT. "This sculpture is part of a corpus of works created following the trauma of the tsunami that struck Japan in 2011. If the Monumental form evokes a waterspout, or a wave similar to the one that swept over the country after the earthquake, it is also reminiscent of a kind of Buddhist memorial sculpture in front of which one might stand to meditate and reflect. For this work, Murakami collaborated with to Graffiti artists Madsaki and Snipe1."
(Fondation Louis Vuitton, Paris, curator´s review, 2018)

E1.3.C.2_REF4_PH FOR NIETZSCHE, TRAGIC = JOYFUL "To believe in the innocence of the future and the past, to believe in the eternal return. What Nietzsche calls his glad tidings is that existence is no longer treated as blameworthy nor does the will feel guilty for existing. "Will, this is what the liberator and the messenger of joy is called". The glad tidings are tragic thought, for tragedy is not found in the recriminations of ressentiment, the conflicts of bad conscience or the contradictions of a will which feels guilty and responsible. The tragic does not even fight against ressentiment, bad conscience or nihilism. According to Nietzsche it has never been understood that the tragic = the joyful. This is another way of putting the great equation: to will = to create. We have not understood that the tragic is pure and multiple positivity, dynamic gaeity. Affirmation is tragic because it affirms chance and the necessity of chance; because it affirms multiplicity and the unity of multiplicity. The dicethrow is tragic. All the rest is nihilism, Christian and dialectic pathos, caricature of the tragic, comedy of bad conscience."
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophie, 1962)

E1.3.C.2_REF4.1_PH REPLACE ALL VALUE JUDGMENTS BY A SINGLE YES "From the moment one admits that the world pursues no end, Nietzsche proposes to welcome its innocence, to affirm that it escapes all judgment since it cannot be judged to possess any intention, and to replace all value judgments by a single yes, a full and exalted adhesion to this world. Thus, from absolute despair will spring infinite joy, from blind servitude, merciless freedom. To be free is precisely to abolish the ends. As soon as one consents to it, the innocence of becoming represents the maximum of freedom. The free spirit loves what is necessary. Nietzsche's deepest thought is that the necessity of phenomena, since it is absolute, without cracks, does not imply any kind of constraint. Total adherence to absolute necessity is his paradoxical definition of freedom. The question "free from what?" is then replaced by "free for what?". Freedom coincides with heroism. It is the asceticism of the Great Man, "the most taut bow that exists."
(Albert Camus, The Rebel)

E1.3.C.2_REF4.2_PH "AMONG ALL IMAGES, SUNRISE GIVES AN INSTANTANEOUS LESSON. IT DEFINES A LYRICISM OF IMMEDIATENESS. To Nietzsche, it does not suggest a panorama, but an action. Foe him, it is not of the order of contemplation, it is of the order of decision. The Nietzschean sunrise is the act of an irrevocable decision. It is nothing other than the eternal return of strength, it is the myth of the eternal return, translated from the passive to the active. And the doctrine of the eternal return will be better understood if it is included in the account of the awakenings of the will to power. Who knows how to rise like a sun, in a single shoot, knows how to launch his being in a destiny each day reassumed, each day reconquered by a renewed amor fati. In his agreement with the cosmic forces of return, it seems that the Nietzschean dreamer can say to the night: "I will make the sun rise. I am the night watchman who will proclaim the hour of awakening, the night is but a long wait for awakening." From then on, the consciousness of the eternal return is a consciousness of the projected will. It is our being which finds itself, which returns to the same consciousness, to the same certainty of being a will, it is our being which projects the world again. One understands the Nietzschean universe poorly if one does not put in the first place dynamic imagination, if one conceives the universe as an immense mill which turns endlessly by crushing the same wheat. Such a universe is dead, it is annihilated by fate. A Nietzschean cosmos lives in moments nurtured by an impulse that areis always young. It is a story of rising suns."
(Gaston Bachelard, Air and Dreams - Essay on the Imagination of Movement, 1943)

E1.3.C.2_REF4.3_CUR TRAGIC ILLUSION
In this installation by Robert Barry, seemingly unrelated words are formed into large letters on the floor. Although there is no articulated message, viewers are compeled to construct a meaning, if only by associating words that are in close proximity. “TRAGIC” and “ILLUSION” are juxtaposed: isn't the tragic an illusion masking reality? This reality, though tragic, becomes a wellspring of joy. As Deleuze, drawing on Nietzsche, helps us understand: the tragic equals the joyful.

E1.3.C.2 _REF4.4_PH WE REALLY DO BECOME, FOR BRIEF INSTANTS, THE ORIGINAL BEING ITSELF AND WE EXPERIENCE ITS INSATIABLE THIRST FOR EXISTENCE "To counter the despair that has driven science and religion, Nietzsche proposes the tragic—the most sublime expression of music—which partakes in the profound being [...] Tragic philosophy offers an essential consolation: "We really become, for brief moments, the original being itself, and experience its insatiable thirst for existence." Recognizing the countless forms of existence leads us to accept as necessary "the struggle, agony, and destruction of phenomena." We experience not only terror and pity, as interpreters of Aristotelian catharsis have noted, but also, more importantly, the joy of living through participation in the "living unity" (Kroner I, p. 117).".
(Angèle Kremer-Marietti, Introduction to Nietzsche's The Birth of Tragedy, 1994)

E1.3.C.2_REF4.4.a_PH IT IS ONE OF NIETZSCHE'S THESES THAT "MAN WANTS TO KNOW OUT OF FEAR IF HE IS PREY, OR OUT OF WILL TO POWER, IF HE IS AT THE TOP OF THE FOOD CHAIN - EITHER WAY, HE CANNOT STAND DOUBT. In "The Gay Science", Nietzsche speaks of the "dangerous perhaps" which constitute the engine of philosophical research. Precisely because uncertainty or the lack of answers drive the human animal mad, this ignorance must be remedied. What Nietzsche says is that knowledge is a consequence of this mental system of protection: the first motor of knowledge is fear (of not knowing, of the next day ...). The second motor is the will to master reality. To know is to tame reality in such a way that our relationship with the world becomes viable. This viability demands falsifications that make our view of the world overly utilitarian; this also applies to logic and to science. Damien Hirst, seems to echo this idea in the sculpture "Remnants of Apollo". From Apollo (who, for Nietzsche, represents  the one who "disguises" reality so that it is acceptable - unlike Dionysus who embraces it as it is), there is only one of his foot left, on which crawls a disturbing incarnation of science - a wrinkled, albino lab mouse growing a human ear on its back to be transplanted on a human later. There it wanders, squeaking among the ruins of an era (or a civilization?).

E1.3.C.2_REF4.4.b_SCI A 3D EAR GRAFTED ON A MOUSE

“In a stunning example of reality surpassing science fiction, American researchers have achieved a major breakthrough in regenerative medicine. By successfully implanting a 3D-printed ear on a mouse, they've taken a significant step towards developing laboratory-grown organs for transplantation. This groundbreaking experiment not only demonstrated the feasibility of implanting 3D-printed organs but also proved their viability. Remarkably, after just two months, the plastic component of the ear had completely disappeared, replaced by living cartilage.

The artificial ear was created using a special ink with two key ingredients: a biodegradable, body-safe plastic that provided the desired shape, and a gel containing living cells. This innovative approach resulted in an ear that closely resembled a human one in structure while being composed of living cells. The combination of these elements is what makes this ear truly unique.

The real test came when the ear was transplanted under a mouse's skin. The results were nothing short of miraculous. Not only did the graft take, but within two months, the plastic scaffold had completely disappeared, replaced by living cartilage. The 3D-printed ear essentially became a real, functioning organ, complete with blood vessels nourishing it. This remarkable achievement extends beyond ears—the researchers also successfully replicated this experiment with 3D-printed bones and muscles, marking a significant leap forward in regenerative medicine.”
(Mélanie Gomez, Europe 1, 02/18/2016)

E1.3.C.2_REF4.5_PH LIFE IS DEVALUED IN THE NAME OF FICTITIOUS HIGHER VALUES (SUCH AS GOD OR THE GOOD) THAT DENY AND ANNIHILATE LIFE. We then react against these higher values by denying their validity, leading to the devaluation of these values themselves. This leads to a vision of life without values or purpose, where everything is mere appearance and life continues to be devalued.
"NIHILISM
In the word nihilism nihil does not signify non-being but primarily a value of nil. Life takes on a value of nil insofar as it is denied and depreciated. Depreciation always presupposes a fiction: it is by means of fiction that one falsifies and depreciates, it is by means of fiction that something is opposed to life. The whole of life then becomes unreal, it is represented as appearance, it takes on a value of nil in its entirety. The idea of another world, of a supersensible world in all its forms (God, essence, the good, truth), the idea of values superior to life, is not one example among many but the constitutive element of all fiction. Values superior to life are inseparable from their effect: the depreciation of life, the negation of this world. And if they are inseparable from this effect it is because their principle is a will to deny, to depreciate. We must be careful not to think that higher values form a threshold where the will stops, as if, confronted by the divine, we were released from the constraint of willing. It is not the will that denies itself in higher values, it is higher values that are related to a will to deny, to annihilate life. "Nothingness of the will": this Schopenhauerian concept is only a symptom; it means primarily a will to annihilation, a will to nothingness . . . "but it is and remains a will". Nihil in "nihilism" means negation as quality of the will to power. Thus, in its primary and basic sense, nihilism signifies the value of nil taken on by life, the fiction of higher values which give it this value and the will to nothingness which is expressed in these higher values.

Nihilism has a second, more colloquial sense. It no longer signifies a will but rather a reaction. The supersensible world and higher values are reacted against, their existence is denied, they are refused all validity - this is no longer the devaluation of life in the name of higher values but rather the devaluation of higher values themselves. Devaluation no longer signifies life taking on the value of nil, the null value, but the nullity of values, of higher values. The sensational news spreads: there is nothing to be seen behind the curtain, "The characteristics which have been assigned to the 'real being' of things are the characteristics of non-being, of nothingness". Thus the nihilist denies God, the good and even truth — all the forms of the supersensible.  Nothing is true, nothing is good, God is dead. The nothingness of the will is no longer merely the symptom of a will to nothingness, but ultimately a negation of all will, a taedium vitae. There is no longer any human or earthly will. "Here is snow; here life has grown silent; the last crows whose cries are audible here are called 'wherefore?', 'in vain!', nada - here nothing will grow or prosper any longer". This second sense would be familiar but no less incomprehensible if we did not see how it derives from and presupposes the first. Previously life was depreciated from the height of higher values, it was denied in the name of these values. Here, on the contrary, only life remains, but it is still a depreciated life which now continues in a world without values, stripped of meaning and purpose, sliding ever further towards its nothingness. Previously essence was opposed to appearance, life was turned into an appearance. Now essence is denied but appearance is retained: everything is merely appearance, life which is left to us remains for itself an appearance. The first sense of nihilism found its principle in the will to deny as will to power. The second sense, "the pessimism of weakness", finds its principle in the reactive life completely solitary and naked, in reactive forces reduced to themselves. The first sense is a negative nihilism; the second sense a reactive nihilism."
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophy, 1962)

E1.3.C.2_REF4.5.a_PH PITY IS A PRACTICE OF NIHILISM IN THAT IT IS ASSOCIATED WITH REACTIVE FORCES THAT DEVALUE LIFE, CULMINATING IN A STATE WHERE LIFE BECOMES SELF-SUFFICIENT BUT DEVOID OF HIGHER ASPIRATIONS OR VALUES.
"ANALYSIS OF PITY

— What is pity? It is this tolerance for states of life close to zero. Pity is the love of life, but of the weak, sick, reactive life. It is militant and announces the final victory of the poor, the suffering, the powerless and the small. It is divine and gives them this victory. Who feels pity? Precisely those who can only tolerate life when it is reactive, those who need this life and this triumph, those who build their temples on the marshy ground of such a life. Those who hate everything which is active in life, those who use life to deny and depreciate life, to oppose it to itself. Pity, in Nietzsche's symbolism, always designates this complex of will to nothingness and reactive forces, this affinity or tolerance of one for the other. "Pity is practical nihilism. . . pity persuades to nothingnessl . . .One does not say 'nothingness": one says 'the Beyond'; or 'God'; or 'true life'; or Nirvana, redemption, blessedness . . . This innocent rhetoric from the domain of religio-moral idiosyncracy at once appears much less innocent when one grasps which tendency is here draping the mantle of sublime words about itself: the tendency hostile to life". Pity for the reactive life in the name of higher values, God's pity for the reactive man: we can guess what kind of will is hidden in this way of loving life, in this God of mercy, in these higher values.

God suffocates from pity: it is as if the reactive life had blocked up his throat. The reactive man puts God to death because he can no longer bear there being a witness, he wants to be alone with his triumph and his strength. He puts himself in God's place: he no longer knows any values which are superior to life, but only a reactive life that is satisfied with itself and claims to secrete its own values. The weapons which God gave him, ressentiment, even bad conscience – all the forms of his triumph - are turned against and opposed to God. Ressentiment becomes atheistic, but this atheism is still ressentiment, always ressentiment, always bad conscience. God's murderer is the reactive man, "the ugliest man", "rumbling with bile and full of secret shame". He reacts against God's pity, "There is also good taste in pity: that said at last: Away with such a god. Better no god, better to produce destiny on one's own account, better to be a fool, better to be God oneself!". - How far will he go along this road? As far as the great disgust. It is better to have no values at all than higher values, it is better to have no will at all, better to have a nothingness of will than a will to nothingness. It is better to fade away passively. It is the prophet, "prophet of great weariness", who announces the consequences of the death of God: the reactive life left alone with itself, no longer even having the will to disappear, dreaming of a passive extinction. "Everything is empty, everything is past! . . . All our wells have dried up, even the sea has receded. The earth wants to break open, but the depths will not devour us! Alas, where is there still a sea in which one could drown . . . Truly we have grown too weary even to die." The last man is the descendant of God's murderer: it is better to have no will at all, better to have a single herd. "Nobody grows rich or poor any more: both are too much of a burden. Who still wants to rule? Who still wants to obey? Both are too much of a burden. No herdsman and one herd. Everyone wants the same thing, everyone is the same . . ."

Told in this way the story still leads to the same conclusion: negative nihilism is replaced by reactive nihilism, reactive nihilism ends in passive nihilism. From God to God's murderer, from God's murderer to the last man. But this outcome is known to the prophet. There are many avatars, many variations on the nihilist theme, before we reach this point. The reactive life strives for a long time to secrete its own values, the reactive man takes the place of God: adaptation, evolution, progress, happiness for all and the good of the community; the God-man, the moral man, the truthful man and the social man. These are the new values that are recommended in place of higher values, these are the new characters proposed in place of God. The last men
still say: "We have invented happiness" […]

Values can change, be renewed or even disappear. What does not change and does not disappear is the nihilistic perspective which governs this history from beginning to end and from which all these values (as well as their absence) arise. This is why Nietzsche can think that nihilism is not an event in history but the motor of the history of man as universal history. Negative, reactive and passive nihilism: for Nietzsche one and the same history is marked out by Judaism, Christianity, the reformation, free thought, democratic and socialist ideology etc. Up until the last man."
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophy, 1962)

E1.5.B.5.5.d.wE1.3.C.2_REF4.5_PH

E1.3.C.2_REF4.5.b_PH LAUGHTER, PLAY, AND DANCE ARE FORMS OF AFFIRMATION, TRANSFORMING PAIN INTO JOY AND NEGATION INTO AFFIRMATION. This transformation leads to a change in the quality of values, promoting active forces over reactive ones.
"IS MAN ESSENTIALLY "REACTIVE"? […]
The higher man remains within the abstract element of activity, he never raises himself, even in thought, to the element of affirmation. The higher man claims to reverse values, to convert reaction into action. Zarathustra speaks of something else: transmuting values, converting negation into affirmation. But reaction will never become action without this deeper conversion: negation must first become a power of affirming. Separated from the conditions which would make it viable, the enterprise of the higher man is abortive, not accidentally but in principle and essence. Instead of forming a becoming-active it nourishes the opposite becoming, becoming-reactive. Instead of reversing values, values are changed, made to exchange places while retaining the nihilistic perspective from which they derive. Instead of training forces and making them active they organize associations of reactive forces. Conversely the conditions which would make the enterprise of higher man viable are conditions which would change its nature: Dionysian affirmation rather than man's species activity. The element of affirmation is the superhuman element. The element of affirmation is what man lacks - even and above all the higher man. Nietzsche expresses this lack symbolically as the deficiency at the heart of man in four ways: 1) There are things that the higher man does not know how to do: to laugh, to play and to dance. To laugh is to affirm life, even the suffering in life. To play is to affirm chance and the necessity of chance. To dance is to affirm becoming and the being of becoming. [...]

10) AFFIRMATION AND NEGATION
"Transmutation or transvaluation means: 
1) Change of quality in the will to power. Values and their value no longer derive from the negative, but from affirmation as such. In place of a depreciated life we have life which is affirmed - and the expression "in place of' is still incorrect. It is the place itself which changes, there is no longer any place for another world. The element of values changes place and nature, the value of values changes its principle and the whole of evaluation changes character. […]

4) Reign of affirmation in the will to power. Only affirmation subsists as an independent power; the negative shoots out from it like lightning, but also becomes absorbed into it, disappearing into it like a soluble fire. In the man who wants to perish the negative announces the superhuman, but only affirmation produces what the negative announces. There is no other power but affirmation, no other quality, no other element: the whole of negation is converted in its substance, transmuted in its quality, nothing remains of its own power or autonomy. This is the conversion of heavy into light, of low into high, of pain into joy. This trinity of dance, play and laughter creates the transubstantiation of nothingness, the transmutation of the negative and the transvaluation or change of power of negation. What Zarathustra calls "the Communion".
5) Critique of known values. The values known up to the present lose all their value. Negation reappears here but always in the form of a power of affirming, as the inseparable consequence of affirmation and transmutation. Sovereign affirmation is inseparable from the destruction of all known values, it turns this destruction into a total destruction.
6) Reversal of the relation of forces. Affirmation constitutes becoming active as the universal becoming of forces. Reactive forces are denied, all forces become active. The reversal of values and the establishment of active values are all operations which presuppose the transmutation of values, the conversion of the negative into affirmation.

We are now perhaps in a position to understand Nietzsche's texts concerning affirmation, negation and their relations. In the first place, negation and affirmation are opposed as two qualities of the will to power, two ratios of the will to power. They are both opposites, but also wholes which exclude their opposite. We can say that negation has dominated our thought, our ways of feeling and evaluating, up to the present day. In truth, it's part of being human. And with man, it's the whole world that sinks and becomes sick, it's the whole of life that is devalued, the whole of the known that slides into its own nothingness. Conversely, affirmation manifests itself only above humanity, outside humanity, in the superhuman that it produces, in the unknown that it brings with it. But the superhuman, the unknown, is also the whole that drives out the negative. The superhuman as a species is also "the superior species of all that is." Zarathustra says yes and amen "in an enormous and unlimited way"; he himself is "the eternal affirmation of all things. "I bless and affirm always, provided you are around me, clear sky, abyss of light! I carry my blessing affirmation into all abysses". As long as the negative reigns, we would look in vain for the grain of affirmation here below and in the other world: what we call affirmation is grotesque, a sad ghost stirring the chains of the negative. But when transmutation occurs, it is the negation that dissolves, nothing remains of it as an independent force, in quality or in reason: "Supreme constellation of Being, which no desire reaches, which no negation tarnishes, eternal affirmation of Being, eternally I am your affirmation." [...]"
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche et la philosophie, 1962)

E1.3.C.2_REF4.5.c_PH A « LARK MIRROR » IS A SMALL MIRROR USED TO ATTRACT AND TRAP SMALL BIRDS ATTRACTED TO SHINY THINGS. The expression « lark mirror » is used to refer metaphorically to an apparently attractive offer that is really just trying to attract gullible people.
"The question is: how do reactive forces triumph? That is, when do they prevail over active forces, do the reactive forces become dominant in their turn, aggressive and subjugating, do they all together form a greater force which would be active in its turn? Nietzsche answers: reactive forces, even when they unite, do not form a greater force that would be active. They proceed quite differently: they decompose; they separate the active force from what it can; they subtract from the active force a part or almost all of its power; and by this they do not become active, but on the contrary make the active force join them, become itself reactive in a new sense. [...]
This separation is based on a fiction, on a mystification or falsification. It is the will of nothingness that develops the negative and reversed image, that  effectuates the subtraction. [...]
The active force is separated from what it can by a fiction, but it does not become any less reactive all the same, it is even by this means that it becomes really reactive. Hence Nietzsche's use of the words « vile », « corrupt », « slave »: these words designate the state of reactive forces that put themselves on top, that draw the active force into a trap, replacing the masters by slaves who do not cease to be slaves."
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophy, 1962)

E1.3.C.2_REF4.5.d_PH "WHEN REACTIVE FORCES ARE NO LONGER ACTED UPON, THEY PROJECT AN INVERTED IMAGE — what Nietzsche calls a fiction: the fiction of a supra-sensible world opposed to this one, the fiction of a God contradicting life. Nietzsche distinguishes this fiction from the active power of dreams and from the positive image of gods that affirm and glorify life: « While the world of dreams reflects reality, the world of fiction only distorts, depreciates, and denies it. » This fiction governs the entire evolution of resentment, operating by separating the active force from its potential (falsification), accusing and treating it as guilty (depreciation), and overturning the corresponding values (negation). Through this fiction, reactive forces portray themselves as superior. « To be able to say no to everything that represents life's upward movement—to everything noble, powerful, beautiful, self-affirming on earth—the instinct of resentment, having become genius, had to invent another world, from which this affirmation of life appeared as evil, a reprehensible thing in itself. »"
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and philosophy, 1962)

E1.3.C.2_REF4.5.e_PH "WE DO NOT REALLY KNOW WHAT A MAN DENUDED OF RESSENTIMENT WOULD BE LIKE. A man who would not accuse or depreciate existence - would he still be a man, would he think like a man? Would he not already be something other than a man, almost the Overman? To have ressentiment or not to have ressentiment - there is no greater difference, beyond psychology, beyond history, beyond metaphysics. It is the true difference or transcendental typology - the genealogical and hierarchical difference.
Nietzsche presents the aim of his philosophy as the freeing of thought from nihilism and its various forms. Now, this implies a new way of thinking, an overthrow of the principle on which thought depends, a straightening out of the genealogical principle itself, a "transmutation".
 "
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche et la philosophie, 1962)

E1.3.C.2_REF4.5.f_PH “UNSPOKEN EXPECTATIONS ARE PREMEDITATED RESENTMENTS.”
(Neil Strauss)

E1.3.C.2_REF5_PH BEWARE: TO SAY YES TO NIHLILISM IS A CARICURE OF AFFIRMATION
"Nietzsche's thesis can be summarized as follows: the yes that does not know how to say no (the donkey's yes) is a caricature of affirmation. Precisely because it says yes to everything that is no - because it supports nihilism - it remains at the service of the power to deny and to the demon whose burdens it carries. The Dionysian yes, on the contrary, is the one who knows how to say no: it is pure affirmation, it has defeated nihilism and deprived negation of any autonomous power, this because it has put the negative at the service of the powers of affirmation. To affirm is to create, not to bear, to draw on, to assume. The donkey entertains a ridiculous thought: « To think and to take a thing seriously, to assume its weight, it is all the same thing for them, they have no other experience. » [...]
To affirm is not to take on a burden, to bear what is, but to free, to liberate what lives. To affirm is to lighten: not to burden life with the weight of superior values, but to create new values that are those of life, that make life light and active. Strictly speaking, there is creation only to the extent that, far from separating life from what it can, we use the surplus to invent new forms of life. « And what you have called the world, you must begin by creating it: your reason, your imagination, your will, your love must become this world. »"
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophy, 1962)

E1.3.C.2_REF5.1_PH TRUE AFFIRMATION, IN NIETZSCHE'S PHILOSOPHY, ISN'T ABOUT MERELY ACCEPTING OR ENDURING WHAT EXISTS. RATHER, IT'S ABOUT CREATING AND LIBERATING LIFE. THIS CONCEPT FOCUSES ON FORGING NEW VALUES THAT ENRICH AND UPLIFT LIFE INSTEAD OF WEIGHING IT DOWN.
"THE SENSE OF AFFIRMATION  [...]

But the real and its acceptance remain what they are, false positivity and false affirmation. Faced with "the men of the present" Zarathustra says: "the unfamiliar things of the future and whatever frightened stray birds, are truly more familiar and more genial than your 'reality'. For thus you speak: 'We are complete realists and without belief or superstition': thus you thump your chests - alas, even without having chests! But how should you be able to believe, you motley-spotted men! - you who are paintings of all that has ever been believed! . . . Unworthy of belief: that is what / call you, you realists! . . You are unfruitful . . . You are half-open doors at which grave-diggers wait. [...]

Nietzsche wants to say three things:
1) Being, the true and the real are the avatars of nihilism. Ways of mutilating life, of denying it, of making it reactive by submitting it to the labour of the negative, by loading it with the heaviest burdens. Nietzsche has no more belief in the self-sufficiency of the real than he has in that of the true: he thinks of them as the manifestations of a will, a will to depreciate life, to oppose life to life.
2) Affirmation conceived of as acceptance, as affirmation of that which is, as truthfulness of the true or positivity of the real, is a false affirmation. It is the yes of the ass. The ass does not know how to say no because he says yes to everything which is no. The ass or the camel is the opposite of the lion; in the lion negation becomes a power of affirming, but in them affirmation remains at the service of the negative, a simple power of denying.
3) This false conception of affirmation is still a way of preserving man. As long as being is a burden the reactive man is there to carry it. Where could being be better affirmed than in the desert? And where could man be better preserved. "The last man lives the longest." Beneath the sun of being he loses even the taste for dying, disappearing into the desert to dream at length of a passive extinction. - Nietzsche's whole philosophy is opposed to the postulates of being, of man and of acceptance. "Being: we have no other representation of it than the fact of living. How could that which is dead have being?". The world is neither true nor real but living. And the living world is will to power, will to falsehood, which is actualised in many different powers. To actualise the will to falsehood under any power whatever, to actualise the will to power under any quality whatever, is always to evaluate. To live is to evaluate. There is no truth of the world as it is thought, no reality of the sensible world, all is evaluation, even and above all the sensible and the real. "The will to appearance, to illusion, to deception, to becoming and change (to objectified deception) here counts as more profound, primeval, 'metaphysical', than
the will to truth, to reality, to mere appearance: - the last is itself merely a form of the will to illusion". Being, truth and reality are themselves only valid as evaluations, that is to say as lies. But, in this capacity, as means of actualising the will through one of its powers, they have, up to now served the power or quality of the negative. Being, truth and reality itself are like the divine in which life is opposed to life. The ruler is then negation as quality of the will to power which, opposing life to life, denies the whole of it and makes it triumph as reactive in particular. By contrast, the other quality of the will to power is a power through which willing is adequate to the whole of life, a higher power of the false, a quality through which the whole of life and its particularity is affirmed and has become active. To affirm is still to evaluate, but to evaluate from the perspective of a will which enjoys its own difference in life instead of suffering the pains of the opposition to
this life that it has itself inspired. To affirm is not to take responsibility for, to take on the burden of what is, but to release, to set free what lives. To affirm is to unburden: not to load life with the weight of higher values, but to create new values which are those of life, which make life light and active. There is creation, properly speaking, only insofar as we make use of excess in order to invent new forms of life rather than separating life from what it can do. "And you yourselves should create what you have hitherto called the World: the World should be formed in your image by your reason, your will and your love!". But this task is not completed in man. Going as far as he can man raises negation to a power of affirming. But
affirming in its full power, affirming affirmation itself — this is beyond man's strength. "To create new values - even the lion is incapable of that: but to create itself freedom for new creation - that the lion can do". The sense of affirmation
can only emerge if these three fundamental points in Nietzsche's philosophy are borne in mind: not the true nor the real but evaluation; not affirmation as acceptance but as creation; not man but the Overman as a new form of life. Nietzsche attaches so much importance to art because art realises the whole of this programme: the highest power of the false, Dionysian affirmation or the genius of the superhuman.

Nietzsche's argument can be summarised as follows: the yes which does not know how to say no (the yes of the ass) is a caricature of affirmation. This is precisely because it says yes to everything which is no, because it puts up with nihilism it continues to serve the power of denying - which is like a demon whose every burden it carries. The Dionysian yes, on the contrary, knows how to say no: it is pure affirmation, it has conquered nihilism and divested negation of all autonomous power. But it has done this because it has placed the negative at the service of the powers of affirming. To affirm is to create, not to bear, put up with or accept. A ridiculous image of thought is formed in the head of the ass. " 'Thinking' and 'taking
something seriously', giving it 'weighty consideration' - to them these things go together: that is the only way they have 'experienced' it"
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophy, 1962)

E1.3.C.2_REF6_MU MUSICAL ILLUSTRATION: Francis Poulenc - Concert Champêtre for harpsichord and orchestra

Watch it on YouTube: https://youtu.be/QmSQBYLx0vo?feature=shared

E1.3.C.2_REF6.1_MU MUSICAL ILLUSTRATION: Francis Poulenc, Konzert für zwei Klaviere, hr-Sinfonieorchester, Lucas & Arthur Jussen, Alain Altinoglu

Watch it on YouTube: https://youtu.be/Q9iaollYj2U?feature=shared

E1.3.C.2_REF7_PH THE LEGEND OF THE GREEN KNIGHT: BLISS COMES WHEN YOU PUT ASIDE PASSING MOMENTS WITH THEIR TERRORS AND TEMPTATIONS. One should not fear death but have the courage to live—the hero embraced an opportunity that threw him into an adventure beyond the course of his history until he met the Green Knight. He follows his heart and deals with the consequences: affirming life in all its dimensions.
(Joseph Campbell, The Power Of Myth, Episode 5, Sacrifice and Bliss - 39' - 40')

E1.3.C.2_REF8_PH "IL FAUT QUE LE HASARD SOIT ARTISTE pour avoir fait qu’étreinte soit anagramme d’éternité."
(Jacques Darriulat, Aphorismes, 2021)

E1.3.C.2_REF8.1_PH “THE WONDER OF WONDERS: that there is something and not rather nothing. And the wonder of this wonder of wonders: that there is, lodged in the wonder of wonders, a living being to think that there is a wonder of wonders."
(Jacques Darriulat, Aphorisms, 2021)

E1.3.C.3. "GOD'S LOVE IS PURE WHEN JOY AND SUFFERING INSPIRE EQUAL GRATITUDE.

[...] The only organ of contact with existence is acceptance, love. That is why beauty and reality are identical. That is why joy and the sense of reality are identical."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.3.D. ARE WE HUMANLY CAPABLE OF THIS?
Is it possible to fully embrace reality without yearning for something more? Are we truly capable of such acceptance?

E1.3.D.1. IS EXTRA-LUCIDITY COMPATIBLE WITH HAPPINESS? DOESN'T REALITY SYSTEMATICALLY CRUSH US?

E1.3.D.1.1. "IS THERE A POSSIBLE ALLIANCE BETWEEN LUCIDITY AND JOY?" It's certain that such an alliance exists, as evidenced by the joy that combines unshakeable cheerfulness with an ever-present sense of life's utter futility. Examples abound: Nietzsche's "gai savoir," Spanish humor, and Mozartian gladness, to name a few. Yet paradoxically, this union of joy and lucidity defies reason, rendering it theoretically impossible. As Cioran aptly notes, "to exist is equivalent to a protest against the truth." This verdict is sound—existence is, indeed, indefensible. Consequently, any sensible argument in its favor inevitably devolves into nonsense, as illustrated by this medieval adage from Martinus von Biberach:

"I come from I know not where,
I am I know not who,
I die I know not when,
I go I know not where,
I'm surprised to be so cheerful."
(I marvel at being so joyful.)

(Clément Rosset, The Major Force, 1983)

E1.3.D.1.2. THE WAKE OF JOY, EVEN IF IT IS NOT JOY, REMAINS A SURE BULWARK AGAINST RESENTMENT AND LOW SELF-ESTEEM.
"The brave person knows the value and despair of transience. Yet, they refuse to build resentment upon it. Instead, they are determined to avoid resentment. This is indeed a struggle, as resentment seems the most rational response to life's shortcomings in relation to reason. It would be logical for reason to foster bitterness from life's disappointments and inadequacies. However, the courageous individual—who in this sense has access to the unspeakable—maintains an inner sense and will for joy. No one knows if they'll truly experience it; claiming so would be utopian and fanciful. But at least they will have stood in its wake. And even if the wake of joy is not joy itself, it remains a sure bulwark against resentment and low self-esteem.
The brave thus align with Bergsonian optimism. This optimism might appear provocative or intellectually lacking. Yet, it's rather a sign of determination to act. While joy isn't certain, the resolve for joy is within reach of courageous people. This resolve isn't futile—it prevents barbarism. There's no ethics of despair, and Bergson recognizes the importance of belonging to 'those whose desires are on earth.' Rootedness in personal existence is the surest path to eternity and the feeling that finitude won't have the last word, at least symbolically."
(Cynthia Fleury, The End of Courage, 2010)

E1.3.D.1.2_REF1_PH JOY IS NOT IDENTIFIED WITH GRACE, BUT WITH THE STATE OF GRACE, THAT VOLUNTARY STATE WHICH TESTIFIES TO THE WILLINGNESS OF THE BRAVE TO REJOICE AND TO THEIR FIERCE ACTIVITY. "The man of duration [...] finds his joy on the spot, in the very immanence and exciting present of his historical here and now. Bergson "recovers all lost time. And so does the courageous. "To become is not to die slowly or to languish [...] but to realize oneself infinitely". Bergson's optimism may seem blissful and ineffectual. 
But [those who have the courage to say everything] are not naive. On the contrary, they are the most clear-sighted. To bet on optimism is, above all, to refuse to bet on fantasy. Refusing to bet on the escape from reality as the source of happiness. To bet on optimism is to take responsibility for our destiny. The moral maxim is therefore simple: "There is no need to be tragic, just be serious. The impact of melancholy, its grandiosity, its undeniable accuracy and intelligence do not protect it from its ineffectiveness. What's the point of so much panache if it fails? Melancholy is a demonic adversary that knows how to bring you down by making you its servant. Who hasn't thought that being melancholy makes you smarter than everyone else? Who hasn't thought that this is the very side of intelligence, the price to pay? Courage maintains that there are other epistemologies. "There is therefore no place in Bergsonism for complexes of failure, impasse, or disappointment, nor for the convicts of Schopenhauerian nonsense [...]. The knights of the absurd will find no ally in Bergson. The symptom of these triumphs is joy. In this sense, Bergson's ethics is a philosophy of joy, insofar as joy is identified not with grace, but with the state of grace, that voluntary state that testifies to the willingness of the brave to rejoice and to their fierce activity. The epistemology of courage is not a pathos of abandonment, but an open metaphysics that defines in the courageous moment an access to eternity and meaning. If the Bergsonian ethic of joy is an epistemology of courage, it's because it knows that "man is in forced residence in becoming," that he is "the forced laborer of temporality."
(Cynthia Fleury, The End of Courage, 2010)

E1.3.D.1.2_REF2_CUR “URS FISCHER'S WORK OFTEN EXPLORES THE THEME OF DECOMPOSITION, highlighting the fragility of existence. In "With You" (2007), Fischer takes this concept to its extreme by destroying the floor of Gavin Brown's Enterprise gallery. He excavates a pit nearly 2.5 meters deep, creating a monumental void. This isn't a homage to artists like Gordon Matta-Clark, Michael Heizer, or Walter De Maria. Instead, it's a continuation of Fischer's artistic vision—a cathartic sculpture that's both exuberant and somber. The work embraces absurdity as an unavoidable aspect of reality, finding delight in this acceptance.”
(Caroline Cros, What is sculture today, 2008)

E1.3.D.1.2_REF3_CUR "THE VIRGIN MARY is often depicted as melancholic when she holds Jesus in her arms. Yet there are portraits of the Virgin and Child in which she is cheerful: a sign of the painter's wisdom, whose love of reality includes an awareness of death - or a sign of the artist's atheism? We prefer the former."
(Pierre Schindler)

E1.3.D.1.2_REF4_PO “I SAY YES

I could say
that life is beautiful, and very much so,
and that the revolution walks with flowering feet
in the fields of my country,
with rubber feet
in the great Brazilian cities
and that my heart
is a sun of hope between lungs
and clouds

I could say that my people
is a party just hear the voice
of Clara Nunes
in the spinning
of the mix of races during carnival
on the Avenue.
But no. The poet is lying.

We grind life into blood
and samba
while the whole night rolls
over the unequal homeland. Life
we make it ours
happy and sad, singing
in the midst of hunger
and saying yes
in the midst of violence and loneliness saying
yes -
for the wonder of beauty
for Tereza's flame
for my lost son
on this vast continent
for the wounded Vianinha
for our fallen brother
for love and what it denies
for what it gives and what it blinds
for what will finally come,
I'm not saying that life is beautiful
nor do I deny it:
- I say yes”
(Ferreira Gullar, In the Vertigo of Daylight, 1975-1980 - translated by Pierre Schindler)

E1.3.D.1.2_REF4.1_MU MUSICAL ILLUSTRATION: CLARA NUNES, O CANTO DAS TRÊS RAÇAS [The song of the three races]

Listen to it on YouTube: https://youtu.be/dcVKb2ht6BE?feature=shared

CLARA NUNES, TRISTEZA PÉ NO CHÃO [Kill the sadness with your feet on the ground]

Listen to it on YouTube: https://youtu.be/1rHZIcB6JIs?feature=shared


E1.3.D.1.2_REF5_PO “BEES SWARM ALONG THE
FRAGILE EDGE OF DARKNESS
Bees swarm along the fragile edge of darkness.
Open wounds attract blood-hungry flies.
Near my heart lie savage little souls
Neatly arrayed to feast upon my life.
In eight days God will be through with miracles.
Even so, life is a gift of love.

So how does one enjoy this gift of love,
Even as one moves from light to darkness?
There is no moment free of miracles,
However swift and deep one's passion flies.

Glory is the dancing quark of life,
Alight with love and lust in all our souls.
Born of the cataclysm, our burgeoning souls
Race towards infinity, love
Infinite, lust infinite, life
Eternal as light billowing into darkness.
Little do we see how far it flies
As we spin through Earth-bound miracles.
Nor can we comprehend these miracles.
Darkness is the center of our souls,
Like still black water in the moonlight. Love
Is of this emptiness; unburdened, it flies
Swiftly in widening circles, skimming the darkness,
A motion outward at the heart of life.

More cry than ocean, more wish than star, life
Is the lyric of an explosion of miracles.
Dream and dung, it is the gospel of darkness;
In a petrie dish, a canticle of souls.
Earth is the stage for a concert of passionate love:
Lettuces and roses, gulls and flies.

Let flies and fish and redwoods sing of life
Equally, of love and miracles;
Nor shall our souls deny their birth in darkness.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E1.3.D.1.3. THE AFFIRMATION OF REALITY COMES—PERHAPS PRIMARILY—THROUGH FULLY ACCEPTING OUR OWN LIMITATIONS

E1.3.D.1.3_REF1_PH WHEN JACQUES THE FATALIST BLAMES HIMSELF FOR ALWAYS WANTING SOMETHING OTHER THAN HIS LOT AND FINALLY TAKES THE PARTY OF BEING AS HE IS. "Jacques. - My master, one does not know what to rejoice about or what to grieve about in life. Good brings evil, evil brings good. We walk in the night under what is written above, equally foolish in our desires, our joys, and our sorrows. When I cry, I often find that I'm a fool. 
The Master. - And when you laugh? 
James. - I still think I'm a fool, but I can't stop crying or laughing, and that makes me so angry. I've tried a hundred times. I haven't slept a wink all night... 
The Master. - No, no, tell me what you tried. 
Jacques. - To make fun of everything. Ah, if only I had succeeded. 
The Master. - What good would it have done you? 
James. - To be free of worries, to need nothing more, to be in perfect control of myself, to find myself with my head against a street-corner bollard as well as on a good pillow. That's how I am sometimes, but the devil is that it doesn't last, and as hard and firm as a rock on the big occasions, it often happens that a small contradiction, a trifle unlocks me, it's to give oneself bellows. I've given up, I've decided to be as I am, and I've seen, on reflection, that it's almost the same thing, adding that it doesn't matter how you are. It's a different, easier and more convenient resignation.
(Denis Diderot, James the Fatalist, 1778-1780)

E1.3.D.1.3_REF2_PH FOR GEORGE ORWELL, "TO BE HUMAN IS ESSENTIALLY NOT TO SEEK PERFECTION."
George Orwell is asking us not only to recognize that perfection is not of this world, but to understand that to seek it is to turn our backs on what it means to be human. It's a disturbing statement: for centuries, a whole current of thought has invited us to strive for a state of perfection identified with a kind of detachment or domination of reason over our entire being. And so we all regret not being a little more perfect, believing that if we were, we'd be happier - but we're wrong.
You regret a judgment you unjustly hurled at another person? great! You're getting in touch with the depth of your existence. Instead of beating yourself up over and over again for not living up to your idea of perfection, of always being right, always being precise, you're honestly facing the abyss of your own heart, and that allows you to develop a real tenderness for yourself. Yes, sometimes you're clumsy, sometimes you're inadequate, sometimes you're a bit of an idiot! Do you know what makes a great writer? His ability to show us what is petty and mediocre in all of us. That's the genius of Dostoyevsky or Proust: they reveal all the twists and turns of our lies, our cowardice, our jealousy. They do this not out of cruelty or despair, but in order to grasp the profound reality of our existence, and it's a relief to finally be able to enter into the complexity, but also the beauty, of our lives. Bad writers stay on the surface of feelings, sometimes even suffocating us with their false promises of happiness. Contrary to popular belief, the former are driven by an infinite tenderness that allows them to see the human being in all its dimensions, while the latter simply don't have access to it, or are afraid to. They're afraid of real life, they're afraid of their hearts. But how do we make peace with our imperfections? 

Think of someone you love: think of their flaws, their wounds, and see them not as what hinders their existence, but as what makes them beautiful. Knowing that we're imperfect makes us more tolerant and caring for others.
(Fabrice Midal, 3 minutes of philosophy to become human again)

Listen to the podcast: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/3-minutes-de-philosophie-pour-redevenir-humain/accepter-ses-imperfections-pour-sublimer-son-humanite

E1.3.D.1.4. LACAN OBSERVED THE FADING OF THE SUBJECT WHEN CONFRONTED WITH REALITY

E1.3.D.1.4_REF1_PH TAKING A LOOK AT THE SECRET OF THINGS WHEN NO ONE IS THERE "In the art of still life, as it triumphed in the 17th century [...] in Dutch painting with [Heda and Kalf], those sumptuous meals that magically glow in the darkness [...] aren't they not superlatively present, real in their very unreality, through their hallucinatory presence, as if the painter was showing us the triumph of inviolated things ? [They] show themselves on the stage of the painting with all the more magnificence that there is no longer a spectator in the room to gaze at them, as if the painter was attempting the imaginary operation which consists of taking a look at the secret of things when no one is there to see them any longer. This eclipse of the subject is all the more evident as the painter explicitly suggests it in the painting : the crumpled tablecloth, the fallen and often broken glass, the shiny blade of a knife balanced on the edge of the table, the blackish material crumbling from the disemboweled cake, the murky glow of white wine in the Rhine glass, all these clues suggest that the guest fell to the ground, struck down by the poison of this fantastic meal. [...]
We understand the affinity sometimes underlined by Lacan between the principle of reality, the death drive and the violence of desire : the presence of things is all the more irrefutable that we feel more annihilated by their revelation, a trial that doesn't dismiss desire, if desire is the temptation of transgression, the crossing of a limit, in theses painting even of the absolute limit, that which separates the conscious from the unconscious and being from nothingness."
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Listening to madness, III-Reality, 2019)

Read the essay in its integrality: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Lacan/Ecouterlafolie/Ecouterlafolie3.html

E1.3.D.1.4_REF2_MU MUSICAL ILLUSTRATION: MALHER, DAS LIED VON DER ERDE

Listen to it on YouTube :
https://youtu.be/idRevTkIPts

E1.7.D.6.13.wE1.3.D.1.4.

E1.3.D.1.5. "AT TIMES, IN THAT CHAOS, THAT PILING UP OF DAYS,
the sound of a single word rings in the ear,
some brief, syllabic cry,
like ‘love,’ perhaps, or possibly merely ‘hi!’
But before I can make it out, static or haze
trouble the scanning lines that undulate
and wave like the loosened ripples of your hair [...]
I notice a sleeve’s hem, as my eyes fall,
and an elbow bending itself. Coordinates show
my location as paradise, that sovereign, blessed
place where all purpose and longing is set at rest.
This is a planet without vistas, with no
converging lines, with no prospects at all. [...]
I find myself, as it were, on a mountain peak.
Beyond me there is ... Chronos and thin air.
Preserve these words. The paradise men seek
is a dead end, a worn-out, battered cape
bent into crooked shape,
a cone, a finial cap, a steel ship’s bow
from which the lookout never shouts, “Land ho!”
All you can tell for certain is the time.
That said, there’s nothing left but to police
the revolving hands. The eye drowns silently
in the clockface as in a broad, bottomless sea.
In paradise all clocks refuse to chime
for fear they might, in striking, disturb the peace.
Double all absences, multiply by two
whatever’s missing, and you’ll have some clue
to what it’s like here. A number, in any case,
is also a word and, as such, a device
or gesture that melts away without a trace,
like a small cube of ice. [...]
Consisting of Love, of dirty words, a blend
of ashes, the fear of death, the fragile case
of the bone, and the groin’s jeopardy, an erect
body at seaside is the foreskin of space,
letting semen through. His cheek tear-silver-flecked,
man juts forth into Time; man is his own end. [...]"
(Joseph Brodsky, Collected poems in English, Lullaby of Cape Cod, 1975)

E1.3.A.1.2_REF2_LIT.wE1.3.D.1.

E1.3.D.1.7. CENTERING… IS THE DISCIPLINE OF BRINGING IN (I.E., OF SYMPATHY OR EMPATHY) RATHER THAN OF LEAVING OUT. OF SAYING “YES, YES” TO WHAT WE BEHOLD. TO WHAT IS HOLY AND TO WHAT IS UNBEARABLE.  "Centering is a verb. It is an ongoing process… centering is not a model, but a way of balancing, a spiritual resource in times of conflict, an imagination. It seems in certain lights to be an alchemical vessel, a retort, which bears an integration of purposes, an integration of levels of consciousness. It can be called to, like a divine ear. […]
Centering… is the discipline of bringing in (i.e., of sympathy or empathy) rather than of leaving out. Of saying “Yes, Yes” to what we behold. To what is holy and to what is unbearable. But my experience tells me now that there is an important crucial stage of saying Yes to a No. For resistance also must be embraced. Not only accepting resistance but practicing it. [...]
The hardest and most rewarding lesson has been to learn to experience antipathy objectively, with warmth. For antipathy follows a gesture of separating, and the goal, which is to be both separate and connected, requires that one move inwardly in opposite directions. Toward self-definition and toward community. Toward ethical individualism and toward social justice. It is this fusing of the opposites that Centering enables. […]
In centering the clay on the potter’s wheel, one centers down, yes, and then one immediately centers up! Down and up, wide and narrow, letting focus bear within it an expanded consciousness and letting a widened awareness (empathetic) have the commitment to detail of a focused attention. Not “either… or,” but “both… and.” You can perhaps feel the inner movement of a Centering consciousness that plays dynamically in the tides of inner and outer, self and other, in an instinctive hope toward wholeness.[…]
“Center” and “centered” have come to be fairly widely used. They tend to imply a connection with the navel, with one-pointedness, on the way to bliss, realization, and inner peace. But these are not the goals of the Centering process. For it is a continual engagement with experience, not a withdrawal from it. It begins with pain and ends with paradox. It wrestles with evil and the daimonic as it does with angels and repentance. It is an activity of consciousness, not a stage of spiritual achievement. […]
I have found that Centering, like clay, … bears the future within it. For it contains a space for ongoing development and differentiation. In other words, it proves to be an open image, a vessel, holding a content that is life itself. […]
It could be said that fidelity to the processes of Centering is a path to full breathing, to a balance willingly at risk. […]
The deeper we go into these realms, the more contact we make with another’s reality. The sharper the sense of pain and bliss as they interweave through the heartbreak and luck of life, the more the line between self and other may dissolve. […]
I am an odd bird in both academic and craft worlds, perhaps because I am a poet, and thus, by calling, busy with seeing the similarities between things ordinarily thought to be different, busy with feeling the sense of relatedness grow through my limbs like a smoke-tree wafting and fusing its images, busy with the innerness of outerness, eating life in its layers like a magic cake made of silica sounds shapes and temperatures and all the things that appear to be separated stacked together in transparencies of color, and it is perhaps my vocation to swallow it whole. The expanding universe. The resilient appetite. The continuous play. The changing, changeful person, mobile and intact, finding his way on. […]
For life — I am sure of this — is not transforming energy, but transforming person. Energy is the means. Being is not what but whom. It is Presence in whom and before whom we show ourselves. Let us ride our lives like natural beasts, like tempests, like the bounce of a ball or the slightest ambiguous hovering of ash, the drift of scent: let us stick to those currents that can carry us, membering them with our souls. Our world personifies us, we know ourselves by it. Let us then speak to each other in our most intimate concern."
(M.C. Richards, Centering: In Pottery, Poetry, and the Person, 1964)

E1.3.D.1.8. ANGER TRULY FELT AT ITS CENTER IS THE ESSENTIAL LIVING FLAME OF BEING FULLY ALIVE AND FULLY HERE
"ANGER is the deepest form of compassion, for another, for the world, for the self, for a life, for the body, for a family and for all our ideals, all vulnerable and all, possibly about to be hurt. Stripped of physical imprisonment and violent reaction, anger is the purest form of care, the internal living flame of anger always illuminates what we belong to, what we wish to protect and what we are willing to hazard ourselves for. What we usually call anger is only what is left of its essence when we are overwhelmed by its accompanying vulnerability, when it reaches the lost surface of our mind or our body’s incapacity to hold it, or when it touches the limits of our understanding. What we name as anger is actually only the incoherent physical incapacity to sustain this deep form of care in our outer daily life; the unwillingness to be large enough and generous enough to hold what we love helplessly in our bodies or our mind with the clarity and breadth of our whole being. [...]
What we have named as anger on the surface is the violent outer response to our own inner powerlessness, a powerlessness connected to such a profound sense of rawness and care that it can find no proper outer body or identity or voice, or way of life to hold it. What we call anger is often simply the unwillingness to live the full measure of our fears or of our not knowing, in the face of our love for a wife, in the depth of our caring for a son, in our wanting the best, in the face of simply being alive and loving those with whom we live.
Our anger breaks to the surface most often through our feeling there is something profoundly wrong with this powerlessness and vulnerability… Anger in its pure state is the measure of the way we are implicated in the world and made vulnerable through love in all its specifics. [...]
Anger truly felt at its center is the essential living flame of being fully alive and fully here; it is a quality to be followed to its source, to be prized, to be tended, and an invitation to finding a way to bring that source fully into the world through making the mind clearer and more generous, the heart more compassionate and the body larger and strong enough to hold it. What we call anger on the surface only serves to define its true underlying quality by being a complete but absolute mirror-opposite of its true internal essence."
(David Whyte, Consolations: The Solace, Nourishment and Underlying Meaning of Everyday Words)

E1.7.B.2.3.h.wE1.3.D.1.

E1.7.B.2.3.i.wE1.3.D.1.

E1.6.G.2.10_REF1_LIT.wE1.3.D.1.

E1.3.D.1.9. "I THINK I COULD TURN AND LIVE WITH ANIMALS, THEY ARE SO PLACID AND SELFCONTAIN’D,
I stand and look at them long and long.

They do not sweat and whine about their condition,
They do not lie awake in the dark and weep for their sins,
They do not make me sick discussing their duty to God,
Not one is dissatisfied, not one is demented with the mania of owning things,
Not one kneels to another, nor to his kind that lived thousands of years ago,
Not one is respectable or unhappy over the whole earth.

So they show their relations to me and I accept them,
They bring me tokens of myself, they evince them plainly in their possession.

I wonder where they get those tokens,
Did I pass that way huge times ago and negligently drop them?"
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.3.D.1.10. "SOMETIMES A WILD GOD

Sometimes a wild god comes to the table.
He is awkward and does not know the ways
Of porcelain, of fork and mustard and silver.
His voice makes vinegar from wine.

When the wild god arrives at the door,
You will probably fear him.
He reminds you of something dark
That you might have dreamt,
Or the secret you do not wish to be shared.

He will not ring the doorbell;
Instead he scrapes with his fingers
Leaving blood on the paintwork,
Though primroses grow
In circles round his feet.

You do not want to let him in.
You are very busy.
It is late, or early, and besides…
You cannot look at him straight
Because he makes you want to cry.

Your dog barks;
The wild god smiles.
He holds out his hand and
The dog licks his wounds,
Then leads him inside.

The wild god stands in your kitchen.
Ivy is taking over your sideboard;
Mistletoe has moved into the lampshades
And wrens have begun to sing
An old song in the mouth of your kettle.

‘I haven’t much,’ you say
And give him the worst of your food.
He sits at the table, bleeding.
He coughs up foxes.
There are otters in his eyes.

When your wife calls down,
You close the door and
Tell her it’s fine.
You will not let her see
The strange guest at your table.

The wild god asks for whiskey
And you pour a glass for him,
Then a glass for yourself.
Three snakes are beginning to nest
In your voicebox. You cough.

Oh, limitless space.
Oh, eternal mystery.
Oh, endless cycles of death and birth.
Oh, miracle of life.
Oh, the wondrous dance of it all.

You cough again,
Expectorate the snakes and
Water down the whiskey,
Wondering how you got so old
And where your passion went.

The wild god reaches into a bag
Made of moles and nightingale-skin.
He pulls out a two-reeded pipe,
Raises an eyebrow
And all the birds begin to sing.

The fox leaps into your eyes.
Otters rush from the darkness.
The snakes pour through your body.
Your dog howls and upstairs
Your wife both exults and weeps at once.

The wild god dances with your dog.
You dance with the sparrows.
A white stag pulls up a stool
And bellows hymns to enchantments.
A pelican leaps from chair to chair.

In the distance, warriors pour from their tombs.
Ancient gold grows like grass in the fields.
Everyone dreams the words to long-forgotten songs.
The hills echo and the grey stones ring
With laughter and madness and pain.

In the middle of the dance,
The house takes off from the ground.
Clouds climb through the windows;
Lightning pounds its fists on the table
And the moon leans in.

The wild god points to your side.
You are bleeding heavily.
You have been bleeding for a long time,
Possibly since you were born.
There is a bear in the wound.

‘Why did you leave me to die?’
Asks the wild god and you say:
‘I was busy surviving.
The shops were all closed;
I didn’t know how. I’m sorry.’

Listen to them:

The fox in your neck and
The snakes in your arms and
The wren and the sparrow and the deer…
The great un-nameable beasts
In your liver and your kidneys and your heart…

There is a symphony of howling.
A cacophony of dissent.
The wild god nods his head and
You wake on the floor holding a knife,
A bottle and a handful of black fur.

Your dog is asleep on the table.
Your wife is stirring, far above.
Your cheeks are wet with tears;
Your mouth aches from laughter or shouting.
A black bear is sitting by the fire.

Sometimes a wild god comes to the table.
He is awkward and does not know the ways
Of porcelain, of fork and mustard and silver.
His voice makes vinegar from wine
And brings the dead to life."
(Tom Hirons)

Listen to the poem read by the author: https://soundcloud.com/tomhirons/sometimes-a-wild-god?utm_source=tomhirons.com&utm_campaign=wtshare&utm_medium=widget&utm_content=https%253A%252F%252Fsoundcloud.com%252Ftomhirons%252Fsometimes-a-wild-god

E1.3.D.2. THE TEMPTATION TO GIVE UP OR "CHEAT" WHEN REALITY IMPOSES ITSELF ON US

E1.3.D.2_REF1_PH EVEN IF WE ADOPT A MATERIALIST BIAS, IT'S SOMETIMES HARD TO ACCEPT.
"What is at stake in James [the Fatalist, by Denis Diderot] is certainly not the materialist bias, but the consequences that can be drawn from it, even though necessity is experienced by everyone both as contingency (i.e., the opposite of necessity, an absence of identifiable determinations - what we call "chance" - as a result of our ignorance of the complex causes that govern us) and as a call to responsibility in the moral, social, and political order. Diderot doesn't reject this either. He also discusses it: for there is reason to laugh and to reflect. [As a "philosopher," the fatalist at least knows that his will is part of the great interplay of cause and effect. As a "fatalist" in the second sense of the word, he is sometimes tempted to let the course of things decide for him, since even our most voluntary actions come up against an order that transcends them.
(Pierre Chartier, preface to James the Fatalist)

E1.3.D.2_REF1.1_PH "THE LAZY ARGUMENT
This is an argument traditionally used against fatalism, especially Stoic fatalism. If everything is subject to fate, there's no point in acting or caring about anything: fatalism could only lead to laziness or inaction. For example, if it's written that I'm going to pass my exam, what's the point of preparing for it? And if it says I'm going to fail, what's the point? There would be no point in preparing in either of these two cases, which are the only possible ones... For the Stoics, what is fatal is not this or that isolated event (the result of an exam, for example), but the chain of causes and events (each event being, as Chrysippus said, "confatal" with others: the student's work with his exam results, for example)".
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.3.D.2_REF1.2_PH THE STOICS COUNTER THE LAZY ARGUMENT (IF EVERYTHING IS PREDESTINED, WHAT IS THE POINT OF DOING ANYTHING?) WITH THE CONCEPT OF FATUM, OR WHAT IS DECIDED AT THE SAME TIME AS DESTINY.
"For the Stoics, destiny unfolds according to providence, which is the intelligence of God. This is one with the world and synonymous with reason — in contemporary terms, the DNA of a germ, or logos spermaticus.
The Stoics counter the lazy argument that if everything is predetermined, then what is the point of doing anything? with the concept of the 'confatalia', which is what is decided at the same time as destiny. Since humans possess the spark of reason from the daemon within them, they co-create destiny alongside God. Destiny is the chain of causes, the 'nexus causal', in which we are caught up and to which we can react. I am the principal cause of this reaction, which is an action in a situation, so every action derives from a choice. The god from whom I originate knows what I am going to do, but he does not do it — it is I who act. By choosing, I collaborate with destiny. It is my responsibility to make good use of the opportunities offered by destiny. Stoicism is a philosophy of action, particularly political action: 'The wise man will participate in political life if nothing prevents him from doing so.'
Similar beings tend to come together; it is man's natural instinct to live in society. When this does not work, it is because people do not make good use of reason. It is the foolish who resist; it is when people have forgotten what nature wants. Men's freedom and responsibility is to live in accordance with their own nature — but first they must recognise it, and with the help of the exercises proposed by Stoicism, be capable of nurturing accurate representations of reality. "Intelligence and reason can advance through all resistance, according to their nature and as they wish"
(Valéry Laurand in the programme Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 26 March 2019).

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/le-destin-m-empeche-t-il-d-agir-8457380

E1.3.D.2_REF2_PH "THE BAD PLAYER COUNTS ON SEVERAL THROWS OF THE DICE, ON A GREAT NUMBER OF THROWS. IN THIS WAY HE MAKES USE OF CAUSALITY AND PROBABILITY TO PRODUCE A COMBINATION THAT HE SEES AS DESIRABLE. He posits this combination itself as an end to be obtained, hidden behind causality. This is what Nietzsche means when he speaks of the eternal spider, of the spider's web of reason, "A kind of spider of imperative and finality hidden behind the great web, the great net of causality - we could say, with Charles the Bold when he opposed Louis XI, "I fight the universal spider". To abolish chance by holding it in the grip of causality and finality, to count on the repetition of throws rather than affirming chance, to anticipate a result instead of affirming necessity - these are all the operations of a bad player. They have their root in reason, but what is the root of reason? The spirit of revenge, nothing but the spirit of revenge, the spider. Ressentiment in the repetition of throws, bad conscience in the belief in a purpose. But, in this way, all that will ever be obtained are more or less probable relative numbers. That the universe has no purpose, that it has no end to hope for any more than it has causes to be known - this is the certainty necessary to play well. The dicethrow fails because chance has not been affirmed enough in one throw. It has not been affirmed enough in order to produce the fatal number which necessarily reunites all the fragments and brings back the dicethrow. We must therefore attach the greatest importance to the following conclusion: for the couple causality-finality, probability-finality, for the opposition and the synthesis of these terms, for the web of these terms, Nietzsche substitutes the Dionysian correlation of chance necessity, the Dionysian couple chance-destiny. Not a probability distributed over several throws but all chance at once; not a final, desired, willed combination, but the fatal combination, fatal and loved, amor fati; not the return of a combination by the number of throws, but the repetition of a dicethrow by the nature of the fatally obtained number."
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophy, 1962)

E1.3.D.2_REF2.1_PH IT IS NECESSARY TO AFFIRM THE WHOLE OF CHANCE AT ONCE ""I cook every chance in my pot. And only when it is quite cooked do I welcome it as my food. And truly, many a chance came imperiously to me; but my will spoke to it even more imperiously, then it went down imploringly on its knees – imploring shelter and love with me, urging in wheedling tones; 'Just see, O Zarathustra, how a friend comes to a friend!' ". This means that there are fragments of chance which claim to be valid in themselves, they appeal to their probability, each solicits several throws of the dice from the player; divided among several throws, having become simple probabilities, the fragments of chance are slaves who want to speak as masters. But Zarathustra knows that one must not play or let oneself be played, on the contrary, it is necessary to affirm the whole of chance at once (therefore boil and cook it like the player who warms the dice in his hands), in order to reunite all its fragments and to affirm the number which is not probable but fatal and necessary. Only then is chance a friend who visits his friend, a friend who will be asked back, a friend of destiny whose destiny itself assures the eternal return as such."
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophy, 1962)

E1.3.D.2_REF2.2_PO UN COUP DE DÉS JAMAIS N'ABOLIRA LE HASARD [A THROW OF THE DICE WILL NEVER ABOLISH CHANCE]
(Stéphane Mallarmé, 1897)

Read it online in French: https://fr.wikisource.org/wiki/Un_coup_de_d%C3%A9s_jamais_n%E2%80%99abolira_le_hasard

Read it online in English:
https://monoskop.org/images/4/44/Mallarme_Stephane_1897_2012_A_Throw_of_Dice_Will_Never_Abolish_Chance.pdf

E1.3.D.2_REF2.2.a_PO IN SOME SPIRITUAL STAGING
"Paper intervenes each time an image, of itself, stops or reappears, accepting the succession of others, and since it is not, as it always is, a matter of regular sound strokes or verses, but rather of prismatic subdivisions of the idea, the moment of its appearance and that their contest lasts, in some exact spiritual staging, it is in variable places, near or far from the latent thread, because of the verisimilitude, that the text imposes itself."
(Stéphane Mallarmé, Preface to A Throw of the Dice Will Never Abolish Chance, 1914)

Read it online: https://fr.wikisource.org/wiki/Un_coup_de_d%C3%A9s_jamais_n%E2%80%99abolira_le_hasard

E1.3.D.2_REF2.2.b_PO "I SEEMED TO SEE THE FIGURE OF A THOUGHT PLACED FOR THE FIRST TIME IN OUR SPACE. Here, truly, the vastness spoke, dreamed, gave birth to temporal forms. Expectation, doubt and concentration were visible. My gaze dealt with silence that would have taken shape. I was at ease in the contemplation of inestimable moments. The fraction of a second in which an idea is astonished, shines or is extinguished, the atom of time, the germ of psychological centuries and infinite consequences, finally seemed like beings, all surrounded by their sensitive nothingness. They were murmurs, intimations, thunder for the eyes, a whole spiritual storm carried from page to page to the extreme of thought, to a point of indescribable rupture. There the miracle happened; there, on the paper itself, I don't know what shimmer of last stars trembled infinitely pure, in the same inter-conscious emptiness where, like a new kind of matter, distributed in clusters, driven into systems, language coexisted".
(Paul Valéry on "A Throw of the Dice Will Never Abolish Chance," Mallarmé's 1914 poem)

E1.3.D.2_REF2.2.c_PO GUIDE DE LECTURE DU POÈME DE STÉPHANE MALLARMÉ, "UN COUP DE DÉS JAMAIS N'ABOLIRA LE HASARD", DE 1897: reconstruction des "idées" diffractées par le "prisme" du poème. Nous suggérons d'imprimer les 10 pages du poème, de les placer côte-à-côte sur une table et de les parcourir un crayon à la main pour y dessiner des lignes qui reconstruisent le sens. Les lignes entrecroisées suivantes ne sont  que des suggestions de chemin lecture possible.

[LIGNE DE DIFRACTION 1] {p. 2 à 10}
"UN COUP DE DÉS - JAMAIS - N'ABOLIRA - LE HASARD"
[et "Toute Pensée émet un Coup de Dés", dernières lignes du poème p. 12,... effet circulaire de retour à la case départ: "UN COUP DE DÉS - JAMAIS - N'ABOLIRA - LE HASARD"]

[LIGNE DE DIFRACTION 2] {p. 4 à 10}
"SOIT 		[comme ainsi soit-il? l'acceptation du réel serait posée en premier mot]		QUAND BIEN MÊME LANCÉ DANS DES CIRCONSTANCES ÉTERNELLES		DU FOND D'UN NAUFFRAGE - LE MAÎTRE 	jadis il empoignait la barre		l'unique Nombre 		[c.f. LIGNE 3]		qui ne peut pas		être un autre - COMME SI		COMME SI		- SI		C'ÉTAIT		issu stellaire - CE SERAIT		 pire		non		d'avantage	 ni moins		indifféremment mais autant		LE HASARD"
[Comment poser les bases de l'action humaine au sein du hasard fruit du caos originel? Il faut pourtant que l'homme agisse car il est l'unique créature "qui ne peut pas être un autre" car il est le seul être conscient de ce qu'il est] > [Conclusion: "Toute Pensée émet un Coup de Dés", qui renvoie elle-même à la LIGNE 1]

[LIGNE DE DIFRACTION 3] {p. 9 et 10} 
"LE		NOMBRE		[c.f. LIGNE 2: le Nombre serait le maître, sujet de l'action, c'est-à-dire l'homme]		EXISTÂT-IL		autrement qu'hallucination éparse - COMMENÇÂT-IL ET CESSÂT-IL		sourdant que nié et clos quand apparu		enfin		par quelque profusion répandue en		rareté		SE CHIFFRÂT-IL		évidence de la somme pour peu qu'une		ILLUMINÂT-IL		LE HASARD [intersection avec le point d'arrivée des LIGNE 1 et 2 qui terminent toutes sur "LE HASARD". L'action de l'homme n'est-elle qu'une "hallucination" ou bien a-t-il le pouvoir d'"illuminer le hasard", c'est-à-dire de créer du sens?]

[PAUSE, coupure explicative p. 10 - temps suspendu - "Choit la plume en rythmique suspens", juste sur le point de rencontre et d'aboutissement des LIGNES 1,2 et 3 qui se rejoignent et finissent sur "LE HASARD"] {p. 10} 
"Choit		la plume		rythmique suspens du sinistre		s'ensevelir		aux écumes originelles		naguères d'où sursauta son délire jusqu'à une cime		flétrie		par la neutralité identique du gouffre"
[l'action de l'homme, qu'il pense être sublime, est futile au regard de l'indifférence tragique du monde]

[LIGNE DE DIFRACTION 4] {p. 11 et 12} 
"RIEN 		de la mémorable crise ou se fût 		l'évènement		accompli en vue de tout résultat nul 			humain 		N'AURA EU LIEU		une élévation ordinaire 		verse l'absence		QUE LE LIEU		inférieur clapotis quelconque comme pour disperser l'acte vide		abruptement		qui sinon		par son	mensonge		eût fondé	la perdition		dans ces parages 		du vague en quoi toute réalité se dissout		EXCEPTÉ		à l'altitude 		fusionne avec au delà 		PEUT-ÊTRE		UNE CONSTELLATION		froide d'oubli et de désuétude		pas tant		qu'elle n'énumère		sur quelque surface vacante et supérieure		le heurt successif		 sidéralement		 d'un compte total en formation		veillant		doutant		roulant		brillante et méditant		avant de s'arrêter		à quelque point dernier qui le sacre		Toute Pensée		émet un Coup de Dés"
[D'un côté l'action humaine n'a aucun sens, "acte vide" dans l'univers - ce dernier lui-même ayant "PEUT-ÊTRE" son propre sens auquel nous ne sommes pas initiés - si bien qu'il nous apparaît comme pur hasard et "dissout toute réalité": "RIEN - N'AURA EU LIEU - QUE LE LIEU - EXCEPTÉ - PEUT ÊTRE - UNE CONSTELLATION". 
D'un autre côté, la pensée permet à l'homme d'échapper à la "perdition" - même si toute pensée est arbitraire "mensonge" au regard du "froid oubli sidéral" - elle n'en "sacre" pas moins l'homme comme être conscient, au "résultat nul", certes, mais joueur, et conscient de l'être: "Toute Pensée émet un Coup de Dés" même si "UN COUP DE DÉS - JAMAIS - N'ABOLIRA - LE HASARD"]
(Pierre Schindler)

E1.3.D.2_REF2.2.e_MU MUSICAL ILLUSTRATION: PHILIP GLASS, STRING QUARTET NO. 3 "MISHIMA"

Listen to it on YouTube: https://youtu.be/IpJX_qUq7NM?feature=shared

E1.3.D.2_REF2.2.f_PO STÉPHANE MALLARMÉ'S PROFOUND LUCIDITY IS NOT ACCOMPANIED BY JOY AND RISKS DESCENDING INTO THE MELANCHOLIA OF COMPLAINTS

E1.6.B.1.7.b.wE1.3.D.2_REF2.2.f_PO

E1.3.D.2_REF3_PH I CONSENT "The way to make use of physical pain. When suffering no matter what degree of pain, when almost the entire soul is inwardly crying “Make it stop, I can bear no more,” a part of the soul, even though it be an infinitesimally small part, should say: “I consent that this should continue throughout the whole of time, if the divine wisdom so ordains.” The soul is then split in two. For the physically sentient part of the soul is — at least sometimes — unable to consent to pain. This splitting in two of the soul is a second pain, a spiritual one, and even sharper than the physical pain that causes it. [...]
A similar use can be made of hunger, fatigue, fear, and of everything that imperatively constrains the sentient part of the soul to cry: I can bear no more! Make it stop! There should be something in us that answers: I consent that it should continue up to the moment of death, or that it should not even finish then, but continue for ever. Then it is that the soul is as if divided by a two-edged sword.
To make use in this way of the sufferings that chance inflicts upon us is better than inflicting discipline upon oneself."
(Simone Weil,  First and Last Notebooks, 1942)

E1.3.D.2_REF4_CUR DON'T RELY ON YOUR AMULETS AND OTHER EVASIVE STRATEGIES TO PROTECT YOU FROM CHAOS! There is no human shield that can withstand the burning blast of annihilation. This is not a call to despair but rather an invitation to lucid joy - scorched with a flamethrower...

E1.3.D.2_REF5_PH LIFE IS WASTED WHEN WE MAKE IT MORE TERRIFYING, PRECISELY BECAUSE IT IS SO EASY TO DO SO. WE MUST GO IN SEARCH OF ENCHANTMENT. "Experience of conflict and a load of suffering has taught me that what matters above all is to celebrate joy for the eyes and the mind. It is much easier to terrorize than to charm… I live in a very unpleasant world because of its routine ugliness. That’s why my painting is a battle, or rather a counter-offensive. [...]

We think that if life is seen in a tragic light it is seen more clearly, and that we are then in touch with the mystery of existence. We even believe that we can reach objectivity thanks to this revelation. The greater the terror, the greater the objectivity.

This notion is the result of philosophies (materialist or idealist), that claim that the real world is knowable, that matter is of the same essence as mind, since the perfect mind would no longer be distinct from the matter it explains and would thus deny it. The man on the street is unknowingly in harmony with this idea: he thinks there is a mystery, he thinks he must live and suffer and that the very meaning of life is that it is a dream-nightmare. [...]

Our mental universe (which contains all we know, feel or are afraid of in the real world we live in) may be enchanting, happy, tragic, comic, etc.

We are capable of transforming it and giving it a charm which makes life more valuable. More valuable since life becomes more joyful, thanks to the extraordinary effort needed to create this charm.

Life is wasted when we make it more terrifying, precisely because it is so easy to do so. It is an easy task, because people who are intellectually lazy are convinced that this miserable terror is “the truth”, that this terror is knowledge of the “extra-mental” world. This is an easy way out, resulting in a banal explanation of the world as terrifying.

Creating enchantment is an effective means of counteracting this depressing, banal habit. […]

We must go in search of enchantment."
(René Magritte, Selected Writings, 1947)

E1.3.D.2_REF6_PH "SUGGESTING THAT THE DICE WERE RIGGED IMPLIES THAT ONE IS INCAPABLE OF TAKING CHARGE OF ONE'S OWN DESTINY and unable to process one's experiences."
(The Chronicle of Rafael Enthoven)

Listen to the Chronicle in French on X: 
https://twitter.com/twitter/statuses/977088467342536704

E1.3.D.3. "THE CONDITION OF BEING GOOD IS THAT IT SHOULD ALWAYS BE POSSIBLE FOR YOU TO BE MORALLY DESTROYED BY SOMETHING YOU COULDN’T PREVENT. To be a good human being is to have a kind of openness to the world, an ability to trust uncertain things beyond your own control, that can lead you to be shattered in very extreme circumstances for which you were not to blame. That says something very important about the human condition of the ethical life: that it is based on a trust in the uncertain and on a willingness to be exposed; it’s based on being more like a plant than like a jewel, something rather fragile, but whose very particular beauty is inseparable from its fragility. [...]
Being a human means accepting promises from other people and trusting that other people will be good to you. When that is too much to bear, it is always possible to retreat into the thought, “I’ll live for my own comfort, for my own revenge, for my own anger, and I just won’t be a member of society anymore.” That really means, “I won’t be a human being anymore.”
You see people doing that today where they feel that society has let them down, and they can’t ask anything of it, and they can’t put their hopes on anything outside themselves. You see them actually retreating to a life in which they think only of their own satisfaction, and maybe the satisfaction of their revenge against society. But the life that no longer trusts another human being and no longer forms ties to the political community is not a human life any longer."
(Interview of Martha Nussbaum by  Bill Moyers published in Bill Moyers: A World of Ideas, 1989)

Read it on the Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2014/03/14/martha-nussbaum-bill-moyers-world-of-ideas/?mc_cid=f1cfa17d52&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E1.3.D.3_REF1_PH YOU SHOULD CARE ABOUT THINGS IN A WAY THAT MAKES IT A POSSIBILITY THAT TRAGEDY WILL HAPPEN TO YOU "Things get significantly more complicated, however, when we find ourselves in binds that seem to call for tragedy by asking us to make impossible choices between multiple things we hold dear. Nussbaum illustrates this by pointing to Aeschylus’s Agamemnon, in which the king-protagonist has to choose between saving his army and saving his daughter. The same tragedy plays out on a smaller scale in everyday dilemmas, such as juggling your career with being a good parent. Most of the time, as Nussbaum puts it, the two “enrich each other and make the life of each of them better.” But sometimes, practical circumstances pose such insurmountable challenges like an important meeting and your child’s school play happening at the same time — one of these two priorities inevitably suffers, not because you are a bad parent or a bad leader, but because life just happens that way. Therein lies the human predicament — the more we aspire to live well, according to our commitments and priorities, the more we welcome such tragic choices. And yet the solution isn’t not to aspire. Nussbaum tells Moyers:

"Tragedy happens only when you are trying to live well, because for a heedless person who doesn’t have deep commitments to others, Agamemnon’s conflict isn’t a tragedy…
Now the lesson certainly is not to try to maximize conflict or to romanticize struggle and suffering, but it’s rather that you should care about things in a way that makes it a possibility that tragedy will happen to you. If you hold your commitments lightly, in such a way that you can always divest yourself from one or the other of them if they conflict, then it doesn’t hurt you when things go badly. But you want people to live their lives with a deep seriousness of commitment: not to adjust their desires to the way the world actually goes, but rather to try to wrest from the world the good life that they desire. And sometimes that does lead them into tragedy."
(Maria Popova´s review on the Interview of Martha Nussbaum by  Bill Moyers published in Bill Moyers: A World of Ideas, 1989)

Read it on the Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2014/03/14/martha-nussbaum-bill-moyers-world-of-ideas/?mc_cid=f1cfa17d52&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E1.3.D.3_REF2_PO BEFORE YOU KNOW WHAT KINDNESS REALLY IS
YOU MUST LOSE THINGS,
FEEL THE FUTURE DISSOLVE IN A MOMENT
LIKE SALT IN A WEAKENED BROTH.

"KINDNESS
Before you know what kindness really is
you must lose things,
feel the future dissolve in a moment
like salt in a weakened broth.
What you held in your hand,
what you counted and carefully saved,
all this must go so you know
how desolate the landscape can be
between the regions of kindness.
How you ride and ride
thinking the bus will never stop,
the passengers eating maize and chicken
will stare out the window forever.

Before you learn the tender gravity of kindness,
you must travel where the Indian in a white poncho
lies dead by the side of the road.
You must see how this could be you,
how he too was someone
who journeyed through the night with plans
and the simple breath that kept him alive.

Before you know kindness as the deepest thing inside,
you must know sorrow as the other deepest thing.
You must wake up with sorrow.
You must speak to it till your voice
catches the thread of all sorrows
and you see the size of the cloth.

Then it is only kindness that makes sense anymore,
only kindness that ties your shoes
and sends you out into the day to mail letters and purchase bread,
only kindness that raises its head
from the crowd of the world to say
It is I you have been looking for,
and then goes with you everywhere
like a shadow or a friend."
(Naomi Shihab Nye)

Watch the animation on “Kindness” by Naomi Shihab Nye on Vimeo: https://vimeo.com/433736862?share=copy

E1.3.D.3_REF3_PO "FIRST LESSON 
Lie back, daughter, let your head 
be tipped back in the cup of my hand. 
Gently, and I will hold you. Spread 
your arms wide, lie out on the stream 
and look high at the gulls. A dead-
man’s-float is face down. You will dive
and swim soon enough where this tidewater 
ebbs to the sea. Daughter, believe 
me, when you tire on the long thrash 
to your island, lie up, and survive. 
As you float now, where I held you 
and let go, remember when fear 
cramps your heart what I told you:
lie gently and wide to the light-year 
stars, lie back, and the sea will hold you."
(Philip Booth)

E1.3.D.4. "YOU CAN’T HAVE IT ALL

But you can have the fig tree and its fat leaves like clown hands
gloved with green. You can have the touch of a single eleven-year-old finger
on your cheek, waking you at one a.m. to say the hamster is back.
You can have the purr of the cat and the soulful look
of the black dog, the look that says, If I could I would bite
every sorrow until it fled, and when it is August,
you can have it August and abundantly so. You can have love,
though often it will be mysterious, like the white foam
that bubbles up at the top of the bean pot over the red kidneys
until you realize foam’s twin is blood.
You can have the skin at the center between a man’s legs,
so solid, so doll-like. You can have the life of the mind,
glowing occasionally in priestly vestments, never admitting pettiness,
never stooping to bribe the sullen guard who’ll tell you
all roads narrow at the border.
You can speak a foreign language, sometimes,
and it can mean something. You can visit the marker on the grave
where your father wept openly. You can’t bring back the dead,
but you can have the words forgive and forget hold hands
as if they meant to spend a lifetime together. And you can be grateful
for makeup, the way it kisses your face, half spice, half amnesia, grateful
for Mozart, his many notes racing one another towards joy, for towels
sucking up the drops on your clean skin, and for deeper thirsts,
for passion fruit, for saliva. You can have the dream,
the dream of Egypt, the horses of Egypt and you riding in the hot sand.
You can have your grandfather sitting on the side of your bed,
at least for a while, you can have clouds and letters, the leaping
of distances, and Indian food with yellow sauce like sunrise.
You can’t count on grace to pick you out of a crowd
but here is your friend to teach you how to high jump,
how to throw yourself over the bar, backwards,
until you learn about love, about sweet surrender,
and here are periwinkles, buses that kneel, farms in the mind
as real as Africa. And when adulthood fails you,
you can still summon the memory of the black swan on the pond
of your childhood, the rye bread with peanut butter and bananas
your grandmother gave you while the rest of the family slept.
There is the voice you can still summon at will, like your mother’s,
it will always whisper, you can’t have it all,
but there is this."
(Emily Levine, You can't have it all, Bite Every Sorrow)

E1.3.D.4.1.  “PEOPLE CAN’T, unhappily, invent their mooring posts, their lovers and their friends, anymore than they can invent their parents, life gives these and also takes them away and the great difficulty is to say Yes to life.”
(James Baldwin)

E1.3.D.4.2. "THE BEST OF ALL POSSIBLE WORLDS IS ONE CAPABLE OF GENERATING, BY ITSELF, AN INFINITY OF POSSIBLE WORLDS. It is precisely in this world that we have life, movement, and being."
(Jacques Darriulat, Aphorisms, 2021)

E1.3.D.4.3. THE DISTANCING AND DENIAL OF REALITY THAT EVERYONE CONSTANTLY ENGAGES IN IRRITATES US!
Spinoza's wisdom is based on total mental and physical alignment with reality, or substance, through desire and lucidity. Starting from the observation of suffering in books 4 and 5, we trace the path to joy by converting sad passions. Is anger the most difficult sad passion to convert?
It is because of the distancing and denial of reality that everyone constantly engages in that irritates us! Pascal asks, "Why should a lame mind irritate us when a lame person does not bother us?" Clément Rosset wonders if Spinoza's entire ethical enterprise is a form of catharsis to erase the last traces of his anger."
(Clément Rosset on the program À Voix Nue, broadcast on France Culture on February 22, 2006)

E1.3.D.4.4. "THE TRIANGLE OF SELF-OBSESSION: PEOPLE SUFFERING FROM ADDICTION CONTINUE TO DEPEND ON THE WORLD AROUND THEM AFTER CHILDHOOD AND REFUSE TO ACCEPT THAT THEY WILL NOT BE GIVEN EVERYTHING.
When we are born we are conscious only of ourselves, we are the universe. We perceive little other than our basic needs, and if these needs are met we are content. As our consciousness expands we become aware of a world outside ourselves. We discover that there are people, places, and things around us, and that they fulfill our needs. At this point we also begin to recognize differences and develop preferences. We learn to want and choose. We are the center of a growing universe and expect to be provided with the things we need and want. Our source of contentment shifts from basic needs miraculously met to the fulfillment of our desires.
Most children, through experiences over a period of time, come to realize that the outside world cannot provide all their wants and needs. They begin to supplement what is given to them with their own efforts. As their dependency on people, places, and things decreases they begin to look to themselves more and more. They become more self-sufficient and learn that happiness and contentment come from within. Most continue to mature; they recognize and accept their strengths, weaknesses, and limitations. At some point, they usually seek the help of a Power greater than themselves to provide the things they cannot provide for themselves. For most people, growing up is a natural process.
As addicts, however, we seem to falter along the way. We never seem to outgrow the self-centeredness of the child. We never seem to find the self-sufficiency that others do. We continue to depend on the world around us and refuse to accept that we will not be given everything. We become self-obsessed; our wants and needs become demands. We reach a point where contentment and fulfillment are impossible. People, places, and things cannot possibly fill the emptiness inside of us, and we react to them with resentment, anger, and fear.
Resentment, anger, and fear make up the triangle of self-obsession. All of our defects of character are forms of these three reactions. Self-obsession is at the heart of our insanity. Resentment is the way most of us react to our past. It is the reliving of past experiences, again and again in our minds. Anger is the way most of us deal with the present. It is our reaction to and denial of reality. Fear is what we feel when we think about the future. It is our response to
the unknown; a fantasy in reverse. All three of these things are expressions of our self-obsession. They are the way that we react when people, places, and things (past, present, and future) do not live up to our demands.
In Narcotics Anonymous we are given a new way of life and a new set of tools. These are the Twelve Steps, and we work them to the best of our ability. If we stay clean, and can learn to practice these principles in all our affairs, a miracle happens. We find freedom—from drugs, from our addiction, and from our self-obsession. Resentment is replaced with acceptance; anger is replaced with love; and fear is replaced with faith.
We have a disease that, in the end, forces us to seek help. We are fortunate that we are given only one choice; one last chance. We must break the triangle of self-obsession; we must grow up, or die.
The way we react to people, places, and things:
 Negative 				Positive
 Resentment 	Past 			Acceptance
 Anger 		Present 		Love
 Fear 		Future 			Faith "
(Narcotics Anonymous World Services, 1983)

E1.3.D.5. THE STRANGE THING IS THAT JOY REMAINS, EVEN THOUGH IN THE VOID AND IS DEPRIVED OF ANY FOUNDATION. "There is no good in the world which a lucid examination does not ultimately reveal to be ludicrous and unworthy of attention, if only in view of its fragile constitution, I mean its position both ephemeral and minuscule in the infinity of time and space. The strange thing is that joy remains, even though it hangs in the void and is deprived of any foundation. [...] Let me now turn to the central paradox of joy, which I have only sketched. This paradox can be summarized as follows: joy is an unconditional rejoicing in and about existence; yet there is nothing less rejoicing than existence, if we look at it with all the coldness and clarity of mind.
(Clément Rosset, The Major Force, 1983)

E1.3.D.5_REF1_PH JOY CONSISTS IN UNTHINKABLE REJOICING. "From this incompatibility between joy and its rational justification - an incompatibility that defines the paradox of joy - it follows that joy, if there is joy, consists in an unthinkable rejoicing: a rejoicing that it is possible to experience but impossible to conceive, for it is impossible to explain it and to cover it with the authority of any argument. But from the fact that joy is unthinkable, is it legitimate to deduce the other, less obvious, though often drawn from the same line of thought, that joy consists in illusory rejoicing? [...]
Either joy consists in the ephemeral illusion of being finished with the tragedy of existence, in which case joy is not paradoxical but illusory. Or it consists in the approval of existence as irremediably tragic: in which case joy is paradoxical but not illusory.
It will come as no surprise that I prefer the second of these alternatives, convinced as I am that joy not only succeeds in accommodating the tragic, but also, and above all, that it consists solely in and through paradoxical agreement with it.
(Clément Rosset, The Major Force, 1983)

E1.3.D.1.1..wE1.3.D.5_REF1_PH

E1.3.D.5_REF1.1_PH "ELATION IS, IN ANY CASE, AN UNAVOWABLE FEELING: AN IRRATIONAL FEELING, THE CONTENT OF WHICH IT IS IMPOSSIBLE TO REVEAL TO ANYONE, SINCE ONE IGNORES IT ONESELF. No solid reason can establish the advantage of there being something rather than nothing; not even the principle of the very best proclaimed by Leibniz, who subordinates his reasons to an advantage in being, as Spinoza does to an advantage in the power to act, but does not question the advantages of this very advantage. That's why happiness, and the love of life that it implies, is always a more or less secret feeling: a happiness that we will never share with anyone because we are incapable of formulating it for ourselves. If there is a mystery - that is, something whose existence we know, but also, according to the etymology, before which we remain short-sighted because it remains closed in itself, thus withdrawn from any possibility of disclosure - it is indeed the nature of one's own elation, the way we have - probably unlike any other, that is, idiotically - of being in love with reality: the place of the only very private realm, absolutely untranslatable and indivisible". 
(Clément Rosset, Discourse on Idiocy, 1977)

E1.3.D.5_REF1.1.a_PH MUSIC AND JOY. "Music, expressing only itself, reveals the miraculous fact of existence - and is therefore jubilant. It is reality without words, joy without reason, naked reality. 
If I have a reason to be happy and I don't want to see the tragedy of existence, my joy is illusory, based as it is on an incomplete representation of a world reduced to its good moments. It's a fleeting joy that lacks substance and depth. Joy is either reasonable - but it isn't joy - or it isn't and is therefore paradoxical, but true. True joy is mad joy...in spite of everything, against all odds. There's a tradition of Christian mystics who agree with this vision.
Joy is astonishment (not acceptance, not affirmation, if by that we mean a justified or intellectualistic affirmation) at the fullness of reality - the rejection of a dual [false reality]. The creation of a dual reality has two main motivations: the refusal of the real (anything but that!) or the expression of a lack - the inability to feel the fullness of the real.
For Schopenhauer, aesthetic experience and music bring relief. For Rosset, joy is no consolation. Music doesn't console, it allows joy to blossom without cause. If Nietzsche says that "life without music would be a mistake," it's because he believes that the conditions for Spinozist-style absolute affirmation are met by the immediate and absolute experience that music provides.
In the song of elation in the penultimate chapter of Zarathustra, Nietzsche also tells us: "I have discovered the truth of truths: joy is deeper than sadness. This is the virtuous circle of joy that Spinoza transforms from passive to active.
In The Major Force, Clément Rosset writes: "Music is what occupies all the nerve centers of Nietzsche's philosophy, in which it replaces exactly everything that in any other system is called upon to act as a principle or foundation: it is what answers all questions and thus takes the place of theology, metaphysics, and physics all at once. It is the primary revelation that once and for all provides sufficient information about the meaning, cause, and end of all existence.
(Clément Rosset, interview rebroadcast on France Culture's À voix nue on 06/01/2018)

Listen to the podcast: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/a-voix-nue/clement-rosset-autant-etre-heureux-et-ne-pas-se-tourmenter-puisque-le-pire-est-certain-9752496

E1.3.D.5_REF1.1.b_PH JOY IS ALSO STRONGER THAN PAIN IN THE NIGHT WALKER'S SONG:
« Sing now yourselves the song, the name of which is “Once more,” the signification of
which is “Unto all eternity!”—sing, ye higher men, Zarathustra’s roundelay!
O man! Take heed!
What saith deep midnight’s voice indeed?
“I slept my sleep—,
“From deepest dream I’ve woke, and plead:—
“The world is deep,
“And deeper than the day could read.
“Deep is its woe—,
“Joy—deeper still than grief can be:
“Woe saith: Hence! Go!
“But joys all want eternity–,
“–Want deep, profound eternity!”»
(Nietzsche, Thus spoke Zarathustra, The Night Walker's Song or Song of Elation, 1883)

E1.3.D.5_REF1.2_PH BY ELATION WE MEAN, STRICTLY AND ONLY, THE LOVE OF REALITY "There is, however, a thought that can be substituted, without harm and with benefit, for the concept of grace: one that performs a similar function without being suspiciously indebted to an external and miraculous intervention. Or rather, a feeling that sums up all the power of grace without having to question an uncertain supernatural instance. This feeling, commonplace but no less mysterious than what theologians understand by grace, is what we call elation. 
By elation we mean, strictly and only, the love of reality: that is, neither the love of life, nor the love of a person, nor the love of oneself, nor, if it exists, the love of God-all are loves that love of reality implies, but to which it is not limited and which, above all, do not condition it in any way".
(Clément Rosset, Discourse on Idiocy, 1977)

E1.3.D.5_REF1.3_PH "WHAT BRINGS ABOUT TRAGIC LAUGHTER, MANIFESTING A DESTRUCTIVE PLEASURE INDIFFERENT TO THE NATURE OF WHAT IS DESTROYED, IS OBVIOUSLY THE IDEA OF CHANCE ; more precisely: the ability to recognize chance as an anti-principle to everything that exists. Only such recognition makes it possible to experience at the same time the vision of an uncompensated disappearance (a void which is not to be replaced) and the pleasure derived from the spectacle of such a disappearance (which manifests itself precisely in laughter). Tragic laughter, which implies that one takes pleasure in chance and that one celebrates, through laughter, its appearance, is therefore entirely foreign to the universe of signification, and of meaning and counter-meaning that can be developed inside it: indifference to meaning, but also to the absence of meaning, which differentiates it radically from all other forms of laughter."
(Clément Rosset, Logic of the worst, 1971)

E1.3.D.5_REF1.4_PO "THE EFFLUX OF THE SOUL IS HAPPINESS, here is happiness,
I think it pervades the open air, waiting at all times,
Now it flows unto us, we are rightly charged."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, The song of teh open road, 1855)

E1.3.D.5_REF1.5_PO EXILERATING WINDS "I am grateful, then, for these little things we call stopovers, 
which were halts, bivouacs, and will remain fragments,
that still speak for a latent fire, 
a trail of powder, a thread as tenuous as a sensitive cord. 
To an elation that persists when all else fails and for which I don't know the cause, 
that may come from the sea, from afar through blood, rhyme, and obscure vertigo 
and which I call, for lack of a better word, the exilerating winds".
(Michel Baglin, Exilerating Winds, 2010)

E1.3.D.5_REF2_PH THE FACT THAT WE ARE INCAPABLE OF INHABITING BEATITUDE DOES NOT PREVENT US FROM DISCOVERING, AT TIMES, THAT IT DOES INHABIT US.
“Beatitude is truly happiness, or happiness that is true, which would be eternal (truth is always eternal), complete (truth lacks nothing), and like another name for salvation. But don't dream too much about it. Beatitude is eternal, explains Spinoza; how could it begin? Therefore it is vain to hope for it: no one attains it except by ceasing to wait for it. 
'If joy consists in the passage to a greater perfection,' writes Spinoza, ‘beatitude must consist in the fact that the soul itself is endowed with perfection’ (Eth., V, 33, scolie). But perfection is nothing other than reality (Eth., II, def. 6): beatitude would be the normal state of the soul, from which we are separated only by our illusions and lies. It is not the reward of virtue, but virtue itself (Eth., V, prop. 42). 
More simply, it is the happiness of the wise, or wisdom itself as happiness. Its content is joy, hence love. Its object is truth, hence everything. It is the true love of the truth. 
The fact that we are incapable of inhabiting it does not prevent us from discovering, at times, that it inhabits us."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

“Most of the time, we're much happier than we think!”
(Denis Grozdanovitch, The Difficult Art of Doing Almost Nothing, 2009)

E1.3.D.5_REF2.1_PH "PROPOSITION 33, SCOLIUM
Although this love towards God has [...] no beginning, it yet possesses all the perfections of love, just as though it had arisen as we feigned in the Coroll. of the last Prop.. Nor is there here any difference, except that the mind possesses as eternal those same perfections which we feigned to accrue to it, and they are accompanied by the idea of God as eternal cause. If pleasure consists in the transition to a greater perfection, assuredly blessedness must consist in the mind being endowed with perfection itself."
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics, Part 5)

Read The Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.3.D.5_REF2.2_PH "DEFINITIONS [...]
VI. Reality and perfection I use as synonymous terms."
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics, Part 2)

Read The Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.3.D.5_REF2.2.a_PH "PROPOSITION 30
Our mind, in so far as it knows itself and the body under the form of eternity, has to that extent necessarily a knowledge of God, and knows that it is in God, and is conceived through God.

PROOF
Eternity is the very essence of God, in so far as this involves necessary existence [...]. Therefore to conceive things under the form of eternity, is to conceive things in so far as they are conceived through the essence of God as real entities, or in so far as they involve existence through the essence of God ; wherefore our mind, in so far as it conceives itself and the body under the form of eternity, has to that extent necessarily a knowledge of God, and knows, &c. Q.E.D.

PROPOSITION 31
The third kind of knowledge depends on the mind, as its formal cause, in so far as the mind itself is eternal.

PROOF
The mind does not conceive anything under the form of eternity, except in so far as it conceives its own body under the form of eternity (Prop. 29) ; that is, except in so far as it is eternal [...]; therefore [...], in so far as it is eternal, it possesses the knowledge of God, which knowledge is necessarily adequate [...]; hence the mind, in so far as it is eternal, is capable of knowing everything which can follow from this given knowledge of God [...], in other words, of knowing things by the third kind of knowledge [...], whereof accordingly the mind [...], in so far as it is eternal, is the adequate or formal cause of such knowledge. Q.E.D.

SCHOLIUM
In proportion, therefore, as a man is more potent in this kind of knowledge, he will be more completely conscious of himself and of God ; in other words, he will be more perfect and blessed".(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics, Part 5)

Read The Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.3.D.5_REF2.2.b_PH "PROPOSITION 42
Blessedness is not the reward of virtue, but virtue itself ; neither do we rejoice therein, because we control our lusts, but, contrariwise, because we rejoice therein, we are able to control our lusts.

PROOF
Blessedness consists in love towards God [...], which love springs from the third kind of knowledge [...]; therefore this love [...] must be referred to the mind, in so far as the latter is active ; therefore [...] it is virtue itself. This was our first point. Again, in proportion as the mind rejoices more in this divine love or blessedness, so does it the more understand [...]; that is [...], so much the more power has it over the emotions, and [...] so much the less is it subject to those emotions which are evil ; therefore, in proportion as the mind rejoices in this divine love or blessedness, so has it the power of controlling lusts. And, since human power in controlling the emotions consists solely in the understanding, it follows that no one rejoices in blessedness, because he has controlled his lusts, but, contrariwise, his power of controlling his lusts arises from this blessedness itself."
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics, Part 5)

Read The Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.3.D.5_REF3_PH FOR CAMUS, WE ”MUST IMAGINE SISYPHUS HAPPY”, although he's free of hope. Camus does not explain, but you can understand either:
1. Because Sisyphus is stronger than his fate, despite its lack of meaning;
2. As an ironic lucidity -  the whole situation is hopeless, so I don't have to worry about it, it becomes nearly fun;
3. Because joy is senseless. Despite the lack of meaning, Sisyphus to his own surprise, realizes he is happy.

E1.3.D.5_REF4_PH IF WE DO NOT ATTEND TO THE WORK OF PROJECTING DELIGHT UPON THE WORLD, WHAT ARE WE ACTUALLY DOING? 
"What is joy? Where is it? Where is love in this world that is such an evil mess. [ ]
MAJA, LONDON, UK

Are you an optimist?
GIL, RIO, BRAZIL

Who is your favourite cartoonist?
ALAN, OXFORD, UK

Do you like Leonard Cohen?
LEON, MONTREAL, CANADA

Dear Maja, Gil, Alan, and Leon,

If we do not attend to the work of projecting delight upon the world, what are we actually doing? If we do not look for joy, search for it, reach deep for it, what are we saying about the world? Are we saying that malevolence is the routine stuff of life, that oppression and corruption and degradation is the very matter of the world? That we greet each day with suspicion, bitterness and contempt? It seems to me that to make suffering the focus of our attention, to pay witness only to the malevolence of the world, is to be in service to the devil himself.

Is the world heading for disaster? I suppose so. We are constantly, relentlessly, told as much. Am I hopeful for its future? Well, yes, I am. I choose to be an optimist through a kind of necessity, because from my experience pessimism is a corrosive and damaging position to take – one  that casts its shadow over all things,  causing a kind of societal sickness, a contaminant that ultimately amplifies and glorifies the problems it professes to abhor.

For me, to strive toward joy has become a calling and a practise. It is carried out with the full understanding of the terms of this hallowed and harrowed world. I pursue it with an awareness that joy exists both in the worst of the world and within the best, and that joy, flighty, jumpy, startling thing that it is, often finds its true voice within its opposite. Joy sings small, bright songs in the dark — these moments, so easily disregarded, so quickly dismissed, are the radiant points of light that pierce the gloom to give validation to the world. That’s how the light gets in, Leonard Cohen tells us, whilst casting his genius and delight forever among the cosmos.

But no one understands joy like the Australian cartoonist, Michael Leunig. In his classic cartoon, ‘Gee Dad, you’re fantastic!’, a father plays his ukulele to the delight of his family, picnicking in a beam of light that cuts though an utterly devastated landscape. I can’t think of a work of art that more poignantly articulates the utter and urgent need for the pursuit of joy. Maja, joy exists as a bright, insistent spasm of defiance within the darkness of the world. Seek it. It is there.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #219 / JANUARY 2023)

E1.3.D.5_REF5_PO "A DEFENSE OF JOY
Defend joy like a trench
defend it from scandal and routine
from misery and misers
from truancies passing
and permanent

defend joy as a principle
defend it from bewilderments and bad dreams
from the neutral and the neutron
from sweet infamies
and grave diagnoses

defend joy like a flag
defend it from lightning and melancholy
from the fools and the frauds
from rhetoric and ruptures of the heart
from the endemic and the academic

defend joy as a destiny
defend it from fire and firefighters
from suicides and homicides
from vacations and ruts
from the obligation to be joyful

defend joy as a certainty
defend it from rust and smut
from the famous patina of time
from dew and exploitation
by the pimps of laughter

defend joy as a right
defend it from God and winter
from uppercase and the casket
from surnames and the pity
of chance
and of joy too."
(Mario Benedetti, translated by Maria Popova)

"DEFENSA DE LA ALEGRÍA

Defender la alegría como una trinchera
defenderla del escándalo y la rutina
de la miseria y los miserables
de las ausencias transitorias
y las definitivas

defender la alegría como un principio
defenderla del pasmo y las pesadillas
de los neutrales y de los neutrones
de las dulces infamias
y los graves diagnósticos

defender la alegría como una bandera
defenderla del rayo y la melancolía
de los ingenuos y de los canallas
de la retórica y los paros cardiacos
de las endemias y las academias

defender la alegría como un destino
defenderla del fuego y de los bomberos
de los suicidas y los homicidas
de las vacaciones y del agobio
de la obligación de estar alegres

defender la alegría como una certeza
defenderla del óxido y la roña
de la famosa pátina del tiempo
del relente y del oportunismo
de los proxenetas de la risa

defender la alegría como un derecho
defenderla de dios y del invierno
de las mayúsculas y de la muerte
de los apellidos y las lástimas
del azar
y también de la alegría."
(Mario Benedetti)

Listen to the poem read by Maria Popova in English: https://youtu.be/zGi2skojQEc
Listen to the poem read by Isabel Behncke in Spanish: https://youtu.be/Ve6-Rlc2JVI

E1.3.D.5_REF6_PO “THE WIND THE RIVER ROILS WELL
The wind the river roils well
And rocks like shells the boats offshore.
Reeds and cattails thrash and turn
As willows loose their streaming hair.

Soon the storm shall strip them bare
And wash downstream the whiplike ferns.
The river past its banks shall pour
And misery reduce to hell.

So do we all await the power
That rises with the rising wind.
The air electric sings of woe,
And darkness like a dirge descends.

Well do we know our fate depends
On more than we will ever know.
Nor will nor prayer that fate rescinds
Though grace attends each anxious hour.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E1.3.D.5_REF7_PO “EVEN A MOLE-RAT
RELISHES THE SWEETNESS
Even a mole-rat relishes the sweetness
Inside its mole-skinned eyes. And a roach,
Groping through a stove-pipe's greasy dust,
Has spots on its soul specialized for joy.
There are salt songs for anemones, and lust
Yet unsavored for a starfish to broach.
Sorrowing butterflies grieve for life's fleetness;
Ecstasy floods them at autumn's approach.
Vines feel the Earth's turning, heavy with must;
Each brief, tilted round their tongues will destroy.
No creature not surfeit with terror and trust.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E1.3.D.6. "WE CAN UNDERSTAND A PHILOSOPHY ALMOST ENTIRELY BY HOW IT CONCEIVES THE NEGATIVE. Even if this conception remains implicit, if the philosopher hasn't explicitly addressed it, and even if they've barely mentioned the "negative," it's still the active core around which everything revolves. The same applies to each of us: tell me how you perceive the negative, and I'll tell you how you think, because that's where all divisions in thought begin. It's not just about how you think, but also how you live—what your choices in life are, whether you're aware of them or not."
(François Jullien, De-coincidence, Where Art and Existence Come From, 2017)

E1.3.D.6_REF2_PH "[1] GOOD VERSUS EVIL. If, in the classical way, we consider the negative to be only external and turn it into evil, whether we are talking about "evils" (war, disease, death...) or moral evil, then we have to eliminate it. This evil is a scandal or an enigma, because it does not fit into any reason for things and calls for liberation from it. This is the discourse of redemption, an eminently dramatic discourse organized in a grand narrative, that of the struggle of good against evil, in which the soul, or whatever name we give to this individual principle of interiority, is involved. Religion, whatever its historical manifestation, is the privileged site of this antagonism. 

[2] THE THEODICY OF HARMONY. Or what we call evil, instead of rejecting it, we integrate it into the order of things. One perceives how "evil" cooperates with what is positively called good, becoming the condition of possibility—the very foundation of negative thought. Indeed, one understands that these concepts are inseparable: without illness, we wouldn't know health; without death, we couldn't grasp life. On a moral level, without the capacity for wrongdoing, we wouldn't comprehend the desire to do good or the promotion of freedom. Nothing is in vain; every misdeed carries a hidden benefit we must learn to detect [...] This is the endless discourse of theodicies justifying God and creation, which Hegel deemed fit to apply to History. Consequently, rather than revolting against what offends us and attempting to exclude it, we aim to include it in the world's "syntax." Instead of focusing on the soul and the singular destiny of the subject, we emphasize the grand cosmic process perceived in its entirety. Rather than privileging the category of the agent or what they passively undergo, we highlight the impersonal functioning of the whole march of things. In place of dramatic narrative, we proceed to explanatory description, meticulously detailing the "harmony." Instead of celebrating the figure of the saint, we praise that of the sage (one extreme represented by Manichaeism, the other by Stoicism). Since Plato and throughout classical philosophy, thinking has meant "moving the cursor somewhere between these opposites.

[3] THE NEGATIVE "ENGINE" - THAT OF THE INADEQUACY OF THE SELF, WHOSE CONTRADICTION, BY DEMANDING TO BE OVERCOME, LEADS TO PROGRESS. But what modernity introduces in this respect, because it has taken advantage of the development of thinking about the "self" or the subject (from Augustine to Descartes), is that when the negative reveals itself as positive, it is no longer only through such an integration into the world in which it would sufficiently find its function and therefore its justification. For it remains outside the subject. It is no longer in the sense that this negative cooperates with the order of the whole, is part of the great economy of things - which is indeed the traditional mode of wisdom. But through a truly internal integration, this time within the self: in that this negative, working within every "self", becomes neg-active by dissociating this self from itself, by bringing it to its development. This is the internal negative that Hegel conceived, but within the traditional framework of truth and its adequacy, i.e. by considering that this internal negative - the negative "engine" - is that of inadequacy within the self, whose contradiction, by demanding to be overcome, leads to progress, both in truth and in history.

[4] THE NEGATIVE OF ADEQUACY, BY UNCOUPLING THE POSITIVE FROM ITS POSITIVITY, IS WHAT PROMOTES EXISTENCE. Now it remains to analyze more closely - that is, even more deeply, by shifting the suspicion further upstream - what this initial inadequacy consists of and what makes decoincidence original. Basically, it remains to be asked whether this inadequacy is not to be found in adequacy itself - and not, as in Hegel's case, still relatively, between the self and its object: whether it is not adequacy itself that is already inadequate, that adequacy which, comforted by its adequacy, freezes and no longer allows itself to be disturbed by what this very state of adequacy would keep it closed to. And so, if it isn't the positive itself that contradicts itself, it is precisely by establishing itself as positive that it reveals itself to be negative through its positivity. This, in turn, takes us beyond the restrictive framework of truth and beyond the forced limits of the Hegelian ideology of progress. And this is precisely what decoincidence ultimately suggests, since it leads us from the thought of being, i.e. of adequate-truth, to the thought of living decoincidentally from ourselves in order to inaugurate, activate, and invent ourselves. Or, to put it in logical terms, but contradicting logic in order to make room for the rise of life that dissociates itself from its present state, it sheds light on how the negative of adequacy, by dissociating adequacy from its own adequacy, or the positive from its positivity, is what promotes existence. It is therefore the very principle of ethics."
(François Jullien, Dé-coïncidence, Where from come art and existence, 2017)

E1.5.B.13.2.wE1.3.D.6.

E1.3.D.6_REF3_PH "ONE DISCOVERS THE LIGHT IN THE DARKNESS, THAT IS WHAT DARKNESS IS FOR; BUT EVERYTHING IN OUR LIVES DEPENDS ON HOW WE BEAR THE LIGHT. It is necessary, while in darkness, to know that there is a light somewhere, to know that in oneself, waiting to be found, there is a light. What the light reveals is danger, and what it demands is faith. [...]
This is why one must say Yes to life and embrace it whenever it is found — and it is found in terrible places; nevertheless, there it is. […]
For nothing is fixed, forever and forever and forever, it is not fixed; the earth is always shifting, the light is always changing, the sea does not cease to grind down rock. Generations do not cease to be born, and we are responsible to them because we are the only witnesses they have.
The sea rises, the light fails, lovers cling to each other, and children cling to us. The moment we cease to hold each other, the moment we break faith with one another, the sea engulfs us and the light goes out."
(James Baldwin, Nothing Personal, 1964)

E1.3.D.6_REF4_PH FACED WITH THE DEPTH OF LOSS AND DISAPPEARANCE IN THE AVERAGE LIFE, A MEASURE OF DENIAL IS CREATIVE, NECESSARY AND SELF-COMPASSIONATE. "DENIAL is deeply underestimated as a state of being. Denial is an ever-present and even splendid thing when seen in the light of its merciful and elemental powers to cradle and hold an identity until it is ready to move on. Faced with the depth of loss and disappearance in the average life, a measure of denial is creative, necessary and self-compassionate: children are not meant to know they are one day to die and older adults are not meant to tell them. Refusing to face what we are not yet ripe and ready to face can help us to live through the more than enough difficulties of the present. [...]
Denial can be a prison if inhabited in too concrete and unmoving a way, but denial is also a necessary stepping-stone and a compassionate foundation for viewing those unable to take the next courageous step. [...]
All of us live with temporary names and temporary stories, which allow us to breathe the air of the present while looking into the eyes of enormous powers that make up our immediate horizon of understanding. [...]
To live in denial is to be in very good company. Denial is the crossroads between perception and readiness; to deny denial is to invite powers into our lives we have not yet readied ourselves to meet."
(David Whyte, Consolations, The Solace, Nourishment and Underlying Meaning of Everyday Words, 2015)

E1.3.D.6_REF4.1_SCI "THE ORIGINS OF LYING AND DECEPTION IN EVERYDAY LIFE

Self-deception clearly it presents both advantages and disadvantages:
Benjamin, a shy young man, calls a woman for a date and is told that she cannot see him because she is busy for the next three weekends. He now has a choice: He can conclude that she does not want to go out with him, and feel humiliated and shamed at the rejection. Alternatively, he can conclude he does not want to date such a busy woman. This spares him the shame and humiliation. In fact, both thoughts pass through his mind, but he remembers only that he does not want to date her.
The psychic advantage of this way of thinking seems clear; in some circumstances, there may be little reason to lower one’s self-esteem by being honest with oneself. On the other hand, self-deception may close off the possibility of learning from one’s mistakes or taking some necessary action—for example, if a person examines his body and discovers an unexplained lump. If the individual persuades himself that the lump has always been there—a false memory—he is likely to take no action. Should the lump be recognized later as a first sign of cancer, the delay of treatment stemming from this self-deception could bring serious consequences. It is fair to say self-deception may be psychologically valuable but also sometimes self-defeating. [...] 

By three years of age, a child’s ability to maintain internal rules and goals enables him to consider the success or failure of his behavior and even to apportion blame or credit for it. [...] This new ability also allows for the emergence of the self-conscious emotions of embarrassment, shame, guilt, and pride. [...] By age three, children show shame when they fail a task and pride when they succeed. These powerful emotions provide the motivation for ways of thinking about themselves, which also allows them to self-deceive around their own success and failure. 
Although it is easiest to observe in young children, where it may be dismissed as simple “play,” self-deception is important for emotional life at all ages. Moreover, as we and Trivers believe, self-deception may be needed for all forms of deception."
(American Scientist, March-April 2015 - Volume 103, Number 2)

E1.3.D.6_REF5_PH WHAT LIES DEEP WITHIN US THAT WE MUST SEEK OUT BECAUSE IT RESIDES ONLY THERE? "Orpheus embodies the enigma of listening, while Narcissus represents the enigma of looking. What do we preserve through listening? What do we preserve through looking? What is there to preserve? These are urgent questions for our time.

Orpheus, to bring back his beloved Eurydice after her death by snakebite, ventures into the underworld. His poetic song moves the gods, who allow him passage, but with one condition: he must not look back as Eurydice follows him to the surface. This myth echoes the journey of great artists, from Dante to Charlie Chaplin, who have traversed the hells of their times to breathe life back into the world.

What in our world should we confront? What hell must we endure to find genuine light? What lies deep within us that we must seek out because it resides only there? Becoming an adult and gaining control over one's existence involves facing death, overcoming fear—both of our own existence and of the world—to find the flower of innocence and metamorphosis. And we must do this without looking back, without being able to measure our actions."
(Fabrice Midal, Let´s look at the world through Narcissus'eyes !, broadcast on France Culture on 08/26/2018)

E1.3.D.6_REF6_CUR GUSTAV KLIMT, BEETHOVEN FRIEZE, 1901 - PART 1 OF 3
"The frieze takes its theme from Richard Wagner's interpretation of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony and depicts human kind's search for happiness. To symbolize this yearning, Klimt chose floating genii who lead us into the story, recurring several times in the frieze as a horizontal chain of figures. On the left-hand wall, this horizontal band is only interrupted by one group of figures: a naked woman standing and a naked couple kneeling - symbols of suffering humanity - beg the knight in shining armor for help. The « Well-armed Strongman » sets off in search of happiness on humanity's behalf, inwardly spurred on by the two allegorical female figures behind him: Ambition and Compassion."
(Wiener Secession)

E1.3.D.6_REF6.1_CUR GUSTAV KLIMT, BEETHOVEN FRIEZE, 1901 - PART 2 OF 3
"In the scene on the narrow wall, humanity must face the dangers and temptations of the « Hostile Forces ». The giant Typhoeus, a hybrid monster with shaggy fur, blue wings, and a snake-like body, extends across almost the entire wall, fixing the viewer with mother-of-pearl eyes. To his left stand his daughters, the three Gorgons, and above them, mask-like female heads stare out of the picture, allegorical representations of Sickness, Madness, and Death. The women to the monster's right symbolize Lasciviousness, Wantonness and Intemperance, the latter identifiable by her large belly. Slightly further to the right cowers the emaciated female figure of « Gnawing Grief ». At the top right of the narrow wall, we see the head of a floating genie. In Klimt's narrative, this stands for humankind's wishes and desires overcoming the « Hostile Forces »."
(Wiener Secession)

E1.3.D.6_REF6.2_CUR GUSTAV KLIMT, BEETHOVEN FRIEZE, 1901 - PART 3 OF 3
"On the right-hand wall, humanity's yearning for happiness finds fulfillment in poetry, portrayed as a female figure with a lyre. This is followed by an empty section under which, in the original exhibition layout, an opening gave a view of Klinger's Beethoven sculpture. With this visual inclusion of the Beethoven icon, Klimt prepared for the frieze's dramatic climax: in the final scene, female figures symbolizing the arts lead the way into the ideal realm of art. Klimt's apotheosis of art consists of a kissing couple in front of the « Choir of Angels », referring directly to Beethoven: the final chorus of Beethoven's Ninth, based on Friedrich von Schiller's Ode to Joy, contains the words « This kiss to the whole world »."
(Wiener Secession)

E1.3.D.6_REF7_PH GENUINE JOY CAN ONLY BE SERIOUS
"Powerful winds that crack the boughs of November! — and the bright calm sun, untouched by the furies of the earth, abandoning the earth to darkness, and wild forlornness, and night, as men shiver in their coats and hurry home. And then the lights of home glowing in those desolate deeps. There are the stars, though! high and sparkling in a spiritual firmament. We will walk in the windsweeps, gloating in the envelopment of ourselves, seeking the sudden grinning intelligence of humanity below these abysmal beauties. Now the roaring midnight fury and the creaking of our hinges and windows, now the winter, now the understanding of the earth and our being on it: this drama of enigmas and double-depths and sorrows and grave joys, these human things in the elemental vastness of the windblown world."
(Jack Kerouac, Windblown World: The Journals of Jack Kerouac, 1947)

E1.3.D.6_REF8_PH DESPAIR IS THE RUDDER COURSE-CORRECTING THE SHIP OF THE SELF, STEERING IT FROM THE ACTUAL TO THE IDEAL. "“There is no love of life without despair of life,” Albert Camus wrote as he reckoned with the rudiments of happiness. “We hope. We despair. We hope. We despair. This is what governs us,” artist Maira Kalman observed in her illustrated chronicle of the pursuit of happiness.

To accept that there can be no happiness without despair is to recognize that, rather than a malady of the spirit, despair is the rudder course-correcting the ship of the self, steering it from the actual to the ideal.

That is what Søren Kierkegaard (May 5, 1813–November 11, 1855) explores in his characteristically grimly titled and characteristically deeply insightful 1849 book The Sickness Unto Death, so radical in some of its ideas that he published it under a pseudonym."
(Maria Popova's review of Søren Kierkegaard's The Sickness Unto Death, 1849,  in The Marginalian)

Read it on The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2023/06/10/kierkegaard-despair/?mc_cid=05c212c00f&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E1.3.D.6_REF8.1_PH "FOR KIERKEGAARD, THE SPIRT AND THE SELF ARE ONE AND DESPAIR IS A SICKNESS IN THEM — ONE EXPOSING THE GAP BETWEEN THE SELF THAT IS, THE SELF THAT KEEPS US SMALL, AND THE SELF THAT CAN BE, THE VAST ETERNAL SELF OF FULL POTENTIATION. With an eye to this spiritual sickness, he writes:

'The self is a relation which relates to itself… A human being is a synthesis of the infinite and the finite, of the temporal and the eternal, of freedom and necessity… A synthesis is a relation between two terms. Looked at in this way a human being is not yet a self. […]

Despair is the imbalance in a relation of synthesis, in a relation which relates to itself.'

Considering the disruption of the self’s relation to itself as the root of despair, he traces the inner machinery of how it sets in:

'If a person in despair is, as he thinks, aware of his despair and doesn’t refer to it mindlessly as something that happens to him… and wants now on his own, all on his own, and with all his might to remove the despair, then he is still in despair and through all his seeming effort only works himself all the more deeply into a deeper despair. The imbalance in despair is not a simple imbalance but an imbalance in a relation that relates to itself and which is established by something else.' [...]

Kierkegaard observes that, on the surface, you always feel yourself despairing over something. But beneath that is really the self’s relation to that something, fomenting a desire to rid yourself of your self in order to expunge the negative feeling — which, Kierkegaard cautions, is an existential impossibility and, as such, sunders the spirit with despair:

'The relation to himself is something a human being cannot be rid of, just as little as he can be rid of himself, which for that matter is one and the same thing, since the self is indeed the relation to oneself… With despair a fire takes hold in something that cannot burn, or cannot be burned up — the self… To despair over oneself, in despair to want to be rid of oneself, is the formula for all despair. [...]

Despair is an aspect of spirit, it has to do with the eternal in a person. But the eternal is something he cannot be rid of, not in all eternity. […]

If there were nothing eternal in a man, he would simply be unable to despair… Having a self, being a self, is the greatest, the infinite, concession that has been made to man, but also eternity’s claim on him.'"
(Maria Popova's review of Søren Kierkegaard's The Sickness Unto Death, 1849,  in The Marginalian)

Read it on The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2023/06/10/kierkegaard-despair/?mc_cid=05c212c00f&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E1.3.D.6_REF9_PH “THE ANTIQUE WORLD AND PLEASURE.—The man of the antique world understood better how to rejoice, we understand better how to grieve less. They continually found new motives for feeling happy, for celebrating festivals, being inventive with all their wealth of shrewdness and reflection. We, on the other hand, concentrate our intellect rather on the solving of problems which have in view painlessness and the removal of sources of discomfort. With regard to suffering existence, the ancients sought to forget or in some way to convert the sensation into a pleasant one, thus trying to supply palliatives. We attack the causes of suffering, and on the whole prefer to use prophylactics.—Perhaps we are only building upon a foundation whereon a later age will once more set up the temple of joy.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 187, 1878)

E1.3.D.7. WINTERING IS THE ACTIVE ACCEPTANCE OF SADNESS. IT IS THE PRACTICE OF ALLOWING OURSELVES TO FEEL IT AS A NEED. "[Since childhood] we are taught to ignore sadness, to stuff it down into our satchels and pretend it isn’t there. As adults, we often have to learn to hear the clarity of its call. That is wintering. It is the active acceptance of sadness. It is the practice of allowing ourselves to feel it as a need. It is the courage to stare down the worst parts of our experience and to commit to healing them the best we can. Wintering is a moment of intuition, our true needs felt keenly as a knife. [...]
When you start tuning in to winter, you realise that we live through a thousand winters in our lives — some big, some small… Some winters creep up on us so slowly that they have infiltrated every part of our lives before we truly feel them. […]
To get better at wintering, we need to address our very notion of time. We tend to imagine that our lives are linear, but they are in fact cyclical. [...]
We are in the habit of imagining our lives to be linear, a long march from birth to death in which we mass our powers, only to surrender them again, all the while slowly losing our youthful beauty. This is a brutal untruth. Life meanders like a path through the woods. We have seasons when we flourish and seasons when the leaves fall from us, revealing our bare bones. Given time, they grow again."
(Katherine May,  Wintering: The Power of Rest and Retreat in Difficult Times, 2020)

E1.3.D.7.1.  "THIS CYCLICAL NATURE OF THE SEASONS OF THE SPIRIT IS COUNTER TO OUR DOMINANT CULTURAL NARRATIVE OF SELF-IMPROVEMENT, WITH ITS ETHOS OF LINEAR PROGRESSION TOWARD STATES OF EVER-INCREASING FLOURISHING.LVES TO FEEL IT AS A NEED. It is counter, too, to the world’s major spiritual traditions, with their ideas of salvation and enlightenment. (Any longtime practitioner of Zen or metta meditation, for instance, knows that while we do reach moments of so-called enlightenment — a gladsome dissolution of the self into an all-pervading lovingkindness — these moments are inevitably punctuated by visitations of our habitual tendencies toward egoic shortness of temper, the self-absorption we call melancholy, and other conditioned modes of unenlightened conduct.) And yet befriending this cyclical rhythm of our inner lives, May observes with life-tested clarity, is the key to wintering — to emerging from the coldest seasons of the soul not only undiminished but revitalized."
(Maria Popova's review of Katherine May's Wintering: The Power of Rest and Retreat in Difficult Times, 2020 - Brain Pickings)

E1.3.D.7.2. "HERE IS ANOTHER TRUTH ABOUT WINTERING: YOU’LL FIND WISDOM IN YOUR WINTER, AND ONCE IT’S OVER, IT’S YOUR RESPONSIBILITY TO PASS IT ON.  It’s an exchange of gifts in which nobody loses out. This may involve the breaking of a lifelong habit, one passed down carefully through generations: that of looking at other people’s misfortunes and feeling certain that they brought them upon themselves in a way that you never would. This isn’t just an unkind attitude. It does us harm, because it keeps us from learning that disasters do indeed happen and how we can adapt when they do. It stops us from reaching out to those who are suffering. And when our own disaster comes, it forces us into a humiliated retreat, as we try to hunt down mistakes that we never made in the first place or wrongheaded attitudes that we never held. Either that, or we become certain that there must be someone out there we can blame. Watching winter and really listening to its messages, we learn that effect is often disproportionate to cause; that tiny mistakes can lead to huge disasters; that life is often bloody unfair, but it carries on happening with or without our consent. We learn to look more kindly on other people’s crises, because they are so often portents of our own future."
(Katherine May,  Wintering: The Power of Rest and Retreat in Difficult Times, 2020)

E1.3.D.7.3. "YOU MUST BE VULNERABLE TO BE SENSITIVE TO REALITY. And to me being vulnerable is just another way of saying that one has nothing more to lose. I don’t have anything but darkness to lose. I’m way beyond that."
(Bob Dylan in interviews,  Listening: Interviews, 1970–1989)

E1.3.D.8. JOHN COWPER POWYS REMINDS US THAT MAINTAINING PEACE OF MIND IN THE FACE OF THE STATE OF THE WORLD IS A CONSTANT STRUGGLE

E1.3.D.8.1. THE MIND HAS ALWAYS TO BE SURMOUNTING OBSTACLES TO ITS PEACE "Just as Montaigne who was a master life-lover is perpetually gathering himself together to cope with Death, so, though I am driven on by a terrific “libido” to write book after book, I feel uneasy and uncomfortable if I am not making constant efforts to adjust my life-illusion and my pride to a situation starker [...]. The mind—heaven help us all!—has always to be surmounting obstacles to its peace; and what I have come to feel is that since, as Heraclitus says, “all life is war” peace of mind is something that must be perpetually fought for and held with a grim clutch. I have come of late to use the phrase “premeditated ecstasy” and I would try to explain what I am aiming at in this daring expression. When our inmost self gathers up its battle-mood and en protois iiachon eche monuchos hippous!” … “and into the mêlée drives with a cry its single-hooved horses,” it attains an interior calm underneath the turmoil of its gesture; and this interior calm offers itself, like a clear mirror beneath confusion, to all those restorative elements, in the impinging weight of the surrounding cosmos, which are the cause of human ecstasy. In reality both the initial peace of mind and its exultant response to these elements are creative acts of the mind itself, of the mind using what is called “the will” and “the imagination”—whatever mysterious activities these may be—to force itself to be strong and exultant in the midst of an opposing turmoil and in the face of a catastrophic menace."
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934)

E1.3.D.8.1_REF1_PO "THE HOPE I HOLD
The leering 1 demon-days 
Deride 2, and reason plays, 
Snug as a raven on a gallows tree 3 
Its ancient game with me,
Flapping its wings and lewdly 4 gibbering 5 
‘Life is a humorous thing!’
But on I fare, clutching— 
It is not gold, 
The hope I hold. 

The hope I hold 
Nature herself with glee 
Derides. And destiny 
With evil goblin laughter indicates 
The adamantine 6 gates, 
And with a maniac-chuckle rallies me, 
‘That way is closed, you see!’ 
But I fare on, clutching— 
It is not gold, 
The hope I hold. 

‘O hope, whose face in madness I have kissed,
O hope, that art a mirage and a mist, 
Shall I destroy thee now, and laugh thereat 7?— 
It is too late for that.’ ” 

Anotations:
1 malicious
2 to laugh at someone or something in a way that shows you think they are stupid
3 hanging tree
4 inclined to lust
5 to speak inarticulately or meaninglessly
6 mythical material
7 instead

(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber, p.530)

E1.3.D.8.1_REF2_PO “IN BLACK DESPAIR
In grayish doubt and black despair,
I drafted hymns to the earth and the air, pretending to joy, although I lacked it.
The age had made lament redundant.
So here's the question -- who can answer it --Was he a brave man or a hypocrite?”
(Czeslaw Milosz)

E1.3.D.8.2. TO FORCE ONESELF TO BE STRONG AND EXULTANT IN THE MIDST OF AN OPPOSING TURMOIL: RADICAL HUMANISM VS. OPTIMISM

E1.3.D.8.2_REF1_PH “PESSIMISM IS MOOD, SAID ALAIN, OPTIMISM IS WILL: ANY MAN WHO LETS HIMSELF GO IS SAD.”
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

"Choose joy. Choose it like a child chooses the shoe to put on the right foot, the crayon to paint a sky. Choose it at first consciously, effortfully, pressing against the weight of a world heavy with reasons for sorrow, restless with need for action. Feel the sorrow, take the action, but keep pressing the weight of joy against it all, until it becomes mindless, automated, like gravity pulling the stream down its course; until it becomes an inner law of nature. If Viktor Frankl can exclaim “yes to life, in spite of everything!” — and what an everything he lived through — then so can any one of us amid the rubble of our plans, so trifling by comparison. Joy is not a function of a life free of friction and frustration, but a function of focus — an inner elevation by the fulcrum of choice. [...]
I think often of this verse from Jane Hirshfield’s splendid poem “The Weighing”:
"So few grains of happiness
measured against all the dark
and still the scales balance."
Yes, except we furnish both the grains and the scales. I alone can weigh the blue of my sky, you of yours."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings)

E1.3.D.8.2_REF2_PH OPTIMISM IS AN ALIENATED FORM OF FAITH, PESSIMISM AN ALIENATED FORM OF DESPAIR. "If one truly responds to man and his future, i.e., concernedly and “responsibly,” one can respond only by faith or by despair. Rational faith as well as rational despair are based on the most thorough, critical knowledge of all the factors that are relevant for the survival of man. The basis of rational faith in man is the presence of a real possibility for his salvation: the basis for rational despair would be the knowledge that no such possibility can be seen. [...]
The statement, “Human nature is evil,” is not a bit more realistic than the statement, “Human nature is good.” But the first statement is much easier to make: anyone who wants to prove man’s evilness finds followers most readily, for he offers everybody an alibi for his own sins — and seemingly risks nothing. Yet the spreading of irrational despair is in itself destructive, as all untruth is; it discourages and confuses. Preaching irrational faith or announcing false Messiahs is hardly less destructive — it seduces and then paralyzes."
(Erich Fromm, The Anatomy of Human Destructiveness, 1972)

Read it in the Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2016/04/04/erich-fromm-anatomy-of-human-destructiveness/?mc_cid=881cb55cba&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E1.3.D.8.2_REF2.1_PH HUMANIST RADICALISM SEEKS TO LIBERATE MAN FROM THE CHAINS OF ILLUSIONS. TO HAVE FAITH MEANS TO DARE, TO THINK THE UNTHINKABLE, YET TO ACT WITHIN THE LIMITS OF THE REALISTICALLY POSSIBLE. "The attitude of the majority is neither that of faith nor that of despair, but, unfortunately, that of complete indifference to the future of man. With those who are not entirely indifferent, the attitude is that of “optimism” or of “pessimism.” The optimists are the believers in the dogma of the continuous march of “progress.” They are accustomed to identifying human achievement with technical achievement, human freedom with freedom from direct coercion and the consumer’s freedom to choose between many allegedly different commodities. The dignity, cooperativeness, kindness of the primitive do not impress them; technical achievement, wealth, toughness do…
The optimists live well enough, at least for the moment, and they can afford to be “optimists.” Or at least that is what they think because they are so alienated that even the threat to the future of their grandchildren does not genuinely affect them. The “pessimists” are really not very different from the optimists. They live just as comfortably and are just as little engaged. The fate of humanity is as little their concern as it is the optimists’. They do not feel despair; if they did, they would not, and could not, live as contentedly as they do. And while their pessimism functions largely to protect the pessimists from any inner demand to do something, by projecting the idea that nothing can be done, the optimists defend them selves against the same inner demand by persuading them selves that everything is moving in the right direction anyway, so nothing needs to be done. [...]

Humanist radicalism … seeks to liberate man from the chains of illusions; it postulates that fundamental changes are necessary, not only in our economic and political structure but also in our values, in our concept of man’s aims, and in our personal conduct.
To have faith means to dare, to think the unthinkable, yet to act within the limits of the realistically possible; it is the paradoxical hope to expect the Messiah every day, yet not to lose heart when he has not come at the appointed hour. This hope is not passive and it is not patient; on the contrary, it is impatient and active, looking for every possibility of action within the realm of real possibilities. [...]

The situation of mankind today is too serious to permit us to listen to the demagogues — least of all demagogues who are attracted to destruction — or even to the leaders who use only their brains and whose hearts have hardened. Critical and radical thought will only bear fruit when it is blended with the most precious quality man is endowed with — the love of life."
(Erich Fromm, The Anatomy of Human Destructiveness, 1972)

Read it in the Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2016/04/04/erich-fromm-anatomy-of-human-destructiveness/?mc_cid=881cb55cba&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E1.6.E.wE1.3.D.8.2_REF2_PH

E1.3.D.8.2_REF3_PH THE HOPE I’M INTERESTED IN IS ABOUT BROAD PERSPECTIVES WITH SPECIFIC POSSIBILITIES, ONES THAT INVITE OR DEMAND THAT WE ACT. [...] You could call it an account of complexities and uncertainties, with openings. [...]
When you recognize uncertainty, you recognize that you may be able to influence the outcomes — you alone or you in concert with a few dozen or several million others. Hope is an embrace of the unknown and the unknowable, an alternative to the certainty of both optimists and pessimists. 

E1.3.D.8.2_REF3.1_LIT WE NEED A A WAR CHANT FOR OUR VICTORIES "Amnesia leads to despair in many ways. "The status quo would like you to believe it is immutable, inevitable, and invulnerable, and lack of memory of a dynamically changing world reinforces this view. In other words, when you don’t know how much things have changed, you don’t see that they are changing or that they can change. [...]
You row forward looking back, and telling this history is part of helping people navigate toward the future. We need a litany, a rosary, a sutra, a mantra, a war chant for our victories. The past is set in daylight, and it can become a torch we can carry into the night that is the future."
(Rebecca Solnit, Hope in the Dark: Untold Histories, Wild Possibilities, 2003)

E1.3.D.8.2_REF3.2_LIT HOPE LOCATES ITSELF IN THE PREMISES THAT WE DON’T KNOW WHAT WILL HAPPEN AND THAT IN THE SPACIOUSNESS OF UNCERTAINTY IS ROOM TO ACT. "Hope is a gift you don’t have to surrender, a power you don’t have to throw away. And though hope can be an act of defiance, defiance isn’t enough reason to hope. But there are good reasons. [...]
Progressive, populist, and grassroots constituencies have had many victories. Popular power has continued to be a profound force for change. And the changes we’ve undergone, both wonderful and terrible, are astonishing. […]
This is an extraordinary time full of vital, transformative movements that could not be foreseen. It’s also a nightmarish time. Full engagement requires the ability to perceive both. [...]
It’s important to say what hope is not: it is not the belief that everything was, is, or will be fine. The evidence is all around us of tremendous suffering and tremendous destruction. The hope I’m interested in is about broad perspectives with specific possibilities, ones that invite or demand that we act. It’s also not a sunny everything-is-getting-better narrative, though it may be a counter to the everything-is-getting-worse narrative. You could call it an account of complexities and uncertainties, with openings. [...]
Hope locates itself in the premises that we don’t know what will happen and that in the spaciousness of uncertainty is room to act. When you recognize uncertainty, you recognize that you may be able to influence the outcomes — you alone or you in concert with a few dozen or several million others. Hope is an embrace of the unknown and the unknowable, an alternative to the certainty of both optimists and pessimists. Optimists think it will all be fine without our involvement; pessimists take the opposite position; both excuse themselves from acting. It’s the belief that what we do matters even though how and when it may matter, who and what it may impact, are not things we can know beforehand. We may not, in fact, know them afterward either, but they matter all the same, and history is full of people whose influence was most powerful after they were gone. [...]
Amnesia leads to despair in many ways. The status quo would like you to believe it is immutable, inevitable, and invulnerable, and lack of memory of a dynamically changing world reinforces this view. In other words, when you don’t know how much things have changed, you don’t see that they are changing or that they can change. [...]
You row forward looking back, and telling this history is part of helping people navigate toward the future. We need a litany, a rosary, a sutra, a mantra, a war chant for our victories. The past is set in daylight, and it can become a torch we can carry into the night that is the future."
(Rebecca Solnit, Hope in the Dark: Untold Histories, Wild Possibilities, 2003)

E1.3.D.8.2_REF3.2.a_LIT "IDEAS AT FIRST CONSIDERED OUTRAGEOUS OR RIDICULOUS OR EXTREME GRADUALLY BECOME WHAT PEOPLE THINK THEY’VE ALWAYS BELIEVED. How the transformation happened is rarely remembered, in part because it’s compromising: it recalls the mainstream when the mainstream was, say, rabidly homophobic or racist in a way it no longer is; and it recalls that power comes from the shadows and the margins, that our hope is in the dark around the edges, not the limelight of center stage. Our hope and often our power. […]
Change is rarely straightforward… Sometimes it’s as complex as chaos theory and as slow as evolution. Even things that seem to happen suddenly arise from deep roots in the past or from long-dormant seeds. [...]
A victory doesn’t mean that everything is now going to be nice forever and we can therefore all go lounge around until the end of time. Some activists are afraid that if we acknowledge victory, people will give up the struggle. I’ve long been more afraid that people will give up and go home or never get started in the first place if they think no victory is possible or fail to recognize the victories already achieved. Marriage equality is not the end of homophobia, but it’s something to celebrate. A victory is a milestone on the road, evidence that sometimes we win, and encouragement to keep going, not to stop. [...]
Americans are good at responding to crisis and then going home to let another crisis brew both because we imagine that the finality of death can be achieved in life — it’s called happily ever after in personal life, saved in politics — and because we tend to think political engagement is something for emergencies rather than, as people in many other countries (and Americans at other times) have imagined it, as a part and even a pleasure of everyday life. The problem seldom goes home. […]
Going home seems to be a way to abandon victories when they’re still delicate, still in need of protection and encouragement. Human babies are helpless at birth, and so perhaps are victories before they’ve been consolidated into the culture’s sense of how things should be. I wonder sometimes what would happen if victory was imagined not just as the elimination of evil but the establishment of good — if, after American slavery had been abolished, Reconstruction’s promises of economic justice had been enforced by the abolitionists, or, similarly, if the end of apartheid had been seen as meaning instituting economic justice as well (or, as some South Africans put it, ending economic apartheid).
It’s always too soon to go home. Most of the great victories continue to unfold, unfinished in the sense that they are not yet fully realized, but also in the sense that they continue to spread influence. A phenomenon like the civil rights movement creates a vocabulary and a toolbox for social change used around the globe, so that its effects far outstrip its goals and specific achievements — and failures."
(Rebecca Solnit, Hope in the Dark: Untold Histories, Wild Possibilities, 2003)

E1.6.E.wE1.3.D.8.2_REF3.2.a_LIT

E1.3.D.8.2_REF3.2.b_LIT ”IT IS NOT WHO OR WHAT WE PRAY TO BUT WHAT WE PRAY FOR THAT REVEALS AND REDEEMS OUR LIVES; [it is not] what we pray for, not on our knees but in our choices and the stories we tell about them, conjures up the world we yearn to live in and it is our yearning that we act upon to make the world. Every choice we make in our political and personal lives is a prayer. All change is prayerful action toward a different kind of world — an act of faith toward the future and an act of heresy toward the status quo.”
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.3.D.8.2_REF3.3_LIT "THE FUTURE IS DARK, WHICH IS THE BEST THING THE FUTURE CAN BE, I THINK," Virginia Woolf wrote in her journal on January 18, 1915 [...]
It's an extraordinary declaration, asserting that the unknown need not be turned into the known through false divination or the projection of grim political or ideological narratives; it's a celebration of darkness, willing - as that "I think" indicates to be uncertain even about its own assertion.

Most people are afraid of the dark. Literally when it comes to children, while many adults fear, above all, the darkness that is the unknown, the unseeable, the obscure. And yet the night in which distinctions and definitions cannot be readily made is the same night in which love is made, in which things merge, change, become enchanted, aroused, impregnated, possessed, released, renewed.

As I began writing this essay, I picked up a book on wilderness survival by Laurence Gonzalez and found in it this telling sentence: "The plan, a memory of the future, tries on reality to see if it fits." His point is that when the two seem incompatible we often hang onto the plan, ignore the warnings reality offers us, and so plunge into trouble. Afraid of the darkness of the unknown, the spaces in which we see only dimly, we often choose the darkness of closed eyes, of obliviousness. Gonzalez adds, "Researchers point out that people tend to take any information as confirmation of their mental models. We are by nature optimists, if optimism means that we believe we see the world as it is. And under the influence of a plan, it's easy to see what we want to see." It's the job of writers and explorers to see more, to travel light when it comes to preconception, to go into the dark with their eyes open. [...]

You don't know if your actions are futile; that you don't have the memory of the future; that the future is indeed dark, which is the best thing it could be; and that, in the end, we always act in the dark. The effects of your actions may unfold in ways you cannot foresee or even imagine. They may unfold long after your death. That is when the words of so many writers often resonate most. [...]"
(Rebecca Solnit, Woolf's Darkness: Embracing the Inexplicable, 2009)

E1.3.D.8.2_REF3.3.a_LIT  "TO ME, THE GROUNDS FOR HOPE ARE SIMPLY THAT WE DON'T KNOW WHAT WILL HAPPEN NEXT, AND THAT THE UNLIKELY AND THE UNIMAGINABLE TRANSPIRE QUITE REGULARLY. And that the unofficial history of the world shows that dedicated individuals and popular movements can shape history and have, though how and when we might win and how long it takes is not predictable.

Despair is a form of certainty, certainty that the future will be a lot like the present or will decline from it; despair is a confident memory of the future [...]

Optimism is similarly confident about what will happen. Both are grounds for not acting. Hope can be the knowledge that we don't have that memory and that reality doesn't necessarily match our plans; hope like creative ability can come from what the Romantic poet John Keats called Negative Capability.

On a midwinter's night in 1817, a little over a century before Woolf's journal entry on darkness, the poet John Keats walked home talking with some friends and as he wrote in a celebrated letter describing that walk, "several things dove-tailed in my mind, and at once it struck me what quality went to form a Man of Achievement, especially in Literature.... I mean Negative Capability, that is, when a man is capable of being in uncertainties, mysteries, doubts, without any irritable reaching after fact and reason." [...]

Keats walking and talking and having several things dovetail in his mind suggests the way wandering on foot can lead to the wandering of imagination and to an understanding that is creation itself, the activity that makes introspection an outdoor pursuit. In her memoir "A Sketch of the Past," Woolf wrote, "Then one day walking round Tavistock Square I made up, as I sometimes make up my books, To the Lighthouse; in a great, apparently involuntary, rush. One thing burst into another. Blowing bubbles out of a pipe gives the feeling of the rapid crowd of ideas and scenes which blew out of my mind, so that my lips seemed syllabling of their own accord as I walked. What blew the bubbles? Why then? I have no notion."
(Rebecca Solnit, Woolf's Darkness: Embracing the Inexplicable, 2009)

“Above the shattered world there stretches a pure blue heaven, which continues to hold it together.”
(Elias Canetti)

E1.3.D.8.2_REF3.4_PO IT IS DARK BUT I SING
"The land is still dark
In the peasant dawn 
But planting is a must.
Night was deeper,
Now morning is coming. 
The song made of fear
Lost all its value:
It doesn't fool solitude.
It's time now for a simple 
Constant song of truth. 
Time to be merry:
Life is built day by day 
With bread and song.
I feel in the air
The scent of ripe wheat.
Time of harvest.
I see miracles like
A blue rain on the cornfield,
Beanstalks bursting into flower 
Fresh sap flowing from the rubber trees
In the distant riverside stand.
The time to love is almost here.
I pick up the fiery sun in the ground
And plow the light within the sugarcane:
My soul in seating on its pennant. A dawn full of hope.
The land is still dark (it's clearer now),
Working is worthwhile.
It is dark but I sing
For morning is coming soon."
(Thiago de Mello, "The Peasant Dawn/Madrugada camponesa, in: Man: view from the forest /A floresta e o homem Edited and translated by Sergio Bath Manaus: Editora Valer, Prefeitura de Manaus, 2006)

E1.3.D.8.2_REF3.4.a_PO EVEN THE DARKEST CLOUD HAS A SILVER LINING
“With my head bowed low,
I walked alone, deep in thought,
When suddenly I heard
The clear voice of a cheerful little bird.

It said: Take heart,
Hope is a treasure.
Even the darkest cloud
Has a silver lining.

Even the darkest cloud
Always has a silver lining.

When evening falls,
I hear the little bird
Chirping up there in the shadows,
On the branch by the water's edge.

And soon its sweet song
Gives me new strength.
Even the darkest cloud
Always has a silver lining.

Even the darkest cloud
Always has a silver lining.
(Song by Les Petits Chanteurs à la Croix)

MEME LE PLUS NOIR NUAGE A TOUJOURS SA FRANGE D'OR
“Le front penché sur la Terre
J'allais seul et soucieux
Quand résonna la voix claire
D'un petit oiseau joyeux

Il disait: reprends courage
L'espérance est un trésor
Même le plus noir nuage
A toujours sa frange d'or

Même le plus noir nuage
A toujours sa frange d'or

Lorsque le soir se fait sombre
J'entends le petit oiseau
Gazouiller là-haut, dans l'ombre
Sur la branche au bord de l'eau

Et bientôt son doux ramage
Me donne un nouvel essor
Même le plus noir nuage
A toujours sa frange d'or

Même le plus noir nuage
A toujours sa frange d'or”
(Chanson des Petits Chanteurs à la Croix)

E1.3.D.8.2_REF3.5_PO "THE HALF-LIFE OF HOPE

Walking beneath the concrete canopy
     of Manhattan
I find myself thinking about
Charles B. Kaufmann
     who
just after the end
of the Second World War
invented bird spikes
     who
thought it a fine idea
to fang the roofs
of hospitals and banks,
to weaponize the libraries
to keep the thing with feathers
from perching on our homes
to keep the angels
     from alighting.

Twenty bird generations later
atop a maple tree
outside a hospital in Belgium
a magpie has heisted
a thousand metal spikes
to make of them
     a nest
to sing from it
the requiem
     of the saved."
(Maria Popova)

Listen to the poem read by the Author: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YmFnX-kUMgs

E1.6.C.2.4.wE1.3.D.8.2_REF3_PH

E1.3.D.8.2_REF3.6_PO HOPE" IS THE THING WITH FEATHERS -
THAT PERCHES IN THE SOUL -

And sings the tune without the words -

And never stops - at all -



And sweetest - in the Gale - is heard -

And sore must be the storm -

That could abash the little Bird

That kept so many warm -



I’ve heard it in the chillest land -

And on the strangest Sea -

Yet - never - in Extremity,

It asked a crumb - of me."
(Emily Dickinson)

E1.3.D.8.2_REF3.7_LIT  “HOPE IS NOT THE SAME AS JOY THAT THINGS ARE GOING WELL, or willingness to invest in enterprises that are obviously headed for early success, but, rather, an ability to work for something because it is good, not just because it stands a chance to succeed.”
(Václav Havel)

E1.3.D.8.2_REF3.8_PO “PROVERBS OF TRUST
1. Trust is a decision.
2. The bestowal of trust is a gift; its maintenance, a
reward.
3. Trust engenders trust; distrust engenders distrust.
4. It is far better to trust and be disappointed in a
person than to distrust and be disappointed in life.
5. Trust differs from blindness as love differs from
obsession.
6. The proper limit of trust is prudence, not fear.
7. Trust permits risk, which permits change, which
permits growth.
8. Trust in the future is called hope.
9. Hope, like all forms of trust, is based on a
combination of desire, experience, and will.
10. Without hope, life is not possible.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E1.3.D.8.2_REF4_PO CAN WE ARRIVE AT THE CONCLUSION THAT THERE IS NO HOPE? ARE WE TRAPPED CREATURES, DISTRACTING OURSELVES WITH TRIVIALITIES WHILE BEING PERIODICALLY DRIVEN TO INSANE ACTS OF SELF-DESTRUCTION? HAVE WE COME TO THE END OF DREAMS?
“WE ARE GETTING TO THE END “
We know that even as larks in cages sing
Unthoughtful of deliverance from the curse
That holds them lifelong in a latticed hearse,
We ply spasmodically our pleasuring.
And that when nations set them to lay waste
Their neighbours’ heritage by foot and horse,
And hack their pleasant plains in festering scams.
They may again,—not warely, or from taste.
But tickled mad by some demonic force.—
Yes, We are getting to the end of dreams!”
(Thomas Hardy, The Collected Poems, 1840-1928)

E1.3.D.8.2_REF5_LIT THE SEDUCTION OF PESSIMISM
“For reasons I have never understood, people like to hear that the world is going to hell.”
—Historian Deirdre McCloskey
Optimism is the best bet for most people because the world tends to get better for most people most of the time.
But pessimism holds a special place in our hearts. Pessimism isn’t just more common than optimism. It also sounds smarter. It’s intellectually captivating, and it’s paid more attention than optimism, which is often viewed as being oblivious to risk.
Before we go further we should deﬁne what optimism is. Real optimists don’t believe that everything will be great. That’s complacency. Optimism is a belief that the odds of a good outcome are in your favor over time, even when there will be setbacks along the way. The simple idea that most people wake up in the morning trying to make things a little better and more productive than wake up looking to cause trouble is the foundation of optimism. It’s not complicated. It’s not guaranteed, either. It’s just the most reasonable bet for most people, most of the time. The late statistician Hans Rosling put it diﬀerently: “I am not an optimist. I am a very serious possibilist.”
Now we can discuss optimism’s more compelling sibling: pessimism. […]

“Every group of people I ask thinks the world is more frightening, more violent, and more hopeless—in short, more dramatic—than it really is,” Hans Rosling wrote in his book Factfulness.
When you realize how much progress humans can make during a lifetime in everything from economic growth to medical breakthroughs to stock market gains to social equality, you would think optimism would gain more attention than pessimism. And yet.
The intellectual allure of pessimism has been known for ages. John Stuart Mill wrote in the 1840s: “I have observed that not the man who hopes when others despair, but the man who despairs when others hope, is admired by a large class of persons as a sage.” […]
The question is, why? And how does it impact how we think about money?

Let’s repeat the premise that no one is crazy.
There are valid reasons why pessimism is seductive when dealing with money. It just helps to know what they are to ensure we don’t take them too far.
Part of it is instinctual and unavoidable. Kahneman says the asymmetric aversion to loss is an evolutionary shield. He writes:
When directly compared or weighted against each other, losses loom larger than gains. This asymmetry between the power of positive and negative expectations or experiences has an evolutionary history. Organisms that treat threats as more urgent than opportunities have a better chance to survive and reproduce.
But a few other things make ﬁnancial pessimism easy, common, and more persuasive than optimism.
[1.] One is that money is ubiquitous, so something bad happening tends to aﬀect everyone and captures everyone’s attention.
That isn’t true of, say, weather. A hurricane barreling down on Florida poses no direct risk to 92% of Americans. But a recession barreling down on the economy could impact every single person—including you, so pay attention. […]

There are two topics that will aﬀect your life whether you are interested in them or not: money and health. While health issues tend to be individual, money issues are more systemic. In a connected system where one person’s decisions can aﬀect everyone else, it’s understandable why ﬁnancial risks gain a spotlight and capture attention in a way few other topics can.
[2.] Another is that pessimists often extrapolate present trends without accounting for how markets adapt. […]

Assuming that something ugly will stay ugly is an easy forecast to make. And it’s persuasive, because it doesn’t require imagining the world changing. But problems correct and people adapt. Threats incentivize solutions in equal magnitude. That’s a common plot of economic history that is too easily forgotten by pessimists who forecast in straight lines.
[3.] A third is that progress happens too slowly to notice, but setbacks happen too quickly to ignore.
There are lots of overnight tragedies. There are rarely overnight miracles. […]
Growth is driven by compounding, which always takes time. Destruction is driven by single points of failure, which can happen in seconds, and loss of conﬁdence, which can happen in an instant. […]
It’s easier to create a narrative around pessimism because the story pieces tend to be fresher and more recent. Optimistic narratives require looking at a long stretch of history and developments, which people tend to forget and take more eﬀort to piece together.”
(Morgan Housel, The Psychology of Money, 2020)

E1.3.D.8.2.a. CRITICAL THINKING WITHOUT HOPE IS CYNICISM. HOPE WITHOUT CRITICAL THINKING IS NAIVETY.

E1.3.D.8.2.a_REF1_PH "TO LIVE WITH SINCERITY IN OUR CULTURE OF CYNICISM IS A DIFFICULT DANCE — one that comes easily only to the very young and the very old. The rest of us are left to tussle with two polarizing forces ripping the psyche asunder by beckoning to it from opposite directions — critical thinking and hope.

Critical thinking without hope is cynicism. Hope without critical thinking is naïveté.

Finding fault and feeling hopeless about improving the situation produces resignation — cynicism is both resignation’s symptom and a futile self-protection mechanism against it. Blindly believing that everything will work out just fine also produces resignation, for we have no motive to apply ourselves toward making things better. But in order to survive — both as individuals and as a civilization — and especially in order to thrive, we need the right balance of critical thinking and hope. [...]

Yes, people sometimes do horrible things, and we can speculate about why they do them until we run out of words and sanity. But evil only prevails when we mistake it for the norm. There is so much goodness in the world — all we have to do is remind one another of it, show up for it, and refuse to leave.
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings, Hope, Cynicism, and the Stories We Tell Ourselves)

Read it in the Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2015/02/09/hope-cynicism/?mc_cid=881cb55cba&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E1.3.D.8.2.a_REF2_LIT IMPROPER EXPECTATION IS DICTATED NOT BY REASON, BUT BY DESIRE "Hope is itself a species of happiness, and, perhaps, the chief happiness which this world affords : but, like all other pleasures immoderately enjoyed, the excesses of hope must be expiated by pain ; and expectations improperly indulged, must end in disappointment. If it be asked, what is the improper expectation which it is dangerous to indulge, experience will quickly answer, that it is such expectation as is dictated not by reason, but by desire ; expectation raised, not by the common occurrences of life, but by the wants of the expectant ; an expectation that requires the common course of things to be changed, and the general rules of action to be broken."
(Boswell’s Life of Johnson, revised third edition 1799, first published in 1791)

E1.3.D.8.2.a_REF3_PH "FOLLOWING THE LAST FEW YEARS I'M FEELING EMPTY AND MORE CYNICAL THAN EVER. I'm losing faith in other people, and I'm scared to pass these feelings to my little son. Do you still believe in Us (human beings)?
VALERIO, STOCKHOLM (AND ROME), SWEDEN (AND ITALY)

Dear Valerio,

You are right to be worried about your growing feelings of cynicism and you need to take action to protect yourself and those around you, especially your child. Cynicism is not a neutral position — and although it asks almost nothing of us, it is highly infectious and unbelievably destructive. In my view, it is the most common and easy of evils.
 
I know this because much of my early life was spent holding the world and the people in it in contempt. It was a position both seductive and indulgent. The truth is, I was young and had no idea what was coming down the line. I lacked the knowledge, the foresight, the self-awareness. I just didn’t know. It took a devastation to teach me the preciousness of life and the essential goodness of people. It took a devastation to reveal the precariousness of the world, of its very soul, to understand that it was crying out for help. It took a devastation to understand the idea of mortal value, and it took a devastation to find hope.
 
Unlike cynicism, hopefulness is hard-earned, makes demands upon us, and can often feel like the most indefensible and lonely place on Earth. Hopefulness is not a neutral position either. It is adversarial. It is the warrior emotion that can lay waste to cynicism. Each redemptive or loving act, as small as you like, Valerio, such as reading to your little boy, or showing him a thing you love, or singing him a song, or putting on his shoes, keeps the devil down in the hole. It says the world and its inhabitants have value and are worth defending. It says the world is worth believing in. In time, we come to find that it is so.
 
Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #190 / APRIL 2022)

E1.3.D.8.2.a_REF3.1_PH WE ARE AT WAR WITH THE MUNDANE AND THE UNINSPIRED. APATHY AND COMPLACENCY ARE MORAL FAILINGS AND OUR URGENT DUTY IS TO BE OF SERVICE TO THE WORLD.
"In what way did the profession of your father influence you as an artist and as a person?
MICHAEL, SEVENOAKS, ENGLAND

Dear Michael,

[...] My father instilled in me the idea of the pre-eminence of creativity – that to create was an act of largesse that had the capacity to redeem the world, and that the pursuit of this path was a serious matter. My father despised cynicism. He felt that whatever a person decided to do in life, they needed to apply themselves fully to the task, and not fuck around. Admittedly, I took a fairly destructive and treacherous route on the way to understanding what he meant. But I know now. He meant that we are at war with the mundane and the uninspired, and that apathy and complacency are moral failings and that it is our urgent duty to be of service to the world. He meant that what we do in life has consequences, and that each of us are effectual and of great value. He believed in the sovereignty of the individual and felt that although we do not always have control over the things that happen to us, it is entirely our choice how we live our life in relation to them. [...]

With love, Nick"

(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #29 / MARCH 2019)

Read it on the The Red Hand Files: https://www.theredhandfiles.com/what-is-your-earliest-memory/

E1.3.D.8.2.a_REF4_PH "MY RELATIONSHIP TO MYSELF IS MEDIATED BY THE PRESENCE OF THE OTHER PERSON, by what he is for me and what I am for him. To love anybody is to expect something from him, something which can neither be defined nor foreseen; it is at the same time in someway to make it possible for him to fulfill this expectation. Yes, paradoxical as it may seem, to expect is in someway to give: but the opposite is none the less true; no longer to expect is to strike with the sterility the being from whom no more is expected. It is then in some way to deprive him or to take from him in advance what is surely a certain possibility of inventing or creating [himself]. Everything looks as though we can only speak of hope where the interaction exists between him who gives and him who receives, where there is that exchange which is the mark of all spiritual life. [...]
It is precisely where such love exists, and only where it exists, that we can speak of hope. […]
We might say that hope is essentially the availability of a soul which has entered intimately enough into the experience of communion to accomplish in the teeth of will and knowledge the transcendent act. [...]
[To those who feel imprisoned by despair, for whom to hope appears utterly beyond their power, Marcel answers with the ultimate, most lucid and luminous antidote to cynicism, which is at bottom a form of alienation from life and each other (Maria Popova):]
The simple fact that you ask me the question already constitutes a sort of first breach in your prison. In reality it is not simply a question you ask me; it is an appeal you address to me, and to which I can only respond by urging you not only to depend on me but also not to give up, not to let go, and, if only very humbly and feebly, to act as if this Hope lived in you… What is important to understand thoroughly is that if it is shifted to the level of intersubjectivity, the problem changes its nature: the despairing person ceases to be an object about which one asks [and] is re-established in his condition as a subject, and at the same time, he is integrated into a living relation with the world of men, from which he had cut himself off."
(Gabriel Marcel, Homo Viator: Introduction to the Metaphysic of Hope, 1962)

E1.3.D.8.2.a_REF5_PH "DON’T JUST RESIST CYNICISM — FIGHT IT ACTIVELY. Fight it in yourself, for this ungainly beast lays dormant in each of us, and counter it in those you love and engage with, by modeling its opposite. Cynicism often masquerades as nobler faculties and dispositions, but is categorically inferior. Unlike that great Rilkean life-expanding doubt, it is a contracting force. Unlike critical thinking, that pillar of reason and necessary counterpart to hope, it is inherently uncreative, unconstructive, and spiritually corrosive. Life, like the universe itself, tolerates no stasis — in the absence of growth, decay usurps the order. Like all forms of destruction, cynicism is infinitely easier and lazier than construction. There is nothing more difficult yet more gratifying in our society than living with sincerity and acting from a place of largehearted, constructive, rational faith in the human spirit, continually bending toward growth and betterment. This remains the most potent antidote to cynicism. Today, especially, it is an act of courage and resistance."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.3.D.8.2.a_REF6_PH “WARNING TO THE DESPISED.—When we have sunk unmistakably in the estimation of mankind we should cling tooth and nail to modesty in intercourse, or we shall betray to others that we have sunk in our own estimation as well. Cynicism in intercourse is a sign that a man, when alone, treats himself too as a dog.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 256, 1878)

E1.3.D.8.2.a_REF7_LIT GRAVITY AND SADNESS YANK US DOWN, AND HOPE GIVES US A NUDGE TO HELP ONE ANOTHER GET BACK UP OR TO SIT WITH THE FALLEN ON THE GROUND, IN THE ABYSS, IN SOLIDARITY. "What I resist is not the truth but when people put a pretty bow on scary things instead of saying, “This is a nightmare. I hate everything. I’m going to go hide in the garage.” […]

My understanding of incarnation is that we are not served by getting away from the grubbiness of suffering. Sometimes we feel that we are barely pulling ourselves forward through a tight tunnel on badly scraped-up elbows. But we do come out the other side, exhausted and changed. […]

To heal, it seems we have to stand in the middle of the horror, at the foot of the cross, and wait out another’s suffering where that person can see us. [...]

No matter what happens to us — to our children, to our town, to our world — we feel it is still a gift to be human and to have a human life, as long as we ignore the commercials and advertisements and the static that the world beams at us, and understand that we and our children are going to get knocked around, sometimes so cruelly that it will take our breath away. Life can be wild, hard and sweet, but it can also be wild, hard and cruel.

The bad news is that after the suffering, we wait at the empty tomb for a while, the body of our beloved gone, grieving an unsurvivable loss.

It’s a terrible system. But the good news is that then there is new life. Wildflowers bloom again… They’re both such surprises. Wildflowers stop you in your hiking tracks. You want to savor the colors and scents, let them breathe you in, let yourself be amazed. And bulbs that grow in the cold rocky dirt remind us that no one is lost. [...]

A great truth, attributed to Emily Dickinson, is that “hope inspires the good to reveal itself.” This is almost all I ever need to remember. Gravity and sadness yank us down, and hope gives us a nudge to help one another get back up or to sit with the fallen on the ground, in the abyss, in solidarity."
(Anne Lamott, Stitches: A Handbook on Meaning, Hope and Repair)

E1.3.D.8.2.a_REF8_PH RADICAL OPTIMISM HAS EXPERIENCED THE SUFFERING OF THE WORLD, BELIEVES IN THE INSUBORDINATE NATURE OF HOPE AND IS FOREVER AT WAR WITH BANAL PESSIMISM, CYNICISM AND NIHILISM.
"Do you have hope?
ANNA, HAMBURG, GERMANY

Are you an optimist?
RAYMOND, DALLAS, USA

What does Christmas mean to you?
GREG, SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA

Dear Anna, Raymond and Greg,

Hope and optimism can be different, almost opposing, forces. Hope rises out of known suffering and is the defiant and dissenting spark that refuses to be extinguished. Optimism, on the other hand, can be the denial of that suffering, a fear of facing the darkness, a lack of awareness, a kind of blindness to the actual. Hope is wised-up and disobedient. Optimism can be fearful and false. However, there exists another form of optimism, a kind of radical optimism. This optimism has experienced the suffering of the world, believes in the insubordinate nature of hope and is forever at war with banal pessimism, cynicism and nihilism. [...]"

Love, Nick

The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #178 / DECEMBER 2021

E1.3.D.8.2.a_REF9_PH "WHEN WE DO EVIL, WE DON'T KNOW IT, BECAUSE EVIL FLEES FROM THE LIGHT. 

Does evil, as we conceive it when we don't do it, exist? Doesn't the evil we do seem to be something simple, natural, and self-evident? Isn't evil analogous to illusion? When we fall victim to an illusion, we don't feel it as an illusion, but as a reality. The same may be true of evil. When we are in evil, we do not feel it as evil, but as a necessity or even a duty. 

Once we do evil, evil appears as a kind of duty. Most people feel a sense of duty to do some bad things and some good things. The same person feels it is his duty to sell for as much as he can, not to steal, and so on. The good in them is on the level of evil, a good without light.
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)


E1.3.D.8.2.a_REF10_PH "PERHAPS THE GRAVEST VIOLENCE WE CAN DO TO OURSELVES IS TO LIVE OUT OUR LIVES BELIEVING THE WORLD TO BE A FIXITY handed down to us by the authorities of history and life to be a matter of taking immutable givens. Daring to believe otherwise — to believe that even our smallest purposeful action alters the monolith of reality in some subtle, meaningful way — is an act of courage and resistance, an act of immense vulnerability to the possibility of disappointment, vulnerability the commonest cowering from which is cynicism."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings)
"Never forget what you were born knowing. That this fluke, single, huge, cross-indexed, thermodynamic experiment of a story that the world has been inventing to tell itself at bedtime is still in embryo. It’s not even the outline of a synopsis of notes toward a rough draft yet. Buy the plot some time."
(Richard Powers, Take My Advice: Letters to the Next Generation from People Who Know a Thing or Two, 2002)

E1.5.F.6_REF3_PSI.wE1.3.D.8.2.

E1.3.D.8.2.a_REF11_LIT "WE LOSE HOPE, SOLNIT SUGGESTS, BECAUSE WE LOSE PERSPECTIVE — WE LOSE SIGHT OF THE “ACCRETION OF INCREMENTAL, IMPERCEPTIBLE CHANGES” WHICH CONSTITUTE PROGRESS and which render our era dramatically different from the past, a contrast obscured by the undramatic nature of gradual transformation punctuated by occasional tumult. [...]

"Imagine the world as a theater. The acts of the powerful and the official occupy center stage. The traditional versions of history, the conventional sources of news encourage us to fix our gaze on the stage. The limelights there are so bright they blind you to the shadowy spaces around you, make it hard to meet the gaze of the other people in the seats, to see the way out of the audience, into the aisles, backstage, outside, in the dark, where other powers are at work. A lot of the fate of the world is decided onstage, in the limelight, and the actors there will tell you that no other place matters."

In a passage that calls to mind Simone Weil’s memorable words — “When someone exposes himself as a slave in the market place, what wonder if he finds a master?” 

[...]  She considers the disposition of the hopeless:

"They speak as though we should wait  for improvement to be handed to us, not as though we might seize it. Perhaps their despair is in some ways simply that they are audience rather than actors."

Our most radiant horizon of hope, Solnit argues, lies in the darkness beyond the limelight:

"The grounds for hope are in the shadows, in the people who are inventing the world while no one looks, who themselves don’t know yet whether they will have any effect, in the people you have not yet heard of who will be the next Cesar Chavez, the next Noam Chomsky, the next Cindy Sheehan, or become something you cannot yet imagine. In this epic struggle between light and dark, it’s the dark side — that of the anonymous, the unseen, the officially powerless, the visionaries and subversives in the shadows — that we must hope for. For those onstage, we can just hope the curtain comes down soon and the next act is better, that it comes more directly from the populist shadows."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings, review on Rebecca Solnit's Hope in the dark: Untold Histories, Wild Possibilities)

E1.3.D.8.2.a_REF12_PO ”CYNICISM COMES
FROM SELF-DISGUST
Cynicism comes from self-disgust,
Yearning for a world one has surrendered.
No vision is complete but in repose,
Implicit in the steady gaze within.
Come, then, to know that good and evil must
In everyone with due respect be rendered,
So delicate their dance, as much in those
Not cynical as in those steeped in sin.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E1.3.D.8.3. I FEEL THAT THE DEEPEST THING IN LIFE IS THE SOUL’S INDIVIDUAL STRUGGLE TO REACH AN EXULTANT PEACE IN RELATION TO MORE COSMIC FORCES THAN ANY SOCIAL SYSTEM, JUST OR UNJUST, CAN COPE WITH OR COMPASS.
"Gleeful wonder at the simple fact of being alive is an omnipresent theme in Leonardo da Vinci’s work, masterfully embodied in Saint John the Baptist. John Cowper Powys places the painter in a line of thinkers who started roughly in the same period with the preSocratics in the West and Indian and Chinese philosophy in the East : " I feel that the deepest thing in life is the soul’s individual struggle to reach an exultant peace in relation to more cosmic forces than any social system, just or unjust, can cope with or compass. What is wrong with so many clever people to-day is the fatal distrust lodged in their minds—and lodged there by a superstitious awe in the presence of transitory scientific theories—of the power in their own souls. What we need—and the key to it lies in ourselves—is a bold return to the magical view of life. I [mean] that kind of faith in the potentialities of the ego, with which all great poetry and all great philosophy has been concerned. That feeling of exultant liberation from the immediate pressure of practical life, which any “logos” from the arena of Goethe, or Spinoza, or Leonardo, or Plato, or Heraclitus, or Epictetus, or the old Chinese Taoists conveys, is what we need.”
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934)

E1.3.D.8.4. "DISCORDANCES
I pronounce
Darkness

To put it better
Swallow

Because you can cross them
I count the walls

I press myself against the slates
To engrave my poems in them

And plunge into the abyss
To set the moment in fire."
(Andrée Chédid)

E1.3.D.8.5. THE DARKNESS THAT CREEPS AND RISES AT SUNSET IS NOT TO BE FEARED. YOU MUST LOVE IT, JUST AS YOU LOVE THE DAWN. "Darkness frightens almost everyone, she finally says, from birth to death. However, there is a difference between good darkness and evil darkness. The good darkness is God. He is so different from us that he can only be darkness for us, so that we do not die immediately at the sight of him. And then our sins darken him a little too. The evil darkness is the spirit of evil, everything that happens in this world is of its doing. But the evil darkness is powerless by itself. It needs the intermediary of man. It only acts when man gives up his heart to it. My boy, until your death, fear the good darkness. And desire this fear. The evil darkness, ignore it. Protect yourself from it, as you protect yourself from hunger, from the snowstorm, from the wolf. This, my boy, is human darkness, darkness of the heart. You must never forget it. Whereas the darkness that creeps and rises at sunset is not to be feared. You must love it, just as you love the dawn. Could you see the stars without the night?"
(Piotr Bednarski, The Blue Snow, 2004)

E1.3.D.9. DIONYSUS VS. APOLLO
In his first work, "The Birth of Tragedy," Nietzsche examines the mechanism of constructing a system of appearances that attempts to make a chaotic world livable. He calls this the Apollonian approach, which he deems inherently flawed as it tries to mask aspects of reality we refuse to confront. Nietzsche contrasts this with the Dionysian strategy—a complete acceptance of reality. However, when taken to the extreme, this approach risks losing itself in the undifferentiated identity within the universal whole. The question remains: is there a possible reconciliation between these two approaches?

E1.3.D.9.1. DIONYSOS

E1.3.D.9.1.a. AN ECSTATIC ACQUIESCENCE: ETERNALLY SATISFIED WITH THE VARIABILITY OF PHENOMENA

E1.3.D.9 .1. a_REF1_PH "THE WORD 'DIONYSIAC' EXPRESSES A NEED FOR UNITY, AN OVERCOMING OF THE PERSON, OF DAILY BANALITY, OF SOCIETY, OF REALITY, CROSSING THE ABYSS OF THE EPHEMERA; the outpouring of a passionate and painfully overflowing soul into more indistinct, fuller and lighter states of consciousness; an ecstatic acquiescence in the general property of life to be the same under all changes, equally powerful, equally intoxicating; the great pantheistic sympathy of joy and suffering which approves and sanctifies even the most fearful and disturbing characters of life; the eternal will of generation, fertilization, return; the sense of unity which embraces necessity and that of destruction. "
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Posthumous Fragments)

E1.3.D.9.1.a_REF2_PH "ONLY WITH REFERENCE TO THE SPIRIT OF MUSIC DO WE UNDERSTAND A JOY IN THE DESTRUCTION OF THE INDIVIDUAL. For in particular examples of such a destruction is made clear to us the eternal phenomenon of Dionysian art, which brings into expression the will in its omnipotence out from behind, so to speak, the principio individuationis [principle of individuation] , the eternal life beyond all appearances and in spite of all destruction.
The metaphysical joy in the tragic is a translation of the instinctive unconscious Dionysian wisdom into the language of the image: the hero, the highest manifestation of the will, is destroyed, and we are happy at that, because, after all, he is only an illusion, and the eternal life of the will is not disturbed by his destruction. “We believe in eternal life,” so tragedy calls out, while the music is the direct idea of this life. […]
In Dionysian art and in its tragic symbolism this same nature speaks to us with its true, undisguised voice: 'Be as I am! Under the incessant changes in phenomena, the eternally creative primordial mother, eternally forcing things into existence, eternally satisfied with the changing nature of appearances!'”
"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, La naissance de la tragédie, 1872)

E1.3.D.9.1.a_REF2.1_CUR THE TITLE OF THIS MOBILE proposed by Halsman and Dali seems to dialog with the voice of Dyonisian nature as imagined by Nietzsche when it tells us: 'Be as I am! Under the incessant changes in phenomena, the eternally creative primordial mother, eternally forcing things into existence, eternally satisfied with the changing nature of appearances!' for 'eternity resides beyond all phenomena and in spite of all annihilation’.
(Friedrich Nietzsche, The Birth of Tragedy, 1872)

E1.3.D.9.1.a_REF3_PH "THE PARADOXICAL EXPRESSION AN « INSTANT OF ETERNITY » CONVEYS AN EXTREMELY PRIVILEGED EXPERIENCE. Thus spoke Friedrich Nietzsche, quoted by the poet Jean Mambrino in L'Hespérie, Country of the Evening: « Let us admit that we say "yes" to a single moment, we would have said "yes" not only to ourselves, but to everything that exists. For nothing is isolated, neither in us nor in things, and if even once joy resounded in our soul, the whole preceeding eternity was needed to create the conditions for this one moment, and all of eternity was approved, justified in that one moment that we said "yes" ». We feel, confusedly but deeply convinced, that the moment as we have just evoked it is related, by its flavor of plenitude, to what eternity must be."
(François Cheng, Five meditations on death)

E1.3.D.9.1.a_REF4_PH "THE REBEL, WHO AT FIRST DENIES GOD, FINALLY ASPIRES TO REPLACE HIM. BUT NIETZSCHE'S MESSAGE IS THAT THE REBEL CAN ONLY BECOME GOD BY RENOUNCING EVERY FORM OF REBELLION, even the type of rebellion that produces gods to chastise humanity. "If there is a God, how can one tolerate not being God oneself?" There is, in fact, a god— namely, the world. To participate in its divinity, all that is necessary is to consent. "No longer to pray, but to give one's blessing," and the earth will abound in men-gods. To say yes to the world, to reproduce it, is simultaneously to re-create the world and oneself, to become the great artist, the creator. Nietzsche's message is summed up in the word creation, with the ambiguous meaning it has assumed. Nietzsche's sole admiration was for the egotism and severity proper to all creators. The transmutation of values consists only in replacing critical values by creative values; by respect and admiration for what exists. Divinity without immortality defines the extent of the creator's freedom. Dionysos, the earth-god, shrieks eternally as he is torn limb from limb. But at the same time he represents the agonized beauty that coincides with suffering. Nietzsche thought that to accept this earth and Dionysos was to accept his own sufferings."
(Albert Camus, L´Homme révolté, La révolte méthaphysique, 1951)

E1.3.D.9.1.a_REF5_PH “DIONYSUS IS AN HYBRID GOD: THE CONTEMPORARY GOD OF OUR TIME
“To all mongrels, all half-breeds, all centaurs, all mermaids, to all variegated beings,
who have always been told that they have none or have too many identities...” 
(Gabrielle Halpern , All of us centaurs , Le pommier)

Dionysus is a hybrid god, because although he was conceived by Zeus and Selene, a mortal woman Hera, 
Zeus' wife, managed to have her killed, and Zeus brought Dionysus out of the womb of Selene's womb 
and brought him to life in his thigh. Dionysus comes out of Zeus' thigh.

Dionysus goes berserk when he's not recognized as a god; he's a god with an identity problem.
We don't know where he comes from, and his arrival is always untimely.
He's often preceded by a mask that some fisherman finds, for example, and then arrives in the flesh, jumping and dancing;
He's a stranger, a strange stranger, a disturbing strangeness. But who is he? What does he want?

he's surrounded by a hybrid troupe of women who leave everything behind to accompany him, including family and husband,
to help him exact his revenge by dismembering those who doubted him.

This motley, hybrid troupe are the maenads or bacchantes, and with them he brings out a collective unconscious.
He's the god of alcohol, wine and sex; he's also accompanied by weird, wacky people.
Tragedy lurks around Dionysus, and he foments it; Cf Euripides Les bacchantes.

Every drunken party is his lot, he destructures society, he dismantles public order, he deconstructs what was taken for granted
to propose a richer society, better educated in all realities, a society that also recognizes its otherness.

Drugs would also be a way for a society to experience its otherness, far from the expected frameworks, if he lived among us;
but he lives with us in rave parties, in drug binges, in electronic music, in all the mutations of the genre.
He's the contemporary god of our time.”
(Martine Aronowicz, Dionysos is an hybrid God, 2023)

E1.3.D.9.1.b. THE IMMEASURABLE PRIMORDIAL JOY OF EXISTENCE. 

E1.3.D.9.1.b_REF1_PH WE ARE TO SEEK DELIGHT, NOT IN APPEARANCES, BUT BEHIND THEM "Dionysian art thus wishes to convince us of the eternal delight in existence: only we are to seek this delight, not in appearances, but behind them; we are to recognize how everything which comes into being must be ready for painful destruction; we are forced to gaze directly into the terror of individual existence — and nonetheless are not to become paralyzed: a metaphysical consolation tears us momentarily out of the hustle and bustle of changing forms. For a short time we really are the primordial essence itself and feel its unbridled lust for and joy in existence; the struggle, the torment, the destruction of appearances now seem to us necessary, on account of the excess of innumerable forms of existence pressing and punching themselves into life and of the exuberant fecundity of the world
will; we are transfixed by the raging barbs of this torment in the very moment when we become, as it were, one with the immeasurable primordial delight in existence and when, in Dionysian rapture, we sense the indestructible and eternal nature of this joy. In spite of fear and pity, we are fortunate vital beings, not as individuals, but as the one living being, with whose procreative joy we have been fused."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, The Birth of Tragedy, 1872)

E1.3.D.9.1.b_REF1.1_PH "ART, HERE, IS DIONYSIAN, IT HAS THE FUNCTION OF RELEASING HUMANS FROM KNOWLEDGE, FROM ACTION, FROM SUFFERING. [...] Courage consists in facing the contradiction of the world, instead of trying to hide it by inventing a world of truth. From the truth, let's move on to the fact of creation, to the fact of aggression that many 'truths' have covered up, and let's imagine a myth that, coming from the psychic and cosmic depths of humanity, will turn the depths upside down to erect them into a cosmic mountain, the place where a new world can be born".
(Angèle Kremer-Marietti, Angèle Kremer-Marietti, Introduction to Nietzsche's The Birth of Tragedy, 1994)

E1.3.D.9.1.b_REF1.2_CUR “IN TRIUMPH OF BACCHUS, Bob Thompson borrowed compositional elements of the Roman god of wine. Rejected descriptive clarity, however, substituting a vividly hued arrangement in which the figures’ identities are left open-ended. In reimagining these historical sources, Thompson painted in the manner akin to jazz musicians’ innovations, where improvisation was based on a thorough understanding of pre-existing styles. Saxophonist Steve Lacy, a friend of Thompson's, referred to the artist as “jazz himself”, explaining that the way he painted was like jazz-taking liberties with colors.”
(Whitney Museum, NY curator´s review, 2019)

E1.3.D.9.1.b_REF2_PH AFFIRMATION IS MAN UNDER THE SUN "Fauzia Assaad-Mikhail: Since we're talking about the power of words, let me return to the word 'being', which Heidegger reminded us here in 1955 does not exist in all languages. In Arabic, for example, the words for 'being' refer either to existence or, when conjugated, to the cosmos. Heidegger concludes that philosophy 'speaks Greek,' that it is specifically Western. This statement has troubled me greatly over the past fifteen years. Recently I attended a conference on Taoism where they talked about 'being and non-being', and the character translated as 'being' simply means 'affirmation'. The word shi is written as 是, which is divided into three elements:
Sun 日 under 下 Man 人
So affirmation is Man under the Sun. Could anything be more Nietzschean? Houang, whom I questioned on this point, replied, 'In Chinese, being is not said, it is felt.' But the explanations he gave me suggest that it would be better to say, 'it affirms itself.' This is exactly what Nietzsche means when he speaks of 'power'. Should we conclude that he is not a philosopher, or rather that there are philosophies other than Western ontology?"
(Fauzia Assaad-Mikhail, in the discussion following Roberto Calasso's paper, Parody of Parody, Nietzsche Today, 1973)

E1.3.D.9.1.c. WE MUST FIND, FOR EACH THING IN TURN, THE SPECIAL MEANS BY WHICH IT IS AFFIRMED, BY WHICH IT CEASES TO BE NEGATIVE.  “Dionysus affirms all that appears, "even the most bitter suffering", and appears in all that is affirmed. Multiple and pluralist affirmation - this is the essence of the tragic. This will become clearer if we consider the difficulties of making everything an object of affirmation. Here the effort and the genius of pluralism are necessary, the power of transformations, Dionysian laceration. When anguish and disgust appear in Nietzsche it is always at this point: can everything become an object of affirmation, that is to say of joy? We must find, for each thing in turn, the special means by which it is affirmed, by which it ceases to be negative. The tragic is not to be found in this anguish or disgust, nor in a nostalgia for lost unity. The tragic is only to be found in multiplicity, in the diversity of affirmation as such. What defines the tragic is the joy of multiplicity, plural joy. […]
It is joy that is tragic. But this means that tragedy is immediately joyful, that it only calls forth the fear and pity of the obtuse spectator, the pathological and moralising listener who counts  on it to ensure the proper functioning of his moral sublimations and medical purgings.”
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophy, 1962)

E1.3.D.9.1.d. NOTHING WORRYING OR SAD COULD EVER DISTURB THE MOOD OF A PHILOSOPHER IN WHOM THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORST IS INVARIABLY MIXED WITH THE FEELING OF THE BEST 
"LA GAYA CIENCIA.
The notion of « joyful knowledge », which summarizes and defines philosophy's status according to Nietzsche, literally associates joy with science. It is of course not about joy in the strictly psychological sense nor about the science of the scientists, but about a gaiety deeper than any psychologically motivated joy and a knowledge more cruel than any science. Nietzsche's gay knowledge thus evokes a gaiety that has nothing to do with any reason to be joyful, and a knowledge that has nothing to do with any interest or benefit one can expect from science. It constitutes precisely a philosophical bliss, where the most lucid and consequently the least joyful knowledge matches the most euphoric mood. A state of bliss that can be said to be absolute, since it escapes by definition any possibility of denial. How indeed could one oppose such a gaiety? Nothing worrying or sad could ever disturb the mood of a philosopher in whom the knowledge of the worst is invariably mixed with the feeling of the best. And on the other hand it would be vain to look for motives to what does not need any motive to exist : which is the case of Nietzsche's gaya ciencia."
(Clément Rosset, The major force, 1983)

E1.3.D.9.1.d.a. "THERE IS NO SERIOUS KNOWLEDGE THAT CAN BE RECEIVED WITH LUCIDITY WITHOUT THE AUTHORIZATION OF ABSOLUTE BEATITUDE, which, since it imposes no conditions on the exercise of happiness, imposes - and is the only one that can impose - no limitations on the exercise of knowledge. In this way, Nietzschean gaiety is necessarily learned or 'knowledgeable' in order to measure itself against the scope of what it is permitted to know without harm; and, conversely, Nietzschean knowledge is necessarily gay in order to exist only in proportion to the gaiety that makes it possible."
(Clément Rosset, Force Majeure, 1983)

E1.3.D.9.1.d.a_REF1_PH NIETZSCHE'S DIONYSUS IS ALSO THE PLACE OF THE MOST PROFOUND AND LUCID KNOWLEDGE "Before specifying what Nietzschean gay knowledge is knowledge of, the nature of that worse of which it claims to know, it is worth noting from the outset that it is a knowledge. This is an elementary but necessary point, if we are to remember that Nietzschean gaiety is not simply a matter of psychology, but implies knowledge in the most intellectual and theoretical sense of the term - and, incidentally, that Nietzsche is not only a brilliant psychologist, but also, and above all, a great philosopher. No doubt Nietzsche always recommended Dionysus, god of wine and drunkenness. But Nietzsche's Dionysus is also the place of the most profound and lucid knowledge, always combining the warmth of intoxication with the cold sobriety of knowledge; that physiological as well as mental sobriety in which Nietzsche, at the end of his lucid life, recognised in Ecce Homo one of his most precious and eminent qualities. The Nietzschean beatitude is indeed an intoxication, but not an intoxication that would allow us to free ourselves from knowledge, to overlook the regrettable and harmful aspects of knowledge, in the manner of Pascalian amusement. On the contrary, it is what gives access to knowledge, what authorises (and is the only way to authorise) full knowledge.
For there is no serious knowledge that can be received with lucidity without the authorization of absolute beatitude, which, since it imposes no conditions on the exercise of happiness, imposes - and is the only one that can impose - no limitations on the exercise of knowledge. In this way, Nietzschean gaiety is necessarily learned or 'knowledgeable' in order to measure itself against the scope of what it is permitted to know without harm; and, conversely, Nietzschean knowledge is necessarily gay in order to exist only in proportion to the gaiety that makes it possible."
(Clément Rosset, Force Majeure, 1983)

E1.3.D.9.1.d_REF1_PH IN THE 'SAD KNOWLEDGE' THE SEARCH FOR TRUTH IS CONFUSED WITH AN ESCAPE FROM TRUTH "Socratic or Platonic rationalism, as criticised by Nietzsche from The Birth of Tragedy onwards, is the exact opposite of Gaia Scienza. It would be utterly senseless to ascribe this criticism, as has often been done, to a supposed Nietzschean irrationalism. What Nietzsche fundamentally criticises in Platonic rationalism - as in all philosophical forms of 'sad knowledge' - is not so much that it is alien to art, but that it is neither sufficiently gay nor, above all, sufficiently learned: that it implies a secret bias of ignorance out of despair, a 'repression', in the Freudian sense, of what we must not know if we are to retain the courage to live (above all, the knowledge of death and insignificance). The search for truth is here confused with an escape from truth; and this is Nietzsche's only permanent grievance against most searches for truth, which paradoxically ends up cutting them short".
(Clément Rosset, The Major Force, 1983)

E1.3.D.9.1.d_REF2_PH "GAIA SCIENZA.
The concept of 'gay knowledge', which sums up and defines the status of philosophy according to Nietzsche, literally associates elation with science. Of course, this is not elation in the strict psychological sense, nor the science of the learned, but a joy more profound than any psychologically motivated rejoicing, and a knowledge more cruel than any science. Nietzsche's gay knowledge thus evokes a gaiety that has nothing to do with any reason to be gay, and a knowledge that has nothing to do with any interest in or benefit from science. It is precisely a philosophical beatitude in which the most euphoric mood corresponds to the clearest and therefore least cheerful knowledge. A state of bliss that can be described as absolute because, by definition, it escapes any possibility of denial. Indeed, how could anyone oppose such gaiety? Nothing worrying or sad could ever disturb the mood of a philosopher, in whom the knowledge of the worst is always combined with a feeling for the best. And, on the other hand, it would be futile to oppose motives to that which needs no motive to exist, which is the case of Nietzsche's gay knowledge."
(Clément Rosset, The Major Force, 1983)

E1.3.D.9.2. APOLLO

E1.3.D.9.2.a. APOLLONIANISM CREATES ILLUSION AND DEIFIES THE PRINCIPLE OF INDIVIDUATION. Once the individual is isolated from the world, Apollo allows deliverance through appearance (whereas Dionysus leads to "a regression towards a common undifferentiated foundation of all beings")

E1.3.D.9.2.a_REF1_PH THE BEAUTIFUL APPEARANCE "Apollo is the divine incarnation of the principle of individuation. He constructs the appearance of appearance, the beautiful appearance, the dream or the plastic image and is thus freed from suffering: "Apollo overcomes the suffering of the individual by the radiant glorification of the eternity of the phenomenon", hit obliterates pain. Dionysus, on the contrary, returns to primitive unity, he shatters the individual, drags him into the great shipwreck and absorbs him into original being. Thus he reproduces the contradiction as the pain of individuation but resolves them in a higher pleasure, by making us participate in the superabundance of unique being or universal  willing."
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophy, 1962)

E1.3.D.9.2.a_REF2_PH LIBERATION THROUGH APPEARANCE “Apollo enables liberation through the appearance of appearance, while Dionysus proposes the dissolution of appearance. This dissolution ends individuation through the call of jubilation, acting as the opposite charm to Apollo's. Intoxication—whether from a beverage, the effect of spring on nature, or spiritual ecstasy—is not a sublimation but a regression. This regression moves first below the appearance of appearance, then below appearance itself, that is, beyond the individual, towards an undifferentiated common core of all beings. This process occurs under the influence of enthusiasm.”
(Angèle Kremer-Marietti, Introduction to Nietzsche's The Birth of Tragedy, 1994)

E1.3.D.9.2.a_REF3_PH “JUST AS SHADOW IS NECESSARY FOR MORE BEAUTY, so ‘obscurity’ is necessary for more clarity. - Art makes the aspect of life bearable by covering it with the veil of indecisive thought.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, Too Human, aphorism 151, 1878)

E1.3.D.9.2.a_REF4_PH THE WORLD AS REPRESENTATION “Apollinism creates illusion, and Socrates himself is afflicted with a 'delusional illusion,' the metaphysical illusion that will become traditional. This illusion is 'the unshakeable belief that thought,  guided by causality, reaches the deepest abysses of being, and that it is capable not only of knowing being, but of correcting it.'”
(Angèle Kremer-Marietti, Introduction to Nietzsche's The Birth of Tragedy, 1994)

"Whoever revealed to us the essence of the world would disappoint us all most unpleasantly. It is not the world as a thing in itself, but the world as idea (as error) that is so rich in meaning, deep, wonderful, pregnant with happiness and unhappiness."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, All Too Humain, aphorism 29, 1878)

E1.3.D.9.2.a_REF5_LIT IS MARCEL PROUST'S REMEMBRANCE OF THINGS PAST AN APOLLONIAN APPROACH TO REWRITING LIFE IN ORDER TO RECONCILE ONESELF WITH IT?

Watch François Cheng: Remembrance of Things Past, the book that changed his life, on Youtube: https://youtu.be/WEF97II2dVE?feature=shared

E1.3.D.9.2.b. "LITERARY MODES ARE VERY NATURAL TO US, VERY CLOSE TO ORDINARY LIFE AND TO THE WAY WE LIVE AS REFLECTIVE BEINGS. When we return home and “tell our day,” we are artfully shaping material into story form. (These stories are very often funny, incidentally.) So in a way as word-users we all exist in a literary atmosphere, we live and breathe literature, we are all literary artists, we are constantly employing language to make interesting forms out of experience which perhaps originally seemed dull or incoherent. How far reshaping involves offences against truth is a problem any artist must face. A deep motive for making literature or art of any sort is the desire to defeat the formlessness of the world and cheer oneself up by constructing forms out of what might otherwise seem a mass of senseless rubble."
(Iris Murdoch, Existentialists and Mystics: Writings on Philosophy and Literature)

E1.3.D.9.2.c. FERNANDO PESSOA'S ESCAPISM: EVADING REALITY THROUGH IDEALIZATION 
“The true sage is the one who is willing for external events to alter him in the slightest. To do this, he needs to armor himself by surrounding himself with realities that are closer to him than the facts, and through which the facts, altered to suit them, reach him.”
(Fernando Pessoa, Book of Disquiet)

E1.3.D.9.3. IS THERE A MIDDLE GROUND BETWEEN THE DIONYSIAN AND THE APOLLONIAN?

E1.3.D.9.3_REF1_PH IS IT AN EXAGGERATION TO APPROVE OF REALITY IN ITS ENTIRETY? "AFFIRM
To say what one believes or knows or wants to be true. Stoic assent, for example. It also means to acknowledge it, to approve of it, to rejoice in it. Thus Nietzsche's amor fati: "the Dionysian affirmation of the universe as it is, without the possibility of subtraction, exception, or choice. It's total acceptance, with something more, is perhaps too much - like a more resolute or enthusiastic yes to reality. Look at Zarathustra, who 'says yes and amen in an enormous and unlimited way', who wants to be 'the eternal affirmation of all things'... Reality has gone to his head. 
The most affirmative sentence in the history of philosophy? That of Spinoza: 'By reality and by perfection I mean the same thing.
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.3.D.9.3_REF1.1_PH "ACCEPTANCE
We should not confuse acceptance, which concerns a fact, with approval, which implies a value judgment. 'There are two ways to say yes to everything, a friend with cancer used to tell me: you can say yes to everything because it's good, or because it's inescapable reality. It's not the same at all!' And she was right. Accepting that you have cancer, if that's the case, is a necessary step. How else can you fight it? That's no reason to think it's good or to approve of it. Accept the horror? I'm willing to try. But don't ask me to applaud. This disproves the Stoics, who see fate as providence. And it vindicates Spinoza, who sees it only as a necessity. [...]
But joy, if it is possible, is clearly on the side of acceptance. How can we treat ourselves joyfully if we don't accept that we are sick? How can we fight joyfully if we don't accept conflict? Loving your enemies requires that you have them and that you accept that you have them. That's what makes it possible to fight them with joy. The wisdom of the Gospels: to love is to say yes. But it doesn't mean giving up acting, confronting, changing and overcoming. So the sculptor must first accept the marble, just as the man of action must accept the world in order to transform it. So parents accept everything about their children (that is, they love them as they are, without denying or rejecting anything), but they don't give up educating them, or even, sometimes, punishing them. It's not forbidden to forbid, only to despise, reject and hate. It's not forbidden to say no if it's for a freer or clearer yes. Acceptance is neither weakness nor renunciation. It is a clear and generous strength.
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.3.D.9.3_REF1.2_PH "AMOR FATI 
The love of fate, that is, the joyful acceptance of what happens. Often attributed to the Stoics (although I don't recall finding it in their writings), this expression is most indebted to Nietzsche, in whom it plays a major role. For example, in Ecce Homo: "My formula for the greatness of man is Amor fati. We must not ask for anything else, neither in the past nor in the future, for all eternity. We must not only accept what is necessary, let alone hide from it - all idealism is a lie in the face of necessity - we must also love it" ("Why I am so wise," § 10; [...]). It means to want to be nothing but "pure approbation" (Gaya Scienza, IV, 276), which is why the formula has always struck me as outrageous. Accept? One must, and joyfully if one can. But why should we approve? Love your enemies? Love the wicked? That's the spirit of Christ, and good for you if you can. That's no reason to applaud them or to give up fighting them. Love the whole? That's the spirit of Spinoza. That's no reason to love everything."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.3.D.9.3_REF2_PH APOLLIAN AND DYONISIAN ARE TWO COMPLEMENTARY PRINCIPLES. IF YOU ADOPT EITHER OF THEM TO THE EXTREME, DO YOU TEND TO YOUR OWN DESTRUCTION? "The Complementarity of the Two Principles
The opposition of Apollo and Dionysus, however, does not bring together two contradictory concepts, but rather two complementary ones. The one lives only through the other, and the one without the other necessarily tends to its own destruction. Only their union is fruitful, and it is precisely the strength of the Greek genius that it was able to find the secret of this union. From the very first sentence of the essay, the figures of the two gods are compared to sexual differentiation, which only makes sense through mating: 'The entire development of art is linked to the duality of the Apollonian and the Dionysian, just as, analogously, generation depends on the difference between the sexes' (§ 1, p. 41). Throughout the text, there is never any talk of conflict, as a somewhat simplistic reading often claims, but rather of the union of the two principles. In § 4, after evoking the pessimism of Silenus and the crushed revolt of the Titans, Nietzsche shows how 'this veiled background of suffering' is necessary for the affirmation of the Apollonian measure: 'And behold, Apollo could not live without Dionysus! The "titanic" and the "barbaric" were ultimately as necessary as the Apollonian' (55). The entire history of Greece is based on the fruitful embrace of Apollo and Dionysus: 'The Dionysian and the Apollonian, reinforcing each other through an ever-renewed series of mutual births and conflicts, have dominated the Hellenic soul: Archaic and feudal Greece, 'the age of bronze, with its battles of the Titans', then Homeric Greece, which 'obeys the Apollonian impulse to beauty'; from the 8th century onwards, the Apollonian equilibrium is "submerged by the 'Dionysian torrent', and finally 'the Apollonian recovers in the majestic rigidity of Doric art and world-view',  i.e. classical Greece of the 6th and 5th centuries (§ 4, p. 56). In this outline of ancient Greek history, the two principles alternate rather than merge. At the very least, this succession shows the extent to which one is exhausted if it is not regenerated by the other. The Apollonian form manifests itself in all its splendor only when it appears in proximity to the Dionysian tension, and the Dionysian trance achieves beauty only when it is transfigured by the Apollonian form: 'It is in the fraternal alliance of Apollo and Dionysus that both forms of art culminate, the Apollonian as well as the Dionysian' (§ 24, p. 151). And in the last paragraph (§ 25, p. 155-156) it is said that 'the two impulses of art are obliged to exert their force in strictly reciprocal proportion and according to the law of eternal justice'. One of the two is kept alive only by the violence exerted upon it by its antagonist, its double. Nietzsche explains that, without Apollo, Dionysus would sink into chaos or madness, or, exhausted by ecstasy, into the Buddhist annihilation in which orgiasm finally collapses: 'From orgiasm there is only one way open to a people: that which leads to Hindu Buddhism, which, if it is to be able to endure its striving for nothingness, needs those ecstatic states which, though rare, are capable of rising above space, time and individuality' (§ 21, p. 135).

And conversely, without Dionysus, Apollonian genius exacerbates self-assertion, individuality, and national character, and gives rise to the imperialist state, which knows no limits to the expansion of its power: A people rooted in the unconditional valorization of political impulses [a few lines earlier, Nietzsche had developed the theme of 'Apollo, the state-builder"] rushes down the path of absolute secularization, whose grandest but also most frightening expression remains the imperium romanum' (ibid.). ). The relationship between the suffering consoled by the Dionysian trance's suppression of the individuation principle and the self-affirmation expressed by the Apollonian's limitation of formal perfection is not yet one of interpretation (as it will later be for Nietzsche), but rather one of transfiguration. In § 4, Nietzsche alludes at length to Raphael's famous painting The Transfiguration (1516-1520), which is a kind of iconological hapax, since it brings together in a single scene two episodes that had previously been depicted separately: Christ's transfiguration on Mount Tabor and the healing of a demon-possessed boy that immediately follows in the text of Matthew (XIV). The disparate nature of this composition, which unites demonic agitation and divine revelation almost without transition, has often been emphasized. Goethe, however, had already pointed out the close connection between suffering and redemption: 'It is always surprising that anyone has dared to criticize the great unity of such a conception. In the Lord's absence, heartbroken parents present his disciples with a demon-possessed boy; perhaps they have already tried to exorcise the evil spirit; a book has even been opened to find an effective formula against this evil, but in vain. At this moment, the only liberator appears, glorified and greeted by his great ancestors; the assistants hastily point to this vision as the only source of salvation. How can we separate what is above from what is below? They are one and the same. Below, suffering, need; above, strength, help, one in relation to the other, one affecting the other. In other words, can an ideal relationship to reality be separated from it? . Nietzsche takes up this analysis, seeing in the gesticulation of the madman the image of Dionysian frenzy, and in the Hellenistic beauty of Christ raised to heaven and surrounded by light, a kind of Christianized Apollo of Belvedere, the dazzling appearance of the Apollonian form: Here, in the supreme symbolism of art, we are offered both the Apollonian world of beauty and its background, the terrible wisdom of Silenus, in such a way that we intuitively grasp their mutual necessity.".
(Jacques Darriulat, The Birth of Tragedy from the Spirit of Music, A-2- The Complementarity of the Two Principles, 2007)

Read the full essay: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Nietzsche/Naissancetragedie/NietzscheNT-2.html

E1.3.D.9 .3_REF2.2_PH CONNECTING BUDDHISM WITH THE ORGIASTIC ABYSS THAT SUBSIDES IN THE DISSOLUTION OF IDENTITY
 "It is in this way, explains Nietzsche, that without Apollo, Dionysus would sink into chaos or madness, or, exhausted by ecstasy, into the Buddhist annihilation in which orgiasm finally collapses: 'From orgiasm, there is only one path open to a people: that which leads to Hindu Buddhism, which, if it is to be able to endure its aspiration to nothingness, needs those ecstatic states that are rare but capable of elevating above space, time and individuality' (§ 21, p. 135).”
(Jacques Darriulat, The Birth of Tragedy from the Spirit of Music, A-2- The Complementarity of the Two Principles, 2007)

E1.7.D.1.3.wE1.3.D.9.3_REF2.2_PH

E1.3.D.9.3_REF2.3_PH APOLLO, LEFT ALONE, FALLS INTO HUBRIS. Without Dionysus, Apollonian genius exacerbates self-assertion, individuality, and national character, and gives rise to the imperialist state, which knows no limits to the expansion of its power: 'A people rooted in the unconditional valorization of political impulses [...] rushes down the path of absolute secularization, whose grandest but also most frightening expression remains the imperium romanum.'"
(Jacques Darriulat, The Birth of Tragedy from the Spirit of Music, A-2- The Complementarity of the Two Principles, 2007)

E1.3.D.9.3_REF2.4_PH "EITHER WE ARE ABLE TO RETURN BY MODERN AND CONTEMPORARY MEANS TO THIS SUPERIOR IDEA OF POETRY [...] that is to say, without meditation, without useless contemplation, without scattered dreams, to arrive at an awareness and also possession of certain dominant forces, of certain notions which direct everything; and since these notions when they are effective carry with them their energy, to find in ourselves these energies which in the end create order and nourish life's intensity, or we have to surrender ourselves immediately without resistance, and recognize that we are only good for disorder, famine, blood, war and epidemics.
Either we bring all the arts back to a central attitude and necessity, finding an analogy between a gesture made in painting or in the theater, and a gesture made by lava inside a volcano's chaos, or we must stop painting, clamoring, writing and doing anything.
I propose we return [...] to this elementary magical idea, taken up by modern psychoanalysis, which consists in seeking to cure a sick person by making him adopt the external attitude of the state to which one would like to bring him back."
(Antonin Artaud, Theater and its Double, 1932-38)

E1.3.D.9.3_REF3_LIT THE CONTENDING ENERGIES OF CREATION AND DISSOLUTION "Our experience of flowers is so deeply drenched in our sense of time. Maybe there’s a good reason we find their fleetingness so piercing, can scarcely look at a flower in bloom without thinking ahead, whether in hope or regret. We might share with certain insects a tropism inclining us toward flowers, but presumably insects can look at a blossom without entertaining thoughts of the past and future — complicated human thoughts that may once have been anything but idle. Flowers have always had important things to teach us about time. [...]
Look into a flower, and what do you see? Into the very heart of nature’s double nature — that is, the contending energies of creation and dissolution, the spiring toward complex form and the tidal pull away from it. Apollo and Dionysus were names the Greeks gave to these two faces of nature, and nowhere in nature is their contest as plain or as poignant as it is in the beauty of a flower and its rapid passing. There, the achievement of order against all odds and its blithe abandonment. There, the perfection of art and the blind flux of nature. There, somehow, both transcendence and necessity. Could that be it — right there, in a flower — the meaning of life?"
(Michael Pollan, The botany of desire)

E1.3.D.9.3_REF4_MU MUSICAL ILLUSTRATION: BENJAMIN BRITTEN, FOUR SEA INTERLUDES from « Peter Grimes », Op. 33a - II. Sunday morning & III. Moonlight

Listen to it on Youtube:
II. Sunday morning https://youtu.be/jsA7hP23ESU?feature=shared

III. Moonlight: https://youtu.be/Yx_IxikHLgI?feature=shared

E1.3.D.9.3.a. WAS NIETZSCHE HIMSELF ABLE TO FIND A BALANCE BETWEEN THE DIONYSIAN AND THE APOLLONIAN?

E1.3.D.9.3.a_REF1_PH DOESN'T NIETZSCHE FINALLY FEAR THAT EXISTENCE IS ONLY A DISEASE? "A musician Socrates! Nietzsche foresaw this in The Birth of Tragedy. Responding to the call of the divinities who had invited the philosopher in his dreams to devote himself to music, this figure of Socrates the musician would reconcile the ironic lucidity of rational consciousness with demonic enthusiasm. It would truly be "the tragic man" as found in the unpublished works.
In this musical Socrates, Nietzsche projects his own dream, his longing for a reconciliation between Apollo and Dionysus. 
And in the dying Socrates, Nietzsche also sees his own drama reflected. Socrates wanted to die, and in dying he uttered the enigmatic words: 'O Crito, I owe Asclepius a rooster,' as if, cured of some illness, he owed something to the god of health. The last grotesque and terrible word," cries Nietzsche, "which means to anyone who has ears: O Crito, existence is a disease! Can it be! A man of his caliber... such a man was a pessimist! He was content to put a brave face on life, and all through life he'd been hiding his final verdict, his deepest feeling! Socrates, Socrates was suffering from life! And in the end he took his revenge on it with that veiled, frightening word, that pious blasphemy. I wish he had kept silent until the last moments of his life - perhaps then he would have been in a higher class of spirits?
As E. Bertram has admirably shown, Nietzsche here reveals his secret, his own intimate doubt, the drama of his existence. He, Nietzsche, who wanted to be the champion of the joy of existence and life, does he not suspect, does he not fear that existence is nothing but a disease. Socrates betrayed this secret. He lets us know what he thinks of earthly life. But Nietzsche wants to belong to 'a superior class of spirits', those who know how to keep this terrible secret silent. Was his fiery, Dionysian dithyramb about life and nothing but life,' writes E. Bertram, 'merely the form of silence under which a great educator of life did not believe in life? In a final reversal, The Twilight of the Idols offers a new interpretation of Socrates' last words. The disease from which Socrates must be cured is no longer life itself, but the kind of life Socrates led: 'Socrates is not a doctor," he murmured to himself. Only death is a doctor. Socrates, on the other hand, was only sick for a long time. This time it would be Socratic lucidity, Socratic morality, that would be the disease that eats away at life. But on the other hand, isn't Socrates' illness the illness of Nietzsche himself, his myth-dissolving lucidity, his ruthless conscience? Nietzsche's amorous hatred of Socrates is identical to Nietzsche's amorous hatred of himself. And isn't the ambiguity of the figure of Socrates in Nietzsche ultimately based on the ambiguity of the central figure of Nietzschean mythology, that of Dionysus, the god of death and life?'"
(Pierre Hadot, In Praise of Socrates, 1974)

E1.3.D.9.3.a_REF2_PH THE PHILOSOPHER DEMANDS OF HIMSELF A JUDGMENT, A YES OR NO ON LIFE AND THE VALUE OF LIFE. "There are so many different kinds of dangers involved in the development of a philosopher these days that it can be doubted whether this fruit is still capable of ripening at all. The height and width of the tower of science have grown to be so monstrously vast that the philosopher is that much more likely to become exhausted before he has even finished his education, or to let himself grab hold of something and “specialize.” And so he is never at his best, never reaches a high point in his development from which he would be able to look over, look around, and look down. Or he gets there too late, when he is already past his prime and his strength has started to fade; or he gets there disabled, having become coarse and degenerate, so that his gaze, his overall value judgment is largely meaningless. Perhaps the very refinement of his intellectual conscience lets him hesitate and be slowed down while underway; he is afraid of being seduced into becoming a dilettante, a millipede with a thousand feet and a thousand feelers; he knows too well that someone who has lost his self-respect will no longer command or lead, even in the field of knowledge: unless he wants to become a great actor, a philosophical Cagliostro and rabble-rouser of spirits, in short, a seducer. In the end, this is a question of taste, even if it is not a question of conscience. And just to double the philosopher’s difficulties again, there is the additional fact that he demands a judgment of himself, a Yes or a No, not about science but about life and the value of life. It is only with reluctance that he comes to believe he has a right or even a duty to render this sort of a judgment, and he has to draw on the most wide-ranging (and perhaps the most disturbing and destructive) experiences so that he can look – hesitantly, skeptically, silently – for a path to this right and this belief. In fact, the masses have misjudged and mistaken the philosopher for a long time, sometimes confusing him with the scientific man and ideal scholar, and sometimes with the religiously elevated, desensualized, desecularized enthusiasts and intoxicated men of God. If you hear anyone praised these days for living “wisely” or “like a philosopher” it basically just means he is “clever and keeps out of the way.” To the rabble, wisdom seems like a kind of escape, a device or trick for pulling yourself out of the game when things get rough. But the real philosopher (and isn’t this how it seems to us, my friends?) lives “unphilosophically,” “unwisely,” in a manner which is above all not clever, and feels the weight and duty of a hundred experiments and temptationsof life: – he constantly puts himself at risk, he plays the rough game . . ."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil, Aphorism 205, 1886)

E1.3.D.9.3.a_REF3_PH NIETZSCHE RECEIVED THE REVELATION OF A TRUTH THAT PARALYZED HIM - THIS IS A LUCIDITY OF IMMENSE WEIGHT TO BE CARRIED - HOW MUCH TRUTH CAN ONE HANDLE? "There is a more mysterious dimension to philosophy, this connection with madness... If you look at the origins of Greek philosophy, particularly at Delphi with the Pythia, the oracular dimension of knowledge: In the temple of Delphi there are these two commandments, 'Know thyself' and 'Nothing is too much', the beginnings of Greek philosophy. Basically, Pythia and oracular knowledge are given in a trance, in a fit of madness... Nietzsche worked on this mantic [divinatory practices] from his very first work, with this notion of the Dionysian: what does the contemplation of naked truth do to man once the veil of illusion has been lifted? Nietzsche challenged this division between the fundamental reality and the world of appearances.
In Ecce Homo, Nietzsche asks, 'Do we understand Hamlet? It's not doubt but certainty that drives one mad'. Hamlet receives the revelation of a truth that paralyzes him - it's a lucidity of immense weight to be carried - how much truth can one handle? In The Birth of Tragedy, Nietzsche explains that the Greeks invented art to cloak reality in illusion. Later, he says, 'in order not to die of the truth'. Elsewhere: 'If you stare too long into the abyss, the abyss stares back at you" - there is a revelation in the philosopher - not of a final truth - but of a final meaninglessness with which it is difficult to live. There are only possible experiments and perspectives that we are lucky enough to be able to taste - let us use our time well, in the perspective of the thought experiment of eternal return!
But Nietzsche himself finds it hard to live up to this ideal - he will often panic at what he discovers. He is constantly trying to free himself from his passion, so as not to remain a prisoner of the certainties that his desire elaborate. He calls for a love of uncertainty.
(Dorian Astor on Les chemins de la philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 09/09/2019)

Listen to the podcast: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/ce-n-est-pas-le-doute-c-est-la-certitude-qui-rend-fou-1461626

E1.5.B.13.wE1.3.D.