E1.4. IF WE DON'T HAVE THE WILL TO BE HAPPY, WE'LL NEVER BE!

E1.4.A. IS ALL PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS DOOMED?
If experience seems to grant some reality to happiness itself, the very nature of this experience makes the idea of a "pursuit of happiness" suspect. From a distance, it's impossible to say what my happiness will be. It only appears up close, when it happens, in a series of unforeseeable circumstances. Under these conditions, can happiness still guide our lives? Is it not striving in vain and being the plaything of circumstances, without ever being prepared to win (since we look elsewhere)? On the other hand, it can be argued that if we don't have the will to be happy, we'll never be!

E1.4.A.1. IS JOY SELFLESSNESS ITSELF?
"Seeking what causes happiness is not the same as seeking happiness itself. Innocence behaves as if its merit grants it rights, though it need not be aware of this. The reward is not its aim, even if joy becomes the unexpected outcome of its selflessness—or, as Spinoza might say, if beatitude is selflessness itself. This is the nature of innocence: happiness may result from its merit, but it is not pursued as a goal. Thus, innocence achieves joy while remaining disinterested; its virtue is joyful without being mercenary."
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, Virtues and Love, 1970)

E1.4.A.2. AVOIDING DEAD ENDS - BE CAREFUL NOT TO DELUDE YOURSELF WITH SELF-FULFILLING PROPHECIES such as those of personal development.

E1.4.A.2.1. PERSONAL DEVELOPMENT
"What can we say to this reminder that life is ultimately 'beautiful,' that we should think about 'simple pleasures' and be carefree - if not laugh at this nonsense? Add to this the complicity of the media in creating an image of an icon of consensuality (a photo with a blissful smile), thereby making us believe that we can enter into thought without further difficulty. 'Wisdom' has thus become an ideology of 'personal development,' with everyone complacently telling their own story - as if this preaching and anecdotal evidence had 'indexical' value (to use the ancient Chinese term), or were sufficient to constitute truth. The philosopher, it should be remembered, has no interest in telling his own story: 'He who listens, not to me, but to the discourse,' logos, said the great Heraclitus preemptively; and philosophy, need we remind you? - does not preach. 
The result is this fatally redundant, edgeless discourse of blissful simplicity that imitates naiveté ("marvel at life!"), a mixture of hedonism and zenism from which any driving negative (neg-active) is evacuated, and which pompously repeats the great theme of fusion with the cosmos (and takes an initiatory turn: the journey, no longer to Kathmandu, but to Korea), all in a tone of humility that doubles as exhibitionism. It's as if we could forget that the starting point of morality, for lack of a 'foundation', is not to be found in affirmed good intentions, which so easily turn into posturing and are always suspected of duplicity, nor in collective assent (the gregariousness denounced by Nietzsche). It's really surprising that our age has sunk to such a level of stupidity (coupled with cynicism?) [...].
For such 'wisdom' today is no longer measured by the constituted discipline of thought, but by a discourse without logos, i.e. without argument or, consequently, without reasoning, without concepts (as tools), nor questioning (as a requirement), consequently neither demonstrative nor persuasive, but which readily lapses into incantation and replaces the stakes of truth with its ideology of happiness (the 'taste' of living) and harmony".
(François Jullien, A Second Life, 2017)

E1.4.A.2.2. LIA CHAIA IS A SHY PERSON who rarely exposes her intimacy in her work. In Sorriso [Smile], her bosom bare, sheltered from view in the privacy of her bathroom, she displays a frozen smile cut from a magazine in which the photographed subjects seemed determined to be happy. Is this false cheerfulness, which she doesn't project for others in the intimacy of her bath, an attempt to convince herself?

E1.4.A.2.3. NELLY SACHS: « MANY THINGS MUST REMAIN HEAVY, DESPITE THE MERCHANTS OF THE SOUL'S EFFORTS TO MAKE EVERYTHING LIGHT »
"Have you ever been asked to smile when you were sad or worried? When I find myself in this situation, I feel uncomfortable; it's as if I'm guilty of feeling the weight of things. A smile is beautiful when it appears as a gift, but not when it means that nothing should be serious. Ever since I was a child, I have been accused of being too serious, and indeed things are often too important to me. Then I discovered this sentence by Nelly Sachs, who received the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1966, and everything fell into place: « Many things must remain heavy, despite the merchants of the soul's efforts to make everything light ». The effort to make everything light, under a sympathetic exterior, is very violent. To make everything pleasant is to prevent ourselves from seeing what is not pleasant, what needs to be transformed, changed or rejected - it makes us powerless.

The Greeks knew this, as they invented tragedy to teach men to rediscover a sacred relationship with the truth of existence, by assuming the weight of their commitments and decisions. The whole art of being human consists precisely in weighing each situation, each event, in a just way, knowing what we must lighten and what must find its just weight."
(Fabrice Midal, 3 minutes of philosophy to bcome human again, 2019)

Listen to the podcast: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/3-minutes-de-philosophie-pour-redevenir-humain/nelly-sachs-bien-des-choses-doivent-rester-lourdes-et-les-marchands-d-ames-veulent-rendre-tout-leger-3808731

E1.4.A.2.4. "I'M WARY OF CHEERFUL BIRDS: THEY SING EXCESSIVELY BUT RARELY TAKE FLIGHT." (Paul Lambda @LambdaPaul)

"Aragon was in a good position to know: 'I know of nothing crueler in this world than determined optimists. They are beings of such unrestrained malice that I would swear they've made it their business to impose the blind reign of stupidity... Leave, leave to the pedagogues of the all-is-well this philosophy that everything refutes in the daily practice of life!' Pessimism or lucidity?"
(André Comte-Sponville, Dictionary of Philosophy, 2013)

E1.4.A.2.5. JENNY HOLZER REMINDS US WITH THIS MESSAGE FOUND IN A FORTUNE COOKIE that simply wishing for things to get better won't change them. We need to take action!

E1.4.A.3. AVOIDING DEAD ENDS - BE CAREFUL NOT TO REPLACE HAPPINESS WITH THE SPECTACLE OR STAGING OF HAPPINESS: as in the case of emoticons and selfies, or the person who forces a laugh to convince himself that he's happy.

E1.4.A.3.1. WHAT IMAGE DO I WANT TO GIVE TO OTHERS? Do I wear a happy face so that others think I'm happy? Lia Chaia asked passers-by on the street to wear the smiles she had cut out from magazines, where the photographed subjects appeared determined to be happy... once plastered on the faces of passers-by on a main avenue in the center of São Paulo, these frozen smiles appear to be what they are - fake.

E1.4.A.4. DON'T GIVE UP JUST BECAUSE IT'S HARD. When we struggle to achieve a goal, we often downplay it to reassure ourselves that our failure isn't real. "I can't get it, so I don't want it!" If this is the case, let's free ourselves from this weakness and strive to fulfill our desire.

E1.4.A.5. HAPPINESS IS SOMETHING THAT CAN BE ORGANIZED. ITS MINIMUM DEPENDS PARTLY ON HOW HARD WE WORK.

E1.4.A.5.1. HAPPINESS IS SOMETHING THAT YOU ORGANIZE "If there are no recipes for experiencing pleasure, since pleasure is essentially capricious and whimsical, happiness is at least something that is organized; all the material conditions of happiness can be fulfilled without the grace of joy agreeing to touch us: Venice seems empty to us, the memory of our beloved leaves us strangely cold and dry, we don't rediscover the enthusiasm and joyful exaltation of yesteryear. But the vital minimum of happiness depends to a great extent on our efforts".
(Vladimir Jankelevitch, Virtues and Love, 1970)

E1.4.A.5.2. "YOU HAVE TO WANT TO BE HAPPY AND WORK FOR IT. If we remain in the position of an impartial spectator, hoping for happiness to enter through open doors, it is sadness that will come in. The truth of pessimism lies in the fact that a simple, uncontrolled mood, seen through the eyes of an unoccupied child, soon leads to sadness or irritation. The attraction of play, which is very strong at this age, is not that of a fruit that awakens hunger or thirst; rather, I see in it a will to be happy through play, as we see others are. And the will finds its grip here, because it's all about moving, whipping the spinner, running and screaming; things we can want, because the execution follows immediately. The same determination can be seen in worldly pleasures, which are pleasures by decree, but also require that we put ourselves into them by costume and attitude, which support the decree. What the city dweller likes most in the countryside is to travel there; the act carries the desire. I don't think we are very good at wishing for what we can't do, and unsupported hope is always sad. That's why life is always sad for those who expect happiness as something they are owed.
Everyone has observed some domestic tyrant; and one would like to think, by too simple a view, that the egoist makes his own happiness the law of those around him; but things are not so; the egoist is sad because he expects happiness; even without any of those little evils which are hardly lacking, boredom sets in; it is therefore the law of boredom and unhappiness that the egoist imposes on those who love him or fear him. On the contrary, good humor is generous; it gives rather than takes. It is true that we must think of the happiness of others; but it is not often enough said that the best thing we can do for those who love us is to be happy.
(Alain, On Happiness, April 10, 1923)

E1.4.A.5.3. "THERE IS THE FUTURE THAT IS MADE AND THE FUTURE THAT WE MAKE FOR OURSELVES. THE REAL FUTURE CONSISTS OF BOTH. As for the future that is made, like a storm or an eclipse, there's no point in hoping; you have to know and observe with dry eyes. Just as we wipe the lenses of the telescope, we must wipe the fog of passions from our eyes. I hear well. The heavenly things that we can't change have taught us resignation and a geometric mind, which are a good part of wisdom. But in earthly things, so many changes are made by the industrious individual! Fire, wheat, ships, trained dogs, tamed horses - these are works that man would not have done if science had killed hope.
Especially in the human order itself, where confidence is one of the facts, I count very badly if I don't count on my own confidence. If I believe I will fall, I will fall; if I believe I can't do anything, I can't do anything. If I think my hope is deceiving me, it is deceiving me. Be careful there. I make good weather and storms; first in myself, then around me, in the world of men. For despair and hope move from one to the other, faster than the drift of clouds. If I trust him, he's honest; if I accuse him beforehand, he steals from me. They all give me my change, according to the coin. And remember again that hope only holds by will, based on what we will do if we want to, like peace and justice; instead of despair, which settles and fortifies itself by the power of what is. That's how we save what there is to save in religion, and what religion has lost, I mean, beautiful hope.
(Alain, On Happiness, January 28, 1913)

E1.4.A.5.4. "HAPPY [...]
To be happy is also to have the feeling of being happy. This is what Marcel Conche calls Montaigne's eudemonic cogito: "I think I'm happy, therefore I am. This leaves room for evaluation, for working on oneself, for philosophy.
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.4.A.5.5. "A SONG OF THE ROLLING EARTH
Accouche! accouchez!
Will you rot your own fruit in yourself there?
Will you squat and stifle there?"
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.4.A.6. JOY IS NOT IN FASHION
"Men who have received a deep wound from life have cast suspicion on all serenity, as if it were always childish and puerile and revealed an insanity whose appearance could provoke only pity and tenderness"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, The dawn of day, 1881)

E1.4.B. MEDITATION ON JOY RATHER THAN THE WILL TO BE HAPPY
”The permanence of joy depends on the permanence of a desiring, thinking, and reflecting will. Lasting, inner, and strong joy depends on the perpetual interaction of reflection and the constant reiteration of the work of second foundation.
If this were not so, the traveler [of joy] would soon realize that he himself is only a result. He would grasp himself as if carried by a movement he had once instigated, but which would now be as if alien to him.”
(Robert Misrahi, Les actes de la joie, 1987)

E1.4.B.1. LETTING GO OF PASSIVITY WITHIN ONESELF "To rise to the level of activity, to rediscover the flavor and melody of free choice, affective independence, and sovereign joy, the travelers of joy must repeatedly work on these themes. They must release their inner passivity, moods, and emotions—even joyful ones that express their free desire. They must redouble the movement that brought satisfaction, deciding anew to stand solely for themselves. Laying the foundations of happiness means laying them again, now, not in the past or future. The second foundation, reflective rather than merely vital, is the ever-renewed reality of a fresh act, not the dull weight of a long-ago result."
(Robert Misrahi, The Acts of Joy, 1987)

E1.4.B.1.1. THE PERMANENCE OF JOY DEPENDS ON THE PERMANENCE OF A DESIRING, REFLECTIVE, AND REFLECTING WILL. "Reflexive reiteration is not the repetition of a content but the confirmation of a founding activity insofar it reaffirms a foundation. It grounds a content [...] that inscribes itself in the unforeseeable opening of time: it is joy itself. What is repeated in reflexive reiteration is not the content of joy, but the operation that founds it as an experience that is always desirable, valid, and autonomous. [...]
The permanence of joy depends on the permanence of a desiring, reflective, and reflecting will. Lasting, inner, and strong joy relies on the ongoing interaction of reflection with constant foundational work. Without this, the [real life] traveler would soon realize that he is merely a result himself. He would see himself as carried by a movement he once initiated but which would now be foreign to him."
(Robert Misrahi, The Acts of Joy, 1987)

E1.4.B.1.2. "FOR JOY TO BE INSCRIBED IN PERMANENCE, IT HAS TO BE BASED ON A PERMANENT AND REITERATED ACTION. From there, it discovers that the founding operation is itself a joy since joy and second freedom are inseparable. [...]
Why joy from now on? Because the second foundation is the establishment of the foundation on which the building of joy will rest. The work of foundation will be understood as the present construction of a future whose meaning and permanence it anticipates. Let us insist on this: the building of joy anticipates itself in the building of its conditions. The traveler-architect of life measures the foundation to be constructed by the size and gravity of the building to be supported. Because this building is nothing less than the joy of being, that is to say, the absolute stake, the foundation itself, apparently a simple preparation and preliminary, will nevertheless already be grasped as joy itself."
(Robert Misrahi, The Acts of Joy, 1987)

E1.4.B.1.3. PURSUING JOY BECOMES A JOY "And because to build the foundations of joy is to seize oneself in this double gladness, the subject will be justified in his will to constantly reiterate the founding act, since he already experiences this act as a present element of a global joy that he thought at first would be a mere future. 
The traveler now understands better why he identified the goal and the path, the aim and its itinerary. To prepare for joy is already to move towards it, to take the path is already to reach its end: the path is its own mediation, its own finality. [...]
As in the empirical journey, the Journey of being realizes the synthesis of the movement and the goal. The journey of being is this self-creating movement which reaches that which it pursues by the very movement of pursuing it: pursuing joy becomes a joy, and this joy as the place and means of existential progression allows to reach higher existential forms, higher joys which constitute a goal. And these in their turn become the means (the strength and the resource) of new joyful progressions, towards new forms of being and splendor. The spiral is infinite. The unity of the end and the means perpetually taken up in an upward movement, is at once instrument, task and result."
(Robert Misrahi, The Acts of Joy, 1987)

E1.4.B.1.3.a. WITH THE SECOND FOUNDATION, ROBERT MISRAHI TRANSFORMS THE GOAL INTO A MEANS AND THE MEANS INTO A GOAL. 
"MEANS 
Notice, with Aristotle, that the same thing can be both the means to an end and the end of a means. For example, money: an end for work, a means for comfort or luxury. Or comfort: end for money, means for pleasure. But if this were the case indefinitely, with each end merely a means to another end, we'd never stop choosing one thing over another, so that, as Aristotle writes, 'desire would be futile and vain.' So we have to stop somewhere, and to do that we have to find a 'perfect end,' which is the end of all means and the means to no end. This is the case with happiness and happiness alone: 'Everything we choose is chosen with a view to something else, except happiness, which is an end in itself' (Nicomachean Ethics, I and X)".
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.4.B.1.3.b. "GOAL [vs. END].
What one aims at, what one pursues, what one wants to reach or obtain. 
The Stoics distinguished between the end (telos) and the goal (skopos). The goal is external to the action: it is for example the target that the archer aims at. The end is internal: it is not a question of reaching the target (that does not depend on us: a sudden gust of wind can make the arrow deviate), but of aiming at it well. The goal is always to come; the end, always present. The goal is the object of a hope; the end, of a will. 
The wise man acts without a goal (this is what the Orientals call "detachment from the fruit of the act"), but not without an end. And he aims all the better at the target as he does not care if he will reach it. 
The action is enough for him."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.4.B.1.4. "ALL IT TAKES IS THE WILL TO BE COURAGEOUS AND TO ACT, AND JOY BECOMES ACCESSIBLE. THEREIN LIES THE JOY, THE DESIRE FOR JOY, IN THIS 'CONTENTMENT TO CONTINUE.”
“We live at the cost of our lives, and we should know joy. This is already a courageous journey, so impossible and senseless does the challenge seem. But therein lies the joy, the desire for joy, in this 'contentment to continue.' 
Joy comes from effort, and the joyful person rejoices 'not in having but in giving, not in hoarding but in spending, not in saving but in sacrificing.' Let's set aside the overly blissful and optimistic aspect of this description of the joyful. Instead, let's focus on the absolute simplicity they demonstrate. Joy in effort is another name for unencumbered joy—without precautions, without complication. All it takes is a willingness to be brave and to act, and joy becomes accessible.
There's no need for a more sophisticated intellectual act. On the contrary, the capacity for simplicity demonstrated by the epistemology of courage is most welcome: only it can truly capture the mystery of the adequacy between saying and doing, the same mystery that regulates the course of moments and makes life an eternal birth."
(Cynthia Fleury, The End of Courage, 2010)

E1.4.B.2. "TO BE AWAKE IS TO BE ALIVE.
We must learn to reawaken and keep ourselves awake, not by mechanical aids, but by an infinite expectation of the dawn, which does not forsake us in our soundest sleep. I know of no more encouraging fact than the unquestionable ability of man to elevate his life by a conscious endeavor. It is something to be able to paint a particular picture, or to carve a statue, and so to make a few objects beautiful; but it is far more glorious to carve and paint the very atmosphere and medium through which we look, which morally we can do. To affect the quality of the day, that is the highest of arts. Every man is tasked to make his life, even in its details, worthy of the contemplation of his most elevated and critical hour. [...]

Why is it that men give so poor an account of their day if they have not been slumbering? They are not such poor calculators. If they had not been overcome with drowsiness, they would have performed something. The millions are awake enough for physical labor; but only one in a million is awake enough for effective intellectual exertion, only one in a hundred millions to a poetic or divine life. To be awake is to be alive. I have never yet met a man who was quite awake. How could I have looked him in the face? 
We must learn to reawaken and keep ourselves awake, not by mechanical aids, but by an infinite expectation of the dawn, which does not forsake us in our soundest sleep. I know of no more encouraging fact than the unquestionable ability of man to elevate his life by a conscious endeavor. It is something to be able to paint a particular picture, or to carve a statue, and so to make a few objects beautiful; but it is far more glorious to carve and paint the very atmosphere and medium through which we look, which morally we can do. To affect the quality of the day, that is the highest of arts. Every man is tasked to make his life, even in its details, worthy of the contemplation of his most elevated and critical hour."
(Henry David Thoreau, Walden or Life in the woods, 1854)

E1.4.B.3. EMILY DICKINSON: "WATER IS TAUGHT BY THIRST."
Knowledge can teach me many things about water, but not the essentials. Only experience can teach me the essential...well, not always, for experience can also lead me astray. We are so often the victims of prejudice, so what can we do?
Listen to the poet: she tells us that we learn about water not by dipping our hands in it, but by thirst. Have you ever wanted something? Then you already know; the intensity of desire pushes us to open up for good to what we're trying to achieve. In this sense it is a great teacher. Unfortunately, there's a lot of propaganda today that says you have to get what you want to be happy, to have all the experiences you dream of. On the contrary, it makes us unhappy; our desire can no longer take flight, and we are mistaken about what it can teach us. Here Dickinson rediscovers the forgotten intuition of the great Greek philosophy: Eros, desire, is the son of Penia, poverty, and Poros, abundance. On his mother's side, Eros is thin, shoeless, and sleeps under the stars - but on his father's side, he is always in search of the beautiful and the good, persevering, eager to know. What a profound way to illuminate the meaning of desire: to desire is to discover what I lack most deeply and to go in search of it. For Plato, this is the very definition of philosophy: not to seek the flabby wisdom that's sold to us by the pound, but to let ourselves be seized by the most ardent desire, to set ourselves in motion. 
But how can we recognize this desire that can awaken us and teach us what we need deep inside? The difficulty is that we mustn't imagine, as we all tend to do. Instead, it's important to take the time to discover what's calling us - what am I thirsty for? What is it that I'm so desperately missing in order to be more fully who I am? And indeed, our true desire comes from our guts, from deep within us - so we must learn to listen to that call within us. It strikes me that most social, political and religious discourse teaches us to extinguish this flame. They try to make us calm, efficient and submissive - which is terrible, because it's this real philosophical burning that makes us alive; it alone opens all the doors, all the windows - without it, without this passion, nothing great can be done.
(Fabrice Midal, 3 minutes of philosophy to become human again, 2019)

Listen to the podcast: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/3-minutes-de-philosophie-pour-redevenir-humain/emily-dickinson-on-apprend-l-eau-par-la-soif-2265216

E1.4.B.3.1. "WATER, IS TAUGHT BY THIRST. 
Land — by the Oceans passed. 
Transport — by throe —
Peace, by it's battles told —
Love, by memorial mold —
Birds, by the snow."
(Emily Dickinson, 1859)

E1.4.B.4. ONCE WE BEGIN TO FEEL DEEPLY ALL THE ASPECTS OF OUR LIVES, WE BEGIN TO DEMAND FROM OURSELVES AND FROM OUR LIFE-PURSUITS THAT THEY FEEL IN ACCORDANCE WITH THAT JOY WHICH WE KNOW OURSELVES TO BE CAPABLE OF. "The erotic is a measure between the beginnings of our sense of self and the chaos of our strongest feelings. It is an internal sense of satisfaction to which, once we have experienced it, we know we can aspire. For having experienced the fullness of this depth of feeling and recognizing its power, in honor and self-respect we can require no less of ourselves. […]

The very word erotic comes from the Greek word eros, the personification of love in all its aspects — born of Chaos, and personifying creative power and harmony. When I speak of the erotic, then, I speak of it as an assertion of the lifeforce of women; of that creative energy empowered, the knowledge and use of which we are now reclaiming in our language, our history, our dancing, our loving, our work, our lives. [...]

The erotic is not a question only of what we do; it is a question of how acutely and fully we can feel in the doing. Once we know the extent to which we are capable of feeling that sense of satisfaction and completion, we can then observe which of our various life endeavors bring us closest to that fullness. [...]

When we begin to live from within outward, in touch with the power of the erotic within ourselves, and allowing that power to inform and illuminate our actions upon the world around us, then we begin to be responsible to ourselves in the deepest sense. For as we begin to recognize our deepest feelings, we begin to give up, of necessity, being satisfied with suffering and self-negation, and with the numbness which so often seems like their only alternative in our society. [...]

The sharing of joy, whether physical, emotional, psychic, or intellectual, forms a bridge between the sharers which can be the basis for understanding much of what is not shared between them, and lessens the threat of their difference. […]

That self-connection shared is a measure of the joy which I know myself to be capable of feeling, a reminder of my capacity for feeling. And that deep and irreplaceable knowledge of my capacity for joy comes to demand from all of my life that it be lived within the knowledge that such satisfaction is possible, and does not have to be called marriage, nor god, nor an afterlife.

This is one reason why the erotic is so feared, and so often relegated to the bedroom alone, when it is recognized at all. For once we begin to feel deeply all the aspects of our lives, we begin to demand from ourselves and from our life-pursuits that they feel in accordance with that joy which we know ourselves to be capable of."
(Audre Lorde, Sister Outsider: Essays and Speeches, 1984)

E1.4.B.5. "DON'T HESITATE
If you suddenly and unexpectedly feel joy, don't hesitate. Give in to it. There are plenty of lives and whole towns destroyed or about to be. We are not wise, and not very often kind. And much can never be redeemed. Still, life has some possibility left. Perhaps this is its way of fighting back, that sometimes something happens better than all the riches or power in the world. It could be anything, but very likely you notice it in the instant when love begins. Anyway, that's often the case. Anyway, whatever it is, don't be afraid of its plenty. Joy is not made to be a crumb."
(Mary Oliver, Swan, 2010)

E1.4.C. JOY AND IMAGINATION
Simulating our future through imagination can help us define a path that leads to joy. Here are 13 examples:
1. Nietzsche's fictional test of the "eternal return."
2. The "miracle question" of the Palo Alto school of psychotherapy.
3. Victor Segalen, Gaston Bachelard, Robert Misrahi and Adrienne Maree Brown: how the imaginary does not oppose reality, but rather establishes it.
4. Robert Musil's The Man of Possibilities.
5. Adam Phillips examines the paradoxical relationship between frustration and satisfaction, exploring how our unlived lives inform the priorities, values, and desires that underpin the lives we live.
6. Hope as a necessary force to enable us to achieve an imagined future good.
7. Faced with the impossibility of imagining an experience that must first be lived, the best response is to choose according to our will to discover who we will become.
8. Henry David Thoreau: "If you have built castles in the air, your work need not be lost; that is where they should be. Now put the foundations under them."
9. How Nick Cage eased the pain of losing his son.
10. Turning mass into energy: E=mc2, with Jeanette Winterson.
11. Spinoza's role of imagination in achieving bliss.
12. Charles Darwin: “The value of the products of our imagination depends of course on the number, accuracy, and clearness of our impressions, on our judgment and taste in selecting or rejecting the involuntary combinations, and to a certain extent on our power of voluntarily combining them.”
13. The philosophy of Shelley's poetry: Shelley cultivated the imagination to perceive what he called "intellectual beauty." The vehicle for this is poetry, and the active principle that transforms the world is love.

E1.4.C.1.  1. NIETZSCHE'S ETERNAL RETURN is not a cosmological thesis; it's a test—a fictitious trial that ranks people based on how much they accept the hypothesis. The hypothesis also has educational significance: joyfully approving the test of the eternal return means living as if the hypothesis were true.

E1.4.C.1.1. WHOEVER RISES LIKE THE SUN, IN A SINGLE MOTION, KNOWS HOW TO DIRECT THEIR BEING TOWARD A DESTINY THAT IS RENEWED AND RECONQUERED DAILY BY A RENEWED AMOR FATI "Among all images, sunrise offers an immediate lesson. It symbolizes the urgency of action. To Nietzsche, it is not a panorama but an action. For him, it is not about contemplation; it is about decision. The Nietzschean sunrise represents an irrevocable decision. It embodies the eternal return of strength, translating the myth of the eternal return from passive to active. The doctrine of the eternal return is better understood when seen as part of the will to power's awakenings.

Whoever rises like the sun, in a single motion, knows how to direct their being toward a destiny that is renewed and reconquered daily by a renewed amor fati. In harmony with the cosmic forces of return, the Nietzschean dreamer might say to the night: "I will make the sun rise. I am the night watchman who will proclaim the hour of awakening. The night is but a long wait for awakening."

Thus, the consciousness of the eternal return is the consciousness of a projected will. It is our being finding itself, returning to the same consciousness and certainty of being a will. It is our being that projects the world anew. One misunderstands the Nietzschean universe if they do not first consider dynamic imagination. Viewing the universe as an immense mill endlessly grinding the same wheat depicts it as dead, annihilated by fate. A Nietzschean cosmos thrives in moments nurtured by an ever-young impulse. It is a story of rising suns."
(Gaston Bachelard, Air and Dreams - Essay on the Imagination of Movement, 1943)

E1.4.C.1.2. "QUAND UNE FOIS ON A EU LA CHANCE D’AIMER FORTEMENT, LA VIE SE PASSE À CHERCHER DE NOUVEAU CETTE ARDEUR ET CETTE LUMIÈRE » MAIS « CE N’EST PAS SI FACILE DE DEVENIR CE QU’ON EST, DE RETROUVER SA MESURE PROFONDE".
(Albert Camus, Le retour a Tipasa)

E1.7.D.6.19.b_REF2_PHwE1.4.C.1.2.

E1.4.C.1.3. WHAT YOU WANT, WANT IT IN SUCH A WAY THAT YOU ALSO WANT THE ETERNAL RETURN OF IT ALL. "As an ethical thought, the concept of the eternal return is a new formulation of a practical synthesis: What you want, want it in such a way that you also want the eternal return of it all. «If, in all that you want to do, you start by asking yourself: am I sure that I want to do it an infinite number of times, it will be for you the most solid center of gravity.» One thing in the world disgusts Nietzsche: the small compensations, the small pleasures, the little joys, everything you agree to once, just once. The things you can only do again the next day if you have said to yourself the day before: tomorrow I won't do it again - all the ceremonial of the obsessed. Let us see better how the eternal return operates a selection here. It is the thought of the eternal return that selects. It makes wanting something whole. The thought of the eternal return eliminates from wanting everything that falls outside of the eternal return; it makes wanting a creation, it effectuates the equation wanting = creating."
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and philosophy, 1962)

E1.4.C.1.3.a. HE WHO IS, WHO IS REAL, WHO IS TRUE, IS AWARE THAT HE CONFERS HONOR ON THINGS, THAT HE CREATES VALUES. "Nietzsche announces that wanting is liberating; against the pain of the wanting, Nietzsche proclaims that wanting is joyful. Against the image of a desire that dreams of receiving established values, Nietzsche proclaims that to want is to create new values. [...]

Goodness describes the activity, the affirmation, the pleasures experienced in its exercise: a certain quality of the soul, “a certain fundamental certainty that a soul possesses about itself, something that is impossible to seek, impossible to find and perhaps even to lose”. What Nietzsche often calls distinction is the internal character of what we affirm (we don't have to look for it), of what we put into action (we can't find it), of what we enjoy (we can't lose it). The one who affirms and acts is at the same time the one who is: “The word esthlos means, according to its root, means one who is, who has reality, who is real, who is true”. “He who is is aware that he confers honor on things, that he creates values.”
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophy, 1962)

E1.4.C.1.4. THE ETERNAL RETURN IS THE ONLY SIMULATION MACHINE THAT ALLOWS MAN TO ASSIMILATE HIMSELF TO THE SELF-GENERATING PROCESS OF THE WORLD. DOES IT KILL THE SUBJECT? "Nietzsche's eternal return is above all the practice that excludes any possible recovery of philosophy as a position of theses. The dilemma Nietzsche posed for himself [...] could be formulated as follows: either thinking wants the whole - and then it kills the subject who thinks it; or thought renounces the whole - and then it kills life. The eternal return presents itself as the only practice that makes it possible to follow the first possibility, and its most succinct formula could be that of a posthumous fragment from the summer of 1889 (Cahier NV 9): "We must not want a single state, but we must want to become periodic beings, that is, to become the same as existence." [...] 
In order to become similar to existence, the individual, who is already dead as a subject when he utters this statement, must approach necessity. In fact, for Nietzsche, the greatest servitude of consciousness, its blindness, is not to perceive the necessity that governs it. The eternal return, then, will be that unique machine of simulation which allows man to assimilate himself to the process of self-generation of the world. [...] 
And now I ask myself which of the manifestations of our world, at least among those that have been given a name, would even partially meet Nietzsche's demand. None, it seems to me. None of them has the wild obedience to the goddess Anankè [representing necessity] that Nietzsche predicted. [...] Nietzsche's role was rather that of a traitor; what he announced was a very strange kind of revolution, which would at the same time be the betrayal of the West".
(Roberto Calasso, Parody of parody, Nietzsche today, 1973)

E1.4.C.1.5. “In self-destruction reactive forces are themselves denied and led to nothingness. This is why self-destruction is said to be an active operation an "active destruction" (VP III 8, EH III 1). It and it alone expresses the becoming-active of forces: forces become active insofar as reactive forces deny and suppress themselves in the name of a principle which, a short time ago, was still assuring their conservation and triumph. Active negation or active destruction is the state of strong spirits which destroy the reactive in themselves, submitting it to the test of the eternal return and submitting themselves to this test even if it entails willing their own decline; "it is the condition of strong spirits and wills, and these do not find it possible to stop with the negative of 'judgement'; their nature demands active negation" (VP III 102/WP 24). This is the only way in which reactive forces become active. Furthermore this is why negation, by making itself the negation of reactive forces themselves, is not only active but is, as it were, transmuted. It expresses affirmation and becoming-active as the power of affirming. Nietzsche then speaks of the "eternal joy of becoming. . . that joy which includes even joy in destroying", "The affirmation of passing away and destroying, which is the decisive feature of a Dionysian philosophy" (EH III "The Birth of Tragedy”3 p. 273);
The second selection in the eternal return is thus the following: the eternal return produces becoming-active. It is sufficient to relate the will to nothingness to the eternal return in order to realise that reactive forces do not return. However far they go, however deep the becoming-reactive of forces, reactive forces will not return. The small, petty, reactive man will not return. In and through the eternal return negation as a quality of the will to power transmutes itself into affirmation, it becomes an affirmation of negation itself, it becomes a power of affirming, an affirmative power. This is what Nietzsche presents as Zarathustra's cure and Dionysus' secret. "Nihilism vanquished by itself thanks to the eternal return (VP HI). This second selection is very different from the first. It is no longer a question of the simple thought of the eternal return eliminating from willing everything that falls outside this thought but rather, of the eternal return making something come into being which cannot do so without changing nature. It is no longer a question of selective thought but of selective being; for the eternal return is being and being is selection. (Selection = hierarchy) ”
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophy, 1962)

E1.4.C.1.5.a. EVERYTHING UNIMAGINABLY SMALL AND GREAT IN YOUR LIFE WILL COME BACK TO YOU, AND ALL IN THE SAME ORDER AND SEQUENCE. "Here, too, Nietzsche's allegiance is opposed to and surpasses the optimism of Leibniz, who is in many ways quite close to Nietzsche. In fact, Leibniz's exaltation goes so far, even before Nietzsche, as to affirm the idea of eternal return: "Some say that the evils are great and numerous in comparison with the goods: they are mistaken. (...) I believe that there are few people who, at the moment of death, would not wish to have their life back, on condition of passing through the same number of goods and evils again, as long as they were not of the same kind: we would be content to vary. Without demanding a better state than that in which we have been". This Leibnizian version of eternal return is clearly close to the Nietzschean one. But it is easy to see how Leibniz's eternal return differs from Nietzsche's - and, judged by Nietzsche's values, is indicative of a lesser beatitude: while Leibniz agrees with Nietzsche that nothing better is required, Leibniz nevertheless demands a slight variation of the same. But [...] such a demand does not figure at all in Nietzsche's thinking about the eternal return: "Everything unimaginably small and great in your life will have to come back to you, and all in the same order and sequence." That's why it's hard to follow Deleuze's claim that Nietzsche's eternal return operates a "second selection" that favors the return of active forces and excludes that of reactive forces: "You only have to relate the desire for nothingness to eternal return to realize that reactive forces do not return. No matter how far they go, no matter how deep the reactive becoming of the forces, the reactive forces will not return. The small, petty, reactive man will not return. This idea of a possible progression of the good, of a better ready to blossom in the very best, would no doubt win Leibniz's approval, but certainly not Nietzsche's".
(Clément Rosset, Force Majeure, 1983)

E1.4.C.2.  2. IN THERAPY: IMAGINE THE SOLUTION THAT WOULD BRING SUFFERING TO AN END more quickly by transposing yourself into a new equilibrium.

E1.4.C.2.1. THE PALO ALTO SCHOOL AND BRIEF THERAPIES
"The Palo Alto school offers keys to understanding Buddhism by questioning the nature of the mind. Contrary to the Cartesian tradition that views the mind as a faculty of an individual subject, they conceive it as a totality in interaction. This aligns with a central Buddhist thought: the mind is a situation.
The Palo Alto school reframes unhappiness, seeing it not as a personal problem but as the result of psychological situations. This stance is both anti-Cartesian and anti-psychoanalytic (as psychoanalysis also views the mind as a faculty of the subject). They argue that faculties are neither foundational nor existent: phenomena like memory emerge depending on the situation."
(Alexis Lavis on Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 06/08/2018)

E1.4.C.2.1.a. CREATING EXPECTATIONS OF CHANGE
"We've found it helpful to encourage clients to describe what they would like to be different once their disorder is resolved. It's intuitive that knowing your destination makes it easier to get there. What's less obvious is that simply expecting a slightly different, more satisfying outcome can make it easier to achieve."
(Collective from the Palo Alto School)

E1.4.C.2.1.b. IMAGINING THE SOLUTION BEFORE FINDING THE CAUSE OF THE PROBLEM "The more detail the client gives about the pattern of the disorder, the more goals and possibilities for intervention there are, i.e. potential avenues for the client to know that the problem is solved. Even disorder statements as vague as 'I don't know who I really am' or 'We just can't communicate' may be enough. In this case, setting goals becomes the objective: 'When will you know that you know who you really are?', “'What will you do, when you know who you really are, that you're not doing now?', 'How will your best friend know that you really know who you really are?'”
(Collective from the Palo Alto School)

In this collage, Davide Trabucco connects desolation and hope.
"Wishing for the moon" symbolizes an impossible desire. The Palo Alto school suggests that when we're psychologically suffering and feel trapped, imagining new equilibriums—without initially worrying about how to achieve them—can help us find solutions. We should allow ourselves to envision success, whether it's reaching the moon or the sun (as in Olafur Eliasson's installation). Then, with a therapist's guidance, we can craft a path towards this reimagined future.
(Pierre Schindler)

E1.4.C.2.1.c. THE MIRACLE QUESTION "The famous 'miracle question' (de Shazer, 1988a) helps therapists and clients visualize the steps already taken, the resources available to them, and possible future solutions. In the 'miracle question', the client is asked:
'Suppose you're at home sleeping, and a miracle happens—the problem is solved. How would you know the miracle had occurred? What would be different?' (De Shazer, 1988, p. 5)"
(Collective from the Palo Alto School)

E1.4.C.2.1.d. CHANGE IS NOT ONLY POSSIBLE BUT INEVITABLE “Simply, it seems that disorders persist because people expect the damn thing to keep happening over and over again. Talking about other possible futures when the disorder is no longer a viable life option, helps create the expectation that change is not only possible but inevitable.” 
(Collective from the Palo Alto School)

E1.4.C.2.1.e. CREATING GOOD MEMORIES IS A STRATEGY TO NOURISH THE “REMEMBERINGE SELF”.
"The therapist told them that for the next two weeks he would only ask them to do one thing: have one good experience, which they would remember ten years from now. Who had washed the dishes, taken out the trash or tidied up the attic, no one would remember in ten years, but an unusual event, like with the dolphins, they would always remember. [...] Creating good memories is one of my favorite therapeutic strategies, and a good one to apply to our own lives.”
(Cloé Madanes, Palo Alto School)

AE1.4.C.2.2. FOR A PSYCHOANALYSIS OF ASCENT: PROPOSING AN ALTERNATIVE FUTURE AS EARLY AS POSSIBLE

E1.4.C.2.2.a. ASCENSIONAL IMAGINATION COMMANDS THE DIALECTIC OF ENTHUSIASM AND ANGUISH "In order to evaluate the transformative power of fine emotions, the first investigation consists, according to us, in determining in which measure they lighten us or in which measure they weigh us down. It is their positive or negative vertical differential that describes best their efficiency, their psychic destiny. We will therefore formulate this first principle of ascensional imagination: of all metaphors, the metaphors of height, elevation, depth, lowering, and falling are axiomatic metaphors par excellence. Nothing explains them and they explain everything. More simply: when we engage fully with them, when we feel them, and especially compare them, we realize that they carry an essential signature and that they are more natural than all the others. They engage us more than visual metaphors, more than any bright image. And yet language does not favor them. Language, instructed by forms, does not easily make picturesque height´s dynamic images. However, these images are of singular power: they command the dialectic of enthusiasm and anguish. Vertical valuation is so essential, so defining, its supremacy is so indisputable that the spirit cannot turn away from it when it has once recognized it in its immediate and direct sense. One cannot do without the vertical axis to express moral values."
(Gaston Bachelard, Air and Dreams: An Essay on the Imagination of Movement, 1943)

E1.4.C.2.2.b. IT IS ADVISABLE TO PROPOSE SCENARIOS OF THE FUTURE AS SOON AS POSSIBLE TO SOMEONE WHO WE HAVE JUST FREED FROM THE WEIGHT OF A HEAVY PAST "Naturally, Robert Desoille realizes that the psychiatrist and the educator should clear away everything that hinders someone's psychic future - and, in this regard, the task of psychoanalysis remains useful - but it is advisable to propose scenarios of the future as soon as possible to someone who we have just freed from the weight of a heavy past. Often even - having scruples to invite the subject to painful confidences - Desoille begins directly by proposing his images of ascension, his images of the future. Without this rapid or even immediate suggestion of an expanding future, the person who has suffered for a long time from his faults and mistakes can be overwhelmed by his suffering and continue his life in disarray. Before the psychoanalytic treatment, he was a heavy soul. One does not become a light soul overnight. If pleasure is natural and easy, one must learn happiness; one must become aware of the alleviating value ​​of happiness."
(Gaston Bachelard, Air and Dreams: an essay on the imagination of movement, 1943)

E1.4.C.2.2.c. "DIDN'T YOU KNOW THAT JOY IS REALLY A FEAR OF WHICH WE HAVE NO FEAR? We live through a fear from beginning to end, and that is precisely what joy is. A fear of which we do not only know the signature. A fear in which one has confidence."
(Rainer Maria Rilke, Eleventh Dream, The Book of Dreams and Other Prose)

"The dream of flying is then a fall in slow motion, a fall from which one rises easily without damage. The dream of flying is the synthesis of fall and elevation. Only a soul capable of total synthesis as was Rilke's knows how to handle in a state of joy the fear that joy overcomes. More divided, more disunited souls have only memory to reunite opposites, to live one after the other, one causing the other, pain and joy. But it is already of great enlightenment that a dream can show us that fear can produce happiness. If one of the first fears, as we will recall later, is the fear of falling; if the greatest of human responsibilities - physical and moral - is the responsibility of our verticality, how much a dream that makes us raise tall, that energizes our uprightness, that stretches the arc of our body from heels to neck, that rids us of our weight, that gives us our first, our only aerial experience, how much such a dream must be salutary, comforting, marvellous, emotional! What a memory it must leave in a soul that knows how to link its nightlife with the poetic reverie of the day!"
(Gaston Bachelard, Air and Dreams - Essay on the Imagination of Movement, 1943)

E1.4.C.2.2.d. I PROPOSE WE SEEK TO CURE A SICK PERSON BY MAKING HIM ADOPT THE EXTERNAL ATTITUDE OF THE STATE TO WHICH ONE WOULD LIKE TO BRING HIM BACK "Either we are able to return by modern and contemporary means to this superior idea of poetry [...] that is to say, without meditation, without useless contemplation, without scattered dreams, to arrive at an awareness and also possession of certain dominant forces, of certain notions which direct everything; and since these notions when they are effective carry with them their energy, to find in ourselves these energies which in the end create order and nourish life's intensity, or we have to surrender ourselves immediately without resistance, and recognize that we are only good for disorder, famine, blood, war and epidemics.
Either we bring all the arts back to a central attitude and necessity, finding an analogy between a gesture made in painting or in the theater, and a gesture made by lava inside a volcano's chaos, or we must stop painting, clamoring, writing and doing anything.
I propose we return [...] to this elementary magical idea, taken up by modern psychoanalysis, which consists in seeking to cure a sick person by making him adopt the external attitude of the state to which one would like to bring him back."
(Antonin Artaud, Theater and its Double, 1932-38)

E1.4.C.3.  3. THE "ALTERNATING GAME" involves the internal transformation that the imaginary performs on reality, and that reality in turn performs on the imaginary. This creates another world at the core of the Real.

E1.4.C.3.1. “SEGALEN'S RESPONSE IS BOLD AND SIMPLE: NOT ONLY IMAGINATION DOES NOT OPPOSE REALITY, BUT IT FOUNDS IT... while a Reality, perceived in the depth of all its dimensions, goes beyond the imaginary. [...]
But it does not reside elsewhere than in this world when perceived by the metaphysical poet capable of transmuting reality without suppressing it. The most striking work of the imagination here is perceiving the real in its Reality, that is, in all its meaning, richness, and splendor. […]

This Reality overflows the imaginary; it gains the density, brilliance, and existence where imagination failed short and could only render a ghostly idea. […]
Thus, the alternation of the real and imagination is not a movement that leads to an imaginary flight from everyday realism. The "alternating game" consists much more in the internal transmutation that imagination applies to the real and that the real in turn applies to imagination. Another world is then created at the very core of the Real."
(Robert Misrahi, The Acts of Joy, 1987)

E1.4.C.3.1.a. LOUISE SWÄRDSHAMMAR:
Thanks! 🙏 A really interesting text.
Reality always surpasses poem and at the same time we need the imagination to explore and move the boundaries of reality. It seems as if the world we live in is made up of a contrasting duality where one cannot exist without the other. Again, one can say… two sides of the same coin. ✨

E1.4.C.3.2. "A JOURNEY TO THE LAND OF REALITY: ON VICTOR SEGALEN [...]
[Ernst Bloch] powerfully shows how all history and culture are carried by  dreamy or utopian imagination gradually embodied in real works. At the base of this imagination is a categorial structure of the subject: the principle of hope. The anticipatory dimension of consciousness and desire is a crucial condition of life, that of consciousness and that of the whole being. Anticipation and hope, structures that enable the subject to be present, are difficult to separate from an imaginative activity capable of eliciting new arrangements, new forms, cultural, social or individual beings never encountered before ."
(Robert Misrahi, The Acts of Joy, 1987)

E1.4.C.3.2.1. LOUISE SWÄRDSHAMMAR:
Wow! Thanks! 🙏🌟
Again, your text reference touches on my intention and thoughts behind the artwork.

I often work with symbolic worlds, which I try to animate with feelings and emotions of vulnerability, loneliness (and solitude), along with a longing for change and transformation. These are the experiences of my own life and at the same time universal elements we all humans share.

This painting is part of a series of works with the theme "Nexus" and this is the descriptive text: "We often experience the world as a sequential line through time and space. A movement filled with decisions and actions that relentlessly urges our lives forward, whether we like it or not. Though, at times this mysterious moment occurs when the adamant motion seems to pause for a brief second and we are suddenly looking at everything as from the alongside. The nexus point where faith and opportunity collide, and everything from here on having profoundly changed."

Pierre Schindler:
I love the descriptive text as much as the work. At the nexus, this oscillation of desire, this moment of freedom, we have the opportunity to imagine what is the next step that will best suit our individual desire (not the mimetic one that might have taken hold of us). Imagination at this moment - together with an awareness of our desire - is crucial to shape the path to joy. Robert Misrahi writes about it in another passage that I will send via private message not to be too long here. 
Cheers, have a great day and keep following your desire at the inflection point of freedom!

E1.4.C.3.3. BY IMAGINING, WE ABANDON THE ORDINARY COURSE OF THINGS. PERCEIVING AND IMAGINING ARE AS DIFFERENT AS PRESENCE AND ABSENCE. TO IMAGINE IS TO BE ABSENT, TO LAUNCH INTO A NEW LIFE.
In fact, the way we escape from reality clearly indicates our intimate reality. A being deprived of the function of the unreal is as neurotic as one deprived of the function of the real. We could say that a disturbance in the function of the unreal impacts the function of the real. If the function of openness, which is properly the function of imagination, is impaired, perception itself remains obtuse. We therefore need to find a regular link between the real and the imaginary.

E1.4.C.3.3_REF1_PH "REGARDING ANY IMAGE THAT STRIKES US, WE MUST ASK OURSELVES: WHAT IS THE LINGUISTIC FERVOR THAT THIS IMAGE UNLEASHES WITHIN US?  How do we unfasten it from the stable background of our familiar memories? To fully realize the imaginative function of language, we must patiently seek the desire for otherness, the desire for double meaning, the desire for metaphor embedded in all words. In a more general way, we must become aware of all the desires to depart from what we see and say in favor of what we imagine. This way, we have a chance to reinstitute imagination's role of seduction. Through imagination, we abandon the ordinary course of things. To perceive and to imagine are as antithetical as presence and absence. To imagine is to be absent, to set off towards a new life."
(Gaston Bachelard, Air and Dreams: An Essay on the Imagination of Movement, 1943)

E1.4.C.3.3_REF1.1_PH "FOR EACH IMAGE THAT STRIKES US, WE MUST ASK OURSELVES: WHAT LINGUISTIC PASSION DOES THIS IMAGE AROUSE IN US? How do we separate it from the too-stable background of our familiar memories? To fully appreciate the imaginative role of language, we must patiently search for the desire for otherness, the desire for double meaning, the desire for metaphor in all words. More generally, we need to take stock of all the desires to leave behind what we see and what we say in favor of what we imagine. This will give back to the imagination its seductive role. By imagining, we abandon the ordinary course of things. Perceiving and imagining are as antithetical as presence and absence. To imagine is to take leave, to start a new life. [...]

In fact, the way we escape from reality clearly indicates our intimate reality. Someone who is deprived of the function of the unreal is just as neurotic as someone who is deprived of the function of the real. We could say that a disturbance in the function of the unreal has an effect on the function of the real. If the function of openness, which is actually the function of imagination, is impaired, perception itself remains obtuse. Therefore, we must find a regular relationship between the real and the imaginary. [...]

The word wing, the word cloud, are immediate evidence of this ambivalence between the real and the imaginary. The reader can immediately make of it what he wants: a view or a vision, a drawn reality or a dreamed movement. What we're asking the reader to do is not only to experience this dialectic, these alternating states, but to bring them together in an ambivalence in which we understand that reality empowers our dreams and that dreams are part of reality. Unfortunately, the moment of this ambivalence is short-lived. We have to admit that soon we are either seeing or dreaming. We are then either the mirror of forms or the silent slave of inert matter. [...]

In other words, from our point of view, images are psychic realities. In its birth, in its rise, the image is in us the subject of the verb imagine. It is not its complement. The world is imagined in human reverie".
(Gaston Bachelard, Air and Dreams - An Essay on the Imagination of Movement, 1943)

E1.4.C.3.3_REF2_PH BACHELARD URGES US TO INVEST OURSELVES ACTIVELY IN DAYDREAMING, WHICH IS AN EXPERIENCE OF THE IMAGE, AND TO PLUNGE INTO A CONTEMPLATIVE STATE THAT DISSOLVES THE SUBJECT-OBJECT DISTINCTION. “For Bachelard, imagination is as vital as reason. He criticizes psychoanalysis for reducing dreams to mere obscure desires and passions. Instead, he grants dreams an autonomous reality, arguing that they possess their own logic—one that reason may not comprehend. Our attraction to certain images isn't arbitrary; these images are integral to the human spirit. Reason and daydreaming, in Bachelard's view, represent the pinnacle of human mental achievement, contrasting sharply with the mundane aspects of everyday life.
Bachelard distinguishes between nocturnal dreams—where the subject is suspended and obliterated—and daydreams, where the subject is present and engaged. "A poor daydream is one that invites you to take a nap,": true daydreaming is an active, image-rich experience that blurs the line between subject and object.
Consider the contemplation of still water. Bachelard ponders: when a man gazes at his reflection, is it truly man observing himself, or the world observing man? This illustrates how the dreamer becomes one with the world. For Bachelard, this non-separation of man and world in reverie is fundamental. The psychic division between subject and world is a later development, achieved through education and rational thinking. This explains why children excel at reverie.
Poetic imagery has the power to immerse us in reverie. Bachelard writes, "I need the reveries of others to remember that I too was a dreamer under candlelight" (Fire and Dreams). Daydreaming, then, becomes a means of reconnecting with others—a "communion of men." It's trans-subjective, transcending individual boundaries.
Daydreaming is a form of meditation centered on imagination rather than present-moment awareness. It suspends time and frees us from social and professional constraints. Bachelard argues passionately for its importance in work: "If you take away dreams, you'll knock out the worker. Neglect the dream-inspiring powers of work, and you diminish and annihilate the worker... The dream-inspiring capability of work is the very condition of the worker's mental integrity." He envisions a future where every trade has its dreamer, its dreaming guide, where factories have poetic offices. For Bachelard, will without the capacity to dream is mere brutality.
While projects represent the rationalized dimension of work, following predefined methods, true joy in work comes from the ability to dream—to visualize one's actions against resistant materials. This visualization stage, familiar to craftsmen, is crucial. Yet in today's professional culture, the idea of "dreaming well to work well" is seldom heard or valued.”
(Julien Lamy, in the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture, on 05/21/2019)

Listen to the podcast: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/bachelard-le-dormeur-eveille-1852208

E1.4.C.3.3_REF3_LIT DREAMING IS A RISKY BUT ESSENTIAL ACT FOR BEING FULLY AWAKE TO LIFE, AND THE GREATEST CHALLENGE IS NOT MERELY ACHIEVING A DREAM BUT FIRST DISCERNING ONE'S OWN AUTHENTIC DREAM FROM THE SECOND-HAND TEMPLATES OF CULTURAL SUCCESS.
“Evolution invented REM sleep, that ministry of dreams, to give us a safe way of practicing the possible into the real. The dreams of the night clarify our lives. The dreams of the day complicate them, charge them with the battery of fear and desire, quiver them with the urgency of our mortality and the fervor of our lust for life. To dream is to dare traversing the roiling ocean between what is and what could be on a ramshackle raft of determination and luck. The price we pay for dreaming is the possibility of drowning; the price we pay for not dreaming is the surety of coasting through life in a stupor of autopilot, landlocked in the givens of our time, place, and culture. The dreamer, then, is the only one fully awake to life — that bright technology of the possible the universe invented to prevail over the probable amid the cold austerity of eternal night.

But what may be even harder than getting what you dream of is knowing what to dream of, annealing your imagination and your desires enough to trust that your dreams are your own — not the second-hand dreams of your parents, not your heroes’ costumes of achievement, not your culture’s templates of success. “No one can acquire for another — not one,” Walt Whitman reckoned with how to own your life, “not one can grow for another — not one,” while two hundred miles north Thoreau was reckoning with the nature of success, concluding: If the day and the night are such that you greet them with joy, and life emits a fragrance like flowers and sweet-scented herbs, is more elastic, more starry, more immortal — that is your success.”

They are nothing less than patron saints of the human spirit, those who protect our dreams from the false gods of success.”
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2025/09/11/arundhati-roy-success/?mc_cid=7b31f4c096&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E1.4.C.3.4. NIETZSCHE'S IMAGINATION PROPAGATES A CLIMATE OF IMAGINARY ALTITUDE "It does not seem that Nietzsche actually climbed to the peaks where « the chamois itself has lost its track ». Nietzsche is not a mountaineer. In the end, he haunted the high plateaus more than the peaks. He often wrote his poems while descending from the heights, while returning to the valleys where men dwell.
But the imaginary climate is more defining than the real one. Nietzsche's imagination is more instructive than any experience. It propagates a climate of imaginary altitude. It leads us into a special lyrical universe. The first of Nietzschean value transmutations is a transmutation of images. It transforms the richness of the deep into the glory of the high. Nietzsche seeks a beyond of the deep, that is, a beyond of evil and a beyond of the high, that is, a high beyond the noble, because he is not satisfied with a tradition of prestige. He stretches all moral forces between these imaginary poles, refusing any utilitarian material « progress » which would only be a horizontal progress, without modification of our heavy being. Nietzsche put all his lyrical energy in an exchange of the heavy in light, the terrestrial in air. He made the abysses speak the language of the summits. The abyss suddenly gave back aerial echoes: « O joy... My abyss speaks. I have turned my last depth towards the light! » (Zarathustra, The Convalescent) [...]
Nietzsche has, we believe, designated himself as one of the greatest philosophers of the ascending psyche in this one great line (To Hafis, Poems): « You are the depth of all peaks. »"
(Gaston Bachelard, Air and Dreams - Essay on the Imagination of Movement, 1943)

E1.4.C.3.4_REF1_PH "FOR NIETZSCHE, AIR IS THE VERY SUBSTANCE OF OUR FREEDOM AND SUPERHUMAN JOY. IT IS A KIND OF MATTER THAT HAS BEEN TRANSCENDED, JUST AS NIETZSCHEAN JOY IS A KIND OF HUMAN JOY THAT HAS BEEN TRANSCENDED.[...]
Nietzschean air is therefore a strange substance; it has no substantial qualities. It can therefore characterise a philosophy of total becoming. In the realm of the imagination, air frees us from substantial, intimate and digestive daydreams. It frees us from our attachment to matter; it is therefore the substance of our freedom. For Nietzsche, air brings nothing. It gives nothing. It is the immense glory of nothingness. But isn't the gift of nothingness the greatest gift of all? The great giver with empty hands frees us from the desires of the outstretched hand. He accustoms us to perceiving nothing and therefore to accepting everything. 'Is it not up to the giver,' asks Nietzsche, 'to thank those who have been willing to take?' [...]
For a true Nietzschean, the nose must provide the reassurance of scentless air; it must bear witness to immense happiness and the blissful awareness of feeling nothing. It is the guarantor of the absence of smells. The sense of smell, of which Nietzsche was so proud, is not a virtue of attraction. It is given to the Übermensch so that they may turn away at the slightest hint of impurity. A Nietzschean cannot take pleasure in a smell. In contrast, Baudelaire and the Countess of Noailles — both earthly beings, which is another sign of power — dream and meditate on smells. Perfumes have infinite resonances, linking memories to desires and an enormous past to an immense, unformulated future. In contrast, here is Nietzsche:
Breathing the purest air,
His nostrils flared like cups,
without future, without memory...
Pure air is the awareness of a free moment that opens up a future. Nothing more. Smells are sensory sequences that have continuity within themselves. There are no discontinuous smells. Pure air, on the other hand, creates an impression of youth and novelty (p. 260): 'He breathed in the air slowly through his nostrils, as if questioning it, like someone in a new country tasting the air for the first time.' We would even venture to say that it is a new emptiness and a new freedom, as there is nothing exotic, intoxicating, or heady about this new air. The climate consists of pure, dry, cold and empty air.
I am sitting here breathing the best air,
the air of paradise, truly,
clear and light, streaked with gold,
as good as it has ever been
fallen from the moon...
Nietzsche's imagination abandons smells to the same extent that it detaches itself from the past. All nostalgia dreams of indestructible scents. To foresee is the opposite of feeling. [...]
If air symbolises rest and relaxation, it also makes us aware of forthcoming action, freeing us from accumulated will. Thus, in the simple joy of breathing in pure air, we find the promise of power.
The air is filled with promises;
I feel the breath of unknown lips passing over me
Here comes the great coolness... (p. 274).
What better way to express that unknown lips are not promises of intoxication than in this sudden freshness?
This freshness — this great freshness that is about to come — introduces a Nietzschean value which points to a profound reality in tangible ways. It is one of those direct, real metaphors that constitute immediate and elementary data for a doctrine of the imagination. For Nietzsche, the true invigorating quality of the air — the quality that makes breathing a joy and energises the still air — is this coolness, a deep energisation that is the very life of the dynamic imagination."
(Gaston Bachelard, Air and Dreams: An Essay on the Imagination of Movement, 1943)

E1.4.C.3.5. OLAFUR ELIASSON HELPS US TO IMAGINE "LA VIE EN ROSE" by offering us a view of the world through the tinted windows of a footbridge suspended above the city.

E1.4.C.3.6. ADRIENNE MAREE BROWN ON RADICAL IMAGINATION AND MOVING TOWARDS LIFE
“Adrienne Maree Brown: I started the work of emergent strategy, started to listen to what is up with the natural world; what can it teach us about how to be humans and how to be humans in a better relationship with each other? And what I realized is it is the work of radical imagination to do so, but also that we’re living inside of imaginations that other people told us were true and told us, this is how the world is.

And I always uplift my friend Terry Marshall. He was the first person to say this to me, that we’re in an imagination battle, which just blew my mind, and I think about it often; that we live in this abundant world, and we’ve been told it’s scarce. And then we’re given all these stories of scarcity. And because of that scarcity, we have to fight each other constantly. […]
If we imagine that we’re supposed to be divided and we imagine these constructs to live inside, we can get very committed to those constructs. And then our imaginations can get very limited, because it’s just like, oh, what can I dream? For me as a Black, queer woman, it’s like, what are the dreams that I can dream inside of the boxes of Blackness and queerness that someone else has constructed for me?

And that’s never felt like enough room, because I’m a spirit, [laughs] you know? I’m this massive energy like all humans are. So, so much of the work for me, of radical imagination is: what does it look like to imagine beyond the constructs? What does it look like to imagine a future where we all get to be there, not causing harm to each other, and experiencing abundance? And what — how do we make it compelling? Is it — do we tell the right kind of story? Will that make it compelling? […]
we very much have said all organizing is science fiction, right? It’s like, we are reaching into the future, we are trying to project what we can imagine into the future, and organizing is a way of saying, we are going to put our hands directly on the future. We’re not going to sit by and let injustice perpetuate. We are going to get involved and shape it into something that we can all be in. But it’s also time-traveling backwards. So much of organizing is looking back, at what did our ancestors try, what did they learn, what were they up to?”

(Adrienne Maree Brown in conversation with Krista Tippett, On Radical Imagination and Moving Towards Life, On Being, June 23, 2022)

Listen to the podcast or read the full transcript: https://onbeing.org/programs/adrienne-maree-brown-on-radical-imagination-and-moving-towards-life/

E1.4.C.4.  4."A POSSIBLE EVENT AND A TRUTH ARE NOT EQUAL TO A REAL EVENT AND TRUTH MINUS THE VALUE OF "REALITY", but contain, according to their supporters at least, something divine, a fire, an elation, a will to build, a conscious utopia which, far from dreading reality, simply treats it as a perpetual task and invention. [...]
It is reality that awakens possibilities  to deny this would be utterly absurd. However, on the whole and on average, the same possibilities will always repeat themselves, until a man comes - for whom a real thing is no more important than a thing in thought. This person, for the first time, gives new possibilities their meaning and their destination, it is he who awakens them."
(Robert Musil, The man without qualities, first part, 1930)

E1.4.C.4.1. "IF THERE IS A SENSE OF REALITY, [...] THERE MUST BE SOMETHING THAT YOU MIGHT CALL THE SENSE OF POSSIBILITIES.
The person who has this gift, for example, will not say: here has happened, is going to happen, must happen such and such a thing; but she will imagine: here could, should happen such and such a thing; and when you tell her a thing is the way it is, she thinks it might as well be something else. So one could define the sense of possibilities simply as the faculty of thinking about anything that could be "as well", and of not giving more importance to what is than to what is not. The consequences of this creative disposition can be remarkable; unfortunately, it is not uncommon for it to reveal as false what men admire and licit what they forbid, or to be indifferent to both ... These men [and women] of possibilities live, as we say here, in a finer fabric, a weft of smoke, imaginations, reveries and subjunctives. [...]
A possible event and a truth are not equal to a real event and truth minus the value of "reality", but contain, according to their supporters at least, something divine, a fire, an elation, a will to build, a conscious utopia which, far from dreading reality, simply treats it as a perpetual task and invention. [...]
It is reality that awakens possibilities  to deny this would be utterly absurd. However, on the whole and on average, the same possibilities will always repeat themselves, until a man comes - for whom a real thing is no more important than a thing in thought. This person, for the first time, gives new possibilities their meaning and their destination, it is he who awakens them."
(Robert Musil, The Man Without Qualities, 1930)

E1.4.C.4.2. "WITH “IMAGINED PREGNANCY”, GLANTZ IMAGINES HER OWN PREGNANCY OUT OF CURIOSITY, and indirectly proposes a range of narratives which are unstable and subject to different perceptions depending on how her life develops. In a future where she never becomes a mother, the painting proposes a non-existent world; alternatively, if Glantz were to become pregnant, the painting could be perceived as a self-fulfilling prophecy– whilst it now remains something from neither of those realms and exists as fertile ground for all possibilities instead. It is in this manner that Glantz not only subverts fixed ways of looking at images but challenges set and traditional forms of representation by recognizing the ever-changing nature and fragility within meaning"
(Ambar Quijano)

E1.4.C.4.3. TO WHAT EXTENT IS THE MAN OF POSSIBILITIES SUBJECT TO SPLEEN? IS IT BECAUSE  HE NEVER GRASPS HIS DESIRE? "Such a man [of possibilities] is, however, by no means an unambiguous matter. Since his ideas, in so far as they are not mere idle phantasmagoria, are nothing else than as yet unborn realities, he too of course has a sense of reality; but it is a sense of possible reality and moves towards its goal much more slowly than most people’s sense of their real possibilities. He wants, as it were, the wood, and the others the trees; and the wood in itself is something that it is very difficult to express, whereas trees mean so and so many cubic feet of a definite quality. Or perhaps it can be put better by saying that the man with an ordinary sense of reality resembles a fish that nibbles at the hook and does not see the line, while the man with the kind of sense of reality that one can also call the sense of possibility pulls a line through the water without any notion whether there is a bait on it or not. In him an extra ordinary indifference to the life nibbling at the bait is in contrast with the probability that he will do utterly eccentric things."

E1.4.C.4.4. ERNEST BECKER USES KIERKEGAARD'S PHILOSOPHY TO ARGUE THAT PSYCHOSIS REPRESENTS A FAILURE TO BALANCE OUR EXISTENTIAL DUALISM, WITH SCHIZOPHRENIA BEING A FLIGHT INTO INFINITE POSSIBILITY THAT LOSES TOUCH WITH REALITY, AND DEPRESSION BEING A COMPLETE IMPRISONMENT BY THE FINITE NECESSITY OF THE WORLD.
“Kierkegaard talks about decoying the prodigious elasticity of freedom “into the madhouse” where it is held prisoner. What does he mean by such a condensed image? To me he means that one of the great dangers of life is too much possibility, and that the place where we find people who have succumbed to this danger is the madhouse. Here Kierkegaard shows that he was a master theorist not only of “normal cultural pathology” but also of abnormal pathology or psychosis. He understands that psychosis is neurosis pushed to its extreme. At least this is how I read many of his observations in the section of his book called “Despair Viewed Under the Aspects of Finitude/ Infinitude.” […]

‘‘Now if possibility outruns necessity, the self runs away from itself, so that it has no necessity whereto it is bound to return—then this is the despair [sickness] of possibility. The self becomes an abstract possibility which tries [sic: “tires”?] itself out with floundering in the possible, but does not budge from the spot, not get to any spot, for precisely the necessary is the spot; to become oneself is precisely a movement at the spot.’
What Kierkegaard means here is that the development of the person is a development in depth from a fixed center in the personality, a center that unites both aspects of the existential dualism—the self and the body. But this kind of development needs precisely an acknowledgment of reality, the reality of one’s limits:
’What the self now lacks is surely reality—so one would commonly say, as one says of a man that he has become unreal. But upon closer inspection it is really necessity that man lacks… . What really is lacking is the power to … submit to the necessary in oneself, to what may be called one’s limit. Therefore the misfortune does not consist in the fact that such a self did not amount to anything in the world; no, the misfortune is that the man did not become aware of himself, aware that the self he is, is a perfectly definite something, and so is the necessary. On the contrary, he lost himself, owing to the fact that this self was seen fantastically reflected in the possible.’
Of course, this description touches everyday man as well at the extreme of schizophrenia, and it is just the cogency of Kierkegaard’s analysis that the two can be placed on the same continuum:
Instead of summoning back possibility into necessity, the man pursues the possibility—and at last cannot find his way back to himself.’ […]

‘But in spite of the fact that a man has become fantastic in this fashion, he may nevertheless … be perfectly well able to live on, to be a man, as it seems, to occupy himself with temporal things, get married, beget children, win honor and esteem—and perhaps no one notices that in a deeper sense he lacks a self.’ […]

If schizophrenic psychosis is on a continuum of a kind of normal inflation of inner fantasy, of symbolic possibility, then something similar should be true of depressive psychosis. And so it is in the portrait that Kierkegaard paints. Depressive psychosis is the extreme on the continuum of too much necessity, that is, too much finitude, too much limitation by the body and the behaviors of the person in the real world, and not enough freedom of the inner self, of inner symbolic possibility. This is how we understand depressive psychosis today: as a bogging down in the demands of others—family, job, the narrow horizon of daily duties. In such a bogging down the individual does not feel or see that he has alternatives, cannot imagine any choices or alternate ways of life, cannot release himself from the network of obligations even though these obligations no longer give him a sense of self-esteem, of primary value, of being a heroic contributor to world life even by doing his daily family and job duties. As I once speculated,28 the schizophrenic is not enough built into his world—what Kierkegaard has called the sickness of
infinitude; the depressive, on the other hand, is built into his world too solidly, too overwhelmingly. […]

This is precisely the condition of depression, that one can hardly breathe or move. One of the unconscious tactics that the depressed person resorts to, to try to make sense out of his situation, is to see himself as immensely worthless and guilty. This is a marvelous “invention” really, because it allows him to move out of his condition of dumbness, and make some kind of conceptualization of his situation, some kind of sense out of it—even if he has to take full blame as the culprit who is causing so much needless misery to others. […]

‘The loss of possibility signifies: either that everything has become necessary to man or that everything has become trivial.’
Actually, in the extreme of depressive psychosis we seem to see the merger of these two: everything becomes necessary and trivial at the same time—which leads to complete despair. Necessity with the illusion of meaning would be the highest achievement for man; but when it becomes trivial there is no sense to one’s life. 

Why would a person prefer the accusations of guilt, unworthiness, ineptitude—even dishonor and betrayal—to real possibility? This may not seem to be the choice, but it is: complete self-effacement, surrender to the “others,” disavowal of any personal dignity or freedom—on the one hand; and freedom and independence, movement away from the others, extrication of oneself from the binding links of family and social duties—on the other hand. This is the choice that
the depressed person actually faces and that he avoids partly by his guilty self-accusation. The answer is not far to seek: the depressed person avoids the possibility of independence and more life precisely because these are what threaten him with destruction and death. He holds on to the people who have enslaved him in a network of crushing obligations, belittling interaction, precisely because these people are his shelter, his strength, his protection against the world. Like most everyone else the depressed person is a coward who will not stand alone on his own center, who cannot draw from within himself the necessary strength to face up to life. So he embeds himself in others; he is sheltered by the necessary and willingly accepts it. But now his tragedy is plain to see: his necessity has become trivial, and so his slavish, dependent, depersonalized life has lost its meaning. It is frightening to be in such a bind. One chooses slavery because it is safe and meaningful; then one loses the meaning of it, but fears to move out of it. One has literally died to life but must remain physically in this world. And thus the torture of depressive psychosis: to remain steeped in one’s failure and yet to justify it, to continue to draw a sense of worthwhileness out of it. […]”
(Ernest Becker, The Denial of Death, 1973)

E1.4.C.5.  5. "IN MISSING OUT: IN PRAISE OF THE UNLIVED LIFE, ADAM PHILLIPS EXAMINES THE PARADOXICAL RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN FRUSTRATION AND SATISFACTION, exploring how our unlived lives illuminate the priorities, values, and desires undergirding the lives we do live."
(Maria Popova's review of Adam Phillips' Missing Out: In Praise of the Unlived Life, 2012 - in The Marginalian)

E1.4.C.5.1. "THE UNEXAMINED LIFE IS SURELY WORTH LIVING, BUT IS THE UNLIVED LIFE WORTH EXAMINING? It seems a strange question until one realizes how much of our so-called mental life is about the lives we are not living, the lives we are missing out on, the lives we could be leading but for some reason are not. What we fantasize about, what we long for, are the experiences, the things and the people that are absent. It is the absence of what we need that makes us think, that makes us cross and sad. We have to be aware of what is missing in our lives — even if this often obscures both what we already have and what is actually available — because we can survive only if our appetites more or less work for us. Indeed, we have to survive our appetites by making people cooperate with our wanting. We pressurize the world to be there for our benefit. And yet we quickly notice as children — it is, perhaps, the first thing we do notice — that our needs, like our wishes, are always potentially unmet. Because we are always shadowed by the possibility of not getting what we want, we learn, at best, to ironize our wishes — that is, to call our wants wishes: a wish is only a wish until, as we say, it comes true — and, at worst, to hate our needs. But we also learn to live somewhere between the lives we have and the lives we would like. […]

We refer to them as our unlived lives because somewhere we believe that they were open to us; but for some reason — and we might spend a great deal of our lived lives trying to find and give the reason — they were not possible. And what was not possible all too easily becomes the story of our lives. Indeed, our lived lives might become a protracted mourning for, or an endless tantrum about, the lives we were unable to live. But the exemptions we suffer, whether forced or chosen, make us who we are. [...]

We are always haunted by the myth of our potential, of what we might have it in ourselves to be or do… We share our lives with the people we have failed to be. […]

Our lives become an elegy to needs unmet and desires sacrificed, to possibilities refused, to roads not taken. The myth of our potential can make of our lives a perpetual falling-short, a continual and continuing loss, a sustained and sometimes sustaining rage."
(Adam Phillips, Missing Out: In Praise of the Unlived Life, 2012)

E1.4.C.5.1.a. IT IS PRECISELY BY RECOGNIZING OUR EXISTENTIAL INCOMPLETENESS AND OUR INHERENT INSUFFICIENCY, THAT WE CAN BEGIN TO FEEL THE FULLNESS OF LIFE "Phillips argues that these unlived lives reveal themselves most obviously in our envy of others, the psychology of which Kierkegaard keenly observed a century and a half earlier, and in the demands we place on our children — an idea that furthers the parallel between Phillips with Jung, for it was the great Swiss psychiatrist who famously asserted that what most shapes children’s developing psychological reality are “the unlived lives of the parents.” But where Jung believed that “the sole purpose of human existence is to kindle a light in the darkness of mere being,” Phillips suggests that it’s equally important to kindle a light in the darkness of non-being, of never-having-been:

      'We have an abiding sense, however obscure and obscured, that the lives we do lead are informed by the lives that escape us.'

It is precisely by recognizing our existential incompleteness and our inherent insufficiency, by embracing the fact that we are a cosmic accident, that we can begin to feel the fullness of life — but this is hard to do, Phillips points out, in a culture predicated on inflating the specialness of the self as a singular unit aimed at optimizing and making maximally productive the lived life"
(Maria Popova's review of Adam Phillips' Missing Out: In Praise of the Unlived Life, 2012 - in The Marginalian)

E1.4.C.5.1.a_REF1_TH  "BECAUSE WE ARE NOTHING SPECIAL — ON A PAR WITH ANTS AND DAFFODILS — IT IS THE WORK OF CULTURE TO MAKE US FEEL SPECIAL; just as parents need to make their children feel special to help them bear and bear with — and hopefully enjoy — their insignificance in the larger scheme of things. In this sense growing up is always an undoing of what needed to be done: first, ideally, we are made to feel special; then we are expected to enjoy a world in which we are not… When people realize how accidental they are, they are tempted to think of themselves as chosen. We certainly tend to be more special, if only to ourselves, in our (imaginary) unlived lives.

So it is worth wondering what the need to be special prevents us seeing about ourselves — other, that is, than the unfailing transience of our lives; what the need to be special stops us from being. This, essentially, is the question psychoanalysis was invented to address: what kind of pleasures can sustain a creature that is nothing special? Once the promise of immortality, of being chosen, was displaced by the promise of more life — the promise, as we say, of getting more out of life — the unlived life became a haunting presence in a life legitimated by nothing more than the desire to live it. For modern people, stalked by their choices, the good life is a life lived to the full. We become obsessed, in a new way, by what is missing in our lives; and by what sabotages the pleasures that we seek."
(Adam Phillips, Missing Out: In Praise of the Unlived Life, 2012)

E1.4.C.5.1.a_REF2_TH THERE IS A GAP BETWEEN WHAT WE WANT AND WHAT WE CAN HAVE, AND THAT GAP … IS OUR LINK, OUR CONNECTION, TO THE WORLD "To mitigate the wistful vestiges this existential neverland lodges in our psyche, Phillips argues, we create and hold on to various possible selves and possible lives — pockets of possibility that exist no matter how remote the probability of realizing them might be. These improbable possibles, Phillips asserts, come to both reveal and shape who we really are:

      'We make our lives pleasurable, and therefore bearable, by picturing them as they might be; it is less obvious, though, what these compelling fantasy lives — lives of, as it were, a more complete satisfaction — are a self-cure for. Our solutions tell us what our problems are; our fantasy lives are not — or not necessarily — alternatives to, or refuges from, those real lives but an essential part of them… There is nothing more obscure than the relationship between the lived and the unlived life. (Each member of a couple, for example, is always having a relationship, wittingly or unwittingly, with their partner’s unlived lives; their initial and initiating relationship is between what they assume are their potential selves.) So we may need to think of ourselves as always living a double life, the one that we wish for and the one that we practice; the one that never happens and the one that keeps happening. [...]
There is a gap between what we want and what we can have, and that gap … is our link, our connection, to the world… This discord, this supposed mismatch, is the origin of our experience of missing out. [...]
Our utopias tell us more about our lived lives, and their privations, than about our wished-for lives.'"
(Maria Popova's review of Adam Phillips' Missing Out: In Praise of the Unlived Life, 2012 - in The Marginalian)

E1.4.C.5.1.a_REF3_TH TO BE DEPRIVED OF FRUSTRATION IS TO BE DEPRIVED OF THE POSSIBILITIES OF SATISFACTION  "The paradox — and the most important point — is that it is through the privation of not getting what we want, as Nietzsche memorably argued more than a century earlier, that we arrive at the promise of satisfaction:

      'In our unlived lives we are always more satisfied, far less frustrated versions of ourselves… Our possibilities for satisfaction depend upon our capacity for frustration; if we can’t let ourselves feel our frustration — and, surprisingly, this is a surprisingly difficult thing to do — we can’t get a sense of what it is we might be wanting, and missing, of what might really give us pleasure… That frustration is where we start from; the child’s dawning awareness of himself is an awareness of something necessary not being there. The child becomes present to himself in the absence of something he needs.'

But it is through our frustrations that we come to know our wants, against the light of which the contour of our personhood is shaded in:

      'The more we frustrate ourselves in wanting something, the more we value our desire for it… Waiting too long poisons desire, but waiting too little pre-empts it; the imagining is in the waiting… Wanting takes time; partly because it takes some time to get over the resistances to wanting, and partly because we are often unconscious of what it is that we do want. But the worst thing we can be frustrated of is frustration itself; to be deprived of frustration is to be deprived of the possibilities of satisfaction.'"
(Maria Popova's review of Adam Phillips' Missing Out: In Praise of the Unlived Life, 2012 - in The Marginalian)

E1.4.C.6.  6. LET YOUR LOVE OF LIFE BE LOVE FOR YOUR HIGHEST HOPES. 
Deprived of heavenly ground for hope, you still to have to have hope in order to help you attain, in the present, an imagined good

E1.4.C.6.1. "HOPE 
There were tensions between hope and faith in the Christian tradition, exemplified by Peter Lombard in the 12th century. He is not so sure wether St. Paul’s inherited 3 theological virtues: faith, hope and love, go together. He asks if Christ needs all three, and concludes that Christ only needs love. He then asks if men need all three and if there could be tension between faith and hope. Faith is certainty about salvation, so if you have faith, you don't need hope. If you are hoping for salvation, that could mean your faith is not strong enough.  Peter Lombard comes up with the ingenious solution that hope is the future expectation of Glory. Hope is the representation of a future good in the present by the work of imagination, this representation is compatible with the certainty of salvation implied by faith. Hope viewed that way is not a bearing on the possible, but a certain expectation: it is an interpretation that removes uncertainty from the definition of hope, whereas in common language, if you think something is impossible, you cannot hope for it.
Thomas Aquinas builds on Peter Lombard’s definition of hope as the representation of a future good, but - although he recognizes the existence of earthly pleasures - ultimate happiness, which is communion with God, is outside the reach of our will. Hope is the refusal to deny that our deepest desire is for something that we can neither retain by ourselves nor do without. Hope is a gift from God, however Aquinas believes we have to train the will to believe in it (whereas for Luther later, faith is a god-given and there is nothing more to hope beyond faith).
If for the Christians hope is never disappointed because Jesus will come back in the second coming, the moderns need a substitute to the heavenly ground of hope. With the Enlightenment, hope stops to be underwritten by revelation and starts to be seen as supported by the structure of the world or by the structure of reason, as it is in Kant. We see an interesting transposition of the grounds of hope from a promise given from without to something that is inherent to the world or to human beings.
The young Nietzsche sees hope as an evil not because it makes us lazy (as the Greeks thought),  but because it is fundamentally an illusion and hides the true tragic nature of life from us. The later Nietzsche calls hope a rainbow. Hope is deceptive, yes, but it helps us to live; hope, like art, has also a transfigurative power - it can make this life better: “let your love of Life be love for your highest hopes” - you have to have hope in order to help you attain, in the present, an imagined good."
(From the program In our time, broadcasted on BBC Radio 4 on Thu 22 Nov 2018)

Listen to the program: https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/m00017vl

E1.4.C.7.  7. FACED WITH THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF IMAGINING AN EXPERIENCE THAT MUST FIRST BE LIVED, THE BEST ANSWER IS TO CHOOSE ACCORDING TO OUR WILL TO DISCOVER WHO WE WILL BECOME.

E1.4.C.7.1. "TO BE HUMAN IS TO SUFFER FROM A PECULIAR CONGENITAL BLINDNESS: On the precipice of any great change, we can see with terrifying clarity the familiar firm footing we stand to lose, but we fill the abyss of the unfamiliar before us with dread at the potential loss rather than jubilation over the potential gain of gladnesses and gratifications we fail to envision because we haven’t yet experienced them. Emerson knew this when he contemplated our resistance to change and the key to true personal growth: “People wish to be settled; only as far as they are unsettled is there any hope for them.” Rilke, too, knew it when he considered how great upheavals bring us closer to ourselves: “That is at bottom the only courage that is demanded of us: to have courage for the most strange, the most singular and the most inexplicable that we may encounter.
When faced with the most transformative experiences, we are ill-equipped to even begin to imagine the nature and magnitude of the transformation — but we must again and again challenge ourselves to transcend this elemental failure of the imagination if we are to reap the rewards of any transformative experience.

In Transformative Experience (public library), philosopher L.A. Paul illustrates this paradox and examines how we are to unbind ourselves from it in a simple, elegant thought experiment: If you were offered the chance to become a vampire — painlessly and without inflicting pain on others, gaining incredible superpowers in exchange for relinquishing your human existence, with all your friends having made the leap and loving it — would you do it?”
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.4.C.7.1_REF1_PH WHEN YOU FIND YOURSELF FACING A DECISION INVOLVING A NEW EXPERIENCE THAT IS UNLIKE ANY OTHER EXPERIENCE YOU’VE HAD BEFORE, YOU CAN FIND YOURSELF IN A SPECIAL SORT OF EPISTEMIC SITUATION. "The trouble is, in this situation, how could you possibly make an informed choice? For, after all, you cannot know what it is like to be a vampire until you are one. And if you can’t know what it’s like to be a vampire without becoming one, you can’t compare the character of the lived experience of what it is like to be you, right now, a mere human, to the character of the lived experience of what it would be like to be a vampire. This means that, if you want to make this choice by considering what you want your lived experience to be like in the future, you can’t do it rationally. At least, you can’t do it by weighing the competing options concerning what it would be like and choosing on this basis. And it seems awfully suspect to rely solely on the testimony of your vampire friends to make your choice, because, after all, they aren’t human any more, so their preferences are the ones vampires have, not the ones humans have. [...]

When you find yourself facing a decision involving a new experience that is unlike any other experience you’ve had before, you can find yourself in a special sort of epistemic situation. In this sort of situation, you know very little about your possible future, in the same way that you are limited when you face a possible future as a vampire. And so, if you want to make the decision by thinking about what your lived experience would be like if you decided to undergo the experience, you have a problem… You find yourself facing a decision where you lack the information you need to make the decision the way you naturally want to make it — by assessing what the different possibilities would be like and choosing between them. The problem is pressing, because many of life’s big personal decisions are like this: they involve the choice to undergo a dramatically new experience that will change your life in important ways, and an essential part of your deliberation concerns what your future life will be like if you decide to undergo the change. But as it turns out, like the choice to become a vampire, many of these big decisions involve choices to have experiences that teach us things we cannot know about from any other source but the experience itself. [...]

In many ways, large and small, as we live our lives, we find ourselves confronted with a brute fact about how little we can know about our futures, just when it is most important to us that we do know. For many big life choices, we only learn what we need to know after we’ve done it, and we change ourselves in the process of doing it. I’ll argue that, in the end, the best response to this situation is to choose based on whether we want to discover who we’ll become. [...]

Unless you’ve had the relevant experiences, what it is like to be a person or an animal very different from yourself is, in a certain fundamental way, inaccessible to you. It isn’t that you can’t imagine something in place of the experience you haven’t had. It’s that this act of imagining isn’t enough to let you know what it is really like to be an octopus, or to be a slave, or to be blind. You need to have the experience itself to know what it is really like.

This brings out another, somewhat less familiar fact about the relationship between knowledge and experience: just as knowledge about the experience of one individual can be inaccessible to another individual, what you can know about yourself at one time can be inaccessible to you at another time."
(L.A. Paul, Transformative Experience, 2014)

E1.4.C.8.  8. FROM EXPERIENCE, I'VE LEARNED THIS MUCH AT LEAST: that if you walk confidently in the direction of your dreams, striving to live the life you've imagined, you'll meet with unexpected success at the most common times.

E1.4.C.8.1. IF ONE LISTENS TO THE FAINTEST BUT CONSTANT SUGGESTIONS OF HIS GENIUS "If one listens to the faintest but constant suggestions of his genius, which are certainly true, he sees not to what extremes, or even insanity, it may lead him; and yet that way, as he grows more resolute and faithful, his road lies. The faintest assured objection which one healthy man feels will at length prevail over the arguments and customs of mankind. No man ever followed his genius till it misled him. Though the result were bodily weakness, yet perhaps no one can say that the consequences were to be regretted, for these were a life in conformity to higher principles. If the day and the night are such that you greet them with joy, and life emits a fragrance like flowers and sweet-scented herbs, is more elastic, more starry, more immortal — that is your success. All nature is your congratulation, and you have cause momentarily to bless yourself. The greatest gains and values are farthest from being appreciated. We easily come to doubt if they exist. We soon forget them. They are the highest reality. Perhaps the facts most astounding and most real are never communicated by man to man. The true harvest of my daily life is somewhat as intangible and indescribable as the tints of morning or evening. It is a little star-dust caught, a segment of the rainbow which I have clutched."
(Henry David Thoreau, Walden, 1854)

E1.4.C.8.2. IF YOU HAVE BUILT CASTLES IN THE AIR, YOUR WORK NEED NOT BE LOST; THAT IS WHERE THEY SHOULD BE. NOW PUT THE FOUNDATIONS UNDER THEM. "I learned this, at least, by my experiment: that if one advances confidently in the direction of his dreams, and endeavors to live the life which he has imagined, he will meet with a success unexpected in common hours. He will put some things behind, will pass an invisible boundary; new, universal, and more liberal laws will begin to establish themselves around and within him; or the old laws be expanded, and interpreted in his favor in a more liberal sense, and he will live with the license of a higher order of beings. In proportion as he simplifies his life, the laws of the universe will appear less complex, and solitude will not be solitude, nor poverty poverty, nor weakness weakness. If you have built castles in the air, your work need not be lost; that is where they should be. Now put the foundations under them."
(Henry David Thoreau, Walden, 1854)

E1.4.C.9.  9. "ONE DESPERATE MORNING, HOWEVER, I DID THE MOST SIMPLE OF THINGS [...]. I sat by myself, in a quiet space, and called upon my son by name. I closed my eyes and imagined lifting him from my heart — this tormented place in which I was told he lived — and I positioned him outside of my body, next to me, beside me. I said, “You are my son and now you are beside me.” These few words had a powerful, vibrational effect, and this simple act of imagination was the first step in a process that would eventually lead me back to the world. By performing this act I was temporarily released from the rational world, a merciless place that gave me no peace, and given access to an impossible realm where I could form an increasingly resolute relationship with the spiritual idea of my lost child."

E1.4.C.9.1.  "Hey first I wanna say really like your music i have lost my beautiful wife in cancer and my dear brother in covid 19 my question to you is how keep you going on after lost your son its hard sometimes to keep going on with life.
MATTI, STOCKHOLM, SWEDEN

Dear Matti,

There is little to say to someone who has lost a loved one that is of itself any real help. That has been my experience. Language falls short before the immensity of the experience of grief. There are simply not the words. My well-meaning and desperately worried friends would speak into my grief, using words that made no sense. They would tell me that my son lived in my heart, for example, but I genuinely did not understand these words because when I searched my heart I found nothing but chaos and despair.

One desperate morning, however, I did the most simple of things and perhaps this can help you with the loss of your wife, and your brother, more than my words. I sat by myself, in a quiet space, and called upon my son by name. I closed my eyes and imagined lifting him from my heart — this tormented place in which I was told he lived — and I positioned him outside of my body, next to me, beside me. I said, “You are my son and now you are beside me.” These few words had a powerful, vibrational effect, and this simple act of imagination was the first step in a process that would eventually lead me back to the world. By performing this act I was temporarily released from the rational world, a merciless place that gave me no peace, and given access to an impossible realm where I could form an increasingly resolute relationship with the spiritual idea of my lost child.

I began to feel Arthur’s presence. I talked to him. He talked to me. I took him with me wherever I went. I toured Europe and America with the ‘In Conversations’ show and he sat with me in my dressing room, or later at night in my hotel, or he escorted me onto stage and stood there beside me. I felt emboldened by his constructed presence, or perhaps true presence — who knows? What did it matter? I felt increasingly empowered, unafraid, as I allowed him to accompany me out of my boundless grief. Sometimes, on stage, I would look out at the audience and feel a collective spiritual influence attending to everyone. It was a deeply powerful experience and testament to the restorative force of our imaginings — that child of God, that divine invention — rescuing me from my catastrophic heart and in doing so freeing himself from the convulsion of my grief.

Matti, forgive me if this makes no sense to you, but perhaps there is a way to summon your wife and dear brother and release them from your despair so that they can attend to you — allow them to become your spiritual companions in that impossible realm, to look after you in their imagined presence, and guide you forward until things get better. For they do, in time, they do.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #126 / NOVEMBER 2020)

E1.4.C.10.  10. TRANSFORMING MASS INTO ENERGY, AND ENERGY INTO MASS, IS WHAT CREATIVE WORK IS ALL ABOUT. AN IDEA TAKES SHAPE. A TRAGEDY COMES TO AN END. To escape into a story other than our own reminds us that we, too, are a narrative that could be different. We're not imprisoned, confined, predestined, or condemned to one genre or type of passion. Learning to see ourselves as both fiction and fact is liberating—it's the difference between energy and mass. Mass is the beloved object, the world we can touch and feel, but it is also the dead weight in ourselves and others.
Moving dead weight requires energy, but in its atomic core, dead weight is energy. Transforming mass into energy, and energy into mass, is what creative work is all about. An idea takes shape. A tragedy comes to an end.

E1.4.C.10.1. "ONE OF THE THINGS THE STORY TEACHES US IS THIS: READ YOURSELF AS A FICTION AS WELL AS A FACT.
When I had left home at sixteen and was living in a Mini, I had my favourite books stashed in the boot and whenever I could be in the library, I was there. This wasn’t a fantasy world or escapism — though it was an escape; it was the hidden door in the blank wall. Open it.
I opened the book and went through.
The escape into another story reminds us that we too are another story. Not caught, not confined, not predestined, not only one gender or passion. Learning to read yourself as a fiction as well as a fact is liberating — it is the difference between energy and mass. Mass is the beloved object — the world we can touch and feel — but mass is also the dead weight in ourselves and others.
Shifting the dead weight takes energy but at its atomic core the dead weight is energy. Transforming mass into energy, energy into mass is what creative work is about. An idea becomes embodied. A tragedy is released."
(Jeanette Winterson, Oranges Are Not the Only Fruit, 1985)

E1.4.C.10.2. "WITHIN NAUDLINE PIERRE'S DYNAMIC PAINTINGS THERE IS A RECURRING CENTRAL FIGURE, a sort of avatar accompanied by other ethereal characters who together can be seen creating tender moments and a space for understanding and healing. [...] Pierre explores imagination as a mode of expression, rescue and survival."
(Ambar Quijano)

E1.4.C.11.  11. IT'S NOT ABOUT WILLPOWER; IT'S ABOUT ENCOUNTERS. JOY WILL COME AS WE DO CERTAIN THINGS. “Eventually, the affects of sadness will become secondary. If I try to fight item, I'll only add to them. I'm angry, I don't want to be angry— I'm angry at my anger, and it's a vicious circle. Instead of focusing on my anger, I'll talk to the person I love, read texts that nourish me, and the sad passion will take up less and less space in my life. If we achieve bliss, other emotions will occupy less space in our lives, especially if we don't think about them at all.

It's not an injunction to be joyful. If we try to be joyful, we miss out on joy and risk encountering sadness because we can't force it. It's not about willpower; it's about encounters. Joy will come as we do certain things. We begin by proposing opportunities and rules for living to ourselves and others, which become habits and bring joy.

Spinoza says in Part 3 of the "Ethics" that for something to be possible for oneself, it must already be imagined as possible. What is good is what we know to be useful for ourselves (and not just what we believe to be useful), meaning what increases our power to act. This is the link between virtue and beatitude.”

E1.4.C.11.1. A SPINOSIST MISUNDERSTANDINGS: "BEATITUDE IS NOT THE PRICE OF VIRTUE, BUT VIRTUE ITSELF"
"Beatitude is still the keystone of this text. [...] For Spinoza, salvation is immanent. Beatitude, eternity, salvation, these 3 terms go together, and I find it a little less difficult to understand if we focus on the term eternity. There would be something paradoxical in saying to ourselves: "I'll have access to eternity after my death, because eternity has neither before nor after. Spinoza's eternity is the exact opposite of the fear of dying and the hope that life will continue afterwards. Spinoza suggests that we encounter eternity in this life. So to achieve beatitude is to experience eternity: beatitude is a form of eternal joy. Since joy is always the transition to a higher perfection, and beatitude is perfection, it's as if beatitude were a form of joy anchored in eternity. A joy that would know no more variation or increase, because it would in fact be perfection itself. It remains to be seen whether beatitude can be found in this world... In my opinion, we can in the same way as we encounter eternity, i.e. not as something that is built up by degrees - a plateau to which we gain access - but rather something that is of the order of an encounter. The mistake is to think that adding more and more accumulated time will result in eternity, whereas eternity has nothing to do with time, in the sense of something that can have a before and an after.

In the 11th proposition of the third part of the Ethics, Spinoza speaks of tickling, which immediately evokes something corporal. Does tickling bring us closer to joy by degree? The Latin term, titillatio, refers to a titillation that's irritating because it calls on a single part of the body to the detriment of the others. Joy, on the other hand, increases my power to act.  Joy is the transition to a higher perfection, and for Spinoza, being and perfection are one and the same - not in the sense of being content with what is, which would be paradoxical with the path the Ethics shows us - but in the sense that our being, our conatus, tends to increase our potency to act. It is a potency that is not power. Power, potestas in Latin, is something that is "exercised over" and contains the idea of taking possession of another, of a form of authority - which is not always necessarily benevolent. Potency, potencia in Latin, "is exercised with". If I increase my potency to be, I don't diminish yours. I increase my capacity to be affected by you and to affect you, so that together we can have even greater potency. While power is usually exercised at the expense of others, potency is really about openness. To the extent that potency is expressed, it is shared with others.
This is a very important point, because one might think that the journey Spinoza invites us to take in slow steps is all about the self, whereas he is telling us that understanding relationships with others is indispensable for access to this very beatitude; without them, my potency will be inferior. I'm referring to another text - On the Improvement of the Understanding - where he says: "the true and supreme good, that is the end to which I must tend. To acquire this superior human nature, and to make every effort to ensure that many others acquire it with me. [...] It is important to my happiness that many others rise with me to the same thoughts as I, so that their thoughts and understanding are in accord with mine". It's up to each person to make the journey for themselves, but it will be all the easier if they are accompanied by others. 

Eventually, the affects of sadness will become secondary. If I try to fight item, I'll only add to them. I'm angry, I don't want to be angry— I'm angry at my anger, and it's a vicious circle. Instead of focusing on my anger, I'll talk to the person I love, read texts that nourish me, and the sad passion will take up less and less space in my life. If we achieve bliss, other emotions will occupy less space in our lives, especially if we don't think about them at all.
It's not an injunction to be joyful. If we try to be joyful, we miss out on joy and risk encountering sadness because we can't force it. It's not about willpower; it's about encounters. Joy will come as we do certain things. We begin by proposing opportunities and rules for living to ourselves and others, which become habits and bring joy.
Spinoza says in Part 3 of the "Ethics" that for something to be possible for oneself, it must already be imagined as possible. What is good is what we know to be useful for ourselves (and not just what we believe to be useful), meaning what increases our power to act. This is the link between virtue and beatitude.

There is the presupposition of Spinoza's love of being, which is not self-evident - a power to affirm that is not questioned. Spinoza does not believe that we can act against ourselves with full knowledge of the facts. There's no room for disgust with being, or even for neutrality - there's always movement in Spinoza and little room for chosen respite - to continue being, you have to keep increasing your potency to act."
(Julie Henry on Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 06/05/2020)

Listen to the podcast :
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/quatre-malentendus-spinozistes-34-la-beatitude-nest-pas-le-prix-de-la-vertu-mais-la-vertu-elle-meme 

E1.4.C.11.2. "PROPOSITION 12
The mind, as far as it can, endeavours to conceive those things, which increase or help the power of activity in the body.

PROOF
So long as the human body is affected in a mode, which involves the nature of any external body, the human mind will regard that external body as present [...], and consequently [...], so long as the human mind regards an external body as present, that is [...], conceives it, the human body is affected in a mode, which involves the nature of the said external body ; thus so long as the mind conceives things, which increase or help the power of activity in our body, the body is affected in modes which increase or help its power of activity [...] ; consequently [...] the mind's power of thinking is for that period increased or helped. Thus [...] the mind, as far as it can, endeavours to imagine such things.

PROPOSITION 13
When the mind conceives things which diminish or hinder the body's power of activity, it endeavours, as far as possible, to remember things which exclude the existence of the first-named things.

PROOF
So long as the mind conceives anything of the kind alluded to, the power of the mind and body is diminished or constrained [...] ; nevertheless it will continue to conceive it, until the mind conceives something else, which excludes the present existence thereof [...] ; that is (as I have just shown), the power of the mind and of the body is diminished, or constrained, until the mind conceives something else, which excludes the existence of the former thing conceived: therefore the mind [...], as far as it can, will endeavour to conceive or remember the latter.

COROLLARY
Hence it follows, that the mind shrinks from conceiving those things, which diminish or constrain the power of itself and of the body.

NOTE
From what has been said we may, clearly understand the nature of Love and Hate. Love is nothing else but pleasure accompanied by the idea, of an external cause : Hate is nothing else but pain accompanied by the idea of an external cause. We further see, that he who loves necessarily endeavours to have, and to keep present to him, the object of his love ; while he who hates endeavours to remove and destroy the object of his hatred. But I will treat of these matters at more length hereafter."
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics, Part three)

Read the Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.4.C.11.3. "PROPOSITION 9
The mind, both in so far as it has clear and distinct ideas, and also in so far as it has confused ideas, endeavours to persist in its being for an indefinite period, and of this endeavour it is conscious.

[...]

NOTE
This endeavour, when referred solely to the mind, is called will, when referred to the mind and body in conjunction it is called appetite ; it is, in fact, nothing else but man's essence, from the nature of which necessarily follow all those results which tend to its preservation ; and which man has thus been determined to perform. Further, between appetite and desire there is no difference, except that the term desire is generally applied to men, in so far as they are conscious of their appetite, and may accordingly be thus defined : Desire is appetite with consciousness thereof. It is thus plain from what has been said, that in no case do we strive for, wish for, long for, or desire anything, because we deem it to be good, but on the other hand we deem a thing to be good, because we strive for it, wish for it, long for it, or desire it."
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics, Part three)

Read the Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.4.C.11.3_REF1_PH "PROPOSITION 14
If the mind has once been affected by two emotions at the same time, it will, whenever it is afterwards affected by one of the two, be also affected by the other.

PROOF
If the human body has once been affected by two bodies at once, whenever afterwards the mind conceives one of them, it will straightway remember the other also (Prop. 18, p. II). But the mind's conceptions indicate rather the emotions of our body than the nature of external bodies (Coroll. 2, Prop. 16, p. II) ; therefore, if the body, and consequently the mind (Defin. 3) has been once affected by two emotions at the same time, it will, whenever it is afterwards affected by one of the two, be also affected by the other. Q.E.D.

PROPOSITION 15
Anything can, accidentally, be the cause of pleasure, pain, or desire.

PROOF
Let it be granted that the mind is simultaneously affected by two emotions, of which one neither increases nor diminishes its power of activity, and the other does either increase or diminish the said power (Post. 1). From the foregoing Proposition it is evident that, whenever the mind is afterwards affected by the former, through its true cause, which (by hypothesis) neither increases nor diminishes its power of action, it will be at the same time affected by the latter, which does increase or diminish its power of activity, that is (Note, Prop. 11) it will be affected with pleasure or pain. Thus the former of the two emotions will, not through itself, but accidentally, be the cause of pleasure or pain. In the same way also it can be easily shown, that a thing may be accidentally the cause of desire. Q.E.D.

COROLLARY
Simply from the fact that we have regarded a thing with the emotion of pleasure or pain, though that thing be not the efficient cause of the emotion, we can either love or hate it.

PROOF
For from this fact alone it arises (Prop. 14), that the mind afterwards conceiving the said thing is affected with the emotion of pleasure or pain, that is (Note, Prop. 11), according as the power of the mind and body may be increased or diminished, &c. ; and consequently [...], according as the mind may desire or shrink from the conception of it [...], in other words [...], according as it may love or hate the same.

NOTE
Hence we understand how it may happen, that we love or hate a thing without any cause for our emotion being known to us ; merely, as the phrase is, from sympathy or antipathy. We should refer to the same category those objects, which affect us pleasurably or painfully, simply because they resemble other objects which affect us in the same way. This I will show in the next Proposition. I am aware that certain authors, who were the first to introduce these terms sympathy and antipathy, wished to signify thereby some occult qualities in things ; nevertheless I think we may be permitted to use the same terms to indicate known or manifest qualities.

PROPOSITION 16
Simply from the fact that we conceive, that a given object has some point of resemblance with another object which is wont to affect the mind pleasurably or painfully, although the point of resemblance be not the efficient cause of the said emotions, we shall still regard the first-named object with love or hate.

PROOF
The point of resemblance was in the object (by hypothesis), when we regarded it with pleasure or pain, thus [...], when the mind is affected by the image thereof, it will straightway be affected by one or the other emotion, and consequently the thing, which we perceive to have the same point of resemblance, will be accidentally [...] a cause of pleasure or pain. Thus (by the foregoing Corollary), although the point in which the two objects resemble one another be not the efficient cause of the emotion, we shall still regard the first-named object with love or hate. Q.E.D.

PROPOSITION 17
If we conceive that a thing, which is wont to affect us painfully, has any point of resemblance with another thing which is wont to affect us with an equally strong emotion of pleasure, we shall hate the first-named thing, and at the same time we shall love it.

PROOF
The given thing is (by hypothesis) in itself a cause of pain, and [...], in so far as we imagine it with this emotion, we shall hate it : further, inasmuch as we conceive that it has some point of resemblance to something else, which is wont to affect us with an equally strong emotion of pleasure, we shall with an equally strong impulse of pleasure love it (Prop. 16) ; thus we shall both hate and love the same thing. Q.E.D.

NOTE
This disposition of the mind, which arises from two contrary emotions, is called vacillation ; it stands to the emotions in the same relation as doubt does to the imagination (Note, Prop. 44, p. II) ; vacillation and doubt do not differ one from the other, except as greater differs from less. But we must bear in mind that I have deduced this vacillation from causes, which give rise through themselves to one of the emotions, and to the other accidentally. I have done this, in order that they might be more easily deduced from what went before ; but I do not deny that vacillation of the disposition generally arises from an object, which is the efficient cause of both emotions. The human body is composed (Post. 1, p. II) of a variety of individual parts of different nature, and may therefore (Axiom 1 after Lemma 3 after Prop. 13, p. II) be affected in a variety of different ways by one and the same body ; and contrariwise, as one and the same thing can be affected in many ways, it can also in many different ways affect one and the same part of the body. Hence we can easily conceive, that one and the same object may be the cause of many and conflicting emotions."
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics, Part three)

Read the Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.4.C.11.3_REF2_PH "PROPOSITION 18
A man is as much affected pleasurably or painfully by the image of a thing past or future as by the image of a thing present.

PROOF
So long as a man is affected by the image of anything, he will regard that thing as present, even though it be non-existent (Prop. 17, p. II, and Coroll.), he will not conceive it as past or future, except in so far as its image is joined to the image of time past or future (Note, Prop. 44, p. II). Wherefore the image of a thing, regarded in itself alone, is identical, whether it be referred to time past, time future, or time present ; that is (Coroll. 2, Prop. 16, p. II), the disposition or emotion of the body is identical, whether the image be of a thing past, future, or present. Thus the emotion of pleasure or pain is the same, whether the image be of a thing past or future. Q.E.D.

NOTE 1
I call a thing past or future, according as we either have been or shall be affected thereby. For instance, according as we have seen it, or are about to see it, according as it has recreated us, or will recreate us, according as it has harmed us, or will harm us. For, as we thus conceive it, we affirm its existence ; that is, the body is affected by no emotion which excludes the existence of the thing, and therefore (Prop. 17, p. II) the body is affected by the image of the thing, in the same way as if the thing were actually present. However, as it generally happens that those, who have had many experiences, vacillate, so long as they regard a thing as future or past, and are usually in doubt about its issue (Note, Prop. 44, p. II) ; it follows that the emotions which arise from similar images of things are not so constant, but are generally disturbed by the images of other things, until men become assured of the issue.

NOTE 2
From what has just been said, we understand what is meant by the terms Hope, Fear, Confidence, Despair, Joy, and Disappointment. Hope is nothing else but an inconstant pleasure, arising from the image of something future or past, whereof we do not yet know the issue. Fear, on the other hand, is an inconstant pain also arising from the image of something concerning which we are in doubt. If the element of doubt be removed from these emotions, hope becomes Confidence and fear becomes Despair. In other words, Pleasure or Pain arising from the image of something concerning which we have hoped or feared. Again, Joy is Pleasure arising from the image of something past whereof we doubted the issue. Disappointment is the Pain opposed to Joy.

PROPOSITION 19
He who conceives that the object of his love is destroyed will feel pain ; if he conceives that it is preserved he will feel pleasure.

[...]

PROPOSITION 20
He who conceives that the object of his hate is destroyed will feel pleasure.

[...]

PROPOSITION 21
He who conceives, that the object of his love is affected pleasurably or painfully, will himself be affected pleasurably or painfully ; and the one or the other emotion will be greater or less in the lover according as it is greater or less in the thing loved.

PROOF
The images of things (as we showed in Prop. 19) which postulate the existence of the object of love, help the mind's endeavour to conceive the said object. But pleasure postulates the existence of something feeling pleasure, so much the more in proportion as the emotion of pleasure is greater ; for it is [...] a transition to a greater perfection ; therefore the image of pleasure in the object of love helps the mental endeavour of the lover ; that is [...], it affects the lover pleasurably, and so much the more, in proportion as this emotion may have been greater in the object of love. This was our first point. Further, in so far as a thing is affected with pain, it is to that extent destroyed, the extent being in proportion to the amount of pain [...] ; therefore [...] he who conceives, that the object of his love is affected painfully, will himself be affected painfully, in proportion as the said emotion is greater or less in the object of love.

PROPOSITION 22
If we conceive that anything pleasurably affects some object of our love, we shall be affected with love towards that thing. Contrariwise, if we conceive that it affects an object of our love painfully, we shall be affected with hatred towards it.

PROOF
He, who affects pleasurably or painfully the object of our love, affects us also pleasurably or painfully - that is, if we conceive the loved object as affected with the said pleasure or pain [...]. But this pleasure or pain is postulated to come to us accompanied by the idea of an external cause ; therefore [...], if we conceive, that anyone affects an object of our love pleasurably or painfully, we shall le affected with love or hatred towards him.

NOTE
Proposition 21 explains to us the nature of Pity, which we may define as pain arising from another's hurt. What term we can use for pleasure arising from another's gain, I know not. We will call the love towards him who confers a benefit on another, Approval ; and the hatred towards him who injures another, we will call Indignation. We must further remark, that we not only feel pity for a thing which we have loved [...], but also for a thing which we have hitherto regarded without emotion, provided that we deem that it resembles ourselves (as I will show presently). Thus, we bestow approval on one who has benefited anything resembling ourselves, and, contrariwise, are indignant with him who has done it an injury."
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics, Part three)

Read the Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.4.C.12. CHARLES DARWIN ON HOW TO EVOLVE YOUR IMAGINATION
“Darwin knew that our triumphs of invention — fire and language he held above all others — are the fruits of our ability to reason, to question, and to make observations, but he believed that nothing has been more crucial, more fertile, more responsible for our evolutionary success than our “powers of the imagination, wonder, curiosity, [and] an undefined sense of beauty. […]

Toward the end of his life, Darwin took up the question of the imagination on the pages of ‘The Descent of Man’. This “highest prerogative” of the human animal, he wrote, “unites former images and ideas, independently of the will, and thus creates brilliant and novel results.

By making the imagination the crux of our humanity, Darwin argued — in an era when women and people were barred from higher education, barred from the professional institutions of art and science, barred from general citizenship in humanity — that true equality between human beings could only be achieved when all have their “reason and imagination exercised to the highest point” from a young age. But he placed the imagination above reason in the development of “the moral faculties” — empathy, after all, is always a creative act of unselfing, a way of imagining what it is like to be someone else. […]

“Whatever renders the imagination more vivid and strengthens the habit of recalling and comparing past impressions, will make the conscience more sensitive.”

Because he understood the statistical distribution by which natural selection develops, tests, and improves traits, he understood that minds too exists along a vast continuum “from absolute imbecility to high excellence,” and that different individuals within the same species fall at different points on it. But he believed that we can propel ourselves along the continuum and cultivate high excellence of the imagination by being vigilant over what we feed the chaos out of which we create — an evolutionary case for the “garbage in, garbage out” model of the mind:

“The value of the products of our imagination depends of course on the number, accuracy, and clearness of our impressions, on our judgment and taste in selecting or rejecting the involuntary combinations, and to a certain extent on our power of voluntarily combining them.”

On his deathbed, Darwin himself lamented having failed to keep feeding his mind those greatest nourishments of the empathic imagination — none mightier, he believed, than poetry and music — turning it instead into “a kind of machine for grinding general laws out of large collections of facts.” He saw, from the wistful vantage of nearing the void, how “the loss of these tastes is a loss of happiness.”

The most creative mind, in the end, as well as the most felicitous, may be the mind that never loses its appetite for wonder and its largehearted curiosity about what it is like to be another.”

(Maria Popova’s review of Darwin’s The Descent of Man in the Marginalian)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2025/01/26/darwin-imagination/

E1.4.C.13. SHELLEY CULTIVATED THE IMAGINATION TO PERCEIVE WHAT HE CALLED "INTELLECTUAL BEAUTY." THE VEHICLE FOR THIS IS POETRY, AND THE ACTIVE PRINCIPLE THAT TRANSFORMS THE WORLD IS LOVE.

“THE PHILOSOPHY OF SHELLEY'S POETRY.

HIS RULING IDEAS.

When I was a boy in Dublin I was one of a group who rented a room in a mean street to discuss philosophy. My fellow-students got more and more interested in certain modern schools of mystical belief, and I never found anybody to share my one unshakable belief. I thought that whatever of philosophy has been made poetry is alone permanent, and that one should begin to arrange it in some regular order, rejecting nothing as the make-believe of the poets. I thought, so far as I can recollect my thoughts after so many years, that if a powerful and benevolent spirit has shaped the destiny of this world, we can better discover that destiny from the words that have gathered up the heart's desire of the world, than from historical records, or from speculation, wherein the heart withers. Since then I have observed dreams and visions very carefully, and am now certain that the imagination has some way of lighting on the truth that the reason has not, and that its commandments, delivered when the body is still and the reason silent, are the most binding we can ever know. I have re-read _Prometheus Unbound_, which I had hoped my fellow-students would have studied as a sacred book, and it seems to me to have an even more certain place than I had thought, among the sacred books of the world. I remember going to a learned scholar to ask about its deep meanings, which I felt more than understood, and his telling me that it was Godwin's _Political Justice_ put into rhyme, and that Shelley was a crude revolutionist, and believed that the overturning of kings and priests would regenerate mankind. I quoted the lines which tell how the halcyons ceased to prey on fish, and how poisonous leaves became good for food, to show that he foresaw more than any political regeneration, but was too timid to push the argument. I still believe that one cannot help believing him, as this scholar I know believes him, a vague thinker, who mixed occasional great poetry with a phantastic rhetoric, unless one compares such passages, and above all such passages as describe the liberty he praised, till one has discovered the system of belief that lay behind them. It should seem natural to find his thought full of subtlety, for Mrs. Shelley has told how he hesitated whether he should be a metaphysician or a poet, and has spoken of his 'huntings after the obscure' with regret, and said of that _Prometheus Unbound_, which so many for three generations have thought _Political Justice_ put into rhyme, 'It requires a mind as subtle and penetrating as his own to understand the mystic meanings scattered throughout the poem. They elude the ordinary reader by their abstraction and delicacy of distinction, but they are far from vague. It was his design to write prose metaphysical essays on the Nature of Man, which would have served to explain much of what is obscure in his poetry; a few scattered fragments of observation and remarks alone remain. He considered these philosophical views of mind and nature to be instinct with the intensest spirit of poetry.' From these scattered fragments and observations, and from many passages read in their light, one soon comes to understand that his liberty was so much more than the liberty of _Political Justice_ that it was one with Intellectual Beauty, and that the regeneration he foresaw was so much more than the regeneration many political dreamers have foreseen, that it could not come in its perfection till the hours bore 'Time to his grave in eternity.' In A Defence of Poetry, the profoundest essay on the foundation of poetry in English, he shows that the poet and the lawgiver hold their station by the right of the same faculty, the one uttering in words and the other in the forms of society, his vision of the divine order, the Intellectual Beauty. 'Poets, according to the circumstances of the age and nation in which they appeared, were called in the earliest epoch of the world legislators or prophets, and a poet essentially comprises and unites both these characters. For he not only beholds intensely the present as it is, and discovers those laws according to which present things are to be ordained, but he beholds the future in the present, and his thoughts are the germs of the flowers and the fruit of latest time.' 'Language, colour, form, and religious and civil habits of action, are all the instruments and materials of poetry.' Poetry is 'the creation of actions according to the unchangeable process of human nature as existing in the mind of the creator, which is itself the image of all other minds.' 'Poets have been challenged to resign the civic crown to reasoners and merchants.... It is admitted that the exercise of the imagination is the most delightful, but it is alleged that that of reason is the more useful.... Whilst the mechanist abridges and the political economist combines labour, let them be sure that their speculations, for want of correspondence with those first principles which belong to the imagination, do not tend, as they have in modern England, to exasperate at once the extremes of luxury and want.... The rich have become richer, the poor have become poorer,... such are the effects which must ever flow from an unmitigated exercise of the calculating faculty.' The speaker of these things might almost be Blake, who held that the Reason not only created Ugliness, but all other evils. The books of all wisdom are hidden in the cave of the Witch of Atlas, who is one of his personifications of beauty, and when she moves over the enchanted river that is an image of all life, the priests cast aside their deceits, and the king crowns an ape to mock his own sovereignty, and the soldiers gather about the anvils to beat their swords to ploughshares, and lovers cast away their timidity, and friends are united; while the power, which in _Laon and Cythna_, awakens the mind of the reformer to contend, and itself contends, against the tyrannies of the world, is first seen, as the star of love or beauty. And at the end of _The Ode to Naples_, he cries out to 'the spirit of beauty' to overturn the tyrannies of the world, or to fill them with its 'harmonizing ardours.' He calls the spirit of beauty liberty, because despotism, and perhaps, as 'the man of virtuous soul commands not nor obeys,' all authority, pluck virtue from her path towards beauty, and because it leads us by that love whose service is perfect freedom. It leads all things by love, for he cries again and again that love is the perception of beauty in thought and things, and it orders all things by love, for it is love that impels the soul to its expressions in thought and in action, by making us 'seek to awaken in all things that are, a community with what we experience within ourselves.' 'We are born into the world, and there is something within us which, from the instant that we live, more and more thirsts after its likeness.' We have 'a soul within our soul that describes a circle around its proper paradise which pain and sorrow and evil dare not overleap,' and we labour to see this soul in many mirrors, that we may possess it the more abundantly. He would hardly seek the progress of the world by any less gentle labour, and would hardly have us resist evil itself. He bids the reformers in _The Philosophical Review of Reform_ receive 'the onset of the cavalry,' if it be sent to disperse their meetings, 'with folded arms,' and 'not because active resistance is not justifiable, but because temperance and courage would produce greater advantages than the most decisive victory;' and he gives them like advice in _The Masque of Anarchy_, for liberty, the poem cries, 'is love,' and can make the rich man kiss its feet, and, like those who followed Christ, give away his goods and follow it throughout the world.
He does not believe that the reformation of society can bring this beauty, this divine order, among men without the regeneration of the hearts of men. Even in Queen Mab, which was written before he had found his deepest thought, or rather perhaps before he had found words to utter it, for I do not think men change much in their deepest thought, he is less anxious to change men's beliefs, as I think, than to cry out against that serpent more subtle than any beast of the field, 'the cause and the effect of tyranny.' He affirms again and again that the virtuous, those who have 'pure desire and universal love,' are happy in the midst of tyranny, and he foresees a day when 'the spirit of nature,' the spirit of beauty of his later poems, who has her 'throne of power unappealable in every human heart,' shall have made men so virtuous that 'kingly glare will lose its power to dazzle and silently pass by,' and as it seems even commerce, 'the venal interchange of all that human art or nature yields, which wealth should purchase not,' come as silently to an end.  He was always, indeed in chief, a witness for that 'power unappealable.' Maddalo, in Julian and Maddalo, says that the soul is powerless, and can only, like a 'dreary bell hung in a heaven-illumined tower, toll our thoughts and our desires to meet round the rent heart and pray'; but Julian, who is Shelley himself, replies, as the makers of all religions have replied 'Where is the beauty, love and truth we seek   But in our minds? And if we were not weak,   Should we be less in deed than in desire?'”
(William Butler Yeats, Ideas of Good and Evil, 1903)

E1.4.D. BUILDING JOY THROUGH SHEER FORCE OF WILL
Seven very different versions:
1. Plato's Harmony of the Soul
2. Aristotle's virtue
3. Spinoza's Conatus
4. Diderot's "wisdom" of Rameau's nephew
5. Nietzsche's "Become what you are"
6. Jean-Paul Sartre's radical freedom
7. Hildegard von Bingen's green vitality

E1.4.D.1. FOR PLATO, THE UNJUST MAN IS UNHAPPY BECAUSE HIS SOUL IS OUT OF BALANCE. Of the three faculties of the soul—reason, courage, and desire—the last has taken over. The just man, on the other hand, uses reason and, through courage, masters his desires to restore harmony to his soul.

E1.4.D.1.1. "THE MYTH OF ER THE PAMPHYLIAN: ARE WE RESPONSIBLE FOR OUR DESTINY?
Er returns after death to tell the living what has happened. After 600 pages of rigorous argument in the Republic, Plato ends with a myth. In the Republic, he presents his arguments showing that justice (my virtue) makes me happy through the self-esteem, harmony, and friendship I develop with myself. There are also the rewards I receive from other people for being virtuous; this is social justice. Finally, in the myth of Er, he adds the retribution of the gods after death".
(Anne Merker on Les chemins de la philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 01/10/2019)

Listen to the podcast: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/le-mythe-d-er-le-pamphylien-sommes-nous-responsables-de-notre-destin-8872734

E1.4.D.2. FOR ARISTOTLE, HAPPINESS IS NOT A MATTER OF CHANCE, BUT THE RESULT OF CULTIVATING EXCELLENCE AND PUTTING ETHICS INTO PRACTICE. He asserts, "The truly determining cause of happiness lies in activity consistent with virtue, while activity in the opposite direction leads to the opposite state." It is virtue we must hold onto when joy abandons us in the face of life's challenges.

E1.4.D.2.1. VIRTUE IS NOT WITHOUT EFFORT, BUT NEITHER WITHOUT PLEASURE OR JOY. 
"Virtue is the effort to behave well, which defines the good by that very effort. It is not the application of a pre-existing rule, much less the observance of a transcendent prohibition: it is the realization, both prescriptive and normative, of an individual who becomes his own rule, forbidding himself only that which he considers unworthy of what he is or wants to be. 
The word arétè, which the Latins translated as virtus, primarily means power or excellence. For example, the virtue of a knife is to cut; the virtue of a medicine is to heal; the virtue of a person is to live and act humanely. Here we come to moral or ethical virtue. It's a power, but it's normative. An excellence, but in action. It's an acquired disposition (we are not born virtuous, we become virtuous) to do good, as Aristotle put it, to do what we must, when we must, as we must, with no other guide and almost no other rule than our virtue itself. It's not without reason, but it's not without will. It is not without effort, but neither without pleasure or joy. He who gives without pleasure is not generous; he is only a miser who forces himself. He who resists dissipation without pleasure is not temperate; he is merely continent and frustrated. 
Aristotle defined virtue as the middle ground (or temperance) between two opposite but both vicious extremes (though they may be unequal), "one by excess and the other by deficiency" (Nicomachean Ethics, II, 5-6, 1106 -1107 a). Thus courage, between recklessness and cowardice: the reckless man takes ill-considered risks (he sins by excess), the coward doesn't take enough (he sins by deficiency); the courageous man takes the risks he must, as he must, when he must. It's obviously a mistake to see this as an excuse for half-heartedness, centrism, or mediocrity. The golden mean is also an extreme, but upward: it's a peak, it's a perfection (ibid.), like a ridge between two abysses or between two marshes".
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.4.D.2.2. THE HAPPY MAN WILL ALWAYS ENGAGE IN ACTIONS CONSISTENT WITH VIRTUE
"The happy man will have the attribute of permanence which we are discussing, and he will remain happy throughout his life. For he will always or to the highest degree both do and contemplate what is in conformity with virtue; he will bear the vicissitudes of fortune most nobly and with perfect decorum under all circumstances, inasmuch as he is truly good and 'four-square beyond reproach.'"
(Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics)

E1.4.D.2.3. EVEN THOUGH THE ETYMOLOGY OF THE WORD HAPPINESS IS GOOD FORTUNE, THE TRUE CAUSE OF HAPPINESS LIES IN ACTIVITY ALIGNED WITH VIRTUE.

E1.4.D.2.3.a. "SINCE HAPPINESS ALSO NEEDS FORTUNE, SOME PEOPLE REGARD GOOD FORTUNE AS IDENTICAL WITH HAPPINESS. But that is not true, for even good fortune, if excessive, can be an obstruction; perhaps we are, in that case, no longer justified in calling it "good fortune," for its definition is determined by its relation to happiness."
(Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics)

E1.4.D.2.3.b. IF, AS WE SAID, THE ACTIVITIES DETERMINE A MAN'S LIFE, NO SUPREMELY HAPPY MAN CAN EVER BECOME MISERABLE "But fortune brings many things to pass, some great and some small. Minor instances of good and likewise of bad luck obviously do not decisively tip the scales of life, but a number of major successes will make life more perfectly happy; for, in the first place, by their very nature they help to make life attractive, and secondly, they afford the opportunity for noble and good actions. On the other hand, frequent reverses can crush and mar supreme happiness in that they inflict pain and thwart many activities. Still, nobility shines through even in such circumstances, when a man bears many great misfortunes with good grace not because he is insensitive to pain but because he is noble and high-minded.

If, as we said, the activities determine a man's life, no supremely happy man can ever become miserable, for he will never do what is hateful and base. For in our opinion, the man who is truly good and wise will bear with dignity whatever fortune may bring, and will always act as nobly as circumstances permit, just as a good general makes the most strategic use of the troops at his disposal, and a good shoemaker makes the best shoe he can from the leather available, and so on with experts in all other fields. If this is true, a happy man will never become miserable; but even so, supreme happiness will not be his if a fate such as Priam's befalls him. And yet, he will not be fickle and changeable; he will not be dislodged from his happiness easily by any misfortune that comes along, but only by great and numerous disasters such as will make it impossible for him to become happy again in a short time; if he recovers his happiness at all, it will be only after a long period of time, in which he has won great distinctions."
(Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics)

E1.4.D.2.3.b.i. "HAPPY
Etymologically, to be happy is to be lucky. This reveals much about happiness—not because luck alone suffices, but because no happiness is possible without it. For every human being, there exists what they can endure and what they cannot. Whether one encounters, before dying, that which renders happiness impossible is as much a matter of chance as it is of virtue.
Are you happy? Primarily, it's because nothing impedes you, nothing proves stronger than you. How could you be stronger than everything?”
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.4.D.2.3.c. "IT IS OBVIOUS, IN FACT, THAT IF WE FOLLOW IT STEP BY STEP IN ITS VARIOUS VICISSITUDES, WE WILL OFTEN CALL THE SAME MAN ALTERNATELY HAPPY AND UNHAPPY, thus making the happy man a kind of chameleon or a house threatening ruin. Should we not rather think that following fortune in all its detours is an absolutely incorrect procedure? It is not in this, indeed, that prosperity or adversity consist: they are, as we have said, only simple adjuvants which the life of every man needs. The truly determining cause of happiness lies in activity in accordance with virtue, activity in the opposite direction being the cause of the opposite state."
(Aristotle, The Nicomachean Ethics)

E1.4.D.2.4. THE HAPPY MAN CAN NEVER BECOME MISERABLE, BUT THE UPS AND DOWNS OF OUR FRIENDS DO AFFECT OUR HAPPINESS.
“As for maintaining that the ups and downs of our descendants and all our friends in no way influence our happiness, this is obviously a doctrine too foreign to friendship and contrary to received opinions.”
(Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics)

E1.4.D.2.4.a. "THE HAPPY MAN CAN NEVER BECOME MISERABLE, YET HE WILL NOT ATTAIN FULL HAPPINESS IF HE FALLS INTO MISFORTUNES like those of Priam. But neither is he subject to variation and change, for, on the one hand, he will not be easily shaken in his happiness, nor by the first misfortunes that come his way: for this will require multiplied and serious failures; and, on the other hand, following disasters of such magnitude, he cannot recover his happiness in a day, but if he does, it can only be at the end of a long period of time, in the course of which he will have obtained great and beautiful satisfactions."
(Aristotle, The Nicomachean Ethics)

E1.4.D.3. "THE THIRD KIND OF KNOWLEDGE" COMBINES RATIONALITY WITH THE CONTEMPLATION OF REALITY
In the fifth part of Ethics, Spinoza introduces "the third kind of knowledge"—a mental path that leads to a profound understanding of nature. This approach enables us to transcend the suffering of finitude by merging rationality with the contemplation of reality. The result is a state of universal compassion and the highest form of joy: beatitude.

E1.4.D.3.1. THERE ARE NO WORDS TO DESCRIBE THE EXPERIENCE OF ETERNITY. IT IS BEYOND KNOWLEDGE, IN THE REGISTER OF "FEELING". This is why Spinoza, who is so methodical throughout the first four parts of the Ethics, radically changes his style in the fifth part.

E1.4.D.3.1.a. "THE ETHICS OF SIMPLE REASON [...] DOES NOT ALLOW US TO ELEVATE OURSELVES TO A POSITIVE ETHICS, WHICH TEACHES US TO RECOGNIZE THE ACTUAL CONTENT OF WISDOM, and not merely to remove the forces that stand in the way of this recognition [...] this demonstrative and deductive reason, which presides over the writing of the Ethics [...] is not, according to Spinoza, the highest faculty of knowledge granted to us. There is another kind of knowledge that is superior to it, and through which we may hope to gain access to the real and positive content of wisdom [...].
To know the inner power that gives us existence and leads us to action, the source of our most authentic life, we must not know this truth as an objective truth, i.e. as an object that we place in exteriority, and determine by exposing it to our observations - which is what rational knowledge is all about. On the contrary, we must experience it inwardly, as an intrinsic truth, inseparable from our own nature, intimately intuited and not objectively determined. [...] It's no longer a matter of stringing together a demonstrative discourse, but of feeling and experiencing the gush of life in the depths of myself."

E1.4.D.3.1.a_REF1_PH SPINOZA'S ETHICS DISTANCE ITSELF FROM MORALS BY SEEKING TO UNDERSTAND HUMAN PASSIONS THROUGH NATURAL NECESSITY INSTEAD OF DICTATING DUTIES. Spinoza uses a geometric method to deal with human passions, but this rational approach is not sufficient to achieve supreme bliss. Intuitive, supra-rational knowledge is needed to fully grasp the inner forces that drive us and enable us to act authentically.
"Unlike morality, which imposes duties on man's free will, ethics merely sets out to show how the passions produce each other, without the need to impose duties on the will, which acts out of the necessity of its nature when it is free, and passionately suffers the forces that subjugate it when it is oppressed. The question that then arises is no longer the one formulated by Kant, "What must we do?" - but one that requires us to know the necessity that compels us to do what we do. And salvation no longer depends on a choice of life that exists only in our imagination, but rather on our awareness, more or less clear, more or less profound, of the motives behind our actions. This is why Spinoza's Ethics has sometimes been seen as a lesson in quietism, which is true insofar as this wisdom does not claim to change the world, but false insofar as it does not lead in any way to the renunciation of the will, but on the contrary to the joyful affirmation of the essence of the will, insofar as it obeys nothing but its own intrinsic necessity. For Spinoza, it's not a question of dreaming of another life, but of understanding our present life so that we can fully recognize ourselves in it, embrace it, and enjoy it. It's not about changing life, but about recognizing and accepting the perfection of the present life: "By reality and perfection I mean the same thing" (Definition 6 of Ethics II). It's about reconciling ourselves to reality. Therefore, the passions of men may be treated, not in the tone of moral condemnation, but with the necessity of a geometrical demonstration: "It will seem surprising that I should undertake to deal with the vices of men and their infirmities in the manner of geometers, and that I should wish to demonstrate by rigorous reasoning what they never cease to proclaim to be contrary to reason, vain, absurd, and worthy of horror [...] 
I shall therefore consider human actions and appetites as if it were a question of lines, surfaces, and solids" (Preface to Eth. III). However, by following this method of pure rationality, the demonstrative path only leads to a political ethics, that of Book IV, which defines the principles of a society of reason through the calculation of mutual interests and the mutual neutralization of enmities. The ethics of simple reason is thus the purely negative ethics of political wisdom. At the point we have now reached, it does not allow us to ascend to a positive ethics, an ethics that teaches us to recognize the actual content of the beatitude, and not merely to remove the forces that stand in the way of this recognition. Perhaps this is the limit of the "geometric way," which knows "reason" only through the productive power of adequate ideas, rigorously chained together in an understanding that obeys the inner necessity that expresses itself in it, without allowing itself to be entertained by the passionate alienations that deprive it of itself. But this demonstrative and deductive reason, which presides over the writing of the Ethics itself and links propositions, demonstrations, scolies, and corollaries, is not, according to Spinoza, the highest faculty of knowledge granted to us. There is another kind of knowledge that is superior to it, and thanks to which we can hope to gain access to the real and positive content of wisdom, or the supreme beatitude, beyond the calculation of a merely geometrical reason for well-understood interests. [...]
To make this transition from the alienating servitude of mutual passions to the sovereign affirmation of one's full nature, reason is not enough. Another, higher, supra-rational knowledge is required. For reason concatenates adequate ideas, produced solely by the productive or generative logic of understanding, which it posits as objective truths. But in order to know the inner force that gives us existence and leads us to action, the source of our most authentic life, we must not know this truth as an objective truth, that is, as an object that we posit in exteriority and thus determine by exposing it to our observations-which is the hallmark of rational knowledge. On the contrary, we must experience it inwardly, as an intrinsic truth, inseparable from our own nature, intimately intuited and not objectively determined. But such knowledge, intuitive and not merely deductive, goes beyond the limits of reason and requires recourse to a higher faculty capable of concretely experiencing the vital impulse that lifts us into existence and determines our orientation. It's no longer a matter of stringing together a demonstrative discourse, but of feeling and experiencing the effervescence of life in the depths of my being. [...]"
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the Fullness of this World, 6-"We feel and experience that we are eternal", 2017)

Read the full article: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Spinoza/Introduction/Introd6.html

E1.4.D.3.1.b. "WE FINALLY SEE HOW KNOWLEDGE THROUGH REASON IS NOT CONCLUSIVE, but rather a step that helps us reach the desired goal. It is like a well-intended spirit that, without falsehood or deceit, brings us a message of the ultimate good to inspire us to seek and unite with it. This union is our highest salvation and happiness."

E1.4.D.3.1.b_REF1_PH SPINOZA'S BEATITIDE IMPLEMENTS THE INTUITIVE KNOWLEDGE THAT SPIRIT AND BODY HAVE NATURE "(GOD OR NATURE"). Unlike the mystical tradition, which advocates renunciation, the Spinozist beatitude celebrates self-affirmation and embodied existence on earth, emphasizing an intimate union with nature without detachment from the material world.
"There is thus an almost fusional intimacy, like that of the fetus in the mother's womb, between the soul and the body with which it is united, between the individual substance, soul and body, and the great whole of nature, and finally between nature and God". Through this "close union" all that is is also closely connected with the infinite life that is in God, which we "know", not by demonstrative reason, but by an immediate feeling, which is also the feeling of the life that springs from the depths of ourselves, by an immediate intuition, therefore, and not by deductive connection. And this knowledge is also the "regeneration" of ourselves (a notion that lies at the foundation of Reformed religion): "When we perceive such effects, we may truly say that we are born anew; for our first birth took place when we united with the body, whereby such effects and movements of animal spirits occurred; but this other and second birth will take place when we perceive in ourselves, thanks to the knowledge of this immaterial object, quite different effects of love; effects which differ from the former as much as the corporeal differs from the incorporeal, the spirit from the flesh. This can all the more be called regeneration, since from this love and this union alone can follow an eternal and unalterable stability" (last words of chapter 22 of the Short Treatise, II). And in chapter 25 of the same second part of the Short Treatise, Spinoza returns to the excellence of intuitive knowledge, which is superior to objective rationality, and by which we are given to experience and feel the intimate fusion of the life that is in God, or nature, and that which burns in the depths of ourselves, by a very close union, which gives rise to the highest bliss in him who knows how to become conscious of it: "Finally, we see that knowledge by reason is by no means the main thing in us, but is only like a degree by which we ascend to the desired end; or like a good spirit which, without falsehood or deception, brings us a message of the sovereign good, in order to excite us to seek it ourselves, and to unite ourselves with it [Spinoza here compares knowledge of the third kind, or intuitive knowledge, with the angel who brings the Good News, or eu-aggelos, Latin: euangelium]; which union is our highest salvation and bliss. "What is meant by this is the whole program of the work to be accomplished, as it will find its full and complete expression in the Ethics. [...]
[In the Ethics] Beginning with the scolie of V 23 (GF p. 325), "We feel and know by experience that we are eternal," the whole sequence to the end (prop. 42) is a long, almost hymn-like development of the beatitude we derive from intuitive knowledge of God's life in us. Prop. 25: "The highest effort (conatus) of the soul and its highest virtue (virtus) is to know things by the third kind of knowledge" (GF 325). We understand that it's no longer a question of knowledge, but of beatitude, of the closest proximity of God's life to the heart of our life, like a focus of eternity that radiates our whole being, at least as long as we keep ourselves alive, as long as we persist in existing. And so it is that Spinoza the atheist finds himself in the tradition of mystical experience, the third kind of knowledge being strangely similar to the unitive fruition of the soul, lovingly united with the God who creates it and brings it into being, with the difference that it is not the soul alone that enjoys this union (as in the case of the mystics: Ecstasy is rapture, the body is abandoned like an inert, unnecessarily heavy disguise), but indifferently - for the one and the other are two expressions of one and the same substance - of the spirit (Mens is the creator of concepts, the producer of its own rationality, while Anima only makes itself available for the gift of grace, receptive rather than productive), as well as of the body, which is also raised to blissful life, in glory and great health. An earthly beatitude that does not raise us to the third heaven, as Paul of Tarsus rejoiced (2 Cor 12), but rather keeps our feet firmly on the ground, affirming and cultivating our incarnate individuality, our own will, the nature that expresses itself in us in a singular and unique way. This is why the Spinozan beatitude must be distinguished from the spiritual deification that takes place in holy souls who have been able to empty themselves and make themselves capable of receiving divinity at the cost of their own annihilation, according to the teaching of Eckhart, so alive in the northern countries, the beguinage countries, And this, even if Spinoza's words sometimes seem to recall this wisdom, for the beatitude of the fifth book of the Ethics is that of self-affirmation, not of renunciation, an exultation of experiencing oneself alive on the earth of men, not that of the detachment that renounces itself as well as the world and yields to rapture in the beyond. "
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the Fullness of this World, 6-"We feel and experience that we are eternal", 2017)

Read the full article: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Spinoza/Introduction/Introd6.html

E1.4.D.3.1.c. IN CONTRAST TO THE JOY WE GET FROM AN EXTERNAL CAUSE THAT BOOSTS OUR ABILITY TO ACT, BLISS COMES FROM WITHIN. We draw the strength to achieve bliss from ourselves, as we experience ourselves being alive.

E1.4.D.3.1.c_REF1_PH  SPINOZA DISTINGUISHES JOY FROM EXTERNAL CAUSES AND BEATITUDE THAT EMANATES FROM OUR UNION WITH NATURE (“GOD OR NATURE”),  seen as an immanent cause. This intuitive knowledge culminates in the last book of the Ethics, where it is linked to intellectual love of God and liberation from negative passions.
"Reading is another example of this synthetic grasp of the intelligence's gaze: for the global method has taught us that in the mind's eye the whole precedes the part, that we don't learn to read by adding one letter to another, but by grasping the word as an indivisible whole, immediately and intuitively recognizable by the mind. Don't we begin by reading the Ethics itself, sentence by sentence, perhaps understanding the letter of this or that passage, but unable to grasp at a glance the guiding thought, the view of the mind that inspires the letter? And yet, by reading and re-reading this text, we end up reading it as a poem, expressing and modulating in different ways one and the same joy of life that inspires it in all its parts. Thus, in the first solfeggio lesson, the apprentice painfully spells out the notes, while the virtuoso pianist deciphers with his eyes what his fingers impetuously translate onto the keyboard: only the latter really hears the music, the former merely counts what he doesn't understand. And this last example is admirably suited to Spinoza's demonstration, for the authentic pianist, a veritable automaton both manually and mentally, adheres to the movement of music, to the necessity of its development, and through the effect of the divine necessity expressed in his playing, experiences the most exhilarating of freedoms. So it's true to say that intuition, perhaps more than deduction, is a mode of knowledge that can be cultivated and deepened. And even if we have understood in what sense the mind can, by this operation, translate the temporal sequence into the whole of eternity - which is then the gathering of the successive into the simultaneous - the reason why, by this third kind of knowledge, we are enabled to access the very beatitude, by the fullness of which "we feel and experience that we are eternal - sentimus experimurque nos aeternos esse" (V, scolie de 23), is still neither clear nor distinct. This experience of eternity - which is not the privilege of the blessed in the hereafter, but on the contrary is accessible from this life - is in fact the result of the third kind of knowledge. It is also invoked in the scolie of prop. 23, which prepares and announces the final movement of Book V, which is devoted to the third kind of knowledge (25 to 32; prop. 25: "The supreme effort of the mind and its sovereign virtue is to understand things through the third kind of knowledge"), which produces "the intellectual love of God" (prop. 33 to 37; prop. 33: "The intellectual love of God that arises from the third kind of knowledge is eternal"), which leads to beatitude (prop. 38 at the end, i.e. prop. 42; prop. 38: "The more the mind understands through the second and third kinds of knowledge, the less it suffers from feelings that are evil and the less it apprehends death"). The enigmatic theme of immediate, intuitive knowledge, which had been forming since the earliest writings, thus finds its crowning, speculative fulfillment in the last book of the Ethics: the whole of this meditation tended only to this ultimate end. By beatitude Spinoza-who borrows the word from the vocabulary of theologians, who use it to denote the perfect enjoyment of the blessed, who are received into paradise and immersed in the face vision of the Deity-designates not a passion due to an external cause, but, conversely, the fulfillment (gaudium) of our own nature, apprehended from the source that gives us life. In contrast to the joy (laetitia) we derive from encountering an external cause that increases our power to act, beatitude (beatitudo) has its source in ourselves, and it is from ourselves, insofar as we experience ourselves as existing, that we draw the power to raise ourselves to beatitude. And if Spinoza can write that this supreme joy comes from our union with God, then we must specify that this God is an immanent cause, not transitive or transcendent, interior and not exterior (I, 18: "God is the immanent but non-transitive cause of all things"). Thus, in order to understand how the beatitude can lead us to the experience of eternity, we must understand the nature of our union with God and the intuition that is the principle of this high knowledge."
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the Fullness of This World, 6-"We feel and experience that we are eternal", 2017)

Read the full article: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Spinoza/Introduction/Introd6.html

E1.4.D.3.1.d. CONATUS: THE DESIRE TO DESIRE, I.E. TO ALWAYS PROJECT ONE'S EXISTENCE WITH A VIEW TO INTENSIFYING IT AND INCREASING ONE'S POWER TO ACT. “The conatus achieves the paradox of being a singular universal, since it is a notion that is both common to all and, in the intimacy of each individual, infinitely unique and singular. [...]
So let us turn our attention, not to our existence, but to its very essence, and strive to get to know it better, through intuitive, not deductive, knowledge [...].
Yet it is not just any desire that is essential - many desires are provoked by the imaginary of the encounter and find their cause in exteriority, not in the very essence of the desiring subject - but the desire to desire, i.e. to always project one's existence with a view to its intensification, to the increase in the power to act that carries it beyond itself and determines it to persevere in its momentum.”
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the Fullness of This World, 6-"We feel and experience that we are eternal", 2017)

E1.4.D.3.1.d_REF1_PH THE CONATUS IS THE ESSENCE OF ALL BEING, REPRESENTING A UNIVERSAL AND DYNAMIC EFFORT PRESENT IN ALL THINGS THAT PROJECTS BEING TOWARD CONTINUOUS INTENSIFICATION.
"Descartes' physics is static, Spinoza's ontology is dynamic. This force, or rather effort (conatus), is the essence of all being - as the word itself suggests, it denotes the movement of taking oneself beyond oneself (ex-sistence), of projecting oneself ahead of oneself, according to the continuity of one's trajectory or the fulfillment of one's destiny. It is therefore universal, since the founding, initiating act that carries existence into the continuity of its movement is equally present in all things, in every being, whether living or inert, unconscious or conscious; and it is a concrete universal, since it can be apprehended only subjectively - by intuition and not by deduction, which knows only objectively - existence, in so far as it is endowed with consciousness, is capable of experiencing in itself the activity of its own essence, the dynamism of a divine power, because it is absolute and creative (the giver of existence), the activity of the living God, who expresses himself and radiates in everything endowed with the virtue that sustains it in being. The conatus achieves the paradox of being a singular universal, because it is a concept that is both common to all and, in the intimacy of each individual, infinitely unique and singular. [...]
Let us turn our attention, then, not to our existence, but to its essence, and let us strive to know it better by an intuitive, not deductive, knowledge of the third kind, which, according to the order of reasons, is developed in the fifth and last book of the Ethics. This divine life in us, this ecstatic movement that leads us to act always, to project ourselves ahead of ourselves, to exist by the power of continuous self-creation, we intuit as a perpetual source, a constant inclination to live, and to live ever more: "Desire is the essence of man in so far as he is conceived as determined to do something by an affection given in him" (III, Definition of Affections, I). But it is not just any desire that is essential - many desires are provoked by the imaginary of the encounter and find their cause in the exterior, not in the essence of the desiring subject - but the desire to desire, that is, to project one's existence always with a view to intensifying it, to increasing the power of action that carries it beyond itself and determines it to persevere in its momentum. Existence, then, is the movement of the being that is affected by itself, that is, by its essence, by the energy that supports and lifts it. It is, therefore, one and the same thing to grasp intuitively as being and as being alive, and to understand that this energy, which is the act of divinity - alas, existence is given to us, we are only its tenants, not its owners, we receive it from God, who is its eternal source - can have neither beginning nor end, pure vital momentum, which is at the origin of this miracle: that there is something and not rather nothing, and that this institution of being is determined by its essence to persevere forever and ever, eternally present and alive. Therefore, if we are born and die, it is not by the essential act that sustains us and brings us into existence, but by the thousand passions we suffer from the encounters and shocks we undergo as a result of our subjection to causes external to us, for we are parts of nature, provisional creatures in the swarming of innumerable creatures, all equally alive (though in different degrees), ceaselessly transforming and regenerating themselves in the continuous metamorphoses of the whole of nature, which is God's play with himself. "
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the fullness of this world, 6-"We feel and experience that we are eternal", 2017)

Read the full article: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Spinoza/Introduction/Introd6.html

E1.4.D.3.1.d_REF2_PH BEING IMPLIES PERMANENCE, WHILE TO EXIST, DERIVED FROM THE LATIN "EX-SISTERE," MEANS TO ENTER INTO THE BECOMING OF ONE'S FULFILLMENT. Spinoza illustrates this idea by defining the essence of man as the desire to persevere in his being, not by remaining static, but by always seeking to become more. In this way, being is a process of becoming, not mere permanence.
"Among the three meanings carried by the three roots that knot together in the verb to be - namely, to live, to flourish, and to abide - there is an obvious contradiction between the first two, which have meaning only as becoming, and the third, which, on the contrary, remains in its state, persists and maintains itself, similar to itself. From this contradiction we can deduce the difference that separates Being from Existence, and understand how Existence could be generated from Being. In fact, there's a Latin verb from which our Existence is directly derived: ex-sistere, from sisto, sistere, which means to establish, to maintain, to firm up, to fix, to stop (and also to bring before a court, in the sense of a "court judgment" or "to put under arrest"). In Latin (stare, sisto, stano) we find the root sta- (from which we derive, for example, stable, station, static, statue), which is the equivalent of the Germanic root wes, with the meaning of to dwell, to inhabit. To ex-ist, then, is to cease to be what one is and to enter into the becoming of one's fulfillment. Being remains as it is, while existence moves toward its full manifestation. These two yet contradictory meanings are also inscribed in the root of being, without this contradiction ever having been perceptible to the ears of the ancients: to be is also to affirm one's state, to maintain oneself against adversity, but it is also to become, not to be a "dweller" who vegetates and makes no further progress, but a force that cultivates itself and increases its power. So when Spinoza defines the essence of man as the desire (cupiditas) or the effort (conatus) to persevere in one's being (in suo esse perseverare), he certainly doesn't mean that man's true nature is to remain what he is-for that would be to renounce desire, which is nevertheless part of his essence-but, on the contrary, that he always tends to become what he is not yet. To "persevere in his being," according to Spinoza, is not to remain as he is, but to desire always to desire, and always to desire more. And this is indeed how people desire, they desire to desire, they don't want to live, they want to live more, it's not enough for them to be, they want to exist fully. Being is becoming, not pure permanence. This is true of man, but also of the world, which is nature, that is to say nativity, birth, hatching and genesis."
(Jacques Darriulat, Being and Existence, 2-Expressing Existence, 2020)

E1.4.D.3.1.e. "ONE MUST LIVE IN THE GLORY OF ETERNITY AND ESTABLISH ONESELF IN PERFECT ADEQUATION TO ONESELF, in the bliss of being and knowing oneself fully, and perpetually enjoying this fullness."

E1.4.D.3.1.e_REF1_PH WE FEEL AND WE EXPERIENCE THAT WE ARE ETERNAL "In this immense drama - in which energy unfolds in the life of matter like an expanding sphere and where invention multiplies in the life of the spirit - a role is assigned to us from which we can't turn way. But we have the choice to either live that role fully, or to deny it and to walk through the light of Being without ever fathoming the infinite power which gives us life and existence, and makes us persevere in that bliss, which is the enjoyment of simply existing. [Spinoza's] Ethic teaches us not how to choose our destiny - vain pretension of the imagination, which dreams with eyes opened and doesn't know anything of the real life which constitutes its essence - but how to live it in fullness, and to enjoy knowing ourselves, as an expression among the infinity of possibilities, all equally destined for necessary realization [...]
The value of our lives doesn't reside in the choices we would be able to make, because of an imaginary freedom that we attribute to ourselves only because we ignore the real causes that determine us as well as the necessity that lead us by the hand. The value of our lives reside in that it offers us the experience, although limited in time and in space, [...] to feel and experience ourselves eternal: « We feel and we experience that we are eternal. […] We feel that our spirit, insofar as it envelops the essence of the body under the aspect of eternity - sub aeternitatis specie - is eternal, and that its existence cannot be defined by time, in other words, be explained by duration » (Baruch Spinoza, Ethics V, scolie 23).”
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the plenitude of this world, 6 - “We feel and we experience that we are eternal”, 2017)

Read the full article: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Spinoza/Introduction/Introd6.html

E1.4.D.3.1.e_REF1.1_PH WE FEEL AND EXPERIENCE THAT WE ARE ETERNAL "In this immense drama-the expanding sphere in which energy unfolds in the life of matter as invention multiplies in the life of spirit-we are assigned a role from which it is not in our power to depart. But it is in our power to live it to the full, or to deny it and pass into the light of being without ever fathoming the infinite power that gives us life and existence and makes us persevere in that beatitude which is the enjoyment of pure being. The lesson of ethics teaches us not how to choose our destiny, a vain pretension of the imagination, which dreams with its eyes open and knows nothing of the life that is its essence, but how to live it to the full, and to enjoy knowing ourselves as one expression among the infinity of possibilities, all equally destined to a necessary realization, of the living God who animates, in varying degrees, all things to which the incomprehensible gift of existence has been given. "For what we have shown so far is quite general and applies equally to human beings and to other individuals, all of whom are animated, though in different degrees" (Note of II, 13). Life is not worth living because of the choices we could make, because of an imaginary freedom we attribute to ourselves only because we are unaware of the true causes that determine us and the necessity that leads us as if by the hand. Life is worthwhile because it offers us the experience - limited, it is true, in time and space - of participating in the life that is in God, of feeling ourselves eternal by the very fact of the essence that gives us existence: "We feel and experience that we are eternal [...] We feel that our spirit, insofar as it envelops the essence of the body under the aspect of eternity - sub aeternitatis specie - is eternal, and that its existence cannot be defined by time, in other words explained by duration" (V, scolie de 23). Eternity is not immortality. The first takes Being into a dimension beyond time, a definition which is admittedly only negative, not yet affirmative; the second, on the contrary, extends indefinitely the time allotted to this singular existence. As far as bliss is concerned, the ancient Greeks knew only the latter, and they knew nothing more divine than the fact of being immortal, to the point of making this attribute the very name of divinity, for they said of their gods that they were the immortals. But the Jewish God knows himself to be infinite, not indefinite, and it cannot be enough for him to live indefinitely in time; he must live in the glory of eternity - which triumphs over the dissension and diaspora that make up the intimate weave of duration - and re-establish himself in perfect adequacy with himself, in the beatitude of being and knowing himself fully, and of enjoying this plenitude forever."
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the fullness of this world, 6-"We feel and experience that we are eternal", 2017)

E1.4.D.3.1.e_REF1.2_PH "SEVEN WHITE BUTTERFLIES

Seven white butterflies 
delicate in a hurry look 
how they bang the pages 
    of their wings as they fly

to the fields of mustard yellow 
and orange and plain 
gold all eternity 
    is in the moment this is what

Blake said Whitman said such 
wisdom in the agitated 
motions of the mind seven 
    dancers floating

even as worms toward 
paradise see how they banter 
and riot and rise
    to the trees flutter

lob their white bodies into 
the invisible wind weightless 
lacy willing
    to deliver themselves unto

the universe now each settles 
down on a yellow thumb on a 
brassy stem now 
    all seven are rapidly sipping

from the golden towers who 
would have thought it could be so easy?"
(Mary Oliver, West wind, 1997)

E1.4.D.3.1.e_REF2_PH "WE FEEL AND KNOW THAT WE ARE ETERNAL."
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics V, Scolium de la Propostion XXIII)

"We conceive things as actual in two ways; either in so far as we conceive that they exist in relation to a certain time and place, or in so far as we conceive that they are contained in [Nature] and follow from the necessity of nature. Now those which are conceived in this second way as true or real, we conceive under the species of eternity, and their ideas envelop the eternal and infinite essence of [Nature]." 
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics V, Scolium of Propostion XXIX - we have substituted in the original text "God" for [Nature] as Spinoza invites us to do in the preface to Part 4 of the : "this eternal and infinite Being, which we call God or Nature, acts with the same necessity as it exists".)

Read the Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.4.D.3.1.f. "THE INFINITE HAS AN INTENSIVE, NOT EXTENSIVE, DIMENSION AND THERE IS NO LIMIT TO THE INTENSITY WITH WHICH WE CAN PARTICIPATE, THROUGH THE EXERCISE OF ATTENTION, through the penetration of consciousness, in the divine activity that carries us into Existence, and continually perseveres in this momentum. Indeed, as we have seen, it is the hallmark of intuitive knowledge to be able, through exercise, to extend the field of its examination, the radius of its horizon of evidence. This knowledge, or awareness, is accompanied by the highest enjoyment, since it makes us experience inwardly the act of divine causation, which affects us not passionately, through the effect of an external cause, but fills us inwardly, through the intuition of our very essence. [...]
"Beatitude is not the reward of virtue, but virtue itself" (prop. 42, last proposition of the Ethics). Paradoxically, this extraordinary work teaches us that we live in paradise and enjoy eternity right now. For we only need this world to find the eternity and perfection that humans have only been able to imagine in another world. For, as it is written on the very first page of Book I of the Ethics: "By eternity I mean existence itself, insofar as it is conceived as necessarily following from the sole definition of an eternal thing" (I, def. 8), i.e. insofar as it is known by its very essence, the effect of the infinite power of divine causation; and reaffirmed in another way on the very first page of Book II: "By reality and by perfection, I mean the same thing." This world is perfect. Everything is accomplished."

E1.4.D.3.1.f_REF1_PH ACCORDING TO SPINOZA, BLISS AND INTUITIVE KNOWLEDGE OF LIFE ARE ACCESSIBLE IN THE PRESENT MOMENT, WITHOUT THE NEED TO PROLONG EXISTENCE OR SEEK REWARDS IN THE AFTERLIFE. Life, according to Spinoza, is an end in itself, and true wisdom lies in the realization of the natural (or divine) forces that animate us.
"All men are born and die. But it is up to them, as long as they are given the gift of Being and remain in its Glory, to reconcile themselves to themselves, to enjoy the flame that burns within them, to quench their thirst at the source of life that radiates within them and gives them the infinite power of Existence. And to enjoy this eternity, it's not necessary to prolong our existence indefinitely. On the contrary, it's in the here and now that this bliss is given to us, provided that we become aware of this life-giving power within us, and according to the depth that the practice of meditation will give to the intuitive knowledge of this infinite life of which we are a singular expression. For infinity is an intense, not an extensive, magnitude, and there is no limit to the intensity with which we can participate, through the exercise of attention, through the penetration of consciousness, in the divine activity that brings us into Existence and continually perseveres in this impulse. Indeed, as we have seen, it is the hallmark of intuitive knowledge to be able, through exercise, to expand the field of its investigation, the radius of its horizon of evidence. This knowledge, or consciousness, is accompanied by the highest pleasure, for it makes us experience inwardly the act of divine causation, which does not affect us passionately, through the effect of an external cause, but fills us inwardly, through the intuition of our own essence Only the creature enjoys the infinite power of Existence, because it receives it from the immanent God who gives it life, and not God himself, who gives existence by the necessity of his infinite power, and therefore cannot experience this power as a gift that fills him, because it is his own essence: "We conclude that a created thing may be said to enjoy existence, because existence is not its essence, but God cannot be said to enjoy existence, for God's existence is God himself; so also is his essence; from which it follows that created things enjoy duration, but God in no way enjoys it. " (Metaphysical Thoughts, II, 1; GF I, 359). This suggests that the status of the creature is perhaps more enviable than that of God, who eternally and of his own necessity produces, without being able to enjoy or even be aware of it, the generation of bodies in matter and the continuation of ideas in minds. Spinoza's God is not a personal God who addresses his creature by name-Abraham, Isaac, or Jacob; he is the eternal activity of universal necessity, always at work in gesine and creation, generation and production. There is no other wisdom than that which leads us to become aware of it and to enjoy, as far as it is in our power, this power which radiates us as long as our existence in the bosom of nature lasts. Spinoza's God begets and produces; he neither loves nor knows (or rather, he loves only himself, insofar as he is the cause of himself and thus affects himself by giving himself Existence). But it's very important for our beatitude that we know him - intuitively, not deductively, subjectively, not objectively, with an all-intellectual love that has its source in the depths of ourselves, and not in the imprint or image that clouds our reason with the shock of an alienating encounter. The "intellectual love of God," from which we draw the beatitude of feeling and experiencing ourselves as eternal, is not the love-passion of the imagination; it is an "intellectual" love born of the mind's intuitive knowledge of its own essence, as well as of the essence of the body of which it is the idea, a knowledge of the conatus that sustains all existence in the effort it expends to persevere in existing. Unlike Tristan and Isolde, who love each other passionately because of the fascinating, subjugating image that one has of the other, and thus condemn themselves to the loneliness of the fantasy that makes the dream of embrace illusory, God's intellectual love is the love of parents for their children, who rejoice to see them blossom for themselves, to see life assert itself in them and triumph over the obstacles that oppress it; Or the love of the gardener for the bud he sees bursting and the flower blossoming, rejoicing in the universal germination that animates nature, a benevolent and non-jealous love that recognizes the freedom of each individual to be himself and to become what he is. And it can still be the love of lovers (even if Spinoza is more than discreet on this point), when the tenderness of love, sharpened by the intimacy of the embrace, enables one and the other, through the attention of the intuitive intelligence, to come as close as possible to the mystery that beats in the other and in the one-each knowing the other through the source of life that also pours forth in the other-and, like Abraham and Sarah, to feel and experience themselves as eternal. Crazy love alienates us from the outside and seeks an impossible fusion with an other who will always refuse to be just another us. The intellectual love of God drinks from the fountain that wells up in the depths of ourselves, and enjoys the universal life that animates all things, albeit to varying degrees. The beatitude that arises in us from the intellectual love of the God who gives us life and the power of existence-whose density is infinite and whose richness and depth we can never exhaust-is a regeneration and deification of the creature, a true fusion or transfiguration of singular existence in the infinite activity of divine causation. Such a beatitude elevates the Sage, like the blessed in Paradise, to that state which theologians call "glory," the infinite enjoyment of the soul rapt in the contemplation of divinity (denied to Moses himself in this life) and of the body, redeemed from its humiliation by the first sin, restored to its original splendour as the image of God, re-established in eternity by the resurrection of the flesh, without which the soul alone would be as if mutilated from that other, the body, to which it is united by a divine bond: "By this we clearly understand in what our salvation, or beatitude, or freedom consists, namely, in a constant and eternal love to God, or the love of God to man. And it is this love, or beatitude, that is called gGlory in the sacred books, and not without reason. For, whether this love relates to God or to our intelligence, it may rightly be called the contentment of the spirit (acquiescentia animi), which in truth is indistinguishable from Glory. For in so far as this love refers to God, it is a joy (if it is still permissible to use this term) which is accompanied by the idea of oneself (concomitante idea sui), and in the same way in so far as this love refers to the intelligence. Moreover, since the essence of our intelligence consists in knowledge alone, of which God is the principle and foundation, this makes it clear to us how and in what way our intelligence follows from the divine nature, according to essence and according to existence, and depends continually on God" (Note from Ethics part V, prop. 36).
Thus, according to Spinoza, life has no end other than itself and the intuitive knowledge of the infinite power that brings it into Existence. It has no meaning or purpose, because it is its own meaning and purpose. Therefore, there is no need for any reward in the hereafter, since there is no gift or reward more wonderful than Existence itself, and the bliss it inspires in the mind that knows how to pay attention to its continuous activity. It's enough to live and to be aware of the infinity of this gift. And it is vain to hope for a salvation that would be given to us as the price of this gift, which is already in itself supreme and inestimable: "Beatitude is not the reward of virtue, but virtue itself" (prop. 42, last sentence of the Ethics). Paradoxically, this extraordinary work teaches us that we live in paradise and enjoy eternity. In fact, we only need this world to find the eternity and perfection that people have only been able to imagine in another world. For, as it says on the very first page of Book I of the Ethics: "By eternity I mean existence itself, in so far as it is conceived as necessarily following from the sole definition of an eternal thing" (I, def. 8), that is, in so far as it is known by its essence, the effect of the infinite power of divine causation; and it is affirmed in another way on the very first page of Book II: "By reality and by perfection I mean the same thing." This world is perfect. Everything is accomplished."
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the fullness of this world, 6-"We feel and experience that we are eternal", 2017)

Read the full article: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Spinoza/Introduction/Introd6.html

E1.4.D.3.1.g. FOR SPINOZA, WE RECOGNIZE THE TRUTH WHEN WE REALIZE WE WERE MISTAKEN IN THINKING WE HAD SEEN IT. Contact with reality comes through the third kind of knowledge. We move from the second to the third kind of knowledge through common notions (knowledge of relationships), which merge with (but are not the same as) the notion of God (or Nature). This is intuition. The idea of God (or Nature) is the foundation of all relationships. It has two sides: it is oriented towards common notions. Once we are in the idea of God (or Nature), a pivot takes place that helps us perceive that all essences are composed in the idea of God (or Nature). Hence the asymptotic acceleration of intuition. The third kind of knowledge refers to the world of light, as opposed to the world of equivocal signs and darkness.

E1.4.D.3.1.g_REF1_PH "PROPOSITION 30
Our mind, in so far as it knows itself and the body under the form of eternity, has to that extent necessarily a knowledge of [Nature], and knows that it is in [Nature], and is conceived through [Nature].

PROOF
Eternity is the very essence of [Nature], in so far as this involves necessary existence [...]. Therefore to conceive things under the form of eternity, is to conceive things in so far as they are conceived through thp essence of [Nature] as real entities, or in so far as they involve existence through the essence of [Nature] ; wherefore our mind, in so far as it conceives itself and the body under the form of eternity, has to that extent necessarily a knowledge of [Nature], and knows, &c. 

PROPOSITION 31
The third kind of knowledge depends on the mind, as its formal cause, in so far as the mind itself is eternal.

PROOF
The mind does not conceive anything under the form of eternity, except in so far as it conceives its own body under the form of eternity [...] ; that is, except in so far as it is eternal [...] ; therefore (by the last Prop.), in so far as it is eternal, it possesses the knowledge of [Nature], which knowledge is necessarily adequate [...]; hence the mind, in so far as it is eternal, is capable of knowing everything which can follow from this given knowledge of [Nature] [...], in other words, of knowing things by the third kind of knowledge [...], whereof accordingly the mind [...], in so far as it is eternal, is the adequate or formal cause of such knowledge. 

SCHOLIUM
In proportion, therefore, as a man is more potent in this kind of knowledge, he will be more completely conscious of himself and of [Nature] ; in other words, he will be more perfect and blessed, as will appear more clearly in the sequel. But we must here observe that, although we are already certain that the mind is eternal, in so far as it conceives things under the form of eternity, yet, in order that what we wish to show may be more readily explained and better understood, we will consider the mind itself, as though it had just begun to exist and to understand things under the form of eternity, as indeed we have done hitherto ; this we may do without any danger of error, so long as we are careful not to draw any conclusion, unless our premisses are plain."
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics V - we have substituted in the original text "God" for [Nature] as Spinoza invites us to do in the preface to Part 4 of the : "this eternal and infinite Being, which we call God or Nature, acts with the same necessity as it exists".)

E1.4.D.3.2. SPINOZA INVITES US TO ENTER INTO RESONANCE WITH NATURE THROUGH A DEVALUATION OF CONSCIOUSNESS, YET WITHOUT DISSOLVING OUR ESSENCE. Unlike ante-predictive Eastern philosophies, his path does not dissolve identity or the will.

E1.4.D.3.2.a. “IT'S NOT A QUESTION OF LOSING ONE'S INDIVIDUALITY THROUGH COMMUNION WITH THE SOUL OF THE GREATER WHOLE, but rather of affirming the power to act that gives the individual cohesion, coherence, and identity. All particular existence tends to affirm the unity that maintains it in Being and has no desire to dissolve into an undifferentiated immensity. [...] 
Without conatus, which is the power to persevere in existence, the individual, as part of nature, would immediately lose its identity, and the organization that gives it form would dissolve into the immensity of disorganized and soon undifferentiated matter. The conatus is therefore the immanent cause of the individual's identity. It exists in the body through its presence and in thought through the concatenation of adequate ideas, allowing the individual to assert and renew itself throughout its existence, according to the resistance it can oppose to contrary forces.”

E1.4.D.3.2.a_REF1_PH ROUSSEAU SEES THE DISSOLUTION OF THE SELF IN THE IMMENSITY OF NATURE AS A SUBLIME ECSTASY, WHILE SPINOZA INSISTS ON THE CONATUS, THE VITAL FORCE THAT DRIVES EACH INDIVIDUAL TO PERSEVERE IN HIS OWN BEING AND ASSERT HIS OWN EXISTENCE. 
"In communion with the soul of the world, the individual loses himself ecstatically in immensity. Here we recognize the feeling of the sublime, which Kant called the feeling of the absolutely great, the intuition of the infinite on which Schleiermacher based his new theology. But such an experience is inspired not by Spinoza's experience of eternity, but by Rousseau's reverie. The ecstasies of the solitary wanderer are born of the dissolution of the ego, which intoxicatingly loses itself in the Whole: "The more sensitive the soul of the contemplator, the more he surrenders to the ecstasies aroused in him by this agreement ["the harmony of the three kingdoms" of nature]. A sweet and profound reverie then seizes his senses, and he loses himself with a delicious intoxication in the immensity of this beautiful system with which he feels identified. Then all particular objects escape him; he sees and feels nothing but the whole [...] I never meditate, I never dream more deliciously than when I forget myself. I feel ecstasies, inexpressible raptures, when I melt, as it were, into the system of beings, when I identify myself with the whole of nature" (Seventh Promenade). Spinoza has no such thing. The conatus, the desire to assert one's own existence, is the essence of Being, that is, the divine power expressed in the vital force that animates each individual: "Every thing, so far as it is in itself, strives to persevere in its being" (Eth. III, 6). This is by no means a matter of losing individuality through communion with the soul of the Greater Whole, but rather of asserting the power to act that gives the individual its cohesion, coherence, and identity. All particular existence thus tends to assert the unity that sustains it in Being, and in no way wishes to dissolve into an undifferentiated immensity: "For what we have shown so far is quite general and applies equally to human beings and to other individuals, all of whom are animated, though in different degrees" (Note in Part II, proposition 13). Everything, including the stone, owes its cohesion to a divine force that maintains its unity and affirms its existence against the various pressures - which cause it to suffer a thousand passions - exerted on it by the things around it, in a full world where all bodies interact with one another. A stone is obviously unaware of this; only man can rise to the idea of the idea, which defines the principle and law of its cohesion, and understand its necessity. Man, like the stone, is only a part of nature, and every part is only a temporary aggregation of corpuscles that form a system for the duration assigned to this necessarily fragile organism, constantly attacked by external bodies and constantly regenerated by the renewal of its cells, the microformations that infinitely compose it, for the density of the Absolute is realized in matter as well as in thought. Without the conatus, the power to persevere in existence, the individual as a part of nature would immediately lose its identity, and the organization that gives it a body would immediately dissolve in the immensity of disorganized and soon undifferentiated matter. The conatus is therefore the immanent cause, in the expanse through the existence of the body, in the thought through the concatenation of adequate ideas, of the identity of the individual, destined to assert and renew itself throughout the duration of its existence, according to the resistance it is able to offer to the forces that oppose it."
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza et la plénitude de ce monde, 5- Une société de raison, 2017)

Read the full article: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Spinoza/Introduction/Introd5.html

E1.4.D.4. ONE MUST STRIVE TO BE TRUE TO ONE'S NATURE - IF ONE IS VILE - LET IT BE SO WITHOUT HYPOCRISY. I see an infinite number of honest people who are not happy, and an infinite number of people who are happy without being honest.
(Denis Diderot, Le neveu de Rameau, 1762 - 1773)

E1.4.D.4.1. “RAMEAU'S NEPHEW" DISCUSSES THE IDEA THAT IT IS MORE PRACTICAL AND BENEFICIAL TO EMBRACE ONE'S NATURAL VICES RATHER THAN STRIVING FOR VIRTUES THAT ARE DIFFICULT TO ACQUIRE AND MAINTAIN.
"Since I can build my happiness on vices that are natural to me, that I acquired without work, that I preserve without effort, that fit in with the morals of my nation; that are of the taste of those who protect me, and more analogous to their particular small needs than virtues that would embarrass them, by accusing them from morning to night; It would be very singular if I were to torment myself like a damned soul, to agonize and make myself other than I am; to give myself a character foreign to mine; very estimable qualities, I agree, not to argue; but which would cost me a lot to acquire, to practice, would lead me to nothing, perhaps to worse than nothing, because of the continual satire of the rich, from whom beggars like me are dependent for their life. Virtue is praised; but it is hated; but it is shunned; but it is freezing cold; and in this world, one must have warm feet. And then it would make me angry, infallibly; for why do we so often see devotees so dry, so annoying, so unsociable? It is because they have imposed on themselves a task which is not natural to them. They suffer, and when you suffer, you make others suffer. This is not my account, nor that of my protectors; I must be cheerful, flexible, pleasant, joking, funny. Virtue makes itself respected; and respect is inconvenient. Virtue is to be admired, and admiration is not amusing. I have to deal with bored people and I have to make them laugh. Now it is the ridiculous and the madness which make people laugh, it is thus necessary that I am ridiculous and mad; and when nature would not have made me such, the shortest would be to appear it. Fortunately, I don't need to be a hypocrite; there are already so many of all colors, not counting those who are hypocrites with themselves."
(Denis Diderot, Rameau's Nephew, 1805)

E1.4.D.4.2. SOME PEOPLE CAN LIVE SERENELY AFTER COMMITTING A CRIME, IN FULL AWARENESS OF THEIR ACTIONS.
Conversation finale entre Woody Allen et le Docteur dans le film de Woody Allen, Crimes and mesdeameanors, 1989.

Regarder sur YouTube: https://youtu.be/R5UP44x8nxw

E1.4.D.4.3. EXCESS HAS ITS VERTUE

"Proverbs of Hell

[...]  The road of excess leads to the palace of wisdom.

  Prudence is a rich, ugly old maid courted by Incapacity.

  He who desires but acts not, breeds pestilence.

[...]  No bird soars too high, if he soars with his own wings.

[...]  The roaring of lions, the howling of wolves, the raging of the stormy sea, and the destructive sword are portions of eternity too great for the eye of man.

[...]  You never know what is enough unless you know what is more than enough.

[...]   Exuberance is Beauty."
(William Blake, The marriage of heaven and hell, c. 1790)

E1.4.D.4.4. "DEBAUCHERY
Sexual intemperance. Always regrettable (because of the intemperance, not the sex), often regretted or envied. There would be nothing to reproach the debauched for,' said Epicurus, ‘if they were happy’ (Capital Maxims, X). But if they were, would they need debauchery?"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.4.D.4.5. WHEN ONE HAS NO ACCESS TO THE KIND OF BLISS EXPERIENCED IN DEEP STATES OF MEDITATIVE ABSORPTION, ONE REMAINS IN THRALL TO THE JOYS OF SENSUAL DESIRE.
‘“The Shorter Discourse on the Mass of Suffering recounts an exchange in Nigrodha’s Park outside Kapilavatthu. Mahanama greets the Buddha, sits to one side, and says:

I have long understood your dharma as saying: “Greed corrupts the mind, hatred corrupts the mind, delusion corrupts the mind.” Yet at times, greedy, hateful, and deluded states overwhelm my mind and stay there. And I wonder: what state (dhamma) is still at work within me such that these greedy, hateful, and deluded thoughts keep invading me and won’t go away?’

The Buddha explains how the “state” that lies at the root of Mahanama ’s spiritual anguish is his sensual desire (kama). It is not that Mahanama fails to understand that sensual desire provides little gratification and often leads to much suffering. On the contrary, he appears to understand this well. But because he has no access to the kind of bliss experienced in deep states of meditative absorption, he remains in thrall to the joys of sensual desire.

Kama is a very old concept in India. As far back as the Rig Veda (X.129) we find an account of creation that describes how “in the beginning there was sensual desire (kama),” out of which the cosmos and its creatures evolved. In Buddhist cosmology human beings are
said to inhabit the world of sensuality (kamaloka), which is ruled by Mara (the “devil”), known as Kamadeva—the god of sensuality. Kama is closely identified with passion and sexual lust, with the primary, instinctive urge to survive and reproduce. The passage from the Shorter Discourse on the Mass of Suffering presents it as more deeply rooted in our neurobiology than the greed, hatred, and confusion that periodically overwhelm us. Kama is what makes greed, hatred, and confusion stick, linger, and fester in our minds.”
(Stephen Batchelor, After Buddhism, rethinking the dharma for a secular age, 2016)

E1.4.D.5. TO "BECOME WHAT WE ARE" IN "GRAND STYLE", IS TO BECOME "GOOD NEIGHBORS OF THE CLOSEST THINGS", as Nietzsche put it. In order to tune in to this pure reallity, we must agree to be only what we are, in the present, which means always starting anew. When we "project" ourselves, we miss the very being that is given to us in moments of grace, when we taste the "pure feeling of existence".

E1.4.D.5.1. WHAT IS DIFFICULT IS TO BECOME WHAT WE ARE, IN THE MOMENT, IN THE INTENSITY OF THE PRESENT THAT WE ARE CURRENTLY LIVING, but from which we almost always turn away, out of inattention, resentment, or futility. "The subtitle of Ecce Homo (1888), 'How we become what we are: wie man wird, was man ist,' has a long history. There are many possible interpretations of this formula. It remains ambiguous in Nietzsche himself, although the Arcadian revelation of the summer of St. Moritz leads us to understand it as an imperative of the present: the hardest thing is not to remain faithful to what we have been, to our past oaths, nor to remain constant in our plans for the future; it is more simply, but perhaps more difficult, to become what we are in this moment, in the intensity of the present that we are living now, but from which we almost always turn away, through inattention, resentment, or futility. "
(Jacques Darriulat, "Become What You Are," 2007-2008)

E1.4.D.5.1.a. THE DIFFICULT PATH OF THOUGHT TO ITS OWN TRUTH
"When Nietzsche, for his part, adopts this formula, he becomes part of a long tradition. In fact, he does more than take up the formula; he chooses it as the subtitle of one of his works: Ecce Homo (1888) is actually subtitled How one becomes what one is.: 'wie man wird, was man ist.' Perhaps we should understand: the task of autobiography - Ecce Homo is the essay of a 'Nietzsche by himself' - is not to accumulate insignificant anecdotes, but to show what is necessary and true in the course of an existence, namely the progressive manifestation of the originality of the individual, his own being, irreducible to any other. In this essay, Nietzsche reflects on what he became by overcoming the alienation that held him captive to those he was not, namely Schopenhauer and Wagner. [...]
Isn't this difficult journey of thought toward its own truth, and of the self toward itself, precisely what the maxim of authenticity (let's call it the imperative that commands us to become what we are) says? It should come as no surprise, then, that Nietzsche's own interpretation of the meaning of this maxim is vague and indecisive. The author leaves the task of interpretation to the reader, so that the reader can find himself after losing himself in the reading of another. Of the various meanings Nietzsche seems to give to the imperative of authenticity, it will be up to us to decide which is the most profoundly Nietzschean.
In Nietzsche's texts, the imperative of authenticity seems to have three main meanings, depending on whether the interpretation is naturalistic or moral (in both cases, the emphasis is on becoming) or aesthetic (the emphasis is on the eternal)."
(Jacques Darriulat, "Become What You Are," 2007-2008)

E1.4.D.5.1.a.i. "THE WILL EXPRESSES ALL THE POWER THAT IS IN IT ONLY ON THE CONDITION OF BEING INNOCENT, SPONTANEOUS WILL, and not the will of the will (this formalism denotes the torture of autonomy or 'purity' of the will in Kantian morality). With this 'immoralist' inversion, Nietzsche makes idleness and leisure, not work, the condition for the accomplishment of a task that is truly 'mine'. Here we return to Nietzsche's critique of conscience and the illusion of the 'goals' we set for ourselves."
(Jacques Darriulat, "Become What You Are," 2007-2008)

E1.4.D.5.1.a.i_REF1_PH NIETZSCHE'S NATURALISTIC INTERPRETATION OF AUTHENTICITY SUGGESTS THAT NATURAL GROWTH REACHES ITS FULLNESS IF LEFT UNHINDERED. He criticizes traditional morality, which holds that the will must be directed toward a goal. Nietzsche values innocence, spontaneity and leisure as conditions for personal fulfillment.
“I- The naturalistic interpretation of 'Become What You Are'
The maxim of authenticity can first be interpreted as a law of natural development: if the growth of an animal, or equally of a plant, is not thwarted by an insurmountable obstacle, it will inevitably reach the fullness of its accomplished form, what the Greeks called its 'essence'. [...]
Human, all too human (1878), § 263: 'Talent. In such a highly developed humanity as the present one, each man by nature has access to many talents. Each has inborn talent, but only a few have inherited and cultivated such a degree of toughness, endurance, and energy that they really become a talent, become what they are - that is, release it in works and actions.' [...]
'Beware of every big word, every big attitude! Nothing but dangers that instinct “understands itself” too early —  Meanwhile the organizing “idea” that is called to rule grows and grows in depth — it begins to command, it slowly leads back from byways and wrong paths, it prepares individuals Qualities and abilities that will one day prove to be indispensable as a means to the whole' (Ecce Homo, 9, 1908). 
This inversion contains the essence of Nietzsche's critique of morality: the will really wants only on condition that it makes itself available to encounter and grace; on the contrary, it blinds itself by submitting to a goal. In other words, the will expresses all the power that is in it only on condition that it is an innocent, spontaneous will and not the will of the will (this formalism denotes the torture of autonomy or 'purity' of the will in Kantian morality). With this 'immoralist' reversal, Nietzsche makes idleness and leisure, not work, the condition for the accomplishment of a task that is truly 'mine'. Here we return to Nietzsche's critique of conscience and the illusion of the 'goals' we set for ourselves, developed in §3 and §8 of the 'Four Great Errors' chapter of Twilight of the Idols. To become what we are, then, is to practice the art of 'self-preservation,' 'the art of egoism' (EH, §9), which paradoxically consists in refusing to be enclosed by an exclusive project and in making ourselves available to the invitation of encounter ('amor fati')."
(Jacques Darriulat, "Become What You Are," 2007-2008)

Read the full essay: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Nietzsche/Imperatifpresent/Imperatifpresent1.html

E1.4.D.5.1.a.ii. “A WILL THAT WANTS TO WILL IS A WILL THAT CONSTRAINS ITSELF, THAT SUBJECTS ITSELF TO THE TORTURE OF DUTY. If the will [...] wants its autonomy, it can only want it, according to Nietzsche, by paradoxically renouncing wanting, and abandoning itself to its 'destiny'.”
(Jacques Darriulat, “Become What You Are”, 2007-2008)

E1.4.D.5.1.a.ii_REF1_PH THE MORAL INTERPRETATION OF AUTHENTICITY, INFLUENCED BY KANT, SUGGESTS THAT THE WILL MUST FORGE ITS OWN AUTONOMY AND FREEDOM. Nietzsche, though critical of Kant, shares this vision, but insists on surrender to one's destiny rather than the compulsion of the will. Kantian morality is seen as a necessary suffering for autonomy, while Nietzsche advocates an ethic of creation and self-transcendence, opposed to narcissism and immediate gratification.
“II- The moral interpretation of 'Become What You Are'
But the maxim of authenticity can also be interpreted in a moral sense: it is an imperative addressed to the will to find within itself the energy to forge, against all odds, its own autonomy, to declare its freedom. We are close here to Kantian morality, which marks the fundamental moment in the history of thought when reason recognizes itself for the first time in the pure will (a pure will is always, according to Kant, a good will, and the moral law is the law of the good will), when the spirit knows itself to be the will to power. This interpretation, suggested by a few texts or fragments, seems contradictory to the immoralist or amoralist orientation of Nietzsche's meditation. Yet Nietzsche is, to a certain extent, following in the footsteps of Kant's revolution: morality can only achieve its full potential (or, in Nietzsche's view, go beyond it) if it is a metaphysics of freedom: Duty is no longer an imperative that subjects the will to a value superior to it (the 'sovereign good'), but the imperative addressed to the will to become fully itself, to free itself from all alienation and achieve its autonomy, which is the form of its purity. In this sense, the Kantian imperative commands nothing of the will, except that it must will absolutely, that it must will itself, according to the law of the 'higher faculty of desire'. On the contrary, it is the imperative of the most intense desire, which is the desire for freedom, by which humanity, which is holy, is instituted in man, who is always profane. Nietzsche is fully committed to the legacy of this founding reversal. He criticizes Kant, however, because he suspects that he has not taken his own thinking to its logical conclusion: if the will wants to be autonomous, it can only do so, according to Nietzsche, by paradoxically renouncing its will, and abandoning itself to its 'destiny'. A will that wants to will is a will that constrains itself, that submits itself to the torture of duty. [...]
Life does not want the identity-based, and therefore suicidal, autonomy of reason (the rational is only what conforms to our categories), but rather the expression of the irrational and the unconscious, at the price of the suffering of metamorphosis. Kantian morality thus appears as a 'histrionics' of the will, which takes on duties like so many burdens (like the camel in the first metamorphosis of the spirit, the camel that heads straight for the desert of nihilism), grimaces under the effort and takes on the advantageous posture of the hero who suffers, and puts on a brave face in the midst of torment. The Kantian imperative can only conceive of autonomy in the form of suffering, through resistance to torture. Kantian morality exalts life only by humiliating it. [...]
It is with this problematic in mind, which situates Nietzsche in the heritage of, as well as in opposition to, Kantian morality, that we must examine the texts that seem to give the maxim of authenticity a moral meaning. [...]
Nietzschean ethics, if there is such a thing as ethics, is in truth a poetics, or rather a 'poietics', i.e. an ontology of creation. Its depravity can be seen in contemporary 'individualism', with its cult of the immediate and the spontaneous, or at least what is presented as such: 'become what you are' translates into 'let's enjoy ourselves without hindrance', perfectly in line with the advertising standards that govern herd communication. To be an 'individual', all you have to do is free yourself from censorship and satisfy all your desires. However, Nietzsche's conquest of individuality was by no means achieved through enjoyment - which reconciles the living with itself and puts it to sleep in satisfaction - but, on the contrary, through the fruitful suffering of creation: it's a question of going beyond oneself, according to the tragic ethic of risk that increases the intensity of life, and not of wallowing in oneself, in the happy appeasement of satisfaction. The high demands of creation disintegrate into the narcissism of a desire that is always self-indulgent, and concerned with its own exclusive contentment.”
(Jacques Darriulat, “Become What You Are”, 2007-2008)

Read the full essay: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Nietzsche/Imperatifpresent/Imperatifpresent1.html

E1.4.D.5.1.a.iii. “THE IMPERATIVE OF THE PRESENT DOES NOT COMMAND US TO BECOME WHAT WE ARE NOT YET, BUT MORE SUBTITLY TO CONSENT FINALLY TO BECOME WHAT WE ARE, in this place, in this moment, in the fullness of a here and now that the emphasis of the project, which carries us into a time that is not our own, always makes us miss. [...] To listen to this pure given, we must renounce the project and agree to be only what we are, in the miraculous da capo of a present that always begins anew. In the 'project', we miss the very being that is given to us in moments of grace, when we taste the 'pure feeling of being' (Rousseau), finally freed from the emphasis of becoming and the pathos of authenticity.”
(Jacques Darriulat, “Become What You Are”, 2007-2008)

E1.4.D.5.1.a.iii_REF1_PH JACQUES DARRIULAT EXPLORES THE NIETZSCHEAN MAXIM “BECOME WHAT YOU ARE”, HIGHLIGHTING A THIRD AESTHETIC INTERPRETATION, DISTINCT FROM THE NATURALISTIC AND MORAL ONES. This approach values the intensity of the present and the 'pure feeling of being', renouncing projects and aspirations that distract us from our true essence.
“III- The aesthetic interpretation of 'Become What You Are'
Neither the naturalistic nor the moral interpretation exhausts the polysemy of Nietzsche's maxim. Apart from the fact that it would be paradoxical to naturalize the will to power (nature is a process, not the act of a will), and even more paradoxical to moralize the thought of someone who claims to be 'beyond good and evil', it is easy to find texts in the thinker's work that clearly do not relate to these two interpretations, however complex or subtle the analysis. In Nietzsche's work, then, there is a third dimension to the maxim of authenticity, which involves neither nature nor morality, and which is undoubtedly closer to what is irreducibly original in Nietzsche's thought. The maxim must then be understood as an imperative of the present, with the present tense of the verb to be (du bist) the focus of our attention. There is in fact a contradiction between the hope of becoming, open to a possible future, and the fact of the present, which remains the actuality of the given. Strictly speaking, we never become what we are, but what we must be, that is, what we may be, but are not yet. The whole paradox of the formula lies in this contradiction: how can we become what we already are? We need to understand that the present is what we miss the most, what we miss the most, turning us away from its present intensity, from the earth as it gives itself to us in the fullness of the here and now, to carry us towards elsewhere where we believe we can find our true home. To become who we are, then, would be to free ourselves from the resentment of the past as well as the lyricism of the future, to affirm only the present, to become attentive to the gift of the present alone, to the present of the present, to yield to the instance of the instant. [...]
The imperative of the present does not command us to become what we are not yet, but more subtly to consent at last to become what we are, in this place, in this instant, in the fullness of a here-and-now that the emphasis of the project, which carries us into a time that is not our own, invariably causes us to miss. The alleged openness of 'understanding' is perhaps no more than a lack of understanding and a blindness to what is nevertheless staring us in the face: the instance of a present, or the present of an instant, which is perpetually given to us in the inexhaustible enigma of its appearance. To listen to this pure given, we must renounce the project and agree to be only what we are, in the miraculous da capo of a present that always begins anew. In the 'project', we miss the very being that is given to us in moments of grace, when we taste the 'pure feeling of being' (Rousseau), finally freed from the emphasis of becoming and the pathos of authenticity. [...]”
(Jacques Darriulat, “Become What You Are”, 2007-2008)

Read the full essay: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Nietzsche/Imperatifpresent/Imperatifpresent1.html

E1.4.D.5.1.a.iii_REF2_PH "STILL, IT IS NECESSARY TO DEFINE THE ORIENTATION OF THE GLANCE THAT OPENS TO THE EPIPHANY OF THE PRESENT. 
Since we often turn away from the present, what perspective must the will aim at to reach this target? The present appears only to the artist's will, which makes it appear by creating new values (aesthetic, not moral), diversifying the nuances of appearance, inventing new perfumes, colors, and sounds, and making them answer each other "in a tenebrous and deep unity" (Baudelaire). The creative will reenchants the world and reveals its current plenitude, intensifying its presence.
The artistic evaluation is thus this superior lucidity that makes the present present, sharpens our glance and listening, and increases the intensity of phenomenal presentation.

Thus, the dancer takes support on the ground only to allow the impulse of a new leap, or the walker makes his step sound only to carry himself towards the next step. By continually renewing our touch of sensitive apprehensions and calibrating the rhythm of touch rather than the ecstasy of vision, all life moves towards the world and gradually perceives the inexhaustible richness of appearance."
(Jacques Darriulat, “Become What You Are”, 2007-2008)

Lottie Kingslate, So I danced again, 2022 - 4 min animation_still from video
Watch the animation on Vimeo: https://vimeo.com/353320315

E1.4.D.5.1.a.iii_REF2.1_PH JACQUES DARRIULAT EXPLORES THE NOTION OF THE EPIPHANY OF THE PRESENT FROM A NIETZSCHEAN PERSPECTIVE, CONTRASTING NIETZSCHE'S CREATIVE, ACTIVE VISION WITH SCHOPENHAUER'S PASSIVE CONTEMPLATION. He argues that sensibility is value-creating and that aesthetic experience must be an active elaboration of the will, reconciling art and life by magnifying the presence of the present.
"We have yet to define the orientation of the gaze that opens up to the revelation of the present: since we most often turn away from the present, what perspective must the will seek to reach this goal? The present appears only to the artistic will that makes it appear: by creating new values (aesthetic, not moral), by diversifying the spectrum of appearances, by giving birth to new scents, colours and sounds, by making them respond to each other "in a tenebrous and profound unity" (Baudelaire), the creative will re-enchants the world, reveals its present fullness, intensifies its presence. [...] Artistic judgement is therefore the superior lucidity that makes the present present, sharpening our gaze, our hearing, and thus increasing the intensity of the phenomenal manifestation. [...] 
So it is with the dancer who leans on the ground only to give himself the impetus for a new leap, or the walker who makes his step sound only to carry himself to the next step. It is in this way, through the ever renewed touch of sensitive apprehension, through the rhythm of touch rather than the ecstasy of vision, that all life moves towards the world and gradually perceives the inexhaustible richness of appearance. In this sense, life is forged 'with a hammer', that is, it produces within itself the miracle of metamorphosis through the 'tragic' transgression of its own limits. [...] This is how life is forged, through the shock of the aesthetic encounter that carries it beyond itself, through this opening to the external, which is inseparable from suffering and joy, and which, in Nietzsche's language, is called 'Dionysus'. [...] 
Sensibility, then, is not 'receptive', as Kant claimed, it is value-creating, and the senses reach out to the world not only to receive the 'matter of sensation', the 'variety of phenomena', but to actively, i.e. artistically, perceive the treasure of appearances, just as the perceiver perceives the tax on the riches of this world. All life, however humble, is artistic in the sense that it brings itself to the forefront of phenomenal presentation through sensation. The sensitive spectator is also an actor by virtue of his sensitivity, even if he is unaware of the interpretation that makes him live and desire. All reception is creation. For Nietzsche, the beatitude of aesthetic 'contemplation' is also the beatitude of creation; it mobilises the will, but in no way 'disinterests' it, and it is through this 'great yes to life', through the movement of reaching out to the earth, that the supernatural eternity of the present consents to appear. Unlike Schopenhauer, who made the renunciation of the will a necessary condition for aesthetic contemplation, propaedeutic to the ascetic ideal, Nietzsche subordinates the intensity of aesthetic experience to the creative activity of the will, which transforms the world by multiplying its splendour. [...]
According to Schopenhauer, the nihilism of contemplation opens the way to eternity only to those who free themselves from the torment of becoming, who tear themselves away from the wheel of Ixion and renounce will. Nietzsche, on the other hand, seeks eternity not outside of time, but within time itself, in the interval of duration, in the awareness of the present as well as in the present of awareness. To do this, he must overturn Schopenhauer's nihilism, turn negation into affirmation, and the passivity of renunciation into the activity of creation. Then it becomes clear that the aesthetic transfiguration of the earth is the fruit of the interpretation of the artist, who is seduced by the dance of phenomena, by the play of appearances, who wants to intensify their values, and not by the extinction of the will, which reduces the subject of contemplation ('the pure knowing subject') to being only 'the clear mirror of the world' ('one forgets oneself, one's will, and subsists only as a pure subject, as the clear mirror of the object, in such a way that everything happens as if the object existed alone, without anyone perceiving it...' (The World, Book III, p. 231). For the beatitude of eternity not to weigh heavily on the heart that experiences it, it must not be experienced as a passive revelation, but rather as the fruit of an active elaboration, the artistic achievement of an evaluative and creative will. Only then are art and life reconciled (whereas, according to Schopenhauer, beauty is only discovered in the eyes of those who pretend to be dead), and eternity shines forth in the heart of becoming, magnifying the presence of the present and making us finally become what we are. The melancholy of exile, which demands that we renounce beauty in order to return to life, to want and desire, is no longer relevant: it's up to us to bring back, through the work of art, the fullness of the present, the eternity of the moment".
(Jacques Darriulat, “Become What You Are”, 2007-2008)

Read the complete essay: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Nietzsche/Imperatifpresent/Imperatifpresent1.html

E1.4.D.5.1.a.iii_REF3_PH THE ARTIST, AS A METAPHYSICIAN, ELEVATES THE WORLD TO ETERNAL GLORY THROUGH STYLE, WHICH SHAPES AND RECREATES REALITY. Nietzsche's concept of "great style" involves mastering chaos and giving form to fleeting moments, enriching our perception and making us see the world with greater clarity and nuance. 
"Art is the revealer of eternity, and the artist makes us interested in life (the phenomenon recreated by art functions as a lure for desire, and the "veil of Maya" is the adornment of a seductress) through the invention of new values, which transfigure life in our eyes. 
This thesis, of the transfiguration of the world by art, of its re-creation through the invention of new "values", turns the classical maxim on its head: it is not art that imitates nature, it is conversely nature that imitates art. [...] Without art, we would miss the beauty of this world, and life would perish with boredom. In this way, the artist is the true meta-physician, since it is his task to raise the stage of this world to the glory of eternity, to reunite heaven and earth, to rediscover the earthly paradise.
This is the foundation of a theory of style, and even of what Nietzsche calls "the great style", which is that higher activity of the will to power, which brings form out of chaos, which brings value out of the undifferentiated. Art shapes and recreates the world. Style understood in this way is not the expression of subjectivity, the projection of psychology: on the contrary, it is objective rather than subjective, sculpting the shape of the world, making phenomena appear in the scintillation of their presence, in the eternity of the present. The " great style " affirms the value of the fleeting and the contingent transfigured into the eternal (Baudelaire), the rare brilliance of form, and "against the value of that which remains eternally identical (the naiveté of Spinoza, Descartes too), the value of that which is most brief, most perishable, the seductive glitter of gold on the belly of the serpent vita" (posthumous fragment, autumn 1887, OC: XIII, p. 26). In another posthumous fragment, from spring 1888: 14 [61] (OC, XIV, p. 48), entitled "Music and the Great Style", Nietzsche wrote: "The greatness of an artist is not measured by the beautiful feelings he arouses; that is what good women believe [alluding to Wagnerian women, always hysterical according to Nietzsche]. But to the extent that it approaches great style, to the extent that it is capable of great style [...] To master the chaos that one is: to force one's chaos to become form; to become necessity in form: to become logical, simple, unequivocal, mathematical; to become law - that is the great ambition." Great style gives form to the world, and the artist brings the phenomenon to a kind of incandescence that reveals the fullness of the present. Through this formalism, this cult of form that turned him away from Wagner and towards Bizet's Carmen, Nietzsche considerably apollinated the Dionysus of The Birth of Tragedy, and drew closer to certain aesthetic currents of his time, which he was nevertheless unaware of. [...] Art thus plays an active part in the progress of visibility: it discovers new possibilities for us, enriching our vision by bringing to light nuances, contrasts and iridescence that we had previously failed to see. It makes us see. Without the aesthetic stimuli with which painting has enriched our visual field, we might still see the world in black and white: "The rest of us are stuck in the perceptions that our eyes offer us, and our power of visual representation soon reaches its limit, an impenetrable darkness paralyzes us. The artist, on the other hand, finds within himself the means to express and grasp with increasing precision those vague, indeterminate processes by which we perceive a visible world as a whole" (Fiedler, On the Origin of Artistic Activity, ed. Kohn, p. 87). There's nothing unconscious about this work on the visible. On the contrary, according to Fiedler, the artist is in a sense hyperconscious: he elevates sensation to the awareness of his own activity, he perceives actively and no longer passively: "If, for others, the artist seems to carry out his activity in a kind of dream, for him, this activity is a real awakening" (ibid. p. 90). We perceive the visible in a kind of twilight state; the artist calls us to a higher lucidity."
(Jacques Darriulat, “Become What You Are”, 2007-2008)

Read the complete essay: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Nietzsche/Imperatifpresent/Imperatifpresent1.html

E1.4.D.5.1.a.iii_REF4_PH "LIFE IMITATES ART MUCH MORE THAN ART IMITATES LIFE".
"Fiedler's contemporaries, like him, sensed the revelatory power of art in the realm of the sensible: the artist teaches us to see differently, better; he draws new nuances and values from the depths of the visible. Oscar Wilde's famous paradox in Intentions (1891; it is a collection of essays in which Wilde expresses his theory of art), 'The Decline of Lies' (this article first appeared in a magazine in January 1889) is well known: 'Life imitates art much more than art imitates life' (Pléiade 805). Art, according to Wilde, is a self-sufficient game, a pure fiction that justifies the praise of lies, the only thing capable of enchanting a nature that is itself dull, monotonous and inhuman. Wilde deplores the passion for reality that drives contemporary art, the platitude and prosaism that Maupassant and Zola advocate (Pléiade, 799-800). According to Wilde, realism is merely the expression in art of the numbness of industrial civilisation, the stupidity of a world in the throes of Americanisation, prey to 'America's crass commercialism, its materialistic spirit, its lack of interest in the poetic aspect of things and its lack of imagination and inaccessible noble ideals' (Pléiade, 788). Wilde asks art, that wonderful lie, not to represent reality but to re-enchant the world and thus create the only reality we value: 'Where do we get these wonderful bistre mists that creep through our streets, blur the lampposts, and give the houses the appearance of fantastic shadows, if not from the Impressionists? To whom do we owe, if not to them and their master, those delightful silvery mists that linger on our rivers, giving the curve of a bridge, the bobbing of a barge, delicate shapes that fade away gracefully? It is only to a certain school of art that we owe the extraordinary change of climate that we have experienced in London in the last ten years [...] For what is Nature? Nature is not some great mother who bore us in her womb. Nature is our creation. Nature is born in our brains. Things only exist because we see them. And what we see, how we see it, depends on the arts that have shaped us. There's a big difference between looking and seeing. We don't see an object until we see its beauty. Only then does it really exist. Today we see fog not because there is fog, but because painters and poets have introduced us to the mysterious charms of such effects. It's likely that London has had fog for centuries. I'd go so far as to say it probably has. But nobody saw it, so we knew nothing about it. It didn't exist until art invented it [...]. This quivering of white sunlight with strange mauve splashes and unstable violet shadows that we are now seeing in France is its latest trick, and all in all Nature imitates it admirably. Where she once gave us Corots and Daubignys, she now gives us delicious Monets and enchanting Pissaros' (Pléiade, 796-797). And this reversal applies not only to the landscape of the world, but also to the face of our fellow man, and even more to the face that fixes our desire; we only love the women the artist makes us love: 'Life imitates art much more than art imitates life. We have all seen in contemporary England that a certain strange and fascinating type of beauty, invented and enhanced by two painters who gave free rein to their imagination [they are Dante Gabriel Rossetti and Edward Burne-Jones], has exerted such an influence on life that there is not a private exhibition, not an art salon, where one does not see the mystical gaze of Rossetti's reveries, the long ivory throat, the curious square jaw, the dark unkempt hair which he loved so much, or the virginal sweetness of the Escalier d'or, the flowery mouth and lovely weariness of Laus amoris, the face pale with terror of Andromède, the long hands and unbound beauty of Viviane of Merlin's Dream' (Pléiade, 791). [...]
Proust, Time regqined (Pléiade, III, 895-896): 'Style for the writer, like colour for the painter, is not a question of technique but of vision. It is the revelation, which would be impossible by direct, conscious means, of the qualitative difference in the way the world appears to us, a difference which, without art, would remain everyone's eternal secret. It is only through art that we can go outside ourselves to know what another sees of this universe, which is not the same as ours, and whose landscapes would have remained as unknown to us as those that might exist on the moon. Thanks to art, instead of seeing a single world, ours, we see it multiplied, and as many original artists as there are, we have as many worlds at our disposal, each one more different from the others than those that roll in infinity, and which, many centuries after the fire from which they were born has been extinguished, whether it was called Rembrandt or Vermeer, send us their special ray'".
(Jacques Darriulat, “Become What You Are”, 2007-2008)

Read the complete essay: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Nietzsche/Imperatifpresent/Imperatifpresent1.html

E1.4.D.5.1.a.iii_REF5_PH “LET'S RETURN NOW TO NIETZSCHE, TO THE PRESENT IMPERATIVE, and consider the related fragments, which can be interpreted in neither a moral nor a naturalistic sense, and which point the way to the aesthetic - we might also say phenomenological - reading we've just outlined.”
(Jacques Darriulat, “Become What You Are”, 2007-2008)

E1.4.D.5.1.a.iii_REF5.1_PH METAPHYSICAL ART "1878. Mixed opinions and sentences, Aph. 371 (Human, all to human, II,): 'What we ask of art is this: one wants to enjoy being what he is through art, the other wants, thanks to art, to go beyond the limits of his being for a moment, to distance himself from it. In relation to these two needs, there is a double species of art and artist'. Here Nietzsche contrasts purely aesthetic art, which affirms the present ('to enjoy being what it is') by 'valuing' the representation of the phenomenon (e.g., in Nietzsche's time, the Impressionists), with escapist, i.e., metaphysical art, which transports us to an imaginary elsewhere (the Symbolists and, no doubt, Wagner). The first Nietzsche, in The Birth of Tragedy, belonged to the second category; the last Nietzsche (from Gaya Scienza onwards), that is, the Nietzsche who has finally become what he is, belongs to the first. This text, written in 1879, marks precisely the transition from one to the other of these two periods".
(Jacques Darriulat, “Become What You Are”, 2007-2008)

Read the complete essay: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Nietzsche/Imperatifpresent/Imperatifpresent1.html

E1.4.D.5.1.a.iii_REF5.2_PH IT IS THE HERE AND NOW THAT AESTHETIC EVALUATION AFFIRMS AND MAGNIFIES. "1879. Posthumous fragments, July 1879 (Humain, all too humain, II): 'Conclusion: let us become what we are not yet: good neighbors of the nearest things.' Reversing the formula: what we are not yet is precisely what we are, if we push back the offer of the present to carry us to imaginary distant places. The word "conclusion" is paradoxical for an isolated fragment that neither precedes nor follows anything. "Conclusion" undoubtedly refers to the aesthetic revolution taking place in Nietzsche's thought at the end of the seventies: a break with the metaphysics of Schopenhauer and the metaphysical art of Wagner, both of which eschew the reality of the present in favor of a Beyond where all suffering would be appeased. Nietzsche begins to suspect that this "back world", of which he himself had been the theorist in his first work, is nothing more than a myth, designed above all to devalue the present of this world ("the nearest things"), and that, conversely, it is the "here and now" that aesthetic evaluation affirms and magnifies".
(Jacques Darriulat, “Become What You Are”, 2007-2008)

Read the complete essay: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Nietzsche/Imperatifpresent/Imperatifpresent1.html

E1.4.D.5.2. NIETZSCHE CRITICIZES THE IDEA OF LIMITING OURSELVES TO A SINGLE, STABLE ESSENCE, POINTING OUT THAT WE ARE A MULTIPLICITY OF IMPULSES AND THAT OUR EXISTENCE IS SHAPED BY THE ACCIDENTS OF LIFE. The organizing idea of our life, according to Nietzsche, grows in depth and gradually leads us to our true potential.
"The phrase 'become what you are' sounds like a slogan, as pithy as it is mysterious and seductive, conjuring up two seemingly incompatible notions: being and becoming.
Isn't becoming first and foremost a matter of knowing yourself? And no quest is more difficult than that of knowing what we are not yet. This formula confronts us with the problem of personal identity and immediately assumes a certain duality of the self: an apparent self and a deep, authentic self...
A philosophy of becoming vs. a philosophy of being - what is Nietzsche's position?

Nietzsche is probably one of the philosophers who most criticized self-knowledge, and today we read this formula as a recipe for personal development!

But for Nietzsche, to set a goal - to try to achieve a supposedly unique and stable essence - is to limit oneself excessively, to exclude from one's field of vision other possibilities, other tasks for achieving greater fulfillment. The two presuppositions of the formula 'must succeed' and 'that one can be someone' are at odds with Nietzsche's thinking. We 'are' a multiplicity of impulses - we are not a single substance.
It is the accidents of existence, to which we are largely subjected without understanding them - or at least without choosing them - that construct our existence.
In the third of his Untimely Meditations, 1873, Nietzsche invites us to turn to an "I" that is not within us, but above us. Laziness leads us to adopt the desires and values of the masses because 'it gives us the indifferent allure of mass-produced goods unworthy of trade and teaching' - by having the courage to rediscover the desire we once had for the world - as examples of the multiplicity of possibilities - we can grow the sphere of the self. It's the prism of love that must guide us. Whatever happens, I am always becoming, and in this becoming I must become more.
When Nietzsche speaks of singularity, he doesn't mean an essence, but rather the result of an experiment of impulses that only we can carry out. I am not a singular entity, but the seat of a construction, a free crystallization. I'm not even aware of the multiplicities I could bring into play. Nietzsche says 'I' because language offers no other possibility.
Our educators must be our liberators - they must teach us not to adhere to what is inculcated in the masses.
‘there would be no greater danger than facing oneself with this task [of self-construction]. Becoming what you are presupposes that you have absolutely no idea what you are. From this point of view, even life's mistakes have squandered their own meaning and value, the temporary byways and wrong turns, the delays, the "modesty", the seriousness, on tasks that lie beyond the task. Great wisdom, even supreme wisdom, can be expressed in it […] forgetting oneself, misunderstanding oneself, diminishing, narrowing, and mediating oneself becomes reason itself. Expressed morally: charity, life for others and other things can be the protective measure for maintaining the hardest self-reliance. This is the exceptional case in which, against my rule and conviction, I take the side of the "selfless" instincts: they work here in the service of selfishness, self-discipline. — One must keep the whole surface of consciousness — consciousness is a surface — clean of any of the great imperatives. Beware of every big word, every big attitude! Nothing but dangers that instinct “understands itself” too early — — Meanwhile the organizing “idea” that is called to rule grows and grows in depth — it begins to command, it slowly leads back from byways and wrong paths, it prepares individuals Qualities and abilities that will one day prove to be indispensable as a means to the whole - she develops all serving faculties one after the other before she lets anything of the dominant task, of "aim", "purpose", "meaning" be heard. — Looked at from this side, my life is simply wonderful’ (Ecce Homo, Aphorism 9, 1888).
Note how Nietzsche refers to the “I” as “the organizing idea”.
(Céline Denat on Les Chemins de la Philosophie, France Culture, 09/12/2024)

Listen to the podcast: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/deviens-ce-que-tu-es-7689651

E1.4.D.5.2.a. “I AM NO LONGER AFRAID OF BECOMING LOST, BECAUSE THE JOURNEY BACK ALWAYS REVEALS SOMETHING NEW, and that is ultimately good for the artist.” 
(Billy Joel cited by arthunter.me)

"The gravest danger would be to perceive oneself, at the same time as the task [of construction of oneself]. To become what you are supposes that you do not represent to yourself in the least the image of what you are. From this point of view, even the blunders of life have their meaning and their value, and for a time the roundabout paths, the dead ends, the hesitations, the modesties, the seriousness wasted on tasks which seem to lie beyond the task - in this can be expressed a great sagacity, [...] which is forgetting oneself, [...] and which becomes a reason in itself. Meanwhile, the organizing idea, that which is bound to dominate, only grows in depth. It begins to command; it slowly brings you back from the roundabout paths, dead ends where you had lost your way, it prepares the birth of isolated qualities and aptitudes which, later on, will prove to be indispensable as means to reach the whole. It forms one after the other the auxiliary faculties before revealing anything about the dominant task, itse goal, its end, its meaning. Seen in this light, my life is simply miraculous." 
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Ecce Homo, 1908)

E1.4.D.5.2.b. « IT'S TO DISCOVER WHERE I'M GOING THAT I'M WALKING ». (Johann Wolfgang von Goethe)
"It is not enough to remain open while following one's path; rather one should  discover that the meaning of what one does is revealed only by committing oneself to it. If I choose to do such and such a job, it is step by step, experiencing that reality, that I will discover what I can derive from it. If I decide to write a book, it is by devoting myself to it that I will understand the meaning of this work.
When we are fixed on a goal, work becomes tedious. We just want it to be over, to finally arrive at our destination. Too bad ! We miss everything we could have learned on the way.
The interest of travel is precisely the journey itself. This is why Rabbi Naham said, « Never ask directions on your way to someone who knows, for you might not go astray. »"
(Fabrice Midal)

E1.4.D.5.2.c. MISTAKES AND PAINFUL EXPERIENCES IN OUR YOUTH ULTIMATELY GIVE LIFE MEANING AND OFTEN LEAD TO A HAPPY LIFE IN LATER YEARS "I'm sixteen and have just recently gotten really into your work. I was wondering: what advice would you give to your sixteen year old self and why?
TAYA, LOWER SACKVILLE, CANADA

Dear Taya,
This is an excellent question and I am often asked it, but I find it a very difficult question to answer. 
The difficulty is that I am, in fact, my sixteen-year-old self, just half a century older. Not only that but, sitting here at the kitchen table, with the sun streaming through the window, answering your excellent question, my older self, the current destination of my younger self, is mostly happy.
However, my older self is protective and instinctively wants to warn my sixteen-year-old self not to make the mistakes that I know from experience are going to cause him pain. But, you see, this older and more experienced self also knows that the painful things are often the things that ultimately give substance and meaning to life. My older self knows that life’s mistakes are destiny’s way of laying the tracks that will bring my younger self to the place where I am at this very moment — the mostly happy place, where I sit, with the sun coming through the window, writing an answer to your excellent question. 
Have a great life, Taya, it’s all ahead of you.
Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #176 / DECEMBER 2021)

E1.4.D.5.2.d. “I UNDERSTAND WITH AGE HOW MUCH MORE TRUSTFUL I HAVE REMAINED TO MYSELF THAN I EVER DARED TO THINK.”
(Jacques Darriulat, Aphorisms, 2021)

E1.4.D.5.2.e. GLORIA GAYNOR, I AM WHAT I AM

Listen on YouTube: https://youtu.be/zreTvtpTeoU

E1.4.D.6. FOR JEAN-PAUL SARTRE, WE ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR OUR OWN HAPPINESS. Our lives are the result of our choices, and we have a responsibility to humanity: the model of life we choose must be a model for others.
(Pierre Schindler)

E1.4.D.7. “IF… WE GIVE UP THE GREEN VITALITY OF [OUR] VIRTUES AND SURRENDER TO THE DROUGHT OF OUR INDOLENCE, so that we do not have the sap of life and the greening power of good deeds, then the power of our very soul will begin to fade and dry up.”
(Hildegard von Bingen, Book of Divine Works [Liber Divinorum Operum], 1162-1174)

Around the same time, in two distant civilizations without cultural exchange, two remarkable artists shared a similar ability to experience life in communion with nature.

E1.4.E. "JOY IS A MEETING PLACE, OF DEEP INTENTIONALITY AND OF SELF-FORGETTING, the bodily alchemy of what lies inside us in communion with what formerly seemed outside, but is now neither, but become a living frontier, a voice speaking between us and the world [...]. The sheer intoxicating beauty of the world inhabited as an edge between what we previously thought was us and what we thought was radically other than us.
Joy may be made by hard-won, practised achievement as much as by an unlooked for, passing act of grace arrived out of nowhere; joy, to our consternation, is a measure of our relationship to death and our living with death; joy is the act of giving ourselves away before we need to or are asked to; joy is practised generosity. [...]
To feel a full and untrammelled joy is to have become fully generous; to allow ourselves to be joyful is to have walked through the doorway of fear, the dropping away of the anxious, worried self, felt like a thankful death itself, a disappearance, a giving away."
(David Whyte, Consolations, The Solace, Nourishment and Underlying Meaning of Everyday Words, 2015)