E1.5. EVEN IF WE WANT TO, ARE WE FREE TO BE HAPPY?

E1.5.A. HOW MUCH OF JOY DO WE CONTROL?
Joy and sadness are partly influenced by our emotions and brain function, over which we have limited control. These factors can hinder our pursuit of joy. Sometimes, we make choices that inadvertently distance us from happiness because we are led by our brain's automatic responses.

Genetics also plays a role in our capacity for joy. Some individuals are naturally more inclined towards happiness than others, exposing a significant disparity.

Age is another determinant of joy. Population studies generally indicate increased happiness with age. This could possibly be attributed to growing awareness and wisdom as we age.

E1.5.A.1. "WYSIATI [What You See Is All There Is].
The present state of mind looms very large when people evaluate their happiness."
(Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow, 2011)

E1.5.A.1.1. THE FOCUSSING ILLUSION
"Nothing in life is as important as you think it is when you are thinking about it."

E1.5.A.1.1_REF1_PSI "THE FOCUSSING ILLUSION. Any aspect of life to which attention is directed will loom large in a global evaluation. This is the essence of the focussing illusion, which can be described in a single sentence: « Nothing in life is as important as you think it is when you are thinking about it. »
The focusing illusion can cause people to be wrong about their present state of well-being as well as about the happiness of others, and about their own happiness in the future; [...]
We can infer from the speed with which people respond to questions about their life, and from the effects of current mood on their responses, that they do not engage in a careful examination when they evaluate their life. They must be using heuristics, which are examples of both substitution and WYSIATI  [What You See Is All There Is]. Although their view of their life was influenced by a question about dating or by a coin on the copying machine, the participants in these studies did not forget that there is more to life than dating or feeling lucky. The concept of happiness is not suddenly changed by finding a dime, but [their brain] readily substitutes a small part of it for the whole of it."
(Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow, 2011)

E1.5.A.1.1_REF2_PSI "MISWANTING"
"Daniel Gilbert and Timothy Wilson introduced the word miswanting to describe bad choices that arise from errors of affective forecasting. This word deserves to be in everyday language. The focusing illusion (which Gilbert and Wilson call focalism) is a rich source of miswanting. In particular, it makes us prone to exaggerate the effect of significant purchases or changed circumstances on our future well-being."
(Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow, 2011)

E1.5.A.1.1_REF2.1_PH THE QUESTION IS ONE OF TRUE KNOWLEDGE OF WHAT IS REALLY DESIRABLE. NON-PHILOSOPHERS ARE UNABLE TO CHOOSE THE GOOD LIFE IN PLATO'S MYTH OF ER: their choice is determined by the imprint made on them by the conditions of their past life - it's not a thoughtful choice.
"In Plato's myth of Er the Pamphylian, the basic question is how our happiness is conditional on virtue and what is the freedom of souls once they have to choose the life model in which to reincarnate. The most telling in this tale is that the divinity bears no responsibility - each soul will choose its life model freely.
Ulysses for example selects a private and quiet life after the turpitude of a hero's life. Souls choose the pattern of life which they believe corresponds to their desire, but the whole question is that of true knowledge of what is really desirable. Often a soul, after a well-ordered life in a city where the political constitution and its birth has spared it from exercising its virtue "by force of habit, but without philosophy", will choose the life model of the tyrant, believing that the tyrant is freer than its subjects. On the contrary, those who have suffered themselves and seen others suffer, will mostly choose a good life.
In Timaeus, Plato will come back to the process of developing virtue to conclude that its responsibility belongs to educators. Even though no one is wicked on purpose - because all seek the good - it is our educators who teach us how not to make mistakes."
(Anne Merker in the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 01/10/2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: 
https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/le-mythe-d-er-le-pamphylien-sommes-nous-responsables-de-notre-destin-8872734

E1.5.A.1.1_REF2.1.a_SONG JACQUES HIGELIN, TOMBÉ DU CIEL

Listen to the song on YouTube:
https://youtu.be/f5bFIHLScWY

E1.5.A.1.1_REF2.2_PH MISWANTING, AS CONCEPTUALIZED BY DANIEL GILBERT AND TIMOTHY WILSON, ALIGNS WITH SPINOZA'S IDEAS ABOUT THE INCONSTANCY OF HUMAN JUDGMENT, the influence of feelings on decision-making, and the tendency for individuals to pursue actions based on imagined future states that may lead to regret.

E1.5.A.1.1_REF2.2.a_PH "PROPOSITION 51
Different men may be differently affected by the same object, and the same man may be differently affected at different times by the same object.

NOTE
We thus see that it is possible, that what one man loves another may hate, and that what one man fears another may not fear ; or, again, that one and the same man may love what he once hated, or may be bold where he once was timid, and so on. Again, as everyone judges according to his emotions what is good, what bad, what better, and what worse ( Prop. 39), it follows that men's judgments may vary no less than their emotions[1] hence when we compare some with others, we distinguish them solely by the diversity of their emotions, and style some intrepid, others timid, others by some other epithet. For instance, I shall call a man intrepid, if he despises an evil which I am accustomed to fear ; if I further take into consideration, that, in his desire to injure his enemies and to benefit those whom he loves, he is not restrained by the fear of an evil which is sufficient to restrain me, I shall call him daring. Again, a man will appear timid to me, if he fears an evil which I am accustomed to despise ; and if I further take into consideration that his desire is restrained by the fear of an evil, which is not sufficient to restrain me, I shall say that he is cowardly ; and in like manner will everyone pass judgment. Lastly, from this inconstancy in the nature of human judgment, inasmuch as a man often judges of things solely by his emotions, and inasmuch as the things which he believes cause pleasure or pain, and therefore endeavours to promote or prevent, are often purely imaginary, not to speak of the uncertainty of things alluded to in Prop. 28 ; we may readily conceive that a man may be at one time affected with pleasure, and at another with pain, accompanied by the idea of himself as cause. Thus we can easily understand what are Repentance and Self-complacency. Repentance is pain, accompanied by the idea of one's self as cause ; Self-complacency is pleasure accompanied by the idea of one's self as cause, and these emotions are most intense because men believe themselves to be free (Prop. 49)."
(Baruch Spinoza, The Ethics, Part Three)

Read the Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.5.A.1.2. SIMPLE, COMMON GESTURES can unconsciously influence our thoughts and feelings

E1.5.A.1.2_REF1_PSI "GO AHEAD AND TAKE A PENCIL, AND HOLD IT BETWEEN YOUR TEETH for a few seconds with the eraser pointing to your right and the point to your left. Now hold the pencil so the point is aimed straight in front of you, by pursuing your lips around the eraser end. You were probably unaware that one of these actions forced your face into a frown and the other into a smile. College students were asked to rate the humor of cartoons from Gary Larsons The Far Side while holding a pencil in their mouth. Those who were “smiling” (without any awareness of doing so) found the cartoons funnier than did those who were “frowning.” In another experiment, people whose face was shaped into a frown (by squeezing their eyebrows together) reported an enhanced emotional response to upsetting pictures—starving children, people arguing, maimed accident victims. Simple, common gestures can also unconsciously influence our thoughts and feelings."
(Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow, 2011)

E1.5.A.1.2_REF2_PH "THE CUSTOMS OF POLITENESS ARE VERY POWERFUL OVER OUR THOUGHTS; and it is no small help against mood and even against stomach ache if we mime gentleness, benevolence and joy; these movements, which are bows and smiles, have that good thing that they make impossible the opposite movements, of fury, distrust or sadness. This is why social life, visits, ceremonies and parties are always loved; it is an opportunity to mime happiness; and this kind of comedy certainly delivers us from tragedy; this is not a small thing."
(Alain, Writing on happiness, 16 February 1922)

E1.5.A.1.2_REF3_PSI "ACTING HAPPY
Although we typically assume that feeling happy leads people to act happy, the converse may also be true: Simply smiling could make people feel better. This idea dovetails with the facial feedback hypothesis, which posits that our facial expressions can influence our mood. In a classic test of this hypothesis (Strack et al. 1988), participants were instructed to hold a pen in their mouths in a way that prompted them to smile or frown. Participants found a cartoon funnier if they were led to smile. However, nearly 20 years later, 17 research labs failed to replicate this original finding in a registered replication report (RRR), calling the validity of the facial feedback hypothesis into question (Wagenmaker et al. 2016).

Of course, even if the pen-in-mouth task has no effect, a more natural type of smile might enhance mood. To test this possibility, over 20 labs from 19 different countries formed an adversarial collaboration. As part of a registered report, they induced all participants to (a) smile and (b) hold a neutral expression (in counterbalanced order) and to report how happy they felt after each expression. Some participants were induced to smile with the pen-in-mouth task, while others smiled in a more natural way, by mimicking a photo of someone else smiling (n ≈ 500). The pen-in-mouth task produced no benefits for mood compared to the neutral expression, but smiling more naturally did lead to elevated mood. Thus, this large study suggests smiling can induce feelings of happiness as long as the smile is natural.

However, this result could be explained by a demand characteristic: Participants who exhibited a natural smile may have reported feeling happier because they thought this was what the researchers expected. To examine this issue, Coles et al. (2023) conducted three additional studies with university students from the United States and Kenya. Some participants were given no information about the researchers’ expectations, while others were told that the researchers either expected or did not expect to find benefits of smiling (n’s ≈ 75). Even after being told the researchers did not expect any benefits from smiling, participants still reported feeling significantly happier after smiling, although these effects were smaller than in the other two conditions.

Still, participants might have reported feeling happier after smiling because they themselves expected to benefit from putting on a happy face. Thus, Coles et al. (2023) recruited people from dozens of countries and identified those who believed smiling could improve mood (n = 117) and those who did not (n = 70). Even nonbelievers reported being significantly happier after smiling, although the effect was larger among believers. The authors found the same pattern in a smaller study (n's ≈ 28), suggesting that the benefits of smiling cannot be easily explained by expectancy effects.

When Wagenmaker and colleagues (2016) failed to replicate the classic pen-in-mouth study, the facial feedback hypothesis seemed likely to become another casualty of the post–replication crisis era. However, two sets of large, cross-cultural studies provide evidence that exhibiting a natural smile reliably induces immediate mood benefits, regardless of people's beliefs about the facial feedback hypothesis."
(Dunigan Folk and Elizabeth Dunn, How Can People Become Happier? A Systematic Review of Preregistered Experiments, 2023)

Read the full article: https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.1146/annurev-psych-022423-030818#abstractSection

E1.5.A.2. THE GENETICS OF TEMPERAMENT:
"One reason for the low correlations between individuals’ circumstances and their satisfaction with life is that both experienced happiness and life satisfaction are largely determined by the genetics of temperament. A disposition for well-being is as heritable as height or intelligence, as demonstrated by studies of twins separated at birth. People who appear equally fortunate vary greatly in how happy they are."
(Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow, 2011)

E1.5.A.2_REF1_PH "GAIETY 
[...] A disposition to joy, which makes it easy, natural, spontaneous, as if it were already there even before we had any reason to rejoice. A virtue of nonchalance, which seems to come from mood rather than will. Its strength lies in its superficiality: great misfortunes as well as great joys are too deep for it; they pass through it more than they reach it. To be cheerful is to feel joy easily or naturally. What talent could be more enviable? What more seductive charm? [...]

GRAVITY 
[...] Sometimes it's a pose, favored by adults (Pascal: "Le chancelier est grave et revêtu d'ornements"). But sometimes it's a temperament, more inclined than others to sadness, to meditation, less gifted for happiness or entertainment, more attentive to the weight or difficulty of existence. There are serious children; they are the ones, perhaps because I was one, who touch me the most. Not everyone can be Mozart, and lightness never sufficed for beatitude. Moreover, gravity, taken in this sense and despite its etymology, is not heaviness. Rather, it is a sensitivity to what weighs down, to the poignancy of things and of life. Vice, death, poverty and illness are serious matters," writes Montaigne, "and they weigh heavily" (Essais, III, 5). It's like an everyday tragedy, but without emphasis, without grandiloquence, without panic, as Montaigne again says - a tragedy that doesn't get caught up in the tragedy, but doesn't manage to laugh about it either. It is not to be confused with seriousness: its opposite is not humor, but frivolity."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.5.A.2_REF2_SCI “An honorable human relationship — that is, one in which two people have the right to use the word ‘love’ — is a process, delicate, violent, often terrifying to both persons involved, a process of refining the truths they can tell each other,” Adrienne Rich wrote in her stunning meditation on relationships. A happy human relationship, it turns out, is contingent not upon the nature and delivery process of these truths, particularly the difficult truths, but upon the nature of the hearer — upon our emotional orientation and sensitivity, which appears to be encoded in our DNA via a particular gene that regulates serotonin in the brain. So indicates the fascinating research of U.C. Berkeley psychophysiologist and behavioral neuroscientist Robert Levenson.
Known as 5-HTTLPR (serotonin-transporter-linked polymorphic region) and located on chromosome 17 of your DNA, this gene comes in two varieties — one with a short allele and the other with a long allele. Decades of research have revealed a strong positive correlation between the short-allele type and a high precedence of depression, anxiety, and attention disorders, suggesting that people with the short allele respond more negatively to emotional friction within a relationship and seeding the assumption that having this gene is plainly problematic for one’s psychoemotional health. But Levenson’s lab uncovered a much more nuanced and surprisingly optimistic reality — rather than predisposing to more negative emotional responses, the short allele appears to predispose simply to more emotional responses, serving as a kind of psychoemotional magnifying glass that renders all emotions, the lows as well as the highs, more deeply and intensely felt."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings on Robert Levenson's research at U.C. Berkley)

Read more on Brain Pickings:
https://www.brainpickings.org/?s=robert+levenson%27s

Watch Robert Levenson explain on Youtube:
https://youtu.be/xn38OsTeXlk

E1.5.A.2_REF3_PH "THE ONE NECESSARY THING . A person must have one or the other. Either a disposition which is easygoing by nature, or else a disposition eased by art and knowledge."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, all too human, aphorism 486, 1878)

E1.5.A.2_REF3.1_PH “TO HAVE MUCH JOY. - He who has much joy must be a good man: but perhaps he is not the most intelligent, though he achieves what the most intelligent aspires to with all his intelligence.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human All Too Human II, 1878)

E1.5.A.2_REF3.1.a_PH "TRUE HAPPINESS IS FEELING HAPPY BECAUSE YOU CAN'T HELP IT."
(@jeestunavatar)

E1.5.A.2_REF4_LIT "TRUTH IS I HAVE A HORRID MORBIDITY OF TEMPERAMENT which has shown itself at intervals — it is I have no doubt the greatest Enemy and stumbling block I have to fear — I may even say that it is likely to be the cause of my disappointment. How ever every ill has its share of good — this very bane would at any time enable me to look with an obstinate eye on the Devil Himself… I feel confident I should have been a rebel Angel had the opportunity been mine."
(John Keats, Selected letters)

E1.5.A.2_REF5_TH IF A BROADENING OF THE SENSE OF SELF SEEMS TO BE LINKED TO A STATE OF JOY that Romain Rolland described as "oceanic", how can we explain the fact that some people, even some of the most profound, never experience it? Freud's explanation - whether valid or not - does not remove the potential as a source of profound joy of "oceanic" feeling. (the debate over the source of religiosity being indifferent to its implication for joy). Is this "oceanic" feeling an innate ability - or can it be acquired?

E1.5.A.2_REF5.1_TH FREUD ADMITS HE DOESN'T FEEL THE SENSE OF “ETERNITY” OR “OCEANIC FEELING”, DISTINCT FROM FAITH OR RELIGIOUS ILLUSIONS, DESCRIBED BY SOME. He does, however, recognize the validity of this feeling in others, and questions its role as a basis for religious needs.
“One of these exceptional few calls himself my friend (a) in his letters to me. I had sent him my small book that treats religion as an illusion (b), and he answered that he entirely agreed with my judgement upon religion, but that he was sorry I had not properly appreciated the true source of religious sentiments. This, he says, consists in a peculiar feeling, which he himself is never without, which he finds confirmed by many others, and which he may suppose is present in millions of people. It is a feeling which he would like to call a sensation of ‘eternity’, a feeling as of something limitless, unbounded—as it were, ‘oceanic’.
This feeling, he adds, is a purely subjective fact, not an article of faith; it brings with it no assurance of personal immortality, but it is the source of the religious energy which is seized upon by the various Churches and religious systems, directed by them into particular channels, and doubtless also exhausted by them.
One may, he thinks, rightly call oneself religious on the ground of this oceanic feeling alone, even if one rejects every belief and every illusion.
The views expressed by the friend whom I so much honour, and who himself once praised the magic of illusion in a poem, caused me no small difficulty. I cannot discover this ‘oceanic’ feeling in myself. It is not easy to deal scientifically with feelings. One can attempt to describe their physiological signs. Where this is not possible—and I am afraid that the oceanic feeling too will defy this kind of characterization—nothing remains but to fall back on the ideational content which is most readily associated with the feeling.
If I have understood my friend rightly, he means the same thing by it as the consolation offered by an original and somewhat eccentric dramatist to his hero who is facing a self-inflicted death. ‘We cannot fall out of this world.’ That is to say, it is a feeling of an indissoluble bond, of being one with the external world as a whole. I may remark that to me this seems something rather in the nature of an intellectual perception, which is not, it is true, without an accompanying feeling-tone, but only such as would be present with any other act of thought of equal range. From my own experience I could not convince myself of the primary nature of such a feeling. But this gives me no right to deny that it does in fact occur in other people. The only question is whether it is being correctly interpreted and whether it ought to be regarded as the fons et origo (c) of the whole need for religion.”

Notes:
(a) Freud refers here to Romain Rolland, a French writer (1866-1944) with whom he corresponded. Divided between Nietzsche and Tolstoy, Romain Rolland defended the concept of humanitarian heroism. 
(b) The Future of an Illusion, published in 1927. In it, Freud explored the psychological significance of religious representations and developed his thesis that religion responds to a human need, dating from childhood, to feel protected by an almighty and just father who guarantees the order of the world. 
(c) Latin expression meaning "source and origin. "
(Sigmund Freud, Civilization and its Discontents, 1930)

E1.5.A.2_REF5.1.a_TH IN ADULTS, THE SENSE OF SELF IS DISTINCT FROM THE EXTERNAL WORLD, BUT IN INFANTS, IT IS INITIALLY FUSED WITH IT. This feeling evolves through experiences of pleasure and displeasure, leading to recognition of a threatening external world. Freud considers that the “oceanic” feeling, a sensation of unity with the universe, which he associates with an early phase of ego development, derives its origin from a desire for paternal protection against external threats.
“Further reflection tells us that the adult's ego-feeling cannot have been the same from the beginning. It must have gone through a process of development, which cannot, of course, be demonstrated but which admits of being constructed with a fair degree of probability. An infant at the breast does not as yet  distinguish his ego from the external world as the source of the sensations flowing in upon him. He gradually learns to do so, in response to various promptings. He must be very strongly impressed by the fact that some sources of excitation, which he will later recognize as his own bodily organs, can provide him with sensations at any moment, whereas other sources evade him from time to time—among them what he desires most of all, his mother's breast—and only reappear as a result of his screaming for help. In this way there is for the first time set over against the ego an ‘object’, in the form of something which exists ‘outside’ and which is only forced to appear by a special action.
A further incentive to a disengagement of the ego from the general mass of sensations—that is, to the recognition of an ‘outside’, an external world—is provided by the frequent, manifold and unavoidable sensations of pain and unpleasure the removal and avoidance of which is enjoined by the pleasure principle, in the exercise of its unrestricted domination. A tendency arises to separate from the ego everything that can become a source of such unpleasure, to throw it outside and to create a pure pleasure-ego which is confronted by a strange and threatening ‘outside’. The boundaries of this primitive pleasure-ego cannot escape rectification through experience. Some of the things that one is unwilling to give up, because they give pleasure, are nevertheless not ego but object; and some sufferings that one seeks to expel turn out to be inseparable from the ego in virtue of their internal origin. One comes to learn a procedure by which, through a deliberate direction of one's sensory activities and through suitable muscular action, one can differentiate between what is internal—what belongs to the ego—and what is external—what emanates from the outer world.
In this way one makes the first step towards the introduction of the reality principle which is to dominate future development.
This differentiation, of course, serves the practical purpose of enabling one to defend oneself against sensations of unpleasure which one actually feels or with which one is threatened. In order to fend off certain unpleasurable excitations arising from within, the ego can use no other methods than those which it uses against unpleasure coming from without, and this is the starting-point of important pathological disturbances.
In this way, then, the ego detaches itself from the external world. Or, to put it more correctly, originally the ego includes everything, later it separates off an external world from itself. Our present ego-feeling is, therefore, only a shrunken residue of a much more inclusive—indeed, an all-embracing—feeling which corresponded to a more intimate bond between the ego and the world about it. If we may assume that there are many people in whose mental life this primary ego-feeling has persisted to a greater or less degree, it would exist in them side by side with the narrower and more sharply demarcated ego-feeling of maturity, like a kind of counterpart to it. In that case, the ideational contents appropriate to it would be precisely those of limitlessness and of a bond with the universe— the same ideas with which my friend elucidated the ‘oceanic’ feeling. […]
Thus we are perfectly willing to acknowledge that the ‘oceanic’ feeling exists in many people, and we are inclined to trace it back to an early phase of ego-feeling. The further question then arises, what claim this feeling has to be regarded as the source of religious needs.
To me the claim does not seem compelling. After all, a feeling can only be a source of energy if it is itself the expression of a strong need. The derivation of religious needs from the infant's helplessness and the longing for the father aroused by it seems to me incontrovertible, especially since the feeling is not simply prolonged from childhood days, but is permanently sustained by fear of the superior power of Fate. I cannot think of any need in childhood as strong as the need for a father's protection. Thus the part played by the oceanic feeling, which might seek something like the restoration of limitless narcissism, is ousted from a place in the foreground.”
(Sigmund Freud, Civilization and its Discontents, 1930)

E1.5.A.2_REF6_SOC "BY STUDYING IDENTICAL TWINS, RESEARCHERS FOUND THAT HAPPINESS WAS 50% DETERMINED BY OUR GENETICS. This means that we all have an innate level of happiness, and that after experiencing great joy or great sorrow, we all tend to return to that level. For some, that level is being very happy, and for others it's being less happy."
(Happy, documentary, 2012)

E1.5.A.2_REF7_PH "LE MOI
[...] The weaker the character of him who endures affliction, the more quickly is the ‘I’ destroyed. To be more exact, the limit of the affliction which destroys the ‘I’ is situated at a greater or lesser distance according to the quality of the character, and the further it is the more the character is said to be strong.
The position of this limit, whether near or far, is probably a fact of nature in the same way as a gift for mathematics, and he who, without having any faith, is proud of preserving his morale in difficult circumstances, has no more reason to be so than the youth who is conceited because mathematics come easily to him."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.5.A.2_REF8_SCI PEOPLE WHO ARE BORN WITH A CHEERFUL BIOCHEMISTRY ARE GENERALLY HAPPY AND CONTENT.
“[How to explain the] psychological and sociological findings that, for example, married people are happier on average than singles?
First, these findings are correlations – the direction of causation may be the opposite of what some researchers have assumed. It is true that married people are happier than singles and divorcees, but that does not necessarily mean that marriage produces happiness. It could be that happiness causes marriage. Or more correctly, that serotonin, dopamine and oxytocin bring about and maintain a marriage. People who are born with a cheerful biochemistry are generally happy and content. Such people are more attractive spouses, and consequently they have a greater chance of getting married. They are also less likely to divorce, because it is far easier to live with a happy and content spouse than with a depressed and dissatisfied one. Consequently, it’s true that married people are happier on average than singles, but a single woman prone to gloom because of her biochemistry would not necessarily become happier if she were to hook up with a husband.
In addition, most biologists are not fanatics. They maintain that happiness is determined mainly by biochemistry, but they agree that psychological and sociological factors also have their place. Our mental air-conditioning system has some freedom of movement within predetermined borders. It is almost impossible to exceed the upper and lower emotional boundaries, but marriage and divorce can have an impact in the area between the two. Somebody born with an average of level  happiness would never dance wildly in the streets. But a good marriage should enable her to enjoy level seven from time to time, and to avoid the despondency of level three.
If we accept the biological approach to happiness, then history turns out to be of minor importance, since most historical events have had no impact on our biochemistry. History can change the external stimuli that cause serotonin to be secreted, yet it does not change the resulting serotonin levels, and hence it cannot make people happier.”
(Yuval Noah Harari, Sapiens, A Brief History of Humankind, 2011)

E1.5.A.2_REF9_PO ”YOU’LL BECOME ONLY WHO YOU ALWAYS WERE.
What the gods give they give at the start.
     Only once does Fate give you
     Your fate, for you’re but one.
Little is attained by the effort you exert 
In accord with your native ability.
     Little, if you were not 
     Conceived for more. 
Be glad to be who you cannot resist 
Being. You will still have the vast 
     Sky to cover you, and the earth, 
     Green or dry, given the season. “
(Fernando Pessoa, 2 May 1921)

E1.5.A.3. THE INCREASE OF HAPPINESS WITH AGE might have to do with the notion that attention, like a muscle, grows with training. Since happiness is so heavily anchored to our capacity for presence and so diminished by our mind-wandering, the ability to truly see when we look at the world — something that takes time, practice, and awareness that youth rarely affords — is central to our sense of well-being. But if happiness is a habit to be cultivated, so is its opposite: Lest we forget, 40-year-old Eliot reminds us in The Mill on the Floss that “one gets a bad habit of being unhappy.” Fortunately, Eliot did grow her own capacity for contentment with age.

E1.5.A.3_REF1_SCI ACCORDING TO DATA FROM BEHAVIORAL ECONOMIST ANDREW OSWALD, HAPPINESS FOLLOWS A U-SHAPED PATTERN OVER A LIFETIME, DECLINING FROM TEENAGE YEARS TO MID-40S AND THEN INCREASING AGAIN WITH AGE. This pattern is consistent across different cultures and even observed in primates. The increase in happiness with age may be linked to improved attention and presence, which are cultivated over time.
"In her book on optimism bias and the life-cycle of happiness, neuroscientist Tali Sharot shares some data consistent with Eliot’s sentiment. This is the pattern of a typical person’s happiness over the course of a lifetime — a pattern that persists even when controlled for variables like marital status, health, and cultural climate:

The data comes from behavioral economist Andrew Oswald’s research, which Sharot synthesizes:

'Happiness and the ability to learn from bad news alter with age in reverse patterns. The latter follows an inverse U shape, while the former a more traditional U shape. The behavioral economist Andrew Oswald found that from about the time we are teenagers, our sense of happiness starts to decline, hitting rock bottom in our mid-40s (middle-age crisis, anyone?). Then our sense of happiness miraculously starts to go up again rapidly as we grow older. This finding contradicts the common assumption that people in their 60s, 70s, and 80s are less happy and satisfied than people in their 30s and 40s. […]
All in all, Oswald tested a half million people in 72 countries, in both developing and developed nations. He observed the same pattern across all parts of the globe and across sexes. From Switzerland to Ecuador, from Romania to Singapore, Slovakia, Israel, Spain, Australia, and China. Happiness diminishes as we transition from childhood to adulthood and then starts rising as we grow wrinkles and acquire gray hair. And it’s not only we humans who slump in the middle and feel sunnier toward the end. Just recently, Oswald and colleagues demonstrated that even chimpanzees and orangutans appear to experience a similar pattern of midlife malaise.'

The increase of happiness with age might have to do with the notion that attention, like a muscle, grows with training. Since happiness is so heavily anchored to our capacity for presence and so diminished by our mind-wandering, the ability to truly see when we look at the world — something that takes time, practice, and awareness that youth rarely affords — is central to our sense of well-being. But if happiness is a habit to be cultivated, so is its opposite: Lest we forget, 40-year-old Eliot reminds us in The Mill on the Floss that “one gets a bad habit of being unhappy.” Fortunately, Eliot did grow her own capacity for contentment with age."
(Maria Popova's review on Tali Sharot's The Science of Optimism: Why We’re Hard-Wired for Hope, 2012 - Brain Pickings)

E1.5.A.3_REF2_LIT "ONE HAS TO SPEND SO MANY YEARS IN LEARNING HOW TO BE HAPPY. I am just beginning to make some progress in the science, and I hope to disprove Young’s theory that “as soon as we have found the key of life it opens the gates of death.” Every year strips us of at least one vain expectation, and teaches us to reckon some solid good in its stead. I never will believe that our youngest days are our happiest. What a miserable augury for the progress of the race and the destination of the individual if the more matured and enlightened state is the less happy one! Childhood is only the beautiful and happy time in contemplation and retrospect: to the child it is full of deep sorrows, the meaning of which is unknown. Witness colic and whooping-cough and dread of ghosts, to say nothing of hell and Satan, and an offended Deity in the sky, who was angry when I wanted too much plumcake. Then the sorrows of older persons, which children see but cannot understand, are worse than all. All this to prove that we are happier than when we were seven years old, and that we shall be happier when we are forty than we are now, which I call a comfortable doctrine, and one worth trying to believe!"
(George Eliot's life, as related in her letters and journals)

E1.5.A.3_REF3_SOC "WORLD HAPPINESS REPORT 2024
In this issue of the World Happiness Report we focus on the happiness of people at different stages of life. In the seven ages of man in Shakespeare’s As You Like It, the later stages of life are portrayed as deeply depressing. But happiness research shows a more nuanced picture, and one that is changing over time. We encourage you to explore the 2024 report for the latest findings on the happiness of the world’s young, the old – and everyone in between."

Read de full report: https://worldhappiness.report/

E1.5.A.3_REF3.1_SOC SINCE 2006-10, AS WE SHALL SEE, HAPPINESS AMONG THE YOUNG (AGED 15-24) HAS FALLEN SHARPLY IN NORTH AMERICA – TO A POINT WHERE THE YOUNG ARE LESS HAPPY THAN THE OLD. Youth happiness has also fallen (but less sharply) in Western Europe.
"In the West, the received wisdom was that the young are the happiest and that happiness thereafter declines until middle age, followed by substantial recovery. But since 2006-10, as we shall see, happiness among the young (aged 15-24) has fallen sharply in North America – to a point where the young are less happy than the old. Youth happiness has also fallen (but less sharply) in Western Europe.

By contrast, happiness at every age has risen sharply in Central and Eastern Europe, so that young people are now equally happy in both parts of Europe. In the former Soviet Union and East Asia too there have been large increases in happiness at every age, while in South Asia and the Middle East and North Africa happiness has fallen at every age.

It is of course an issue to what extent these changes reflect generational changes that can be expected to persist as each generation gets older."
(World Happiness Report 2024)

Read de full report: https://worldhappiness.report/

E1.5.A.3_REF4_SOC THE GLOBAL LOSS OF THE U-SHAPED CURVE OF HAPPINESS
Happiness used to be U-shaped by age, with middle age the least happy. Not anymore. Young people are now the least happy.
(David Blanchflower and Alex Bryson, May27, 2024)

E1.5.A.3_REF4.1_SOC SINCE THE MID-2010S,WE ARE WITNESSING A WORSENING YOUTH MENTAL HEALTH CRISIS GLOBALLY, with increased anxiety, depression, and suicide rates among gen z, particularly girls.
"Over the last year, Zach has written a series of articles examining the international scope of the youth mental health crisis. In his five-part series, he has shown that measures of anxiety, depression, and other measures of poor mental health among youth have worsened in the five Anglo nations, the five Nordic nations, and many other nations throughout Western and Eastern Europe. Zach has also shown that suicide rates are up for Gen Z girls across the Anglosphere, with higher rates than any generation of girls that came before them.1 He also found the same trends for emergency department visits and hospitalizations for non-fatal self-harm. In addition, Zach has documented variations in suicide and self-harm across Europe, showing that social, cultural, and religious factors have a mitigating effect on such behaviors. 

But even as the evidence of a multinational youth mental health crisis increases, there are a few researchers who continue to argue that the youth mental health crisis is not real or (for some skeptics) it is grossly exaggerated in the USA and is limited to the USA. Some claim, for example, that perhaps "More check-ups, more screenings, and more protections for behavioral health conditions lead to lots of kids screening positive for depression and getting diagnosed—helping to explain the rise in self-reported depression since 2011."2 Or those who show the “graphs that Haidt doesn’t want you to see.”3 Or those who claim that “...Indeed, most of this stuff is just the U.S. I suppose there may be a few other places here and there, but there's no international trend, sorry.”4 

In early April, the Dartmouth labor economist and adviser to the UN David Blanchflower (goes by “Danny”), reached out to us (Jon, Zach, and Jean Twenge), telling us that he had independently found the same pattern of youth decline that we have been examining across numerous datasets and countries. He found that the classic “U-shaped curve of well-being” and the“hump-shaped curve of ill-being” have recently disappeared because young adults (18-25) have been doing so much worse since the mid-2010s (especially young women). Before he began studying trends in young people, he had been focusing on the mental health of middle-aged adults and the “deaths of despair” literature popularized by Case & Deaton (2020). He explained that he had not noticed the changes among young people until more recently because he was so focused on the traditional groups that were struggling most (such as middle-aged less-educated white men, and Native Americans). 

But after seeing how rapid the change in young adult mental health has been, in contrast to the relative stability of adults over 40, he has shifted focus. He has now published his own series of articles on the topic and has shown something astonishing and of global importance: the general contour of happiness across the age-span has changed around the world. Young adults are now the least happy people, and this broad multinational change began sometime in the mid-2010s, right as Gen Z was entering this age-group.  

Danny co-wrote this essay with his research partner, Alex Bryson, a University College, London professor. Their findings offer a strong response to those who say that “the kids are alright.”"
(Zach Rausch and Jon Haidt)

Read the full study: http://https://www.afterbabel.com/p/youth-health-declines-82-countries?r=rogzz&utm_medium=ios&triedRedirect=true

E1.5.A.4. EMOTIONS HELP US ACKNOWLEDGE THE IMPORTANCE OF THINGS WE DO NOT FULLY CONTROL:
Emotions … involve judgments about important things, judgments in which, appraising an external object as salient for our own well-being, we acknowledge our own neediness and incompleteness before parts of the world that we do not fully control. […]
Emotions should be understood as “geological upheavals of thought”: as judgments in which people acknowledge the great importance, for their own flourishing, of things that they do not fully control — and acknowledge thereby their neediness before the world and its events. [...]
Human beings appear to be the only mortal finite beings who wish to transcend their finitude. Thus they are the only emotional beings who wish not to be emotional, who wish to withhold these acknowledgments of neediness and to design for themselves a life in which these acknowledgments have no place. This means that they frequently learn to reject their own vulnerability and to suppress awareness of the attachments that entail it. 

E1.5.A.4_REF1_PH MARTHA NUSSBAUM ARGUES THAT EMOTIONS ARE INTEGRAL TO ETHICAL REASONING, CONTAINING JUDGMENTS ABOUT VALUE AND IMPORTANCE THAT CANNOT BE SIDELINED IN MORAL PHILOSOPHY. This perspective challenges the traditional view of morality as detached from emotions, emphasizing their role in ethical judgment and human self-understanding.
"A lot is at stake in the decision to view emotions in this way, as intelligent responses to the perception of value. If emotions are suffused with intelligence and discernment, and if they contain in themselves an awareness of value or importance, they cannot, for example, easily be sidelined in accounts of ethical judgment, as so often they have been in the history of philosophy. Instead of viewing morality as a system of principles to be grasped by the detached intellect, and emotions as motivations that either support or subvert our choice to act according to principle, we will have to consider emotions as part and parcel of the system of ethical reasoning. We cannot plausibly omit them, once we acknowledge that emotions include in their content judgments that can be true or false, and good or bad guides to ethical choice. We will have to grapple with the messy material of grief and love, anger and fear, and the role these tumultuous experiences play in thought about the good and the just. […]
Emotions are not just the fuel that powers the psychological mechanism of a reasoning creature, they are parts, highly complex and messy parts, of this creature’s reasoning itself. […]
Insofar as they involve acknowledgment of neediness and lack of self-sufficiency, emotions reveal us as vulnerable to events that we do not control. […]
Emotions seem to be characterized by ambivalence toward their objects. In the very nature of our early object relations … there lurks a morally subversive combination of love and resentment, which springs directly from the thought that we need others to survive and flourish, but do not at all control their movements. If love is in this way always, or even commonly, mixed up with hatred, then, once again, this might offer us some reasons not to trust to the emotions at all in the moral life, but rather to the more impersonal guidance of rules of duty. […]
Personal love has typically been thought too wonderful to remove from human life; but it has also been seen (not only by philosophers) as a source of great moral danger because of its partiality and the extreme form of vulnerability it involves, which make a connection with jealousy and anger virtually inevitable. […]
Emotions … involve judgments about important things, judgments in which, appraising an external object as salient for our own well-being, we acknowledge our own neediness and incompleteness before parts of the world that we do not fully control. […]
Emotions should be understood as “geological upheavals of thought”: as judgments in which people acknowledge the great importance, for their own flourishing, of things that they do not fully control — and acknowledge thereby their neediness before the world and its events. […]
Human beings appear to be the only mortal finite beings who wish to transcend their finitude. Thus they are the only emotional beings who wish not to be emotional, who wish to withhold these acknowledgments of neediness and to design for themselves a life in which these acknowledgments have no place. This means that they frequently learn to reject their own vulnerability and to suppress awareness of the attachments that entail it. We might also say … that they are the only animals for whom neediness is a source of shame, and who take pride in themselves to the extent to which they have allegedly gotten clear of vulnerability. […]
The process of development entails many moments of discomfort and frustration. Indeed, some frustration of the infant’s wants by the caretaker’s separate comings and goings is essential to development — for if everything were always simply given in advance of discomfort, the child would never try out its own projects of control. […]
The child’s evolving recognition that the caretaker sometimes fails to bring it what it wants gives rise to an anger that is closely linked to its emerging love. Indeed, the very recognition that both good things and their absence have an external source guarantees the presence of both of these emotions — although the infant has not yet recognized that both take a single person as their object. […]
The emotions of the adult life sometimes feel as if they flood up out of nowhere, in ways that don’t match our present view of our objects or their value. This will be especially true of the person who maintains some kind of false self-defense, and who is in consequence out of touch with the emotions of neediness and dependence, or of anger and aggression, that characterize the true self. […]
The understanding of any single emotion is incomplete unless its narrative history is grasped and studied for the light it sheds on the present response. This already suggests a central role for the arts in human self-understanding: for narrative artworks of various kinds (whether musical or visual or literary) give us information about these emotion-histories that we could not easily get otherwise. This is what Proust meant when he claimed that certain truths about the human emotions can be best conveyed, in verbal and textual form, only by a narrative work of art: only such a work will accurately and fully show the interrelated temporal structure of emotional “thoughts,” prominently including the heart’s intermittences between recognition and denial of neediness. […]"
(Martha Nussbaum, Upheavals of thought: The intelligence of emotions, 2001)

E1.5.A.4_REF2_PH “UNSPOKEN EXPECTATIONS ARE PREMEDITATED RESENTMENTS.”
(Neil Strauss)

E1.5.B. LIMITATIONS ON JOY
There are numerous constraints on our freedom to pursue joy: societal expectations, personal fears, lack of education, fatigue, existential loneliness, illness and disabilities, mental health issues, financial constraints, and external adversities such as war and other calamities. At times, we might even contribute to our own misfortune.

E1.5.B.1. LIBERATION!
TO ENHANCE OUR POTENTIAL FOR HAPPINESS, WE MUST LIBERATE OURSELVES from fears, prejudices, and societal impositions. This requires exercising courage and nurturing our unique qualities.

E1.5.B.1.1. THERE IS NO WAY TO HELP ANY SOUL ATTAIN HAPPINESS SO LONG AS IT REMAINS SHACKLED WITH THE CHAINS OF OPINION AND FEAR.

E1.5.B.1.1_REF1_PH NIETZSCHE EMPHASIZES THE IMPORTANCE OF INDIVIDUAL AUTHENTICITY AND LIBERATION FROM SOCIETAL EXPECTATIONS. He argues that true happiness and fulfillment come from following one's conscience and rejecting conformity, warning against the despair of living a life dictated by fear and opinion.
"Any human being who does not wish to be part of the masses need only stop making things easy for himself. Let him follow his conscience, which calls out to him: « Be yourself! All that you are now doing, thinking, desiring, all that is not you. »
Every young soul hears this call by day and by night and shudders with excitement at the premonition of that degree of happiness which eternities have prepared for those who will give thought to their true liberation. There is no way to help any soul attain this happiness, however, so long as it remains shackled with the chains of opinion and fear. And how hopeless and meaningless life can become without such a liberation! There is no drearier, sorrier creature in nature than the man who has evaded his own genius and who squints now towards the right, now towards the left, now backwards, now in any direction whatever."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Untimely Meditations, Schopenhauer as Educator)

E1.5.B.1.1_REF2_PH “DO NOT SPARE YOURSELF
The only thing more dangerous than wanting to save another person — a dangerous desire too often mistaken for love — is wanting to save yourself, to spare yourself the disappointment and heartbreak and loss inseparable from being a creature with hopes and longings constantly colliding with reality, with the indifference of time and chance, with the opposing hopes and longings of others.
We have, of course, always invented institutions of salvation — religion to save us from our sins, therapy to save us from our traumas, marriage to save us from our loneliness — in order to salve our suffering, which is the price we pay for the fulness of living. And salve it we must, yet there is no damnation greater than spending our allotted days in the catatonia of comfort and certainty, our inner lives automated by habit and halogen lit by convenience. To try to save ourselves from the despair by which we contour hope, to spare ourselves the fertile doubt and the gasps of self-surprise by which we discover who we really are, is to live a safe distance from alive.” 
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

Read it on the Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2025/01/10/no-te-salves/?mc_cid=693f2b9af1&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E1.5.B.1.1_REF3_PH WE OBSERVE THAT MAN’S ONLY REAL ENEMY IS FEAR
"We discover that the poet, whatever his medium, is the only true inventor. Into this single type are merged all the heroes we at one time or another worshiped. 
We observe that man’s only real enemy is fear, and that all imaginative acts (all heroism) are inspired by the desire and the unflinching resolve to conquer fear – in whatever form it manifests itself. The hero-as-poet epitomizes the inventor, the pioneer, the pathfinder, the truth seeker. [...] The poet-as-hero inhabits reality: he seeks to establish this reality for all mankind."
(Henry Miller, The books in my life, New Direction books, p.165-169, 1969)

E1.5.B.1.2. THE FIGHT "AGAINST" VS. THE STRUGGLE "IN FAVOR":
The struggle to maintain one's individuality in the face of societal expectations can be energy-consuming. Fighting "against" only liberates us from something. However, enduring joy doesn't come from resistance alone, but from construction. We need to fight "in favor" of our essence - to strive to be "what we want to be" rather than just aiming "not to be what we don't want to be".

E1.5.B.1.2.a. WE FIND HAPPINESS WHEN ENGAGING IN INVIGORATING AND CREATIVE STRUGGLES. An exclusive struggle "against", even if motivated by universal love, leads to neurosis, as suggested by Nietzsche and Freud.

E1.5.B.1.2.a_REF1_PH HERACLITUS: "STRUGGLE IS THE FATHER OF ALL THINGS."
Sport has taken on a considerable role in our societies; to watch a match is to discover two teams fighting to win. A fair fight takes place when everyone is challenged to give the best of themselves; it's magnificent and even exhilarating at times. And yet, Heraclitus' phrase "Struggle is the father of all things" shocks us - should we really be fighting for everything? Isn't that a violent, even aggressive statement? We think so because we confuse struggle with violence, when they are two very different things. What struggle are you fighting today? Getting the kids to eat, getting ready for a meeting, dealing with this disagreement between you and your partner... You just can't do it and it irritates you. On the contrary, accept to enter into the struggle fully, and you'll see that it changes everything. I'm not telling you to fight "against" something or someone for the purpose of destruction, but "to" reveal what you want to say or do. Fighting is the father of all things, because it is through fighting that everything can appear and unfold. This sentence seems to me to be one of the most striking that the ancient world has left us, because it gives us valuable guidance: we'd like things to manifest by themselves, without struggle; that's far too naive - and so we perceive struggle as negative, difficult and tiring. But any work, any project, any creation exists only to the extent that what is latent, inapparent, shows itself a little more. You have to write that memo, that contract, that e-mail, and you have to weigh every word, check every formulation, so that what you want to say finally appears. By refusing tension, by refusing to fight, we deny our project the chance to manifest. That's why the more we tell people to be calm and detached, the more we teach them powerlessness. We're happy because we manage to engage in an invigorating, creative struggle. But how do you get the desire to fight? All you have to do is rediscover your deepest desire. Let's go back to our question: What battle do you have to fight today? Take a few seconds to feel what you're trying to do, to show, to create through this battle, and then the battle becomes exciting. What trick will I find to get my daughter to eat? Instead of seeing combat as an exhausting struggle, let's return to its deeper meaning, let's be like a great soccer player: let's have anger in our bellies, let's be full of energy, inventiveness, passion: "Struggle is the father of all things".
(Fabrice Midal, 3 minutes of philosophy to become human again)

Listen to the podcast:
https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/3-minutes-de-philosophie-pour-redevenir-humain/heraclite-le-combat-est-pere-de-toutes-choses-9449619

E1.5.B.1.2.a_REF2_PH NIETZSCHE CRITICIZES MORALISTS WHO PRIORITIZE SELF-CONTROL, ARGUING THAT THEY DEVELOP A CONSTANT IRRITABILITY TOWARDS NATURAL IMPULSES AND MOVEMENTS. 
"These moralists who first and foremost encourage one to control himself, arouse in one a singular illness: a constant irritability to all propensitiy, to all natural movements, and so to speak a sort of itching. Any impulse that pushes, drags, attracts, carries one - from inside as well as from outside - will always make this irritable person fear that his self-domination risks being undone: he must no longer abandon himself to any instinct, to any free flight, he is constantly on the defensive, armed against himself, with a keen and wary eye, eternal guardian of the fortress he has voluntarily become. Undoubtedly, notwithstanding this, he can show greatness! But how unbearable he is now for others, how difficult for himself, how impoverished and cut off from all the beautiful adventures of the soul! And even from any new learning! For one must know how to lose oneself of sight for a long time, if one wants to learn something from the realities that one is not himself !"
(Nietzsche, Gaya Scienza, aphorism 305, 1882)

E1.5.B.1.2.a_REF3_TH SIGMUND FREUD STRESSES THAT UNREALISTIC ETHICAL REQUIREMENTS OF CIVILIZATION, SUCH AS "LOVE YOUR NEIGHBOR AS YOURSELF," lack consideration for one's own happiness and human psychological realities.
"In our research into, and therapy of, a neurosis, we are led to make two reproaches against the super-ego of the individual. In the severity of its commands and prohibitions it troubles itself too little about the happiness of the ego, in that it takes insufficient account of the resistances against obeying them—of the instinctual strength of the id [in the first place], and of the difficulties presented by the real external environment [in the second]. Consequently we are very often obliged, for therapeutic purposes, to oppose the super-ego, and we endeavour to lower its demands. Exactly the same objections can be made against the ethical demands of the cultural super-ego. It, too, does not trouble itself enough about the facts of the mental constitution of human beings. It issues a command and does not ask whether it is possible for people to obey it. On the contrary, it assumes that a man's ego is psychologically capable of anything that is required of it, that his ego has unlimited mastery over his id. This is a mistake; and even in what are known as normal people the id cannot be controlled beyond certain limits. If more is demanded of a man, a revolt will be produced in him or a neurosis, or he will be made unhappy. The commandment, ‘Love thy neighbour as thyself’, is the strongest defence against human aggressiveness and an excellent example of the unpsychological proceedings of the cultural super-ego. The commandment is impossible to fulfil; such an enormous inflation of love can only lower its value, not get rid of the difficulty. Civilization pays no attention to all this; it merely admonishes us that the harder it is to obey the precept the more meritorious it is to do so. But anyone who follows such a precept in present-day civilization only puts himself at a disadvantage vis-à-vis the person who disregards it. What a potent obstacle to civilization aggressiveness must be, if the defence against it can cause as much unhappiness as aggressiveness itself!"
(Sigmund Freud, Civilization and its Discontents, 1930)

Note:
Freud owes the term “Id” to Groddeck (1866-1934), the German physician and founder of psychosomatics (The book of the id, 1923). In “The Ego and the Id”, in 1923, Freud proposes “to take this into account by calling the entity which starts from the Pc (preconscious) system and which is first of all pcs the Ego, and by naming, in the manner of Groddeck, the other part of the psyche in which the ego continues and which behaves as ics (unconscious), the Id”. 
At the end of his article, he refers to the drive form of the id in the following terms: “The Id [...] has no way of expressing love or hate to the ego. It cannot say what it wants; it has not constituted a unitary will. Eros and the death drive fight within him [...]. We could present things as if the id were under the domination of mute but powerful death drives that want rest and want to bring this disturbing peace of eros back to rest [...]”. (“The Ego and the Id”, 1923) 
(Clotilde Leguil)

E1.5.B.1.2.b. ART INVITES US TO THINK "WITH" RATHER THAN "AGAINST". The appreciation of art is insightful as it encourages us to continually surprise ourselves by learning to love intelligently. In this context, the beauty in an aesthetic artwork becomes an invitation to knowledge, and is therefore beneficial.

E1.6.C.2.6.b_REF1_PH.wE1.5.B.1.2.b. 

E1.5.B.1.2.b_REF2_CUR HISTORY IS WRITTEN BY THE VICTORS. Lopes' installation questions the gaps in history, the history of forgotten or poorly told defeats. A bronze horse, similar to those ridden by heroes in memorials around the world, has fallen and is lying on its side on the ground. It tries to get up, but is covered by a mountain of earth - will it stand up again, or will it be buried?

E1.5.B.1.2.b_REF3_CUR IN THIS VIDEO ESSAY, YOUNG HOMOSEXUALS MOBILIZE TO RESIST A SOCIETY THAT LEAVES THEM FEW SPACES FOR EXPRESSION. Fighting "against" injustice is desirable and necessary, but in the intensity of our commitment, do we sometimes forget to fight "for" an affirmation of who we are? This work seems to us to be an example of how to reconcile these two facets of the struggle.

E1.5.B.1.2.b_REF4_PH RENÉ GIRARD DESCRIBES THE SELF-DESTRUCTIVE NATURE OF MIMETIC DESIRE WHEN IT ENTERS ITS MOST SEVERE STAGE: THE FOCUS ON THE OBSTACLE RATHER THAN THE DESIRED OBJECT. René Girard´s Mimetic Theory is a useful framework for thinking how to “fight for” what we want instead of “fighting against” what be do not.
“The cult of the obstacle drives human beings from their human condition toward what is most against them, toward what hurts them the most, toward the non-human, toward the inert, toward the mineral, toward death … toward everything that goes against love, against spirit.” (René Girard, All desire is a desire of being)
“In Girard's Mimetic Theory, desire is not a direct line from a Subject to an Object. It is triangular, involving a Model/Mediator.
Subject > Model/Mediator > Object
When the Subject and the Model become rivals (especially in internal mediation, where the Model is close and seen as an equal), the Model transforms into the Obstacle blocking the Subject's desire.
The "cult of the obstacle" describes the shift where the Subject stops caring about the original Object and becomes completely consumed by the need to confront, destroy, or defeat the Rival/Obstacle. The purpose of the desire is no longer acquisition, but confrontation.”
(Gemini, October 2025)

E1.5.B.1.2.b_REF5_THR “THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO PREFER TO SAY ‘YES’, AND THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO PREFER TO SAY ‘NO’. Those who say ‘Yes’ are rewarded by the adventures they have, and those who say ‘No’ are rewarded by the safety they attain. There are far more ‘No’ sayers around then ‘Yes’ sayers, but you can train one type to behave like the other. […]

There is a link with status transactions here, since low-status players tend to accept, and high-status players to block. High-status players block any action unless they feel they can control it. The high-status player is obviously afraid of being humiliated in front of an audience, but to block your partner’s idea is to be like the drowning man who drags down his rescuer. There’s no reason why you can’t play high status, and yet yield to other people’s invention. […]

Many teachers get improvisers to work in conflict because conflict is interesting but we don’t actually need to teach competitive behaviour; the students will already be expert at it, and it’s important that we don’t exploit the actors’ conflicts. Even in what seems to be a tremendous argument, the actors should still be co-operating, and coolly developing the action. The improviser has to understand that his first skill lies in releasing his partner’s imagination. What happens in my classes, if the actors stay with me long enough, is that they learn how their ‘normal’ procedures destroy other people’s talent. Then, one day they have a flash of satori—they suddenly understand that all the weapons they were using against other people they also use inwardly, against themselves. […]

Blocking and Accepting
Blocking is a form of aggression. I say this because if I set up a scene in which two students are to say ‘I love you’ to each other, they almost always accept each other’s ideas. Many students do their first interesting, unforced improvisations during ‘I love you’ scenes.
If I say ‘start something’ to two inexperienced improvisers, they’ll probably talk, because speech feels safer than action. And they’ll block any possibility of action developing. […]

If you’ll stop reading for a moment and think of something you wouldn’t want to happen to you, or to someone you love, then you’ll have thought of something worth staging or filming. We don’t want to walk into a restaurant and be hit in the face by a custard pie, and we don’t want to suddenly glimpse Grannie’s wheelchair racing towards the edge of the cliff, but we’ll pay money to attend enactments of such events. In life, most of us are high-skilled at suppressing action. All the improvisation teacher has to do is reverse this skill and he creates very ‘gifted’ improvisers. Bad improvisers block action, often with a high degree of skill. Good improvisers develop action. […]

I call anything that an actor does an ‘offer’. Each offer can either be accepted, or blocked. If you yawn, your partner can yawn too, and therefore accept your offer.
A block is anything that prevents the action from developing, or that wipes out your partner’s premise.5 If it develops the action it isn’t a block. […]

Once you have established the categories of ‘offer’, ‘block’ and ‘accept’ you can give some very interesting instructions. For example, you can ask an actor to make dull offers, or interesting offers, or to ‘overaccept’, or to ‘accept and block’ and so on. […]
Good improvisers seem telepathic; everything looks prearranged. This is because they accept all offers made—which is something no ‘normal’ person would do. Also they may accept offers which weren’t really intended. I tell my actors never to think up an offer, but instead to assume that one has already been made. Groucho Marx understood this: a contestant at his quiz game ‘froze’ so he took the man’s pulse and said, ‘Either this man’s dead or my watch has stopped.’ […]
Reading about spontaneity won’t make you more spontaneous, but it may at least stop you heading off in the opposite direction; and if you play the exercises with your friends in a good spirit, then soon all your thinking will be transformed.”
(Keith Johnstone, Impro, Improvisation and the theatre, 1979)

E1.5.B.1.2.c. "YOU WILL THRIVE MORE — AND SO WILL OTHERS — when you promote what you love rather than bash what you hate. Life is short; focus on the good stuff."
(Kevin Kelly, Excellent Advice for Living: Wisdom I Wish I’d Known Earlier)

E1.5.B.1.2.c_REF1_SOC JULIE GURNER ASSERTS THAT PEOPLE OFTEN WORK AGAINST NEGATIVE CIRCUMSTANCES AND ARE MOTIVATED BY FEAR, WHICH CAN BE POSITIVE. However, Pierre Schindler disagrees.
"People are more adept [at] working against [things] than oftentimes we give them credit for. We often think of people working for things, but they often work against things. They work against poverty. They work against their upbringing. They work against some of these things just as much as they’re working for them. Some people are very fear-driven. We talk about fear as being very negative, but it also can be very positive.”
(Julie Gurner, The Knowledge Project Ep. #169] Julie Gurner: Caring Deeply, Challenging Directly, Part 1)

We disagree with Julie Gurner's assertion that people are motivated by fear in the examples she provides. As we explain in other reference texts on this platform, while suffering can play a positive role in shaping us, fear is not the driving force, as Gurner incorrectly states. Instead, it is experience.
(Pierre Schindler)

E1.5.B.1.2.d. BEWARE NOT TO BECOME WHAT YOU FIGHT AGAINST!
"Nothing is clearer in history than the adoption by successful rebels of the methods they were accustomed to condemn in the forces they deposed."
(Will and Ariel Durant)

E1.5.B.1.2.e. "WE ARE GOOD AT FIGHTING, AS HE PUTS IT, AND NOT AS GOOD AT HOLDING IN OUR IMAGINATIONS WHAT IS TO BE ADORED AND PRESERVED AND EXALTED — advocating for what we love, for what we find beautiful and necessary. And without this, he says, we can not speak meaningfully even about our longings for a more just world, a more whole existence for all. I love this wisdom of Ross: that we practice tenderness and mercy in part because to understand that we are all suffering is a quality of what he calls “adult joy.” [...]

Tippett:I wanted to talk to you about justice and how you grapple with that reality, that aspiration, that concept. And there has been an evolution of that. You have brought together the idea of longing for justice and working for justice with also exalting the beautiful and tending to what one loves, as much as what one must fight.

Gay:Tending to what one loves feels like the crux. Yeah, I’m very confused about justice, I think. I feel like the way we think of justice is absolutely inadequate, often. Often. Not everyone. I am curious about a notion of justice that is in the process of exalting what it loves.

Tippett:So here’s something you wrote somewhere. You said, “I often think the gap in our speaking about and for justice, or working for justice, is that we forget to advocate for what we love, for what we find beautiful and necessary. We are good at fighting, but imagining, and holding in one’s imagination what is wonderful and to be adored and preserved and exalted is harder for us, it seems.” [...]

Tippett:I think about journalism a lot and how — when you talk about the delight — you developed a delight radar and a delight muscle — basically, journalism has a despair radar and a despair muscle.

Gay:I know. I know.

Tippett:And there’s nothing — it’s not that we don’t need to know those things. It’s not that those aren’t part of the story. But I feel like what you’re saying is — that’s what you mean, right? It’s inadequate.

Gay:Well, part of the story, that’s the thing. If the news was as invested in talking about how this person was great to that person as it was in talking about how that person was terrible to that person, it would be a radically different experience. It would be like, “Oh, okay — we live amongst people. People do many things.”

[laughter]

But it feels — part of what I think is interesting about this book is that it brings to my attention, just clear, that many things are happening. Many things are happening. And like you said — it sells. It sells.

Tippett:Well, it also — our brains are wired to get riveted by something that’s scary, that’s threatening. We mobilize around that. It’s automatic. [...]

Tippett:Well, I mean that if we acknowledge this reality that on autopilot, we’re going to be galvanized by something terrible coming at us, then those of us who care about getting this other story about ourselves in the world out there have to also apply some intelligence to doing that well so that it will also rivet. And that’s what I feel like this book did that. It was an intentionality. It was a practice. And it’s with this care with words and stories, which we do respond to.

Gay:And I think it also knows, or comes to know that what is galvanizing, as well, is what we love, and has a kind of belief in that. And also believes in the thing — the book itself believes that it’s elbowing its neighbor and being like, “Right? Look at all this. What do you love? What do you love?”
(Krista Tippett, On Being with Ross Gay, On the Insistence of Joy, Original Air Date: July 25, 2019)

Listen to the podcast or read the full transcript:
https://onbeing.org/programs/ross-gay-on-the-insistence-of-joy/

E1.5.B.1.2.e_REF1_SOC HOW TO LIVE IN THIS WORLD WITH THIS MEDIA AND RETAIN MEANINGFUL, REASONABLE HOPE AND AGENCY?
“A calming and helpful conversation for making sense of the very story of our time, and how that is coming to us and being powerfully shaped through media and journalism. The theory of change of journalism as it came out of the 20th century, David Bornstein says, is that shining a light on what is going wrong — what is dangerous and dysfunctional, catastrophic or corrupt — will mobilize and lead us to correct it. But this emphasis on the terrible and the extreme, from whichever side of our cultural trenches you inhabit, has helped fuel a paralyzing, dehumanizing fear and the collapse of trust in institutions and in each other. Many of us are turning away from the news altogether. Is that the answer? How to live in this world with this media and retain meaningful, reasonable hope and agency? And what are we not seeing and hearing that we can orient towards?”
(Krista Tippett, On being, with David Bornstein - On Our Lives with the News, November 2024)

Listen to the podcast and read the transcript: https://onbeing.org/programs/david-bornstein-on-our-lives-with-the-news/

E1.6.B.3.wE1.5.B.1.2. HOW TO DISCOVER YOUR TRUE CALLING ?
"There are so many people who don’t know what they want. And I think that, in this world, that’s the only thing you have to know — exactly what you want. … Doing what you were born to do … That’s the way to be happy."
(Agnes Martin — legendary abstract painter, revered minimalist, celebrated reconstructionist — in a short 1997 interview by Chuck Smith and Sono Kuwayama, by Maria Popova, Brain Pickings)

E1.5.B.1.3. A QUESTION OF COURAGE

E1.5.B.1.3.a. DO YOU HAVE THE COURAGE TO BRING FORTH THE TREASURES THAT ARE HIDDEN WITHIN YOU? 

E1.5.B.1.3.a_REF1_PH DO YOU HAVE THE COURAGE TO BRING FORTH THE TREASURES THAT ARE HIDDEN WITHIN YOU? "This, I believe, is the central question upon which all creative living hinges: Do you have the courage to bring forth the treasures that are hidden within you? […]
Surely something wonderful is sheltered inside you. I say this with all confidence, because I happen to believe we are all walking repositories of buried treasure. I believe this is one of the oldest and most generous tricks the universe plays on us human beings, both for its own amusement and for ours: The universe buries strange jewels deep within us all, and then stands back to see if we can find them.
The hunt to uncover those jewels — that’s creative living.
The courage to go on that hunt in the first place — that’s what separates a mundane existence from a more enchanted one.
The often surprising results of that hunt — that’s what I call Big Magic. [...]
"“We must risk delight,” he [Jack Gilbert] wrote. “We must have the stubbornness to accept our gladness in the ruthless furnace of this world.” […]
He seemed to live in a state of uninterrupted marvel, and he encouraged [his students] to do the same. He didn’t so much teach them how to write poetry, they said, but why: because of delight. Because of stubborn gladness. He told them that they must live their most creative lives as a means of fighting back against the ruthless furnace of this world.
Most of all, though, he asked his students to be brave. Without bravery, he instructed, they would never be able to realize the vaulting scope of their own capacities. Without bravery, they would never know the world as richly as it longs to be known. Without bravery, their lives would remain small — far smaller than they probably wanted their lives to be. [...]
We all know that when courage dies, creativity dies with it. We all know that fear is a desolate boneyard where our dreams go to desiccate in the hot sun. This is common knowledge; sometimes we just don’t know what to do about it. […]
Creativity is a path for the brave, yes, but it is not a path for the fearless, and it’s important to recognize the distinction. […]
If your goal in life is to become fearless, then I believe you’re already on the wrong path, because the only truly fearless people I’ve ever met were straight-up sociopaths and a few exceptionally reckless three-year-olds — and those aren’t good role models for anyone."
(Elizabeth Gilbert, Big Magic: Creative Living Beyond Fear)

E1.5.B.1.3.a_REF1.1_MU BENJAMIN BRITTEN, SYMPHONIC SUITE, Op. 53a, "Gloriana": I. The tournament

Listen on YouTube :
https://youtu.be/5F34urh3lLA

E1.5.B.1.3.b. THE COURAGE TO LOVE LIFE, INCLUDING ITS LOSSES AND SHORTCOMINGS

E1.5.B.1.3.b_REF1_PH "FEARLESSNESS IS WHAT LOVE SEEKS. Love as craving is determined by its goal, and this goal is freedom from fear. [...]
A love that seeks anything safe and disposable on earth is constantly frustrated, because everything is doomed to die. In this frustration love turns about and its object becomes a negation, so that nothing is to be desired except freedom from fear. Such fearlessness exists only in the complete calm that can no longer be shaken by events expected of the future."
(Hannah Arendt,  Love and Saint Augustine)

E1.5.B.1.3.b_REF1.1_PH THE HUMAN CONDITION OF DESIRING TEMPORAL GOODS LEADS TO CONSTANT FEAR OF LOSS AND PREVENTS ENJOYMENT OF THE PRESENT. "So long as we desire temporal things, we are constantly under this threat, and our fear of losing always corresponds to our desire to have. Temporal goods originate and perish independently of man, who is tied to them by his desire. Constantly bound by craving and fear to a future full of uncertainties, we strip each present moment of its calm, its intrinsic import, which we are unable to enjoy. And so, the future destroys the present. [...]
The present is not determined by the future as such… but by certain events which we hope for or fear from the future, and which we accordingly crave and pursue, or shun and avoid. Happiness consists in possession, in having and holding our good, and even more in being sure of not losing it. Sorrow consists in having lost our good and in enduring this loss. However, for Augustine the happiness of having is not contrasted by sorrow but by fear of losing. The trouble with human happiness is that it is constantly beset by fear. It is not the lack of possessing but the safety of possession that is at stake."
(Hannah Arendt,  Love and Saint Augustine, 1929)

E1.5.B.1.3.b_REF2_PH DESIRE IS A COMBINATION OF AIMING AT SPECIFIC GOODS AND REFERRING BACK TO THE INDIVIDUAL'S UNDERSTANDING OF HAPPINESS, guiding the pursuit of what is perceived to make one happy.
"Every craving is tied to a definite object, and it takes this object to spark the craving itself, thus providing an aim for it. Craving is determined by the definitely given thing it seeks, just as a movement is set by the goal toward which it moves. For, as Augustine writes, love is “a kind of motion, and all motion is toward something.” What determines the motion of desire is always previously given. Our craving aims at a world we know; it does not discover anything new. The thing we know and desire is a “good,” otherwise we would not seek it for its own sake. All the goods we desire in our questing love are independent objects, unrelated to other objects. Each of them represents nothing but its isolated goodness. The distinctive trait of this good that we desire is that we do not have it. Once we have the object our desire ends, unless we are threatened with its loss. In that case the desire to have turns into a fear of losing. As a quest for the particular good rather than for things at random, desire is a combination of “aiming at” and “referring back to.” It refers back to the individual who knows the world’s good and evil and seeks to live happily. It is because we know happiness that we want to be happy, and since nothing is more certain than our wanting to be happy, our notion of happiness guides us in determining the respective goods that then became objects of our desires. Craving, or love, is a human being’s possibility of gaining possession of the good that will make him happy, that is, of gaining possession of what is most his own."
(Hannah Arendt,  Love and Saint Augustine)

E1.5.B.1.3.b_REF2.1_PH "    I COULD NOT LOVE EXCEPT WHERE DEATH
    WAS MINGLING HIS WITH BEAUTY’S BREATH...
We are here at the very heart of Edgar Poe's metaphysical drama. Here the motto of his work and life takes on its full meaning:
Strange motto of his twentieth year, which already speaks to the past after so short a life and yet already carries the deep meaning and fidelity of a whole existence.
Thus, to understand Edgar Poe, one must, at all the decisive moments of his poems and tales, make a synthesis of Beauty, Death and Water. This synthesis of Form, Event and Substance may seem artificial and impossible to the philosopher. And yet it is everywhere. If one loves, one immediately admires, fears and guards. In reveries, the three causes that define form, becoming, and matter, merge so well that they are inseparable. A profound dreamer, like Edgar Poe, has united them in one same symbolic force.
This is why water is the element of delicate and faithful death. Water alone can sleep, preserving its beauty; water alone can die, totally still, and yet keep reflecting, reproducing the dreamer's face, faithful to the Great Remembrance, to the One Shadow, water gives beauty to all shadows, it brings all memories to life. Thus is born a kind of delegated and recurrent narcissism that casts beauty on all those we have loved. Man reflects in his past, for him, all images are a memory."
(Gaston Bachelard, Water and Dreams, 1942)

E1.5.B.1.3.b_REF3_PH ““LOVE, BUT BE CAREFUL WHAT YOU LOVE,” the Roman African philosopher Saint Augustine wrote in the final years of the fourth century. We are, in some deep sense, what we love — we become it as much as it becomes us, beckoned from our myriad conscious and unconscious longings, despairs, and patterned desires. And yet there is something profoundly paradoxical about such an appeal to reason in the notion that we can exercise prudence in matters of love — to have loved is to have known the straitjacket of irrationality that slips over even the most willful mind when the heart takes over with its delicious carelessness.

How to heed Augustine’s caution, not by subjugating but by better understanding our experience of love, is what Hannah Arendt explores in her least known but in many ways most beautiful work, Love and Saint Augustine. […]

It was from Augustine that she borrowed the phrase amor mundi — “love of the world” — which would become a defining feature of her philosophy. Occupied by questions of why we succumb to and normalize evil, Arendt identified as the root of tyranny the act of making other human beings irrelevant. Again and again, she returned to Augustine for the antidote: love.”
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

“Every craving is tied to a definite object, and it takes this object to spark the craving itself, thus providing an aim for it. Craving is determined by the definitely given thing it seeks, just as a movement is set by the goal toward which it moves. For, as Augustine writes, love is “a kind of motion, and all motion is toward something.” What determines the motion of desire is always previously given. Our craving aims at a world we know; it does not discover anything new. The thing we know and desire is a “good,” otherwise we would not seek it for its own sake. All the goods we desire in our questing love are independent objects, unrelated to other objects. Each of them represents nothing but its isolated goodness. The distinctive trait of this good that we desire is that we do not have it. Once we have the object our desire ends, unless we are threatened with its loss. In that case the desire to have turns into a fear of losing. As a quest for the particular good rather than for things at random, desire is a combination of “aiming at” and “referring back to.” It refers back to the individual who knows the world’s good and evil and seeks to live happily. It is because we know happiness that we want to be happy, and since nothing is more certain than our wanting to be happy, our notion of happiness guides us in determining the respective goods that then became objects of our desires. Craving, or love, is a human being’s possibility of gaining possession of the good that will make him happy, that is, of gaining possession of what is most his own. […]

So long as we desire temporal things, we are constantly under this threat, and our fear of losing always corresponds to our desire to have. Temporal goods originate and perish independently of man, who is tied to them by his desire. Constantly bound by craving and fear to a future full of uncertainties, we strip each present moment of its calm, its intrinsic import, which we are unable to enjoy. And so, the future destroys the present. […]

The present is not determined by the future as such… but by certain events which we hope for or fear from the future, and which we accordingly crave and pursue, or shun and avoid. Happiness consists in possession, in having and holding our good, and even more in being sure of not losing it. Sorrow consists in having lost our good and in enduring this loss. However, for Augustine the happiness of having is not contrasted by sorrow but by fear of losing. The trouble with human happiness is that it is constantly beset by fear. It is not the lack of possessing but the safety of possession that is at stake. […]

In their fear of death, those living fear life itself, a life that is doomed to die… The mode in which life knows and perceives itself is worry. Thus the object of fear comes to be fear itself. Even if we should assume that there is nothing to fear, that death is no evil, the fact of fear (that all living things shun death) remains. […]

Fearlessness is what love seeks. Love as craving is determined by its goal, and this goal is freedom from fear. […]

A love that seeks anything safe and disposable on earth is constantly frustrated, because everything is doomed to die. In this frustration love turns about and its object becomes a negation, so that nothing is to be desired except freedom from fear. Such fearlessness exists only in the complete calm that can no longer be shaken by events expected of the future. […]

Even if things should last, human life does not. We lose it daily. As we live the years pass through us and they wear us out into nothingness. It seems that only the present is real, for “things past and things to come are not”; but how can the present (which I cannot measure) be real since it has no “space”? Life is always either no more or not yet. Like time, life “comes from what is not yet, passes through what is without space, and disappears into what is no longer.” Can life be said to exist at all? Still the fact is that man does measure time. Perhaps man possesses a “space” where time can be conserved long enough to be measured, and would not this “space,” which man carries with himself, transcend both life and time?

Time exists only insofar as it can be measured, and the yardstick by which we measure it is space. […]

Memory, the storehouse of time, is the presence of the “no more” (iam non) as expectation is the presence of the “not yet” (nondum). Therefore, I do not measure what is no more, but something in my memory that remains fixed in it. It is only by calling past and future into the present of remembrance and expectation that time exists at all. Hence the only valid tense is the present, the Now. […]

The Now is what measures time backwards and forwards, because the Now, strictly speaking, is not time but outside time. In the Now, past and future meet. For a fleeting moment they are simultaneous so that they can be stored up by memory, which remembers things past and holds the expectation of things to come. For a fleeting moment (the temporal Now) it is as though time stands still, and it is this Now that becomes Augustine’s model of eternity. […]

Who will hold [the heart], and fix it so that it may stand still for a little while and catch for a moment the splendor of eternity which stands still forever, and compare this with temporal moments that never stand still, and see that it is incomparable… but that all this while in the eternal, nothing passes but the whole is present. […]

What prevents man from “living” in the timeless present is life itself, which never “stands still.” The good for which love craves lies beyond all mere desires. If it were merely a question of desiring, all desires would end in fear. And since whatever confronts life from the outside as the object of its craving is sought for life’s sake (a life we are going to lose), the ultimate object of all desires is life itself. Life is the good we ought to seek, namely true life. […]

Desire mediates between subject and object, and it annihilates the distance between them by transforming the subject into a lover and the object into the beloved. For the lover is never isolated from what he loves; he belongs to it… Since man is not self-sufficient and therefore always desires something outside himself, the question of who he is can only be resolved by the object of his desire and not, as the Stoics thought, by the suppression of the impulse of desire itself: “Such is each as is his love” [Augustine wrote]. Strictly speaking, he who does not love and desire at all is a nobody. […]

Man as such, his essence, cannot be defined because he always desires to belong to something outside himself and changes accordingly… If he could be said to have an essential nature at all, it would be lack of self-sufficiency. Hence, he is driven to break out of his isolation by means of love… for happiness, which is the reversal of isolation, more is required than mere belonging. Happiness is achieved only when the beloved becomes a permanently inherent element of one’s own being. […]
(Hannah Arendt, Love and Saint Augustine, 1929)

E1.5.B.1.3.c. FEAR IS A FLIGHT FROM TIMELINESS. NOT KNOWING HOW TO SEIZE THE MOMENT, TO LIVE IN THE MOMENT, IS ANOTHER NAME FOR LACK OF COURAGE.

E1.5.B.1.3.c_REF1_PH "COURAGE, MASTERPIECE OF TIMING
Fear remains an escape from adequate timing. Not knowing how to seize the moment, how to live in the present, that's another name for lack of courage. To be constantly deported to a past or a future, to have no sense of time, only of time running out and of nothing ending or happening. Conversely, "living with a sense of time" becomes the art of continuous rebirth. "When I dance, I dance; when I sleep, I sleep; [...] it's an injustice to corrupt one's own rules. [Have you been able to meditate and manage your life? You've done the greatest work of all. It's a glorious masterpiece to put an end to fear, to come to terms with active inadequacy and the lack that comes. It's not about accepting inertia and its wanderings. "Our task is to compose our morality, not to write books and win, not to win battles and provinces, but to bring order and tranquility to our conduct. Our great and glorious masterpiece is to live properly (2). It's about active wandering, making it a humanizing initiation. 
To "behave well and properly as a man". To which Erasmus would reply that one is not born a human being, one becomes one, and the greatness of humanity comes from the courage of the right moment: "There is nothing so beautiful and legitimate as to behave well and properly as a man, nor science so laborious as to know how to live this life well and naturally; and our wildest disease is to despise our being (3)". The Renaissanceists have this sense of communal life and enjoyment, this sense from before the split. The twentieth century marked the end of convergences, the end of the apparent alliance between progress and reason, morality and science, ethics and technology. [...]
Notes:
(2) Montaigne, Les Essais, III, 13, "L'art de vivre". 
(3) Ibid.
(Cynthia Fleury, The End of Courage, 2010)

E1.5.B.1.3.c_REF2_LIT "I WANT TO WRITE DOWN EVERYTHING I KNOW ABOUT BEING AFRAID, but I’d probably never have enough time to write anything else. Afraid is a country where they issue us passports at birth and hope we never seek citizenship in any other country. The face of afraid keeps changing constantly, and I can count on that change. I need to travel light and fast, and there’s a lot of baggage I’m going to have to leave behind me. Jettison cargo."
(Audre Lorde, A Burst of Light and Other Essays)

E1.5.B.1.3.c_REF3_PH MISTAKES AND PAINFUL EXPERIENCES IN OUR YOUTH ULTIMATELY GIVE LIFE MEANING AND OFTEN LEAD TO A HAPPY LIFE IN LATER YEARS
"I'm sixteen and have just recently gotten really into your work. I was wondering: what advice would you give to your sixteen year old self and why?
TAYA, LOWER SACKVILLE, CANADA

Dear Taya,

This is an excellent question and I am often asked it, but I find it a very difficult question to answer. 

The difficulty is that I am, in fact, my sixteen-year-old self, just half a century older. Not only that but, sitting here at the kitchen table, with the sun streaming through the window, answering your excellent question, my older self, the current destination of my younger self, is mostly happy.

However, my older self is protective and instinctively wants to warn my sixteen-year-old self not to make the mistakes that I know from experience are going to cause him pain. But, you see, this older and more experienced self also knows that the painful things are often the things that ultimately give substance and meaning to life. My older self knows that life’s mistakes are destiny’s way of laying the tracks that will bring my younger self to the place where I am at this very moment — the mostly happy place, where I sit, with the sun coming through the window, writing an answer to your excellent question. 

Have a great life, Taya, it’s all ahead of you.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #176 / DECEMBER 2021)

Read it on The Red Hand Files: https://www.theredhandfiles.com/do-you-pray-with-your-family-and-maybe-friends-hopeing-that-sometimes-someone-leesen-your-despered-litle-iner-voice-to-get-answer-or-gidence-ephifany-in-this-cruel-world-which-most-of/

E1.5.B.1.3.d. HOW TO BREAK FREE FROM YOUR OWN PRISONS?

E1.5.B.1.3.d_REF1_CUR "MY WORK « I WALK DOWN ANOTHER STREET » IS ABOUT THE COURAGE and « the night vision » that has been required to get out of a deep hole and the insights that actually make you take a different path, inspired by Portia Nelson's poem « There's a Hole in My Sidewalk »."
(Louise Swardshammar)

"Chapter I
I walk down the street.
There is a deep hole in the sidewalk.
I fall in.
I am lost… I am helpless.
It isn’t my fault.
It takes forever to find a way out.

Chapter II
I walk down the same street.
There is a deep hole in the sidewalk.
I pretend I don’t see it.
I fall in again.
I can’t believe I am in the same place.
But it isn’t my fault.
It still takes a long time to get out.

Chapter III
I walk down the same street.
There is a deep hole in the sidewalk.
I see it is there.
I still fall in… it’s a habit.
My eyes are open.
I know where I am.
It is my fault… I get out immediately.

Chapter IV
I walk down the same street.
There is a deep hole in the sidewalk.
I walk around it.

Chapter V
I walk down another street."
(Portia Nelson, There's a Hole in My Sidewalk)

E1.5.B.1.3.d_REF2_PO "NO ONE STRIPS NAKED BEFORE THEY GET DRESSED.
How many feathers do I possess and which of those feathers do I assume?
Become who you are - said the philosopher
How can I become who I am if I do not assume my own shadows?
Look at me, I admit, I am also narcissic! My greatest fear is also my greatest desire.
I want to be seen, I want to be loved, contemplated, praised!
Here I am! Look at me!
It's in the act of assuming myself that I recognize myself
It's in the act of assuming myself that
I see myself
It's in the act of assuming myself that I become familiar with myself and my feathers
When I take on my own desires I can realise that I no longer need them 
No one can take off the mask they don't assume to be wearing
It is when I assume my own feathers that I can finally pluck myself.
I transit between repression and acceptance
To finally be able to be naked, to finally be authentic, to finally be free, including from my own prisons".
(Jéssica Miranda)

E1.5.B.1.3.d_REF3_CUR "FIST WAS ONE OF DONATI'S WORKS INCLUDED IN THE POSTWAR EXHIBITION DEDICATED TO MYTH AND MAGIC - Le Surréalisme en 1947 at the Galerie Maeght in Paris. Fist consists of a hand clenching two fishy eyes which together create an uncanny facial expression. The work alludes to the evil eye. In « Le Surréalisme » it was in a gallery dedicated to superstition, where the viewers were meant to conceptually confront and ward off their fears."
(Curatorship: Peggy Guggenheim, Venice)

E1.5.B.1.3.d_REF4_CUR Dans "MY EPIDEMIC" LILI REYNAUD DEWAR RÉFLÉCHIT À CE QUI S'EST JOUÉ PENDANT LA CRISE DU SIDA, même si son pic des années 80 est passé. Une épidémie est forcément collective mais avec le sida les rapports intimes des malades sont exposés. Dans le chapitre "Small blood Opera" présenté à la Biénnale de Venise de 2015, Lili Reynaud Dewar réfléchit sur la peur et le rejet dont sont l'objet les personnes atteintes du sida. 
Dans cette installation, Lili Reynaud Dewar nous présente des vidéos dans lesquelles elle danse nue, reproduisant des chorégraphies de Joséphine Baker dans un lieu publique où l'on comprend qu'elle ne devrait pas se livrer à cette activité. L'artiste a fait le choix de Josephine Baker en partie pour se libérer du traumatisme de la danse classique qu'elle avait vécu enfant, mais surtout parce que Baker a démontré un engagement politique puisqu'elle a quitté les US pour venir en France afin de ne plus être une danseuse dans des spectacle réservés à un public spécifique à cause de la ségrégation. On a pu voir Joséphine Baker comme une femme objectivée, mais on peut aussi penser qu'elle retournait vers le spectateur le regard raciste dont elle faisait l'objet - par l'intermédiaire de la danse. Par son travail riche en couches de significations superposée, Lili Reynaud Dewar nous invite à nous libérer de nos peurs par l'action et la réflexion.

Écouter l'entretien avec Lili Reynaud Dewar: https://youtu.be/IY1-LITK2mk

E1.5.B.1.3.e. HOW TO OVERCOME EXCESSIVE SHYNESS?

E1.5.B.1.3.e_REF1_LIT “I HAVE, HEAVEN FORGIVE ME, A PASSION FOR BEING LIKED — I will not say for being admired, for I am not exacting about that — by every child of Adam I meet! The bottom of it is, I suppose, simply Fear. I must resemble a cowardly dog in my conviction that the most negligible person, any sort of a poor devil, could be terribly dangerous. What I expect them to do to me I am sure I don’t know, but when I meet their eyes—the eye of a peddler, of an organ-grinder, of a grocer’s assistant, of a waiter, of a cab-driver, of the forlornest beggar—I feel as if I could not flatter this ferocious and terrifying being humbly enough, or get away quickly enough! Yes that is what it is. It is just fear. My life would have been different at every point, not only at school but long afterwards, now in fact, if I only had the power to stand up to people and speak out, or strike out, boldly. [...] If only I could have got angry! But I couldn’t. I have a long memory for insults, but I cannot flare up and hit back! It is this combination of a cold and even deadly analytical judgment with a perfect terror of scenes, contradictions, clashes, man-to-man challenges, that does the harm."
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber, p.142-144)

E1.5.B.1.3.f. HOW TO LIBERATE OURSELVES FROM THE FEARS INSTILLED IN US BY OUR PARENTS

E1.5.B.1.3.f_REF1_CUR KLEBER MENDONÇA FILHO, VINIL VERDE [Green Vinyl], 2004, short film 16’
Mother gives Daughter a box full of old, colored little vinyl records. Daughter may listen to them, but she should never, ever, play the green one.

Watch the video on Vimeo:
https://vimeo.com/10024257

E1.5.B.1.3.f_REF2_PH OF COURSE YOU MESSED UP
(The school of life)

Watch the episode on YouTube: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Mk_rbJ4lBYM

E1.5.B.1.3.f_REF3_PH HOW A MESSED UP CHILDHOOD AFFECTS YOU IN ADULTHOOD
(The school of life)

Watch the episod on YouTube: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IgUlowmSeHo

E1.5.B.1.3.g. WAR: AN "OPPORTUNITY" TO EXERCISE THE VIRTUE OF COURAGE

E1.5.B.1.3.g_REF1_PH COURAGEOUS INDIVIDUALS FACE DEATH AND WOUNDS RELUCTANTLY BUT ENDURE THEM FOR A NOBLE CAUSE, despite the pain and the significant loss of life's greatest goods.
"Courage is in itself a painful thing, and it is rightly the object of our praise, because it is more difficult to endure sorrows than to abstain from pleasures. Not that we should think that the end which courage proposes to itself is not a pleasant thing; only, it is obscured by the circumstances which accompany it, as it also occurs in the gymnasium's competitions: the end for which the pugilists are fighting is pleasant, they fight for the crown and honors, whereas the blows which they receive are for beings of flesh, a dire and painful thing, as is the whole of their harsh training. And all these efforts - because of their extent - make the final object appear as insignificant and unpleasant. If then the end concerning courage is of the same order, death and wounds will be painful to the courageous man, who will suffer them reluctantly; he will nevertheless endure them, because it is noble to do so, or it is shameful to shirk them. And the more complete the virtue he possesses and the greater his happiness, the more painful will be the thought of death: for it is for such a man that life is especially worth living, it is he whom death will deprive of the greatest goods, and he is fully aware of this: all this is not without affliction. But he is no less brave, perhaps even more so, because he prefers the noble labors of war to these great goods of which we speak."
(Aristotle, The Nicomachean Ethics)

E1.5.B.1.4. DEPENDENCE ON WORK

E1.5.B.1.4_REF1_LIT "IT IS A MELANCHOLY CONSIDERATION, THAT SO MUCH OF OUR TIME IS NECESSARILY TO BE SPENT UPON THE CARE OF LIVING, and that we can seldom obtain ease in one respect but by resigning it in another ; yet I suppose we are by this dispensation not less happy in the whole, than if the spontaneous bounty of Nature poured all that we want into our hands. A few, if they were thus left to themselves, would, perhaps, spend their time in laudable pursuits ; but the greater part would prey upon the quiet of each other, or, in the want of other objects, would prey upon themselves."
(James Boswell, The Life of Samuel Johnson, 1791)

E1.5.B.1.4_REF1.1_CUR IF WE WERE SPEARED WORK, WOULD WE BE HAPPIER? "It is a melancholy consideration, that so much of our time is necessarily to be spent upon the care of living, and that we can seldom obtain ease in one respect but by resigning it in another ; yet I suppose we are by this dispensation not less happy in the whole, than if the spontaneous bounty of Nature poured all that we want into our hands. A few, if they were thus left to themselves, would, perhaps, spend their time in laudable pursuits ; but the greater part would prey upon the quiet of each other, or, in the want of other objects, would prey upon themselves. "
(James Boswell, The Life of Samuel Johnson, 1791)

"Marc Weis and Martin di Mabbia, known as M+M, have created a sinister 3D horror movie in miniature format. The plot in short goes as follows: a tenant feels threatened by the outside world. When an uninvited guest is trying to come close to her, the film ends in a shocking manner. The piece is reminiscent of Roman Polanski's Apartment trilogy and conveys several amazing references and actions. This is surprising in the sense that the protagonists of the vastly symbolic frames are praying mantises. The work's setting - made without any computer animations - is a doll's house. However, the movie is far from cute.
The surrealists had also been fascinated by these anthropomorphic mantises, predominantly remaining in a somewhat statuesque rigidity as well as the myth of the love act, lethal for the males. Shot in 3D - typical for M+M - and presented as a space filling video installation, the instinct driven protagonists appear to be moving closely to the viewer in their physical presence [augmented by the 3D glasses]."
(Cora Waschke)

E1.6.B.wE1.5.B.1.4. WORK AND ACTIVITY
Joy in activity. Chosen work, in the sense of an exercise of our creativity and a spiral of self-improvement, is an element that nourishes joy. But we need to know what we want and be able to work "at leisure"... 

E1.5.B.1.5. RELIGIONS THAT DO MORE HARM THAN GOOD

E1.5.B.1.5_REF1_PH HANNAH ARENDT, UNDERLINES THAT THE DEVELOPMENT OF CHRISTIANISM HAS DEFORMED THE DOCTRINE OF JESUS WITH FUTURE CHASTIMATES AND FEAR, making the "good news" of the Gospels a source of fear rather than joy.
"Perhaps nothing in the whole development of Christianity through the centuries is more contrary or more alien to the letter and spirit of the teaching of Jesus of Nazareth than this detailed catalogue of future punishments and this enormous power of coercion through fear, which only in the last stages of the modern age has lost its political and public importance. From the point of view of religious thought, it is certainly a terrible irony that the "good news" of the Gospels, that "life is eternal," could subsequently lead not to an increase in joy but to an increase in fear on earth, and could make man's death not easier but more painful. "
(Hannah Arendt, The Cultural Crisis, 1954)

E1.7.wE1.5.B.1.5. SPIRITUALITY FREED FROM THE GRIP OF RELIGION
The path of spiritual practice is a technique of the self, founded on a relationship with life, the world, and others. It aims to instigate inner transformation in the person who partakes in it.

1.5.B.1.6. TO WHAT EXTENT IS THE SENSATION OF FREEDOM NECESSARY TO HAPPINESS?

E1.5.B.1.6_REF1_LIT "WHAT I CALL HAPPINESS IS, IN THE END, NOTHING MORE THAN THE INTENSE FEELING OF MY FREEDOM. 
I can go, I'm happy."
(Jean-René Huguenin, Diary)

E1.5.B.1.6_REF2_SOC THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SENSE OF FREEDOM AND LIFE SATISFACTION
A particular channel through which social environment may affect happiness is freedom: the society we live in may crucially affect the availability of options that we have to shape our own life.
The visualization below shows the relationship between self-reported sense of freedom and self-reported life satisfaction using data from the Gallup World Poll. The variable measuring life satisfaction corresponds to country-level averages of survey responses to the Cantril Ladder question (a 0-10 scale, where 10 is the highest level of life satisfaction); while the variable measuring freedom corresponds to the share of people who agree with the statement “In this country, I am satisfied with my freedom to choose what I do with my life”.
As we can see, there is a clear positive relationship: countries where people feel free to choose and control their lives tend to be countries where people are happier. As Inglehart et al. (2008) show, this positive relationship holds even after we control for other factors, such as incomes and strength of religiosity.
Interestingly, this chart also shows that while there are some countries where the perceived sense of freedom is high but average life satisfaction is low (e.g. Rwanda); there are no countries where the perceived sense of freedom is low but average life satisfaction is high (i.e. there are no countries in the top left area of the chart).
To our knowledge there are no rigorous studies exploring the causal mechanisms linking freedom and happiness. However, it seems natural to expect that self-determination and absence of coercion are important components of what people consider a happy and meaningful life."
(Updated happiness and life satisfaction world data)

Read the full article:
https://ourworldindata.org/happiness-and-life-satisfaction#the-relationship-between-sense-of-freedom-and-life-satisfaction

E1.5.B.1.6_REF3_PH "JOY IN COMMANDING AND OBEYING.— Commanding is a joy, like obeying; the former when it has not yet become a habit, the latter just when it has become a habit. Old servants under new masters advance each other mutually in giving pleasure."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human All Too Human II, Aphorism 311, 1879)

E1.5.B.1.7. SEXUAL FULFILLMENT?
While culture can be liberating, it also imposes limits on our sexual fulfillment, leading to unhappiness when curbed. Sigmund Freud proposed that culture has tamed sexual life, reducing it to merely a means of reproduction or, in more liberal societies, confining it to a love relationship restricted to two individuals.

E1.5.B.1.7_REF1_CUR WHEN ARTISTS REMIND US OF THE POWER OF SEXUAL DESIRE and that it cannot be curbed...
... at the risk of seriously compromising our happiness.

E1.6.G.2.14.wE1.5.B.1.7.

E1.5.B.2. LACK OF EDUCATION: ARE THE MORE CULTURED THE HAPPIER?

E1.5.B.2_REF1_PH ONE OF THE LIMITATIONS TO OUR FREEDOM TO PURSUE HAPPINESS IS THE CONDITIONING OF OUR EDUCATIONAL MODEL, which sometimes locks us into limited patterns of thought at the expense of personal fulfilment.

E1.5.B.2_REF2_CUR CARPE DIEM: CEASE THE DAY, MAKE YOUR LIVES EXTRAORDINARY
(Peter Weir, The dead poet society, 1989)

Watch the scene on YouTube:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vi0Lbjs5ECI

E1.6.D.wE1.5.B.2. 

E1.5.B.3. THE FATIGUE of being what you want to be is a "good" fatigue. The other fatigue would be the petty demon of everyday life [...] - the hassles that prevent us from being what we would like to be. It is also the fatigue that prevents us from being present to the world - this inability to embrace every moment weighs on us.

E1.5.B.3.1. ODE TO FATIGUE
The fatigue experienced by someone who is as they desired to be is considered "good" fatigue. Alternatively, the other type of fatigue acts as a petty demon of everyday life. This fatigue involves the hassles that prevent us from becoming what we aspire to be. It also prevents us from being present in the world, and this inability to fully engage in every moment weighs heavily on us.

E1.5.B.3.1_REF1_PH HE WHO IS AS HE WISHED TO BE ENJOYS 'GOOD' FATIGUE 
"Ode to fatigue
Parodying La Fontaine's Les animaux malades de la peste (The Sick Animals of the Plague), and substituting fatigue for the plague, we could say of fatigue that it is now present among men as "an evil that spreads terror, [fatigue], if it must be called by its name, makes war on men, not all of whom die, but all of whom are afflicted. [...] no food aroused their envy, neither wolf nor fox spied on the sweet and innocent prey, the turtle doves fled from each other, no more love given, no more joy".
But the tiredness of the one who is as he wanted to be is a 'good' tiredness. The other kind of tiredness would be the petty demon of everyday life (the phrase comes from Jean Giono) - the annoyances that prevent us from being what we would like to be - but doesn't it also reveal our human condition? Existential fatigue? This tiredness is like a spider's web that catches us without ever facing us: it is treacherous. Like the Lilliputians who immobilise Gulliver by appearing everywhere. Like quicksand, in which the more you stir, the deeper you sink - and from which you can't get out on your own".
(Eric Fiat in Les Chemins de la Philosophie , broadcast on France Culture on 20/12/2017)

Listen to the podcast :
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/la-fatigue-24-ode-a-la-fatigue

E1.5.B.3.2. FATIGUE MAY BE THE REMORSE OF HOURS BADLY SPENT
Could existential fatigue be the memory of hours that are dead because they are empty, those hours of life that we haven't used as an hour of thought or an hour of sympathy? The greater our degree of presence in the world, the less tired we are?

E1.5.B.3.2_REF1_PH “THE AFFECTIVE CHARACTER OF DURATION-THE JOY OR PAIN OF BEING - derives from the proportion or disproportion of living hours used as time for thought, or time for feeling.  Matter neglects being, life neglects living, and the heart neglects loving. It  is  in slumber that we lose paradise. But let us delve more deeply into the scenario of our idleness: an atom radiates with frequency, and hence exists by using a great number,  though never all,  of its instants. A living  cell is already  more sparing in its efforts, using a  mere fraction of the temporal possibilities furnished by the ensemble of atoms that constitute it. As for thought, it is by irregular flashes that it utilizes life. Three types of filters through which all too few instants can emerge  into con-sciousness!  And so the shadow of mute suffering stalks us whenever we go in search of lost instants. Yes, we recall those rich hours marked by the endless pealing of Easter bells,  those bells of resurrection whose strokes we never count because they all count, because they each give rise to an echo in our awakened soul.  But this joyful remembrance readily turns into remorse as soon as we compare those hours of full life to the slow intellectual hours, relatively sparse as they are;  to the dead empty hours, so empty of purpose as Carlyle would lament; to the unending hostile hours, as they yield nothing. 
And so we dream of  a divine hour that would bestow everything. Not the replete hour, but the complete hour. The  hour where all instants of time would be utilized by matter, the  hour where all instants realized by matter would be utilized by life, the hour where all living instants would be felt, loved, thought-hence, the hour where the relativity of consciousness would fade away, for consciousness would now be commensurate with the fullness of time. 
Ultimately, objective time is maximal time-that time which, contain¬ing each  and every instant, is composed of the richly dense ensemble of the Creator's acts.”
(Gaston Bachelard, Intuition of the instant, 1931)

E1.5.B.3.2_REF2_PO "I AM GRATEFUL TO THE POET IN US FASCINATED BY A SIMPLE WAVE,
to this residual part which still resembles us at the end of our fatigues and our lost days,
to this part that we would like to believe to be as irreducible as it is rebellious to the injunction of fashion,
rebel to the dreams that are chartered in order to lose us 
and which makes us look for words to try among the crowd 
to wake up in each of us the poet who was silenced.
(Michel Baglin, Alcohol of the Winds, 2010)

E1.5.B.3.3. THE EXHAUSTION OF BALANCING COMPETING PARTS OF OURSELVES
Can we escape the work-life, self, relationship balance cultural trap? Do we have to make such a dreadfull choice - between working OR being alive? Isn't it rather that "we are collectively exhausted because of our inability to hold competing parts of ourselves together in a more integrated way [...] To neglect any one of the three marriages is to impoverish them all, because they are not actually separate commitments but different expressions of the way each individual belongs to the world."
When work is seen as the ransom of existence, rather than one's "due" (Rodin's expression), one experiences existential fatigue.

E1.5.B.3.3_REF1_PH "THE EQUILIBRIUM BETWEEN PRODUCTIVITY AND PRESENCE IS ONE OF THE HARDEST THINGS TO MASTER IN LIFE, and one of the most important. We, both as a culture and as individuals, often conflate it with the deceptively similar-sounding yet profoundly different notion of “work/life balance” — a concept rather disheartening upon closer inspection. It implies, after all, that we must counter the downside — that which we must endure in order to make a living — with the upside — that which we long to do in order to feel alive. It implies allocating half of our waking hours to something we begrudge while anxiously awaiting the other half to arrive so we can live already. What a woefully shortchanging way to exist — lest we forget, so speaks Annie Dillard: “How we spend our days is, of course, how we spend our lives.”
In The Three Marriages: Reimagining Work, Self and Relationship (public library) — a book reminiscent of Parker Palmer’s beautiful Thoreau-esque writings on the art of inner wholeness yet wholly revelatory in its own right — English poet and philosopher David Whyte aptly calls “work/life balance” a “phrase that often becomes a lash with which we punish ourselves” and offers an emboldening way out of this cultural trap. In an immensely insightful inquiry into these three primary commitments we all make in life, consciously or not, and the dynamics common to them all — the sequence of recognition, pursuit, disappointment, and recommitment — he explores “all those strange and inexplicable inner ways we belong to ourselves.”
In a sentiment reminiscent of Emerson — who observed in his reflections on how we grow: “People wish to be settled; only as far as they are unsettled is there any hope for them.” — Whyte turns a skeptical eye toward the concept of “balance” between work and life. [...]
And yet the most challenging marriage of all is the invisible, private one behind the two public-facing commitments of work and relationship — “the internal and often secret marriage to that tricky movable frontier called ourselves.” While poets and psychologists agree that the self is a fluid phenomenon and there is no such thing as fixed personality, we still cling to the comforting falsehood that the self is a stable foundation. And yet in its very instability, Whyte suggests, lies its promise of satisfaction — the self “moves and changes and surprises us as much as anything in the outer world to which it wants to commit,” and that outer world invariably shapes our inner experience. "
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings)

E1.5.B.3.3_REF1.1_PH "POETS HAVE NEVER USED THE WORD BALANCE, FOR GOOD REASON. First of all, it is too obvious and therefore untrustworthy; it is also a deadly boring concept and seems to speak as much to being stuck and immovable, as much as to harmony. There is also the sense of unbalancing that must take place in order to push a person into a new and larger set of circumstances. […]
The current understanding of work-life balance is too simplistic. People find it hard to balance work with family, family with self, because it might not be a question of balance. Some other dynamic is in play, something to do with a very human attempt at happiness that does not quantify different parts of life and then set them against one another. We are collectively exhausted because of our inability to hold competing parts of ourselves together in a more integrated way." 
(David Whyte, The Three Marriages: Reimagining Work, Self and Relationship)

E1.5.B.3.3_REF1.1.a_PH “LIFE IS SIMPLE BUT NOT EASY. The problem is we want life to be easy, which makes it complicated.”
(FS Street, Brain food)

E1.5.B.3.3_REF1.2_PH "HUMAN BEINGS ARE CREATURES OF BELONGING, though they may come to that sense of belonging only through long periods of exile and loneliness. Interestingly, we belong to life as much through our sense that it is all impossible, as we do through the sense that we will accomplish everything we have set out to do. This sense of belonging and not belonging is lived out by most people through three principal dynamics: first, through relationship to other people and other living things (particularly and very personally, to one other living, breathing person in relationship or marriage); second, through work; and third, through an understanding of what it means to be themselves, discrete individuals alive and seemingly separate from everyone and everything else."
(David Whyte, The Three Marriages: Reimagining Work, Self and Relationship)

E1.5.B.3.3_REF1.2.a_PH "THESE ARE THE THREE MARRIAGES: WORK, SELF AND OTHER. […]
We can call these three separate commitments marriages because at their core they are usually lifelong commitments and … they involve vows made either consciously or unconsciously… To neglect any one of the three marriages is to impoverish them all, because they are not actually separate commitments but different expressions of the way each individual belongs to the world. [...]
We should stop thinking in terms of work-life balance. Work-life balance is a concept that has us simply lashing ourselves on the back and working too hard in each of the three commitments. In the ensuing exhaustion we ultimately give up on one or more of them to gain an easier life. [...]
We can still make a real life even when crowded by other identities, or even when unbalanced and intoxicated with desire, or even when we are disappointed in work or love, and perhaps the way, at the center of all this deep love of belonging and this deep exhaustion of belonging, we may have waiting for us, at the end of the tunnel, a marriage of marriages, a life worth living, and one we can call, despite all the difficulties and imperfections, our very own. [...]
We are each a river with a particular abiding character, but we show radically different aspects of our self according to the territory through which we travel. […]
Neglecting this internal marriage, we can easily make ourselves a hostage to the externals of work and the demands of relationship. We find ourselves unable to move in these outer marriages because we have no inner foundation from which to step out with a firm persuasion. It is as if, absent a loving relationship with this inner representation of our self, we fling ourselves in all directions in our outer lives, looking for love in all the wrong places."
(David Whyte, The Three Marriages: Reimagining Work, Self and Relationship)

E1.5.B.3.3_REF2_PH "IN SHORT, I AM CONVINCED, BOTH BY FAITH AND EXPERIENCE, THAT TO MAINTAIN ONE’S SELF ON THIS EARTH IS NOT A HARDSHIP BUT A PASTIME, if we will live simply and wisely; as the pursuits of the simpler nations are still the sports of the more artificial. It is not necessary that a man should earn his living by the sweat of his brow, unless he sweats easier than I do."
(Henry David Thoreau, Walden, 1854)

E1.5.B.3.1_REF1_PH.wE1.5.B.3.3

E1.5.B.3.4. ACEDIA: WHEN WE LOSE OUR TASTE FOR EXERCISE AND FATIGUE TAKES OVER.
"Burn-out" is not a new concept; it was known as acedia in the Middle Ages, especially among monks. Acedia translates into weariness, slackness, and sometimes hyperactivity without being present in one's actions - this is professional burn-out. Acedia differs from boredom in that boredom is a state of waiting without knowing what for, and it discredits everything that arises. In contrast, acedia no longer holds any expectations.

E1.5.B.3.4_REF1_PH "AKÈDIA
Acedia

Feeling, state of a monk who disinvests from asceticism, who can no longer invest in it (different from losing faith). It's not a loss of faith, but a loss of involvement. State of depression: moodiness, weariness, sadness, boredom, discouragement. (Spiritual) life seems monotonous, aimless, tedious and meaningless: the ascetic ideal is obscured, without attraction. Cassian (Institutions): [...] what the Greeks called akedia, and which we may call boredom or anxiety of the heart (taedium sive anxietas cordis). This phenomenon often appears in the stories of Eastern eremitism. [...]

It's a state (of degradation through blockage) closer to aphanisis (Jones' term: state of non-desire, fear of non-desire) than to castration (fear of castration). [...]

A process well described by Robinson, or rather the sailor Selkirk: "But these appetites [needs] were satisfied, the desire for companionship gnawed at him just as much, and it seemed to him that he was the least needy when everything was lacking; for what was necessary for the support of the body he could easily acquire, while the ardent desire to see a human face again, which arose in the interval between the devouring bodily appetites, was scarcely bearable. He became dull, languid, sad, and could hardly restrain himself from doing violence to himself [...]".

I give these references [...] to Robinson to suggest that acedia is not exclusively associated with the monastic state. We are not monks, but we are interested in acedia. This is precisely because it is typically associated with asceticism, i.e. the practice (in the etymological sense) of a way of life. Acedia is not a belief, an idea, an option of belief (acedia is not a doubt), but the renunciation of a way of life. Acedia: a repeated, widespread, insistent moment when we've had enough of our way of life, our relationship with the world (the mundane). I can wake up one morning and see my week's programme unfolding before me without hope. It repeats itself, it goes round and round: the same tasks, the same appointments, and yet there's no involvement, even if each part of the programme is bearable, sometimes even pleasant. [...]

What is the relationship between acedia and the concept of living together? Historically, a concept linked above all to eremitic asceticism: painful withdrawal from the asceticism of solitude → return of the hermit to the world. Cenobitism: probably partly conceived as a means of combating acedia by integrating the monk into a strong community structure. Acedia (modern): when one can no longer invest in others, in living with others, without being able to invest in solitude. → The waste of everything, without even a place for this waste: waste without a dustbin".
(Roland Barthes, How to Live Together, course at the Collège de France, 1976-1977)

E1.6.B.3.7_REF2_PH.wE1.5.B.3.4_REF1_PH

E1.5.B.3.4_REF2_PO "BREVITY

Why are you so withdrawn? don't you love, as before,
 don't you now no longer love the song? you were fond of it though as a youth,
 In the days of hope,
When you sang without end!"
As is my happiness, so is my song. - Will you bathe in the sunset
It is over, and the earth is cold,
And the night bird flutters
 Uncomfortably before your eyes."
(Friedrich Hölderlin)

E1.5.B.3.4_REF3_PH “BURNOUT FEELS LIKE A LIVING CENTRAL ABSENCE, NOT ONLY OF A CENTRE, BUT THE SOURCES THAT USED TO RISE FROM THAT CENTRE.
The exhaustion of burnout always recalls a previously felt internal fire, one from which our unquenchable energies once emerged. Burnout denotes a kind of amnesia: not only in the forgetting of our very personal priorities but the inability to locate a source inside us that previously seemed to run through all the seasons of our life. This loss of a fiery essential centre is also experienced as a loss of faith: a form of forgetting, not only that the source actually existed inside me in the first place but that I might not now ever remember how to drink from it again. […]
Burnout always involves a loss of the timeless and therefore of the ability to rest. Burnout, in a very profound way, is a loss of friendship with time itself… the experience of feeling continually out of season… In the loss of faith in existence itself, we refuse, in a kind of symmetrical sympathy, to fully exist ourselves. Being out of season with the outside world means we also miss our own inner, creative, tidal comings and goings. […]
Burnout calls for creative breakdown, either in submitting to unconscious self-sabotage, the way that disasters large and small seem to track our exhausted burned-out self on a daily basis, the way we actually create those disasters unknowingly ourselves, trying to make a break for freedom or to create a conscious creative breakdown. Burnout is often as much the resistance to making these changes as being worn down by what we cannot seem to change: all the ways I find it impossible to leave the job, or leave the relationship; all the ways I find it impossible to change my approach to work, or all the ways I need to simply learn to love again must be looked at and allowed to break down and fall away. […]
Burnout fully realised is also the decisive, exhausted moment in which we realise we cannot go on in the same way.
Not being able to go on, is always in the end, a creative act, the threshold moment of our transformation away from physical exhaustion. Not being able to go on is the beginning of a proper relationship with the timeless and the healing possibilities of timelessness: healing ourselves from burnout always involves a reacquaintance with the eternal: my ability to experience the timeless is a parallel to my ability to rest. […]
The foundation from which we transform the experience of burnout is always the realisation that we have been measuring all the wrong things in all the wrong ways and that we have for too long, mis-measured our sense of self in the same way; that we have allowed the shallow rewards of false goals or false people to mesmerise, bedazzle and entrain us: to hide from us an ancient and abiding human dynamic — that we belong to something greater and even better for us than the realm of the measured.”
(David Whyte, Consolations II)

E1.5.B.3.5. FATIGUE: A MISSED OPPORTUNITY FOR WONDER AND ECSTASY IN THE FACE OF REALITY'S STRANGENESS.
For some, fatigue signifies a surrender to the body, a testament to their encounter with reality - they allow their bodies to fully absorb their existence. For others, like Jean-Paul Sartre's character Roquentin, who is repulsed by reality, fatigue is a sign of their rejection of reality. They view such bodily surrender as complacency - they resist the inherent state of existence (what is) to recreate themselves in an existentialist manner.

E1.5.B.3.5_REF1_PH "INTELLIGENCE SHOWS ITS COURAGE BY GRASPING ALTERNATIVES. There are other ways to be right. A thousand other ways that lead elsewhere. And this claim to the elsewhere and the alternative remains, in the final analysis, the prerogative of gifted rationalities. 
Moreover, behind the melancholy of the self lies not so much intelligence as the fear of a self that achieves nothing. From then on, fear prevails over intelligence, splitting the original unity. The self cannot resist, and beyond the melancholy - which knew how to remain a little literary - comes nausea. On the other side of our being is a vindictive Roquentin. "I don't know how to take advantage of the opportunity: I walk at random, empty and quiet, under this unused sky. (1)" 
Notes:
(1) Jean-Paul Sartre, Nausea, 1938".
(Cynthia Fleury, The End of Courage, 2010)

E1.5.B.3.5_REF2_PH "ASTONISHMENT IS BORN OF THE ENCOUNTER WITH THE STRANGE, THE UNUSUAL. This strangeness can be unsettling because it shatters tour habits and places us in the presence of a stranger, a host (hospes, the one who gives or receives hospitality), perhaps even hostile (hostis, the enemy, same root); but this strangeness can still be delightful, it can take us, like a kidnapping, to a higher world that transports us with enthusiasm, in an "explosion of joy". And we can still experience the disconcerting strangeness of this world in the indifference of boredom, when everything is external and indifferent to us, when we suddenly see the absurdity of a daily life that we had come to regard as normal out of habit. Three modes, then, of experiencing the feeling that the world exists: the zero degree of boredom, the minor mode of anguish, the major mode of ecstasy. If we now turn our attention to each of these, we'll become familiar with strangeness and, short of knowing the unknowable, or of making sense of nonsense, we'll be better able to draw its boundaries".
(Jacques Darriulat, Being and Existence, 3-Experiencing Existence, 2020)

E1.5.B.3.5_REF3_PH "WHEN ANXIOUS, WE SUFFER THE OPPRESSION OF MEER PRESENCE, the world which, in the eyes of anxiety, becomes strangely unsettling, exerting against us what we call 'the power of things'.
Under the weight of anxiety, we intimately experience the monstrosity of the phenomenal and the incomprehensible permanence of the Presence, which opens us to the question of Being. This is why the object of anxiety is radically unspecified, it is not about what exists but about existence itself, not about what is but about being itself. And this oppression is fundamental, because it reminds us of the absence and nothingness of another life, which the limited circle of habit has repressed. It is through the ordeal of anguish that man comes to know himself as a being destined to die, and discovers within himself an 'impulse to live' that had hitherto been suppressed by the overwhelming rituals of daily life."
(Jacques Darriulat, Being and Existence, 3-Experiencing Existence, 2020)

E1.5.B.3.5_REF3.1_PH ANGUISH, ACCORDING TO HEIDEGGER, IS A FUNDAMENTAL EXPERIENCE THAT LIBERATES US FROM ROUTINE AND OPENS US UP TO THE QUESTION OF BEING. This experience is essential for escaping the inauthentic life and awakening the intellect to its true power.
“If boredom suffers from the monotony of Being, like the ever-recurring sea, anguish emerges from that state of imbecilic stupor, almost hypnosis, which meditates depression. Boredom is prodigiously indifferent to the platitude, to the overwhelming universality of Existence, everywhere present. But this indifference turns into distress, and even terror, when it is experienced in the feeling of anguish. In the first section of the first part of Sein und Zeit (there is no second part, the work remains unfinished), starting with chapter VI, § 40: “The fundamental affection of anguish as the privileged opening of Dasein” (14), Heidegger develops an “analytic of Dasein”, a reasoned description of the mode of existence that is specifically human, in an astonishing language that is difficult to translate and that belongs to him alone, as if kindled by some fire. Unlike the animal, which inhabits a habitat whose horizon is limited by nature - every animal has its own environment, whose frontier it does not transgress of its own accord, but only when forced to do so by danger, and then at the risk of its own life - man is the living being who has no environment of his own, whose world is not bounded, but rather open to the indefiniteness of transgression. This is why the beast never willingly leaves its niche, whereas man - that Being who only makes sense by asking the question of Being - launches his probes “beyond the sun, beyond the ethers, / Beyond the confines of the starry spheres” (Baudelaire). Dasein, then, is never housed in a specific world, but always stretched towards a beyond whose absence, or nothingness, it suffers. It is only in this tension towards, in the existence of a pro-ject, a project beyond itself, that Dasein becomes worthy of its destination, its historical destiny, in the sense that its destiny does not depend on the historical sequence of circumstances, but on Dasein's very being. If Dasein is thus like a being beyond itself, in debt to itself, to what it is not yet, if no world, however perfect, can calm the movement that carries it beyond, it is because it belongs to the vocation, the "ad-vocation" whose address it perceives, to always question, beyond any manifested world, the Being from which the world comes. Man exists only to provoke being, to ask that question of being which, according to Wittgenstein, is nonsense, but which, according to Heidegger, is the only way to unlock the circle of routine and thus to awaken thought to the power that belongs to it. For the task of thought is not to know or master being, much less to immerse itself in thinking about itself, but to maintain itself in questioning, never forgetting the enigma of being - at the risk of becoming stupid, trapped in a habitat made up of our habits, like a chatter that goes round and round in the circle of the norm, the discourse of the anonymous "someone", the discourse of everyone and no one, and not the authentic declaration of the one who dares to speak. In a style that owes its tension to the dark, nihilistic Romanticism that inspired it, Heidegger destines Dasein to the thought of being - to think is not to know, not to understand, but to weigh the weight of the incomprehensible - an anxiety from which we must not turn away, which we must not forget, for fear of sinking into the inauthentic, worthless life that no longer responds to the call of thought and therefore dies before its death. Anguish, then, is the primordial experience that opens the limited horizon of routine to the insurmountable dimension of the enigma, to the thought of Being. [...]
In anguish (die Angst, from angustia, “narrow”, “constricted”: we are anguished when we find ourselves trapped, like the speleologist in a bottleneck that slowly narrows around him and closes the way back), we suffer the oppression of meer presence, the world which, in the eyes of anxiety, becomes strangely unsettling, exerting against us what we call 'the power of things'. [...]
Under the weight of anxiety, we intimately experience the monstrosity of the phenomenal and the incomprehensible permanence of the Presence, which opens us to the question of Being. This is why the object of anxiety is radically unspecified, it is not about what exists but about existence itself, not about what is but about being itself. And this oppression is fundamental, because it reminds us of the absence and nothingness of another life, which the limited circle of habit has repressed. It is through the ordeal of anguish that man comes to know himself as a being destined to die, and discovers within himself an 'impulse to live' that had hitherto been suppressed by the overwhelming rituals of daily life."
(Jacques Darriulat, Being and Existence, 3-Experiencing Existence, 2020)

E1.5.B.3.5_REF3.1.a_PH "HEIDEGGER'S PENETRATING ANALYSIS FINDS ITS TRANSLATION IN THE STYLE OF THE POPULAR NOVEL NAUSEA, published by Jean-Paul Sartre in 1938. Antoine Roquentin, a drifter who has come back from everything, is engaged in vague research into the life of an 18th-century marquis and ends up in Bouville, a place reminiscent of Le Havre, where the author, an exiled Parisian, bitterly spent his early years as a teacher. Roquentin gets bogged down in Bouville as one gets bogged down in mud, sinking little by little as if absorbed by the inertia of things, by their overwhelming presence. One depressing day, Roquentin comes to sit in Bouville's public garden, a common place for Sunday boredom. Sartre devotes an impressive ten pages to the brutal, shattering revelation of the monstrosity of existence: 'Never, before these last days, had I felt what it meant to exist [...] Suddenly it was there, as clear as day: existence had suddenly revealed itself. It had lost its harmless appeal as an abstract category: it was the very dough of things. "
(Jacques Darriulat, Being and Existence, 3-Experiencing Existence, 2020)

E1.5.B.3.5_REF4_PH “ANXIETY [...]
Contingency is like a possibility that has come to pass. Contingent things are those that are and could not have been otherwise. Every individual being is therefore contingent. This is what anxiety obscurely perceives or manifests, like the shadow cast by nothingness on the suddenly fragile evidence of being. "In anxiety," writes Heidegger, "being as a whole becomes unstable." This is because being loses its necessity, fullness, and justification. Why is there something rather than nothing? There is no answer. All being is contingent and superfluous, as Sartre would say—hence the nausea, which is his vertigo—and absurd, as Camus would say. Being only appears by detaching itself—but why and how?—from the imperceptible background of what we cannot otherwise conceive. "In the clear night of the nothingness of anxiety," writes Heidegger, "the original manifestation of being as such finally shows itself: namely, that there is something rather than nothing." However, as Valéry said, nothingness breaks through, or at least anxiety makes us feel that way. »
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.5.B.3.5_REF5_PH LISA FELDMAN BARRETT SPECULATES THAT ANXIETY IS A DISORDER OF PREDICTION THAT IS THE OPPOSITE OF DEPRESSION: INSTEAD OF BEING LOCKED INTO THE PAST, AN ANXIOUS BRAIN FAILS TO MAKE SUCCESSFUL PREDICTIONS, LEAVING IT OVERWHELMED BY UNRESOLVED PREDICTION ERROR FROM THE WORLD AND A CHRONIC STATE OF UNCERTAINTY.
“Anxiety is a condition that seems very different from chronic pain and depression. When you’re anxious, you feel worried or worked up, like you don’t know what to do with yourself, and generally miserable. This is a stark contrast with depression, in which you feel sluggish, like you can’t go on with life, and also generally miserable, and with chronic pain, which is, well, painful.
So far, we’ve learned that emotion, chronic pain, chronic stress, and de-pression all involve the interoceptive and control networks. Those same networks are critical to anxiety as well. Anxiety is still a puzzle being unraveled, but one thing seems certain: it is yet another disorder of prediction and prediction error across these two networks. The neural pathways studied in anxiety for prediction and prediction error are also the same ones as for emotion, pain, stress, and depression.
Traditional research on anxiety disorders is founded on the old “triune brain” model, that cognition controls emotion. Your allegedly emotional amygdala is overactive, they say, and your so-called rational prefrontal cortex is failing to regulate it. This approach is still influential, even though the amygdala is not the home of any emotion, the prefrontal cortex does not house cognition, and emotion and cognition are whole-brain constructions that cannot regulate each other. So, how is anxiety made? We don’t know all the details yet, but we have some tantalizing clues.
I speculate that an anxious brain, in a sense, is the opposite of a de-pressed brain. In depression, prediction is dialed way up and prediction er-ror way down, so you’re locked into the past. In anxiety, the metaphorical dial is stuck on allowing too much prediction error from the world, and too many predictions are unsuccessful. With insufficient prediction, you don’t know what’s coming around the next corner, and life contains a lot of cor-ners. That’s classic anxiety.

Anxiety sufferers, for whatever reason, have weakened connections between several key hubs in the interoceptive network, including the amygdala. Some of these hubs also happen to sit in the control network. These weakened connections likely translate into an anxious brain that is clumsy at crafting predictions to match the immediate circumstances, and that fails to learn effectively from experience. You might predict threats needlessly, or create uncertainty by predicting imprecisely or not at all. In addition, your interoceptive inputs become even more noisy than usual when your body budget has been in the red for a while; as a consequence, your brain ignores them. These situations leave you open to a lot of uncertainty and a lot of prediction error that you can’t resolve. And uncertainty is more unpleasant and arousing than assured harm, because if the future is a mystery, you can’t prepare for it. For example, when people are seriously ill but have an excellent chance of recovery, they are less satisfied with life than people who know their disease is permanent.
Based on the evidence, it appears that anxiety, like depression, is a con-structed category in the same fashion as emotion, pain, and stress. The misery you feel in anxiety and depression tells you that something is seriously wrong with your body budget. Either your brain is trying to secure a de-posit, ramping up unpleasant affect, or it’s attempting to reduce your need for the deposit by remaining still, resulting in fatigue. Your brain may cat-egorize these sensations as anxiety, depression, or, for that matter, pain or stress or emotion.”
(Lisa Feldman Barrett, How Emotions Are Made - The Secret Life of the Brain, 2017)

E1.5.B.3.6. A SIMPLE REMEDY FOR FATIGUE AND ANXIETY: TAKE A NAP
It's important to understand how to rest, as a tired body can easily fall into despair, further worsening its condition.

E1.5.B.3.6_REF1_PH "THE ELOQUENCE OF PASSION ALMOST ALWAYS TRICKS US; by this I mean the sad or cheerful, brilliant or gloomy phantasmagoria that the imagination unfolds for us, depending on whether our body is rested or tired, excited or depressed. Naturally, we then blame things and our fellow men, instead of finding and changing the real cause, which is often small and insignificant. [...] Always defiant before the proofs of the imagination, he [the tired man] should, by reflection, suspect the eloquence of the passions at play and refuse to believe in them, which would suddenly destroy most of his ailment; for a little headache and tiredness of the eyes are bearable and hardly last; but despair is terrible and of itself aggravates its causes".
(Alain, On Happiness, 14 May 1913)

E1.5.B.3.7. TRANSFORMING THE FAILURE OF FATIGUE INTO VALUE
Flaubert seeks a form of engagement with reality that conceals none of its inherent emptiness. Life is "only this", yet we can create a realm of life sensation that embodies hope.

E1.5.B.3.7_REF1_PH FLAUBERT'S CONCEPT OF STYLE IS INTEGRAL TO HIS LITERARY METHOD, EMPHASIZING IMPERSONALITY, THE RELATIVITY OF VIEWPOINTS, AND NON-CONCLUSIVE NARRATIVES. His style aims to create an existential experience for the reader,  reveal the void within reality and transform failure into value, establishing a sphere of life sensation that offers hope.
"La notion de style telle que la pense Flaubert est totalement intégrante de tout: du concept qu'il invente d'impersonalité qui est le noeud de sa méthode littéraire, de la relativité des points de vues, de la forme non conclusive de son récit, du fait qu'un récit a pour but de faire rêver. Ce style pour lui c'est même un style de vie - du tout pour l'art pour que la lecture devienne une expérience existentielle pour le lecteur. Il ne faut donc pas distinguer le style du sujet chez Flaubert. Ça devient même une affaire de "moi". Il faut s'affranchir du moi pour que le lecteur puisse y trouver toute sa place. L'impersonalité cela consiste à refuser tous ces mensonges dont la littérature de son époque est faite: "le pot de chambre romantique". Il essaye de trouver une forme de rapport au réel qui ne cache rien de ce néant qui traverse le réel; de tous ces phénomènes de répulsion qui traversent notre expérience de la vie, parce que c'est la seule façon de ne pas y ajouter quelque chose de négatif, en donnant au contraire au temps la saveur proustienne de ce qui peut néanmoins être une réussite dans l'échec. C'est le rejet d'une partie du réel qui le fait écrire. Son oeuvre est la dialectique d'une transformation de l'échec en valeur. D'accord la vie ce n'est que cela, mais on peut y établir une sphère de sensation de vie qui constitue un espoir."
(Pierre-Marc de Biasi au micro de l'émission les Chemins de la Philosophie, diffusée sur France Culture le 03/05/2021)

E1.5.B.3.7_REF2_PH "ALL SPIRITUAL LIFE COMES DOWN TO A TANGO WITH THE TRAGEDY OF EXISTENCE AND NOT BEING EMBITTERED BY WHAT OVERWHELMS US. I came across a phrase from Etty Hillesum which offered me a magnificent spiritual exercise: « I am not the only one to be tired, sick, sad or anxious, I am in unison with millions of other people through the centuries, all this is life ».
Therefore, when you get up in the morning, you can choose to consider other people as teammates on the same boat, or even on the same galley. [...] Reflecting on the towering suffering that weighs down on the world every day invites us to venture to be a bit more generous on a daily basis, although this may be easier said than done. Etty Hillesum also urges me not to tell myself « this is my fatigue » but to simply welcome the fatigue that is passing through me today."
(Alexandre Jollien, The Pharmacopoeia n° 56)

E1.5.B.3.8. FATIGUE = A CLAIM BY THE EXHAUSTED INDIVIDUAL BODY FOR THE RIGHT TO SOCIAL REST 
In this sense, it is a form of intensity, not negativity. 

E1.5.B.3.8_REF1_PH FATIGUE, SO OFTEN PERCEIVED AS AN UNACCEPTABLE EXCUSE, IS IN REALITY A LEGITIMATE DEMAND OF THE BODY FOR A SOCIAL REST, a need that society does not recognise.
“Make an experiment: draw up a table of (credible) excuses received: you want to cancel a conference, an intellectual task: what will be the excuses that won't raise suspicion, or retaliation? Fatigue? Certainly not. [...]
So fatigue is not coded, is not acceptable = still functions in language as a mere metaphor, a sign without a referent, which falls into the realm of the artist (of the intellectual as artist) unclassified, therefore unclassifiable: placeless, without a place to rest itself, socially untenable → hence Blanchot's (tired!) cry: “I'm not asking for fatigue to be suppressed. I'm asking to be transported to a region where it is possible to be tired." → Fatigue = the exhausting claim of the individual body that demands the right to social rest (that sociality in me might be allowed to rest for a while = current theme of the Neutral). In fact fatigue = an intensity: society doesn't recognize it.”
(Roland Barthes, The Neutral, course at the Collège de France, 1977-1978)

E1.5.B.3.8_REF2_PH “EXHAUSTION OF THE INTELLECT.—Our occasional coldness and indifference towards people, which is imputed to us as hardness and defect of character, is often only an exhaustion of the intellect. In this state other men are to us, as we are to ourselves, tedious or immaterial.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human III, Aphorism 299, 1878)

E1.5.B.3.9. FATIGUE AND ETHICS
What is the impact of fatigue on our ethical behavior? Can a fatigued person behave in the same way as someone who isn't tired? Do philosophical or moral texts consider the constant state of fatigue that we often experience?

E1.5.B.3.10. FATIGUE BORN OUT OF SUFFERING

E1.5.B.3.10_REF1_PO "THERE IS A LANGUOR OF THE LIFE 
More imminent than Pain -
‘Tis Pains Successor - When the Soul 
Has suffered all it can -

A Drowsiness - diffuses -
A Dimness like a Fog 
Envelopes Consciousness -
As Mists - obliterate a Crag."
(Emily Dickinson, 1863)

E1.5.B.4. THE FRUSTRATION OF OUR DESIRES is perhaps paradoxically the source of our satisfactions.

E1.5.B.4_REF1_PH "ADAM PHILLIPS EXAMINES THE PARADOXICAL RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN FRUSTRATION AND SATISFACTION, exploring how our unlived lives illuminate the priorities, values, and desires undergirding the lives we do live."
(Maria Popova's review of Adam Phillips' Missing Out: In Praise of the Unlived Life, 2012 - in The Marginalian)

E1.5.B.4_REF1.1_PH "THE UNEXAMINED LIFE IS SURELY WORTH LIVING, BUT IS THE UNLIVED LIFE WORTH EXAMINING? It seems a strange question until one realizes how much of our so-called mental life is about the lives we are not living, the lives we are missing out on, the lives we could be leading but for some reason are not. What we fantasize about, what we long for, are the experiences, the things and the people that are absent. It is the absence of what we need that makes us think, that makes us cross and sad. We have to be aware of what is missing in our lives — even if this often obscures both what we already have and what is actually available — because we can survive only if our appetites more or less work for us. Indeed, we have to survive our appetites by making people cooperate with our wanting. We pressurize the world to be there for our benefit. And yet we quickly notice as children — it is, perhaps, the first thing we do notice — that our needs, like our wishes, are always potentially unmet. Because we are always shadowed by the possibility of not getting what we want, we learn, at best, to ironize our wishes — that is, to call our wants wishes: a wish is only a wish until, as we say, it comes true — and, at worst, to hate our needs. But we also learn to live somewhere between the lives we have and the lives we would like. […]

We refer to them as our unlived lives because somewhere we believe that they were open to us; but for some reason — and we might spend a great deal of our lived lives trying to find and give the reason — they were not possible. And what was not possible all too easily becomes the story of our lives. Indeed, our lived lives might become a protracted mourning for, or an endless tantrum about, the lives we were unable to live. But the exemptions we suffer, whether forced or chosen, make us who we are. [...]

We are always haunted by the myth of our potential, of what we might have it in ourselves to be or do… We share our lives with the people we have failed to be. […]

Our lives become an elegy to needs unmet and desires sacrificed, to possibilities refused, to roads not taken. The myth of our potential can make of our lives a perpetual falling-short, a continual and continuing loss, a sustained and sometimes sustaining rage."
(Adam Phillips, Missing Out: In Praise of the Unlived Life, 2012)

E1.5.B.4_REF1.1.a_PH RECOGNIZING OUR EXISTENTIAL INCOMPLETENESS AND INHERENT INSUFFICIENCY ALLOWS US TO FEEL THE FULLNESS OF LIFE, CHALLENGING A CULTURE FOCUSED ON SELF-OPTIMIZATION AND PRODUCTIVITY.
"Phillips argues that these unlived lives reveal themselves most obviously in our envy of others, the psychology of which Kierkegaard keenly observed a century and a half earlier, and in the demands we place on our children — an idea that furthers the parallel between Phillips with Jung, for it was the great Swiss psychiatrist who famously asserted that what most shapes children’s developing psychological reality are “the unlived lives of the parents.” But where Jung believed that “the sole purpose of human existence is to kindle a light in the darkness of mere being,” Phillips suggests that it’s equally important to kindle a light in the darkness of non-being, of never-having-been:

      'We have an abiding sense, however obscure and obscured, that the lives we do lead are informed by the lives that escape us.'

It is precisely by recognizing our existential incompleteness and our inherent insufficiency, by embracing the fact that we are a cosmic accident, that we can begin to feel the fullness of life — but this is hard to do, Phillips points out, in a culture predicated on inflating the specialness of the self as a singular unit aimed at optimizing and making maximally productive the lived life"
(Maria Popova's review of Adam Phillips' Missing Out: In Praise of the Unlived Life, 2012 - in The Marginalian)

E1.5.B.4_REF1.1.b_PH "BECAUSE WE ARE NOTHING SPECIAL — ON A PAR WITH ANTS AND DAFFODILS — it is the work of culture to make us feel special; just as parents need to make their children feel special to help them bear and bear with — and hopefully enjoy — their insignificance in the larger scheme of things. In this sense growing up is always an undoing of what needed to be done: first, ideally, we are made to feel special; then we are expected to enjoy a world in which we are not… When people realize how accidental they are, they are tempted to think of themselves as chosen. We certainly tend to be more special, if only to ourselves, in our (imaginary) unlived lives.

So it is worth wondering what the need to be special prevents us seeing about ourselves — other, that is, than the unfailing transience of our lives; what the need to be special stops us from being. This, essentially, is the question psychoanalysis was invented to address: what kind of pleasures can sustain a creature that is nothing special? Once the promise of immortality, of being chosen, was displaced by the promise of more life — the promise, as we say, of getting more out of life — the unlived life became a haunting presence in a life legitimated by nothing more than the desire to live it. For modern people, stalked by their choices, the good life is a life lived to the full. We become obsessed, in a new way, by what is missing in our lives; and by what sabotages the pleasures that we seek."
(Adam Phillips, Missing Out: In Praise of the Unlived Life, 2012)

E1.5.B.4_REF1.1.c_PH PHILLIPS ARGUES THAT WE CREATE AND HOLD ONTO VARIOUS POSSIBLE SELVES AND LIVES TO MAKE OUR REAL LIVES MORE BEARABLE. These fantasy lives are not mere escapes but essential parts of our reality, reflecting the gap between our desires and what we can achieve, and highlighting our experience of missing out.
"To mitigate the wistful vestiges this existential neverland lodges in our psyche, Phillips argues, we create and hold on to various possible selves and possible lives — pockets of possibility that exist no matter how remote the probability of realizing them might be. These improbable possibles, Phillips asserts, come to both reveal and shape who we really are:

      'We make our lives pleasurable, and therefore bearable, by picturing them as they might be; it is less obvious, though, what these compelling fantasy lives — lives of, as it were, a more complete satisfaction — are a self-cure for. Our solutions tell us what our problems are; our fantasy lives are not — or not necessarily — alternatives to, or refuges from, those real lives but an essential part of them… There is nothing more obscure than the relationship between the lived and the unlived life. (Each member of a couple, for example, is always having a relationship, wittingly or unwittingly, with their partner’s unlived lives; their initial and initiating relationship is between what they assume are their potential selves.) So we may need to think of ourselves as always living a double life, the one that we wish for and the one that we practice; the one that never happens and the one that keeps happening. [...]
There is a gap between what we want and what we can have, and that gap … is our link, our connection, to the world… This discord, this supposed mismatch, is the origin of our experience of missing out. [...]
Our utopias tell us more about our lived lives, and their privations, than about our wished-for lives.'"
(Maria Popova's review of Adam Phillips' Missing Out: In Praise of the Unlived Life, 2012 - in The Marginalian)

E1.5.B.4_REF1.1.d_PH THE PARADOX IS THAT SATISFACTION COMES THROUGH THE PRIVATION OF NOT GETTING WHAT WE WANT. "The paradox — and the most important point — is that it is through the privation of not getting what we want, as Nietzsche memorably argued more than a century earlier, that we arrive at the promise of satisfaction:

      'In our unlived lives we are always more satisfied, far less frustrated versions of ourselves… Our possibilities for satisfaction depend upon our capacity for frustration; if we can’t let ourselves feel our frustration — and, surprisingly, this is a surprisingly difficult thing to do — we can’t get a sense of what it is we might be wanting, and missing, of what might really give us pleasure… That frustration is where we start from; the child’s dawning awareness of himself is an awareness of something necessary not being there. The child becomes present to himself in the absence of something he needs.'

But it is through our frustrations that we come to know our wants, against the light of which the contour of our personhood is shaded in:

      'The more we frustrate ourselves in wanting something, the more we value our desire for it… Waiting too long poisons desire, but waiting too little pre-empts it; the imagining is in the waiting… Wanting takes time; partly because it takes some time to get over the resistances to wanting, and partly because we are often unconscious of what it is that we do want. But the worst thing we can be frustrated of is frustration itself; to be deprived of frustration is to be deprived of the possibilities of satisfaction.'"
(Maria Popova's review of Adam Phillips' Missing Out: In Praise of the Unlived Life, 2012 - in The Marginalian)

E1.5.B.4_REF2_TH WE SHOULD BE WILLING TO RENOUNCE CONTRADICTORY DESIRES. “We must be aware of what our wishes are, or even more, of what our feelings are. [And yet] we do not know what we really feel or want. […]

Even if we recognize a conflict as such, we must be willing and able to renounce one of the two contradictory issues. But the capacity for clear and conscious renunciation is rare, because our feelings and beliefs are muddled, and perhaps because in the last analysis most people are not secure and happy enough to renounce anything. [...]

To make a decision presupposes the willingness and capacity to assume responsibility for it. This would include the risk of making a wrong decision and the willingness to bear the consequences without blaming others for them.”
(Karen Horney, Our Inner Conflicts: A Constructive Theory of Neurosis, 1943)

E1.5.B.4_REF3_PO "SUCCESS IS COUNTED SWEETEST 
BY THOSE WHO NE’ER SUCCEED. 
To comprehend a nectar 
Requires sorest need. 

Not one of all the purple Host 
Who took the Flag today 
Can tell the definition 
So clear of Victory 

As he defeated - dying -
On whose forbidden ear 
The distant strains of triumph 
Burst agonized and clear !"
(Emily Dickinson, 1859)

E1.5.B.4_REF4_TH "OUR FRUSTRATION IS THE KEY TO OUR DESIRE; to want something or someone is to feel their absence; so to register or recognize a lack would seem to be the precondition for any kind of pleasure or satisfaction. Indeed, in this account, frustration, a sense of lack, is the necessary precondition for any kind of satisfaction. […]

The traditional story about lack and desire describes a closed system; in this story I can never be surprised by what I want, because somewhere in myself I already know what is missing; my frustration is the form my recognition takes, it is a form of remembering.

Wanting is recovery, not discovery… There is a part of oneself that needs to know what it is doing, and a part of oneself that needs not to… a part of oneself that needs to know what one wants and a part of oneself that needs not to."
(Adam Phillips, On Giving Up, 2024)

E1.5.B.4_REF5_TH "SUBLIMATION HAS LIVED. PULSIONS HAVE REGAINED THEIR OMNIPOTENCE IN A WORLD THAT DOES NOT SUPPORT LIMITS TO SATISFY THEM. Immediacy, speed, fluidity demand a society without frustration or delay. Whether in public (news, current events, normative pornography, "decomplexed" attitudes) or on the couch (depressed, disoriented patients), the post-industrial, post-traumatic, post-war society finds it hard to accept "sublimation". The narcissistic subject needs a simple, direct field for his impulses, otherwise he becomes depressed. Frustration is unbearable, so let's keep finding new objects for his appetites. Abstraction, style and precision have become the enemy; all these things "slow us down". You don't own a book, it's neither an investment nor an instrument; reading takes time and produces nothing but a heightened capacity to dream and think. The lack of style in cultural production is just as worrying as lives under pressure, morose and functional - so much more numerous than inhabited, desired lives. A world that manages to sublimate is a world that takes shape, that is not formless, as the current general confusion condemns ours to be".
(Anne Dufourmantelle, psychoanalyst)

E1.5.B.5. EXISTENTIAL SOLITUDE, BOREDOM, NOSTALGIA, ANGUISH, DESPAIR AND DEPRESSION

E1.5.B.5.1. LONELINESS IS WHAT EXISTENTIAL SOLITUDE IS - BUT CAN WE DEVELOP A COOL LONELINESS THAT ALLOWS US TO LOOK HONESTLY AND WITHOUT AGGRESSION AT OUR OWN MINDS?
"There is a kind of loneliness that lodges itself in the psyche and never fully leaves, a loneliness most anguishing not in solitude but in companionship and amid the crowd. If solitude fertilizes the imagination, loneliness vacuums it of vitality and sands the baseboards of the spirit with the scratchy restlessness of longing — for connection, for communion, for escape. And yet it is out of this restlessness that so many great works of art are born.
“We have all known the long loneliness,” Dorothy Day wrote, but some — artists, perhaps — know it more intimately than others and few artists have articulated this knowledge with more stunning and stirring lucidity than Virginia Woolf (January 25, 1882–March 28, 1941). Loneliness permeates A Writer’s Diary "
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings)

E1.5.B.5.1_REF1_LIT "THERE IS A KIND OF LONELINESS THAT LODGES ITSELF IN THE PSYCHE AND NEVER FULLY LEAVES, a loneliness most anguishing not in solitude but in companionship and amid the crowd. If solitude fertilizes the imagination, loneliness vacuums it of vitality and sands the baseboards of the spirit with the scratchy restlessness of longing — for connection, for communion, for escape. And yet it is out of this restlessness that so many great works of art are born.
“We have all known the long loneliness,” Dorothy Day wrote, but some — artists, perhaps — know it more intimately than others and few artists have articulated this knowledge with more stunning and stirring lucidity than Virginia Woolf. Loneliness permeates A Writer’s Diary "
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings)

"These October days are to me a little strained and surrounded with silence. What I mean by this last word I don’t quite know, since I have never stopped « seeing » people… No, it’s not physical silence; it’s some inner loneliness."
(Virginia Woolf, A Writer’s Diary)

E1.5.B.5.1_REF2_PH "YOU ARE BORN ALONE. YOU DIE ALONE. THE VALUE OF THE SPACE IN BETWEEN IS TRUST AND LOVE. That is why geometrically speaking the circle is a one. Everything comes to you from the other. You have to be able to reach the other. If not you are alone…"
(Louise Bourgeois, Diary)

"How much trust and love we wrest from life and lavish upon life is largely a matter of how well we have befriended our existential loneliness — a fundamental fact of every human existence that coexists with our delicate interconnectedness, each a parallel dimension of our lived reality, each pulsating beneath our days."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.5.B.5.1_REF2.1_PH "CONTENTMENT IS A SYNONYM FOR LONELINESS, COOL LONELINESS, settling down with cool loneliness. We give up believing that being able to escape our loneliness is going to bring any lasting happiness or joy or sense of well-being or courage or strength. Usually we have to give up this belief about a billion times, again and again making friends with our jumpiness and dread, doing the same old thing a billion times with awareness. Then without our even noticing, something begins to shift. We can just be lonely with no alternatives, content to be right here with the mood and texture of what’s happening. [...]
We are fundamentally alone, and there is nothing anywhere to hold on to. Moreover, this is not a problem. In fact, it allows us to finally discover a completely unfabricated state of being. Our habitual assumptions — all our ideas about how things are — keep us from seeing anything in a fresh, open way… We don’t ultimately know anything. There’s no certainty about anything. This basic truth hurts, and we want to run away from it. But coming back and relaxing with something as familiar as loneliness is good discipline for realizing the profundity of the unresolved moments of our lives. We are cheating ourselves when we run away from the ambiguity of loneliness. [...]
Cool loneliness allows us to look honestly and without aggression at our own minds. We can gradually drop our ideals of who we think we ought to be, or who we think we want to be, or who we think other people think we want to be or ought to be. We give it up and just look directly with compassion and humor at who we are. Then loneliness is no threat and heartache, no punishment. Cool loneliness doesn’t provide any resolution or give us ground under our feet. It challenges us to step into a world of no reference point without polarizing or solidifying. This is called the middle way, or the sacred path of the warrior."
(Pema Chödrön,  When Things Fall Apart: Heart Advice for Difficult Times, 1996)

E1.5.B.5.1_REF3_LIT "“PLACE AND A MIND MAY INTERPENETRATE TILL THE NATURE OF BOTH IS ALTERED,” the great Scottish mountaineer and poet Nan Shepherd wrote as she reflected on the relationship between nature and human nature. But what we call place — that unalloyed presence with a here and now, with the unfolding of time in a locus of space — penetrates more than the mind: it permeates body and spirit and the entire constellation of being. There is a reason why the original Latin use of the word genius was in the phrase genius loci — the spirit of a place. We become who we are in the crucible of where we are.
Our minds, however, are born wanderers — perpetual refugees from presence, perpetually paying for their flight with loneliness. We go on forgetting that we are not only embodied creatures, but embodied in the body of the world; we go on forgetting that the here and now — that locus of intimacy with everything and everyone else inhabiting this island of spacetime, intimacy with the pulsating totality of our own being — is our only refuge from the existential loneliness that is the price of being alive."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.5.B.5.1_REF3.1_LIT BARRY LOPEZ ARGUES AGAINST THE STEREOTYPE THAT INDIGENOUS PEOPLE'S CONNECTION TO PLACE IS PRIMITIVE, EMPHASIZING THE PROFOUND VALUE OF PHYSICAL INTIMACY WITH THE NATURAL WORLD. He suggests that modern civilization's existential loneliness and sense of meaninglessness stem from neglecting the therapeutic relationship with nature. Lopez believes that knowing a place deeply fosters a sense of belonging and reciprocity, which reinforces one's significance in the world. 
"[Drawing on his longtime immersion in indigenous cultures and his lifelong travel with native companions, Lopez counters the hollow stereotype that indigenous people’s connection to place is a sort of “primitive” sensitivity to be contrasted with “advanced” civilization (Maria Popova, The Marginalian)]

"Such a dismissive view, as I have come to understand it, ignores the great intangible value that achieving physical intimacy with a place might provide. I’m inclined to point out to someone who condescends to such a desire for intimacy, although it might seem rude, that it is not possible for human beings to outgrow loneliness. Nor can someone from a culture that condescends to nature easily escape the haunting thought that one’s life is meaningless.

Existential loneliness and a sense that one’s life is inconsequential, both of which are hallmarks of modern civilizations, seem to me to derive in part from our abandoning a belief in the therapeutic dimensions of a relationship with place. A continually refreshed sense of the unplumbable complexity of patterns in the natural world, patterns that are ever present and discernible, and which incorporate the observer, undermine the feeling that one is alone in the world, or meaningless in it. The effort to know a place deeply is, ultimately, an expression of the human desire to belong, to fit somewhere. [...] 

The determination to know a particular place, in my experience, is consistently rewarded. And every natural place, to my mind, is open to being known. And somewhere in this process a person begins to sense that they themselves are becoming known, so that when they are absent from that place they know that place misses them. And this reciprocity, to know and be known, reinforces a sense that one is necessary in the world. [...]

Intimacy with the physical Earth apparently awakens in us, at some wordless level, a primal knowledge of the nature of our emotional as well as our biological attachments to physical landscapes. Based on my own inquiries, my impression is that we experience this primal connection regularly as a diffuse, ineffable pleasure, experience it as the easing of a particular kind of longing. [...]

Perhaps the first rule of everything we endeavor to do is to pay attention. Perhaps the second is to be patient. And perhaps a third is to be attentive to what the body knows."
(Barry Lopez,  Embrace Fearlessly the Burning World, 2022)

E1.5.B.5.1_REF4_PH "GARDENER AND GARDEN. The damp and dark days, loneliness, loveless words that are addressed to us, engender conclusions similar to mushrooms: we see them appear before us, one morning, without us knowing where they come from, looking at us, gray and morose. Woe to the thinker who is not the gardener, but only the soil of his plants!"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Aurora, 1881)

E1.5.B.5.1_REF5_PH "TIME AND MY HUMOR HAVE LITTLE RELATIONSHIP; I have my fogs, and the course of things affects them little. I sometimes strive against fortune; the glory of taming it by myself makes me tame it cheerfully; instead of which I sometimes act disgusted when offered good fortune".
(Pascal, The Thoughts)

E1.5.B.5.1_REF6_CUR "INSPIRED BY THE SHORT COMMERCIALS ON VIDEO PANELS that are gradually replacing posters in the public space, Erwin Olaf created Moving Portraits. He had several of his female protagonists address the viewer directly with short sentences, then turn away from the camera. The poignant appeals made by the women include « Hear me », « Look at me » or « Love me ». Unlike advertising, which aims to awaken desires, Olaf's short videos draw attention to fundamental needs that continue being repressed by some developments in society and politics."
(Kunsthalle, Munich)

E1.5.B.5.1_REF7_CUR IN CONTRAST TO THE ADVERTISING BANNERS THAT PROMISE US HAPPINESS, this one acknowledges our existential solitude in the face of life's difficulties.

E1.5.B.5.1_REF8_MU PHILIP GLASS, STRING QUARTET NO. 4 "BUCZAK", second mouvement

Listen to it on YouTube: https://youtu.be/s2ZSPMl0uu8?feature=shared

E1.5.B.5.1_REF9_PO "THERE IS ANOTHER LONELINESS 
THAT MANY DIE WITHOUT -
Not want of friend occasions it 
Or circumstance of Lot 

But nature, sometimes, sometimes thought 
And whoso it befall 
Is richer than could be revealed 
By mortal numeral -"
(Emily Dickinson, 1867)

E1.5.B.5.1_REF9.1_PO "THERE IS A SOLITUDE OF SPACE 
A solitude of sea 
A solitude of Death, but these 
Society shall be 
Compared with that profounder site 
That polar privacy 
A soul admitted to itself -"
(Emily Dickinson, undated)

E1.5.B.5.1_REF10_PH LONELINESS IS NOT SOLELY DEPENDENT ON EXTERNAL CIRCUMSTANCES BUT IS OFTEN A SPIRITUAL ISSUE LINKED TO NEGLECTED ASPECTS OF LIFE - often one of community, connection to nature or relationship with the sacred. 
"I’m wondering if you have any thoughts about loneliness. I am middle-aged and richly blessed in life, with children, a husband and a good job that I enjoy. I have friends and interests, but still struggle with a sense of loneliness. It is a melancholy that varies in darkness. I don’t think anyone notices because I’m positive and often cheerful.
KARIN, ENKÖPING, SWEDEN
Dear Karin,

The question of loneliness comes up repeatedly in The Red Hand Files. Many people like yourself, leading apparently full and flourishing lives, seem to experience that insistent feeling of loneliness - ‘a melancholy that varies in darkness’.

Karin, I don’t have answers beyond my own experiences, which have taught me that loneliness is not simply down to our circumstances or whether others love us. Rather, it is an indisposition of the spirit brought about, in the main, by certain aspects of our lives that have been unintentionally left untended. Loneliness and lack of meaning seem to inhabit the same dark orbit. Loneliness is the breakdown of the overarching structure of things, a feeling of separateness or exclusion from the sum and substance of the world.

Philosopher, neuroscientist and psychiatrist Iain McGilchrist says we require three things to attain a meaningful life. The first is feeling part of a wider community - family, friends, and society in general. Second is an understanding of nature and a connection to the natural order of things, which McGilchrist feels we have largely lost. Finally, we need to form a relationship with the sacred or divine - this can be found in art, music, poetry and religion, where we acknowledge the ineffable and all-encompassing force that holds the world together.

Personally, I find that feelings of loneliness dissipate when I take time to focus on the sacred, the imagination, beauty, nature, the soul - those unmeasurable and mysterious wellsprings of meaning that reside outside the scientistic and the rational. Here, I feel connected to something universal, eternal, truthful and righteous and, therefore, less alone. Looking back, my most lonely times were when I was separated from my spiritual self, and perhaps I had even affected a certain protective distance from these concerns. These days, however, I try my best to maintain genuine relations with the world - with my loved ones, with nature, and with the sacred - in a comprehensive and participatory manner. Overall, I have found that this keeps the twin devils of loneliness and meaninglessness at bay.

I hope these words are of some help.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #295 / JULY 2024)

Read it in The Red Hand Files: https://www.theredhandfiles.com/thoughts-about-loneliness/

E1.5.B.5.2. BOREDOM

E1.5.B.5.2.a. THE ZERO DEGREE OF BOREDOM
The indifference of boredom, when everything is external and indifferent to us, when we suddenly realize the absurdity of a daily life that, out of habit, we had come to regard as normal.

E1.5.B.3.5_REF2_PH.wE1.5.B.5.2.

E1.5.B.5.2.b. BOREDOM IS THE GREAT REVELATION OF THE DEPRESSED SOUL
Nothing has taste anymore

E1.5.B.5.2.b_REF1_PH BOREDOM STRIPS THE WORLD OF ITS JUSTIFICATIONS, REVEALING ITS ABSURDITY AND STRANGENESS. In the eyes of the melancholic, everything becomes indifferent and things appear as mere meaningless presences. 
"Let's start with boredom. In the eyes of the melancholic, who is not interested in anything, who has no desire to engage with the world, but remains stupefied, contemplating it as an incomprehensible spectacle that has become totally alien to him, all things are equal ("I don't care"), universally indifferent, reduced to the only common denominator: their pure existence, which incomprehensibly persists. By stripping the world of the justifications that legitimise it, boredom lays it bare. In the eyes of the depressed soul, the world appears as fact, never as meaning, so much so that any effort to describe it seems futile and vain, and things, stripped of the words that name and signify them, reduced to the state of pure presences, take on an unusual and vaguely threatening aspect. Boredom makes us extraordinarily sensitive to the enigma of presence. The subject is cancelled and the world discovers its enigma. While we experience ourselves as dissolving in the long time of boredom, prey to duration, things, conversely, take on a density of presence that we never knew they had: a door slamming, a voice in the street, a fading laugh, a car passing and then driving away. Beyond language, which has become useless to the mind that is indifferent to everything, since words no longer have a hold on things and things are no longer linked together by the discourse that signifies them, the spectacle of the world is summed up in the absurd and heterogeneous inventory of diverse objects that follow one another without rhyme or reason. Absurdity - which means that things are deaf, surdus, to the word that calls them by name - is the great revelation of the depressed soul. Boredom teaches us to see the world through the eyes of the grotesque as well as those of desolation, which is why it has been rightly said that humour, or a sense of the comic, is the politeness of despair. Boredom corresponds to a certain modality of discourse, which is the discourse that is always conducted within the limits of nonsense (remember how Wittgenstein claimed that the pure and simple existence of the world could only be grasped as absolute nonsense). The discourse of boredom will therefore be that of an observation, a neutral record of events that follow one another without sequence, a funny or cruel parade, a transcript that limits itself to establishing the facts and leaves to the judge the foolish task of deciding on their meaning".
(Jacques Darriulat, Being and Existence, 3-Experiencing Existence, 2020)

E1.5.B.5.2.b_REF1.1_PH JACQUES DARRIULAT EXPLORES THE POETICS OF WONDER AND NONSENSE THROUGH THE NAÏVE EYES OF A CHILD WHO PERCEIVES EVENTS IN THE WORLD WITHOUT UNDERSTANDING THEIR MEANING. This perspective highlights a form of wonder rather than absurdity and invites us to rediscover being beyond habit and routine.
"Yet the same poetics of things-as-they-are can still—perhaps conversely—express the astonishment, if not the wonder, of an ingenuous mind unable to comprehend the spectacle of the world as it unfolds. This is the viewpoint of a child who cannot tell a story simply because they haven't grasped its meaning. Their mind reduces events to an unusual inventory, following one another without connection. The nonsense of the description compensates for the absence of meaning that typically weaves a story together. Facts are stripped to their simplest existence (disconnected, in themselves), arousing astonishment all the more vivid because we understand nothing of their mere appearance. Nonsense, in this context, is closer to the miraculous than the absurd. For instance, if we ask a child to recount a film they don't understand, we might hear: 'There's a lady, there's a gentleman, so they go off together, then there's a car, so...' In this way, we can envision a poetics of naivety that recreates the world in the freshness of nonsense, inviting us to reclaim the wonder of existence that daily routine and acquired habits have allowed to slip into oblivion."
(Jacques Darriulat, Being and Existence, 3-Experiencing Existence, 2020)

E1.5.B.5.2.b_REF2_PO “ALEM-TEDIO

Nothing insopires me, nothing lives inside
Neither sadness nor the beautiful hours. 
Of not having them and never having them, 
I'm even tired of the things I didn't have.

How I wish, at last, that my soul switched off, 
I could sleep peacefully in a hospital bed... 
I got tired inside me, I got tired of life 
From wandering so much in unreal light.

Once I imagined climbing into the sky
By force of ambition and nostalgia, 
And sick-again, I was God 
In the great blazing trail that hurt me.

I set off. But I soon returned to pain, 
For everything hurt... Everything was the same: 
The chimera, captured, was real, 
The wonder had such colors!

Echoing me in silence, the dark night 
Lowered upon me in my hopeless fall; 
I brought myself back from the depths, 
I dried myself up, hardened with boredom.

And today I have only one joy left: 
It's that, so equal and so empty,
All moments fly by relentlessly
Faster and faster, ever more slender...”
(Mário de Sá-Carneiro, Dispersion, Paris, May 1913)

E1.5.B.5.2.b_REF3_PO “I AM NEITHER MYSELF NOR THE OTHER, 
I'm something in between: 
Pillar of the bridge of boredom 
That goes from me to the Other.”
(Mário de Sá-Carneiro, Clues of Gold, Paris, February 1914)

E1.5.B.5.2.b_REF4_PO “SAWDUST

My life has sat down 
And there's no way to lift it up, 
Of dawn and dusk 
My life has had enough.

And there she is, the drunk, 
Stretched out, her leg crossed, 
On the endless sofa 
Of my upholstered soul.

So it is: my Soul
Once again dreaming of Russian girls, 
Has slipped into unrest, 
And today it dreams only of soft toys.

Go to the cafés, order a bock, 
Reads the “Matin” for punishment,
Yet there's no game 
That can bring my soul back to her old self!

Inside me is a burden 
That doesn't weigh, but is like a hammer: 
The buzzing of a fly, 
Or an itch that won't go away.

Leaflet from the “Capital”
By our Julio Dantas - 
Or something among many 
Of equal antipathy...

The bastard drinks wine now, 
Something I never used to do, 
And smokes his small cigarette 
In the midst of the public!

Any day now, for sure,
When I'll least expect it, 
He's capable of nonsense, 
If he finds an open door...

This can't be... 
But how to find a remedy?
-To finish this interlude 
I rememberd to go crazy:

Which was easy - leaving 
The furniture in my hotel, 
Out into the street
With a paper hat

Shouting “long live Germany”...
But my soul, in truth, 
Doesn't deserve such a feat, 
Such proof of loyalty.

I'll leave her - decided -
In the restroom of a café, 
Like a forgotten ring. 
It's a more "rafınné" ending...”
(Mário de Sá-Carneiro, Clues of Gold, Paris, September 191)

E1.5.B.5.2.c. "BOREDOM MAKES US EXTRAORDINARILY SENSITIVE TO THE ENIGMA OF PRESENCE. The subject annuls itself, and the world discovers its enigma. While we experience ourselves as dissolving in the endless time of boredom, prey to duration, things conversely acquire a density of presence that we never knew existed: a door slams, a voice echoes in the street, a laugh fades away, a car passes and then recedes. Beyond language, which has become useless to the mind that is indifferent to everything, words no longer having a hold on things and things no longer being linked together by the discourse that denotes them, the spectacle of the world boils down to the absurd and heterogeneous inventory of the diversity of objects that pile up one on top of the other without rhyme or reason."
(Jacques Darriulat, Being and Existing, 3- Experiencing Existence, 2020)

E1.5.B.5.2.c_REF1_PO “YOU DON'T ALWAYS KNOW WHAT TO DO WITH YOURSELF 
“The street sparkles children are on vacation
Otherwise their cries would shatter the windows 
And your eardrums more fragile than churches'bells
or those of Mosques synagogues 
(The little spider repairs its web 
In a corner of a window, how meticulous) 
Available a mouse an attic
You don't always know what to do with yourself 
An ode an apple pie from which garden 
A guitar is no less real than a kalach 
The eyes of children the gutters that light up 
The lively joy of clouds above gusts of wind.”
(Valérie Rouzeau, Reverse Meaning, 2018)

E1.5.B.5.2.d BOREDOM PLAYS A CRUCIAL ROLE IN THE EMERGENCE OF SADISTIC TENDENCIES
”What gives rise to sadism? While sadistic behavior (i.e., harming others for pleasure) is well-documented, past empirical research is nearly silent regarding the psychological factors behind it. We help close this gap by suggesting that boredom plays a crucial role in the emergence of sadistic tendencies. Across 9 diverse studies, we provide correlational and experimental evidence for a link between boredom and sadism. We demonstrate that sadistic tendencies are more pronounced among people who report chronic proneness to boredom in everyday life (Studies 1A-1F, N = 1,780). We then document that this relationship generalizes across a variety of important societal contexts, including online trolling; sadism in the military; sadistic behavior among parents; and sadistic fantasies (Studies 2–5, N = 1,740). Finally, we manipulate boredom experimentally and show that inducing boredom increases sadistic behavior (i.e., killing worms; destroying other participants’ pay; Studies 6–9, N = 4,097). However, alternatives matter: When several behavioral alternatives are available, boredom only motivates sadistic behavior among individuals with high dispositional sadism (Study 7). Conversely, when there is no alternative, boredom increases sadistic behavior across the board, even among individuals low in dispositional sadism (Studies 8 and 9). We further show that excitement and novelty seeking mediate the effects of boredom, and that boredom not only promotes sadistic (proactive) aggression, but reactive aggression as well (Study 9). Overall, the present work contributes to a better understanding of sadism and highlights the destructive potential of boredom. We discuss implications for basic research on sadism and boredom, as well as applied implications for society at large.”
(On the relation of boredom and sadistic aggression, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2021)

Read the studies: https://psycnet.apa.org/record/2020-74104-001

E1.5.B.3.4.wE1.5.B.5.2. ACEDIA: WHEN WE LOSE OUR TASTE FOR EXERCISE AND FATIGUE TAKES OVER. 
"Burn-out" already existed in the Middle Ages among monks, who gave it the name acedia, which translates into weariness, slackness and sometimes hyperactivity, without being present to what one is doing - this is professional burn-out. Acedia is different from boredom in the sense that boredom is an expectation that doesn't know what it's waiting for, and disqualifies everything that comes along. Acedia no longer expects anything.

E1.7.B.2.7_REF1_PH.wE1.5.B.5.2. "THERE ARE SEASONS OF BEING WHEN A CLOAK OF MEANINGLESSNESS SEEMS TO SLIP OVER YOU, OVER EVERYTHING, MUFFLING THE SONG OF LIFE. It is not depression exactly, though the two conditions make eager bedfellows. Rather, it is a great hollowing that empties you of that vital force necessary for moving through the world wonder-smitten by reality, that glint of gladness at the mundane miracle of existence. A disenchantment we may call by many names — burnout, apathy, alienation — but one that visits upon every life in one form or another, at one time or another, pulsating with the unmet longing for something elemental and ancient, with the yearning to see the world as beautiful again and feel its magic, to find sanctuary in it, to contact that “submerged sunrise of wonder.”
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.5.B.5.3. NOSTALGIA
when reality is no longer what it used to be, nostalgia takes on its full meaning

E1.5.B.5.3.a. NOSTALGIA IS LONGING FOR A PAST THAT NEVER EXISTED. "[Memories] are only the scent of a flower we have not found, the echo of a tune we have not heard, news from a country we have never visited. [...] we are the words; we are the music; we are the thing itself."

E1.5.B.5.3.a_REF1_LIT C.S. LEWIS DISCUSSES THE PROFOUND AND ELUSIVE LONGING FOR AN UNATTAINABLE IDEAL, OFTEN MISLABELED AS NOSTALGIA OR ROMANTICISM. He argues that beauty, memories, and art are mere reflections of this deeper desire, not the desire itself. These reflections can mislead us into idolizing them, but they are ultimately just hints of a greater reality we have not yet experienced.
"This desire for our own far off country [is] the secret which hurts so much that you take your revenge on it by calling it names like Nostalgia and Romanticism and Adolescence; the secret also which pierces with such sweetness that when, in very intimate conversation, the mention of it becomes imminent, we grow awkward and affect to laugh at ourselves; the secret we cannot hide and cannot tell, though we desire to do both. We cannot tell it because it is a desire for something that has never actually appeared in our experience. We cannot hide it because our experience is constantly suggesting it, and we betray ourselves like lovers at the mention of a name. Our commonest expedient is to call it beauty and behave as if that had settled the matter. Wordsworth’s expedient was to identify it with certain moments in his own past. But all this is a cheat. If Wordsworth had gone back to those moments in the past, he would not have found the thing itself, but only the reminder of it; what he remembered would turn out to be itself a remembering. [...]

The books or the music in which we thought the beauty was located will betray us if we trust to them; it was not in them, it only came through them, and what came through them was longing. These things — the beauty, the memory of our own past — are good images of what we really desire; but if they are mistaken for the thing itself they turn into dumb idols, breaking the hearts of their worshipers. For they are not the thing itself; they are only the scent of a flower we have not found, the echo of a tune we have not heard, news from a country we have never visited. [...]

Behind the cotton wool is hidden a pattern… the whole world is a work of art… there is no Shakespeare… no Beethoven… no God; we are the words; we are the music; we are the thing itself."
(C.S. Lewis, The Weight of Glory, sermon he delivered on June 8, 1941)

E1.5.B.5.3.a_REF2_PO "THE NEAREST DREAM RECEDES - UNREALIZED -
The Heaven we chase -
Like the June Bee - before the School Boy -
Invites the Race -
Stoops - to an easy Clover -
Dips - evades - teazes - deploys -
Then - to the Royal Clouds 
Lifts his light Pinnace -
Heedless of the Boy -
Staring - bewildered - at the mocking sky -

Homesick for steadfast Honey -
Ah - the Bee flies not 
That brews that rare variety !"
(Emily Dickinson, 1862)

E1.5.B.5.3.b. WHEN REALITY IS NO LONGER WHAT IT USED TO BE, NOSTALGIA TAKES ON ITS FULL MEANING
Such would be the successive phases of the image [which ends up masking reality by simulacra]: 
- it reflects a deeper reality
- it masks and distorts a profound reality
- it masks the absence of a profound reality
- it bears no relation to any reality whatsoever: it is its own pure simulacrum.

E1.5.B.5.3.b_REF1_PH JEAN BAUDRILLARD EXPLORES THE IDEA THAT SIMULATION HAS REPLACED REALITY, CREATING A HYPERREAL WHERE MODELS PRECEDE AND ENGENDER THE TERRITORY.

"THE PRECESSION OF SIMULACRA
The simulacrum is never what hides the truth - it is truth that hides the fact that
there is none.
The simulacrum is true.
                              -Ecclesiastes

If once we were able to view the Borges fable in which the cartographers of the Empire draw up a map so detailed that it ends up covering the territory exactly (the decline of the Empire witnesses the fraying of this map, little by little, and its fall into ruins, though some shreds are still discernible in the deserts - the metaphysical beauty of this ruined abstraction testifying to a pride equal to the Empire and rotting like a carcass, returning to the substance of the soil, a bit as the double ends by being confused with the real through aging) - as the most beautiful allegory of simulation, this fable has now come full circle for us, and possesses nothing but the discrete charm of second-order simulacra.

Today abstraction is no longer that of the map, the double, the mirror, or the concept. Simulation is no longer that of a territory, a referential being, or a substance. It is the generation by models of a real without origin or reality: a hyperreal. The territory no longer precedes the map, nor does it survive it. It is nevertheless the map that precedes the territory - precession of simulacra - that engenders the territory, and if one must return to the fable, today it is the territory whose shreds slowly rot across the extent of the map. It is the real, and not the map, whose vestiges persist here and there in the deserts that are no longer those of the Empire, but ours. The desert of the real itself.

In fact, even inverted, Borges's fable is unusable. Only the allegory of the Empire, perhaps, remains. Because it is with this same imperialism that present-day simulators attempt to make the real, all of the real, coincide with their models of simulation. But it is no longer a question of either maps or territories. Something has disappeared: the sovereign difference, between one and the other, that constituted the charm of abstraction. Because it is difference that constitutes the poetry of the map and the charm of the territory, the magic of the concept and the charm of the real. This imaginary of representation, which simultaneously culminates in and is engulfed by the cartographers mad project of the ideal coextensivity of map and territory, disappears in the simulation whose operation is nuclear and genetic, no longer at all specular or discursive. It is all of metaphysics that is lost. No more mirror of being and appearances, of the real and its concept. No more imaginary coextensivity: it is genetic miniaturization that is the dimension of simulation. The real is produced from miniaturized cells, matrices, and memory banks, models of control - and it can be reproduced an indefinite number of times from these. It no longer needs to be rational, because it no longer measures itself against either an ideal or negative instance. It is no longer anything but operational. In fact, it is no longer really the real, because no imaginary envelops it anymore. It is a hyperreal, produced from a radiating synthesis of combinatory models in a hyperspace without atmosphere.

By crossing into a space whose curvature is no longer that of the real, nor that of truth, the era of simulation is inaugurated by a liquidation of all referentials - worse: with their artificial resurrection in the systems of signs, a material more malleable than meaning, in that it lends itself to all systems of equivalences, to all binary oppositions, to all combinatory algebra. It is no longer a question of imitation, nor duplication, nor even parody. It is a question of substituting the signs of the real for the real, that is to say of an operation of deterring every real process via its operational double, a programmatic, metastable, perfectly descriptive machine that offers all the signs of the real and shortcircuits all its vicissitudes."
(Jean Baudrillard, Simulacra and simulation, 1981)

E1.5.B.5.3.b_REF2_LIT AN INVENTED WORD TO ENCAPSULATE A KIND OF MELANCHOLIC TRANCE 
“Ambedo n. a kind of melancholic trance in which you become completely absorbed in vivid sensory details—raindrops skittering down a window, tall trees leaning in the wind, clouds of cream swirling in your coffee—which leads to a dawning awareness of the haunting fragility of life, a mood whose only known cure is the vuvuzela.”
(John Koenig, The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021)

E1.5.B.5.3.c. SIMULATION REFERS TO ABSENCE
To conceal is to pretend not to have what one has. To simulate is to pretend to have what you don't have. One refers to presence, the other to absence. But the matter is more complicated, for to simulate is not to feign: [...] to feign, or to conceal, leaves the principle of reality intact: the difference is always clear, it is only masked. Simulation, on the other hand, calls into question the difference between "true" and "false", between "real" and "imaginary". 

E1.5.B.5.3.c_REF1_PH JEAN BAUDRILLARD EXPLORES THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN DISSIMULATION AND SIMULATION, POINTING OUT THAT SIMULATION CALLS INTO QUESTION THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE TRUE AND THE FALSE, THE REAL AND THE IMAGINARY.
"THE DIVINE IRREFERENCE OF IMAGES
To dissimulate is to pretend not to have what one has. To simulate is to feign to have what one doesn't have. One implies a presence, the other an absence. But it is more complicated than that because simulating is not pretending: "Whoever fakes an illness can simply stay in bed and make everyone believe he is ill. Whoever simulates an illness produces in himself some of the symptoms" (Littré). Therefore, pretending, or dissimulating, leaves the principle of reality intact: the difference is always clear, it is simply masked, whereas simulation threatens the difference between the "true" and the "false," the "real" and the "imaginary." Is the simulator sick or not, given that he produces "true" symptoms? Objectively one cannot treat him as being either ill or not ill. Psychology and medicine stop at this point, forestalled by the illness's henceforth undiscoverable truth. For if any symptom can be "produced," and can no longer be taken as a fact of nature, then every illness can be considered as simulatable and simulated, and medicine loses its meaning since it only knows how to treat "real" illnesses according to their objective causes. Psychosomatics evolves in a dubious manner at the borders of the principle of illness. As to psychoanalysis, it transfers the symptom of the organic order to the unconscious order: the latter is new and taken for "real" more real than the other - but why would simulation be at the gates of the unconscious? Why couldn't the "work" of the unconscious be "produced" in the same way as any old symptom of classical medicine? Dreams already are. [...]

What can psychoanalysis do with the duplication of the discourse of the unconscious in the discourse of simulation that can never again be unmasked, since it is not false either? [...] "
(Jean Baudrillard, Simulacra and simulation, 1981)

E1.5.B.5.3.c_REF2_PH THE FOUR PHASES OF THE IMAGE, DISTINGUISHING REPRESENTATION FROM SIMULATION :
"Such is simulation, insofar as it is opposed to representation. Representation stems from the principle of the equivalence of the sign and of the real (even if this equivalence is Utopian, it is a fundamental axiom). Simulation, on the contrary, stems from the Utopia of the principle of equivalence, from the radical negation of the sign as value, from the sign as the reversion and death sentence of every reference. Whereas representation attempts to absorb simulation by interpreting it as a false representation, simulation envelops the whole edifice of representation itself as a simulacrum.

Such would be the successive phases of the image:

it is the reflection of a profound reality;
it masks and denatures a profound reality;
it masks the absence of a profound reality;
it has no relation to any reality whatsoever;
it is its own pure simulacrum.

In the first case, the image is a good appearance - representation is of the sacramental order. In the second, it is an evil appearance - it is of the order of maleficence. In the third, it plays at being an appearance - it is of the order of sorcery. In the fourth, it is no longer of the order of appearances, but of simulation.

The transition from signs that dissimulate something to signs that dissimulate that there is nothing marks a decisive turning point. The first reflects a theology of truth and secrecy (to which the notion of ideology still belongs). The second inaugurates the era of simulacra and of simulation, in which there is no longer a God to recognize his own, no longer a Last Judgment to separate the false from the true, the real from its artificial resurrection, as everything is already dead and resurrected in advance.

When the real is no longer what it was, nostalgia assumes its full meaning. There is a plethora of myths of origin and of signs of reality - a plethora of truth, of secondary objectivity, and authenticity. Escalation of the true, of lived experience, resurrection of the figurative where the object and substance have disappeared. Panic-stricken production of the real and of the referential, parallel to and greater than the panic of material production: this is how simulation appears in the phase that concerns us - a strategy of the real, of the neoreal and the hyperreal that everywhere is the double of a strategy of deterrence."
(Jean Baudrillard, Simulacra and simulation, 1981)

E1.5.B.5.4. ANGUISH

E1.5.B.5.4_REF1_PO "I HAVE NEVER SEEN « VOLCANOES » -
But, when Travellers tell 
How those old - phlegmatic mountains 
Usually so still -

Bear within - appalling Ordnance, 
Fire, and smoke, and gun -
Taking Villages for breakfast, 
And appalling Men -

If the stillness is Volcanic 
In the human face 
When opon a pain Titanic 
Features keep their place -

If at length, the smouldering anguish 
Will not overcome, 
And the palpitating Vineyard 
In the dust, be thrown ? 

If some loving Antiquary, 
On Resumption Morn, 
Will not cry with joy, « Pompeii » ! 
To the Hills return !"
(Emily Dickinson, 1860)

E1.5.B.5.4_REF2_PO "OUR SHARE OF NIGHT TO BEAR -
Our share of morning -
Our blank in bliss to fill, 
Our blank in scorning -

Here a star, and there a star,
Some lose their way ! 
Here a mist - and there a mist -
Afterwards - Day !"
(Emily Dickinson, 1859)

E1.5.B.5.4_REF3_PH I KNOW THE POWER MY VOICE HAS OVER ME, SO I WILL SPEAK TO MYSELF CALMLY AND NOT LIKE A TRAGEDIAN.
"What I take from this is that passion deceives us as easily as tears, sobs, an upset stomach, heartache, violent gestures, and useless muscle contractions interfere with reasoning. The naive get caught up in it every time, but I know this false light will soon fade. I can extinguish it immediately by refraining from declaiming. I know the power my voice has over me, so I will speak to myself calmly and not like a tragedian. So much for the tone. I also know that illness and death are common and natural, and that this rebellion is a false and inhuman thought. A true and human thought must be adapted to the human condition and the course of things, in my opinion. This is a strong enough reason to avoid these complaints that feed anger and are fed by anger. It's a circle of hell, but I am the devil, and I hold the pitchfork."
(Alain, On Happiness, September 25, 1911)

E1.5.B.5.4_REF4_LIT AN INVENTED WORD TO ENCAPSULATE ANGUISH IN THE NIGHT
“nighthawk  n. a recurring thought that only seems to strike you late at night—an overdue  task, a nagging guilt, a looming and shapeless future—that circles high  overhead during the day, that pecks at the back of your mind while you try to  sleep, that you can successfully ignore for weeks, only to feel its presence  hovering outside the window, waiting for you to finish your coffee, passing the  time by quietly building a nest.”
(John Koenig, The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021)

E1.5.B.5.5. DESPAIR is a necessary and seasonal state of repair

E1.5.B.5.5.a. "A BREAKDOWN IS NOT MERELY A RANDOM PIECE OF MADNESS OR MALFUNCTION; it is a very real — albeit very inarticulate — bid for health and self-knowledge. It is an attempt by one part of our mind to force the other into a process of growth, self-understanding and self-development that it has hitherto refused to undertake. If we can put it paradoxically, it is an attempt to jump-start a process of getting well — properly well — through a stage of falling very ill. […]
In the midst of a breakdown, we often wonder whether we have gone mad. We have not. We’re behaving oddly, no doubt, but beneath the agitation we are on a hidden yet logical search for health. We haven’t become ill; we were ill already. Our crisis, if we can get through it, is an attempt to dislodge us from a toxic status quo and constitutes an insistent call to rebuild our lives on a more authentic and sincere basis. It belongs, in the most acute and panicked way, to the search for self-knowledge"
(Alain de Botton, The School of Life: An Emotional Education)

E1.5.B.5.5.b. "DESPAIR

Despair is a necessary and seasonal state of repair, a temporary healing absence, an internal physiological and psychological winter when our previous forms of participation in the world take a rest; it is a loss of horizon; it is the place we go when we do not want to be found in the same way any more. We give up hope when certain particular wishes are no longer able to come true and despair is the time in which we both endure and heal, even when we have not yet found the new form of hope. [...]

To keep despair alive we have to abstract and immobilize our bodies, our faculties of hearing, touch and smell, and keep the surrounding springtime of the world at a distance. Despair needs a certain tending, a reinforcing, and isolation, but the body left to itself will breathe, the ears will hear the first birdsong of morning or catch the leaves being touched by the wind in the trees, and the wind will blow away even the greyest cloud, will move even the most immovable season; the heart will continue to beat and the world, we realise, will never stop or go away. [...]

We take the first steps out of despair by taking on its full weight and coming fully to ground in our wish not to be here. We let our bodies and we let our world breathe again. In that breathing, despair cannot do anything but change into something else, into some other season, as it was meant to do from the beginning. Despair is a difficult, beautiful, necessary, a binding understanding between human beings caught in a fierce and difficult world where half of our experience is mediated by loss, but it is a season, a waveform passing through the body, not a prison surrounding us. A season left to itself will always move, however slowly, under its own patience, power and volition."
(David Whyte, Consolations, The Solace, Nourishment and Underlying Meaning of Everyday Words, 2015)

E1.5.B.5.5.b_REF1_PO "THERE’S A CERTAIN SLANT OF LIGHT, 
Winter Afternoons -
That oppresses, like the Heft 
Of Cathedral Tunes -

Heavenly Hurt, it gives us -
We can find no scar, 
But internal difference -
Where the Meanings, are -

None may teach it - Any -
‘Tis the Seal Despair -
An imperial affliction 
Sent us of the Air -

When it comes, the Landscape listens -
Shadows - hold their breath -
When it goes, ‘tis like the Distance 
On the look of Death -"
(Emily Dickinson, 1862)

E1.5.B.5.5.b_REF2_PO "IT CEASED TO HURT ME, THOUGH SO SLOW 
I COULD NOT SEE THE TROUBLE GO -
But only knew by looking back -
That something - had benumbed the Track -

Nor when it altered, I could say, 
For I had worn it, every day, 
As constant as the Childish frock -
I hung opon the Peg, at night. 

But not the Grief - that nestled Close 
As Needles - ladies softly press 
To Cushions Cheeks -
To keep their place -

Nor what consoled it, I could trace -
Except, whereas ‘twas Wilderness -
It’s better - almost Peace -"
(Emily Dickinson, 1862)

E1.5.B.5.5.b_REF3_PO "I MEASURE EVERY GRIEF I MEET 
WITH NARROW, PROBING, EYES -
I wonder if It weighs like Mine -
Or has an Easier size -

I wonder if They bore it long -
Or did it just begin -
I could not tell the Date of Mine -
It feels so old a pain -

I wonder if it hurts to live -
And if They have to try -
And whether - could They choose between -
It would not be - to die -

I note that Some - gone patient long -
At length, renew their smile -
An imitation of a Light 
That has so little Oil -

I wonder if when Years have piled -
Some Thousands - on the Harm -
That hurt them Early - such a lapse 
Could give them any Balm -

Or would They go on aching still 
Through Centuries of Nerve -
Enlightened to a larger Pain -
In Contrast with the Love -

The Grieved - are many - I am told -
There is the various Cause -
Death - is but one - and comes but once -
And only nails the Eyes -

There’s Grief of Want - and Grief of Cold -
A sort they call « Despair » -
There’s Banishment from native Eyes -
In sight of Native Air -

And though I may not guess the kind -
Correctly - yet to me 
A piercing Comfort it affords 
In passing Calvary -

To note the fashions - of the Cross -
And how they’re mostly worn -
Still fascinated to presume 
That Some - are like my own -"
(Emily Dickinson, 1863)

E1.5.B.5.5.b_REF4_LIT “[Winter] reminds us that the membrane between life and death is permeable, an endless back and forth that makes something of everything, no matter how small, no matter how transitory. To be impermanent is only one part of life. There will always be a resurrection.” 
(Margaret Renkl, The Comfort of Crows: A Backyard Year)

E1.5.B.5.5.b_REF5_PO ILLUMINATION BEGINS "IN A DARK TIME.”
“In a dark time, the eye begins to see,
I meet my shadow in the deepening shade;
I hear my echo in the echoing wood--
A lord of nature weeping to a tree.
I live between the heron and the wren, Beasts of the hill and serpents of the den. What's madness but nobility of soul
At odds with circumstance? The day's on fire!I know the purity of pure despair,
My shadow pinned against a sweating wall. That place among the rocks--is it a cave,
Or a winding path? The edge is what I have.
A steady storm of correspondences!
A night flowing with birds, a ragged moon, And in broad day the midnight come again!
A man goes far to find out what he is--
Death of the self in a long, tearless night,
All natural shapes blazing unnatural light.
Dark, dark my light, and darker my desire. My soul, like some heat-maddened summer fly, Keeps buzzing at the sill. Which I is I?
A fallen man, I climb out of my fear.
The mind enters itself, and God the mind, And one is One, free in the tearing wind.”
(Theodore Roethke)

E1.5.B.5.5.b_REF6_PO YOU MUST HAVE SHADOW AND LIGHT SOURCE BOTH.

“ENOUGH WORDS?
How does a part of the world leave the world?
How can wetness leave water?

Don't try to put out a fire
by throwing on more fire!
Don't wash a wound with blood!

No matter how fast you run,
your shadow more than keeps up.
Sometimes, it's in front!

Only full, overhead sun
diminishes your shadow.

But that shadow has been serving you!
What hurts you, blesses you.
Darkness is your candle.
Your boundaries are your quest.

I can explain this, but it would break
the glass cover on your heart,
and there's no fixing that.

You must have shadow and light source both.
Listen, and lay your head under the tree of awe. […]

Are these enough words,
or shall I squeeze more juice from this? […]”
(Rumi, The essential, translated by Coleman Barks, 1207-1273)

E1.5.B.5.5.c. "CRISIS
[...] The waveform that overwhelms a maturing human being from the inside is the inescapable nature of their own flaws and weaknesses, their self-deceptions and their attempts to create false names and stories to place themselves in the world; the felt need to control the narrative of the story around them with no regard to outside revelation. The immense wave on the outside is the invitation to give that self to be borne off by the wave and renamed, revealed and re-ordered by the powerful flow."
(David Whyte, Consolations, The Solace, Nourishment and Underlying Meaning of Everyday Words, 2015)

E1.5.B.5.5.d. "THE POET WITH HIS FACE IN HIS HANDS

You want to cry aloud for your 
mistakes. But to tell the truth the world 
doesn't need any more of that sound.

So if you're going to do it and can't 
stop yourself, if your pretty mouth can't 
hold it in, at least go by yourself across

the forty fields and the forty dark inclines 
of rocks and water to the place where
 the falls are flinging out their white sheets

like crazy, and there is a cave behind all that 
jubilation and water-fun and you can 
stand there, under it, and roar all you

want and nothing will be disturbed; you can 
drip with despair all afternoon and still, 
on a green branch, its wings just lightly touched

by the passing foil of the water, the thrush, 
puffing out its spotted breast, will sing 
of the perfect, stone-hard beauty of everything."
(Mary Oliver, New and selected poems: Volume two, 2005)

E1.5.B.5.6. DEPRESSION

E1.5.B.5.6_REF1_LIT “THOSE OF US WHO HAVE LIVED WITH DEPRESSION KNOW THE WAY IT BLINDFOLDS US TO BEAUTY, the way it muffles the song of life, until we are left in the solitary confinement of our own somber ruminations, all the world a blank. It might feel like the visitation of some monster, but it is not something that happens upon us from the outside — it is our own undulating neurochemistry, it is the parts of ourselves we have not yet befriended, integrated, understood. “The gray drizzle of horror induced by depression takes on the quality of physical pain,” William Styron wrote in his timeless account of depression
. The pain can feel interminable. It is a lifeline to remember that it is not — that there is an other side, that the blindfold and the muffler can come off just like they came on.”
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.5.B.5.6_REF2_SOC "MENTAL HEALTH AND HAPPINESS

When trying to discern a relationship between mental health and happiness, it is important to distinguish between macro and micro-level correlations. When we look at macro-level, cross-country trends in the prevalence of mental health disorders such as depression versus self-reported life satisfaction there is no clear relationship: it does not appear that countries with higher depression rates have lower self-reported happiness.

However, when we look at micro-level, within-country correlations the data tells a different story. In the visualization below, we provide evidence of the relationship between health and subjective well-being within countries—specifically; we focus here on mental health and self-reported life satisfaction.

Each bar in the visualization below measures the extent to which mental illness (depression and anxiety) is associated with self-reported life satisfaction, once we control for physical illness and other factors such as income and education. In other words, the bars show a ‘conditional correlation’—the strength of the link between mental illness and happiness after accounting for other factors.

The negative values show that people who have been diagnosed with depression or anxiety tend to be more likely to have lower self-reported life satisfaction.

The size of the coefficients, particularly in the US, and Australia, tell us that the relationship we observe is very strong. For context, in the UK, the US and Australia the magnitude of the correlation between mental illness and life satisfaction is higher than the magnitude for the correlation between income and life satisfaction."
(Updated happiness and life satisfaction world data: Impact of depression on life satisfaction)

Read the full article:
https://ourworldindata.org/happiness-and-life-satisfaction#mental-health-and-happiness

E1.5.B.5.6_REF3_CUR "THERE IS LITTLE DOUBT ABOUT THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THIS PAINTING that was done in February 1890, at a particularly troubled time in Van Gogh's life. He was severely depressed and desperate to leave the stultifying environs of the asylum at Saint-Remy, but it had been decided that he would not be fit to cope alone until the spring. His feelings of being physically trapped, and mentally caught in a perpetual cycle of mental illness beyond his control are clearly evident.
Prisoners Exercising was actually made after a print of Newgate Prison in London by Dore, whose work Van Gogh had admired for some years. Van Gogh had begun to collect graphic illustrations from magazines in the early 1880s, and added prints of Doumier, Paul Gavami (1804-66) and Dore to his collection. He then referred to these works in later years (as well as multiple prints of Millet's paintings), often making several copies of a single image. The prints were in block and white, so Van Gogh improvised with the color, and gave the paintings his own visual interpretation."
(Wikipaintings)

E1.5.B.5.6_REF4_PH "MY DEPRESSION IS SPEWING LIKE AN OIL SPILL ALL OVER the beautiful turquoise-green gulf of my carefully planned and controlled existence. Its black sludge is threatening to smother every last living part of me."
(Bruce Springsteen, Born to Run, 2016)

"I’ve developed some skills that help me in dealing with it, but still — it is a powerful, powerful thing that really comes up from things that still remain unexplainable to me. [...]

Just naming it [helps]… What most people tend to want to do is, when they feel bad, the first thing you want to do is to name a reason why you feel that way: “I feel bad because…” and you’ll transfer that to someone else “…because Johnny said this to me,” or “this happened.” And, sometimes, that’s true. But a lot of times, you’re simply looking to name something that’s not particularly nameable and if you misname it, it just makes everything that much worse.

So my “skill” is sort of saying, “Okay, it’s not this, it’s not that — it’s just this. This is something that comes; it’s also something that goes — and maybe something I have to live with for a period of time.”

But if you can acknowledge it and you can relax with it a little bit, very often it shortens its duration."
(Bruce Springsteen, BBC Radio 4, Desert Island Discs)

Access the link:
https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/articles/9FNJXs9HzJhV6jZ4rMCKN3/which-eight-songs-would-bruce-springsteen-take-to-a-desert-island?mc_cid=ca2cb85856&mc_eid=0b6483decb


E1.5.B.5.6_REF5_PO "DISPERSION

I got lost in myself
Cause I was a labyrinth
And today, as I feel me.
It's in longing of me
 
I'd passed through my life
A dreaming wild star
Yearning to overstep,
I badly was aware of my life...
 
For me, it is always yesterday,
I have not tomorrow either today
The time that elapses to others,
Falls on me like yesterday.

[...]

As a lover cries
Thus I cry for myself
I was an unsteady lover
That betrayed himself
 
I can't feel the space I enclose
Either lines I protect:
If I look me in a mirror, I'm miss it
I can't find me in what I project.

[...]

The twilight came down to my soul
I've been someone that has passed by
I'll be, But I'm not anyway
I don't live, I dream the twilight.

[...]

I'd lost the death and life
And crazy, I don't get out of my mind
The lived hour flees
I follow it, but I don't remain...
 
[...]"
(Mário de Sá-Carneiro, Dispersion, Paris, May 1913)

E1.5.B.5.6_REF6_PO "ALMOST

A little more sun, I would be ember
A little more of blue - I would be beyound
To reach, I missed a wing blow...
If I just remained short...
 
[...]

Almost love, almost triumph and flame,
Almost the beguining and the end - almost the expantion...
But in my soul everything spills
Everything was just illusion!
 
From everything there was a start...and everything failed...
- Oh the pain of being - almost, pain without end...
I failed myself among the most, I failed on me,
Wing that was linked but didn't fly...
 
Moments of soul that I wasted...
Temples where I never put an altar...
Rivers I lost without taking them to the sea...
Cravings that were but I didn't fix...
 
If I wander myself, I only find evidences
Warheads to the sun - I see them closed;
And hands of a hero, without faith, chickened,
It puted grids on the precipices...
 
In a diffuse impetus of breaking,
I started everything and I possessed nothing...
Today, of me, it only remains disenchantment
Of the things I kissed but didn't live...
 
A little more sun, I would be ember
A little more of blue - I would be beyound
To reach, I missed a wing blow...
If I just remained short..."
(Mário de Sá-Carneiro, Dispersion, Paris, May 1913)

E1.5.B.5.6_REF7_PO “AS I DO NOT POSSESS

I look around me. Everyone possesses 
An affection, a smile or a hug. 
I'm the only one who's diluted by anxiety 
And I can't possess even when I embrace.

[...]

I want to feel. I don't know how... I totally lose myself... 
I can't get attached or be me: 
I lack the egoism to ascend to heaven, 
I lack the anointing to sink into the mire.

I'm nobody's friend. To be one 
I had to be able to possess 
Whoever I love - man or woman, 
And I can never possess!...

Castrated of a soul and without knowing how to anchor myself. 
Afternoon after afternoon I sink into my pain... 
- Will I be an emigrant from another world 
That can't even find himself in his pain?...

****

How I long for the girl on the street, 
So agile, so wild, so fit for love...
How I wish I could strip her naked, 
To drink her in spasms of harmony and color!...

Wrong wish... If I'd had her one day, 
All unveiled, her flesh stylized 
Overflowing gasping under my body, 
Even then - oh craving! - I wouldn't have her...

I would only vibrate in agony
On her body of golden ecstasies, 
If before those heaving breasts, 
If before that engulfing sex...

In the face of all my love, I laugh, 
And I see myself as a wreck even winning:
It's just that I'd be alone, feeling and being 
That which I strive for and do not possess.”
(Mário de Sá-Carneiro, Dispersion, Paris, May 1913)

E1.5.B.5.2.b_REF2_PO.wE1.5.B.5.6.

E1.5.B.5.6_REF9_PO “THE FALL

And I am the king of all this incoherence, 
I am a whirlwind and I long to mster it 
But I spin until I break... And everything slips away 
In mist and drowsiness.

If by chance there's a piece of gold left in my hands, 
It immediately turns out to be false... I throw it far away... 
I die of disdain in front of a treasure, 
I die shrinking, in excess.

My face reddish by force of dismay,
I stretch out my arms - and not a spasm do I overcome!... I sift myself in the shadows - 
I condense into nothingness... 
I still vibrate in agonies of light.

I can't master myself, but I can destroy myself, 
- Winning is sometimes the same as falling -
And since I'm still light, I'm going backwards, 
In ideal rages, I ascend to the end: 
I look at the ice from above, I throw myself on the ice...

I fell...

And I lay crushed upon myself!..."
(Mário de Sá-Carneiro, Dispersion, Paris, May 1913)

E1.5.B.5.2.b_REF3_PO.wE1.5.B.5.6

E1.5.B.5.6_REF11_PO “APOTEOSIS

Broken masts, I sail on a sea of Gold
Sleeping fire, uncertain, lingering... 
A vivid dream has revealed to me that all things are equal, 
And today I only live in half of myself...

It's bronze sorrows I still cry over 
Dead pillars, marbles in the setting sun... 
I've been whitewashed by anxiety
Through fake cloisters where I never prayed...

I stepped out of myself. I folded the mantle of stars,
I broke the glass of crystal and astounded, 
Into the shadow, I carved my trail in gold...

I'm finished... Platinum hours... Blazing sun... 
Moonlight of anguish... Light of forgiveness... Orchids of tears...

 - O swamps of Me - stagnant garden...”
(Mário de Sá-Carneiro, Clues of Gold, Paris, June 1914)

E1.5.B.5.6_REF12_PO “TACITURN

There's gold marquetry in me, rare stones, 
Ominous gold sounding like medieval bronzes - 
My Soul's deep jewel of expensive lights, 
Triangular baldaquin of infernal rites.

In my inner world, armors were clenched 
Iron helmets crushed princesses. 
A whole royal line of heroes of Antique bravery 
abandonned their brazen arms and preys to me.

Brazons - moonlight on red impetus, 
Humiliations in linen, violencia in brocade; 
Bazilicas of boredom, bristling harnesses, 
Badges of illusion, trophies of rock and October...

The dull drawbridge of I-have-been 
Rusted-in vain they'll try to lower it...
Over moats of vagueness, ramparts of I-still-want-more 
Mornings of arms still in camps of oblivion... 

I wander within, through halls without windows or doors, 
Long rooms of thick densely packed thrones, 
Where the tapisteries are torn nostalgia,
And the divans, below deep soft anxieties ...

There are purple failing Empires in my renunciation - 
The whimpers of my Astral disdain... 
There are funerals of heroes in my feudal pain -
And my regrets are terraces over the sea...”
(Mário de Sá-Carneiro, Golden Clues, Paris, August 1914)

E1.5.B.5.2.b_REF4_PO.wE1.5.B.5.6.

E1.5.B.5.6_REF14_PO “THE RECREATION

There's a swing in my soul 
That's always rocking -
A swing on the edge of a well, 
Very difficult to ride...

-And a little boy in a bib
Is always playing on it...

If the rope breaks one day, 
(And it's already fraying), 
Gone is the revelry: 
The child drowns...

- I won't change the rope 
It would be a huge blunder...

If the kid dies, let it be... 
It's better to die in a bib
Than in a tuxedo... Let him 
Swing while he lives...

Changing the rope would have been easy... 
I've never tought of it...”
(Mário de Sá-Carneiro, Golden Clues, Paris, October 1915)

E1.5.B.5.6_REF15_PO “MANUCURE

The sensation of polishing my nails:
A sudden inexplicable feeling of tenderness, 
Everything is part of Me - devoutly. 
Then I find myself alone in the café:
In the morning, as always, yellow yawns.
Once again, the tables - ungrateful 
And hard, cornered in their wretchedness 
Foolish, square and free-thinking... 
Outside: May Day of light
And sunshine - a brutal, provincial and democratic day 
That my delicate, refined, slender, city eyes
Cannot tolerate - and only forced 
Bear in nausea. All my sensitivity 
Is offended by this day that will have singers
Among the friends I sometimes hang out with -
Morenos, naturals, with bushy moustaches - 
Who write, but have political parties 
And attend democratic meetings, 
Visit the girls, like red wine,
And turkey or fried sardines...

And I, when polishing my nails 
And painting them with Parisian varnish, 
Become more and more softened 
Until I start to cry over myself... [...]”
(Mário de Sá-Carneiro, undated)

E1.5.B.5.6_REF16_PO WHEN YOU EAT IT, YOU TAKE IN THE CARROT’S WILL TO GO UPWARD. TO HEAVEN
“She gestured at the bowl of raw carrots. “Those are for you. Eat up.”
Hai took a bite from a carrot, then picked up his fork, eager to try the latke.
“No, eat the carrot first. Please.” She leaned forward, knife and fork on each side of the plate, a paper towel tucked in her collar. “It’s important.”
He finished the carrot, then picked another from the bowl and put the whole thing in his mouth.
“They’re good for you, believe me.” She cut into her latke like it was a steak and ate.
“For the eyes, right?”
“That’s a lie the army told in World War Two to hide the fact that they used top- ‑ notch radar. Carrots,” she paused for effect, “give you the will to live.”
He took a bite of the latke, which was perfectly made, crispy at the edges and delicately salted with a touch of herbs he couldn’t name. “What do you mean?” he said, chewing.

“It’s a root. And roots prevent you from getting the blues.” She picked one from the bowl; it gleamed under the kitchen light. “You see, carrots become bright orange because it’s so dark in the ground. They make their own light because the sun never reaches that far— like those fish in the ocean who glow from nothing? So when you eat it, you take in the carrot’s will to go upward. To heaven.” She tucked the carrot back in the bowl, gently, as if it were a tiny person. “Ever heard of a rabbit jumping off a bridge?” she winked. “Of course not. That’s because they have the light in them.”
He had never heard this before, but somehow it made sense.

“When I get the blues, mostly in February, I boil a pot of these and dip them in honey. When my husband died, I ate nothing but carrots for six months straight, and you know what?” She pointed the butter knife at her eye. “Not a single tear. They’re stronger raw, but I lost my molars in ’91. Bush Senior, what can you do?”
(Ocean Vuong, The emperor of gladness, 2025)

E1.5.B.6. HYPERSENSITIVITY: Emotions that overwhelm us

E1.5.B.6_REF1_PH "THE ART OF TRUTHFULNESS IS THE ART OF HYPERSENSITIVITY. IT'S THE ART OF HAPPINESS. I've tried to reflect on it, but it's not the fruit of reasoning or intellectual work. It can't be measured in intensity or quantity, it can't be planned or projected. It can be experienced and recognised by the feeling of fullness and completeness that comes over us. It is the art of the simply true that the hypersensitive feels with every fibre of the body, with every thought of the mind.
It's a love story. It is my grandmother's smile as she takes her simple but delicious cheesecake out of the oven. It's the drawing a child brings home on Mother's Day or Father's Day. It's the comedian who finds his tone, his line, at just the right moment. It's the smile on a gardener's face when he harvests his first tomatoes. It's a jubilant emotion that you immediately want to share and pass on. It's the sense of accomplishment that lets us know our full humanity is unfolding.
We think of happiness as a state of continuous well-being, a smooth road without bumps or potholes, an ersatz satisfaction. Fortunately, the life of a hypersensitive person does not conform to this narrow idea.
It is real life. It is a constant striving for the whaou!, for the sublime, for what feels right, for what feels just. It doesn't settle for small things. It demands that you roll up your sleeves and get in touch with reality, that you commit yourself to what you love.
You'll have moments of frustration, but they're part of life. They're a blessing: they'll keep you going in your quest for something more than the ordinary. You'll move forward on a path that is itself your happiness.
For this is the key that every hypersensitive person discovers: happiness is a commitment to life. We're all in love with something. What are you in love with? Find your way, find your path, let yourself be nourished by what's true for you. Receive that gift, that's what gives you access to pure joy. True happiness..."
(Fabrice Midal)

E1.5.B.6_REF1_PH "ACTION SEEMS TO FOLLOW FEELING, BUT REALLY ACTION AND FEELING GO TOGETHER; and by regulating the action, which is under the more direct control of the will, we can indirectly regulate the feeling, which is not.”
(William James)

E1.5.B.7. ILLNESS

E1.5.B.7.1. THE WISDOM OF CHEERFULNESS

E1.5.B.7.1_REF1_LIT ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING FINDS THAT SUFFERING HAS TAUGHT HER JOY AND SOLITUDE HAS TAUGHT HER THE VALUE OF SOCIETY. 
"I am not desponding by nature, and after a course of bitter mental discipline and long bodily seclusion, I come out with two learnt lessons (as I sometimes say and oftener feel), — the wisdom of cheerfulness — and the duty of social intercourse. Anguish has instructed me in joy, and solitude in society; it has been a wholesome and not unnatural reaction. And altogether, I may say that the earth looks the brighter to me in proportion to my own deprivations. The laburnum trees and rose trees are plucked up by the roots — but the sunshine is in their places, and the root of the sunshine is above the storms. What we call Life is a condition of the soul, and the soul must improve in happiness and wisdom, except by its own fault. These tears in our eyes, these faintings of the flesh, will not hinder such improvement. [...] 
It seems to me from my personal experience that there is kindness everywhere in different proportions, and more goodness and tenderheartedness than we read of in the moralists.
(Elizabeth Barrett Browning, The Love Letters of Elizabeth Barrett and Robert Browning)

E1.5.B.7.1_REF2_LIT WE WERE NEVER PROMISED ANY OF THIS "When a recent bout of illness sent me sulking with indignant disappointment at the ruin of long laid plans, I had to remind myself that we were never promised any of this; that it is hubris and self-importance and almost touching delusion to expect an indifferent cosmos to bend to our will, our wishes, and our plans; that meeting the universe on its own terms is the end of suffering.

Through the haze of what Virginia Woolf called the “wastes and deserts of the soul” exposed by being ill, I remembered a lovely calibration of perspective by the poet and peace activist William Stafford (January 17, 1914–August 28, 1993), found in the posthumous collection The Way It Is: New and Selected Poems."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.5.B.7.1_REF3_PO "YES

It could happen any time, tornado,
earthquake, Armageddon. It could happen.
Or sunshine, love, salvation.

It could, you know. That’s why we wake
and look out — no guarantees
in this life.

But some bonuses, like morning,
like right now, like noon,
like evening."
(William Stafford, The Way It Is: New and Selected Poems)

E1.5.B.7.2. ADVICE ON HEALING

E1.5.B.7.2_REF1_PO "A SCIENTIST´S ADVICE ON HEALING

Try to accept
this fat red hurt
is your starting point,
in the way a pen must be put to paper
     in one particular spot,

then move

beyond
the globby flap
of blame
     and past
          the mono-sulk
               of pain.

Change the subject,
before it’s too late.
Sketch out
what health
you do possess,
what signal-cascades,
what flotilla of cells
circumnavigate you,

then draw yourself back
     together again,
in a language
     of your own.

Your body’s talk
is loose as lymph —
it’ll have you open out
     as a tree,
or sneak up on pain
     as assassin,
     sidekick,
     or wolf.

Encourage this
for healing won’t come at you
     straight.
Embrace the lack of heroics —
this isn’t Hollywood,
it’s you,
in a plot
that may
or may not resolve."
(Christy Ducker, Messenger)

Watch Kate Sweeney's animation on Christy Ducker's poem "A scientit´s advice on healing": https://player.vimeo.com/video/163933380

E1.5.B.7.2_REF2_PO "TONIGHT I SAW MYSELF IN THE MIRROR
in a white undershirt,
with my beard of sick days.
But I had once again been through the pain,
and my flesh was fresh,
and all my doubts dispelled.
I had weathered a season of despair.
As soon as the boat has tacked
and taken shelter behind the gray promontory,
the wind suddenly drops,
and the momentum subsides
and marvels itself at its own exhaustion.
And thus the sailor is saved."
(Valerio Magrelli, Ora serrata retinae, 1980)

E1.5.B.7.2_REF3_CUR PROSPECT COTTAGE "In the late 1980s, while scouting for his film The Garden, the English filmmaker Derek Jarman explored the Dungeness headland on England's Kent Coast. He noticed an old fisherman's hut for sale near a pebble beach close to a huge nuclear power station. Jarman bought the house. which he named "Prospect Cottage".
Despite the hostile conditions, he patiently created a garden where plants of all kinds grew on driftwood stakes and planters made of ships debris, somewhere between horticulture and sculpture. The garden became a therapeutic and poetic place for Jarman, who was suffering from AIDS, as well as a location for his films.
Prospect Cottage is an important site for Tacita Dean and Benoît Piéron: the former, who was close to Jarman, was particularly involved in preserving the place, while the latter, who was strongly influenced by the director, made seed bombs from plants similar to those in the Dungeness garden."
(Curatorship: Bourse de Commerce - Pinault Collection, Paris)

E1.5.B.7.2_REF3.1_CUR A PLACE WHERE SOMETHING ALWAYS SURVIVES "Benoît Piéron's work weaves links between both life and death and nature and culture. From the drawers of an old writing desk, typical of the maritime furniture of the late nineteenth century, plants grow. They have been carefully selected by the artist for their pharmacological properties and their cultural and historical significance. Witches' herbs or lethal plants, hallucinogens or abortifacients, these plants reveal a whole world that speaks volumes about our ways of life and our mindsets. Inspired by Benoît Piéron's intimate relationship with illness, death, and care, L'écritoire resonates with the picture of Derek Jarman's garden with which it shares the exhibition space: a place where something always survives and where the boundaries between the living and the non-living, the human and the non-human, remain blurred."
(Curatorship: Bourse de Commerce - Pinault Collection, Paris)

E1.5.B.7.2_REF4_LIT BELL HOOKS POSITS THAT GENUINE HEALING REQUIRES COURAGEOUSLY CONFRONTING ONE'S PAIN AND TAKING PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR RECOVERY—RATHER THAN ADOPTING A VICTIM IDENTITY.
“All individuals who are genuinely seeking well-being
within a healing context realize that it is important to that
process not to make being a victim a stance of pride or a
location from which to simply blame others. We need to
speak our shame and our pain courageously in order to
recover. Addressing woundedness is not about blaming
others; however, it does allow individuals who have been,
and are, hurt to insist on accountability and responsibility
both from themselves and from those who were the agents
of their suffering as well as those who bore witness. Constructive
confrontation aids our healing.
The story of Jacob's confrontation with the angel is a
narrative of healing precisely because it shows he is innocent.
There is nothing he has done to anger the angel.
The adversarial conflict is not of his making. He is not
accountable. And he is not to blame for his wound. However,
healing happens when he is able to embrace the
wound as a blessing and assume responsibility for his actions.
We are all wounded at times . A great many of us remain
wounded in the place where we would know love. We
carry that wound from childhood into adulthood and on
into old age. The story of Jacob reminds us that embracing
our wound is the way to heal. He accepts his vulnerability.
Kornfield and Feldman remind us that the moment in
which we are touched by pain and " the unpredictability
of life 's changes" is the moment in which we can find
salvation: "As we turn toward the specific shadows in our
own lives with an open heart and a clear and focused
mind, we cease resisting and begin to understand and to
heal. In order to do this, we must learn to feel deeply, not
so much opening our eyes as opening the inner sense of
the mind and the heart." When Jacob wrestles with the
angel, he fee ls a heightened sense of awareness . Facing this
struggle gives him the courage to persevere in his journey
back to face conflicts and reconcile them rather than live
in alienation and estrangement.”
(Bell Hooks, All about love, 2000)

E1.5.B.8. DISABILITY

E1.5.B.8.1. HEDONIC ADAPTATION protects us from lows - partially

E1.5.B.8.1_REF1_PSI WOULD WINNING THE LOTTERY MAKE YOU HAPPIER?
(Raj Raghunathan, TED Ed)

Watch this episod of TED Ed on YouTube:
https://youtu.be/juO4zxsjSjw?si=ZEsAf6HzB0caetlH

E1.5.B.8.1_REF2_SOC DOES DISABILITY CORRELATE WITH LIFE SATISFACTION?
A number of papers have noted that long-term paraplegics do not report themselves as particularly unhappy, when compared to non-paraplegics (see for example the much-cited paper by Brickman, Coates, and Janoff-Bulman, 1978).
This assertion has received attention because it tells us something about the very meaning of well-being and has important consequences for policy. It is, for example, considered in courts of law with respect to the compensation for disability.

However, comparing differences in self-reported life satisfaction among people with different disability statuses is not an ideal source of evidence regarding the effect of tragedy on happiness. Non-paraplegics are potentially different to paraplegics in ways that are hard to measure. A better source of evidence are longitudinal surveys where people are tracked over time.
Oswald and Powdthavee (2008) use data from a longitudinal survey in the UK to explore whether accidents leading to disability imply long-term shocks to life satisfaction.
The chart below, from Oswald and Powdthavee, shows the average reported life satisfaction of a group of people who became seriously disabled (at time T) and remained seriously disabled in the two following years (T+1 and T+2). Here, ‘seriously disabled’ means that disability prevented them from being able to do day-to-day activities.
As we can see—and as the authors show more precisely through econometric techniques—those entering disability suffer a sudden drop in life satisfaction, and recover only partially. This supports the idea that while adaptation plays a role for common life events, the notion of life satisfaction is indeed sensitive to tragic events.
(Updated happiness and life satisfaction world data: Happiness and Life Satisfaction - https://ourworldindata.org/happiness-and-life-satisfaction#)

E1.5.B.8.1_REF3_CUR THIS SURREAL CHARACTER SEEMS TO BE THE SHADOW OF HIS FORMER SELF after a tragic incident that is left for us to imagine. Perhaps because some people who have had a limb amputated say they can still feel it and even feel pain despite its absence, the character seems immobilized in sadness by a ball and chain attached to his torn-off foot. Dark clouds in the distance reinforce the feeling of oppression despite the fair weather, while all the doors that could offer an escape from the desertic land where the character wanders systematically open onto an impassable ocean. 

E1.5.B.8.1_REF4_CUR THE SOUND OF METAL, 2019 is a great film that help us identify with someone confronted with a new unexpected physical handicap.
(Darius Marder, The sound of Metal, 2019)

Watch teh trailer: https://www.imdb.com/title/tt5363618/?ref_=ext_shr_lnk

E1.5.B.8.2. IF OVERCOMPENSATION OF DISABILITY IS THE SECRET OF SUCCESS, does this mean that most people are not disabled enough? 

E1.5.B.8.2_REF1_PH "ONLY CRIPPLES WILL SURVIVE
By managing to develop the paradoxes of their mode of existence, the handicapped can become convincing teachers of the human condition – practising beings of a particular category with a message for practising beings in general. [...]
The virtuoso of the ability to be normal can rarely indulge in the luxury of depressive moods. Living in the Nonetheless imposes an ostentatious zest for life on those who are determined to succeed. The fact that things may be different on the inside is no one’s business. The land of smiles is inhabited by cripple artistes. [...]
‘Overcome inhibition is the mother of all unfolded […] movement.’30 According to Würtz, the movement here termed ‘unfolded’ is not simply compensatory, but in fact overcompensatory movement: the reaction exceeds the stimulus. With this, the author had formulated a theorem whose ambit extends to asymmetrical movement complexes of all kinds – organic and intellectual, mental and political – even if he restricted himself in his book to demonstrating his thesis using the phenomenon of physical disability.
overcoming? If overcompensation for disability transpired as the secret of success, should one conclude that most people are not sufficiently disabled?"
(Peter Sloterdijk, You Must Change Your Life, 2009)

E1.5.B.8.2_REF2_CUR FORREST GUMP'S IMMENSE CAPACITY FOR COMPASSION AND GENEROSITY, which predispose him to friendship and love, are preserved in their intensity largely because Forrest is not disturbed by reason as his intellectual friend Jenny is. Forrest feels free to pursue whatever brings him joy, and is happier than any other character in the film - even if the awareness of his intellectual limitations makes him suffer: He's not a happy fool - because he's aware of his disability, his wisdom is truly admirable. In his case, the handicap hasn't prevented him from being happy. Is this the case for all disabilities?


E1.5.B.8.2_REF2.1_CUR FORREST GUMP RECEIVES A VISIBLY CONSTANT JOY FROM THE CONTEMPLATION OF THE WORLD (landscapes, running, playing ping-pong, even as a soldier fighting in Vietnam) because the generosity of his gaze and his capacity for wonder are not limited by egocentrism.
(Robert Zemeckis, Forrest Gump, 1994)

Watch the Trailer: https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0109830/?ref_=ext_shr_lnk

E1.5.B.8.3. IT'S NOT VERTICAL WALKING THAT MAKES A HUMAN A HUMAN, IT'S THE GERM OF AWARENESS OF MENTAL UNEVENNESS THAT THE STANDING UPRIGHT POSITION PROVOKES IN THE HUMAN BEING.
The topic of differently-abled individuals, those with varied complexions, leads us to an expression that reflects the inherent nature of beings under vertical tension [vertically challanged people]. As stated in Rilke's poem on the torso, "You have to change your life" implies maintaining awareness of the internal vertical and observing the influence of the higher pole's attraction.

E1.5.B.8.3_REF1_PH PETER SLOTERDIJK EXPLORES THE IDEA THAT HUMAN BEINGS ARE INHERENTLY FLAWED AND NEED PROPER TRAINING TO COMPENSATE FOR THEIR VARIOUS DISABILITIES. Human existence is characterized by a constant need to learn and adapt, underscoring the importance of self-awareness and effort to change one's life.
"Wherever humans appear, their crippledom has preceded them: this insight was the chorus of philosophical discussions on the human being in the previous century, regardless of whether, as in psychoanalysis, one speaks of humans as cripples of helplessness who can only hobble towards their goals; or, like Bolk and Gehlen, views them as neotenic cripples whose chronic immaturity can only be balanced out by rigid cultural capsules; or, like Plessner, as eccentric cripples chronically standing beside themselves and observing their lives; or, like Sartre and Blumenberg, as visibility cripples who must spend their lives coming to terms with the disadvantage of being seen. [...]
The implications of these observations are as diverse as the diagnoses themselves. They have one thing in common, however: if humans are cripples, without exception and in different ways, then each one of them, in their own particular way, has good reason to understand their existence as an incentive for corrective exercises. 
We recall that in Würtz’s schema of crippledoms, short persons were classified as ‘growth cripples’. In later times, the same people were termed ‘disabled in terms of growth’. When it even became offensive to speak of ‘disability’, the small became those who have different abilities in terms of their format. In the 1980s, politically correct Americans found the most up-to-date name for people who often have to look upwards: ‘vertically challenged people’. This turn of phrase cannot be admired enough. It constitutes a terminological creation that outgrew its inventors without their even noticing what they had achieved. We can laugh at this formulation twice: once at the correct preciousness of its authors and once at ourselves. We have every right and reason to laugh, for we have an absolute majority in the assembly of those who are challenged by verticality. The formula has been valid since we began to practise learning to live – and, as I am seeking to show, one can neither not practise nor not learn to live. Even being a poor student must first be learned.
In short, people had to speak about the handicapped, the differently constituted, to stumble on a phrase that expresses the general constitution of beings under vertical tension. ‘You must change your life!’ means, as we saw in Rilke’s torso poem: you must pay attention to your inner vertical axis and judge how the pull from its upper pole affects you! It is not walking upright that makes humans human; it is rather the incipient awareness of the inner gradient that causes humans to do so."
(Peter Sloterdijk, You must change your life, 2009)

E1.5.B.9. MADNESS is part of every human being's potential

E1.5.B.9.1. THERE IS A LINK BETWEEN MADNESS AND CREATIVITY, a connection that lies at the heart of what makes us human. This link should be recognized as the potential within every individual. Compared to other primates, our brains are significantly more complex, but also more fragile - more susceptible to instability. With its formidable complexity, our brain can sometimes struggle to support itself.

E1.5.B.9.1_REF1_TH THERE SEEMS TO BE A SUBTLE LINK BETWEEN MADNESS AND CREATIVITY, NOT A DIRECT OVERLAP BUT A KINSHIP. Studies show that people who are related to people with mental disorders are more likely to work in creative professions.
"This connection, this hypothesis of a connection between madness and creativity, I have the impression that everyone has the intuition that there is something that connects madness and creativity. In the history of thought, this intuition takes different forms: the melancholy of the ancient Greeks, the intensification of passions in the Romantics, the demand for absolute freedom in the Surrealists. I was very surprised to discover - and this is where science comes in - that this connection is not what we thought it was. It's not an overlap, where madness = creativity; it's not the cliché "you have to be mad to be creative"; it's actually a link of kinship. Epidemiology shows, for example, that the probability of working in a creative profession is higher among relatives of people with a mental disorder (their parents, siblings, children). There's a family resemblance between madness and creativity, but it's not romantic madness. I think that's largely untrue, it's much more subtle than that. 
We could also talk about genetics. It's quite amazing when you go back in history to prehistoric times to find that the genes that make you susceptible to mental disorders, that increase your risk of having a mental disorder (there is no schizophrenia or bipolar gene) are in the part of the genome that's different from that of the Neanderthal man with whom we lived until minus 30,000 years ago - as if these genes had accompanied us at the root of what makes us humans of knowledge, Homo Sapiens. Evolution would have selected for something that both exposes us to psychic risk and makes us the human beings we are. Our psychic apparatus allows us to create infinitely, because we can manipulate representations of the world and enrich them infinitely, but it's also what exposes us to losing ourselves. Perhaps we could say that this is really our fall from paradise, this access to representations of the world - especially language, of course - but also what makes us strong. 
There's a connection between madness and creativity; it's a connection that's at the root of what makes us human. I think we need to be able to see this as the potential of every human being. Compared to other primates, our brains are much more complex, but also more fragile - more susceptible to the madness bug. Our brain, in all its formidable complexity, can no longer support itself. Following the same line of reasoning, it is highly likely that the proportion of people who will experience moments of suffering that fall within the scope of psychiatric care will increase as our brains become even more powerful in the future - perhaps even more so in the hybridisation it will undergo with machines. We will probably pay an even higher price for the increased complexity and reality of mental disorders."
(Raphaël Gaillard, psychiatrist, interviewed in the programme Les chemins de la philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 1 April 2022)

E1.5.B.9.2. LET'S BE CRAZY, LET'S BE OURSELVES!
To what extent are individuals deemed 'mad' compelled to seek treatment to conform to society's conventional model? What is the genuine need for a person to change for their own betterment? A person considered 'mad,' who poses no harm to themselves or others, is likely happier living freely in their eccentricity than being forced into conformity. This reflection applies to all levels of perceived insanity - extending to the eccentricity inherent in all of us: Let's be crazy, let's be ourselves!

E1.5.B.9.2_REF1_CUR "CRAZY IS YOU OR ME AMPLIFIED".
(Susanna Kaysen, Girl, Interrupted, 1999)

Watch the trailer: https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0172493/?ref_=ext_shr_lnk

E1.5.B.9.2_REF2_PH ON MENTAL HEALTH NORMALITY: THERE IS NO CATEGORICAL DISCONTINUITY BETWEEN A HEALTHY MENTAL STATE and one altered to the point of causing suffering to the individual. It is modern medicine that has decided to create boundaries and categories. 
(Steven Hyman on Categorising Mental Disorders, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the Audio:
https://nigelwarburton.typepad.com/philosophy_bites//2016/01/steven-hyman-on-categorising-mental-disorders.html

E1.5.B.9.2_REF3_CUR JENNY HOLZER CALLS OUT TO PASSERS-BY ON A NEW YORK STREET, telling them to allow themselves to be crazy, so that they might compare it with the status quo of "normality". Is she implying that we have something to gain in terms of wisdom and knowledge? The madman who is harmless to himself and to others is surely happier free to live out his eccentricity than to be forced into a mold of conduct imposed by society. This applies to all grades of ordinary insanity - right down to the eccentricity we all carry within us: Let's be crazy, let's be ourselves!
In the same way, the wise man achieves a different kind of jubilation by allowing himself to embrace reality, freed from reasoned resignation, in what appears to be controlled madness in the eyes of those who take refuge in a wisdom sheltered by the illusion of “normality”.

E1.5.B.9.2_REF4_CUR IN THIS SERIES, NANCY SPERO IS INSPIRED BY THE TREATMENT IMPLEMENTED ON ANTONIN ARTAUD during his stays in psychiatric hospitals, which he described in a number of works, such as Les cahiers de Rodez.

E1.5.B.9.2_REF5_PO "MUCH MADNESS IS DIVINEST SENSE -
To a discerning Eye - 
Much Sense - the starkest Madness -
‘Tis the Majority 
In this, as all, prevail -
Assent - and you are sane -
Demur - you’re straightway dangerous -
And handled with a Chain -"
(Emily Dickinson, 1863)

E1.5.B.10. MONEY AND HAPPINESS

E1.5.B.10.1. HOW MUCH DO WE NEED?

E1.5.B.10.1_REF1_PSI "THE SATIATION LEVEL BEYOND WHICH EXPERIENCED WELL-BEING NO LONGER INCREASES was a household income of about [US$109,000 in 2022] in high-cost areas (it could be less in areas where the cost of living is lower). The average increase of experienced well-being associated with incomes beyond that level was precisely zero. This is surprising because higher income undoubtedly permits the purchase of many pleasures, including vacations in interesting places and opera tickets, as well as an improved living environment. Why do these added pleasures not show up in reports of emotional experience? A plausible interpretation is that higher income is associated with a reduced ability to enjoy the small pleasures of life. [...] “Beyond the satiation level of income, you can buy more pleasurable experiences, but you will lose some of your ability to enjoy the less expensive ones.” 
(Daniel Kahneman, Thinking Fast and Slow, 2011)

E1.5.B.10.1_REF1.1_CUR NEGUIN, 22, PHOTOGRAPHED BY HIS SWIMMING POOL in a working-class neighborhood of Jaboatão dos Guararapes, PE, Brazil, has fought hard to build this bubble in his image. He earns €7,650/year (discounted to 31/12/2023) as a dancer with the group Brega Funk MC Tróia (@mctroiaoficial). 
At what income level does money stop increasing happiness? The most recent studies conducted on the model proposed by Nobel Prize winner Daniel Kahneman in 2011 and updated in 2022 on the level of global satisfaction situate at €100,000/year the household income beyond which there is no longer any marginal increase in satisfaction from earning more. Neguin still has room to catch up...

E1.5.B.10.1_REF1.1.a_CUR “REGINALDO FRANCELINO DA SILVA, 22, STARTED DANCING AT THE AGE OF 10 at swingueira contests in the Totó neighborhood, in the far west of Recife, where he rose to prominence leading the Movimento Dance Group. About five years ago, in possession of a cell phone with a camera and internet access, he began recording home videos in which he appears dancing his own Brega Funk choreographies, which made him known on social media as Neguin do Charme (@neguinhobdtc10). Today, hired exclusively as a dancer for MC Tróia (@mctroiaoficial), he performs more than four shows a week, which guarantees him around three minimum salaries per month. In the future, he says, he plans to open a dance school in the Sucupira region of Jaboatão dos Guararapes, where he lives with his mother. In the photo, Neguin do Charme during the recording of the clip “Tô nem aí”, a song released by MCs Tróia, Lipinho Dantas, Elvis and PP in January 2016.
Until the end of January, photographer Bárbara Wagner will be on ZUM magazine's Instagram with images of the process of her #bolsadefotografia ZUM/IMS winning work, “Mestres de cerimônias”, which documents the relationship between reality and fantasy in the lives of young MCs from the Brega Funk movement in Recife and Funk Ostentação in São Paulo. When MCs, DJs and dancers leave the dances of the periphery and enter the mainstream through music videos made exclusively for social networks, a strong and lucrative culture of online fans and followers consolidates a dynamic of appropriation of status symbols historically belonging to the dominant classes. Following the production of the genre's main music video labels in order to document the gestures and scenes that build MC culture in the two Brazilian capitals, Bárbara observes this economy of desires for visibility, consumption and celebrity never before experienced in the country.”
(Zum Magazine)

E1.5.B.10.1_REF2_PSI HEDONIC ADAPTATION PROTECTS US FROM LOWS BUT CAN WE COUNTER IT TO EXPERIENCE LONGER LASTING JOY? 
The more you spend on being able to enjoy experiences rather than owning things, the happier you will be. As well as the more you spend on others vs. on yourself.

E1.5.B.10.1_REF2.1_PSI WILL WINNING THE LOTTERY MAKE YOU HAPPIER?
(Raj Raghunathan)

Watch the vidéo on YouTube :
https://youtu.be/juO4zxsjSjw

E1.5.B.10.1_REF3_PSI RESEARCH INDICATES THAT FINANCIAL SUPPORT, SUCH AS CASH TRANSFERS, CAN ENHANCE SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING (SWB). A meta-analysis shows a small but significant increase in SWB from cash transfers. Larger cash influxes lead to lasting improvements in SWB, and cash transfers are as effective or better than other cost-comparable interventions like psychotherapy and job training.
"Providing Financial Support
Upon his death in 44 BC, Julius Caesar left 300 Roman coins for each citizen (Goldsworthy 2006). More recently, governments and nonprofit organizations have frequently utilized cash transfers in an attempt to raise the well-being of disadvantaged populations. According to a recent meta-analysis of 45 studies conducted in low- and middle-income countries, cash transfers lead to a small but significant increase in SWB (d = 0.13) (McGuire et al. 2022). Although most of these studies were not preregistered, a growing number of rigorous preregistered experiments suggest that such cash transfers and other forms of financial support can provide an efficient mechanism for enhancing happiness. [...]

Taken together, the collection of studies above provide compelling evidence that increases in wealth cause increases in SWB. While small cash transfers—equivalent to 1 week or month of income—do not necessarily produce benefits, people who receive a large influx of cash exhibit lasting improvements in SWB. Moreover, cash seems to be as good or better than other interventions that carry similar costs, including psychotherapy and job training."
(Dunigan Folk and Elizabeth Dunn, How Can People Become Happier? A Systematic Review of Preregistered Experiments, 2023)

Read the full article: https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.1146/annurev-psych-022423-030818#abstractSection

E1.5.B.10.1_REF4_CUR THE FILM SHOWS HOW SPORT HAS BECOME A FORM OF MONETARY AND SOCIAL ASCENT. In one crucial scene, Jerry Maguire asks his customer whether, when he started playing as a child, he was playing for money, or whether he was playing for pleasure, for love. And only then does Rod Tidwell, his customer, play with passion and manage to score a touchdown.
(Cameron Crowe, Jerry Maguire, 1996)

Watch the trailer: https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0116695/?ref_=ext_shr_lnk

E1.5.B.10.1_REF4.1_CUR “SHOW ME THE MONEY”

Watch the scene on YouTube:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FFrag8ll85w

E1.5.B.10.1_REF4.2_CUR “HELP ME HELP YOU”


Watch the scene on YouTube:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l1B1_jQnlFk

E1.5.B.10.1_REF4.3_CUR “PLAY WITH HEART”

Watch the scene on YouTube:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ASVUj89hyg0

E1.5.B.10.1_REF5_CUR WITH THIS MINIMALIST MOBILE HOME, KEVIN CYR INVITES US TO IMAGINE A MORE FREE AND SIMPLE LIFE - one that the vast majority of people, regardless of their material circumstances, could make a reality.

E1.5.B.10.1_REF6_MU "DO YOU BELIEVE
THAT YOU HAVE TO MAKE LIFE HARD FOR THOSE YOU LOVE THE MOST?"
(François and the Atlas mountains, La vie dure, 2014)

Listen to the song on YouTube: https://youtu.be/9LM8A6JWB0E

E1.5.B.10.2. WISDOM, IT SEEMS TO ME, IS ALWAYS POISED UPON THE KNOWLEDGE OF MINIMUMS; IT MIGHT BE THOUGHT TO BE THE ART OF MINIMUMS
As Thoreau so well knew, and so painstakingly tried to show us, what a man most needs is not a knowledge of how to get more, but a knowledge of the most he can do without, and of how to get along without it. The essential cultural discrimination is not between having and not having or haves and have-nots, but between the superfluous and the indispensable.

E1.5.B.10.2_REF1_LIT BERRY CONTRASTS THE STRENGTH DERIVED FROM SIMPLE, WORLD-DEPENDENT PLEASURES WITH THE WEAKNESS TIED TO MATERIAL WEALTH AND SOCIETAL STANDARDS. Berry recounts growing up around a black man named Nick, who worked for Berry’s grandfather. Nick, to whom he dedicates the book, was a benediction of presence during Berry’s most formative years — a hard-working man with a buoyant imagination and an uncommonly cheerful mindset [...]:
"This much is clear to me: insofar as I am capable of feeling such pleasures as I believe Nick felt, I am strong; insofar as I am dependent on the pleasures made available by my salary and the things I own, I am weak. I feel much more secure in those pleasures for which I am dependent on the world, as Nick was for most of his, than in those for which I am dependent on the government or on a power company or on the manufacturers of appliances. And I am far from conceding anything to those who assume that the poor or anyone else can be improved by recourse to that carnival of waste and ostentation and greed known as “our high standard of living.” As Thoreau so well knew, and so painstakingly tried to show us, what a man most needs is not a knowledge of how to get more, but a knowledge of the most he can do without, and of how to get along without it. The essential cultural discrimination is not between having and not having or haves and have-nots, but between the superfluous and the indispensable. Wisdom, it seems to me, is always poised upon the knowledge of minimums; it might be thought to be the art of minimums."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings, Review on Wendell Berry's The Hidden Wound)

E1.5.B.10.3. CONSUMER HAPPINESS
Consumption permits us to obtain a "well-being that is measurable by objects and signs of comfort," according to Jean Baudrillard in The Consumption Society.
Thus, the quest for happiness is merely the accessible promise of equal well-being through consumption. Equality then loses its authentic political significance and transforms into "equality in front of the Object and other clear signs of social success and happiness." Consequently, the consumer ideal tends to dismiss "that happiness that does not need signs to prove its existence to others or ourselves".

E1.5.B.10.3_REF1_PH "TO THE DELIGHT OF CONSUMERS
The 2019 edition of China's "Singles' Day" was marked by an unprecedented world record, set by commercial giant Alibaba. In 24 hours, consumers spent 268.4 billion yuan, or nearly 35 billion euros, an increase of 26%. This year, it took barely an hour to reach 100 billion. This begs the question: is economic success an indicator of consumer happiness?

According to Jean Baudrillard, theorist of the "consumer society", we need to distinguish between economic well-being, which is socially conditioned, and the private search for authentic happiness. Through the simple act of consumption, it is indeed happiness that we claim to seek, the "absolute reference of the consumer society". But this "myth of happiness" is in fact the one that "collects and embodies in modern societies the myth of equality". And yet, in order to satisfy this desire for equality, it was necessary to provide criteria for measuring happiness; consumption thus allows us to grasp a "well-being measurable in objects and signs, in comfort", he writes in The Consumer Society.

The pursuit of happiness, then, means nothing more than the promise of a well-being that can be achieved through consumption. Equality then loses its real political meaning and becomes "equality before the object and other obvious signs of social success and happiness". In this way, the consumer ideal tends to exclude "that happiness which is independent of signs that could manifest it in the eyes of others and ourselves, that happiness which needs no proof". True happiness lies elsewhere, always outside the realm of consumption.

But can we completely separate the question of happiness from our standard of living and purchasing power? In The Economy of Happiness, Claudia Senik defends the idea that there is a positive link between happiness and economic interaction. Certainly, as the American researcher Richard Easterlin showed in the 1970s, post-war growth in the US did not lead to an increase in reported happiness. Happiness is essentially felt in relation to others, to a reference group, rather than to an objective situation.

To limit ourselves to this observation, however, would be to overlook the "remarkable result" achieved by developed societies. As Claudia Senik puts it: "if the average level of happiness does not increase, the inequality of happiness decreases". In other words, consumption is not a sign of complete happiness, but rather a more modest way out of a real malaise. This explains our attachment to economic development and growth, and the hopes of developing countries.

So what should we think about the concept of degrowth? Considering the hypothesis of a renunciation of growth, Claudia Senik concludes that "the economics of happiness does not lead us to believe that it could make us happier".
(Jean-Baptiste Juillard, Time To Philo, 14/11/2019)

E1.5.B.10.3_REF2_PH “THE LONGING FOR GROWTH IS NOT WRONG. The nub of the problem now is how to flip over, as in jujitsu, the magnificent growth-energy of modern civilization into a nonacquisitive search for deeper knowledge of self and nature… If people come to realize that there are many nonmaterial, nondestructive paths of growth — of the highest and most fascinating order — it would help dampen the common fear that a steady state economy would mean deadly stagnation.”

(Gary Snyder, Turtle Island, 1974)

“The danger and hope politically is that Western civilization has reached the end of its ecological rope. Right now there is the potential for the growth of a real people’s consciousness. […]

All of industrial/technological civilization is really on the wrong track, because its drive and energy are purely mechanical and self-serving — real values are someplace else. The real values are within nature, family, mind, and into liberation… And how do we make the choices in our national economic policy that take into account that kind of cost accounting — that ask, “What is the natural-spiritual price we pay for this particular piece of affluence, comfort, pleasure, or labor saving? […]

The only hope for a society ultimately hell-bent on self-destructive growth is not to deny growth as a mode of being, but to translate it to another level, another dimension… The change can be hastened, but there are preconditions to doing that… Nobody can move from [one] to [the other] in a vacuum as a solitary individual…. What have to be built are community networks… When people, in a very modest way, are able to define a certain unity of being together, a commitment to staying together for a while, they can begin to correct their use of energy and find a way to be mutually employed. And this, of course, brings a commitment to the place, which means right relation to nature.”
(Gary Snyder, The Real Work, 1980)

”True teachers are called into being by the contradictions generated by civilization… We need them.”
(Gary Snyder)

Who are the true teachers of our time?

E1.5.B.11. WAR

E1.5.B.11.1. AND WHEN IT COMES TO FIGHTING A "JUST WAR"?

E1.5.B.11.1.a. WHAT IS THE DIFFICULTY FOR THE MAN WHO HAS TO TAKE THE WORLD AS IT IS AND ACT IN IT, AND YET WOULD PREFER TO LIVE A SPIRITUAL LIFE INSTEAD?

E1.5.B.11.1.a_REF1_PH "THE BHAGAVAD GîTÂ TAKES AS ITS SITE ONE OF THOSE PERIODS OF TRANSITION AND CRISIS THROUGH WHICH HUMANITY PERIODICALLY GOES THROUGH IN ITS HISTORY, when great forces collide, resulting in gigantic destructions and reconstructions, intellectual, social, moral, religious and political; and these crises, at the present stage - psychological and social - of human evolution, generally culminate in a violent physical convulsion: struggle, war or revolution. The Gîtâ accepts the inherent necessity of these violent crises; it accepts not only the moral aspect, the struggle between the just and the unjust, between the asserting law of good and the forces that oppose its progress, but also the material aspect, the actual war of arms or any other violent physical struggle between the human beings who represent the conflicting forces.

Arjuna and Krishna, one human and the other divine, are reunited, not as prophets in a peaceful hermitage dedicated to meditation, but one fighting and the other holding the reins, on a battlefield filled with clamor, in a chariot and amidst a cloud of arrows. The Teacher of the Gîtâ is therefore not only the God in man who reveals himself in the Word of Knowledge, but also the God in man who moves our whole world of action, through whom and for whom all humanity exists, struggles and toils, towards whom all our human life travels and progresses.

It's all a terrible sin - for here the moral sense awakens to justify the revolt of sensations and emotions. It's a sin; there is no right or justice in killing one another, much less in killing those who are the natural objects of our worship and love, those whose death would deprive our life of all its charm. To violate these sacred sentiments cannot be a virtue, but only a heinous crime. It is understood that the offense, the aggression, the first sin, the crimes of lust and selfish passion, which caused such a crisis, came from the other side; nevertheless, armed resistance to evil under such conditions would itself be an even worse sin and crime, for the other side is blinded by passion and unconscious of its fault, whereas on this side one would sin with a clear consciousness of evil.

What then is the difficulty for the man who has to take the world as it is and act in it, and yet wants to live the spiritual life within himself?
(The Bhagavad Gita, commentary by Aurobindo)

E1.5.B.11.1.b. THE TEACHING OF THE GITA
One can draw inspiration from the main teachings of the Gita without necessarily believing in the reincarnation of souls. Interpret the cycle of reincarnations as an allegory for self-reinvention within this life, leading to new states of maturity and consciousness. Additionally, take joy in our contributions to the human condition's adventure, which continues after our death on a grand scale of time.

E1.5.B.11.1.b_REF1_PH "THE ÂRYAN WARRIOR'S CREED
16 - Being is not found in that which does not exist. Non-being is not found in that which exists. The limit of both being and non-being is perceived by those who see the truth.

The soul is and cannot cease to be, although it may change the forms through which it appears. This opposition of being and non-being, this equilibrium of being and becoming, which is the mental conception of existence, ends when we realize that the soul is the unique, imperishable self through which this entire universe has been 'expanded'.

17 - Know this: that with which all this world is woven is not to be destroyed. No one is able to effect the destruction of the imperishable.
18 - These bodies have an end; but they are said to belong to the eternal embodied self – that which is never lost and cannot be measured. So fight, Son of Bharata! 
19 - The one who perceives the self as a killer, and the one who perceives the self as killed: neither of them know that this self does not kill, nor is it killed. 
20 - The self is not born nor does it ever die. Once it has been, this self will never cease to be again. Unborn,eternal, continuing from the old, the self is not killed when the body is killed.
21 - The one who knows the eternal and the indestructible, that which is unborn, and imperishable, how does he cause to die, Son of Pritha, and whom? How does he kill, and whom?
22 - Just as one throws out old clothes and then takes on other, new ones; so the embodied self casts out old bodies as it gets other, new ones.
23 - Weapons do not cut the self, nor does fire burn it, nor do waters drench it, nor does wind dry it. 
24 - The self is not to be pierced, nor burned, nor drenched, nor dried; it is eternal, all-pervading and fixed – unmoving from the beginning.
25 - The self is not readily seen; by sight or mind; it is said to be formless and unchanging; so, when you have known this, you should not mourn.

Our grief at the death of men is an ignorant affliction about those for whom there is no reason to grieve, since they have not gone out of existence, since they have not undergone a painful or terrible change of state, but are, beyond death, neither less existing nor more unhappy than in life.

30 - Son of Bharata, the embodied self which exists in the body of everyone is eternally free from harm; so you should not grieve for any living beings.”
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, commentary by Aurobindo)

E1.5.B.11.1.c. PARTICIPATING IN A JUST CONFLICT IS ALSO PART OF THE COURAGEOUS ETHIC, WHICH FOCUSES NOT ON THE OUTCOME OF AN ACTION, BUT ON ITS JUSTNESS.

E1.5.B.11.1.c_REF1_PH THE BHAGAVAD GÎTÂ EMPHASIZES THE IMPORTANCE OF A JUST BATTLE. The struggle between good and evil is constant, and refusal to fight would be considered a sin. 
"31 - And as you discern your own dharma, you should not waver. For the warrior, there can be found nothing greater than battle for the sake of dharma.

This world, this manifestation of the Self in the material universe, is not merely a cycle of inner development, but a realm in which the outer circumstances of life must be accepted as the milieu and occasion for that development. It's a world of mutual aid and struggle; it doesn't allow us to glide along in peace and serenity among easy joys; every step forward must be conquered by heroic effort, by a violent conflict of opposing forces. Those who carry the inner and outer struggle through to the most physical conflict of all, war, are the kshatriyas [members of the second caste, that of princes and warriors], the powerful men; battle, strength, nobility, courage, that is their nature; to protect the right and to accept the stakes of battle without fail, that is their virtue and their duty.
There is a constant struggle between good and evil, just and unjust, the power that protects and the power that violates and oppresses. When this struggle is carried to the point of physical conflict, the champion, the standard-bearer of Right, must neither tremble nor shudder at the terrible and violent nature of the task he must accomplish. His virtue and duty are in the fight, not in abstention; it's not the slaughter, but the refusal to kill that would be a sin here.

38 - When you have made pleasure and pain the same – also gain and loss, and victory and defeat, then join yourself to battle; and in this way, you will not cause harm.”
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, commentary by Aurobindo)

E1.5.B.11.2. WAR CRIMES

E1.5.B.11.2_REF1_CUR "WITH ITS BLACK-AND-WHITE TONES, THE CHARNEL HOUSE WAS INSPIRED BY NEWSPAPER PHOTOGRAPHS SHOWING PILES OF CORPSES in liberated Nazi concentration camps. Picasso depicted a murdered family unceremoniously tangled together under a dining table. With its varying degrees of finish-you can see traces of charcoal and sections of blank canvas-and vast network of undulating lines and geometric shapes, Picasso seems to have obscured legibility in favor of generating a rhythmic abstraction. As if questioning the ability of painting to represent war, he created a shifting, spectral vision."
(Curatorship, MomA, NYC)

E1.5.B.11.2_REF2_CUR "THIS WORK IS OFTEN INTERPRETED AS A SELF-PORTRAIT THAT CAPTURES THE FEAR HESSE FELT AS A CHILD fleeing her home in Hamburg, Germany, to escape the oppressive Nazi regime. She was one of the last children saved by Kindertransport, a rescue program that transported Jewish children to unoccupied areas of Europe. At age two, she was relocated to Amsterdam with her sister; they rejoined their family in New York a year later. Hesse spoke about the lasting trauma of this experience: "The world thought I was a cute, smart kid and I kidded them. But at home I was called a terror. I was miserable, I had trouble-tremendous fear-incredible fear"
(Curatorship, MomA, NYC)

E1.5.B.11.2_REF3_PO “WAR, WHICH INFICTS SUFFERING ON THE WORLD with its
squadrons,
Is the perfect demonstration of philosophy’s error.
War, like everything human, wants to change things.
But nothing wants to change things more than war, and to
change them so much
And to change them so quickly.
But war causes death.
And to cause death is to disdain the universe.
Since it results in death, war proves itself wrong.
Since it’s proven wrong, all wanting-to-change-things is
proven wrong.
Let’s leave the outer universe and other people where Nature
put them.
So much pride and lack of awareness!
So much bustling, having to do things, wanting to leave a
mark!
When his heart stops beating, the commander of the
squadrons
Slowly returns to the outer universe.
In Nature’s direct chemistry
There’s no room for thought.
Humanity is an uprising of slaves.
Humanity is a government usurped by the people,

Existing because usurped, but erring, since to usurp is to
have no right.
Let the outer world and natural humanity be!
Peace to all prehuman things, including those in man! Peace to the wholly outer essence of the Universe!”
(Fernando Pessoa, A Little Larger Than the Entire Universe Selected Poems)

E1.5.B.12. LET'S NOT ADD TO THE WOES THAT COME FROM OUTSIDE!

E1.5.B.12.1. THERE IS THE FUTURE THAT IS MADE AND THE FUTURE THAT WE MAKE FOR OURSELVES. THE REAL FUTURE IS MADE UP OF BOTH

E1.5.B.12.1_REF1_PH ""THERE IS THE FUTURE THAT IS MADE AND THE FUTURE THAT WE MAKE FOR OURSELVES. THE REAL FUTURE CONSISTS OF BOTH. As for the future that is made, like a storm or an eclipse, there's no point in hoping; you have to know and observe with dry eyes. As we wipe the lenses of the telescope, so we must wipe the fog of passions from our eyes. I hear well. The things of heaven, which we never change, have taught us resignation and the geometric mind, which are a good part of wisdom. But in earthly things, what changes has the industrious man made! [...]
Especially in the human order itself, where confidence is a fact, I count very badly if I don't count my own confidence. If I believe that I will fall, I will fall; if I believe that I can do nothing, I can do nothing. If I believe that my hope deceives me, it deceives me. Be careful there. I make good weather and storms; first in myself, then around me, in the world of men. For despair and hope move from one to the other, faster than the clouds change. If I trust him, he's honest; if I accuse him beforehand, he steals from me. They all give me my change, according to the coin.
(Alain, On Happiness, 1913)

E1.5.B.12.1_REF2_PH IF FAIRIES HAVE ADORNED YOUR CRADLE, BEWARE. "We would like to see a fatality in these choices which we inherit and which we have not made; but these choices do not commit us, for there is no bad lot; every lot is good if we want to make it good. Nothing marks weakness better than to argue about one's nature; no one has a choice; but a nature is rich enough to satisfy the most ambitious. To make virtue necessary is the great and beautiful work. 
"It's a pity I didn't study." That's the lazy man's excuse. Just study. I don't think it's so great to have studied in the past if you don't study anymore. Relying on the past is just as crazy as complaining about the past. Nothing that has been done is so beautiful that we can rest on it, nothing so ugly that we can't save it. I'd even go so far as to say that good luck is harder to track than bad. If fairies have adorned your cradle, beware.
(Alain, On Happiness, 1922)

E1.5.B.12.1_REF3_PH "HE WHO FIGHTS WITH MONSTERS SHOULD BE CAREFUL LEST HE THEREBY BECOME A MONSTER. And if thou gaze long into an abyss, the abyss will also gaze into thee."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil, 1886)

E1.5.B.12.1_REF4_LIT "ARE WE THEN CONDEMNED TO CONTORT OURSELVES LIKE A BUTTERFLY ON A PIN? Not if we do not entertain sorrow or give it a chance to remain with us throughout our life."
(Hans Christian Andersen)

E1.5.B.12.2. LET'S STOP RUINING OUR LIVES!

E1.5.B.12.2_REF1_TH PAUL WATZLAWICK LISTS THE RECIPES FOR MAKING US UNHAPPY IN SPITE OF OURSELVES:
“1. Above all, be loyal to yourself and never give up;
2. Play with the past: The fatal glass of beer; 
3. Just insist; 
4. Perpetuate the situation or difficulty you fear through avoidance; 
5. The powerlessness of the desire for revenge;
6. Communication about the object and the relationship;
7. The illusory alternative;
8. “Do whatever you like, as long as you don't get any pleasure out of it” or ‘Your duty is not to enjoy yourself’ and also ‘Be spontaneous!’ or ‘You should enjoy your duty’;
9. “You have no right, and no reason, to be sad”, ”Be happy!
10. Why should anyone love me?
11. Collusion;
12. Zero-sum games”
(Paul Watzlawick, Instructions to Make Ourselves Unhappy, 1983)

E1.5.B.12.2_REF1.1_TH BE LOYAL TO YOURSELF WITHOUT GIVING UP: "1. Simply choose one and only one [of the various guideposts of the so-called wisdom of the nations] and stick to it, make it your rule of life, the expression of yourself, so that you become absolutely convinced that there is only one valid point of view: your own. From such a point of view, it will soon become clear that the world has gone crazy.
(Paul Watzlawick, Instructions to Make Ourselves Unhappy, 1983)

E1.5.B.12.2_REF1.2_TH PLAYING WITH THE PAST: THE FATAL GLASS OF BEER "2. I never should have done it, but now it's too late. Remorse is choking me, but there's nothing I can do. It was a sin, the first time, that fatal time I'll regret all my life, but I've become a victim of my own sin."
(Paul Watzlawick, Instructions to Make Ourselves Unhappy, 1983)

E1.5.B.12.2_REF1.3_TH ALL YOU HAVE TO DO IS INSIST. "3 This seemingly simple formula, 'just insist,' is one of the most disastrous recipes developed on our planet over hundreds of millions of years. It has driven entire species to extinction. [...] This [...] game is based entirely on the relentless preservation of adaptations and solutions that may once have been the best, or even the only, possible. Difficulties are inevitable because all situations change over time.
(Paul Watzlawick, Instructions to Make Ourselves Unhappy, 1983)

E1.5.B.12.2_REF1.4_TH PERPETUATE THE SITUATION OR DIFFICULTY THROUGH AN AVOIDANCE CONDUCT. "4 Suppose a horse receives an electric shock to one of its hooves through a metal plate concealed in the stable floor. If a bell is rung before each shock, the animal seems to quickly establish a causal relationship between the bell and the unpleasant sensation. Now, every time the bell rings, he lifts his hoof - obviously to avoid the electric shock. Once this causal relationship is established between the two events, the electric shock is no longer useful. The ringing of the bell alone is enough to trigger the movement of the leg to lift the hoof. What's more, each of these avoidance behaviors seems to reinforce the animal's 'belief' that by lifting its hoof, it is avoiding an unpleasant shock. What the horse doesn't know, and what its avoidance behavior will forever prevent it from knowing, is that the danger has ceased to exist.
But this is not just superstition. Superstitious behavior has a well-known irregularity that renders it practically worthless, whereas avoidance behavior deserves the full confidence of all those who seek misfortune."
(Paul Watzlawick, Instructions to Make Ourselves Unhappy, 1983)

E1.5.B.12.2_REF1.5_TH THE POWERLESSNESS OF THE DESIRE FOR REVENGE. "5 Strictly speaking, there is no such thing as revenge. Revenge is an act that we burn to commit when we are powerless and because we are powerless: as soon as the feeling of powerlessness disappears, the desire for revenge disappears with it. 
'Who wouldn't have jumped for joy in 1940 at the mere thought of seeing SS officers humiliated and kicked? But when it becomes possible, it's nothing but ridiculous, pitiful and disgusting.'"
(Paul Watzlawick, Instructions to Make Ourselves Unhappy, 1983)

E1.5.B.12.2_REF1.6_TH COMMUNICATION ABOUT THE OBJECT AND ABOUT THE RELATION. "6. Seventy years ago, Bertrand Russell insisted on the need for a strict separation between statements about things and statements about relations. 'This apple is red' is a statement about the properties of this particular apple. But 'This apple is bigger than that one' is a statement about the relation between these apples. It would make no sense to apply it to either of the two apples separately, because the bigger-than statement focuses not on one of the two apples, but on the relationship that binds them together. 
Anthropologist and communication researcher Gregory Bateson took this important distinction one step further. He pointed out that both forms of statement are always present in all human communication, and he called them the object level and the relational level, respectively. This distinction allows us to understand more clearly that we can quickly come into conflict with any partner - any partner, but the closer the better. Suppose a woman asks her husband: 'Do you like this soup I made according to a new recipe?' If it is, he'll have no trouble answering 'yes,' to her great satisfaction. But if he hates the soup and isn't too worried about disappointing his partner, he can simply answer 'no.' But in the (statistically more likely) case where he both hates the soup and doesn't want to upset his wife, a difficulty arises from the start. At the object level (i.e., as far as the soup object is concerned), his answer should be 'no'. But at the relationship level, his answer should be 'yes' so as not to hurt her feelings. But since we have only one language for both levels, what can he say? His answer can't be yes or no. So he'll probably try to get out of this predicament with an ambiguous statement, such as 'Yes, the taste is fun,' hoping that she'll understand what he really means."
(Paul Watzlawick, Instructions to Make Ourselves Unhappy, 1983)

E1.5.B.12.2_REF1.7_TH THE ILLUSORY ALTERNATIVE"7 There is a useful and effective way to complicate your relationship with others. It consists in offering your interlocutor a choice between two possibilities. As soon as he chooses one, he can be blamed for not choosing the other. Communication experts call this trick the 'illusory alternative'. The structure is very simple. If the partner does A, he should have done B; but if he chooses B, he should have done A. I borrow a particularly telling example from Dan Greenburg's instructions to Jewish mothers - already quoted in the introduction: 
Offer your son two different ties. The first time he wears one, look at him with bitterness and say in the 'basic tone of voice: 'I knew you wouldn't like the other one.'"
(Paul Watzlawick, Instructions to Make Ourselves Unhappy, 1983)

E1.5.B.12.2_REF1.8_TH DO WHATEVER YOU WISH, AS LONG AS YOU DON'T GET ANY PLEASURE OUT OF IT "8. Spontaneously doing what is ordered is as impossible as consciously forgetting or deciding to sleep more soundly. Either we act spontaneously, that is, at our own discretion, or we obey an order and therefore don't act spontaneously. From a purely logical point of view, it is impossible to do both at the same time. [...]
This is the hackneyed and wretched example of the mother who demands that her son do his homework - not because it's the rule at school, but because he should like it. Here we come to the reversal of the definition of Puritanism. It's no longer your duty not to enjoy yourself, but that you should enjoy your duty. [...]
[If we are incapable of it, then] we are forced to assume that we are not normal, or that we live in an abnormal world. Since the 'world' is almost completely beyond individual action, we're practically forced to blame ourselves."
(Paul Watzlawick, Instructions to Make Ourselves Unhappy, 1983)

E1.5.B.12.2_REF1.19_TH "BE HAPPY!" "9 It seems to make little difference whether the 'be happy!' paradox is imposed on us by ourselves or by some external authority. In fact, it's just one of many variations on the 'be spontaneous' paradox. Virtually all spontaneous behavior lends itself to the construction of these inescapable traps: we can demand that someone spontaneously remember or forget; we can express the wish to receive such and such a gift, and then be disappointed to have received it 'only' for having expressed the wish; we can try to induce an erection or an orgasm by the mere play of the will, which makes impossible precisely what it is trying to accomplish; we can try to fall asleep because we want to; we can try to love when love is presented as a moral obligation. "
(Paul Watzlawick, Instructions for Making Ourselves Unhappy, 1983)

E1.5.B.12.2_REF1.10_TH WHY SHOULD ANYONE LOVE ME? "10. I must first refer to Dostoyevsky's interesting suggestion that the biblical commandment 'Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself' would make more sense if understood in reverse - i.e., that one can only love one's neighbor if one begins by loving oneself. 
With less elegance but all the more precision, Marx (no, not that one, Groucho) later wrote: 'I don't want to belong to any club that will accept me as a member' [...] For there is much to be done when one starts from a simple disbelief in one's own ability to arouse the love of others. From the strength of this fundamental conviction, we can discredit, without seeming to touch, all those who would dare to love us. For there is obviously something wrong with people who are capable of loving someone who doesn't deserve to be loved."
(Paul Watzlawick, Instructions to Make Ourselves Unhappy, 1983)

E1.5.B.12.2_REF1.11_TH COLLUSION "11. We need to find a partner who, by being what he or she is, enables us to be what we want to be - but, again, let's be careful not to succeed! 
In communication theory this model is called collusion. It describes a rather subtle arrangement, a form of (often unconscious) give and take, in which I allow myself to be confirmed and sanctioned by my partner in the way I see myself and want to show myself. [...] Only a partner who plays the required role in his relationship with me can make us 'real'. In his absence, we must rely on our dreams alone, the unreality of which is a recognised characteristic. But why should someone be willing to play this particular role for me? There are two possible reasons. 

1. The role he has to play to make me feel 'real' is the same role he wants to play to produce his own 'reality'. You'd think they would complement each other perfectly. And so we might be tempted to question the usefulness of this mechanism for our purposes. But please note that in order to remain perfect, this relationship must never change in the slightest. As time passes, children tend to grow up, patients tend to heal, and initial joy is soon followed by disillusionment. For the desperate attempts to prevent the other from escaping this bond become more unbearable every day. Allow me to quote Sartre again:
'While I am trying to free myself from the grip of others, others are trying to free themselves from mine; while I am trying to enslave others, others are trying to enslave me. We're not talking here about unilateral relations with an object in itself, but about reciprocal, shifting relations.'
Insofar as any collusion presupposes that the other is, of his own accord, exactly as I need him to be, it inevitably leads to a 'be spontaneous' paradox.

2. The inevitability of this result becomes even more obvious when we consider the second reason why a partner might want to play the complementary role from which I will derive a sense of my own 'reality'. This reason is, quite simply, fair payment for the service rendered. The example of prostitution immediately comes to mind.
(Paul Watzlawick, Instructions to Make Ourselves Unhappy, 1983)

E1.5.B.12.2_REF1.12_TH ZERO-SUM GAMES "12. Game theory makes a fundamental distinction between two categories of games, those in which the sum of gains and losses is zero and the others. [You only have to start a zero-sum game at the level of relationships to be sure of the hellish turn things will sooner or later take. Desperately obsessed by the idea of winning in order not to lose, players of this kind of game risk forgetting one thing: the main adversary, life, and all that it has to offer apart from victory and defeat. In the face of this adversary, both partners lose".
(Paul Watzlawick, Instructions to Make Ourselves Unhappy, 1983)

E1.5.B.12.2_REF2_CUR LIKE NICOLÁS ROBBIO, WE CAN CHOOSE TO PLAY THINGS DOWN. This bouquet has clearly undergone unexpected treatment. “It has had better days”, Robbio tells us. By choosing to play down a situation that could hardly have a tragic consequence for anyone, Robbio invites us to adopt this same cheerful outlook on situations that affect us more deeply, and whose impact on our mood we can work on through the use of reason. Let's learn to put things into perspective!

E1.5.B.12.2_REF3_PH "THE REMEDY IS THE SAME, AGAINST ALL FEARS AND TYRANIC FEELINGS; you must go straight to the thing and see what it is.
Epictetus says to the passenger: "You are as afraid of this storm as if you had to swallow this whole great sea; but, my dear, it only takes two pints of water for you to drown". It's safe to say that this tremendous movement of the waves misrepresents the real danger. We say and think: "raging sea: voice of the abyss; angry waves; threat; attack". It's not true; they are rocking according to gravity, the tide and the wind; no bad fate; it's not all this noise or all this movement that will kill you; no fatality; you can survive a shipwreck; you can drown in calm waters; the real problem is this: will you keep your head above water?"
(Alain, On Happiness, December 10, 1910)

E1.5.B.12.3. "THE BAD IS STRONGER THAN THE GOOD".

E1.5.B.12.3_REF1_PSI NEGATIVITY DOMINANCE, supported by research, indicates that bad emotions, feedback, and information have a greater effect on us and are processed more thoroughly than positive counterparts. 
"The psychologist Paul Rozin, an expert on disgust, observed that a single cockroach will completely wreck the appeal of a bowl of cherries, but a cherry will do nothing at all for a bowl of cockroaches. As he points out, the negative trumps the positive in many ways, and loss aversion is one of many manifestations of a broad negativity dominance. Other scholars, in a paper titled « Bad Is Stronger Than Good », summarized the evidence as follows: « Bad emotions, bad parents, and bad feedback have more impact than good ones, and bad information is processed more thoroughly than good. The self is more motivated to avoid bad self-definitions than to pursue good ones. Bad impressions and bad stereotypes are quicker to form and more resistant to disconfirmation than good ones ».”
(Daniel Kahneman, Thinking Fast and Slow, 2011)

E1.5.B.12.3_REF2_PH PSYCHODRAMA "There is the tragedy of existence, loneliness, suffering, disease, wickedness and violence. Let's not make things worse by colapsing into psychodrama, this totally useless mental storm that cuts us off from goodness in the world. Life is like a train, step by step, it moves forward and again and again, suffering appears as soon as you want to settle somewhere."
(Alexandre Jollien, The Pharmacopoeia n ° 60)

E1.5.B.12.3_REF3_CUR MIRROR OF LIFE, like many of Henry Koerner’s paintings, reveals the artist’s preocupation with his experiences during the second World War. Born in Vienna to Jewish parents, Koerner escaped Austria following Hitler's 1938 invasion, fleeing first to Italy and subsequently to America. Soon after, he was drafted by the United States military and stationed in Europe, where he was assigned to sketch the proceedings of the Nuremberg trials. Koerner returns to Vienna only to learn that his parents, who had stayed in Austria, had died in concentration camps during the war. Mirror of Life emerges from this context of conflict and loss. Disorienting juxtapositions - night and day, biblical events and present-day life, ordinary pastimes and bizarre phenomena -  present a chaotic and disjunctive reflection of reality. The shirtless man leaning out of his window seems to be a stand-in for the artist. Home for him, is not only the place where one resides but also a vantage point from which to witness all that has been lost. 
(Whitney Museum, NY curator´s review, 2019)

E1.5.B.12.4. CONSIDER THINGS IN THE GRAND SCALE OF THINGS AND OUR RIGHTFUL PLACE IN THE WORLD

E1.5.B.12.4.a. WHEN WE THINK IN TERMS OF TIME IN THE GRAND SCALE OF THINGS, WE HAVE 3 OPTIONS OPEN TO US: 
i - PROTECT WHAT IS PRECIOUS,
ii - CULTIVATE FOR THE FUTURE, 
iii - ELIMINATE WHAT IS TOXIC.

"The same three tasks recur across cultures and epochs: to shelter what is precious, to yield what is valuable, and to dispose of what is harmful.

Shelter (memories, precious matter, messages, fragile lives).
Yield (information, wealth, metaphors, minerals, visions).
Dispose (waste, trauma, poison, secrets).

Into the underland we have long placed that which we fear and wish to lose, and that which we love and wish to save."
(Robert Macfarlane's Underland: A Deep Time Journey)

E1.5.B.12.4.a.i. PROTECT WHAT IS PRECIOUS

E1.5.B.12.4.a.i_REF1_PH "THE JOY OF MEETING AND THE SORROW OF SEPARATION … WE SHOULD WELCOME THESE GIFTS … with our whole soul, and experience to the full, and with the same gratitude, all the sweetness or bitterness as the case may be. Meeting and separation are two forms of friendship that contain the same good, in the one case through pleasure and in the other through sorrow… Soon there will be distance between us. Let us love this distance which is wholly woven of friendship, for those who do not love each other are not separated."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace)

E1.5.B.12.4.a.i_REF2_CUR “A SCULPTURAL PORTRAIT OF THE ARTIST'S FAMILY, this work features seventeen human skulls, consisting of 3D prints from CT scans of all the biological members, as well as that of the artist's partner. The creation of the installation included the exhumation and scanning of skulls of his younger sister who died in childbirth and his deceased father. This unusual family portrait brings together the 15 alive and 2 deceased members of the family, who get to be together for the first time even when some never met.”
(Curatorship: Jumex, Mexico City)

E1.5.B.12.4.a.ii. CULTIVATE FOR THE FUTURE

E1.5.B.12.4.a.ii_REF1_LIT "IS ART RESISTANCE? CAN YOU PLANT A GARDEN TO STOP A WAR? It depends how you think about time. It depends what you think a seed does, if it’s tossed into fertile soil. But it seems to me that whatever else you do, it’s worth tending to paradise, however you define it and wherever it arises."
(Olivia Laing, Drôle de Temps: L'Art en cas d'Urgence, 2020)

E1.5.B.12.4.a.ii_REF2_LIT ROBERT MACFARLANE EXPLORES THE CONCEPT OF "DEEP TIME," THE VAST CHRONOLOGICAL EXPANSE OF EARTH'S HISTORY MEASURED IN EPOCHS AND AEONS. By adopting this long-term view, we can re-imagine our present, recognize our impact, and consider the legacy we leave for future epochs.
"Enshrined in the layers of the underland, in the layered dust of cultures and epochs, are traces of our abiding need for shelter and sacrament, our age-old hunger for knowledge encoded in the stone tablets of dead languages and the rusted instruments of annealed curiosity, radiating a reminder that we are creatures not only of place but of time. Plunging into the time-warping wonderland beneath the surface through the riven trunk of an old ash tree, Macfarlane writes:
"Down between roots to a passage of stone that deepens steeply into the earth. Colour depletes to greys, browns, black. Cold air pushes past. Above is solid rock, utter matter. The surface is scarcely thinkable… Direction is difficult to keep. Space is behaving strangely — and so too is time. Time moves differently here in the underland. It thickens, pools, flows, rushes, slows."
“Deep time” is the chronology of the underland. Deep time is the dizzying expanses of Earth history that stretch away from the present moment. Deep time is measured in units that humble the human instant: epochs and aeons, instead of minutes and years. Deep time is kept by stone, ice, stalactites, seabed sediments and the drift of tectonic plates. Deep time opens into the future as well as the past. The Earth will fall dark when the sun exhausts its fuel in around 5 billion years. We stand with our toes, as well as our heels, on a brink."

But for all its consolations, such a dilation of the telescopic perspective can be deeply disquieting in alerting us to our own helpless insignificance — motes of matter in a blink of time, adrift amid the unfeeling emptiness of pure spacetime. It takes especial existential courage to inhabit this physical fact with unflinching psychic agency, with the insistence that however brief our earthly time may be, however small our impact relative to the vast scales of time and civilization, we can still leave a worthy mark on an ancient world. Macfarlane cautions against the defeatist cowardice of taking the scale of deep time for permission to squander our precious allotment:

"We should resist such inertial thinking; indeed, we should urge its opposite – deep time as a radical perspective, provoking us to action not apathy. For to think in deep time can be a means not of escaping our troubled present, but rather of re-imagining it; countermanding its quick greeds and furies with older, slower stories of making and unmaking. At its best, a deep time awareness might help us see ourselves as part of a web of gift, inheritance and legacy stretching over millions of years past and millions to come, bringing us to consider what we are leaving behind for the epochs and beings that will follow us. [...]
When viewed in deep time, things come alive that seemed inert. New responsibilities declare themselves. A conviviality of being leaps to mind and eye. The world becomes eerily various and vibrant again. Ice breathes. Rock has tides. Mountains ebb and flow. Stone pulses. We live on a restless Earth."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings, review on Robert Macfarlane's Underland: A Deep Time Journey)

E1.5.B.12.4.a.ii_REF2.1_PO “THE WHOLE OF IT

If you step back, you can see it all
on the horizon: your mother’s death, the children
grown, their smooth eyelids crossed with veins
like saffron filaments. Further still, and see
your smiling grandmother treading the cold ocean,
tiny lakes in her collarbones, your great-
great grandchildren drawing their names
in the sand with sticks. The seas
rising and falling, ice scraping the earth,
and pockets of life surviving — lee sides, hot springs,
protected places. First light on the first day
of your life, and first light of first stars.
And in this way, every death, each apparent ending,
might, in the mind of spacetime, be woven
into one memory, so that always is
this tree, and the long days of falling in love
over the intricate pattern of bark and leaf,
and the first green cell learning to swallow sun.”
(Hannah Fries)

The whole of it by hannah Fries, read by Rose Hanzlik:
https://www.themarginalian.org/2025/06/17/the-whole-of-it-hannah-fries/?mc_cid=c3e50bcd3f&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E1.5.B.12.4.a.ii_REF3_CUR “PALE BLUE DOT”, originally released in 1990, shows Earth as a faint speck in a streak of sunlight. The image was taken by Voyager 1 when it had completed its planetary flybys and was 3.7 billion miles away from the sun.

E1.5.B.12.4.a.iii. ELIMINATE WHAT IS TOXIC

E1.5.B.12.4.a.iii_REF1_LIT “CONSIDER, SIR, HOW INSIGNIFICANT THIS WILL APPEAR A TWELVEMONTH HENCE.” "I was exceedingly uneasy at the aukward appearance I supposed I should make to Johnson and the other gentlemen whom I had invited, not being able to receive them at home, and being obliged to order supper at the Mitre. I went to Johnson in the morning and talked of it as a serious distress. He laughed and said, ‘ Consider, Sir, how insignificant this will appear a twelvemonth hence.’— Were this consideration to be applied to most of the little vexations incidents of life, by which our quiet is too often disturbed, it would prevent many painful sensations. I have tried it frequently, with good effect. ‘ There is nothing (continued he) in this mighty misfortune ; nay, we shall be better at the Mitre.’ "
(Boswell’s Life of Johnson, revised third edition 1799, first published in 1791)

E1.5.B.12.4.b. THE WONDER AND PEACE THAT COME FROM THE AWARENESS OF BEING PART OF A WHOLE FAR MORE MAJESTIC AND ETERNAL THAN ONESELF

E1.5.B.12.4.b_REF1_PO "ACHIEVING PERSPECTIVE

Straight up away from this road,
Away from the fitted particles of frost
Coating the hull of each chick pea,
And the stiff archer bug making its way
In the morning dark, toe hair by toe hair,
Up the stem of the trillium,
Straight up through the sky above this road right now,
The galaxies of the Cygnus A cluster
Are colliding with each other in a massive swarm
Of interpenetrating and exploding catastrophes.
I try to remember that.

And even in the gold and purple pretense
Of evening, I make myself remember
That it would take 40,000 years full of gathering
Into leaf and dropping, full of pulp splitting
And the hard wrinkling of seed, of the rising up
Of wood fibers and the disintegration of forests,
Of this lake disappearing completely in the bodies
Of toad slush and duckweed rock,
40,000 years and the fastest thing we own,
To reach the one star nearest to us.

And when you speak to me like this,
I try to remember that the wood and cement walls
Of this room are being swept away now,
Molecule by molecule, in a slow and steady wind,
And nothing at all separates our bodies
From the vast emptiness expanding, and I know
We are sitting in our chairs
Discoursing in the middle of the blackness of space.
And when you look at me
I try to recall that at this moment
Somewhere millions of miles beyond the dimness
Of the sun, the comet Biela, speeding
In its rocks and ices, is just beginning to enter
The widest arc of its elliptical turn."
(Pattiann Rogers)

E1.5.B.12.4.b_REF2_LIT LOREN EISELEY CONTEMPLATES THE DEEP CONNECTION BETWEEN PAST AND PRESENT LIFE FORMS AND THE JOURNEY OF LIFE ITSELF, EMPHASIZING THE PROFOUND AWARENESS AND GRATITUDE that arise from recognizing our shared biological heritage. He suggests that while humans are bound by time, there is a potential for achieving new dimensions of wisdom and understanding through persistent exploration and curiosity.
"Descending into an enormous slit in Earth’s crust — “a perfect cross section through perhaps ten million years of time” — in search of fossils, Eiseley describes the skull he discovers entombed in stone several million years down this chute of time:

      It was not, of course, human. I was deep, deep below the time of man* in a remote age near the beginning of the reign of mammals. I squatted on my heels in the narrow ravine, and we stared a little blankly at each other, the skull and I. There were marks of generalized primitiveness in that low, pinched brain case and grinning jaw that marked it as lying far back along those converging roads where… cat and man and weasel must leap into a single shape.

Eiseley meets the bygone creature with a jolt of perspective:

      The skull lay tilted in such a manner that it stared, sightless, up at me as though I, too, were already caught a few feet above him in the strata and, in my turn, were staring upward at that strip of sky which the ages were carrying farther away from me beneath the tumbling debris of falling mountains. The creature had never lived to see a man, and I, what was it I was never going to see? … I thought, as I patiently began the task of chiseling into the stone around the skull, I would never again excavate a fossil under conditions which led to so vivid an impression that I was already one myself. The truth is that we are all potential fossils still carrying within our bodies the crudities of former existences, the marks of a world in which living creatures flow with little more consistency than clouds from age to age.

[...] To remember this, just like remembering that we only exist because of flowers, is to allow an awareness that reaches beyond cerebral knowledge and into some deep creaturely gladness that, in an instant, makes you feel connected to everything else alive, grateful to be part of this immense living symphony of time and chance.

      Perhaps there is no meaning in it at all, the thought went on inside me, save that of journey itself, so far as men can see. It has altered with the chances of life, and the chances brought us here; but it was a good journey — long, perhaps — but a good journey under a pleasant sun. Do not look for the purpose. Think of the way we came and be a little proud. Think of this hand — the utter pain of its first venture on the pebbly shore. [...]

Perhaps the Slit, with its exposed bones and its far-off vanishing sky, has come to stand symbolically in my mind for a dimension denied to man, the dimension of time. Like the wistaria on the garden wall he is rooted in his particular century. Out of it — forward or backward — he cannot run. As he stands on his circumscribed pinpoint of time, his sight for the past is growing longer, and even the shadowy outlines of the galactic future are growing clearer, though his own fate he cannot yet see. Along the dimension of time, man, like the rooted vine in space, may never pass in person. Considering the innumerable devices by which the mindless root has evaded the limitations of its own stability, however, it may well be that man himself is slowly achieving powers over a new dimension — a dimension capable of presenting him with a wisdom he has barely begun to discern. Through how many dimensions and how many media will life have to pass? Down how many roads among the stars must man propel himself in search of the final secret? The journey is difficult, immense, at times impossible, yet that will not deter some of us from attempting it… We have joined the caravan, you might say, at a certain point; we will travel as far as we can, but we cannot in one lifetime see all that we would like to see or learn all that we hunger to know."
(Maria Popova's review of Loren Eiseley's The Immense Journey, 1957)

E1.5.B.12.4.b_REF3_PO “THINK ABOUT HOW MANY YEARS IT TOOK TO GET TO THIS YEAR 
how many cities to get to this city 
and how many mothers, all dead, until your mother 
how many languages until the language was this 
and how many summers until this very summer 
in which we find ourselves in this exact 
place
on the edge of a sea that is exactly the same 
the only thing that doesn't change because it always does 
how many empty afternoons and beaches did it take for us to arrive at the emptiness
of this beach this afternoon 
how many words until this word, this one”
(Ana Martins Marques, The Book of Similarities, 2015)

E1.5.B.12.4.b_REF3.1_PO “THE PAST IS AFTER US
like detectives, collectors and thieves 
the future walks ahead 
like children the mountain guides 
the best marathon runners
than us
unless I'm mistaken, the future doesn't print itself 
like the past on stones on furniture on the faces 
of the people we know
the past, unlike cats 
does not clean itself 
domesticated dogs are taught 
to always follow their master 
but dogs, the past, only appear to belongs to us
think about how this armchair this book this beetle this volcano 
this cliff first came out of the primordial mud
in front of us in front of them
runs the dog”
(Ana Martins Marques, The Book of Similarities, 2015)

E1.5.B.12.4.b_REF4_PO "KOSMOS
Who includes diversity and is Nature,
Who is the amplitude of the earth, and the coarseness and sexuality of the earth, and the great charity of the earth and the equilibrium also,
Who has not look’d forth from the windows the eyes for nothing, or whose brain held audience with messengers for nothing,
Who contains believers and disbelievers, who is the most majestic lover,
Who holds duly his or her triune proportion of realism, spiritualism, and of the aesthetic or intellectual,
Who having consider’d the body finds all its organs and parts good,
Who, out of the theory of the earth and of his or her body understands by subtle analogies all other theories,
The theory of a city, a poem, and of the large politics of these States;
Who believes not only in our globe with its sun and moon, but in other globes with their suns and moons,
Who, constructing the house of himself or herself, not for a day but for all time, sees races, eras, dates, generations,
The past, the future, dwelling there, like space, inseparable together."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.5.B.12.4.b_REF4.1_PO "CROSSING BROOKLYN FERRY

 1
Flood-tide below me! I see you face to face!
Clouds of the west—sun there half an hour high—I see you also face to face.

Crowds of men and women attired in the usual costumes, how curious you are to me!
On the ferry-boats the hundreds and hundreds that cross, returning 
    home, are more curious to me than you suppose,
And you that shall cross from shore to shore years hence are more to
me, and more in my meditations, than you might suppose.

 2
The impalpable sustenance of me from all things at all hours of the day,
The simple, compact, well-join’d scheme, myself disintegrated, every one disintegrated yet part of the scheme,
The similitudes of the past and those of the future,
The glories strung like beads on my smallest sights and hearings, on the 
    walk in the street and the passage over the river,
The current rushing so swiftly and swimming with me far away,
The others that are to follow me, the ties between me and them,
The certainty of others, the life, love, sight, hearing of others.

Others will enter the gates of the ferry and cross from shore to shore,
Others will watch the run of the flood-tide,
Others will see the shipping of Manhattan north and west, and the heights of Brooklyn to the south and east,
Others will see the islands large and small;
Fifty years hence, others will see them as they cross, the sun half an hour high,
A hundred years hence, or ever so many hundred years hence, others will see them,
Will enjoy the sunset, the pouring-in of the flood-tide, the falling-back to the sea of the ebb-tide.

3
It avails not, time nor place—distance avails not,
I am with you, you men and women of a generation, or ever so many generations hence,
Just as you feel when you look on the river and sky, so I felt,
Just as any of you is one of a living crowd, I was one of a crowd,
Just as you are refresh’d by the gladness of the river and the bright flow,
I was refresh’d,
Just as you stand and lean on the rail, yet hurry with the swift current, I stood yet was hurried,
Just as you look on the numberless masts of ships and the thickstemm’d pipes of steamboats, I look’d. [...]

5
What is it then between us?
What is the count of the scores or hundreds of years between us?
Whatever it is, it avails not—distance avails not, and place avails not,
I too lived, Brooklyn of ample hills was mine,
I too walk’d the streets of Manhattan island, and bathed in the waters around it,
I too felt the curious abrupt questionings stir within me,
In the day among crowds of people sometimes they came upon me,
In my walks home late at night or as I lay in my bed they came upon me,
I too had been struck from the float forever held in solution,
I too had receiv’d identity by my body,
That I was I knew was of my body, and what I should be I knew I should be of my body."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.5.B.12.4.b_REF4.2_PO "THOUGHTS
[...]
Of vista—suppose some sight in arriere through the formative chaos, 
     presuming the growth, fulness, life, now attain’d on the journey,
(But I see the road continued, and the journey ever continued;)
Of what was once lacking on earth, and in due time has become supplied—and of what will yet be supplied,
Because all I see and know I believe to have its main purport in what will yet be supplied."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.5.B.12.4.b_REF5_PO "DEAD STARS

Out here, there’s a bowing even the trees are doing.
            Winter’s icy hand at the back of all of us.
Black bark, slick yellow leaves, a kind of stillness that feels
so mute it’s almost in another year.

I am a hearth of spiders these days: a nest of trying.

We point out the stars that make Orion as we take out
      the trash, the rolling containers a song of suburban thunder.

It’s almost romantic as we adjust the waxy blue
      recycling bin until you say, Man, we should really learn
some new constellations.

And it’s true. We keep forgetting about Antlia, Centaurus,
      Draco, Lacerta, Hydra, Lyra, Lynx.

But mostly we’re forgetting we’re dead stars too, my mouth is full
      of dust and I wish to reclaim the rising —

to lean in the spotlight of streetlight with you, toward
      what’s larger within us, toward how we were born.

Look, we are not unspectacular things.
      We’ve come this far, survived this much. What

would happen if we decided to survive more? To love harder?

What if we stood up with our synapses and flesh and said, No.
      No, to the rising tides.

Stood for the many mute mouths of the sea, of the land?

What would happen if we used our bodies to bargain

for the safety of others, for earth,
      if we declared a clean night, if we stopped being terrified,

if we launched our demands into the sky, made ourselves so big
people could point to us with the arrows they make in their minds,

rolling their trash bins out, after all of this is over?"
(Ada Limón)

E1.5.B.12.4.b_REF6_PH "GANDHI SAID: « AS LONG AS A MAN DOES NOT PUT HIMSELF IN THE LAST PLACE OF HIS OWN ACCORD, THERE IS NO SALVATION FOR HIM. »
Letting go of one's advantage, daring to put oneself in the last place is perhaps freeing oneself from the stupidest tyranny, that of the ego. Shouldn't we learn to disobey this capricious ego which always wants to put itself at the center of the world, which judges it, comments on it and which draws everything towards itself? Putting oneself in the last place is perhaps letting the others exist as they are, seeing that the world is bigger than our opinions, seeing that the universe is bigger than our desires. Asceticism here, as always, can be joyful. Play with the self. When it's pretentious, that is almost always, resist it kindly. What if putting ourselves in the last place, far from making us suffer and humiliating us, was giving us access to a larger mindset? A state of mind that welcomes everything, without focusing on the little me, without focusing on the mood of the moment."
(Alexandre Jollien, The Pharmacopoeia n ° 22)

E1.5.B.12.4.b_REF7_LIT "TO THE GREEKS, ECSTASY MEANT TO STAND OUTSIDE ONESELF. How is that possible? Through existential engineering. “Give me a place to stand,” Archimedes proclaimed in the third century B.C., “and I will move the earth.” Levered by ecstasy, one springs out of one’s mind. Thrown free of one’s normal self, a person stands in another place, on the limits of body, society, and reason, watching the known world dwindle in the distance (a spot standing far away)."
(Diane Akerman, Deep play)

E1.5.B.12.4.b_REF8_PO "WHELKS

Here are the perfect 
fans of the scallops, 
quahogs, and weedy mussels 
still holding their orange fruit - 
and here are the whelks -
whirlwinds, 
each the size of a fist, 
but always cracked and broken - 
clearly they have been traveling 
under the sky-blue waves 
for a long time.
All my life
I have been restless -
 I have felt there is something 
more wonderful than gloss -  
than wholeness- 
than staying at home. 
I have not been sure what it is.
But every morning on the wide shore 
I pass what is perfect and shining 
to look for the whelks, whose edges 
have rubbed so long against the world 
they have snapped and crumbled - 
they have almost vanished, 
with the last relinquishing 
of their unrepeatable energy, 
back into everything else.
When I find one 
I hold it in my hand,
I look out over that shanking fire, 
I shut my eyes. Not often, 
but now and again there's a moment 
when the heart cries aloud: 
yes, I am willing to be 
that wild darkness, 
that long, blue body of light."
(Mary Oliver, New and selected poems: Volume one, 1992)

E1.5.B.12.4.b_REF9_LIT "IN THE BREAKING WAVES, WOOLF FINDS A STAGGERING EMBLEM OF OUR STRUGGLE TO HOLD THE LARGER WHOLENESS IN VIEW, in faith, when our worlds come momentarily disworlded:

"It seems impossible that their calm should ever return or that we should ever compose from their fragments a perfect whole or read in the littered pieces the clear words of truth."

Radiating from Woolf’s gorgeous words is the reminder that all states of mind, all territories of feeling, even those that feel most unsurvivable — perhaps especially those that feel most unsurvivable — are merely moments in time, and yet they are not islanded in the river of being but belong with the rest of the current, the current that springs from the selfsame source as our capacity for beauty, for transcendence, for experiencing ourselves as “the thing itself”
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings, Review on Virginia Woolf´s To the Lighthouse, 1927)

E1.5.B.12.4.b_REF10_LIT "MAGIC… IN ITS PERHAPS MOST PRIMORDIAL SENSE, IS THE EXPERIENCE OF EXISTING IN A WORLD MADE UP OF MULTIPLE INTELLIGENCES, the intuition that every form one perceives — from the swallow swooping overhead to the fly on a blade of grass, and indeed the blade of grass itself — is an experiencing form, an entity with its own predilections and sensations, albeit sensations that are very different from our own. […]
Caught up in a mass of abstractions, our attention hypnotized by a host of human-made technologies that only reflect us back to ourselves, it is all too easy for us to forget our carnal inherence in a more-than-human matrix of sensations and sensibilities. Our bodies have formed themselves in delicate reciprocity with the manifold textures, sounds, and shapes of an animate earth — our eyes have evolved in subtle interaction with other eyes, as our ears are attuned by their very structure to the howling of wolves and the honking of geese. To shut ourselves off from these other voices, to continue by our lifestyles to condemn these other sensibilities to the oblivion of extinction, is to rob our own senses of their integrity, and to rob our minds of their coherence. We are human only in contact, and conviviality, with what is not human."
(David Abram, The Spell of the Sensuous: Perception and Language in a More-Than-Human World, 1996)

E1.5.B.12.4.b_REF10.1_LIT IMAGINATION IS AN INTRINSIC ATTRIBUTE OF THE SENSES, ENABLING US TO PERCEIVE BEYOND IMMEDIATE SENSORY INPUT AND CONNECT WITH THE HIDDEN ASPECTS OF REALITY
"That which we call imagination is from the first an attribute of the senses themselves; imagination is not a separate mental faculty (as we so often assume) but is rather the way the senses themselves have of throwing themselves beyond what is immediately given, in order to make tentative contact with the other sides of things that we do not sense directly, with the hidden or invisible aspects of the sensible. [...]
The “real world” in which we find ourselves, then — the very world our sciences strive to fathom — is not a sheer “object,” not a fixed and finished “datum” from which all subjects and subjective qualities could be pared away, but is rather an intertwined matrix of sensations and perceptions, a collective field of experience lived through from many different angles. The mutual inscription of others in my experience, and (as I must assume) of myself in their experiences, effects the interweaving of our individual phenomenal fields into a single, ever-shifting fabric, a single phenomenal world or “reality.”
And yet, as we know from our everyday experience, the phenomenal world is remarkably stable and solid; we are able to count on it in so many ways, and we take for granted much of its structure and character. This experienced solidity is precisely sustained by the continual encounter with others, with other embodied subjects, other centers of experience. The encounter with other perceivers continually assures me that there is more to any thing, or to the world, than I myself can perceive at any moment. Besides that which I directly see of a particular oak tree or building, I know or intuit that there are also those facets of the oak or building that are visible to the other perceivers that I see. I sense that that tree is much more than what I directly see of it, since it is also what the others whom I see perceive of it; I sense that as a perceivable presence it already existed before I came to look at it, and indeed that it will not dissipate when I turn away from it, since it remains an experience for others — not just for other persons, but… for other sentient organisms, for the birds that nest in its branches and for the insects that move along its bark, and even, finally, for the sensitive cells and tissues of the oak itself, quietly drinking sunlight through its leaves. It is this informing of my perceptions by the evident perceptions and sensations of other bodily entities that establishes, for me, the relative solidity and stability of the world. [...]
Direct, prereflective perception is inherently synaesthetic, participatory, and animistic, disclosing the things and elements that surround us not as inert objects but as expressive subjects, entities, powers, potencies. And yet most of us seem, today, very far from such experience. Trees rarely, if ever, speak to us; animals no longer approach us as emissaries from alien zones of intelligence; the sun and the moon no longer draw prayers from us but seem to arc blindly across the sky. […]
We may acknowledge, intellectually, our body’s reliance upon those plants and animals that we consume as nourishment, yet the civilized mind still feels itself somehow separate, autonomous, independent of the body and of bodily nature in general. Only as we begin to notice and to experience, once again, our immersion in the invisible air do we start to recall what it is to be fully a part of this world… This breathing landscape is no longer just a passive backdrop against which human history unfolds, but a potentized field of intelligence in which our actions participate."
(David Abram, The Spell of the Sensuous: Perception and Language in a More-Than-Human World, 1996)

E1.5.B.12.4.b_REF10.2_LIT DAVID ABRAM ARGUES THAT MODERN CIVILIZATION HAS DISTANCED ITSELF FROM THE NATURAL WORLD, PERCEIVING ITSELF AS SEPARATE AND AUTONOMOUS. Only by re-experiencing our immersion in the natural world can we fully understand our place within it.
"Trees rarely, if ever, speak to us; animals no longer approach us as emissaries from alien zones of intelligence; the sun and the moon no longer draw prayers from us but seem to arc blindly across the sky. […]
We may acknowledge, intellectually, our body’s reliance upon those plants and animals that we consume as nourishment, yet the civilized mind still feels itself somehow separate, autonomous, independent of the body and of bodily nature in general. Only as we begin to notice and to experience, once again, our immersion in the invisible air do we start to recall what it is to be fully a part of this world… This breathing landscape is no longer just a passive backdrop against which human history unfolds, but a potentized field of intelligence in which our actions participate."
(David Abram, The Spell of the Sensuous: Perception and Language in a More-Than-Human World, 1996)

E1.5.B.12.4.b_REF11_LIT "THE PAST IS ALL AROUND US. Darwin’s biggest contribution was to show us that all individual organisms are connected through time. It doesn’t matter whether you compare kangaroos, bacteria, humans, or salamanders, we all have incredible chemical similarities…. [The pioneering Russian geochemist Vladimir] Vernadsky showed us that organisms are not only connected through time but also through space. The carbon dioxide we exhale as a waste product becomes the life-giving force for a plant; in turn, the oxygen waste of a plant gives us life. This exchange of gas is what the word spirit means. Spirituality is essentially the act of breathing. But the connection doesn’t stop at the exchange of gases in the atmosphere. We are also physically connected, and you can see evidence of this everywhere you look. Think of the protists that live in the hind-gut of the termite, or the fungi that live in the rootstock of trees and plants. The birds that flitter from tree to tree transport fungi spores throughout the environment. Their droppings host a community of insects and microorganisms. When rain falls on the droppings, spores are splashed back up on the tree, creating pockets for life to begin to grow again. This interdependence is an inexorable fact of life. [...]

The fact that we are connected through space and time shows that life is a unitary phenomenon, no matter how we express that fact. We are not one living organism, but we constitute a single ecosystem with many differentiated parts. I don’t see this as a contradiction, because parts and wholes are nestled in each other."
(Lynn Margulis , Talking on the Water: Conversations about Nature and Creativity, 1994)

E1.5.B.12.4.b_REF11.1_LIT LIFE IS A UNITARY PHENOMENON, NO MATTER HOW WE EXPRESS THAT FACT. We are not one living organism, but we constitute a single ecosystem with many differentiated parts.
"The past is all around us. Darwin’s biggest contribution was to show us that all individual organisms are connected through time. It doesn’t matter whether you compare kangaroos, bacteria, humans, or salamanders, we all have incredible chemical similarities…. [...]
The fact that we are connected through space and time shows that life is a unitary phenomenon, no matter how we express that fact. We are not one living organism, but we constitute a single ecosystem with many differentiated parts. I don’t see this as a contradiction, because parts and wholes are nestled in each other."
(Lynn Margulis, Talking on the Water: Conversations about Nature and Creativity, 2016)

E1.7.C.1.2.b_REF1_LIT.wE1.5.B.12.4.b.

E1.5.B.12.4.b_REF13_SCI TWO PERSPECTIVES TO UNDERSTAND THE UNIVERSE. Frank Wilczek explains two perspectives on describing the flow of a river: the Euler description, which specifies velocity at every position and remains unchanged over time, and the Lagrangian description, which follows individual water molecules and sees change over time. He suggests that these perspectives can be applied to understanding the universe, where both static and dynamic views are valid depending on whether one takes an external or internal viewpoint.
"WILCZEK: [...] Think about a river, the flow of a river. There are two different descriptions you could imagine of a river that is flowing in a very regular way.

So, in one description, which technically is called the Euler description, you would specify what the velocity of flow is at every position, and that would give you a complete description of the flow of the river. And if the flow is regular, that could be nothing happening. The velocities wouldn’t change in time.

STROGATZ: Right.

WILCZEK: However, there’s another description, associated with the name of Lagrange. It’s sort of an interior description where you follow the flow of individual molecules of water. And then those samples move along at the local velocity. And as time goes on, they’re in a different place, so they see a different velocity. Even though the velocity originally was a function of a position, but not of time. But looked at from the inside, when you follow the flow itself, then things are happening.

So, so both descriptions are valid. If we call this river a universe, the universe in one sense is not changing. But as experienced from the inside, it is changing. There’s plenty of room for dynamical development when you are within the river and going with the flow.

And I think that may be at a deep level what’s happening in the universe. If you want to have an interior description — a Lagrangian description, as opposed to the Euler description — it’s not a contradiction. It’s just a different way of looking at the same object, the same reality from the interior or from the exterior. A human’s eye view versus a god’s eye view."
(Frank Wilczek, What Is the Nature of Time?, Quantamagazine, February 2024)

Read the full transcript or listen to the Podcast:
https://www.quantamagazine.org/what-is-the-nature-of-time-20240229/?mc_cid=6c4f4fe261&mc_eid=de38e9b771

E1.5.B.12.4.b_REF14_PO "THE JOURNEY

Above the mountains
the geese turn into
the light again

Painting their
black silhouettes
on an open sky.

Sometimes everything
has to be
enscribed across
the heavens

so you can find
the one line
already written
inside you.

Sometimes it takes
a great sky
to find that

small, bright
and indescribable
wedge of freedom
in your own heart.

Sometimes with
the bones of the black
sticks left when the fire
has gone out

someone has written
something new
in the ashes of your life.

You are not leaving
you are arriving."
(David Whyte)

E1.5.B.12.4.c. IDENTIFY YOURSELF WITH THE WHOLE UNIVERSE. ANYTHING LESS THAN THE UNIVERSE IS SUBJECT TO SUFFERING

E1.5.B.12.4.c_REF1_PH "MEANING OF THE UNIVERSE

We are a part which has to imitate the whole.

The atman. Let the soul of a man take the whole universe for its body. Let its relation to the whole universe be like that of a collector to his collection, […] We should identify ourselves with the universe itself. Everything that is less than the universe is subject to suffering.

Even though I die, the universe continues. That does not console me if I am anything other than the universe. If, however, the universe is, as it were, another body to my soul, my death ceases to have any more importance for me than that of a stranger. The same is true of my sufferings.

Let the whole universe be for me, in relation to my body, what the stick of a blind man is in relation to his hand. His sensibility is really no longer in his hand but at the end of the stick. An apprenticeship is necessary. […]

To change the relationship between ourselves and the world in the same way as, through apprenticeship, the workman changes the relationship between himself and the tool. Getting hurt: this is the trade entering into the body. May all suffering make the universe enter into the body.

Habit, skill: a transference of the consciousness into an object other than the body itself.

We do not become detached, we change our attachment. We must attach ourselves to the all.

We have to feel the universe through each sensation. What does it matter then whether it be pleasure or pain? […]

We have to associate the rhythm of the life of the body with that of the world, to feel this association constantly and to feel also the perpetual exchange of matter by which the human being bathes in the world.

Things which nothing can take from a human being as long as he lives: in the way of movement over which his will has a hold, respiration; in the way of perception, space (even in a dungeon, even with our eyes blinded and our ear-drums pierced, as long as we live we are aware of space).

We have to attach to these things the thoughts which we desire that no circumstances should be able to deprive us of.”
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace , 1947)

E1.5.B.12.4.c_REF2_LIT WE ONLY EVER FIND OURSELVES BY GETTING LOST — IN TIME, IN SPACE, IN BEING AND BELONGING "To take the vaster perspective of time and space is always an act of resistance to seeing the present as islanded in time — the depiction menacing us from TV screens and news headlines. But it is also a deeply disorienting experience, for it plunges us into the immensity of being, asking us to learn to swim in the stream of time — or else we sink into our isolated smallness, and drown. [...]
And yet we only ever find ourselves by getting lost — in time, in space, in being and belonging."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.5.B.12.4.c_REF2.1_LIT THE DEFINITION OF THE SOUL IS MADE OF THESE PLACES WHERE YOU FEEL THAT THE WORLD CAME INTO BEING SO THAT THEY COULD EXIST "Walking the embankments of the Seine, Etel Adnan writes:
"I sense the hands that built this open canyon through which the city’s blood runs to the ocean. Such beauty enslaves more than any conquest. The definition of the soul is made of these places where you feel that the world came into being so that they could exist. That’s what we are: beings made through the contact of water with stone, of a chilly sunset with pure geometry. My hands touch the remnants of the day’s warmth on cobblestones, walls, moorings. In this moment no boats are going up or downstream. Three elements concur here: the river, the walls, and me. I will sit here. My thinking will reach low fire, my various desires will vanish. Now I am water, and the wall’s surface, and then I am a flow, and a line, and further on I become many, or one, of the dimensions of Being, maybe the basic molecule of Time. Here. It’s always here. It’s only through this ultimate solitude reached by the very fact of living, that one can find the kind of peace that makes tangible the accumulated absurdities that constitute everyone’s personal truth."
(Etel Adnan, Paris, When It’s Naked, 1993)

E1.5.B.12.4.c_REF3_SCI "THE TEEMING HORDES OF LIVING THINGS ON EARTH, NOT ONLY IN SPACE BUT IN TIME, ARE ACTUALLY ALL ONE MASSIVE, SINGLE ORGANISM just as certainly as each one of us (in our own minds) seems to be a distinct human being throughout our limited lifetime… Each of us is, equally, an independent living human and also just one utterly minute, utterly brief unit of a single vast body that is life on Earth. From this point of view, the passing of human generations, in peace or turmoil, is nothing more than the shedding of cells from one’s skin. [...]
Most of the body’s cells are continually turning over. Some cells renew over a period of years, while other types of cells are replaced every few days. So, most of the molecules (and therefore atoms) of our bodies return to the planet as well, in an endless atomic recycling and replacement. From this perspective, then, are we living beings moving around upon this rock we call Earth? Or are we in fact the Earth itself, whose atoms have self-organized to form these transitory beings that think of themselves as self-sufficient and separate from each other, even though they only ever arose from and will inevitably return to the atomic substance of the planet? [...]

We breathe out molecules (carbon dioxide) and perspire molecules (water, pheromones) and excrete molecules (urine, feces) into the environments around us, and in turn, we eat food that we break down into absorbable molecules (proteins, carbohydrates, fats), breathe in oxygen molecules from the planetary plant mass, and absorb molecules through our skin… since every surface we touch potentially has absorbable molecules on it. While you might say that molecules are only your own when they are within your body, complementarily, there are no real distinctions between “our own” molecules and the molecules of the world around us. They move from us, outward, and come into us from the outside. At the molecular level, just as at the cellular level, each of us is in perpetual, direct continuity with the entire biomass of the planet. [...]

At the smallest, Planck scales, the very smallest creations of all are wholes without parts that merely emanate from space-time and dissolve back into it like phantoms — there but not there, real but not real. Everything only looks like a thing from its own particular vantage point, the level of scale at which it can be seen as “itself,” as a whole. Above that level of scale, it is hidden from view by the higher-level emergent properties it gives rise to. Below that level, it disappears from view into the active phenomena from which it emerged. [...]

While we feel ourselves to be thinking, living beings with independent lives inside the universe, the complementary view is also true: we don’t live in the universe; we embody it. It’s just like how we habitually think of ourselves as living on the planet even as, in a complementary way, we are the planet. […]

You are this body, and you are these molecules, and you are these atoms, and you are these quantum entities, and you are the quantum foam, and you are the energetic field of space-time, and, ultimately, you are the fundamental awareness out of which all these emerge, Planck moment by Planck moment."
(Neil Theise, Notes on Complexity: A Scientific Theory of Connection, Consciousness, and Being, 2023)

E1.5.B.12.4.c_REF4_PH "THE MEANING OF FREEDOM CAN NEVER BE GRASPED BY THE DIVIDED MIND. If I feel separate from my experience, and from the world, freedom will seem to be the extent to which I can push the world around, and fate the extent to which the world pushes me around. But to the whole mind there is no contrast of « I » and the world. There is just one process acting, and it does everything that happens. It raises my little finger and it creates earthquakes. Or, if you want to put it that way, I raise my little finger and also make earthquakes. No one fates and no one is being fated."
(Alan Watts, The Wisdom of Insecurity: A Message for an Age of Anxiety, 1951)

E1.5.B.12.4.c_REF4.1_PH ALAN WATTS ARGUES THAT TRUE FREEDOM IS NOT FOUND IN THE POWER OF CHOICE DRIVEN BY PLEASURE AND PAIN BUT IN THE ACCEPTANCE OF THE PRESENT MOMENT AND THE CONDITIONS OF EXISTENCE. "Of course this is a strange view of freedom. We are accustomed to think that, if there is any freedom at all, it resides, not in nature, but in the separate human will and its power of choice.

But what we ordinarily mean by choice is not freedom. Choices are usually decisions motivated by pleasure and pain, and the divided mind acts with the sole purpose of getting "I" into pleasure and out of pain. But the best pleasures are those for which we do not plan, and the worst part of pain is expecting it and trying to get away from it when it has come. You cannot plan to be happy. You can plan to exist, but in themselves existence and non-existence are neither pleasurable nor painful. I am even assured by doctors that there are circumstances under which death can be a highly pleasant experience.

The sense of not being free comes from trying to do things which are impossible and even meaningless. You are not "free" to draw a square circle, to live without a head, or to stop certain reflex actions. These are not obstacles to freedom; they are the conditions of freedom. I am not free to draw a circle if perchance it should turn out to be a square circle. I am not, thank heaven, free to walk out of doors and leave my head at home. Likewise I am not free to live in any moment but this one, or to separate myself from my feelings. In short I am not free when I am trying to do something contradictory, such as to move without changing position, or to burn my finger without feeling pain. 

On the other hand, I am free, the world process is free, to do anything which is not a contradiction. The question then arises: is it a contradiction, is it impossible, to act or to decide without pleasure as the ultimate aim? The theory that we must inevitably do what gives us the greater pleasure or the lesser pain, is a meaningless assertion based on verbal confusion. To say that I decide to do something because it pleases me says only that I decide to do it because I decide to do it. If "pleasure" is defined in the beginning as "what I prefer," then what I prefer will always be pleasure. If I prefer pain, like a masochist, then pain will be pleasure. In short, the theory begs the question at the start by saying that pleasure means what we desire: therefore anything that we desire is pleasure.

But I fall straight into contradiction when I try to act and decide in order to be happy, when I make "being pleased" my future goal. For the more my actions are directed towards future pleasures, the more I am incapable of enjoying any pleasures at all. For all pleasures are present, and nothing save complete awareness of the present can even begin to guarantee future happiness. I can act in order to eat tomorrow, or take a trip to the mountains next week, but there is really no way of being certain that this will make me happy. On the contrary, it is common experience that nothing ruins a "pleasure" so much as watching yourself in the midst of it to see whether it pleases you. You can only live in one moment at a time, and you cannot think simultaneously about listening to the waves and whether you are enjoying listening to the waves. Contradictions of this kind are the only real types of action without freedom."
(Alan Watts, The Wisdom of Insecurity: A Message for an Age of Anxiety, 1951)

E1.5.B.12.4.c_REF5_PH PIERRE BERGOUNIOUX DISCUSSES HOW HOMER INNOVATED NARRATIVE BY GIVING CHARACTERS CONSISTENT IDENTITIES, MARKING A SHIFT FROM MYTHOLOGICAL TO CAUSAL STORYTELLING. This change highlights the existential conflict between human nature and external forces, as seen in "The Odyssey," which celebrates intelligence while acknowledging its limitations.
"Before Homer, the narrative was mythological; he innovtes giving constancy to the identity of his characters - the character becomes an essence instead of being permeable and the siege of all kinds of metamorphoses imposed by external forces. From then on, all facts are subordinated to the principle of causality. Homer formulates for the first time the awareness of a conflict between the relative powers of our being and those of nature - a desperate battle on our end - at least as long as we are fixed on preserving our being. The observation of the irremediable conflict between our mind and the malignancy of the world marks the emergence of an existential attitude. The Odyssey celebrates the virtues of intelligence while inevitably encountering its limits."
(Pierre Bergounioux in the program Les chemins de al philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 08/27/2019)

Listen to the Podcast (in French):
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/lodyssee-dhomere-24-ulysse-le-raisonnable

E1.5.B.12.4.c_REF6_SCI “PERHAPS IN THE END WE CAN REDISCOVER THE REALITY OF OUR HOME WITH A GREATER SENSE OF WONDER AND A MORE MATURE APPRECIATION. […]

It is the aim of science to coordinate all observable phenomena within a single natural order and it is its faith that such is possible. Hence the basic objection to acceptance of the supernatural. If the scientific stand is justified, then everything, whether of matter, energy, mind or spirit, belongs to one vast scheme — it is all one and every part has meaning in relation to the whole. This is as much a tenet of faith as any other belief, but it forms the working hypothesis of all real scientific endeavor. […]

Put together in the proper way and we all turn out to be a rather weak watery solution of salts and carbon compounds, more or less jellified. You and I, with all that we eat and the various bacteria, fungi and viruses that live so happily within us, are a mingling of the wind and water and dust that constitute the surface of the earth. The miracle is that such stuff as we are made of should walk and talk and know such things as song and sadness. […]

In every second of time the visible beings, large and not so large, vegetable and animal, are growing out of the invisible with a force so subtle yet so irresistible they can break a rock or split an atom. Out of almost nothing came the leviathans of trees and beasts, inexorably expanding to a destined size. Out of a almost nothing, almost but not quite — for there is the fact we tend to overlook or take for granted: the capacity of the smallest unit of living matter to grow into stupendous and bewilderingly complicated wholes. It goes on around us all the tim; it is the world we live in, and it is ourselves, you and I. We are the event itself, or at least a very significant part of it — giant examples of expansion, marvelously elaborated, and of exceptionally long duration. […]

Duration is hard to achieve, not that which belongs to crystals and rock but duration of the transcendent form and sparkle that belong to life. Hence the need for continual renewal, of birth from death, of the corn king who dies and the spring queen who brings forth life again. Life is forever being resurrected, not from nothing but from that speck of continuity that breaks off as a bud or seed or egg, leaving the old blown-up construction of the body lagging behind in time to stumble and die. Each fragment that begins anew, no matter what we call it, has time built into it. […]

If mind and spirit grow out of matter they are nonetheless what they have been thought to be. It is our conception of matter that needs revision. All that is included in thought, perception and spiritual harmony belong as naturally in the universe as visible energy and tangible matter, and it is our peculiarly human task at the moment to see them all as facets of a whole. […]

The universe is as we find it and as we discover it within ourselves.”
(N.J. Berrill, You and the Universe, 1958)

E1.5.B.13. A FULLY AWARE PERSON ACCEPTS STRESS AND SUFFERING AS PART OF A GOOD LIFE

E1.5.B.13.1. THE SOURCE OF OUR WOUNDS IS ALSO THE SOURCE OF OUR POWER
All the dragons in our lives may just be princesses waiting to see us beautiful and brave.

E1.5.B.13.1.a. WHAT IS WOUNDED, IF IT IS RECOGNIZED, SOOTHES AND BECOMES BENEFICIAL.
The dragon is an ancient symbol representing the underworld, which must be vanquished or tamed to do civilizing work. The poet Rilke proposes a different reading: the dragons in our lives can be princesses waiting to see us beautiful and courageous.

E1.5.B.13.1.a_REF1_PH "RILKE: "MAYBE ALL THE DRAGONS IN OUR LIVES ARE JUST PRINCESSES WAITING TO SEE US BE BRAVE AND GLORIOUS."
You no doubt know these images of a knight who slays a dragon. What does this strange animal symbolize? The underground, buried, marshy world that must be overcome so that civilization can thrive. But this fight does not necessarily implies killing the animal; sometimes the dragon is simply tamed. We then see him attached by a ribbon held by a young girl who symbolizes innocence but also the most primordial knowledge, the knowledge of the soul: she knows that the archaic should not be destroyed but understood. What is buried in us, what scares us, must not be eliminated so that clarity reigns, but simply tamed because the obscure is also vitality, the very force of life - it would be a shame for us to forgo its contribution ! Rilke, a visionary among the poets, offers us a breathtaking take on this myth: "Maybe all the dragons in our lives are just princesses waiting to see us be brave and glorious." How do you calm down and transform what hurts? You have to approach your pain, you have to recognize it, meet the dragon - it takes courage, that's why you sometimes have to be helped by the princess who is your own innocence, your own kindness, the one within you that approaches your pain and looks at it. It helps you to acknowledge that what is injured, if it is recognized, calms down and becomes beneficial. This is the true meaning of meditation: to invent a completely different relationship to difficulties, to the pains of life. We are offered far too many recipes and tricks that promise us we will be able to ignore our problems. This, in truth, deprives us of our resources and takes away all depth from existence - no princess can appear anymore and we can no longer be courageous and glorious."
(Fabrice Midal in the program 3 minutes of philosophy to become human again, broadcasted on France Culture on 07/15/2019)

Listen to the podcast, 3 minutes de philosophie pour redevenir humain: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/3-minutes-de-philosophie-pour-redevenir-humain/rilke-tous-les-dragons-de-notre-vie-ne-sont-peut-etre-que-des-princesses-qui-attendent-de-nous-voir

E1.5.B.13.1.a_REF2_PH “SOMETIMES YOU WAKE UP. SOMETIMES THE FALL KILLS YOU. AND SOMETIMES, WHEN YOU FALL, YOU FLY.”
(Neil Gaiman)

E1.5.B.13.1.a_REF3_PO "LET THIS DARKNESS BE A BELL TOWER

Quiet friend who has come so far,

feel how your breathing makes more space around you.
Let this darkness be a bell tower
and you the bell. As you ring,

what batters you becomes your strength.
Move back and forth into the change.
What is it like, such intensity of pain?
If the drink is bitter, turn yourself to wine.

In this uncontainable night,
be the mystery at the crossroads of your senses,
the meaning discovered there.

And if the world has ceased to hear you,
say to the silent earth: I flow."
(Rainer Maria Rilke)

E1.5.B.13.1.a_REF4_CUR JOY [THE CHARACTER REPRESENTING THE EMOTION OF JOY IN RILEY´S MIND] realises that in certain situations - like the one after Riley missed a key action in an important hockey game, active sadness leads to a new understanding of joy. She decides to put Sadness [the character representing the emotion Sadness in Riley´s mind] in control of the situation so that Riley finds her way home and falls in the loving arms of her parents.
(Pete DocterRonnie & Del Carmen, Inside Out, 2015)

Watch the trailer: https://www.imdb.com/title/tt2096673/?ref_=ext_shr_lnk

E1.5.B.13.1.a_REF5_TH “Mountains can only be maintained because they are also places of vast removal. Through a process called isostacy, uplands and mountains accumulate material, making them heavier, and then weather and erode to become lighter again, causing crust to rebound as the earth maintains its balance, which it must do. Upland areas that are still uplifting, such as the Peak District, are doing so precisely because of the erosion that is constantly unburdening the land of their material. In short, stuff must be lost for everything to keep rising. This tells me two fundamental truths: one, that in order to evolve and grow, we must be prepared to face the erosive aspects of life. Two, it’s the weathering that creates the finest landscape of our lives, shaping us and defining us over time. […]

Instead of understanding the erosion rates of rock, I became more enthralled by what weathers a person, and what if anything can be done about that. What happens when the earth is shaken under our feet, undermining the foundations of everything we have known? How do we live with (or even close) the fault lines that open through trauma? How do we negotiate erosive and accumulative periods over time? What would it really mean to weather well? […]

At almost every conceivable level of our imagining, it is impossible to create a change without a discontinuity, without a moment of not knowing who we are, or what we are going to become. Rupture precedes revolution.”
(Ruth Allen, Weathering, 2024)

E1.5.B.13.1.a_REF6_PH “WHY WOULD WE CELEBRATE SUFFERING? Doesn't that sound masochistic? Our suffering is based so much on our fear of impermanence. Our pain is so rooted in our one-sided, lopsided view of reality. Who ever got the idea that we could have pleasure without pain? It's promoted rather widely in this world, and we buy it. But pain and pleasure go together; they are inseparable. They can be celebrated. They are ordinary. Birth is painful and delightful. Death is painful and delightful. Everything that ends is also the beginning of something else. Pain is not a punishment; pleasure is not a reward. Inspiration and wretchedness are inseparable. We always want to get rid of misery rather than see how it works together with joy. The point isn't to cultivate one thing as opposed to another, but to relate properly to where we are. Inspiration and wretchedness complement each other. With only inspiration, we become arrogant. With only wretchedness, we lose our vision. Feeling inspired cheers us up, makes us realize how vast and wonderful our world is. Feeling wretched humbles us. The gloriousness of our inspiration connects us with the sacredness of the world. But when the tables are turned and we feel wretched, that softens us up. It ripens our hearts. It becomes the ground for understanding others. Both the inspiration and the wretchedness can be celebrated. We can be big and small at the same time. […]

When suffering arises in our lives, we can recognize it as suffering. When we get what we don't want, when we don't get what we do want, when we become ill, when we're getting old, when we're dying-when we see any of these things in our lives, we can recognize suffering as suffering. Then we can be curious, notice, and be mindful of our reactions to that. Again, usually we're either resentful and feel cheated somehow, or we're delighted. But whatever our reaction is, it's usually habitual. Instead, we could see the next impulse come up, and how we spin off from there. Spinning off is neither good nor bad; it's just something that happens as a reaction to the pleasure and pain of our existence. We can
simply see that, without judgment or the intention to clean up our act.”
(Pema Chodron,When Things Fall Apart Heart Advice for Difficult Times, 1996)

E1.5.B.13.1.a_REF7_PO “WE ARE THE MIRROR AS WELL AS THE FACE IN IT.
We are tasting the taste this minute
of eternity. We are pain
and what cures pain, both. We are
the sweet cold water and the jar that pours.”
(Rumi, The essential, translated by Coleman Barks, 1207-1273)


E1.5.B.13.1.a_REF8_PH “WITHOUT THE DEVIL TO OBSTRUCT IT, ONE COULD NOT CREATE A PATH. FOR A PATH IS KEPT OPEN BY OVERCOMING THE HINDRANCES THAT PREVENT FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT ALONG IT. If Mara did not get in the way, there would be nothing to give us the purchase we need to propel ourselves out of a crisis. Were there no circular drift to our lives, there would be no need for a guiding vision to orient ourselves; if we were not frustrated, there would be no need to break out of a rut; were there no isolation, then no need to participate in communities of shared ideas and practices; and without conflict or contradiction, no possibility of achieving harmony or resolution.
Rather than gaining insight into a single Absolute Truth, Buddha awoke to a complex of truths that embraced the conflicts of human existence as well as their resolution. This awakening did not leave him stranded in a permanent mystical enlightenment, but opened up for him a path to follow in the midst of the world’s vicissitudes. The impact Buddha had on those who encountered him was not solely due to his wise words and compassionate acts. For it seems that he appeared to others as someone in whom something had stopped in a radical and startling manner.”
(Stephen Batchelor, Living with the Devil, 2004)

E1.5.B.13.1.b. BY EMBRACING DIFFICULTIES, WE WILL FIND THAT THE THINGS THAT SEEMED THE MOST ALIEN TO US WILL BECOME THE THINGS WE MOST TRUST AND FIND MOST COMFORT IN.
Sadness is as much a negative experience as a transformative one. Something new is often difficult to accept and understand, but it is important to embrace it and allow it to change us, as it is often a sign of the future we will have to live in.

E1.5.B.13.1.b_REF1_PH "YOU HAVE HAD MANY AND GREAT SADNESSES, WHICH PASSED. And you say that even this passing was hard for you and put you out of sorts. But, please, consider whether these great sadnesses have not rather gone right through the center of yourself? Whether much in you has not altered, whether you have not somewhere, at some point of your being, undergone a change while you were sad? … Were it possible for us to see further than our knowledge reaches, and yet a little way beyond the outworks of our divining, perhaps we would endure our sadnesses with greater confidence than our joys. For they are the moments when something new has entered into us, something unknown; our feelings grow mute in shy perplexity, everything in us withdraws, a stillness comes, and the new, which no one knows, stands in the midst of it and is silent. [...]
Almost all our sadnesses are moments of tension that we find paralyzing because we no longer hear our surprised feelings living. Because we are alone with the alien thing that has entered into our self; because everything intimate and accustomed is for an instant taken away; because we stand in the middle of a transition where we cannot remain standing. For this reason the sadness too passes: the new thing in us, the added thing, has entered into our heart, has gone into its inmost chamber and is not even there any more, — is already in our blood. And we do not learn what it was. We could easily be made to believe that nothing has happened, and yet we have changed, as a house changes into which a guest has entered. [...]
We cannot say who has come, perhaps we shall never know, but many signs indicate that the future enters into us in this way in order to transform itself in us long before it happens. And this is why it is so important to be lonely and attentive when one is sad: because the apparently uneventful and stark moment at which our future sets foot in us is so much closer to life than that other noisy and fortuitous point of time at which it happens to us as if from outside. [...]
The more still, more patient and more open we are when we are sad, so much the deeper and so much the more unswervingly does the new go into us, so much the better do we make it ours, so much the more will it be our destiny, and when on some later day it “happens” (that is, steps forth out of us to others), we shall feel in our inmost selves akin and near to it. And that is necessary. It is necessary — and toward this our development will move gradually — that nothing strange should befall us, but only that which has long belonged to us. [...]
If only we arrange our life according to that principle which counsels us that we must always hold to the difficult, then that which now still seems to us the most alien will become what we most trust and find most faithful. How should we be able to forget those ancient myths that are at the beginning of all peoples, the myths about dragons that at the last moment turn into princesses; perhaps all the dragons of our lives are princesses who are only waiting to see us once beautiful and brave. Perhaps everything terrible is in its deepest being something helpless that wants help from us.

So you must not be frightened … if a sadness rises up before you larger than any you have ever seen; if a restiveness, like light and cloud-shadows, passes over your hands and over all you do. You must think that something is happening with you, that life has not forgotten you, that it holds you in its hand; it will not let you fall. Why do you want to shut out of your life any agitation, any pain, any melancholy, since you really do not know what these states are working upon you?"
(Rainer Maria Rilke, Letter to a young poet, 1929)

E1.5.B.13.1.b_REF2_LIT "EVERYTHING IS A SYMBOL, EVEN THE MOST PIERCING PAIN. WE ARE DREAMERS WHO SHOUT IN OUR SLEEP. We do not know whether the things afflicting us are the secret beginning of our ulterior happiness or not."
(Léon Bloy, Fragments, 1894)

E1.5.B.13.1.b_REF3_PH “WHERE DANGER IS GREATEST.—We seldom break our leg so long as life continues a toilsome upward climb. The danger comes when we begin to take things easily and choose the convenient paths.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 266, 1878)

E1.5.B.13.1.b_REF4_LIT AN INVENTED WORD TO DESCRIBE A KIND OF PSYCHOLOGICAL EXOSKELETON THAT CAN PROTECT YOU FROM PAIN AND CONTAIN YOUR ANXIETIES
“rigor samsa n. a kind of psychological exoskeleton that can protect you from pain and contain your anxieties, but always ends up cracking under pressure or hollowed out by time—and will keep growing back again and again, until you develop a more sophisticated emotional structure, held up by a strong and flexible spine, built less like a fortress than a cluster of treehouses.”
(John Koenig, The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021)

E1.5.B.13.1.c. "ALL THAT IS REQUIRED TO MOVE FROM INDIFFERENCE TO LOVE IS TO HAVE OUR HEARTS BROKEN.  The heart breaks and the world explodes in front of us as a revelation. [...] There is no problem of evil. There is only a problem of good. Why does a world that is so often cruel, insist on being beautiful, of being good? Why does it take a devastation for the world to reveal its true spiritual nature? I don’t know the answer to this, but I do know there exists a kind of potentiality just beyond trauma. I suspect that trauma is the purifying fire through which we truly encounter the good in the world.

Each day I pray into the silence. I pray to all of them. All of them who are not here. Into this emptiness, I pour all my desire and want and need, and in time this absence becomes potent and alive and activated with a promise. This promise that sits inside the silence is beauty enough. This promise, right now, is amazement enough. This promise, right now, is God enough. This promise, right now, is as much as we can bear."
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #196 / JUNE 2022)

E1.5.B.13.1.c_REF1_PH NICK CAVE ARGUES THAT EVERYONE YEARNS FOR LOVE, WHICH DRAWS US TOWARD LOVING EACH OTHER. He suggests that experiencing heartbreak can transform indifference into love, revealing the world's beauty and goodness despite its cruelty.
"In your opinion, what is God?
SUE, PARIS, FRANCE

Dear Sue,

God is love, which is why I have difficulty relating to the atheist position. Every one of us, even the most spiritually resistant, yearns for love, whether we realise it or not. And this yearning calls us forever toward its objective – that we must love each love. We must love each other. And mostly I think we do – or we live in very close proximity to the idea, because there is barely any distance between a feeling of neutrality toward the world and a crucial love for it, barely any distance at all. All that is required to move from indifference to love is to have our hearts broken. The heart breaks and the world explodes in front of us as a revelation.

There is no problem of evil. There is only a problem of good. Why does a world that is so often cruel, insist on being beautiful, of being good? Why does it take a devastation for the world to reveal its true spiritual nature? I don’t know the answer to this, but I do know there exists a kind of potentiality just beyond trauma. I suspect that trauma is the purifying fire through which we truly encounter the good in the world.

Each day I pray into the silence. I pray to all of them. All of them who are not here. Into this emptiness, I pour all my desire and want and need, and in time this absence becomes potent and alive and activated with a promise. This promise that sits inside the silence is beauty enough. This promise, right now, is amazement enough. This promise, right now, is God enough. This promise, right now, is as much as we can bear.

Love, Nick"

(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #196 / JUNE 2022)

E1.5.B.13.1.d. "THERE ARE CERTAIN EXPERIENCES THAT SHATTER THE EGGSHELL OF THE SELF AND SPILL THE YOLK OF THE UNCONSCIOUS, SLIPPERY AND FERTILE, AGLOW WITH POTENTIAL FOR GROWTH. Shame is one of them — an experience private and powerful, rife with the most elemental questions of who we are and where we belong. At its core is a peculiar form of inner conflict, in which one part of the self gasps with revulsion at the choices of another, exposing the fundamental incoherence of our inner lives and the longing for what D.H. Lawrence called “living unison,” exposing the unsteady foundations of reality itself."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.5.B.13.1.d_REF1_PSI CONFRONTING ONE’S OWN SHAME DIRECTLY, ALTHOUGH PAINFUL, CAN PROVIDE PROFOUND INSIGHTS INTO WHO ONE IS AND WHO ONE MAY BECOME, transforming it into a positive experience of self-revelation.
"Shame is an experience that affects and is affected by the whole self. This whole-self involvement is one of its distinguishing characteristics and one that makes it a clue to identity… In this moment of self-consciousness, the self stands revealed. Coming suddenly upon us, experiences of shame throw a flooding light on what and who we are and what the world we live in is. [...]
It is no accident that experiences of shame are called self-consciousness. Such experiences are characteristically painful. They are usually taken as something to be hidden, dodged, covered up — even, or especially, from oneself. Shame interrupts any unquestioning, unaware sense of oneself. But it is possible that experiences of shame if confronted full in the face may throw an unexpected light on who one is and point the way toward who one may become. Fully faced, shame may become not primarily something to be covered, but a positive experience of revelation."
(Helen Merrell Lynd , On Shame and the Search for Identity, 1958)

E1.5.B.13.1.d_REF1.1_PSI GUILT ARISES FROM WRONGDOING AND CAN BE ALLEVIATED BY APOLOGY, WHILE SHAME STEMS FROM FAILING TO MEET PERSONAL EXPECTATIONS AND REQUIRES A DEEPER TRANSFORMATION OF SELF TO OVERCOME.
"Part of what makes shame so misunderstood and underinvestigated is that it is often conflated with guilt. Although the two may complement and reinforce one another, guilt tends to arise from the feeling of wrongdoing, of having transgressed a boundary, while shame stems from the feeling of falling short, of failing to reach a hope or meet an expectation, which anchors it in a deeper stratum of the personality — for rules and boundaries are externally constructed, while our hopes, expectations, and ideals are the most intimate building blocks of personhood. This is why an apology accepted and pardon granted can vanquish guilt, but they do little to allay shame."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

"Guilt can be expiated. Shame, short of a transformation of the self, is retained. This transformation means, in Plato’s words, a turning of the whole soul toward the light."
(Helen Merrell Lynd , On Shame and the Search for Identity, 1958)

E1.5.B.13.1.d_REF1.2_PSI SHAME DIFFERS FROM GUILT IN ITS UNEXPECTEDNESS AND THE SUDDEN REALIZATION OF INCONGRUITIES BETWEEN ONE'S SELF-IMAGE AND REALITY. This exposure can shake one’s foundational assumptions about the self and the world.
"Experiences of shame appear to embody the root meaning of the word — to uncover, to expose, to wound. They are experiences of exposure, exposure of peculiarly sensitive, intimate, vulnerable aspects of the self. The exposure may be to others but, whether others are or are not involved, it is always… exposure to one’s own eyes… Shame is the outcome not only of exposing oneself to another person but of the exposure to oneself of parts of the self that one has not recognized and whose existence one is reluctant to admit. […]

The feeling of unexpectedness marks one of the central contrasts between shame and guilt. This unexpectedness is more than suddenness in time; it is also an astonishment at seeing different parts of ourselves, conscious and unconscious, acknowledged and unacknowledged, suddenly coming together, and coming together with aspects of the world we have not recognized. Patterns of events (inner and outer) of which we are not conscious come unexpectedly into relation with those of which we are aware. […]

Being taken unawares is shameful when what is suddenly exposed is incongruous with, or glaringly inappropriate to, the situation, or to our previous image of ourselves in it… We have acted on the assumption of being one kind of person living in one kind of surroundings, and unexpectedly, violently, we discover that these assumptions are false. We had thought that we were able to see around certain situations and, instead, discover in a moment that it is we who are exposed; alien people in an alien situation can see around us.  […]

Part of the difficulty in admitting shame to oneself arises from reluctance to recognize that one has built on false assumptions about what the world one lives in is and about the way others will respond to oneself… Shame over a sudden uncovering of incongruity mounts when what is exposed is inappropriate positive expectation, happy and confident commitment to a world that proves to be alien or nonexistent… Even more than the uncovering of weakness or ineptness, exposure of misplaced confidence can be shameful — happiness, love, anticipation of a response that is not there, something personally momentous received as inconsequential. The greater the expectation, the more acute the shame.[...]

What we have thought we could count on in ourselves, and what we have thought to be the boundaries and contours of the world, turn out suddenly not to be the “real” outlines of ourselves or of the world, or those that others accept. We have become strangers in a world where we thought we were at home. We experience anxiety in becoming aware that we cannot trust our answers to the questions Who am I? Where do I belong? […]

Because personality is rooted in unconscious and unquestioned trust in one’s immediate world, experiences that shake trusted anticipations and give rise to doubt may be of lasting importance… Shattering of trust in the dependability of one’s immediate world means loss of trust in other persons, who are the transmitters and interpreters of that world. We have relied on the picture of the world they have given us and it has proved mistaken; we have turned for response in what we thought was a relation of mutuality and have found our expectation misinterpreted or distorted; we have opened ourselves in anticipation of a response that was not forthcoming. With every recurrent violation of trust we become again children unsure of ourselves in an alien world."
(Helen Merrell Lynd , On Shame and the Search for Identity, 1958)

E1.5.B.13.1.d_REF1_PO "SHAME IS THE SHAWL OF PINK 
IN WHICH WE WRAP THE SOUL 
To keep it from infesting Eyes -
The elemental Veil 
Which helpless Nature drops 
When pushed opon a scene 
Repugnant to her probity -
Shame is the tint divine -"

E1.5.B.13.2. NO MATTER HOW DIFFICULT LIFE CAN BE, ISN'T IT STILL A GIFT TO BE HUMAN AND WILL THERE NOT BE A NEW LIFE AND HOPE AFTER SUFFERING ENDS?
Instead of trying to avoid or sugarcoat suffering, shouldn't we face it head-on and understand that it is a part of life? By standing in the middle of the horror and waiting out another's suffering, we can heal.

E1.5.B.13.2_REF1_LIT ANNE LAMOTT DISCUSSES THE IMPORTANCE OF CONFRONTING SUFFERING DIRECTLY RATHER THAN AVOIDING IT. "What I resist is not the truth but when people put a pretty bow on scary things instead of saying, “This is a nightmare. I hate everything. I’m going to go hide in the garage.” […]

My understanding of incarnation is that we are not served by getting away from the grubbiness of suffering. Sometimes we feel that we are barely pulling ourselves forward through a tight tunnel on badly scraped-up elbows. But we do come out the other side, exhausted and changed. […]

To heal, it seems we have to stand in the middle of the horror, at the foot of the cross, and wait out another’s suffering where that person can see us. [...]

No matter what happens to us — to our children, to our town, to our world — we feel it is still a gift to be human and to have a human life, as long as we ignore the commercials and advertisements and the static that the world beams at us, and understand that we and our children are going to get knocked around, sometimes so cruelly that it will take our breath away. Life can be wild, hard and sweet, but it can also be wild, hard and cruel.

The bad news is that after the suffering, we wait at the empty tomb for a while, the body of our beloved gone, grieving an unsurvivable loss.

It’s a terrible system. But the good news is that then there is new life. Wildflowers bloom again… They’re both such surprises. Wildflowers stop you in your hiking tracks. You want to savor the colors and scents, let them breathe you in, let yourself be amazed. And bulbs that grow in the cold rocky dirt remind us that no one is lost."
(Anne Lamott, Stitches: A Handbook on Meaning, Hope and Repair)

E1.5.B.13.2_REF2_PH "PRETENDING TO BE MORAL. You never want to be dissatisfied with yourself, never to suffer because of yourself, - and you call this your moral inclination! But one thing is certain, you will never make the trip around the world (that you are yourself) and you will remain, in yourself, a chance, a clod of earth on a clod of earth. Do you believe, then, that we who are of another persuasion expose ourselves by sheer folly to the journey through our own nothingness, our swamps and our ice peaks, that we have voluntarily chosen pain and disgust like the stylistic anchorites?"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Aurora, Aphorism 343, 1881)

E1.5.B.13.2_REF3_PO "BOUND A TROUBLE - AND LIVES WILL BEAR IT -
Circumscription - enables Wo -
Still to anticipate - Were no limit -
Who were sufficient to Misery ? 

State it the Ages - to a cipher -
And it will ache contented on -
Sing, at it’s pain, as any Workman -
Notching the fall of the even Sun -"
(Emily Dickinson, 1861)

E1.5.B.13.2_REF4_PH "WHAT DO WE DO WITH SUFFERING? AS FAR AS I CAN SEE, WE HAVE TWO CHOICES—WE EITHER TRANSFORM OUR SUFFERING INTO SOMETHING ELSE, OR WE HOLD ON TO IT, AND EVENTUALLY PASS IT ON.

In order to transform our pain, we must acknowledge that all people suffer. By understanding that suffering is the universal unifying force, we can see people more compassionately, and this goes some way toward helping us forgive the world and ourselves. By acting compassionately we reduce the world’s net suffering, and defiantly rehabilitate the world. It is an alchemical act that transforms pain into beauty. This is good. This is beautiful.

To not transform our suffering and instead transmit our pain to others, in the form of abuse, torture, hatred, misanthropy, cynicism, blaming and victimhood, compounds the world’s suffering. Most sin is simply one person’s suffering passed on to another. This is not good. This is not beautiful.

The utility of suffering, then, is the opportunity it affords us to become better human beings. It is the engine of our redemption.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #147 / MAY 2021)


E1.5.B.13.2_REF4.1_PH “LOOSENERS OF TONGUES.—The value of many men and books rests solely on their faculty for compelling all to speak out the most hidden and intimate things. They are looseners of tongues and crowbars to open the most stubborn teeth. Many events and misdeeds which are apparently only sent as a curse to mankind possess this value and utility.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 210, 1878)

E1.5.B.13.2_REF5_LIT "LET YOUR HEART BE BROKEN. ALLOW, EXPECT, LOOK FORWARD TO. The life that you have so carefully protected and cared for. Broken, cracked, rent in two. Heartbreakingly, your heart breaks, and in the two halves, rocking on the table, is revealed rich earth. Moist, dark soil, ready for new life to begin. [...]

The past presses on the present with staggering consistency. Nothing is separate or fresh, always an afterimage. The slow time-lapse photograph catches the multi-image movement of our lives. Danger lurks in every corner. To reconstruct will challenge perceptions of self, to restore will allow old pain to well up.

The price of forgotten memories, however, is more costly. My puppeteer of darkness is cruel. He perpetuates false beliefs and forces reenactments I cannot control.

The miracle is light. The miracle is that we rise again out of suffering. The miracle is the persistence of the soul to find itself, to look hard into the darkness, reach back, and grasp remnants of ourselves. The miracle is that we create ourselves anew."
(Tina Davidson, Let Your Heart Be Broken: Life and Music from a Classical Composer)

E1.5.B.13.2_REF6_LIT HYPERION MOVES FROM A STATE OF DEFEAT TO A STATE WHERE, EVEN WHEN "WITHOUT HOPE, WITHOUT A GOAL," ONE CAN FEEL "A POWER WITHIN ME, AN INDOMITABLE SOMETHING."

“I’ve lingered, I’ve struggled. But finally it has to be.

I see what needs to happen, and because I see it, it shall come to pass. Do not mistake my meaning! do not condemn me! I must advise you to leave me, my Diotima.

I can be for you nothing more, you lovely being! This heart has run dry, and my eyes see living life no more. Oh, my lips are withered; the sweet breath of love wells up in my bosom no more.

A single day has robbed me of all youth; by the Eurotas my life has wept itself weary, oh! by the Eurotas that in irredeemable shame wails with all its waves past Lacedaemon’s rubble. It’s there, there I was mown down by fate. — Am I to possess your love like alms? — I’m so utterly nothing, as unrenowned as the meanest menial. I’m shunned, cursed like a common rebel, and many a Greek in Morea will henceforth recount our heroic deeds to his children’s children as a tale of thieves.

Oh! and one thing I’ve long kept from you. My father solemnly disowned me, banished me beyond recall from the house of my youth, never wants to see me again, either in this life or the next, as he puts it. This was his response to the letter in which I told him of my undertaking.

But don’t ever let yourself be led astray by pity. Believe me, there’s a joy that still remains for us throughout. True pain inspires. Whoever mounts his misery stands higher. And what’s glorious is that only in suffering do we fully feel the freedom of the soul. Freedom! understand the word who can — it’s a profound word, Diotima. I’m so deeply beleaguered, so incredibly hurt, I’m without hope, without a goal, I’m utterly bereft of honour, and yet there’s a power within me, an indomitable something that sends sweet shudders through my bones whenever it stirs in me.

And I still have my Alabanda. He has as little to gain as I do. Him I can keep for myself without harm! Oh! the kingly youth would have deserved a better lot. He’s become so gentle and so still. That often nearly rends my heart. But each of us sustains the other. We say nothing to each other; what should we say? But for all that there’s a blessing in many a little labour of love we perform for one another.

There he sleeps and smiles contentedly, in the midst of our misfortune. The good soul! he doesn’t know what I’m doing. He wouldn’t suffer it. ‘You must write to Diotima,’ he charged me, ‘and must tell her to make ready soon to flee with you to a more liveable land.’ But he doesn’t know that a heart that’s learned despair, such as his and mine, can be nothing more for the beloved. No! no! you could never ever find peace with Hyperion, you would have to become unfaithful, and that I will spare you.

And so farewell then, you sweet girl! farewell! I’d like to tell you, ‘go hither, go thither; there the springs of life purl forth.’ I’d like to point you to a freer land, a land full of beauty and full of soul, and say: ‘Escape thither!’ But oh heaven! if I could do that, then I’d also be another and so there’d be no need for me to part from you — part? Alas! I know not what I do. I weened myself so calm, so cool. Now my head reels and my heart flings itself about like a restless patient. Woe on me! I destroy my last joy. But it has to be and nature’s ‘Alas!’ avails nothing here. I owe this to you, and besides I was born to be homeless and have no resting place. O earth! O you stars! shall I find nowhere to dwell in the end?

Just one more time I should like to return to your bosom, no matter where! Aether eyes! one more time in you to meet myself! to hang upon your lips, you lovely! you ineffable one! to drink in your rapturous, holy-sweet life — but don’t listen to that! I beseech you, pay no heed to that! I’d say I was a seducer, if you were to listen to it. You know me, you understand me. You know how deeply you heed me by not pitying me, by not listening to me.

I can, I may no more — how can the priest go on living if his god is no more? O genius of my people! O soul of Greece! down I must go, in the realm of the dead I must seek you.”
(Friedrich Holderin, Hyperion, or the hermit in Greece, 1797)

E1.5.B.13.2_REF7_LIT “I SEEM DESTINED TO HAVE TO SUFFER THROUGH ALL POSSIBLE MOODS, TO BE REQUIRED TO HAVE EXPERIENCES OF ALL KINDS. At every moment I lie out in the middle of the ocean like a child who is supposed to learn to swim. I scream (this I have learned from the Greeks, from whom one can learn the purely human). Admittedly, I have a swimming belt around my waist, but I do not see the support that is supposed to hold me up. It is an appalling way to gain experience.”
(Søren Kierkegaard, Either or, part 1, 1843)

E1.5.B.13.3. THE EXPERIENCE MACHINE THOUGHT EXPERIMENT
If we could choose, would we prefer a dream life that could be "perfect", or real life with its share of suffering, lived in full awareness?

E1.5.B.13.3_REF1_PH IMAGINE IF YOU COULD PLUG YOUR BRAIN INTO A MACHINE THAT WOULD BRING YOU ULTIMATE PLEASURE FOR THE REST OF YOUR LIFE. The only catch? You have to permanently leave reality behind. 
(Hayley Levitt and Bethany Rickwald - TED Ed, Woud you chose a life without pain?)

Watch on YouTube: https://youtu.be/XNP1x11Z2Ig

E1.5.B.13.3_REF2_PH "THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS MAKE THINGS VIVID IN TERM OF INTUITION but they don't prove anything (see the flaw in the chinese room experiment). They are not complete arguments, but can reveal inconsistency in our thinking and the consequences of our opinions  (like the Robert Nozick's experience machin). The  power of thought experiments is to offer a general scenario which is not submitted to the contingencies of real world examples so that the intuition we derive from it is clearer."
(Julian Baggini on Thought Experiments, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the audio: http://philosophybites.com/2007/12/julian-baggini.html

E1.5.B.13.3_REF3_PH THE EXPERIENCE MACHINE, ROBERT NOZICK

Watch this 20' video on YouTube: https://youtu.be/Hei3RF380H4?feature=shared

E1.5.B.13.3_REF4_CUR HE WILL CHOOSE REAL LIFE. The excruciating pain following his accident drives David to suicide. Before his suicide, he had signed a contract with a company that would keep his body in cryogenics and his subconscious free to invent a dream life - free, but monitored by other consciousnesses. When, after many twists and turns, he is given the choice between the dream life and the real life, free from unbearable physical suffering thanks to medical advances, he chooses the real life. Doesn't this illustrate that conscious living is a condition of our humanity? David's choice recalls Robert Nozick's thought experiment.
(Cameron Crowe, Vanilia Sky, 2001)

Watch the scene on YouTube: Vanilla Sky full ending
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nij1M8Brd00

E1.5.B.13.3_REF5_CUR THE RARE MOMENTS OF JOY OF THE DIVER IN THE BELL
(Julian Schnabel, The Diving Bell and the Butterfly, 2007)

Watch the trailer: https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0401383/?ref_=ext_shr_lnk

E1.5.B.13.4. A LIFE WITHOUT SUFFERING WOULD BE AKIN TO THE UTOPIA OF PARADISE

E1.5.B.13.4_REF1_LIT “THE MIND IS ITS OWN PLACE, AND IN IT SELF CAN MAKE A HEAV’N OF HELL, a Hell of Heav’n,” Milton wrote in his immortal Paradise Lost. With these human minds, arising from these material bodies, we keep trying to find heaven — to make heaven — in our myths and our mundanities, right here in the place where we are: in this beautiful and troubled world. We give it different names — eden, paradise, nirvana, poetry — but it springs from the selfsame longing: to dwell in beauty and freedom from suffering."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.5.B.13.4_REF2_PH THE GOAL OF THE DHARMA IS NOT TO ACHIEVE THE COMPLETE CESSATION OF SUFFERING, BUT TO ENABLE US TO LET GO OF REACTIVITY.
”The shift from tasks to truths, from know-how to knowledge, entailed distorting some of the earliest texts. If we continue probing the Buddhist doctrine of the four noble truths, further anomalies become apparent. […]

If Gotama had really wanted to declare that craving is the cause of suffering, why did he not use a term such as hetu or paccaya, the common Pali words for “cause” or “condition”? […] “Craving is the origin of suffering” is a metaphysical dogma no different in kind to “God created heaven and earth.” It claims to state a fundamental truth about the source of all experience, a truth that is impossible either to verify or to falsify. As Buddhism became an Indian religion, this dogma became one of its fundamental tenets.

At the conclusion of The Four Tasks, one of the five ascetics, Kondañña, is said to have grasped what the Buddha taught. He articulates his insight by uttering the phrase “Whatever is subject to arising is subject to ceasing.” Since Gotama said in the discourse that what ceases (nirodha) is reactivity, it is evident that what arises (samudaya) must refer to reactivity as well. The third noble truth, however, is called the noble truth of the cessation of suffering, while the fourth is called the noble truth that leads to the cessation of suffering. The goal of the dharma becomes to achieve the complete cessation of suffering, of birth, sickness, aging, death, instead of the cultivation of an integral way of life. What began as a fourfold task for coming to terms with dukkha mutated into a four-part metaphysics for explaining and overcoming dukkha. A practice for enabling life to flourish turned into a theory for bringing life to an end. […]

The Buddha to whom I am drawn in the early discourses is not an ontologist. He has no interest in providing an accurate and final description of the nature of “truth” or “reality.” He warns repeatedly of the dangers of getting sidetracked by metaphysical speculation of any kind, of being caught in what he calls “thickets of opinion.” As for what Gotama thinks of those who talk about the “supreme” (parama), we only have to turn to the Chapter of Eights, the text cited earlier as an example of a skeptical voice in the early canon:

The priest without borders
doesn’t seize on what he’s known or beheld.
Not passionate, not dispassionate,
he doesn’t posit anything as supreme.
One who dwells in “supreme” views
and presents them as final
will declare all other views “inferior”—
he has not overcome disputes.

On the basis of such verses, it is hard to understand how Gotama’s followers would proceed not only to develop a theory of ultimate truth but to turn it into a central pillar of his teachings.”
(Stephen Batchelor, After Buddhism, rethinking the dharma for a secular age, 2016)

E1.5.B.13.4_REF2.1_PH TO LET GO OF REACTIVITY AND BEHOLD ITS CEASING IS CERTAINLY NO EASY TASK, BUT AT LEAST IT IS SOMETHING TO WHICH WE CAN ASPIRE, WHEREAS THE END OF THE SUFFERING WILL REMAIN A PIPE DREAM.
“We know that numerous people from all walks of life at Gotama’s time not only beheld the ceasing of reactivity but lived their lives from that perspective. Their experience cannot, therefore, have been that of the ceasing of suffering, the ceasing of the totality of their existential condition, for the simple reason that they were all still very much alive. The Buddha himself complains of physical ailments, the frustration of having to run an organization, the discomforts of old age, and the pain of dying. As long as we have a physical body, we will experience suffering. We might temporarily avoid such pains and frustrations by entering into meditative absorption—as Gotama says he did in order to cope with his last illness—but once we emerge from such a state, we return to this imperfect world with all its irritations and discomforts.

What Buddhists trumpet as the “end of suffering” cannot therefore mean what it says. Not only does it make little sense, the discourses themselves clearly state that it means the end of reactivity. To let go of reactivity and behold its ceasing is certainly no easy task, but at least it is something to which we can aspire, whereas the end of the suffering will remain a pipe dream for as long as we are pulsating, breathing, ingesting, digesting, defecating bodies.”
(Stephen Batchelor, After Buddhism, rethinking the dharma for a secular age, 2016)

E1.5.B.13.4_REF2.2_PH “NIRVANA CAN BE COMPARED TO THE SUDDEN OPENING UP OF A SPACE WITHIN ONE’S EXPERIENCE WHEN ONE’S INNATE INCLINATIONS DIE DOWN AND REACTIVITY FADES AWAY. One glimpses in such moments how one is free to act in a way that is not determined by reactivity, thereby enabling the use of practical reason to decide on another kind of future. But these moments of nirvanic emptiness are liable to vanish just as abruptly as they appear.

Gotama’s awakening led him to see both what enabled and what inhibited human flourishing. Cultivating a clear vision of one’s mortality and conditionality, committing oneself to a path of practical reason, and aspiring to respond to life in ways not determined by reactivity are how he saw a life grounded in dharma. But he also recognized that to see things in this way “is hard for people who love, delight, and revel in their place.” As long as individuals remain preoccupied with place (alaya), they will be blinded to their ground (thana). […] What people assume to be their ground, he suggests, turns out not to be a ground at all but merely a temporary place to which they cling in the futile hope of finding existential security in a profoundly insecure world. […]

Gotama described the shift from place to ground that constituted his awakening as patisotagami, “going against the stream”. […]  To go against the stream is to find yourself going against the cumulative force of innate reactivity. Mythically, this force is described as the “army of Mara,” which is composed of “sensual desire; discontent; hunger and thirst; craving; sloth and torpor; fear; doubt; hypocrisy and obstinacy; gain, renown, honour and ill-gotten fame; and the extolling of oneself and disparaging of others.” […]

By learning how to stabilize attention and dwell in a lucid space of non-reactive awareness, we gain the freedom to see the forces of Mara as thoughts, feelings, emotions, beliefs, and stories that naturally arise because of the impact of the environment on the senses of a conscious creature. From that perspective we see a cascading array of transient, impersonal events that—provided we do not energize them by identifying with them—will fade away as soon as their charge is exhausted. They are not overcome by destruction; rather, we must understand how they arise and play themselves out. The dharma, therefore, involves bringing one’s wayward thoughts under control, establishing mindfulness and concentration, then setting out to realize one’s goals in the world. […]

Mara, the personification of reactivity, is conquered not by eliminating every last reaction from one’s mind but by finding a way to become impervious to his attacks. We acquire freedom from reactivity yet without the reactivity ceasing to occur. If we observe these impulses and do not feed them, they will die down over time and diminish in frequency. But, as this text makes clear, Gotama continued to be subject to Mara’s attacks even after his awakening. As long as we are embodied in flesh, nerves, and blood, reactivity will be part and parcel of what it entails to be human.”
(Stephen Batchelor, After Buddhism, rethinking the dharma for a secular age, 2016)

E1.5.B.13.4_REF2.3_PH PEOPLE FAIL TO UNDERSTAND WHY AND HOW THEY KEEP GETTING “TRICKED” BY THE “BEAUTIFUL AND HIDEOUS SHAPES” CONJURED BY MARA (DESIRE AND THE FORCES ANTAGONISTIC TO ENLIGHTENMENT).
“The arising (samudaya) is to be let go of (pahana).

[…] We are creatures who react as we come into contact with the world through our senses. If what we meet feels pleasant, we react with attraction; if it feels unpleasant, we react with aversion; and if it feels neither pleasant nor unpleasant, we react with restlessness or boredom. To these reactions we could add guilt, self-doubt, vanity, inadequacy, anxiety, conceit, paranoia, expectation, wishful thinking, and so on. Such reactions are entirely natural. They are neither good nor bad. Strictly speaking, they are not even “ours.” They are simply what happens when an organism interacts with its environment. They are what arises. […] The person who lets go of reactivity does not shun involvement with the world but moves nimbly and lightly through it. […]

Tanha, as an element within the classical doctrine of the twelve links of conditionality, is what arises in reaction to the feelings that come from sensory contact with the differentiated world (namarupa) of a conscious being. The reactions include hatred and indifference, loathing and boredom, as much as craving and desire. Nor is the arising of tanha just a series of isolated events; it is a self-reinforcing cycle. A conscious being “wallows” and “indulges” in worries, fears, obsessions, and fantasies. In response to a gnawing sense of lack, tanha supports a yearning to fill the inner void with ever more intense stimulation. Rooted in feelings of existential incompleteness and inadequacy, it inflates the ego and affirms one’s importance in the world. […]

Gotama recognized that human beings spend an inordinate amount of time absorbed in the amplifications and proliferations of reactivity. He talks of these responses as the “snares” or “fishhooks” of Mara. Once someone has been trapped or snagged, it is difficult, painful, and fruitless to struggle to wrench free, for that struggle is likely to be another variant of the very reactivity being struggled against. It just tightens the grip of the snare or embeds the hook’s barb deeper in the flesh. People fail to understand why and how they keep getting “tricked” by the “beautiful and hideous shapes” conjured by Mara. […]

When a reactive pattern such as hatred arises, it simultaneously triggers an emotion of rage that surges through the organism and configures the world to present itself as intrinsically hateful and fearful.
We tend to regard the appearance of such a fearful world as a projection of our mental state. But this reading of the situation is based on the cultural habit of interpreting experience psychologically. No matter how much we tell ourselves that the fearfulness of the world is just a projection, such reassurance does not significantly alter either how the world appears to us or how we feel about it. From the perspective of a dharma practitioner, the task of “letting go of what arises” entails releasing one’s grip on the whole picture: angry-me-facing-hostile- situation. Letting go is not simply a question of breathing deeply to calm my rattled mind; I need to cleanse the doors of my perception. This requires suspending the default habit of seeing the world as being hostile, desirable, or boring. One of the most effective ways of suspending that habit is to train yourself to comprehend the world as an infinitely suffering world.
There is a symbiosis between “comprehending suffering/life” and “letting go of reactivity.” The fourfold task entails cultivating an embrace that is also a release. This action is akin to a dance where each partner holds the other so that both can move with optimal freedom and grace. The more we fully understand the precarious and mysterious situation we are in, the more our egocentric reactivity will either die down of its own accord or appear increasingly petty and absurd. And the more we stop believing what our compulsive mental habits keep telling us, the more the world will tend to reveal itself in all its poignancy, tragedy, and sublimity.”
(Stephen Batchelor, After Buddhism, rethinking the dharma for a secular age, 2016)

E1.5.B.13.4_REF2.4_PH LOGICALLY, AN INTEGRATED LIFE IS THE OUTCOME OF HAVING EMBRACED THE SUFFERING WORLD, LET GO OF REACTIVITY, AND BEHELD REACTIVITY’S CEASING. From this still and empty space one then responds with intuitions, thoughts, intentions, words, and acts that are not determined by reactivity.
“The path (magga) is to be cultivated (bhavana).

[…]  This path, which Gotama calls a “middle” or “centered” path, outlines a way of life that includes every aspect of a person’s humanity. Here is the classical definition:

And this is the path: the path with eight branches: complete
view, complete thought, complete speech, complete action,
complete livelihood, complete effort, complete mindfulness,
complete concentration.

[…] The goal of the fourfold task, I would argue, is to lead an integrated life. It is perhaps for this reason that cultivating the eightfold path is presented as the fourth facet of this task, even though it is already implicit in the other three. Logically, an integrated life is the outcome of having embraced the suffering world, let go of reactivity, and beheld reactivity’s ceasing. From this still and empty space one then responds with intuitions, thoughts, intentions, words, and acts that are not determined by reactivity. […]

As habitual users of language, we assume words to be accurate representations of reality. Complete understanding, however, no longer succumbs to the convenience of oppositional thought but is open to the immediacy and potential of what is happening from moment to moment. Training ourselves to pay intimate and embodied attention to the very pulse of life within and around us exposes the limitations of language. Bearing witness to the arising and unfolding of something renders absurd the notion that “it is not.” Similarly, contemplation of its fading away and disappearance undermines any notion that “it is.” To sustain such a “complete view” is a challenging task. It would require a great deal of discipline and effort to come to see the world and oneself in this way, which runs counter to how we are conditioned to think and speak. 

“By and large,” continues Gotama in his reply to Kaccana, “this world is bound to its prejudices and habits.” But, he says, someone who has achieved this view “does not get caught up in the habits, fixations, prejudices or biases of the mind. He is not fixated on ‘my self.’ He does not doubt that when something is occurring, it is occurring, and when it has come to an end, it has come to an end.
His knowledge is independent of others. In these respects his view is complete.”
Notice that the Buddha differentiates between something “occurring” (uppajjati ) or “coming to an end” (nirujjhati), on the one hand, and its “being” (atthi) or “not being” (natthi), on the other. He is comfortable with a language of process but rejects the language of ontology.”
(Stephen Batchelor, After Buddhism, rethinking the dharma for a secular age, 2016)

E1.5.B.13.4_REF3_PO “WHEN IT’S COLD IN THE SEASON FOR COLD, TO ME IT FEELS PLEASANT,
Since, suited as I am to how things exist,
What’s natural is what’s pleasant just because it’s natural.

I accept life’s hardships because they’re destiny,
As I accept the harsh cold in the dead of winter—
Calmly and without complaint, as one who simply accepts, 
And ﬁnds joy in the fact of accepting,
In the sublimely scientiﬁc and difﬁcult fact of accepting the
inevitably natural.

Aren’t the illnesses I have and the adversity I experience
Just the winter of my life and person?
An erratic winter, whose laws of appearing are unknown to me 
But that exists for me by the same sublime fatality,
The same inevitable fact of being outside me,
As the earth’s heat in high summer
And the earth’s cold in the depths of winter.

I accept because it’s my nature to accept.
Like everyone, I was born subject to errors and defects,
But not to the error of wanting to understand too much, 
Not to the error of wanting to understand only with the
intelligence,
Not to the defect of requiring the world
To be something other than the world.”
(Fernando Pessoa, A Little Larger Than the Entire Universe Selected Poems)

E1.5.B.13.5. TO UNDERSTAND THAT THERE IS NO SECURITY IS FAR MORE THAN TO AGREE WITH THE THEORY THAT ALL THINGS CHANGE, MORE EVEN THAN TO OBSERVE THE TRANSITORINESS OF LIFE. The notion of security is based on the feeling that there is something within us which is permanent, something which endures through all the days and changes of life. We are struggling to make sure of the permanence, continuity, and safety of this enduring core, this center and soul of our being which we call "I." For this we think to be the real man - the thinker of our thoughts, the feeler of our feelings, and the knower of our knowledge. We do not actually understand that there is no security until we realize that this "I" does not exist.

E1.5.B.13.5_REF1_PH ALAN WATTS ARGUES THAT THE DESIRE FOR SECURITY IS INHERENTLY CONTRADICTORY BECAUSE IT SEEKS TO ISOLATE THE SELF FROM THE FLUID AND EVER-CHANGING NATURE OF LIFE. This isolation creates a sense of insecurity, making the pursuit of security a source of pain. True understanding comes from realizing that the notion of a permanent "I" is an illusion, and accepting the impermanence of life.
"It must be obvious, from the start, that there is a contradiction in wanting to be perfectly secure in a universe whose very nature is momentariness and fluidity. But the contradiction lies a little deeper than the mere conflict between the desire for security and the fact of change. If I want to be secure, that is, protected from the flux of life, I am wanting to be separate from life. Yet it is this very sense of separateness which makes me feel insecure. To be secure means to isolate and fortify the "I," but it is just the feeling of being an isolated "I" which makes me feel lonely and afraid. In other words, the more security I can get, the more I shall want.

To put it still more plainly: the desire for security and the feeling of insecurity are the same thing. To hold your breath is to lose your breath. A society based on the quest for security is nothing but a breath-retention contest in which everyone is as taut as a drum and as purple as a beet. [...]

We can hardly begin to consider this problem unless it is clear that the craving for security is itself a pain and a contradiction, and that the more we pursue it, the more painful it becomes. This is true in whatever form security may be conceived. [...] 

To understand that there is no security is far more than to agree with the theory that all things change, more even than to observe the transitoriness of life. The notion of security is based on the feeling that there is something within us which is permanent, something which endures through all the days and changes of life. We are struggling to make sure of the permanence, continuity, and safety of this enduring core, this center and soul of our being which we call "I." For this we think to be the real man - the thinker of our thoughts, the feeler of our feelings, and the knower of our knowledge. We do not actually understand that there is no security until we realize that this "I" does not exist."
(Alan Watts, The wisdom of insecurity, 1951)

E1.5.B.13.5_REF1.1_PH "ON BEING AWARE
It must be obvious, from the start, that there is a contradiction in wanting to be perfectly secure in a universe whose very nature is momentariness and fluidity. But the contradiction lies a little deeper than the mere conflict between the desire for security and the fact of change. If I want to be secure, that is, protected from the flux of life, I am wanting to be separate from life. Yet it is this very sense of separateness which makes me feel insecure. To be secure means to isolate and fortify the "I," but it is just the feeling of being an isolated "I" which makes me feel lonely and afraid. In other words, the more security I can get, the more I shall want.

To put it still more plainly: the desire for security and the feeling of insecurity are the same thing. To hold your breath is to lose your breath. A society based on the quest for security is nothing but a breath-retention contest in which everyone is as taut as a drum and as purple as a beet.

We look for this security by fortifying and enclosing ourselves in innumerable ways. We want the protection of being "exclusive" and "special," seeking to belong to the safest church, the best nation, the highest class, the right set, and the "nice" people. These defenses lead to divisions between us, and so to more insecurity demanding more defenses. Of course it is all done in the sincere belief that we are trying to do the right things and live in the best way; but this, too, is a contradiction.

I can only think seriously of trying to live up to an ideal, to improve myself, if I am split in two pieces. There must be a good "I" who is going to improve the bad "me." "I," who has the best intentions, will go to work on wayward "me," and the tussle between the two will very much stress the difference between them. Consequently "I" will feel more separate than ever, and so merely increase the lonely and cut-off feelings which make "me" behave so badly.

We can hardly begin to consider this problem unless it is clear that the craving for security is itself a pain and a contradiction, and that the more we pursue it, the more painful it becomes. This is true in whatever form security may be conceived. [...] 

To understand that there is no security is far more than to agree with the theory that all things change, more even than to observe the transitoriness of life. The notion of security is based on the feeling that there is something within us which is permanent, something which endures through all the days and changes of life. We are struggling to make sure of the permanence, continuity, and safety of this enduring core, this center and soul of our being which we call "I." For this we think to be the real man - the thinker of our thoughts, the feeler of our feelings, and the knower of our knowledge. We do not actually understand that there is no security until we realize that this "I" does not exist."
(Alan Watts, The wisdom of insecurity, 1951)

E1.5.B.13.5_REF2_LIT "IT IS STRANGE HOW, IN A UNIVERSE GOVERNED BY RELENTLESS CHANGE, HUMAN BEINGS HUNGER FOR CONSTANCY — our bodies wired for homeostasis, our minds hooked on habit, our hearts yearning for everlasting love. We live as patterns unaware of perpetuating themselves, our aching resistance to change reflected in the routines and rituals and relationship formulae out of which we build the superstructure of belief that houses all of our actions, reactions, and choices.

It is not easy, reconfiguring this superstructure to fit something new — a new practice, a new person, a new way of being. The more transformative the new element, the more challenging it is to figure it into the pattern of life as we know it — a pattern shaped by what we believe about love, that deepest sinew of the self."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.5.B.13.5_REF2.1_LIT "WE CAN TAKE FLIGHT FROM OUR LIVES IN A FORM OTHER THAN DENIAL AND RETURN TO OUR AUTHENTIC SELVES… Accidental sightings, whether witnessed in a brain or on a winter dawn, remind us there is no such thing as certainty. [...]

I want to feel both the beauty and the pain of the age we are living in. I want to survive my life without becoming numb. I want to speak and comprehend words of wounding without having these words become the landscape where I dwell. I want to possess a light touch that can elevate darkness to the realm of stars.

This vascular malformation could bleed and burst. Or I can simply go on living, appreciating my condition as a vulnerable human being in a vulnerable world, guided by the songs of birds. What is time, sacred time, but the acceleration of consciousness? There are so many ways to change the sentences we have been given."
(Terry Tempest Williams , When Women Were Birds: Fifty-four Variations on Voice, 2012)

E1.5.B.13.5_REF3_PH “IF WE'RE WILLING TO GIVE UP HOPE THAT INSECURITY AND PAIN CAN BE EXTERMINATED, THEN WE CAN HAVE THE COURAGE TO RELAX WITH THE GROUNDLESSNESS OF OUR SITUATION. THIS IS THE FIRST STEP ON THE PATH.
Turning your mind toward the dharma does not bring security or confirmation. Turning your mind toward the dharma does not bring any ground to stand on. In fact, when your mind turns toward the dharma, you fearlessly acknowledge impermanence and change and begin to get the knack of hopelessness.

In Tibetan there's an interesting word: ye tang che. The ye part means "totally, completely," and the rest of it means "exhausted." Altogether, ye tang che means totally tired out. We might say "totally fed up." It describes an experience of complete hopelessness, of completely giving up hope. This is an important point. This is the beginning of the beginning. Without giving up hope-that there's somewhere better to be, that there's someone better to be-we will never relax with where we are or who we are.

We could say that the word *mindfulness* is pointing to being one with our experience, not dissociating, being right there when our hand touches the doorknob or the telephone rings or feelings of all kinds arise. The word *mindfulness* describes being right where we are. Ye tang che, however, is not so easily digested. It expresses the renunciation that's essential for the spiritual path.

To think that we can finally get it all together is unrealistic. To seek for some lasting security is futile. To undo our very ancient and very stuck habitual patterns of mind requires that we begin to turn around some of our most basic assumptions. Believing in a solid, separate self, continuing to seek pleasure and avoid pain, thinking that someone "out there" is to blame for our pain-one has to get totally fed up with these ways of thinking. One has to give up hope that this way of thinking will bring us satisfaction. Suffering begins to dissolve when we can question the belief or the hope that there's anywhere to hide.

Hopelessness means that we no longer have the spirit for holding our trip together. We may still *want* to hold our trip together. We long to have some reliable, comfortable ground under our feet, but we've tried a thousand ways to hide and a thousand ways to tie up all the loose ends, and the ground just keeps moving under us. Trying to get lasting security teaches us a lot, because if we never try to do it, we never notice that it can't be done. Turning our minds toward the dharma speeds up the process of discovery. At every turn we realize once again that it's completely hopeless-we can't get any ground under our feet.

The difference between theism and nontheism is not whether one does or does not believe in God. It is an issue that applies to everyone, including both Buddhists and nonBuddhists. Theism is a deep-seated conviction that there's some hand to hold: if we just do the right things, someone will appreciate us and take care of us. It means thinking there's always going to be a babysitter available when we need one. We all are inclined to abdicate our responsibilities and delegate our authority to something outside ourselves. Nontheism is relaxing with the ambiguity and uncertainty of the present moment without reaching for anything to protect ourselves. We sometimes think that dharma is something out side of ourselves-something to believe in, something to measure up to. However, dharma isn't a belief; it isn't dogma. It is total appreciation of impermanence and change. The teachings disintegrate when we try to grasp them. We have to experience them without hope. Many brave and compassionate people have experienced them and taught them. The message is fearless; dharma was never meant to be a belief that we blindly follow. Dharma gives us nothing to hold on to at all.

Nontheism is finally realizing that there's no babysitter that you can count on. You just get a good one and then he or she is gone. Nontheism is realizing that it's not just babysitters that come and go. The whole of life is like that. This is the truth, and the truth is inconvenient.

For those who want something to hold on to, life is even more inconvenient. From this point of view, theism is an addiction. We're all addicted to hope-hope that the doubt and mystery will go away. This addiction has a painful effect on society: a society based on lots of people addicted to getting ground under their feet is not a very compassionate place.

The first noble truth of the Buddha is that when we feel suffering, it doesn't mean that something is wrong. What a relief. Finally somebody told the truth. Suffering is part of life, and we don't have to feel it's happening because we personally made the wrong move. In reality, however, when we feel suffering, we think that something is wrong. As long as we're addicted to hope, we feel that we can tone our experience down or liven it up or change it somehow, and we continue to suffer a lot.

The word in Tibetan for hope is rewa; the word for fear is dokpa. More commonly, the word re-dok is used, which combines the two. Hope and fear is a feeling with two sides. As long as there's one, there's always the other. This re-dok is the root of our pain. In the world of hope and fear, we always have to change the channel, change the temperature, change the music, because something is getting uneasy, something is getting restless, something is beginning to hurt, and we keep looking for alternatives.

In a nontheistic state of mind, abandoning hope is an affirmation, the beginning of the beginning. You could even put "Abandon hope" on your refrigerator door instead of more conventional aspirations like "Every day in every way I'm getting better and better."

Hope and fear come from feeling that we lack something; they come from a sense of poverty. We can't simply relax with ourselves. We hold on to hope, and hope robs us of the present moment. We feel that someone else knows what's going on, but that there's something missing in us, and therefore something is lacking in our world.”
(Pema Chodron,When Things Fall Apart Heart Advice for Difficult Times, 1996)

E1.5.B.13.6. STRESS

E1.5.B.13.6_REF1_PSI IF YOU WANT TO HAVE A RELATIONSHIP WITH SOMEONE YOU HAVE TO BECOME A PROBLEM FOR THEM
"It is not unusual for us to feel that life is too much for us. And it is not unusual to feel that we really should be up to it; that there may be too much to cope with — too many demands — but that we should have the wherewithal to deal with it. Faced with the stresses and strains of everyday life it is easy now for people to feel that they are failing; and what they are failing at, one way or another, is managing the ordinary excesses that we are all beset by: too much frustration, too much bad feeling, too little love, too little success, and so on. One of the things people most frequently say in psychoanalysis is, ‘Perhaps I am overreacting, but . . .’; and one of the commonest complaints today is about feeling too much or feeling too little. I want to suggest that we are simply too much for ourselves, but that this too-muchness is telling us something important… My proposition is that it is impossible to overreact. That when we call our reactions overreactions what we mean is just that they are stronger than we would like them to be. In other words, we sometimes call ourselves and other people excessive as a way of invalidating or tempering the truths we tell ourselves or that other people tell us. It is impossible to overreact. [...]

When we make Freudian slips we try to cover our tracks by claiming that we have said more than we mean, when in fact we have meant more than we had wanted to say… We may feel like we are saying too much, but we may be saying just the right amount; adding things to the conversation that are worth talking about and trying out. We can’t decide not to make Freudian slips; but even when we use ordinary language intentionally, we often say more than we intend. If I say to you that I am a great admirer of your work, I am telling you about my greatness as well as yours; when I say, “See you tomorrow,” I am assuming I know what isn’t going to happen in the interim. Our language, without which we couldn’t imagine our lives, is too much for us in the sense that it can surprise us: we hear in it — and we say in it — more than we intend to. And more than we attend to. [...]

We have all had the experience, as children, of being too much for someone; of making someone feel things that they didn’t want to feel… Everyone starts with the experience of being too much for someone else; not only with that experience, but with that experience somewhere in the mix of who one is. Before we acquire the limiting and limited excesses of language we have lived with the excesses of need. If, even only occasionally as a child, you are too much for your parents — which then means you are too much for yourself — what can you do?

The child who experiences himself as being too much for his parents — all children to some extent — experiences himself as in some way harming them. And as the child’s survival depends upon his parents, or those who look after him, this puts him in mortal danger. For this reason alone it is very difficult for the child — and for the adult that he will become — to think of his too-muchness as anything other than a problem. And yet, of course, parents are there to absorb, and be absorbed in, their children’s excesses (and vice versa). Indeed, people know that they are in a relationship when they become a problem to each other (or, to put it slightly differently, if you want to have a relationship with someone you have to become a problem for them)."
(Adam Phillips, On Balance, 2010)

Watch the performance Oxigênio, by Lillian Vidigal and Maurizio Mancioli: https://www.instagram.com/p/CKHHmO6HTQT/?utm_source=ig_web_button_share_sheet&igsh=MzRlODBiNWFlZA==

E1.5.B.13.6_REF2_PSI "WHEN YOU KNOW WHAT NEEDS TO BE DONE, INACTION INCREASES STRESS. You feel a lot less stress when you do the things within your control that move you closer to your objective. Action reduces stress."
(Brain Food, Farnam Street)

E1.5.B.13.6_REF3_LIT THE "GOOD" STRESS: AN INVENTED WORD TO DESCRIBE THE EXHILARATING DREAD OF FINALLY PURSUING A LIFELONG DREAM
“Zielschmerz n. the exhilarating dread of finally pursuing a lifelong dream, which requires you to put your true abilities out there to be tested on the open savannah, no longer protected inside the terrarium of hopes and delusions that you created in kindergarten and kept sealed as long as you could, only to break in case of emergency.”
(John Koenig, The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021)

E1.5.B.13.6_REF4_SCI LISA FELDMAN BARRETT ARGUES THAT STRESS IS NOT AN EXTERNAL EVENT BUT A CONCEPT CONSTRUCTED BY THE BRAIN TO MAKE MEANING OF AN IMBALANCED BODY BUDGET, AND THAT CHRONIC MISBUDGETING CAN PHYSICALLY DAMAGE THE VERY BRAIN NETWORKS RESPONSIBLE FOR ITS REGULATION.
”You might think that stress is something that happens to you, like when you try to juggle five tasks at once, or your boss tells you that tomorrow’s work was due yesterday, or you lose a loved one. But stress doesn’t come from the outside world. You construct it.
Some stress is positive, like the challenge of learning a new subject in school. Some is negative but tolerable, like having a fight with your best friend. And some is toxic, like the chronic stress of prolonged poverty, abuse, or loneliness. In other words, stress is a population of diverse in-stances. It is a concept, just like “Happiness” or “Fear,” that you apply to con-struct experiences from an imbalanced body budget.

You construct instances of “Stress” via the same brain mechanisms that construct emotion. In each case, your brain issues predictions about your body budget in relation to the outside world and makes meaning. These predictions issue from your interoceptive network and descend along the same pathways from the brain to the body. In the opposite direction, the ascending pathways that carry sensory inputs from the body to the brain are also the same for stress and emotion. And the same pair of networks, interoceptive and control, play their same roles. (Emotion and stress re-searchers rarely recognize these similarities, and tend to ask how stress influences emotion and vice versa, as if stress and emotion are independent.) From the viewpoint of construction, what differs is the end result, whether your brain categorizes your sensations as stressful or emotional.
Why does the predicting brain construct instances of stress or emotion in a given situation? No one knows. Maybe the longer your body budget is out of whack, the more likely you are to categorize with the concept “Stress,” but this is pure speculation.
If your body budget is unbalanced for a long time, you may experience chronic stress. (Chronic misbudgeting is often diagnosed as stress, which is why people think stress causes illness.) Chronic stress is dangerous to your physical health. It literally eats away at your interoceptive and control net-works, causing them to atrophy, as your chronically imbalanced body bud-get remodels the very brain circuitry that regulates the budget. So much for the classical division between mental and physical illness.
Scientists are still figuring out the puzzle of immune system, stress, and emotion, but we do know a few things right now. Cumulative imbalance in the body budget  —  say, from growing up in adversity, where you don’t feel safe or are deprived of basic necessities like nutritious food, quiet time to sleep, and so on  —  also changes the structure of your interoceptive net-work, rewiring your brain and reducing its ability to accurately regulate your body budget. All it takes are a couple of highly negative experiences for children to feel like they are living in a combat zone, reducing the size of their body-budgeting regions by the time they reach adulthood. Growing up in a family that is harsh or chaotic, with a lot of conflict or verbal criticism, increases inflammation in adolescent girls and places kids on a trajec-tory toward chronic disease; it’s almost as bad for the development of these networks as childhood abuse or neglect.”
(Lisa Feldman Barrett, How Emotions Are Made - The Secret Life of the Brain, 2017)

E1.7.C.3.wE1.5.B.13. "TRY TO EXCLUDE THE POSSIBILITY OF SUFFERING WHICH THE ORDER OF NATURE AND THE EXISTENCE OF FREE WILLS INVOLVE, AND YOU FIND THAT YOU HAVE EXCLUDED LIFE ITSELF."
Humans must fight for what is right while being most awake to the sacred wonder of reality which is the grace ancient texts like the Gita or Simone Weil's writtings guide us to.

E1.5.B.14. THE BENEFITS OF ACCEPTING THAT LIFE HAS NO INTRINSIC MEANING AND THAT WE DO NOT NEED TO ASSIGN IT ANY
If you possess faith and believe that there was an intent - a plan - behind the creation of the universe, then you perceive life as having meaning. However, if you are an atheist who believes in the randomness and chance as the origin of the universe and life on earth, then human life lacks inherent meaning. Is it a human tendency to assign meaning to life through our activities? Or are our actions primarily motivated by our quest for happiness? Our actions are often driven by joy, and this joy is more potent than the existential solitude we periodically experience in our fleeting lives within a seemingly meaningless world.

E1.5.B.14_REF1_PH CHARLES PÉPIN POSITS THAT WE ENGAGE IN ACTION MOTIVATED BY A NEED TO GIVE OUR LIFE MEANING.

Listen to the interview of Charles Pépin: https://www.instagram.com/reel/C7PEb29NhlR/?igsh=dnJlNHN2aWMxZXJo

E1.5.B.14_REF2_PH "I WOULDN'T EXPRESS THINGS QUITE LIKE CHARLES PÉPIN. It's a matter of vocabulary rather than viewpoint, which I find significant for lifestyle ethics. The way we label things and feelings matters because it influences our perception of the world. As an atheist who believes in chaos as the world's origin and thus an inherent lack of meaning, I align with Pépin. However, I wouldn't describe the human drive for love, chosen work, art, beauty, politics, social justice, and knowledge as attempts to give life meaning. Instead, I see these as activities fo joy. We engage in them for happiness rather than their power to grant life meaning. Viewing human actions as pursuits of joy rather than quests for meaning is crucial for our psyche. This perspective stops us from misleading ourselves by imbuing activities with meaning they don’t have. It also protects us from disappointment when our projects fail. Lastly, relinquishing the search for meaning and embracing joy can make us more resilient to the ever-present existential anxiety. This anxiety is the price for our high level of consciousness. We feel the existential dread tied to a lack of meaning and mortality, take a deep breath, and then immerse ourselves in the activities of joy as physical and mental exercises to dispel that anxiety."
(Pierre Schindler)

Listen to the interview of Charles Pépin: https://www.instagram.com/reel/C7PEb29NhlR/?igsh=dnJlNHN2aWMxZXJo

E1.5.B.14_REF2.1_PH "IN MY VIEW, CHARLES PÉPIN ALSO MISINTERPRETS SPINOZA'S ANALYSIS. While Spinoza acknowledges the laws of nature and suggests that they lead to the loss of human free will, as we are unable to comprehend nature due to the limitations of our senses and intellect. To counter this, Spinoza advocates for the pursuit of knowledge as an activity of joy - a way to partially regain autonomy and freedom (partial, since it's impossible to perceive and know everything). However, this pursuit is guided by the quest for joy, not by the search for meaning, in Spinoza's philosophy and ethics."
(Pierre Schindler)

Listen to the interview of Charles Pépin: https://www.instagram.com/reel/C7PEb29NhlR/?igsh=dnJlNHN2aWMxZXJo

E1.5.C. FINITUDE IN THE BACKGROUND
Doesn't the awareness of death limit our freedom to be happy? Is it like a poison that contaminates all joy? As we discussed earlier, one condition for joy is fully accepting reality, and death is a universal aspect of it.

“IT IS ALWAYS IMPOLITE TO OTHER PEOPLE, TO DIE - C’est toujours impoli envers les autres, de mourir”
(Jean Tinguely)

E1.5.C.1. CAN WE IGNORE DEATH....

E1.5.C.1.1. THERE IS A THREAT TO OUR HAPPINESS: A RISK, NOT SO MUCH OF SUPPRESSION OR DISAPPEARANCE, BUT OF GENERAL DEVALUATION, OF GLOBAL DISQUALIFICATION. For the risk of loss is hardly alarming, compared to the risk of generalized devaluation: we can always hope to replace what we have lost, whereas it is impossible to replace a fortune that we still possess, but which we realize consists and can only consist of worthless objects.

E1.5.C.1.1_REF1_PH "ALL FUTURE HAPPINESS WILL BE WIPED OUT BY THE MEMORY OF A BITTER TRUTH THAT WILL, UNDER ALL CIRCUMSTANCES, DISTURB THE SAVORING OF REALITY: medio de fonte leporum surgit amari aliquid quod in ipsis floribus angat, - from the heart of the source of pleasure springs something bitter that in the very bosom of pleasure remains in the throat.
A bitter truth thus manifests itself medio de fonte leporum, in the very heart of pleasure. Since it is in the heart of pleasure, it occupies an impregnable place, since it controls that which seems most resistant to it: and that is why no wisdom can defeat it, no philosophy can absorb it. All that can be done is to ignore or forget it. This is how bitterness can be defined in the first place, in a very negative way: it denotes something that does not need to be known, something that it is in one's interest to ignore. It is a subject about which any curiosity would be fatal".
(Clément Rosset, The Real Treatise on Idiocy, 1977)

E1.5.C.1.1_REF2_PH "A THREAT HANGS OVER OUR HAPPINESS: A RISK, NOT SO MUCH OF SUPPRESSION OR DISAPPEARANCE AS OF GENERAL DEVALUATION, of global disqualification. For the risk of loss is hardly worrying, compared to the risk of generalized devaluation: one can always hope to replace what one has lost, whereas it is impossible to replace a fortune that one still possesses but which one realizes consists and can only consist of worthless objects. The most irreparable loss thus concerns what one has never ceased to possess. The misfortune of a loss can be soothed by resignation; that of a possession without value is without appeal. Striking down both the goods that one possesses and those that one could possess, it means the end of all happiness forever. All the happiness to come will be obliterated by the reminder of a bitter truth which will come in any circumstance to disturb our taste of reality: « medio de fonte leporum surgit amari aliquid quod in ipsis floribus angat, » - something bitter oozes out and mixes to the source of all pleasures, which in the middle of delights, leaves a taste in your mouth."
(Clément Rosset, The Real Treatise on Idiocy, 1977)

E1.5.C.1.1_REF2.1_PH “DEATH.—Through the certain prospect of death a precious, fragrant drop of frivolity might be mixed with every life—and now, you singular druggist-souls, you have made of death a drop of poison, unpleasant to taste, which makes the whole of life hideous.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human III, Aphorism 322, 1878)

E1.5.C.1.1_REF2.2_PH “LIFE IS SOMETHING WE SUFFER, PUT UP WITH, BEAR. FOR A SENTIENT ORGANISM TO BE BORN INTO SUCH A WORLD ENTAILS BEING SUBJECT TO SICKNESS, AGING, AND DEATH. Dukkha refers not only to explicit pain but to the faint, quivering unease that accompanies happiness. Even as we delight in feeling well, we are aware of the fragility of such a feeling. We are tacitly alert to the sudden stab of physical pain or anguished cry for help that could end it. The very enjoyment of pleasure includes the poignant anticipation of its end. Rather than ignoring these disconcerting facts, we face the challenge of comprehending them.
Dukkha is the tragic dimension of life, implicit in experience because the world is constantly shifting and changing into something else. Dukkha is life’s minor key, its bittersweet taste, its annoyingly fugitive charm, its fascinating and terrifying sublimity. The origin of dukkha lies in the very structure of the world itself, not in an emotion such as craving or an erroneous cognition such as ignorance. A contingent and impermanent world like ours is not the kind of place where we will find enduring happiness. Yet the more we wholeheartedly open ourselves to and embrace this tragic dimension, the more we appreciate the beauty, joy, and enchantment of the world: precisely because they are fleeting and destined to vanish.

The whirling disintegration of the world is a failing to be deplored only if we measure the world against the eternity, perfection, and unity of an Absolute. But when God or God’s surrogates are outside one’s domain, the world is just what it is, neither to be preferred to nor rejected in favor of something else. Instead of grasping hold of the world in order to preserve it from falling apart, or recoiling from it in order to transcend it, someone who practices the dharma embraces the world in order to comprehend it. Such an embrace nurtures a contemplative relation with experience, where attending to what is happening transforms its passing into the fertile nirvanic space from which an unprecedented response to the world’s dukkha can emerge.”
(Stephen Batchelor, After Buddhism, rethinking the dharma for a secular age, 2016)

E1.5.C.1.1_REF3_PH "IS IT POSSIBLE TO LIVE AFTER KNOWING WHAT WE SHOULDN'T HAVE KNOWN, AFTER I AND THE WORLD HAVE BEEN REDUCED TO THE STATE OF THE LIVING DEAD? We're not asking here whether life has meaning, whether it's worth living, or any other such question. We're asking whether it's possible to do so consciously, in both the psychological and the legal sense of the term: that is, sincerely and with full knowledge of the facts. A question that basically boils down to asking, rather naively, whether life is possible in the case of man, insofar as the academic definition of man as a conscious animal is still considered to be valid".
(Clément Rosset, The Real Treatise on Idiocy, 1977)

E1.5.C.1.1_REF3.1_PH DOES THE KNOWLEDGE OF DEATH WIPE OUT ALL EARTHLY HAPPINESS? In reality, everything is here and everything is given to us, as Bluebeard so aptly put it to his wife: "Here's the master key to all my apartments. It's up to us to enjoy it and live a happy life. 
But if everything is offered to us for our enjoyment, without any prohibition or restriction, then this enjoyment itself is only possible on condition that we ignore something, that we do not penetrate a certain secret. In Perrault's story, this secret is symbolised by the key to a small room to which access remains forbidden, unlike all the other rooms in the house [...] The secret that must not be known, and which Bluebeard's wife learns in spite of herself when she enters the forbidden room, is first and foremost, quite simply, death. The death of others and, by extension, her own death, both distant and imminent. The discovery of this secret marks the end of the happy life and the beginning of a period of desolation and sadness. Unlike the Lamb of God, who takes away all the sins of the world, the knowledge of death takes away all the happiness of the world".
(Clément Rosset, The Real Treatise on Idiocy, 1977)

E1.5.C.1.1_REF4_PO "IN GENUINE TRAGEDY
it’s not the fine hero that finally dies, it seems,
but, from constant wear and tear, night after night,
the old stage set itself, giving way at the seams."
(Joseph Brodsky, Lullaby of Cape Cod, 1975)

E1.5.C.1.1_REF5_CUR IN THIS INSTALLATION THE VIEWER APPROACHES A CLOSED DOOR that appears to be that of an old country house - it has probably taken several decades for the boards to rot in this way and take on this faded colour.
We look through the cracks in the boards and see the body of a naked woman, her legs spread and her genitals exposed. Her head is hidden. She is lying on her back in the grass, in a surreal landscape. You'd think she was dead if she wasn't holding a lit lantern at arm's length. 
Marcel Duchamp did not leave us a key to his last work. Don't we discover in it a truth we've been hiding from ourselves? Is it that we must die?

E1.5.C.1.1_REF5_LIT ADMITTEDLY, THE BITTERSWEET HAS A POISONOUS EFFECT, BUT ONCE YOU UNDERSTAND ITS MECHANISM, THE BITTERNESS CAN BE CONTAINED.

"The bittersweet is… an authentic and elevating response to the problem of being alive in a deeply flawed yet stubbornly beautiful world. Most of all, bittersweetness shows us how to respond to pain: by acknowledging it, and attempting to turn it into art, the way the musicians do, or healing, or innovation, or anything else that nourishes the soul. If we don’t transform our sorrows and longings, we can end up inflicting them on others via abuse, domination, neglect. But if we realize that all humans know — or will know — loss and suffering, we can turn toward each other. 

C. S. Lewis called it the “inconsolable longing” for we know not what, or Sehnsucht, a German term based on the words das Sehnen (“the yearning”) and sucht (“an obsession or addiction”). Sehnsucht was the animating force of Lewis’s life and career. It was “that unnameable something, desire for which pierces us like a rapier at the smell of bonfire, the sound of wild ducks flying overhead, the title of The Well at the World’s End, the opening lines of ‘Kubla Khan,’ the morning cobwebs in late summer, or the noise of falling waves.” He’d felt it first as a young boy, when his brother brought him a toy garden in the form of an old biscuit tin filled with moss and flowers, and he was overcome by a joyous ache he couldn’t understand, though he would try for the rest of his life to put it into words, to find its source, to seek the company of kindred spirits who’d known the same wondrous “stabs of joy.

The place you suffer, in other words, is the same place you care profoundly — care enough to act." 
(Susan Cain, Bittersweet: How Sorrow and Longing Make Us Whole, 2022)

E1.5.C.1.1_REF6_PO "HERE AND NOW

 1
What happened to the defunct morning
in the new one?

What are you today
joys of yesterday
extinguished laughters and words of love?

what are you
but ghosts
but miasmas

infecting
with death
what is alive?

 2
If there is sun in the courtyard
and a car enters
and parks
and the driver gets out
slams the door
and walks away
 if this is it
 and nothing more
 than this,
then stick to what you see
and be happy:
 finally understand
 that the past
 is pure disease."
(Ferreira Gullar, Noises, 1980-1987)

E1.5.C.1.1_REF7_PO "OBJECTION : A LOVE POÈME POUR 2 VOIX 
(poème interminable) 

[Lui, en italique] Vieil amant mal aux dents mal au dos pas cadeau déglingue sûre si ça dure rends-toi compte : no future 

Quel présent quel dingue don maintenant profitons ! 

[Lui, en italique]  Profiteroles le temps vole force coule et tout croule 

Course folle vent roucoule cailloux roulent faire est foule 

[Lui, en italique]  Foule de quoi secoue lance ses dés ou ses osselets avant toi m’en irai c’est dans l’ordre des choses je vais mourir d’abord 

Tu vas m’ouvrir d’accord comme Nerval en verlan ou William en longs vers si j’expire la première cela peut arriver accident de vélo broyé contre un pommier une voiture dans platane l’avion qui tombe à l’eau le bateau chaviré une balle perdue ronde ronde au fond du pré carré ou dans quelle avenue de grande ville allumée et le cœur tiens qui stoppe d’un coup sans prévenir 

[Lui, en italique]  Quelle improbabilité tu me déraisonnes là : le temps sapera tout 

Le temps passera c’est tout mais nous en connaîtrons l’or et I’ores et déjà 

[Lui, en italique]  L’or et l’or et l’ordure… Il ne faut pas rêver. 

Mais tu n’es pas un rêve si l’amour s’invente bel 

[Lui, en italique]  L’amour s’évente et bien, entends ce que je dis, je désire hiver calme pas retraite aux flambeaux lune de miel sur les flots et gondoles à Venise je veux finir en paix.

Accorde-nous une chance vivons au jour le jour notre histoire à la joie 

[Lui, en italiquei] Le ménage la routine casseroles et serpillières balais torchons serviettes éponges plonges piles d’assiettes nous auront à l’usure 

Manège cocasse tournis tes baisers me transportent soucoupes fusées ovnis !

[Lui, en italique] Tu n’y penses pas vraiment ?! 

Mais que si ! Songe à la poésie ! 

[Lui, en italique] Justement elle est cuite d’avance la poésie enfaitouts en marmites cocottes et poêles à frire ! 

Je reconnais l’oiseau son refrain seriné sa façon de vous dire qu’il ne s’en laisse conter… 

[Lui, en italique] Je hais la poésie 

Moi non plus souviens-toi c’est pourquoi aujourd’hui je te vole dans les plumes 

[Lui, en italique] Et te prête ma lume 

Ta lume au clair de quoi je t’écrirais un doux billet dessous la lune : es-tu l’ami Pierrot ? 

[Lui, en italique] Ma lume de vieux mec assagi aguerri mon éclairage que tu voies mieux les choses en face… 

Flamme ferait pas l’affaire en matière de lumière que tu me donnerais au lieu de prêter pingre ?

[Lui, en italique] Tu ne veux rien entendre de ce que j’argumente ! 

Et toi donc si tu défermais tes écoutilles !

[Lui, en italique] Tu me flûtes romance tu me sonnes de ces cloches et bientôt glas glas glas !

Port nawak je te parle de vie pas de trépas tu ne me comprends pas ou alors de travers…

[Lui, en italique] Clownette tu m’exaspères 

J‘essaye tout simplement d’un peu te dérider t’amuser te distraire !

[Lui, en italique] Là tu me désespères ! 

Alors tu me laisses comme tomber en amour seule ? 

[Lui, en italique] Je ne peux pas te suivre tu divagues tu es ivre 

Je refuse ton refus toi aussi tu as bu 

[Lui, en italique] Mais j’ai de la distance j’ai quand même l’expérience 

Ah d’accord et moi presque j’aurais de l’innocence !

[Lui, en italique] Je n’ai jamais dit ça 

Tu as dit quoi tu as dis-moi songé à quoi ? 

[Lui, en italique] Nulle Nuit d’été désormais me transformera 

Suis pas une fée je ne m’appelle pas Titania mais garde ta bougie c’est chant d’elle chant de moi je m’en va je m’en va… "

(Valérie Rouzeau, Quand je me deux, 2009)

E1.5.C.1.1_REF8_PH FOR PARMENIDES, TO BE CONDEMNED TO DEATH WAS AN ABOMINATION.
"FRAGMENT 12 [...]

For the narrower ones are filled with unmixed fire,
Those who follow are filled with night; after them there is much flame. 
In the midst of them is the all-ruling divinity:
for it is she who is at the origin of the abominable birth 
of all things and of union, and urges the female to unite
to the male, and vice versa the male to the female.

[...] The divinity is "all ruling". How is this to be understood? The following verse explains it (Υάρ [Yár]): it is she who is "at the origin" (or "is principle", άρχει [árchei], or is "principle", άρχή [árchí]) of birth, τόκος [tókos], of all things ("of all things", Kirk-Rav.-Sch.). This means that Parmenides is not looking for something like a causally intelligible world, of which the sensible world is the emanation (Simplicius), or such a world as the world of beings withdrawn from generation, separated from the sublunary world from which the living are born and die: Parmenides' cosmos is entirely the product of generation and subject to becoming. Why "odious" (Coxon, Kirk-Rav.-Sch.) birth? [...]
Certainly, for him, human beings are above all "mortals" (βροτοί [vrotoí]); and no doubt, for him, as for Heraclitus, future children are "fates of unborn death" (Fr. 20 DK). But it is all things that are "abominably" conceived, and since death is inseparable from birth, the realm of death extends to all beings. Whatever is "abominable" or "hateful" or "terrible" in life is death. And everything in the process of becoming is doomed to dissolution. The philosopher's condemnation is therefore directed against becoming as such".
(Parmenides, The Poem: Fragments, lecture and commentary by Marcel Conche, 1996)

E1.5.C.1.1_REF9_TH ERNEST BECKER CRITIQUES FREUD'S CONCEPT OF THE "DEATH INSTINCT" AS A CONVOLUTED THEORETICAL MANEUVER DESIGNED TO TRANSFORM THE PRIMARY, EXISTENTIAL FEAR OF DEATH INTO A MANAGEABLE BIOLOGICAL DRIVE, THEREBY ALLOWING PSYCHOANALYSIS TO AVOID THE INCURABLE PROBLEM OF MORTALITY AND MAINTAIN ITS FOCUS ON SUPPOSEDLY CURABLE SEXUAL ANXIETIES.
“There seems to have been a certain reluctance in Freud, and without attempting to probe minutely into his writings, I think that this reluctance can be revealed by one key idea. This is the most important idea that emerged in his later writings, the “death instinct.” After reading his introduction of this idea in Beyond the Pleasure Principle the conclusion seems to me inescapable that the idea of a “death instinct” was an attempt to patch up the instinct theory or libido theory that he did not want to abandon but that was becoming very cumbersome and questionable in explaining human motivation. It was becoming difficult to maintain the he did not want to abandon but that was becoming very cumbersome and questionable in explaining human motivation. It was becoming difficult to maintain the casuistry of the dream theory that all dreams, even anxiety dreams, are fulfillments of wishes. It was becoming difficult to maintain the fundamental assertion of psychoanalysis that man is purely a pleasure-seeking animal. Also, man’s terrors, his struggles with and against himself and others, were not easily explainable as an instinctual conflict between sexuality and aggression—especially when the individual was thought to be animated by Eros, by the libido, by the raw life force that seeks its own satisfaction and expansion.10 Freud’s new idea of the “death instinct” was a device that enabled him to keep intact the earlier instinct theory, now by attributing human evil to a deeper organic substratum than merely ego conflict with sexuality. He now held that there was a built-in urge toward death as well as toward life; and thereby he could explain violent human aggression, hate, and evil in a new—yet still biological—way: Human aggressiveness comes about through a fusion of the life instinct and the death instinct. The death instinct represents the organism’s desire to die, but the organism can save itself from its own impulsion toward death by redirecting it outward. The desire to die, then, is replaced by the desire to kill, and man defeats his own death instinct by killing others. Here then was a simple new dualism that tidied up the libido theory, that allowed Freud to keep it as the bulwark of his main prophetic task: to proclaim man firmly embedded in the animal kingdom. Freud could still keep his basic allegiance to physiology, chemistry, and biology and his hopes for a total and simple reductionist science of psychology.

Admittedly, by talking about defusing the instinct to die by killing others, Freud did get at the connection between one’s own death and the butchery practiced by mankind. But he got at it at the price of continually intruding instincts into explanations of human behavior. Again, we see how the fusion of truthful insight with fallacious explanation has made it so difficult to untangle Freud. He seems to have been unable to reach for the really direct existentialist level of explanation, to establish both man’s continuity and his difference from the lower animals on the basis of his protest against death rather than his built-in instinctive urge toward it. The fearfulness of human aggression, the ease with which the animal governed by Eros slaughters other living things, would be explained by such a theory even more simply and directly. Killing is a symbolic solution of a biological limitation; it results from the fusion of the biological level (animal anxiety) with the symbolic one (death fear) in the human animal. As we will see in the next section, no one explained this dynamic more elegantly than Rank: “the death fear of the ego is lessened by the killing, the sacrifice, of the other; through the death of the other, one buys oneself free from the penalty of dying, of being killed.

‘Freud’s tortuous formulations on the death instinct can now securely be relegated to the dust bin of history. They are of interest only as the ingenious efforts of a dedicated prophet to maintain intellectually intact his basic dogma. But the second conclusion that we draw from Freud’s labors on that problem is much more important. Despite all his leanings toward the idea of death, the hopeless situation of the child, the real terror of the external world, and the like, Freud did not need to give them a central place in his thought. He did not need to rework his vision of man from that of primarily a pleasure-seeker of sex to that of the terrified, deathavoiding animal. All he had to do was to say that man carried death within him unconsciously as part of his biology. The fiction of death as an “instinct” allowed Freud to keep the terror of death outside his formulations as a primary human problem of ego mastery. He did not have to say that death was repressed if the organism carried it naturally in its processes. In this formulation, it is not a general human problem, much less the primary human problem, but is magically transformed, as Rank so succinctly put it, “from an unwished-for necessity to a desired instinctual goal.” He adds that “the comfort-giving nature of this ideology could stand neither logic nor experience for long.” In this way, as Rank says, Freud disposed of the “death problem” and made it into a “death instinct”:
… even when he finally stumbled upon the inescapable death problem, he sought to give a new meaning to that also in harmony with the wish, since he spoke of death instinct instead of death fear. The fear itself he had meantime disposed of elsewhere, where it was not so threatening… . [He] made the general fear into a special sexual fear (castration fear) … [and then sought] to cure this fear through the freeing of sexuality. His is a superb critique of psychoanalysis still today.’
As Rank lamented, ’If one had held to the phenomena, it would be impossible to understand how a discussion of the death impulse could neglect the universal and fundamental death
fear to such an extent as is the case in psychoanalytic literature.’
The psychoanalytic literature remained almost silent on the fear of death until the late 1930’s and World War II. And the reason was as Rank revealed: how could psychoanalytic therapy scientifically cure the terror of life and death? But it could cure the problems of sex, which it itself posited.” […]
(Ernest Becker, The Denial of Death, 1973)

E1.5.C.1.1_REF10_TH ERNEST BECKER ARGUES THAT NORMALITY IS ESSENTIALLY A SUCCESSFUL FORM OF NEUROSIS, AS BOTH STATES ARE BASED ON THE NECESSARY HUMAN STRATEGY OF "PARTIALIZATION"—A CREATIVE REFUSAL OF REALITY THAT ALLOWS US TO FUNCTION BY PROTECTING OURSELVES FROM THE OVERWHELMING TERROR OF LIFE.
“When we say neurosis represents the truth of life we again mean that life is an overwhelming problem for an animal free of instinct. The individual has to protect himself against the world, and he can do this only as any other animal would: by narrowing down the world, shutting off experience, developing an obliviousness both to the terrors of the world and to his own anxieties. Otherwise he would be crippled for action. We cannot repeat too often the great lesson of Freudian psychology: that repression is normal self-protection and creative self-restriction—in a real sense, man’s natural substitute for instinct. Rank has a perfect, key term for this natural human talent: he calls it “partialization” and very rightly sees that life is impossible without it. What we call the well-adjusted man has just this capacity to partialize the world for comfortable action. I have used the term “fetishization,” which is exactly the same idea: the “normal” man bites off what he can chew and digest of life, and no more. In other words, men aren’t built to be gods, to take in the whole world; they are built like other creatures, to take in the piece of ground in front of their noses. Gods can take in the whole of creation because they alone can make sense of it, know what it is all about and for. But as soon as a man lifts his nose from the ground and starts sniffing at eternal problems like life and death, the meaning of a rose or a star cluster—then he is in trouble. Most men spare themselves this trouble by keeping their minds on the small problems of their lives just as their society maps these problems out for them. These are what Kierkegaard called the “immediate” men and the “Philistines.” They “tranquilize themselves with the trivial”—and so they can lead normal lives.

Right away we can see the immensely fertile horizon that opens up in all of our thinking on mental health and “normal” behavior. In order to function normally, man has to achieve from the beginning a serious constriction of the world and of himself. We can say that the essence of normality is the refusal of reality. What we call neurosis enters precisely at this point: Some people have more trouble with their lies than others. The world is too much with them, and the techniques that they have developed for holding it at bay and cutting it down to size finally begin to choke the person himself. This is neurosis in a nutshell: the miscarriage of clumsy lies about reality.
But we can also see at once that there is no line between normal and neurotic, as we all lie and are all bound in some ways by the lies. Neurosis is, then, something we all share; it is universal. Or, putting it another way, normality is neurosis, and vice versa. We call a man “neurotic” when his lie begins to show damaging effects on him or on people around him and he seeks clinical help for it or others seek it for him. Otherwise, we call the refusal of reality “normal” because it doesn’t occasion any visible problems. It is really as simple as that.”
(Ernest Becker, The Denial of Death, 1973)

E1.5.C.1.2. THE FREE MAN THINKS OF NOTHING LESS THAN DEATH, AND HIS WISDOM IS A MEDITATION NOT ON DEATH, BUT ON LIFE.

E1.5.C.1.2_REF1_PH "AS IN DEATH, TOO, THE WORLD DOES NOT CHANGE, BUT CEASES.
6.431 As in death, too, the world does not change, but ceases.
6.4311 Death is not an event of life. Death is not lived through.
If by eternity is understood not endless temporal duration but timelessness, then he lives eternally who lives in the present. Our life is endless in the way that our visual _eld is without limit.
6.4312 The temporal immortality of the soul of man, that is to say, its eternal survival also after death, is not only in no way guaranteed, but this assumption in the first place will not do for us what we always tried to make it do. Is a riddle solved by the fact that I survive forever? Is this eternal life not as enigmatic as our present one? The solution of the riddle of life in space and time lies outside space and time. (It is not problems of natural science which have to be solved.)"
(Ludwig Wittgenstein, Tractatus philosophicus, 1921)

E1.5.C.1.2_REF2_PO "I'M GOING TO DIE, BUT THAT'S ALL I'LL DO FOR DEATH"
(Edna St. Vincent Millay, Objection of conscience)

E1.5.C.1.2_REF3_PO "I FOUND A DEAD FOX

I found a dead fox 
beside the gravel road, 
curled inside the big 
iron wheel

of an old tractor 
that has been standing, 
for years, 
in the vines at the edge

of the road. 
I don't know 
what happened to it - 
when it came there

or why it lay down 
for good, settling 
its narrow chin 
on the rusted rim

of the iron wheel 
to look out 
over the fields, 
and that way died -

but I know 
this: its posture - 
of looking, 
to the last possible moment,

back into the world - 
made me want 
to sing something 
joyous and tender"
(Mary Oliver, White pine, 1994)

E1.5.C.1.2_REF4_PH "PROPOSITION LXVII
The free man thinks of nothing less than death, and his wisdom is a meditation not on death, but on life.

DEMONSTRATION
The free man, that is to say, he who lives according to the sole commandment of Reason, is not driven by the fear of death [...], but desires the good directly [...], that is to say [...] he desires to act, to live, to preserve in his being according to the principle that one must seek what is useful for oneself. And therefore he thinks of nothing less than death; but his wisdom is a meditation on life."
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics, Part IV)

Read the Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.5.C.1.2_REF5_PO “DO NOT GO GENTLE INTO THAT GOOD NIGHT,
Old age should burn and rave at close of day;
Rage, rage against the dying of the light.

Though wise men at their end know dark is right,
Because their words had forked no lightning they
Do not go gentle into that good night.

Good men, the last wave by, crying how bright
Their frail deeds might have danced in a green bay,
Rage, rage against the dying of the light.

Wild men who caught and sang the sun in flight,
And learn, too late, they grieved it on its way,
Do not go gentle into that good night.

Grave men, near death, who see with blinding sight
Blind eyes could blaze like meteors and be gay,
Rage, rage against the dying of the light.

And you, my father, there on the sad height,
Curse, bless, me now with your fierce tears, I pray.
Do not go gentle into that good night.
Rage, rage against the dying of the light.”
(Dylan Thomas)

E1.5.C.1.2_REF6_LIT AN ILLUSTRATION OF LIFE'S POWERFUL, INSTINCTUAL AFFIRMATION OF ITS OWN SWEETNESS EVEN UNDER THE SHADOW OF DEATH.
“Eiseley recounts resting beneath a tree after a day of trekking through fern and pine needles collecting fossils, dozing off in the warm sunlight, then being suddenly awakened by a great commotion to see “an enormous raven with a red and squirming nestling in his beak” perching on a crooked branch above. He writes:

‘Into the glade fluttered small birds of half a dozen varieties drawn by the anguished outcries of the tiny parents. No one dared to attack the raven. But they cried there in some instinctive common misery, the bereaved and the unbereaved. The glade filled with their soft rustling and their cries. They fluttered as though to point their wings at the murderer. There was a dim intangible ethic he had violated, that they knew. He was a bird of death. And he, the murderer, the black bird at the heart of life, sat on there, glistening in the common light, formidable, unmoving, unperturbed, untouchable. The sighing died. It was then I saw the judgment. It was the judgment of life against death. I will never see it again so forcefully presented. I will never hear it again in notes so tragically prolonged. For in the midst of protest, they forgot the violence. There, in that clearing, the crystal note of a song sparrow lifted hesitantly in the hush. And finally, after painful fluttering, another took the song, and then another, the song passing from one bird to another, doubtfully at first, as though some evil thing were being slowly forgotten. Till suddenly they took heart and sang from many throats joyously together as birds are known to sing. They sang because life is sweet and sunlight beautiful. They sang under the brooding shadow of the raven. In simple truth they had forgotten the raven, for they were the singers of life, and not of death.’”
(Maria Popova’s review of Loren Eiseley’s The star thrower, 1957 - in the Marginalian)

E1.5.C.2. ... OR SHOULD WE GET USED TO CONTEMPLATING IT - AND ACCEPTING IT AS A CONDITION OF LIFE?

E1.5.C.2.1. AWARENESS OF DEATH AS A CONDITION FOR FREE ACTION AND THE ABILITY TO LIVE MORE INTENSELY IN THE PRESENT

E1.5.C.2.1.a. THE END OF OUR RACE IS DEATH; 'tis the necessary object of our aim, which, if it fright us, how is it possible to advance a step without a fit of ague? The remedy the vulgar use is not to think about it; but from what brutish stupidity can they derive so gross a blindness?

E1.5.C.2.1.a_REF1_PH "THE END OF OUR RACE IS DEATH; 'tis the necessary object of our aim, which, if it fright us, how is it possible to advance a step without a fit of ague? The remedy the vulgar use is not to think about it; but from what brutish stupidity can they derive so gross a blindness? They must bridle the ass by the tail [...]
—let us learn bravely to stand our ground, and fight him. And to begin to deprive him of the greatest advantage he has over us, let us take a way quite contrary to the common course. Let us disarm him of his novelty and strangeness, let us converse and be familiar with him, and have nothing so frequent in our thoughts as death. Upon all occasions represent him to our imagination in his every shape; at the stumbling of a horse, at the falling of a tile, at the least prick with a pin, let us presently consider, and say to ourselves, "Well, and what if it had been death itself?" and, thereupon, let us encourage and fortify ourselves. Let us evermore, amidst our jollity and feasting, set the remembrance of our frail condition before our eyes, never suffering ourselves to be so far transported with our delights, but that we have some intervals of reflecting upon, and considering how many several ways this jollity of ours tends to death, and with how many dangers it threatens it. [...]
Where death waits for us is uncertain; let us look for him everywhere. The premeditation of death is the premeditation of liberty; he who has learned to die has unlearned to serve. There is nothing evil in life for him who rightly comprehends that the privation of life is no evil: to know, how to die delivers us from all subjection and constraint. Paulus Emilius answered him whom the miserable King of Macedon, his prisoner, sent to entreat him that he would not lead him in his triumph, "Let him make that request to himself. [...]
I am at all hours as well prepared as I am ever like to be, and death, whenever he shall come, can bring nothing along with him I did not expect long before. We should always, as near as we can, be booted and spurred, and ready to go, and, above all things, take care, at that time, to have no business with any one but one's self [...]
A man must design nothing that will require so much time to the finishing, or, at least, with no such passionate desire to see it brought to perfection. We are born to action [...] I would always have a man to be doing, and, as much as in him lies, to extend and spin out the offices of life; and then let death take me planting my cabbages, indifferent to him, and still less of my gardens not being finished."
(Montaigne, Essays, I, XIX)

E1.5.C.2.1.b. DEATH CONTRIBUTES TO THE UNIQUENESS OF LIFE

E1.5.C.2.1.b_REF1_PH "IT IS THE PROSPECT OF DEATH THAT MAKES EVERY MOMENT UNIQUE. Death contributes to the uniqueness of life. If there is evil, it lies in abnormal, tragic events and in those villainous, perverted uses of death. The latter, above all, are outside life; they are capable of destroying the order of life itself.
In short, we must distinguish between two kinds of death, as Lao Tzu, the founder of Taoism, did. This thinker of the Way - the forward march of the order of life - asserted in a cryptic phrase: 'To die without perishing is a long life'. [...] In Laozi's view, the character si [to die] takes on the meaning of 'reintegrating the Way'. "
(François Cheng, Five Meditations on Beauty, 2006)

E1.5.C.2.1.b_REF2_PO "AT LEAST 
I WANT TO GET UP EARLY ONE MORE MORNING, 
before sunrise. Before the birds, even. 
I want to throw cold water on my face 
and be at my work table 
when the sky lightens and smoke 
begins to rise from the chimneys 
of the other houses. 
I want to see the waves break 
on this rocky beach, not just hear them 
break as I did all night in my sleep.
I want to see again the ships 
that pass through the Strait from every 
seafaring country in the world — 
old, dirty freighters just barely moving along, 
and the swift new cargo vessels 
painted every color under the sun 
that cut the water as they pass. 
I want to keep an eye out for them. 
And for the little boat that plies 
the water between the ships 
and the pilot station near the lighthouse. 
I want to see them take a man off the ship 
and put another up on board. 
I want to spend the day watching this happen 
and reach my own conclusions. 
I hate to seem greedy — I have so much 
to be thankful for already. 
But I want to get up early one more morning, at least. 
And go to my place with some coffee and wait. 

Just wait, to see what’s going to happen."
(Raymond Carver)

E1.5.C.2.1.b_REF3_PH VLADIMIR JANKÉLÉVITCH DISCUSSES THE HUMAN CONDITION, EMPHASIZING THAT TRUE HAPPINESS AND FULL CONSCIOUSNESS CANNOT COEXIST. "The blessed plenitude that human beings miss, they will feel it only in the joy-lightning of an instant, not in the doubtful return to a lost innocence. We will not experience consciousness and the plenitude of being at the same time : one cannot at the same time know the secret of happiness and remain happy. « Sin » (if one may say) was to be immortal, while knowing and feeling immortal. At the same time. It is this impossibility that the conscience that has lost its innocence fabricates for its own use by telling the myth of a punishment. Human beings will have to live under the law of the alternative, they will eat a bitter bread, they will walk painfully in the valley of tears, with misery as a solution, assailed by the wolves of distress and the crows of the anguish; human beings will be incomplete beings, limited in time, exposed to diseases, to finally return to dust. And yet, this incompleteness, this insufficiency is the price of life... Pascal said it in unforgettable terms. Man will die, but he knows that he will die; and in this at least he is stronger than death, even if this awareness does not prevent him from dying. In the name of this ineffable advantage, in the name of this priceless superiority: the consciousness-of-dying with death as a ransom, - our present semi-divinity is still what we would choose if we had to choose. The most unfortunate man confirms it and repeats it in his heart: I would do it again if I had to."
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, Somewhere in the Unfinished, 1978)

E1.5.C.2.1.b_REF4_PH "THE VIOLENCE OF LOVE AND THE CONCERN OF DEATH ARE THE TWO DEMONS THAT PULL US BY THE HAIR and tear us out of the hypnosis of the cave. Without this double call, without this double sign that reminds us of the enigma, we would live without thinking about what it means to live and what it means to be human. [...] To return to Plato, I only think when a violence is done to me that brings me into the presence of the unthinkable. The unthinkable is the infinity of desire and the infinity of silence, the mystery of death. The thought of death must remain within this questioning. [Death is the enigma that calls us to think. Without the thought of death, we'd be going round in circles in the cage of routine, and life would never appear to us for what it is: an incomprehensible miracle. There is this horizon of silence, like the empty sea in front of the beach, and we must be careful not to forget it if we want to live as men and not as animals. The prisoner, overwhelmed by the influx of sensations, falls into the hypnosis of presence; the thinker contemplates absence, remembers the absent".
(Jacques Darriulat, interview with Nicolas Rousseau and Timothée Coyras, part two, 2010)

E1.5.C.2.1.b_REF5_LIT I HAD THE STARK AND LUMINOUS AND DEVASTATING REALIZATION THAT MY LIFE WOULD END "I dreamed a few years back that I was in a supermarket checking out when I had the stark and luminous and devastating realization — in that clear way, not that oh yeah way — that my life would end. I wept in line watching people go by with their carts, watching the cashier move items over the scanner, feeling such an absolute love for this life. And the mundane fact of buying groceries with other people whom I do not know, like all the banalities, would be no more so soon, or now. Good as now."
(Ross Gay, The book of Delights, 2019)

E1.5.C.2.1.b_REF6_PO THE REALIZATION OF MORALITY IS PROBABLY SELDOM ACCOMPANIED BY AN INCREASED SENSE OF THE VALUE OF LIFE AND ACCRUED JOY

E1.5.C.2.1.b_REF6.1_PO “THERE ARE THESE DAYS WHEN WE SENSE IN THE HOUSE
THE RUIN OF THE HOUSE
and in the body
the death of the body
and in love
the end of love
these days
when to take the bus is to miss it 
and arriving on time is already too late
those are not things one can explain
they're just days when we suddenly know
what we've always known and everyone knows
that wood is only what comes before
ashes
and no matter how many lives it has
each cat
is the corpse of a cat

And yet
the general idea of sleep
this illusion of starting over
having to choose your pants every day
and the face
that you'll put on something we've learned
be it infinitesimal
useless
a person seen for the second time 
an unknown word
suddenly stumbled upon
the fact that tomorrow you will possibly
come”
(Ana Martins Marques, The Book of Similarities, 2015)

E1.5.C.2.1.b_REF7_CUR THIS FRESCO IN 12 GIANT PANELS CAN BE READ AS AN ALLEGORY OF EXISTENCE. We go through life like these boats. Birth and death being almost identical (canvases I & XII), pulling us out of nothingness and plunging us back into it - without drama but rather in fireworks-mode because it is a chance to live - since we might very well never have been born. Young, we are light (canvases II & III) gradually loading ourselves with experience, there are days of sadness (canvas V), days of catastrophe (canvas VII), but as a whole life is made of joyful struggles (canvas X) for those who embrace it and face the unknown, like did the frankly outnumbered fleet that won the naval battle at Lepanto in 1571, overthrowing the Ottoman empire.

E1.5.C.2.1.b_REF8_PH "WITHOUT DEATH, LIFE — OURS, HERE ON THIS EARTH — IS NOT LIFE. Love does not vanquish death but makes it an integral part of life. [...]
Love does not preserve us from the risks and misfortunes of existence. No love, not even those that are most peaceful and happy, escapes the disasters and calamities of time. Love, any love, is made up of time, and no love can avoid the great catastrophe: the beloved is subject to the assaults of age, infirmity, and death."

E1.5.C.2.1.b_REF8.1_PH DESPITE ITS INHERENT CONTRADICTIONS AND VULNERABILITIES, LOVE OFFERS A GLIMPSE OF PURE VITALITY AND A MOMENTARY VICTORY OVER TIME. It is both supreme happiness and misfortune, revealing the transient nature of human existence while providing a profound sense of connection and acceptance.
"In love, predestination and choice, objective and subjective, fate and freedom intersect. [...]

Love is a bet, a wild one, placed on freedom. Not my own; the freedom of the Other. […]

Love… transforms the subject and object of the erotic encounter into unique persons… Its cornerstone is freedom: the mystery of the person. 
[…]

The transformation of the erotic object into a person immediately makes the person a subject who possesses free will. The object I desire becomes a subject who desires me — or rejects me. The giving up of personal sovereignty and the voluntary acceptance of servitude involves a genuine change of nature: by way of the bridge of mutual desire the object becomes desiring subject and the subject becomes desiring object. Love, then, is represented in the form of a knot. A knot made of two intertwined freedoms. [...]

Whether the relationship is the result of accident or predestination, to reach fulfillment the complicity of our will is required. Love, any love, implies a sacrifice; and we choose that sacrifice without batting an eye. This is the mystery of freedom… In short, love is freedom personified, freedom incarnated in a body and a soul. [...]

How precarious and elusive are the ideas with which we attempt to explain the mystery of love. A mystery that is part of a greater one: the human being, who, suspended between chance and necessity, transforms his predicament into freedom. […]

There is an intimate, causal relation between love and freedom. [...]

True love consists precisely of the transformation of the appetite for possession into surrender. [...]

Love is life to the full, at one with itself: the opposite of separation. In the sensation of the carnal embrace the union of the couple becomes feeling, and feeling in turn becomes awareness; love is the discovery of the unity of life. But in that instant the compact unity is broken in two, and time reappears: it is a great hole that swallows us… Total fusion includes the acceptance of death. Without death, life — ours, here on this earth — is not life. Love does not vanquish death but makes it an integral part of life. [...]

Like all the great creations of humanity, love is twofold: it is the supreme happiness and the supreme misfortune… Lovers pass constantly from rapture to despair, from sadness to joy, from wrath to tenderness, from desperation to sensuality… The lover is perpetually driven by contradictory emotions. Popular language, in all times and all places, abounds in expressions that describe the vulnerability of a person in love: love is a wound, an injury. But as St. John of the Cross says, it is “a wound that is a gift,” a “gentle cautery,” a “delightful wound.” Yes, love is a flower of blood. It is also a talisman: the vulnerability of lovers protects them. Their shield is their lack of defense; their armor is their nakedness. […]

Yet despite all the ills and misfortunes it brings, we always endeavor to love and be loved. Love is the closest thing on this earth to the beatitude of the blessed. [...]

Love does not preserve us from the risks and misfortunes of existence. No love, not even those that are most peaceful and happy, escapes the disasters and calamities of time. Love, any love, is made up of time, and no love can avoid the great catastrophe: the beloved is subject to the assaults of age, infirmity, and death. [...]

We are time and cannot escape its dominion. We can transfigure it but not deny it or destroy it. This is what the great artists, poets, philosophers, scientists, and certain men of action have done. Love, too, is an answer: because it is time and made of time, love is at once consciousness of death and an attempt to make of the instant an eternity. All loves are ill-starred, because all are made of time, all are the fragile bond between two temporal creatures who know they are going to die. In all loves, even the most tragic, there is an instant of happiness that it is no exaggeration to call superhuman: it is a victory over time, a glimpse of the other side, of the there that is a here, where nothing changes and everything that is, truly is. [...]

Love does not defeat death; it is a wager against time and its accidents. Through love we catch a glimpse, in this life, of the other life. Not of the eternal life, but… of pure vitality. […]

Love is not eternity; nor is it the time of calendars and watches, successive time. The time of love is neither great nor small; it is the perception of all times, of all lives, in a single instant. It does not free us from death but makes us see it face to face… We are the theater of the embrace of opposites and of their dissolution, resolved in a single note that is not affirmation or negation but acceptance… the presence that dissolves into splendor: pure vitality, a heartbeat of time."
(Octavio Paz, The Double Flame: Love and Eroticism, 1996)

E1.5.C.2.1.b_REF9_LIT THE STOCHASTIC MIRACLE OF LIFE ACROSS TIME EXISTS ONLY BECAUSE DEATH TOO EXISTS.
“I even have troubles of my own with evolutionary biology. Not first principles, mind you, not the big picture, mostly just the details. I understand about randomness and chance, and election, and adaptation, and all that, and I now know better than to talk, ever, about progress in evolution, never mind purpose. My problems come when I think about the earliest form of known life, those indisputable bacterial cells in rocks 3.7 billion years old, our Ur-grandparents for sure, then nothing but bacteria for the next two and one-half billion years, and now the chestnut tree in my backyard, my Abyssinian cat Jeoffry, the almost-but-not-quite free-living microbes living in all our cells disguised as mitochondria, and, just by the way, our marvelous, still-immature, dangerous selves, brainy enough to menace all nature unless distracted by music. […]

We need a better word than chance, even pure chance, or that succession of events, while still evading any notion of progress. But to go all the way from a clone of archaebacteria, in just 3.7 billion years, to the B-Minor Mass and the Late Quartets, deserves a better technical term for the record than randomness.

I like the word stochastic better, because of its lineage in our language. The first root was stegh, meaning a pointed stake in the Indo-European of 30,000 years ago. Stegh moved into Greek as stokhos, meaning a target for archers, and then later on, in our language, targets being what they are and aiming arrows being as fallible as it is, stokhos was adapted to signify aiming and missing, pure chance, randomness, and thus stochastic. On that philosophical basis, then, I’m glad to accept all of evolution in a swoop, but I’m still puzzled by it. […]
’With an eye to various speculative proposals — which have grown all the more various and more unsoundly speculative in the decades since — about hacking the entropy that frays at all matter in order to attain long-term preservation of information systems, including the information system of us, Thomas considers the inherent syllogism of such hopes (Maria Popova, The Marginalian):’
If it had been arranged that way, we’d all still be alive forever but, in the nature of things, we would still be those same archaebacteria born 3.7 billion years ago, unable to make molecular errors, deprived of taking chances, and therefore never blundering into brains.

‘That is, if we could be immortal, we could not exist; if we were already perfect, we could not exist. It is only because we are mortal and imperfect, you and I and Dickinson and Darwin, that the sum of us, the galaxy of humanity drifting through impartial stars, goes on. (Maria Popova, The Marginalian)’
Nature is an immense mechanism, operating itself in accordance with the laws of physics. We, and our brains, are working parts of the machinery, having made our appearance here and having our existence because of the operation of those laws, set in place on what we like to see as the pinnacle by the beneficent operation of chance and quantum mechanics. Pure luck, indeterminate and intentionless, all the way.”
(Lewis Thomas, The Fragile Species)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2022/03/02/the-fragile-species-lewis-thomas/?mc_cid=0a41be4288&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E1.5.C.2.1.c. ACCEPTANCE OF MORTALITY YIELDS AN EXPANSION OF BEING

E1.5.C.2.1.c_REF1_PH "RILKE’S GRASP OF THE TRANSIENT NATURE OF ALL THINGS IS CRITICAL TO HIS CAPACITY TO PRAISE AND TO CHERISH.
In the face of impermanence and death, it takes courage to love the things of this world and to believe that praising them is our noblest calling. Rilke’s is not a conditional courage, dependent on an afterlife. Nor is it a stoic courage, keeping a stiff upper lip when shattered by loss. It is courage born of the ever-unexpected discovery that acceptance of mortality yields an expansion of being. In naming what is doomed to disappear, naming the way it keeps streaming through our hands, we can hear the song that streaming makes. […]
His capacity to embrace the dark and to acknowledge loss brings comfort to the reader because nothing of life is left out. There is nothing that cannot be redeemed. No degree of hopelessness, such as that of prisoners, beggars, abandoned animals, or inmates of asylums, is outside the scope of the poet’s respectful attention. He allows us to see that the bestowal of such pure attention is in itself a triumph of the spirit. […]
Rilke would teach us to accept death as well as life, and in so doing to recognize that they belong together as two halves of the same circle."
(Joanna Macy,  A Year with Rilke: Daily Readings from the Best of Rainer Maria Rilke)

E1.5.C.2.1.c_REF2_PH "THE GREAT SECRET OF DEATH, and perhaps its deepest connection with us, is this: that, in taking from us a being we have loved and venerated, death does not wound us without, at the same time, lifting us toward a more perfect understanding of this being and of ourselves. [...]
I am not saying that we should love death, but rather that we should love life so generously, without picking and choosing, that we automatically include it (life’s other half) in our love. This is what actually happens in the great expansiveness of love, which cannot be stopped or constricted. It is only because we exclude it that death becomes more and more foreign to us and, ultimately, our enemy. [...]
Death is our friend precisely because it brings us into absolute and passionate presence with all that is here, that is natural, that is love… Life always says Yes and No simultaneously. Death (I implore you to believe) is the true Yea-sayer. It stands before eternity and says only: Yes."
(Reiner Maria Rilke, Letter to the Countess Margot Sizzo-Noris-Crouy, 1923)

E1.5.C.2.1.c_REF3_PH "THE PARADOXICAL EFFECT OF LOSING A LOVED ONE IS THAT THEIR SUDDEN ABSENCE CAN BECOME A FEVERISH COMMENT ON THAT WHICH REMAINS. That which remains rises in time from the dark with a burning physicality — a luminous super-presence — as we acquaint ourselves with this new and different world. In loss things — both animate and inanimate — take on an added intensity and meaning. [...]
This feeling… of alertness to the inner-spirit of things — this humming — comes from a hard-earned understanding of the impermanence of things and, indeed, our own impermanence. This lesson ultimately animates and illuminates our lives. We become witnesses to the thrilling emergency of the present — a series of exquisite and burning moments, each extinguished as the next arises. These magical moments are the bright jewels of loss to which we cling. [...]
There is, of course, another side where we lose our resolve — we drop our guard, or just grow tired and descend into that other, darker, less-lovely world, as we disconnect and retreat deep into ourselves… These revolving feelings of connection and disconnection… are the opposing forces of loss that define our lived experience… Many of us inhabit this uncanny realm of loss — and all of us will find our way there in time."
(Nick Cave)

E1.5.C.2.1.c_REF4_PH "TO DEVELOP A TASTE FOR LIFE NECESSARILY IMPLIES THAT ONE REJOICES PRECISELY IN THE FACT THAT IT IS OF AN INDISTINCTLY PERISHABLE AND RENEWABLE ESSENCE, far from regretting its absence of stability and perennity. The most common experience of joy testifies in favor of this habitual and earthly merriment. The flavor of existence is that of time that passes and changes, of the non-fixed, of the never certain nor finished; besides, it is in this movement that resides the best and surest « permanence » of life. To develop a taste for it necessarily implies that one rejoices precisely in the fact that it is of an indistinctly perishable and renewable essence, far from regretting its absence of stability and perennity." 
(Clément Rosset, The major force, 1983)

E1.5.C.2.1.c_REF5_PH PARTICLES PASSING BETWEEN NOT YET AND NO MORE "Every act of living is an act of learning to die, of apprenticing ourselves to the loss of this moment, of this collarbone being touched, of this hand doing the touching. If we are thoughtful and tender enough with ourselves, the terror of the loss cusps into transcendence, the grief into gratitude, into a nonspecific gladness enveloping everything that ever was and ever will be, enveloping us in the sense of ourselves as nothing more than particles passing between not yet and no more, nothing less than particular, particulate miracles bewildered and bewildering in their passage."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings)

E1.5.C.2.1.c_REF6_PO "WHEN DEATH COMES

When death comes 
like the hungry bear in autumn; 
when death comes and takes all the bright coins from his purse

to buy me, and snaps the purse shut; 
when death comes 
like the measle-pox;

when death comes 
like an iceberg between the shoulder blades,

I want to step through the door full of curiosity, wondering: 
what is it going to be like, that cottage of darkness?

And therefore I look upon everything 
as a brotherhood and a sisterhood, 
and I look upon time as no more than an idea, 
and I consider eternity as another possibility,

and I think of each life as a flower, as common 
as a field daisy, and as singular,

and each name a comfortable music in the mouth, 
tending, as all music does, toward silence,

and each body a lion of courage, and something 
precious to the earth.

When it's over, I want to say: all my life 
I was a bride married to amazement. 
I was the bridegroom, taking the world into my arms.

When it's over, I don't want to wonder 
if I have made of my life something particular, and real. 
I don't want to find myself sighing and frightened, 
or full of argument.

I don't want to end up simply having visited this world."
(Mary Oliver, New and selected poems: Volume one, 1992)

E1.5.C.2.1.c_REF7_CUR IN THESE WORKS BY ISMAEL NERY AND DI CAVALACANTI, the artists translate the ephemeral character of the beauty of women who probably focus the attention of their desire. In Nery's work, death is already programmed in the body of his model; in Di Cavalcanti's, death comes to embrace the young woman with an invisible kiss, as if given in another dimension.

E1.5.C.2.1.c_REF8_PO ”I AM A LONELY WANDERER
I am a lonely wanderer
On my way towards death.
I love the clarity of air
Each time I take a breath.
I love the friends who walk with me
And then must go their way.
I love the rose at dawn and dusk
That celebrates each day.
I love to laugh at all the things
That do not know they're fun,
And weep at all the things that wound
And shrivel up the sun.
I never saw my father's face
And will not have a child,
But even so, I share with you
My joy, wind-whipped and wild.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E1.5.C.2.1.c_REF9_PO “THIS WORLD WHICH IS MADE OF OUR LOVE FOR EMPTINESS
Praise to the emptiness that blanks out existence. Existence:
this place made from our love for that emptiness!
Yet somehow comes emptiness,
this existence goes.
Praise to that happening, over and over!

For years I pulled my own existence out of emptiness.
Then one swoop, one swing of the arm,
that work is over.
Free of who I was, free of presence, free of
dangerous fear, hope,
free of mountainous wanting.

The here-and-now mountain is a tiny piece of a piece
of straw
blown off into emptiness.

These words I'm saying so much begin to lose meaning:
existence, emptiness, mountain, straw: words
and what they try to say swept
out the window, down the slant of the roof.”
(Rumi, The essential, translated by Coleman Barks, 1207-1273)

E1.5.C.2.1.c_REF10_PO ”CRAFTSMANSHIP AND EMPTINESS
I've said before that every craftsman
searches for what's not there
to practice his craft.

A builder looks for the rotten hole
where the roof caved in. A water carrier
picks the empty pot. A carpenter
stops at the house with no door.

Workers rush toward some hint
of emptiness, which they then
start to fill. Their hope, though,
is for emptiness, so don't think
you must avoid it. It contains
what you need!
                                   Dear soul, if you were not friends
with the vast nothing inside,
why would you always be casting your net
into it, and waiting so patiently?

This invisible ocean has given you such abundance,
but still you call it "death,"
that which provides you sustenance and work.

God has allowed some magical reversal to occur,
so that you see the scorpion pit
as an object of desire,
and all the beautiful expanse around it
as dangerous and swarming with snakes.

This is how strange your fear of death
and emptiness is, and how perverse
the attachment to what you want. […]”
(Rumi, The essential, translated by Coleman Barks, 1207-1273)

E1.5.C.2.1.d. THE SECOND LIFE IS THE ONE THAT STARTS WHEN I BEGIN TO SET MY DEATH AS A DEADLINE
The first life is one in which facing up to one's death is avoided. The second life, on the other hand, is the one that starts when I begin to set my death as a deadline.

E1.5.C.2.1.d_REF1_PH ONCE YOU'VE ACTUALLY PUT YOUR DEATH BEFORE YOU, LIKE A SKULL ON THE TABLE, YOU'VE IPSO FACTO ENTERED A SECOND LIFE. "That philosophising is 'learning to die' is not a moral platitude, a lesson in renunciation or resignation, but strictly speaking says this (the opposite formula, that philosophising is 'learning to live', does not contradict it in any way): once you have actually put your death before you, like a skull on the table, you have ipso facto entered a second life. There is no longer even a 'choice' (to 'enter' or not). The first life is one in which the confrontation with one's own death is avoided. The second life, on the other hand, is the one that opens up because I have begun to set my death as a deadline. From that point on, a second time of my life begins [...].
Now, before I was able to really contemplate my death (to look at it 'fixedly'), which of itself draws the threshold of a second life, this present, this consistent present, did not appear to me. But now it emerges without insistence, pulls itself out of the hemorrhagic course of duration, stands apart from it - 'ex-ists' - by the very awareness that I thus acquire of my death and that I can resolutely ex-ploit it".
(François Jullien, A Second Life, 2017)

E1.5.C.2.1.d_REF2_PO “FRUIT BOWL
Who remembered to put on the table 
this sweet evidence
of death?”
(Ana Martins Marques, Interiors, 2011)

E1.5.C.2.1.d_REF3_CUR "AMERICAN BY BIRTH, Ethel Sands studied painting in Paris in 1894, and exhibited widely in both London and Paris in the first decades of the twentieth century. Most of her paintings, like this one, are of interior scenes. In part, this reflects the influence of Edouard Vuillard (1868-1940), although the motif of a view through the window of a domestic interior (here probably a bathroom) suggests the influence of Sickert and the Camden Town School. In particular, the prominently placed dark crosses are reminiscent of Sickert's painting of the churchyard at Chagford in Devon, which hangs nearby."
(Curatorship : Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge)

1.5.C.2.1.d_REF4_PO "ALL BUT DEATH, CAN BE ADJUSTED 
Dynasties repaired -
Systems - settled in their Sockets -
Citadels - dissolved -

Wastes of Lives - resown with Colors 
By Succeeding Springs -
Death - unto itself - Exception -
Is exempt from Change -"
(Emily Dickinson, 1863)

1.5.C.2.1.d_REF5_PH "EVERYONE HAS TWO LIVES. The second one begins when you realize you have only one."
(Confucius)

1.5.C.2.1.d_REF6_PH SHIFTING FROM BEING A PASSIVE VICTIM, PARALYZED BY THE "QUANDARY" OF LIFE'S FUTILITY, TO AN ACTIVE PARTNER WITH ONE'S OWN MORTALITY.
“Everything has an end; "even Jesper Morten's sermon at the recent vespers came to an end. " This is a rather bleak view, especially for Jesper Morten, to whom it is no benefit, even though for everyone else it is cheering. [Deleted: Neither does he dare count it to his credit if the congregation were to become so independent that it did not listen to his closing prayer, but itself, motivated by his Reverence, sent up its own fervent prayer of thanksgiving to heaven for its visible assistance by which the sermon came to an end.] But one must not lightly make fun of Jesper Morten or egotistically reassure oneself that one does not belong to those who begin something. For one thing, that would be a poor eulogy on oneself, and for another, it is still always true that every human being begins something, and then for the whole human race that statement becomes a dismal truth. That of which the philosophers in so [IV B 59 211] many ways in word and deed show the difficulty-namely, to begin appears to my more simple and popular view, which sees everything from the opposite end or, to say it more briefly, from the end, to be bound up with enormous difficulties. That is, if what one begins has an end, how then should one decide to begin it? And if what one begins does not have an end, who would have any desire to begin something? This deliberation, if it cannot be stopped, will end in the quandary that ordinary language rightly describes in saying that one knows neither how one shall begin nor end; the person who actually knows how he shall begin knows eo ipso [precisely thereby] how he shall end, and the person who knows how to end knows in that knowledge also how he shall begin. Therefore, it has often amazed me that in our time one so one-sidedly perfects oneself in the art of beginning while practically no word is ever heard about the art of ending. Would it not be timely to commence this art that has the most beautiful promises, for if the end is good, then everything is good. But the beginning is difficult, and yet one cannot begin properly before one knows how to end.
Inasmuch as the bleak view that everything has an end and the equally bleak view that it never has an end could discourage one from beginning, the point is to overcome the doubt that arises, especially when one follows the old advice: respice finem [attend to the end]. The point is that freedom gives existence elasticity and that the corruptible is changed into the incorruptible. The thesis "Everything of humankind has an end" signifies the human suffering in existence. Freedom expresses it by saying: Everything must have an end-by which it signifies that the free individual comes to the aid of existence, or steals a march on existence, and by magnanimously putting an end to the affair itself saves itself from the dying-in-bed of finitude or its parodying metamorphoses. The thesis "Nothing has an end" is the expression for the toughness of finitude and for the individual's negative absorption in existence. Here freedom once again comes to the aid of existence by heroically giving the affair an end. The twin expressions of [IV B 59 212] doubt and suffering that everything has an end and that nothing has an end are transfigured in freedom by giving everything an end. How many a happy moment has not been destroyed because the end came upon it like a thief in the night and so terribly that with retroactive power it embittered even the past? How many a vigorous, sonorous, profoundly modulated mood ended in toothless twaddle because one was unwilling to understand that everything must have an end? How many a fortunate constellation that by a momentary interplay of the most varied powers enchanted everyone ended in mutual disgust because one did not know how to end? How many a sweet, blissful morning dream that promised the moon and stars ended in a state of fatigue because one did not know how to break off? How many an erotic thrill that rightly used would have been invigorating for a long time ended in a paralytic yawn because one was unwilling to understand that everything must have an end?”
(Søren Kierkegaard, Either or, part 2, 1843)

E1.5.C.2.1.e. LIVING WITH DEATH MEANS REALIZING YOU CAN'T GO ON: IT'S A GREAT FREEDOM

E1.5.C.2.1.e_REF1_PH IL Y A UNE LIBERTÉ À L’ÉGARD DE LA PEUR DE NE PAS POUVOIR CONTINUER. "Psychological time is conflict.
It is really a great discovery if one realizes the truth that one is the past, the present and the future; which is time as psychological knowledge. One creates a division between our living in our consciousness and the distant time which is death. That is, one is living with all one's problems and death is something to be avoided, postponed, put at a great distance which is another fragmentation in one's life. To observe holistically the whole movement of life is to live both the living and the dying. […]
One has to enquire very closely and deeply into one's attachment. Death does not permit one to have anything when one dies. One's body is cremated or buried, and what has one left? One`s son, for whom one has accumulated a lot of money which he will misuse anyway. He will inherit one's property, pay taxes and go through all the terrible anxieties of existence just as one did oneself; is that what one is attached to? Or is one attached to one's knowledge, having been a great writer, poet or painter? Or is one attached to words because words play a tremendous part in one's life? Just words. One never looks behind the words. One never sees that the word is not the thing, that the symbol is never the reality.
Can the brain, the human consciousness, be free of this fear of death? As one is the master of psychological time, can one live with death not separating death off as something to be avoided, to be postponed, something to be put away? Death is part of life. Can one live with death and understand the meaning of ending? That is to understand the meaning of negation; ending one's attachments, ending one's beliefs, by negating. When one negates, ends, there is something totally new. So, while living, can one negate attachment completely? That is living with death. Death means the ending. That way there is incarnation, there is something new taking place. Ending is extraordinarily important in life to understand the depth and the beauty of negating something which is not truth. Negate, for example one`s double talk. If one goes to the temple, negate the temple, so that your brain has this quality of integrity.
Death is an ending and has extraordinary importance in life. Not suicide, not euthanasia, but the ending of one's attachments, one's pride, one's antagonism, or hatred, for another. When one looks holistically at life, then the dying, the living, the agony, the despair, the loneliness and the suffering, they are all one movement. When one sees holistically there is total freedom from death not that the physical body is not going to be destroyed. There is a sense of ending and therefore there is no continuity there is freedom from the fear of not being able to continue.
When one human being understands the full significance of death there is the vitality, the fullness, that lies behind that understanding; he is out of the human consciousness. When you understand that life and death are one they are one when you begin to end in living then you are living side by side with death, which is the most extraordinary thing to do; there is neither the past nor the present nor the future, there is only the ending."
(Krishnamurti, The flame of attention, 1983)

E1.5.C.2.1.e_REF2_PO “LEANING OUT THE WINDOW THAT NIGHT,
I SAW THAT THE WORLD HAD BECOME LIGHT

and that there were no more obstacles.
Everything that holds us back in the day seemed more likely to carry me now from one opening to another inside a dwelling of water towards something

faint and luminous as grass:

I was going to enter the grass without fear,

I was going to be grateful for the earth's freshness,

In the footsteps of the moon, I said yes, and off I went...”
(Philippe Jaccottet)

E1.5.C.2.1.e_REF3_PH ALMOST IN TOTAL OPPOSITION, WE CAN THINK THAT THE IRREVOCABILITY OF DEATH - INSTEAD OF LIBERATING US - charges every moment of existence with an immense responsibility - which gives it its value and meaning?

E1.5.C.2.1.e_REF3.1_PH "THE FACT, AND ONLY THE FACT, THAT WE ARE MORTAL, that our lives are finite, that our time is restricted and our possibilities are limited, this fact is what makes it meaningful to do something, to exploit a possibility and make it become a reality, to fulfill it, to use our time and occupy it. Death gives us a compulsion to do so. Therefore, death forms the background against which our act of being becomes a responsibility. […]
Death is a meaningful part of life, just like human suffering. Both do not rob the existence of human beings of meaning but make it meaningful in the first place. Thus, it is precisely the uniqueness of our existence in the world, the irretrievability of our lifetime, the irrevocability of everything with which we fill it — or leave unfulfilled — that gives our existence significance. But it is not only the uniqueness of an individual life as a whole that gives it importance, it is also the uniqueness of every day, every hour, every moment that represents something that loads our existence with the weight of a terrible and yet so beautiful responsibility! Any hour whose demands we do not fulfill, or fulfill halfheartedly, this hour is forfeited, forfeited “for all eternity.” Conversely, what we achieve by seizing the moment is, once and for all, rescued into reality, into a reality in which it is only apparently “canceled out” by becoming the past. In truth, it has actually been preserved, in the sense of being kept safe. Having been is in this sense perhaps even the safest form of being. The “being,” the reality that we have rescued into the past in this way, can no longer be harmed by transitoriness."
(Viktor Frankl, Yes to Life: In Spite of Everything, 1946)

E1.5.C.2.1.e_REF3.2_TH CARL JUNG ON WHY MORTALITY IS THE CATALYST THAT LETS LIFE RIPEN:
“If you accept death, it is altogether like a frosty night and an anxious misgiving, but a frosty night in a vineyard full of sweet grapes. You will soon take pleasure in your wealth. Death ripens. One needs death to be able to harvest the fruit. Without death, life would be meaningless, since the long-lasting rises again and denies its own meaning. To be, and to enjoy your being, you need death, and limitation enables you to fulfill your being.”
(Carl Jung)

E1.5.C.2.1.f. WHEN THE BODY IS WORN OUT AND THE BRAIN IS TIRED, THE WHOLE ORGANISM WELCOMES DEATH

E1.5.C.2.1.f_REF1_PH "THE WISDOM OF THE BODY
[...] When the body is worn out and the brain is tired, the whole organism welcomes death. But it is difficult to understand how death can be welcome when you are young and strong, so that you come to regard it as a dread and terrible event. For the brain, in its immaterial way, looks into the future and conceives it a good to go on and on and on forever - not realizing that its own material would at last find the process intolerably tiresome. Not taking this into account, the brain fails to see that, being itself material and subject to change, its desires will change, and a time will come when death will be good. On a bright morning, after a good night's rest, you do not want to go to sleep. But after a hard day's work the sensation of dropping into unconsciousness is extraordinarily pleasant."
(Alan Watts, The wisdom of insecurity, 1951)

E1.5.C.2.2. ONE OF THE MANY WAYS THAT LOSS INSTRUCTS US IS BY CORRECTING OUR SENSE OF SCALE

E1.5.C.2.2.a. THERE WILL ALWAYS BE A RESTLESS COUPLE 
For whom that morning will be the first dawn 
There will always be water, wind and light 
Nothing passes after all but the passer-by 

E1.5.C.2.2.a_REF1_PO "LIFE IS WORTH IT

A strange thing this world:
one day I will exit without having said it all,
those moments of happiness, those incendiary high noons,
the endless black night with its blonde tearings…

Maybe nothing is as precious as we think.
Others will come—their heart just like my own;
others who know how to touch the grass and say I love you,
dream in the evening when voices die down.

Others will make the journey just like myself
—smile at the sight of a child,
turn around when hearing their name whispered,
while yet others will turn their gaze to the clouds.

There will always be a trembling couple
for whom this morning will be their first dawn;
there will always be the water, the wind, the light
—after all nothing passes away but the passer by.

In the end there’s one thing I can’t understand:
this fear of dying people harbor inside,
as if it were not sufficiently marvelous
that at a given moment the sky looked so tender to us…
Yes, I know this might seem too short at times;
that’s how we are made: that joy and pain
escape from the overrunning cup like lying wine
and to our thirsts the whole sea is but a foretaste.

[...]

Despite it all, I tell you, this life was such
that to those who want to listen to me—for to such I am speaking—
without having on my lips another word except for ‘thank you,’
I would say that despite it all, life was beautiful."
(Louis Araragon, The Eyes of Memory, 1954 - Translated from the French by Youlika Masry)

E1.5.C.2.2.a_REF2_PO “EACH OF US IS FINITUDE 
Infinity is that which is born of us 
made of the unexpected and the unhoped-for 
Celebrating the beyond of desire, the beyond of self 
In truth, it's the only way we can still 
keep the initial promise 
Celebrating the fruit, more than the fruit itself 
rather the infinite flavor 
Celebrate the word, and more than the word itself 
rather the infinite resonance”.
(François Cheng)

E1.5.C.2.2.a_REF2.1_PO “HERE CAME THE GODS 
AND HID THEIR SECRET. 
With our blood we have 
Traced the flowery paths. 
Then we ran 
From hill to hill 
Under the untouchable azure. 
*
To immerse myself in you inside the most secret 
of depths of what we hadn't dared say
and hope for. The world is there. 
As it was in childhood, sprung 
From within, clear and round, round the sky. 
Round the earth. Plain-singing the fruit. 
In unison chickadee and waterfall. 
*
When souls turn into songs, 
The world suddenly remembers. 
*
The night awakens to its dawn 
The breath recovers its rhythm. 
Beyond death, the human 
summer resonates."
(François Cheng, When souls turn into songs, 2018)

E1.5.C.2.2.a_REF3_LIT “WHEN YOU REALIZE YOU ARE MORTAL YOU ALSO REALIZE THE TREMENDOUSNESS OF THE FUTURE, you fall in love with a Time you will never perceive.”
(Etel Adnan, Journey to Mount Tamalpais)

The five limestone vats of Olivestone had been used to decant olive oil at the Palazzo Durini since the 18th century. Beuys inserted blocks from the same quarry into their cavities, leaving a gap into which oil is regularly poured. In decades to come the oil will be absorbed further and further into the stone, gradu ally turning it back into the fertile primeval slime from which it was created 50 million years ago.

E1.5.C.2.2.a_REF4_PO "TO PRAY YOU OPEN YOUR WHOLE SELF
To sky, to earth, to sun, to moon
To one whole voice that is you.
And know there is more
That you can’t see, can’t hear;
Can’t know except in moments
Steadily growing, and in languages
That aren’t always sound but other
Circles of motion.
Like eagle that Sunday morning
Over Salt River. Circled in blue sky
In wind, swept our hearts clean
With sacred wings.
We see you, see ourselves and know
That we must take the utmost care
And kindness in all things.
Breathe in, knowing we are made of
All this, and breathe, knowing
We are truly blessed because we
Were born, and die soon within a
True circle of motion,
Like eagle rounding out the morning
Inside us.
We pray that it will be done
In beauty.
In beauty."
(Joy Harjo)

E1.5.C.2.2.a_REF5_CUR "AN ELECTROMECHANICAL SCULPTURE, DYING CENTAUR 2.0, an animated version of Bourdelle's eponymous work, brings to life the movement sketched in the latter, the centaur on the verge of collapse, his head tilted over his shoulder. Séchas makes him fall on his side, imitating the fall of a horseman: the bust separates from the animal part, the arm breaks, the head rolls to the ground. Soon, the shattered centaur rises, reassembles itself and is magically reborn.
This grounding of the sculpture from its pedestal breaks with the artist's usual practice of erecting figures standing upright. Bourdelle saw his sculpture as an allegory of a humanism doomed to decline and an expression of nostalgia for a world on the verge of disappearing. Séchas rejects his melancholy, and Dying centaur 2.0 expresses his confidence in the eternal renewal of art. A work of great poetic power, it could also have a cathartic and restorative purpose, the fear of death averted here by the simulacrum of a new beginning in a repetitive staging. For Alain Séchas, art is an invitation to share, and one of the artist's missions is to help us face our fears, tame them and free ourselves from them.
(Juliette Laffon, What is Sculpture Today, 2008)

Watch the video on YouTube:
https://youtu.be/6yRvnVArZME?feature=shared

E1.5.C.2.2.a_REF6_PO "ENDLING

Unspooling from a reel
in the sound archive
of the British Library
is the syncopating chirp of
the last Moho braccatus —
a small Hawaiian bird
     now extinct.

After centuries of humans
silenced the species
     with civilization,
after a hurricane
killed the last female
     in 1982,
he alone was left
to sing the final song
     of his kind —
a mating call for
a world void of mate.

In ten billion years,
the Sun will burn out.
In a hundred billion,
the galaxies will drift apart
and take away the light,
leaving the night sky
black as the inside
     of a skull.
In time,
all the energy
of the cosmos
will dissipate
until none is left
     to succor life
as the universe goes on expanding
     into eternity.

Somewhere along the way,
there will have been a creature
to think the last thought
and feel the last feeling
and sing the last song
     of life.

And it will have been beautiful,
this brief movement of being
in the silent symphony
     of forever,
and it will have been merciful
that only hindsight
ever knows
     each last."
(Maria Popova)

Listen to the poem:
https://www.themarginalian.org/2024/02/16/endling/?mc_cid=a23a300827&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E1.5.B.12.4.wE1.5.C.2.2.a. CONSIDER THINGS IN THE GRAND SCALE OF THINGS AND OUR RIGHTFUL PLACE IN THE WORLD

E1.5.C.2.2.b. ONE OF THE MANY WAYS THAT LOSS INSTRUCTS US
is by correcting our sense of scale, showing us the world as it really is: so enormous, complex, and mysterious that there is nothing too large to be lost

E1.5.C.2.2.b_REF1_LIT "ONE OF THE MANY WAYS THAT LOSS INSTRUCTS US IS BY CORRECTING OUR SENSE OF SCALE, showing us the world as it really is: so enormous, complex, and mysterious that there is nothing too large to be lost — and, conversely, no place too small for something to get lost there… Like awe and grief, to which it is closely related, loss has the power to instantly resize us against our surroundings; we are never smaller and the world never larger than when something important goes missing.
It is this harsh corrective to our sense of being central, competent, and powerful that makes even trivial losses so difficult to accept. To lose something is a profoundly humbling act. It forces us to confront the limits of our mind… It forces us to confront the limits of our will: the fact that we are powerless to protect the things we love from time and change and chance. Above all, it forces us to confront the limits of existence: the fact that, sooner or later, it is in the nature of almost everything to vanish or perish."
(Kathryn Schulz, Lost & Found, 2022)

E1.5.C.2.2.c. NOTHING IS LOST, EVERYTHING IS JUST DISPLACED: WE ARE MADE OF STARDUST

E1.5.C.2.2.c_REF1_SCI WE ARE MADE OF STARDUST "« Stardust », the expression used by Hubert Reeves for the title of one of his most famous books, originated with Carl Sagan. In his Cosmos series, the astrobiologist declared « the nitrogen in our DNA, the calcium in our teeth, the iron in our blood, the carbon in our apple pies were made inside collapsing stars. We are made of stardust ».
Indeed, as shozs recent research on the genealogy of the matter that composes us, all of us, which obviously includes all living beings (and also everything that surrounds us, the planet itself as well as all the other bodies of the Solar System), are made up of atoms forged through different cosmic events that have punctuated the 13.8 billion year history of the universe.
To get a clearer picture of the different processes that have shaped atoms around us (and to what extent), Jennifer A. Johnson, from Ohio University, had the idea to revisit the famous periodic table of chemical elements. Many of them admittedly have a stellar genesis, but in her adaptation, the astronomer draws attention to the different conditions required to produce each one."
(FuturaSciences.com)

E1.5.C.2.2.c_REF2_CUR "DURING THE PARTY, RENOIR'S CAMERA FILMS A STATUE OF THE DEITY KALI as the voice-over declares: 'Among these symbols is Kali, goddess of eternal destruction and creation. Creation is impossible without destruction... This is followed by a fade to Bogey, Harriet's younger brother, whose death will be the crux of the drama. By describing the goddess as a symbol of creation impossible without destruction, and then filming little Bogey, Renoir announces the child's death and, in a way, resigns himself to it. The principles of destruction and creation on which Renoir built his film The River reveal his understanding of the Hindu way of life.
The doctrine of this religion is based on the acceptance of the events that punctuate the course of life. Death and life follow each other without human intervention. This 'hellish wheel of birth and death' can only be broken by 'Dharma', a principle whose aim is to liberate man. However, this quest requires an extremely strict ethic, and few Hindus are prepared to make such a sacrifice. As a result, determinism reigns supreme in the Hindu way of life. Renoir understands this perfectly and subtly conveys the idea by sacrificing little Bogey while his mother is pregnant with a new child. When Bogey dies, bitten by a cobra, one shot shows him lying down. The child appears to be asleep (in fact, you can see him breathing), before a fade to black leaves us with the impression of another life. Deep down, every character seems to believe in this reincarnation. And though the pain is palpable, each tries to remain dignified by looking ahead and preparing for the future birth. Creation, destruction, resignation... Every character in The River seems deeply rooted in the Hindu way of life.
(Jean Renoir, The River, 1951)

Watch the trailer: https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0043972/?ref_=ext_shr_lnk

E1.5.C.2.2.c_REF3_PO "WHAT DO YOU THINK HAS BECOME OF THE YOUNG AND OLD MEN? 
And what do you think has become of the women and children?

They are alive and well somewhere,
The smallest sprout shows there is really no death, 
And if ever there was it led forward life, and does not wait at the end to arrest it,
And ceas'd the moment life appear'd.

All goes onward and outward, nothing collapses, 
And to die is different from what any one supposed, and luckier."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.5.C.2.2.c_REF3.1_PO "I DEPART AS AIR, I SHAKE MY WHITE LOCKS AT THE RUNAWAY SUN,
I effuse my flesh in eddies, and drift it in lacy jags.

I bequeath myself to the dirt to grow from the grass I love,
If you want me again look for me under your boot-soles.

You will hardly know who I am or what I mean,
But I shall be good health to you nevertheless,
And filter and fibre your blood."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.5.C.2.2.c_REF4_PH "FOR ME, THE NOTION THAT OUR ATOMS WERE ONCE PART OF OTHER PEOPLE and will again become part of other people after we die provides a meaningful connectedness between us and the rest of humanity, future and past.

If you could tag each of the atoms in your body and follow them backward in time, through the air that you breathed during your life, through the food that you ate, back through the geological history of the Earth, through the ancient seas and soil, back to the formation of the Earth out of the solar nebular cloud, and then out into interstellar space, you could trace each of your atoms, those exact atoms, to particular massive stars in the past of our galaxy. At the end of their lifetimes, those stars exploded and spewed out their newly forged atoms into space, later to condense into planets and oceans and plants and your body at this moment.

The atoms in my body will remain, only they will be scattered about. Those atoms will not know where they came from, but they will have been mine. Some of them will once have been part of the memory of my mother dancing the bossa nova. Some will once have been part of the memory of the vinegary smell of my first apartment. Some will once have been part of my hand. If I could label each of my atoms at this moment, imprint each with my Social Security number, someone could follow them for the next thousand years as they floated in air, mixed with the soil, became parts of particular plants and trees, dissolved in the ocean, and then floated again to the air. And some will undoubtedly become parts of other people, particular people. So, we are literally connected to the stars, and we are literally connected to future generations of people. In this way, even in a material universe, we are connected to all things future and past."
(Alan Lightman, The Transcendent Brain: Spirituality in the Age of Science, 2023)

E1.5.C.2.2.c_REF5_PH "DEATH IS BEAUTIFUL WHEN SEEN TO BE A LAW, AND NOT AN ACCIDENT — It is as common as life… Every blade in the field — every leaf in the forest — lays down its life in its season as beautifully as it was taken up. When we look over the fields we are not saddened because these particular flowers or grasses will wither — for their death is the law of new life."
(Henry David Thoreau , from a letter published in Three Roads Back: How Emerson, Thoreau, and William James Responded to the Greatest Losses of Their Lives)

E1.5.C.2.2.c_REF5.1_PH "WHAT RIGHT HAVE I TO GRIEVE, WHO HAVE NOT CEASED TO WONDER? We feel at first as if some opportunities of kindness and sympathy were lost, but learn afterward that any pure grief is ample recompense for all. That is, if we are faithful; for a great grief is but sympathy with the soul that disposes events, and is as natural as the resin on Arabian trees. Only Nature has a right to grieve perpetually, for she only is innocent."
(Henry David Thoreau , from a letter published in Three Roads Back: How Emerson, Thoreau, and William James Responded to the Greatest Losses of Their Lives)

E1.5.C.2.2.d. LEARNING FROM ANIMALS AND PLANTS

The territory is a site where an unending cycle of kinship and exchange takes place. This cycle involves animals, plants, goods, wealth, species, and rituals. In this cycle, there are no exceptions, no subjects. Everything is exchanged, and the obligations are absolute with total reversibility. No one perceives death as everything is in constant metamorphosis. There's no subject, no death, no unconscious, and no resentment, as nothing interrupts the succession of forms.

E1.5.C.2.2.d_REF1_PH JEAN BAUDRILLARD EXPLORES THE NOTION OF TERRITORY IN ANIMALS AND CONTRASTS IT WITH THAT OF THE HUMAN UNCONSCIOUS. He argues that animals do not have an unconscious because they have a territory, an open, delimited space in which everything is metamorphosed without subject or repression. Humans, on the other hand, have developed an unconscious because they have lost their territory and live in a structure of perpetual mourning.
“Nothing seems more fixed in the perpetuation of the species than animals, but yet they are for us the image of metamorphosis, of all possible metamorphoses. Nothing more errant, more nomadic in appearance than animals, and yet their law is that of the territory. But one must push aside all the counter meanings on this notion of territory. It is not at all the enlarged relation of a subject or of a group to its own space, a sort of organic right to private property of the individual, of the clan or of the species - such is the phantasm of psychology and of sociology extended to all of ecology - nor this sort of vital function, of an environmental bubble where the whole system of needs is summed up. A
territory is also not a space, with what this term implies for us about liberty and appropriation. Neither instinct, nor need, nor structure (be it "cultural" and "behavioral"),
the notion of territory is also opposed in some way to that of the unconscious. The unconscious is a "buried," repressed, and indefinitely subdivided structure. The territory is open and circumscribed. The unconscious is the site of the indefinite repetition of subjective repression and fantasies. The territory is the site of a completed cycle of parentage and exchanges - without a subject, but without exception: animal and vegetal cycle, cycle of goods and wealth, cycle of parentage and the species, cycle of women and ritual - there is no subject and everything is exchanged. The obligations are absolute therein - total reversibility - but no one knows death there, since all is metamorphosed.
Neither subject, nor death, nor unconscious, nor repression, since nothing stops the enchainment of forms.

Animals have no unconscious, because they have a territory. Men have only had an unconscious since they lost a territory. At once territories and metamorphoses have been taken from them - the unconscious is the individual structure of mourning in which this loss is incessantly, hopelessly replayed - animals are the nostalgia for it. The question that they raise for us would thus be this one: don't we live now and already, beyond the effects of the linearity and the accumulation of reason, beyond the effects of the
conscious and unconscious, according to this brute, symbolic mode, of indefinite cycling and reversion over a finite space? And beyond the ideal schema that is that of our culture, of all culture maybe, of the accumulation of energy, and of the final liberation, don't we dream of implosion rather than of explosion, of metamorphosis rather than energy, of obligation and ritual defiance rather than of liberty, of the territorial cycle rather than of .
. . But the animals do not ask questions. They are silent.”
(Jean Baudrillard, Simulacra and simulation, 1981)

E1.5.C.2.2.d_REF2_PO "AFTER READING LUCRETIUS, I GO TO THE POND

The slippery green frog 
that went to his death 
in the heron's pink throat 
was my small brother,

and the heron 
with the white plumes 
like a crown on his head 
who is washing now his great sword-beak 
in the shining pond 
is my tall thin brother.

My heart dresses in black 
and dances"
(Mary Oliver, Blues Horses, 2014)

E1.5.C.2.2.d_REF2.1_PO "WE SHOULD BE WELL PREPARED

The way the plovers cry goodbye.
The way the dead fox keeps on looking down the hill 
    with open eye.
The way the leaves fall, and then there's the long wait.
The way someone says: we must never meet again.
The way mold spots the cake,
the way sourness overtakes the cream.
The way the river water rushes by, never to return.
The way the days go by, never to return.
The way somebody comes back, but only in a dream."
(Mary Oliver, Red bird, 2008)

E1.5.C.2.2.d_REF2.1.a_PO "WHEN THE ROSES SPEAK, I PAY ATTENTION

"As long as we are able to 
be extravagant we will be 
hugely and damply
 extravagant. Then we will drop 
foil by foil to the ground. This 
is our unalterable task, and we do it 
joyfully."

And they went on. "Listen, 
the heart-shackles are not, as you think, 
death, illness, pain, 
unrequited hope, not loneliness, but

lassitude, rue, vainglory, fear, anxiety, 
selfishness."

Their fragrance all the while rising 
from their blind bodies, making me 
spin with joy."
(Mary Oliver, Thirst, 2006)

E1.5.C.2.2.d_REF3_SCI "PERHAPS THE MOST IMPORTANT PSYCHOLOGICAL ROLE THAT OTHER BEINGS PLAY IS TO HELP US RECONCILE OURSELVES WITH OUR PAIN , our inevitable separation as individuals from the remainder of the web of life and our ephemeral existences. The primal feature of nature is that it always rises again, bringing forth new life. Even the most devastating catastrophe gives way over time to green shoots of rebirth and productivity and therefore to hope for ourselves."
(Andreas Weber, The Biology of Wonder: Aliveness, Feeling and the Metamorphosis of Science, 2016)

E1.5.C.2.2.d_REF4_PO "TO VENERATE THE SIMPLE DAYS
Which lead the seasons by -
Needs but to remember 
That from you or I, 
They may take the trifle 
Termed mortality ! 

To invest existence with a stately air -
Needs but to remember 
That the Acorn there 
Is the egg of forests 
For the upper Air !"
(Emily Dickinson, 1859)

E1.5.C.2.2.d_REF5_LIT “I STARTLED A WEASEL WHO STARTLED ME, AND WE EXCHANGED A LONG GLANCE”. Every meaningful encounter is a kind of enchantment — this one came unbidden, leaving Annie Dillard transformed, with clues about how to live her life.

“I would like to learn, or remember, how to live. I come to Hollins Pond not so much to learn how to live as, frankly, to forget about it. That is, I don’t think I can learn from a wild animal how to live in particular — shall I suck warm blood, hold my tail high, walk with my footprints precisely over the prints of my hands? — but I might learn something of mindlessness, something of the purity of living in the physical sense and the dignity of living without bias or motive. The weasel lives in necessity and we live in choice, hating necessity and dying at the last ignobly in its talons. I would like to live as I should, as the weasel lives as he should. And I suspect that for me the way is like the weasel’s: open to time and death painlessly, noticing everything, remembering nothing, choosing the given with a fierce and pointed will. […]
We could, you know. We can live any way we want. People take vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience — even of silence — by choice. The thing is to stalk your calling in a certain skilled and supple way, to locate the most tender and live spot and plug into that pulse. This is yielding, not fighting. A weasel doesn’t “attack” anything; a weasel lives as he’s meant to, yielding at every moment to the perfect freedom of single necessity.

I think it would be well, and proper, and obedient, and pure, to grasp your one necessity and not let it go, to dangle from it limp wherever it takes you. Then even death, where you’re going no matter how you live, cannot you part. Seize it and let it seize you up aloft even, till your eyes burn out and drop; let your musky flesh fall off in shreds, and let your very bones unhinge and scatter, loosened over fields, over fields and woods, lightly, thoughtless, from any height at all, from as high as eagles.”
(Annie Dillard,  The Abundance: Narrative Essays Old and New, 1982)

E1.5.C.2.2.e. THE BANALITY OF DEATH

E1.5.C.2.2.e_REF1_PH "BANALITY
THE NEUTRAL WOULD BE TO SURRENDER TO THE BANALITY WITHIN US, OR, MORE SIMPLY, TO RECOGNISE THAT BANALITY. This banality (as I've already suggested when I said that great suffering and bereavement inevitably cut across the stereotypes of humanity) - this banality is experienced and assumed in contact with death: there are never anything but banal thoughts about death. Neutral would be precisely the movement, non-doctrinal, non-explicit and above all non-theological, that moves towards a certain thought of death as banal, for in death what is exorbitant is its banality".
(Roland Barthes, The Neutral, course at the Collège de France, 1977-1978)

E1.5.C.2.2.e_REF2_PH “NEW ACTORS.—Among human beings there is no greater banality than death. Second in order, because it is possible to die without being born, comes birth, and next comes marriage. But these hackneyed little tragi-comedies are always presented, at each of their unnumbered and innumerable performances, by new actors, and accordingly do not cease to find interested spectators: whereas we might well believe that the whole audience of the world-theatre had long since hanged themselves to every tree from sheer boredom at these performances. So much depends on new actors, so little on the piece.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human III, Aphorism 58, 1878)

E1.5.C.2.3. SHAKY STRATEGIES FOR CONVINCING OURSELVES THAT WE'RE PREPARING FOR DEATH WITHOUT ACTUALLY DOING SO

E1.5.C.2.3.a. AN ANESTHETIZED LIFE WITH SCHOPENHAUER
Schopenhauer lightens the load of death with an ethic of life that leans toward anesthesia. It's no longer me who loves, suffers, or dies. This is why Nietzsche swiftly distanced himself from this line of thought.

E1.5.C.2.3.a_REF1_PH FOR SCHOPENHAUER, ARTISTIC CREATION STEMS FROM THE RENUNCIATION OF LOVE AND INDIFFERENCE TO DEATH, TRANSFORMING THESE CONCEPTS INTO IDEALISED, UNIVERSAL OBJECTS. This neoclassical, contemplative aesthetic alleviates suffering by representing it in pure, unchanging form.
"For Schopenhauer, the will as representation is relieved of the burden of death. The will begins to move towards its extinction; it becomes calmer, because in contemplation it becomes disinterested. Death, or rather the suffering of the living, the agony of torment, becomes a spectacle in representation. The violin cries in my place, the symphony dies in my place, and I contemplate this extinction like a spectator-god. It's not I who dies, it's the musical phrase that dissolves into silence; it's not I who loves, it's the fortissimo that expresses the fury of passion. I eternalise myself in contemplation, I transport myself beyond love and life. [...]
Artistic creation, according to Schopenhauer, is motivated neither by death nor by love, but on the contrary by renunciation of love and indifference to death. A strange aesthetic that tends towards anaesthesia. A spectator's aesthetic that tends not to create but only to contemplate. Under Schopenhauer's gaze, love and death become objects, idealised "objectites", alien to the principle of individuation and the suffering that is its price, universal forms, purified and schematised. Schopenhauer's aesthetic is neoclassical: this serene, distanced image of death is found, for example, in the tombs imagined by Canova and later by his disciples. Death is no longer a terrifying skeleton, but a handsome, melancholic young man, the brother of Sleep, holding an extinguished torch. By allegorising suffering, Schopenhauer alleviates it (or thinks he is alleviating it) in a pure, unchangeable form..."
(Jacques Darriulat, Interview with Nicolas Rousseau and Timothée Coyras, part two, 2010)

E1.5.C.2.3.a_REF1.1_CUR CANOVA'S MAUSOLÉE, the only one of its kind in the church, is a masterpiece of neoclassical sculpture in Carrara marble. The monument is almost five metres high, but since it is placed in the southern wall of the nave, it is not noticed when entering the church. The perfect, pure lines of the pyramid are as striking as the central, bottomless opening that leads to the world of the dead. The life-size funeral procession unfolds on an extraordinary marble carpet, creating a scene that is both tragic and serene. Each of the five figures, except the old man who is supported by an allegory of charity, has his head bowed. The movement of their draped garments, their postures and the garlands of flowers create a fluid, homogeneous group. Virtue, accompanied by her two daughters, is carrying an urn. The urn is symbolic because this monument is a cenotaph. Like the rest of the imperial family, Marie-Christine was buried in the Capuchin crypt, which I recommend you visit. The only reminder of the Archduchess is the bas-relief medallion with her portrait at the top of the pyramid, supported by a splendid couple in high relief. Opposite the procession are a ghost and a lion, both mourning Marie-Christine's death. The movement of this group, marked in the marble by the shield and the inclination of the genie's limbs, contrasts with that of the procession. Together they reinforce the lines of the pyramid and draw our attention to the golden inscription on the door: Uxori optimae Albertus (To the best wife, Albert). It was Albert who commissioned Canova to create this sublime monument. A simple, loving message.
In 1805, the sculptor travelled to Vienna to assemble the various sculptural elements created in his studio. Interestingly, he used a very similar scheme for his own tomb, which can be admired in the church of Santa Maria Gloria dei Frari in Venice.

E1.5.C.2.3.b. RELIGION DEPRIVES US OF THE INSPIRATION OFFERED BY THE THOUGHT OF DEATH

E1.5.C.2.3.b_REF1_PH "DEATH. — Thanks to the certain prospect of death, one could mix into life a delicious and fragrant drop of carelessness - but, you people, singular pharmacists of the soul, have made of this drop a foul poison which makes the whole of life repulsive !"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, all too Human III, aphorism 322, 1878)

E1.5.C.2.3.b_REF1_PH FOR THE PESSIMIST, EVEN IF THERE WAS A GOD AND AN AFTERLIFE, DESPAIR WOULD CONTINUE, for one would be insignificant in the face of time and space. The pessimist needs the eternity of afterlife, Rosset points out in The Major Force. Still, insignificance with regard to space would continue even in eternity - and not only for the duration of this life: would it not be worse for the pessimist; an eternity of suffering and boredom! For Clément Rosset the existence of God is indifferent to the question of joy.

E1.5.C.2.3.c. SOCIETY NO LONGER DARES TO CALL DEATH BY ITS NAME
We often see a sanitized, softened version of old age — one that denies its reality and refuses to acknowledge its nature. It's referred to as "the third age", a term that avoids its true meaning. Society no longer dares to call death by its name.

E1.5.C.2.3.c_REF1_PH "OF ALL THE SIGNS OF THE DEBILITY OF THE EPOCH, ONE OF THE MOST IRRITATING TO ME IS THE WAY OUR TIMES TALKS ABOUT OLD AGE: turbulent (it talks about it all the time) and parochial (it talks about it institutionally, 'legal retirement', 'third-age residences') → just as there are two neutrals, one active and one reactive (ni-ni), a 'noble' neutral and a farcical neutral, so there are two old ages, two retirements:
1) The "flat", scrubbed, clean age, the one that represses itself, that represses its name, its existence, that doesn't dare to say its name: "the third age": society no longer dares to name death, the nearness or rather the fatality of death, institutionalization of the "elderly" (retirement in the administrative sense → "pensioner"). The right to comfort and the organization of leisure activities. Admittedly, progress on archaic societies: it is said that a law of Céos prescribed that men who had reached the age of sixty should drink hemlock: but this is not enough to vitalize old age, to give it a meaning in itself, because today there is no symbolic counterpart to old age, no recognition of a specific value: wisdom, clairvoyance, experience, vision.
2) The strong existentiality of old age: to recognize, to speak of, to sing of its fate, its tragedy, its 'desperate vitality'".
(Roland Barthes, The Neutral, course at the Collège de France, 1977-1978)

E1.5.C.2.3.d. TRYING TO DELAY DEATH BY TRICKERY

E1.5.C.2.3.d_REF1_CUR THE 7 DEATHS OF PEDRO, the boy who collects cow skulls [As 7 mortes de Pedro, o menino que coleciona crânios de vaca]:
Pedro believes there are only 7 ways to die:
Revenge
Scary diseases
Alcohool
Suicide
Work
Evil sadness
Old Age
Soon after the film was completed, Pedro died of Snakebite. He included it in his theory.

Watch the 5-minute video on Vimeo:
https://vimeo.com/48356363

E1.5.C.2.3.d_REF2_CUR HARRY POTTER SURVIVED DEATH BY MASTERING THE ELDER WAND. The legend is that Deathly Hallows would grant who mastered the Elder Wand some sort of immortality. It was a risky and desperate strategy, for no one had mastered the Elder Wand before him except the 3rd brother of the legend -a at least he managed to hide from death until old age.
The story goes that the Deathly Hallows were created by Death as both prize and punishment for the three brothers: Antioch, Cadmus and Ignotus Peverell. They had cheated him by using magic to cross a treacherous river which he had expected to take their lives. He gave the brothers a prize each that lead them to their untimely death, except the wiser younger brother who managed to escape death until old age.
(David Yates, Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2, 2011)

Watch the Deathly Hallows animation on YouTube:
https://youtu.be/bN1_h_eGitE

E1.5.C.2.3.d_REF3_LIT IN "YOUR FACE TOMORROW," A NOVEL BY JAVIER MARÍAS, A MAN TRIES TO ESCAPE DEATH THAT AWAITS FOR HIM IN SALAMANCA. In the novel, the legend serves as a metaphor for the characters' deeper existential concerns and the moral dilemmas they face.
The story explores themes of fate, mortality, and the human desire to evade or control one's destiny. The legend becomes a lens through which the characters grapple with their own personal demons and the consequences of their choices.

E1.5.C.3. HE WHO HAS NO REGRETS AND LIVES IN THE PRESENT HAS NO FEAR OF DEATH... - ALL THE MORE SO IF HE CAN LOOK FORWARD TO A LONG LIFE OR HAS ALREADY REACHED A RIPE OLD AGE?

E1.5.C.3.1. HE WHO HAS NO REGRETS AND LIVES IN THE PRESENT HAS NO FEAR OF DEATH...

E1.5.C.3.1_REF1_PH "WHY ARE WE ANXIOUS ON THE THRESHOLD OF TRANQUILITY? The reason is that stripped of our possessions, we suffer from having wasted our life. It has left us nothing of it, it has passed, ran away. Everyone is keen on living long, not on living well, while in fact it is given to everyone to live well, but to live long, to no one."
(Seneca, Learning to Live, Letters to Lucilius, Learning to Live, Letters to Lucilius)

E1.5.C.3.1_REF2_PH DEATH IS OUR FRIEND PRECISELY BECAUSE IT BRINGS US INTO ABSOLUTE AND PASSIONATE PRESENCE WITH ALL THAT IS HERE, THAT IS NATURAL, THAT IS LOVE
"In a sentiment Montaigne would echo sixteen centuries later in his assertion that “to lament that we shall not be alive a hundred years hence, is the same folly as to be sorry we were not alive a hundred years ago,” Marcus Aurelius rebukes our pathological dread of death by demonstrating how it ejects us from the only arena on which life plays out — the present. Long before Rilke made the countercultural, almost counterbiological observation that “death is our friend precisely because it brings us into absolute and passionate presence with all that is here, that is natural, that is love” [...]"
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings, Marcus Aurelius on Embracing Mortality and the Key to Living with Presence)

E1.5.C.3.1_REF2.1_PH "EVEN IF YOU’RE GOING TO LIVE THREE THOUSAND MORE YEARS, or ten times that, remember: you cannot lose another life than the one you’re living now, or live another one than the one you’re losing. The longest amounts to the same as the shortest. The present is the same for everyone; its loss is the same for everyone; and it should be clear that a brief instant is all that is lost. For you can’t lose either the past or the future; how could you lose what you don’t have?
Remember [...] that the longest-lived and those who will die soonest lose the same thing. The present is all that they can give up, since that is all you have, and what you do not have, you cannot lose."
(Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, Book II)

E1.5.C.3.1_REF3_PH "PEOPLE SHOULD LEAVE LIFE LIKE ODYSSEUS LEFT NAUSICAA – with more blessings than ardor."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil, aphorism 96, 1886)

Note: Nietzsche evokes the Odyssey, Canto VIII, verse 457: “May the husband of Hera, the resounding Zeus, in my dwelling see the day of return, as true as my vows, when I am there, will remain faithful to you: you will be a god to me, all the days of a life I owe to you, O virgin!” 

E1.5.C.3.1_REF4_PO "THERE’S NO LIFE
THAT COULDN’T BE IMMORTAL
if only for a moment.

Death
always arrives by that very moment too late."

E1.5.C.3.1_REF4.1_PO FROM BIRTH TO DEATH WITH ONLY ZEROS IN BETWEEN? Let's put death back in its due place!
"On Death, without Exaggeration

It can’t take a joke,
find a star, make a bridge.
It knows nothing about weaving, mining, farming,
building ships, or baking cakes.

In our planning for tomorrow,
it has the final word,
which is always beside the point.

It can’t even get the things done
that are part of its trade:
dig a grave,
make a coffin,
clean up after itself.

Preoccupied with killing,
it does the job awkwardly,
without system or skill.
As though each of us were its first kill.

Oh, it has its triumphs,
but look at its countless defeats,
missed blows,
and repeat attempts!

Sometimes it isn’t strong enough
to swat a fly from the air.
Many are the caterpillars
that have outcrawled it.

All those bulbs, pods,
tentacles, fins, tracheae,
nuptial plumage, and winter fur
show that it has fallen behind
with its halfhearted work.

Ill will won’t help
and even our lending a hand with wars and coups d’etat
is so far not enough.

Hearts beat inside eggs.
Babies’ skeletons grow.
Seeds, hard at work, sprout their first tiny pair of leaves
and sometimes even tall trees fall away.

Whoever claims that it’s omnipotent
is himself living proof
that it’s not.

There’s no life
that couldn’t be immortal
if only for a moment.

Death
always arrives by that very moment too late.

In vain it tugs at the knob
of the invisible door.
As far as you’ve come
can’t be undone."
(Wislawa Szymborska, 1986)

E1.5.C.3.1_REF5_PO "ALLOW ONLY ONE SUMMER, you mighty ones!
  And an autumn to ripe song for me,
    that my heart,
      satisfied with sweet games, may then die to me more willingly. 

The soul that
  did not receive its divine right in life does not rest down in the orc;
    But I once succeeded in creating the sacred thing that
      is close to my heart, the poem, 

Welcome then, O silence of the shadow world!
  I am satisfied, even if my string playing
     does not lead me down; Once
        I live like gods, and that's all I need."
(Friedrich Hölderlin)

E1.5.C.3.1_REF5_LIT “LIFE WILL BREAK YOU. Nobody can protect you from that, and living alone won’t either, for solitude will also break you with its yearning. You have to love. You have to feel. It is the reason you are here on earth. You are here to risk your heart. You are here to be swallowed up. And when it happens that you are broken, or betrayed, or left, or hurt, or death brushes near, let yourself sit by an apple tree and listen to the apples falling all around you in heaps, wasting their sweetness. Tell yourself that you tasted as many as you could.”
(Louise Erdrich, The painted drum, 2005)

E1.5.C.3.2. ... ALL THE MORE SO IF HE CAN LOOK FORWARD TO A LONG LIFE OR HAS ALREADY REACHED A RIPE OLD AGE?

E1.5.C.3.2_REF1_SOC HEALTH IS AN IMPORTANT PREDICTOR OF LIFE SATISFACTION, both within and among countries. In the visualization below, we provide evidence of the cross-country relationship.
Each dot in the scatterplot below represents one country. The vertical position of the dots shows national life expectancy at birth, and the horizontal position shows national average self-reported life satisfaction in the Cantril Ladder (a scale ranging from 0-10 where 10 is the highest possible life satisfaction).
As we can see, there is a strong positive correlation: countries where people tend to live longer are also countries where people tend to say more often that they are satisfied with their lives. A similar relationship holds for other health outcomes (e.g. life satisfaction tends to be higher in countries with lower child mortality).
The relationship plotted below clearly reflects more than just the link between health and happiness, since countries with high life expectancy also tend to be countries with many other distinct characteristics. However, the positive correlation between life expectancy and life satisfaction remains after controlling for observable country characteristics, such as incomes and social protection. You can read more about this in the World Happiness Report 2017, specifically the discussion in Chapter 2.

Read the full article:
https://ourworldindata.org/happiness-and-life-satisfaction#life-expectancy-and-life-satisfaction

E1.5.C.4. IS THE FEAR OF DEATH AND THE SUFFERING INFLICTED BY THE DEATH OF OUR LOVED ONES INVERSELY PROPORTIONAL TO OUR CAPACITY TO LOVE LIFE?

E1.5.C.4.1. HE WHO DOESN'T KNOW HOW TO "IMMERSE" HIMSELF IN THE LOVE OF ANOTHER PERSON OR IN THE LOVE OF THE WORLD, BY FORGETTING HIMSELF, IS MORE AFRAID OF DEATH.
From the love of one person to the love of the world - and vice-versa - from one to the other - the love of a man or woman feeds and is fed by the love of the world. In "infinite resonance", the fruit of our encounter with the other and with the world offers an "infinite flavour", even if "each of us is finitude".

E1.5.C.4.1.a. TO IMMERSE ONESELF IN ONE'S 
DEEPEST SECRET, 
IN THE DEPTHS OF WHAT ONE 
HAD NOT DARED TO LONG AND HOPE FOR. 
THE WORLD IS THERE. 

E1.5.C.4.1.a_REF1_PO "WHEN THEY CAME HERE, THE GODS 
HAVE HIDDEN THEIR SECRET. 
With our blood we have 
Traced the flowery paths. 
Then we ran 
From hill to hill 
Under the untouchable azure. 
*
To bury in you the most secret 
Of ourselves, in the depths of what we had not 
Dared to say nor hope for. The world is there. 
As it was in childhood, sprung 
From within, clear and round, round the sky. 
Round the earth. Plain-chanting fruits. 
In unison titmouse and waterfall. 
*
When the souls become songs, 
The world suddenly remembers. 
*
The night awakens to its dawn 
The breath retrieves its rhythm. 
Beyond death, Human
Summer rustles with resonance."
(François Cheng, When Souls Become Songs, 2018)

E1.5.C.4.1.a_REF2_PO "YET IT REMAINS FOR US TO CELEBRATE 
as you do 
Celebrate that which springs from among us,
still tends to open life 
That which, out of bruised flesh, cries out for remembrance 
That which, out of spilled blood, cries out for justice. 
The only way, in truth, that we can still
honor the suffering and the dead 

Each of us is finitude 
Infinity is what is born of us 
from the unexpected and unhoped for 
Celebrating beyond desire, beyond self 
The only way, in truth, that we can still
keep the original promise 
To celebrate the fruit, more than the fruit itself 
but the infinite taste 
Celebrate the word, more than the word itself 
but the infinite resonance 

Celebrate the dawn of reinvented names 
Celebrate the evening of exchanged glances 
celebrate the night of emaciated faces 
of the dying who no longer hope for anything 
but expect everything from us 
In us the forever-lost 
That we try to return as an offering
The only way for life to endlessly offer itself 
Palms open."
(François Cheng)

E1.5.C.4.1.a_REF3_PO "KNOWING THAT IT WILL BE TAKEN AWAY,
I marvel that I believe in our season, 
And that our hearts each time 
Refuse the ultimate shipwreck. 
That tomorrow can count. 
When all is surrender 
May we be together 
Lost and lucid. 
Fiery and daily. 
And may love remain after disgrace. 
[...]
Since the dice are final and death is sovereign. 
I marvel that I believe in our season.
(Andrée Chedid, The face alone, 1960)

E1.5.C.4.1.b. "TO LIVE IN THIS WORLD

you must be able 
to do three things: 
to love what is mortal; 
to hold it

against your bones knowing 
your own life depends on it; 
and, when the time comes to let it go, 
to let it go."
(Mary Oliver, In blackwater woods, Amercian primitive, 1983)

E1.5.C.4.1.b_REF1_PO "LIFE STORY

When I lived under the black oaks
I felt I was made of leaves. 
When I lived by Little Sister Pond, 
I dreamed I was the feather of the blue heron
 left on the shore; 
I was the pond lily, my root delicate as an artery, 
my face like a star, 
my happiness brimming. 
Later I was the footsteps that follow the sea. 
I knew the tides, I knew the ingredients of the wrack. 
I knew the eider, the red-throated loon 
with his uplifted beak and his smart eye. 
I felt I was the tip of the wave, 
the pearl of water on the eider's glossy back. 
No, there's no escaping, nor would I want to escape 
this outgo, this foot-loosening, this solution 
to gravity and a single shape.
Now I am here, later I will be there. 
I will be that small cloud, staring down at the water, 
the one that stalls, that lifts its white legs, that 
looks like a lamb."
(Mary Oliver, A Thousand Mornings, 2012)

E1.5.C.4.1.b_REF1.1_PO "POPPIES

The poppies send up their 
orange flares; swaying 
in the wind, their congregations 
are a levitation

of bright dust, of thin 
and lacy leaves. 
There isn't a place 
in this world that doesn't

sooner or later drown 
in the indigos of darkness, 
but now, for a while, 
the roughage

shines like a miracle 
as it floats above everything 
with its yellow hair. 
Of course nothing stops the cold,

black, curved blade 
from hooking forward — 
of course 
loss is the great lesson.

But also I say this: that light 
is an invitation 
to happiness, 
and that happiness,

when it's done right, 
is a kind of holiness, 
palpable and redemptive. 
Inside the bright fields,

touched by their rough and spongy gold, 
I am washed and washed 
in the river 
of earthly delight —

and what are you going to do —
what can you do
about it —
deep, blue night?"
(Mary Oliver, New and selected poems: Volume one, 1992)

E1.5.C.4.1.c. THE ABSURDITY OF AWARENESS OF FINITUDE RESULTS IN A PASSION FOR LIFE
"I draw three consequences from the absurd: my revolt, my freedom and my passion. By the mere activity of conscience, I transform into a principle of life what was an invitation to death".

E1.5.C.4.1.c_REF1_PH "Seeking what is true is not seeking what is desirable. If in order to elude the anxious question: “What would life be?” one must, like the donkey, feed on the roses of illusion, then the absurd mind, rather than resigning itself to falsehood, prefers to adopt fearlessly Kierkegaard’s reply: “despair.” Everything considered, a determined soul will always manage. […]

From the evening breeze to this hand on my shoulder, everything has its truth. Consciousness illuminates it by paying attention to it. Consciousness does not form the object of its understanding, it merely focuses, it is the act of attention, and, to borrow a Bergsonian image, it resembles the projector that suddenly focuses on an image. The difference is that there is no scenario, but a successive and incoherent illustration. In that magic lantern all the pictures are privileged. Consciousness suspends in experience the objects of its attention. Through its miracle it isolates them. Henceforth they are beyond all judgments. This is the “intention” that characterizes consciousness. But the word does not imply any idea of finality; it is taken in its sense of “direction”: its only value is topographical. [...]

I don’t know whether this world has a meaning that transcends it. But I know that I do not know that meaning and that it is impossible for me just now to know it. What can a meaning outside my condition mean to me? I can understand only in human terms. What I touch, what resists me — that is what I understand. And these two certainties — my appetite for the absolute and for unity and the impossibility of reducing this world to a rational and reasonable principle — I also know that I cannot reconcile them. What other truth can I admit without lying, without bringing in a hope I lack and which means nothing within the limits of my condition?

If I were a tree among trees, a cat among animals, this life would have a meaning, or rather this problem would not arise, for I should belong to this world. I should be this world. [...]

The absurd is born of this confrontation between the human need and the unreasonable silence of the world. […]

I draw from the absurd three consequences, which are my revolt, my freedom, and my passion. By the mere activity of consciousness I transform into a rule of life what was an invitation to death — and I refuse suicide."
(Albert Camus, The Myth of Sisyphus, 1942)

E1.5.C.4.1.d. WONDERFUL TO DEPART!
WONDERFUL TO BE HERE!

E1.5.C.4.1.d_REF1_PO "SONG AT SUNSET
[...].
Open mouth of my soul uttering gladness,
Eyes of my soul seeing perfection,
Natural life of me faithfully praising things,
Corroborating forever the triumph of things.

Illustrious every one!
Illustrious what we name space, sphere of unnumber’d spirits,
Illustrious the mystery of motion in all beings, even the tiniest insect,
Illustrious the attribute of speech, the senses, the body,
Illustrious the passing light—illustrious the pale reflection on the new moon in the western sky,
Illustrious whatever I see or hear or touch, to the last.

Good in all,
In the satisfaction and aplomb of animals,
In the annual return of the seasons,
In the hilarity of youth,
In the strength and flush of manhood,
In the grandeur and exquisiteness of old age,
In the superb vistas of death.

Wonderful to depart!
Wonderful to be here!
The heart, to jet the all-alike and innocent blood!
To breathe the air, how delicious!
To speak—to walk—to seize something by the hand!
To prepare for sleep, for bed, to look on my rose-color’d flesh!
To be conscious of my body, so satisfied, so large!
To be this incredible God I am!
To have gone forth among other Gods, these men and women I love.

Wonderful how I celebrate you and myself
How my thoughts play subtly at the spectacles around!
How the clouds pass silently overhead!
How the earth darts on and on! and how the sun, moon, stars, dart on and on!
How the water sports and sings! (surely it is alive!)
How the trees rise and stand up, with strong trunks, with branches and leaves!
(Surely there is something more in each of the trees, some living soul.)
O amazement of things—even the least particle!
O spirituality of things! [...]"
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.5.C.4.1.d_REF2_PO “THE WARM SAND LOVES YOUR FEET 
it hugs them with every step

it sinks into the furrows 
the smallest wrinkles of the skin

the great beach so alive 
is a long field of death

of annihilation 
of crushed       pulverized hardness

to leave       to go away forever 
to capitulate unconditionally        to surrender to Victory!”
(Patrice Repusseau, Ébleui, pages from Houat in the midst of summer, 2013)

E1.5.C.4.1.e. NEAR THE END OF HIS LIFE, TOLSTOY WAS CONSUMED BY THE FEAR OF DEATH, DESPITE SEEING LOVE AS A WAY TO ALLEVIATE THIS DREAD OF LOSING HIS IDENTITY. His pride and unique character as a creator seemed to prevent him from contemplating the dissolution of his ego, even while acknowledging the continuity of life that would outlast him. He managed to become "intoxicated with life" based on an illusion, but it appears he never marveled at being alive. Could this be because he was too rational and not loving enough?

E1.5.C.4.1.e_REF1_LIT IN THE MIDST OF AN EXISTENTIAL CRISIS, LÉON TOLSTOÏ EXPLORES THE LOSS OF MEANING IN THE FACE OF DEATH AND THE RETURN TO THE SIMPLE FAITH OF THE PEOPLE. However, his fame, his pride and his lucidity about human nature prevent him from completely merging into this simplicity.
"On the night of September 2, 1869, in the lost small town of Arzamas, Leo Tolstoy was in the throes of an existential crisis, reeling from the realization that he was about to die and from the absence of any meaning in life.
In Confession, 1882, Tolstoy realizes that nothing can resist the prospect of death, which robs all aspects of life of meaning. He recounts how a return to the religion of his childhood seemed inadequate, as did the renunciation of desire along the lines of Buddhism and Schopenhauer. He came to the idea that we should not seek to express our individuality, but to join the collective that is humanity in a faith that is not reflective at all, but that helps us to live. Humanity creates life by accepting suffering without protest. He realizes that the wealthy class to which he belongs does not need religion. Tolstoy's idea that the simple people are perfectly happy and that their lot doesn't need to be improved didn't stand up to reality when he started hanging out with poor people. He tried to live more in accordance with a simple lifestyle, but his notoriety always followed him. When he plowed his own fields, the press was there to report the event.
In the last 10 years of his life, he returned to a more traditional faith - perhaps out of defiance? His great difficulty was to reconcile the hold that reason had on him (he didn't accept the idea of transcendence and a personal God in religion, for example) with the lack of meaning. It was his pride that prevented him from letting go of reason - he couldn't let go of his ego. It's as if his great character made his personality irreducible.
The idea of merging with the people would have been a way of abolishing conscience. He saw charity as a way to escape the limits of his ego, but as a creator, he was ruthlessly lucid about his fellow man. Romain Roland sheds light on this contradiction: "He [Tolstoy] observes people with flawless realism, but as soon as he closes his eyes, his dreams and his love for humanity take hold of him again. Tolstoy wrote: "You must love your neighbor, the one with whom you live and who bothers you.
His commitment to nonviolence at all costs, even if it meant sacrificing the innocent to the tyrant or renouncing just wars, is another example of his pride: it's as if he were saying: "Whatever you do, you can never destroy me in my being".
(Françoise Lesourd on Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 11/06/2019)

Listen to the podcast: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/quatre-philosophes-russes-34-tolstoi-le-philosophe

E1.5.C.4.1.e_REF1.1_LIT LÉON TOLSTOÏ DESCRIBES HOW, AFTER YEARS OF DEVOTION TO HIS FAMILY AND THE ACCUMULATION OF WEALTH, HE BEGAN TO QUESTION THE MEANING OF LIFE. These questions led him to a state of perplexity and despair, realizing that his aspirations and achievements did not answer his fundamental questions about existence.
"The new circumstances of a happy family life completely diverted me from any search for the overall meaning of life. At that time my whole life was focused on my family, my wife, my children, and thus on a concern for improving our way of life. My striving for personal perfection, which had already been replaced by a striving for perfection in general, a striving for progress, now became a striving for what was best for my family and me.
Thus another fifteen years went by. [...]
And so I lived. But five years ago something very strange began to happen to me. At first I began having moments of bewilderment, when my life would come to a halt, as if I did not know how to live or what to do; I would lose my presence of mind and fall into a state of depression . But this passed, and I continued to live as before. Then the moments of bewilderment recurred more frequently, and they always took the same form. Whenever my life came to a halt, the questions would arise: Why? And what next? [...]

As long as
I do not know the reason why, I cannot do anything. In the middle of my concern with the household, which at the time kept me quite busy, a question would suddenly come into my head: "Very well, you will have 6,000 desyatins* in the Samara province, as well as 300 horses; what then?" And I was completely taken aback and did not know what else to think. As soon as I started to think about the education of my children, I would ask myself, "Why?" Or I would reflect on how the people might attain prosperity, and I would suddenly ask myself, "What concern is it of mine?" Or in the middle of thinking about the fame that my works were bringing me I would say to myself, "Very well, you will be more famous than Gogol, Pushkin, Shakespeare, Moliere, more famous than all the writers in the world-so what?
And I could find absolutely no reply. 

My life came to a stop. I could breathe, eat, drink, and sleep; indeed, I could not help but breathe, eat, drink, and sleep. But there was no life in me because I had no desires whose satisfaction I would have found reasonable. If I wanted something, I knew beforehand that it did not matter whether or not I got it.
If a fairy had come and offered to fulfill my every wish, I would not have known what to wish for. If in moments of intoxication I should have not desires but the habits of old desires, in moments of sobriety I knew that it was all a delusion, that I really desired nothing. I did not even want to discover truth anymore because I had guessed what it was. The truth was that life is meaningless.
I t was as though I had lived a little, wandered a little, until I came to the precipice, and I clearly saw that there was nothing ahead except ruin. And there was no stopping, no turning back, no closing my eyes so I would not see that there was nothing ahead except the deception of life and of happiness and the reality of suffering and death, of complete annihilation. [...]

I myself did not know what I wanted. I was afraid of life, I struggled to get rid of it, and yet I hoped for something from it.
And this was happening to me at a time when, from all indications, I should have been considered a completely happy man; this was when I was not yet fifty years old. I had a good, loving, and beloved wife, fine children, and a large estate that was growing and expanding without any effort on my part. More than ever before I was respected by friends and acquaintances, praised by strangers, and I could claim a certain renown without really deluding myself. Moreover, I was not physically and mentally unhealthy; on the contrary, I enjoyed a physical and mental vigor such as I had rarely encountered among others my age. Physically, I could keep up with the peasants working in the fields; mentally, I could work eight and ten hours at a stretch without suffering any aftereffects from the strain. And in such a state of affairs I came to a point where I could not live; and even though I feared death, I had to employ ruses against myself to keep from committing suicide. [...]

How can anyone fail to see this and live? That's what is amazing! It is possible to live only as long as life intoxicates us; once we are sober we cannot help seeing that it is all a delusion, a stupid delusion! Nor is there anything funny or witty about it; it is only cruel and stupid. [...]

Had I simply understood that life has no meaning, I might have been able to calmly accept it; I might have recognized that such was my lot. But I could not rest content at this. Had I been like a man who lives in a forest from which he knows there is no way out, I might have been able to go on living; but I was like a man lost in the forest who was terrified by the fact that he was lost, like a man who was rushing about, longing to find his way and knowing that every step was leading him into deeper confusion, and yet who could not help rushing about.
This was the horror. And in order to be delivered from this horror, I wanted to kill myself. I felt a horror of what awaited me; I knew that this horror was more terrible than my present situation, but I could not keep it away and I did not have the patience to wait for the end. No matter how convincing the argument was that a blood vessel in the heart would burst anyway or that something else would rupture and it would be all over, I could not patiently await the end. The horror of the darkness was too great, and I wanted to be)free of it as quickly as possible by means of a rope or a bullet. It was this feeling, more powerful than any other, that was leading me toward suicide. [...]

My question, the question that had brought me to the edge of suicide when I was fifty years old, was the simplest question lying in the soul of every human being, from a silly child to the wisest of the elders, the question without which life is impossible; such was the way I felt about the matter. The question is this: What will come of what I do today and tomorrow? What will come of my entire life?
Expressed differently, the question may be: Why should I live? Why should I wish for anything or do anything? Or to put it still differently: Is there any meaning in my life that will not be destroyed by my inevitably approaching death? [...]

Not only had I failed to live my life for the sake of all, but I had not even lived it for myself. I had lived as a parasite, and once I had asked myself why I lived, the answer I received was: for nothing. If the meaning of human life lies in the way it is lived, then how could I, who had spent thirty years not living life but ruining it for myself and others, receive any reply other than this, that my life was meaningless and evil? It was indeed meaningless and evil."
(Léon Tolstoï, Confession, 1882)

E1.5.C.4.1.f. SCHOPENHAUER CAN ONLY DESPAIR AT THE MEANINGLESSNESS OF LIFE, as he is unable to marvel at the absence of meaning and the incredible good fortune of being alive.

E1.5.C.4.1.f_REF1_LIT POUR SCHOPENHAUER, NOTRE VOLONTÉ DE VIVRE EST CE QUI NOUS EMPÊCHE DE CONCEVOIR LE NÉANT, mais pour ceux qui ont transcendé cette volonté, le monde réel est perçu comme néant.
"Et voici ce que dit Schopenhauer:
« Ayant compris l'essence intime du monde comme une volonté et n'ayant reçu que l'abjection de cette volonté depuis l'incontestable précipitation des forces obscures de la nature jusqu'à l'activité pleine de la conscience de l'homme, nous ne pourrons absolument pas éviter la conséquence suivante. Avec la libre négation de sa propre volonté, disparaîtront aussi tous ces phénomènes, cette précipitation continuelle et cette traction sans but ni repos par tous les degrés de l'abjection, dans laquelle et à l'aide de laquelle existe l'univers. La variation des formes successives disparaîtra. Disparaîtront aussi avec la forme tous ces phénomènes avec leurs formes générales, l'espace et le temps, et finalement la dernière forme fondamentale - le sujet et l'objet. S'il n'y a pas de volonté, s'il n'y a pas de figuration, il n'y a pas d'univers non plus. Certainement il ne reste devant nous que le néant. Mais ce qui s'oppose à cette transition au néant - notre nature - n'est donc que cette même volonté de l'existence (Wille zum Leben), de laquelle nous consistons ainsi que le monde. Notre horreur du néant ou bien cette volonté que nous avons tous de vivre veut dire seulement que nous-même nous ne sommes que ce désir de vivre et ne connaissons rien d'autre que ce désir. C'est pourquoi pour nous, qui sommes pleins de volonté, après la destruction complète de la volonté, il ne reste que le néant; mais, au rebours aussi pour ceux chez qui la volonté s'est changée et s'est niée elle-même, pour ceux-là notre monde, si réel avec tous ses soleils et ses voies lactées, n'est aussi que le néant. »"
(Léon Tolstoï, Ma confession: la recherche de réponses aux questions profondes, 1882 - traduction Albert Savine)

E1.5.C.4.1.g. THE ECLESIAST ILLUSTRATES THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN KNOWLEDGE AND UNDERSTANDING. Figures like himself, Schopenhauer, and Tolstoy are examples of those who know without understanding, leading them to despair.

E1.5.C.4.1.g_REF1_LIT "« VANITÉ DES VANITÉS, - DIT SALOMON, - VANITÉ DES VANITÉS, TOUT EST VANITÉ! Quel avantage l'homme tire-t-il de tout le travail qu'il fait sous le soleil ? Une génération passe et une autre génération vient; mais la terre demeure toujours ferme et ce qui a été est ce qui sera; ce qui a été fait est ce qui se fera, et il n'y a rien de nouveau sous le soleil. Y a-t-il quelque chose dont on puisse dire: Regarde, cela est nouveau ? Cela a déjà été dans les siècles qui ont été avant nous. On ne se souvient plus des choses qui ont précédé; de même, parmi ceux qui viendront à l'avenir, on ne se souviendra point des choses qui seront ci après. Moi, l'Ecclésiaste, j'ai été roi sur Israël, à Jérusalem, et j'ai appliqué mon coeur à rechercher et à sonder avec sagesse tout ce qui se faisait sous les cieux, ce qui est une occupation fâcheuse que Dieu a donnée aux hommes afin qu'ils s'y occupent. J'ai regardé tout ce qui se fait sous le soleil, et voilà : tout est vanité et tourment d'esprit. J'ai parlé en mon cœur, et j'ai dit : Voici, j'ai grandi et crû en sagesse par-dessus tous ceux qui ont été avant moi sur Jérusalem et mon coeur a vu beaucoup de sagesse et de science; et j'ai appliqué mon coeur à connaître la sagesse et à connaître les erreurs et la folie ; mais j'ai connu que cela était aussi un tourment d'esprit ; car où il y a abondance de science, il y a abondance de chagrin ; et celui qui s'accroît de la science s'accroît de la douleur.
« J'ai dit en mon coeur : - Allons, que je t'éprouve maintenant par la joie et jouis du bien ; mais voilà, cela aussi est vanité. J'ai dit touchant le ris : Il est insensé, et touchant la joie : - De quoi sert-elle ? J'ai recherché en mon coeur le moyen de me traiter délicatement, et que cependant mon coeur s'appliquant à la sagesse et comprît ce que c'est que la folie, jusqu'à ce que je visse ce qu'il est bon aux hommes de faire sous les cieux pendant les jours de leur vie."
(L'Éclésiate cité par Léon Tolstoï, Ma confession: la recherche de réponses aux questions profondes, 1882 - traduction Albert Savine)

E1.6.D.3.7.wE1.5.C.4.1.g.

E1.6.A.1.1.b.wE1.5.C.4.1. 

E1.5.C.4.2. OR SHOULD WE TURN THE QUESTION AROUND?  Isn't our capacity to love tied to our experience of loss and acceptance of renunciation, to the practice of letting go?

E1.5.C.4.2_REF1_LIT LOSS, ENCOMPASSING SEPARATIONS, UNFULFILLED DREAMS, AND THE PASSAGE OF TIME, IS ESSENTIAL FOR PERSONAL GROWTH. It forces us to confront vulnerabilities, accept imperfections, and mature into responsible, connected individuals. 
"When we think of loss we think of the loss, through death, of people we love. But loss is a far more encompassing theme in our life. For we lose not only through death, but also by leaving and being left, by changing and letting go and moving on. And our losses include not only our separations and departures from those we love, but our conscious and unconscious losses of romantic dreams, impossible expectations, illusions of freedom and power, illusions of safety — and the loss of our own younger self, the self that thought it always would be unwrinkled and invulnerable and immortal. […]

These necessary losses… we confront when we are confronted by the inescapable fact… that we are essentially out here on our own; that we will have to accept — in other people and ourselves — the mingling of love with hate, of the good with the bad;… that there are flaws in every human connection; that our status on this planet is implacably impermanent; and that we are utterly powerless to offer ourselves or those we love protection — protection from danger and pain, from the in-roads of time, from the coming of age, from the coming of death; protection from our necessary losses.

These losses are a part of life — universal, unavoidable, inexorable. And these losses are necessary because we grow by losing and leaving and letting go. [...]

The road to human development is paved with renunciation. Throughout our life we grow by giving up. We give up some of our deepest attachments to others. We give up certain cherished parts of ourselves. We must confront, in the dreams we dream, as well as in our intimate relationships, all that we never will have and never will be. Passionate investment leaves us vulnerable to loss. And sometimes, no matter how clever we are, we must lose… It is only through our losses that we become fully developed human beings. [...]

Exchanging the illusion of absolute shelter and absolute safety for the triumphant anxieties of standing alone… we become a moral, responsible, adult self, discovering — within the limitations imposed by necessity — our freedoms and choices. And in giving up our impossible expectations, we become a lovingly connected self, renouncing ideal visions of perfect friendship, marriage, children, family life for the sweet imperfections of all-too-human relationships. And in confronting the many losses that are brought by time and death, we become a mourning and adapting self, finding at every stage — until we draw our final breath — opportunities for creative transformations. [...]

We cannot deeply love anything without becoming vulnerable to loss. And we cannot become separate people, responsible people, connected people, reflective people without some losing and leaving and letting go."
(Judith Viorst, Necessary Losses, 1987)

E1.5.C.4.2_REF2_PH WE SHOULD NOT GRIEVE FOR THOSE WHO HAVE COMPLETED THEIR LIFE'S WORK, and find joy in eternal beauty and truth that remain beyond human fate and the activities of the younger generation despite uncertain times.
"Mrs. Barjansky wrote to me how gravely living in itself causes you suffering and how "numbed" you are by the indescribably painful blows that have befallen you.

And yet we should not grieve for those who have gone from us in the primes of their lives after happy and fruitful years of activity, and who have been privileged to accomplish in full measure their task in life.

Something there is that can refresh and revivify older people: joy in the activities of the younger generation — a joy, to be sure, that is clouded by dark forebodings in these unsettled times. And yet, as always, the springtime sun brings forth new life, and we may rejoice because of this new life and contribute to its unfolding; and Mozart remains as beautiful and tender as he always was and always will be. There is, after all, something eternal that lies beyond the hand of fate and of all human delusions. And such eternals lie closer to an older person than to a younger one oscillating between fear and hope. For us, there remains the privilege of experiencing beauty and truth in their purest forms."
(Albert Einstein, Letter to the Queen Elisabeth of Belgium, 1934 - found in Krista Tippett´s Einstein’s God: Conversations About Science and the Human Spirit)

E1.5.C.4.2_REF3_LIT "I am simply a man who is always moved and amazed by the brevity of everything, and who strives to at least balance this brevity a little by way of the counterweights within my reach, be it joy, for instance, or otherwise the seeking of beauty. [...]
Every other day since the start of summer, an old deer with a grizzled gray snout has been wandering into my garden to dream away some of what little time he has left. The light around him pivots by a few degrees, arranging its photons as if to ready him for his passing into the beyond. As his body escapes him a little more each day, I think that he’s slowly coming around to a more abstract and somehow purer way of seeing the world. It’s as if his subconscious has fallen out of sync with him and the intricacies and intensity of his life in the forest. From the look in his eye, and the story of sorts that it seems to tell, one remarkably real thing emerges: joy. I know that joy."
(Jean-François Beauchemin, Archives of Joy: Reflections on Animals and the Nature of Being, 2023)

E1.5.C.4.2_REF4_PO “A NIGHT WALK

[...]

I think
with the buildings on my right
and the sea on the left
that one day love will end
and I don't think that's sad
for the sea
I think that the sea doesn't choose
between the ship and the shipwreck
just as spring is indifferent to
honey or bees
like women who have been loved
in two languages
birds go mad in flight 
desire is immense and yet
I think
it won't last either”
(Ana Martins Marques, The Book of Similarities, 2015)

E1.5.C.4.2_REF5_CUR “MIRROR OF LIFE, LIKE MANY OF HENRY KOERNER'S PAINTINGS, REVEALS THE ARTIST'S PREOCCUPATION WITH HIS EXPERIENCES DURING THE SECOND WORLD WAR.Born in Vienna to Jewish parents, Koerner escaped Austria following Hitler's 1938 invasion, fleeing first to Italy and subsequently to America. Soon after, he was drafted by the United States military and stationed in Europe, where he was assigned to sketch the proceedings of the Nuremberg trials.

Koerner returned to Vienna only to learn that his parents, who had stayed in Austria, had died in concentration camps during the war. Mirror of Life emerges from this context of conflict and loss. Disorienting juxtapositions-night and day, biblical events and present-day life, ordinary pastimes and bizarre phenomena-present a chaotic and disjunctive reflection of reality. The shirtless man leaning out of his window seems to be a stand-in for the artist. Home, for him, is not only the place where one resides but also a vantage point from which to witness all that has been lost.”

E1.5.C.4.3. BUT HOW DO YOU REDISCOVER THE LOVE OF LIFE AFTER THE ACCIDENTAL LOSS OF A LOVED ONE, ESPECIALLY OF A CHILD?

E1.5.C.4.3.a. THIS IS THE ESSENTIAL, AVARICIOUS NATURE OF LOSS: IT MAKE US SEE THE WORLD ESSENTIALLY AS MARKED EVERYWHERE BY THE EVIDENCE OF PAST LOSSES AND THE IMMINENCE OF FUTURE ONES AND GRIEF PROVIDES A VIVID LINK TO THE LOST ONE WE RELINQUISH TO LET GO

E1.5.C.4.3.a_REF1_LIT THE VERB "TO LOSE" HAS DEEP ROOTS IN SORROW, EVOLVING FROM MEANINGS OF PERISHING AND SEPARATION TO MODERN CONNOTATIONS OF MISPLACING AND FAILING. Loss is a pervasive force, encompassing both trivial and significant aspects of life.
[After hearing herself say “I lost my father last week”]... "Perhaps because I was still in those early, distorted days of mourning, when so much of the familiar world feels alien and inaccessible, I was struck, as I had never been before, by the strangeness of the phrase. Obviously my father hadn’t wandered away from me like a toddler at a picnic, or vanished like an important document in a messy office. And yet, unlike other oblique ways of talking about death, this one did not seem cagey or empty. It seemed plain, plaintive, and lonely, like grief itself. From the first time I said it, that day on the phone, it felt like something I could use, as one uses a shovel or a bell-pull: cold and ringing, containing within it both something desperate and something resigned, accurate to the confusion and desolation of bereavement. [...]
The verb “to lose” has its taproot sunk in sorrow; it is related to the “lorn” in “forlorn.” It comes from an Old English word meaning to perish, which comes from an even older word meaning to separate or cut apart. The modern sense of misplacing an object only appeared later, in the thirteenth century; a hundred years after that, “to lose” acquired the meaning of failing to win. In the sixteenth century we began to lose our minds; in the seventeenth century, our hearts. The circle of what we can lose, in other words, began with our own lives and each other and has been steadily expanding ever since. This is how loss felt to me after my father died: like a force that constantly increased its reach, gradually encroaching on more and more terrain. [...]
This is the essential, avaricious nature of loss: it encompasses, without distinction, the trivial and the consequential, the abstract and the concrete, the merely misplaced and the permanently gone. We often ignore its true scope if we can, but for a while after my father died, I could not stop seeing the world as it really is, marked everywhere by the evidence of past losses and the imminence of future ones."
(Kathryn Schulz, Lost & Found)

E1.5.C.4.3.a_REF2_LIT "MOST PEOPLE, I THINK, ARE AT LEAST A LITTLE AFRAID OF CEASING TO GRIEVE. I know that I was. However terrible our sorrow may be, we understand that it is made in the image of love, that it shares the characteristics of the person we mourn. Maybe there was a day in your life when you were brought to your knees by a faded blue ball cap or a tote bag full of knitting supplies or the sound of a Brahms piano concerto… Part of what makes grief so seductive, then, is that it seems to offer us what life no longer can: an ongoing, emotionally potent connection to the dead. And so it is easy to feel that once that bleak gift is gone, the person we love will somehow be more gone, too.
Thus our strange relationship with the pain of grief. In the early days, we wish only for it to end; later on, we fear that it will. And when it finally does begin to ease, it also does not, because, at first, feeling better can feel like loss, too."
(Kathryn Schulz, Lost & Found, 2022)

E1.5.C.4.3.a_REF3_LIT THE "VALLEY OF LOST THINGS" IS A METAPHORICAL CONCEPT THAT RESONATES WITH OUR REAL-LIFE EXPERIENCES OF LOSING ITEMS, SUGGESTING A PLACE WHERE ALL LOST THINGS GATHER. This idea is appealing because it provides a location for the otherwise unlocatable, making the abstract concept of loss tangible and visually evocative.
"Although it often goes by other names, the Valley of Lost Things has haunted our collective imagination for centuries… in every context from autobiography to science fiction. […]
Part of the enduring appeal of this imaginary destination is that it comports with our real-life experience of losing things: when we can’t find something, it is easy to feel that it has gone somewhere unfindable. But there is also something pleasing about the idea that our missing belongings, unable to find their rightful owners, should at least find each other, gathering together like souls in the bardo or distant relatives at a family reunion. The things we lose are distinguished by their lack of any known location; how clever, how obviously gratifying, to grant them one… This may be the most alluring aspect of the Valley of Lost Things: it renders the strangeness of the category of loss visible, like emptying the contents of a jumbled box onto the floor. In my mind, it is a dark, pen-and-ink place, comic and mournful as an Edward Gorey drawing: empty clothing drifting dolefully about, umbrellas piled in heaps like dormant bats, a Tasmanian tiger slinking off with Hemingway’s lost novel in its mouth, glaciers shrinking glumly down into their puddles, Amelia Earhart’s Lockheed Electra atilt upon the ground, the air around it filled with the ghosts of nighttime ideas not written down and gone by morning. It is this taxonomically outrageous population, shoes to souls to pterodactyls, that makes the idea of such a place so mesmerizing. Its contents have a unity and meaning based only on the single common quality of being lost, a kind of vast nationality, like “American.”"
(Kathryn Schulz, Lost & Found, 2022)

E1.5.C.4.3.a_REF4_PO "IF ANYBODY’S FRIEND BE DEAD 
It’s sharpest of the theme 
The thinking how they walked alive -
At such and such a time -

Their costume, of a Sunday, 
Some manner of the Hair -
A prank nobody knew but them 
Lost, in the Sepulchre -

How warm, they were, on such a day, 
You almost feel the date -
So short way off it seems -
And now - they’re Centuries from that -

How pleased they were, at what you said ! 
You try to touch the smile 
And dip your fingers in the frost -
When was it - Can you tell -

You asked the Company to tea -
Acquaintance - just a few -
And chatted close with this Grand Thing 
That dont remember you -

Past Bows, and Invitations -
Past Interview, and Vow -
Past what Ourself can estimate -
That - makes the Quick of Wo !"
(Emily Dickinson, 1862)

E1.5.C.4.3.a_REF5_PO “I'M LEAVING WITH MY HEART POUNDING TO CATCH THE TRAIN ON THE MOVE
At the sound of the signal, I'll load my luggage onboard with
my whole life

On the rails I'll think at full speed of the strange happiness 
to feel my weight of sorrow thrown across plains 
I have never seen

Maybe I'll catch a glimpse of a real bird I'll later be told 
it was a hiatus

So much emptiness to throw oneself into that we talk of even
to put things in line with what we believe

A real, authentic joy, where does it go

We'll be well on our way when I've asked myself 
that wow question

And this question of my pain and of plains full of
my pain and of wind I leave it in suspense

They'll be waiting for me on the platform at the exact time I'll wave 
hello by the window I've had a good trip

The food will be good the bed comfortable I won't be 
hungry or sleepy, but I'll pretend I am because 
it's a no-brainer

Then I'll leave with my heart still in pieces 
shattered"
(Valérie Rouzeau, Wehre does it go, 2002)

E1.5.C.4.3.b. HOWEVER, GRIEF ENABLES US TO DEVELOP AN AWARENESS OF LIFE’S FRAGILITY THAT LEADS US BACK TO THE WORLD, TRANSFORMED
We discovered that grief was much more than just despair. We found grief contained many things — happiness, empathy, commonality, sorrow, fury, joy, forgiveness, combativeness, gratitude, awe, and even a certain peace. [...] In time, there is a way, not out of grief, but deep within it.

E1.5.C.4.3.b_REF1_PH GRIEF IS NOT SOMETHING ONE MOVES PAST BUT RATHER A WAY OF LIFE THAT ENCOMPASSES A RANGE OF EMOTIONS AND EXPERIENCES. It is multifaceted, containing elements of happiness, sorrow, and even peace, and it becomes an integral part of one's existence. Over time, grief can bring a heightened awareness of life's fragility and a form of spiritual freedom through the acceptance of our powerlessness. 
"After the sudden and tragic death of our beautiful son, Dominic, my brother recommended for me not to listen to ‘Ghosteen’. Like my son, never one to be told what to do, I found it comforting and consoling but am still struggling with a reason to continue in this mostly beautiful yet, too often, painful world. How have you and your family been able to create meaning through such devastation?
CAROL, STOCKTON-ON-TEES, UK

I am 16 weeks and three days in at losing my child, and although I have found solace in your last three albums, I am a truth seeker in the depths of grief. Aside from moving furniture, how did Susie and yourself find peace with your agonising grief?
LUNA, AUCKLAND, NEW ZEALAND

"Dear Carol and Luna,

Susie and I have learned much about the nature of grief over recent years. We have come to see that grief is not something you pass through, as there is no other side. For us, grief became a way of life, an approach to living, where we learned to yield to the uncertainty of the world, whilst maintaining a stance of defiance to its indifference. We surrendered to something over which we had no control, but which we refused to take lying down. Grief became both an act of submission and of resistance — a place of acute vulnerability where, over time, we developed a heightened sense of the brittleness of existence. Eventually, this awareness of life’s fragility led us back to the world, transformed.

We discovered that grief was much more than just despair. We found grief contained many things — happiness, empathy, commonality, sorrow, fury, joy, forgiveness, combativeness, gratitude, awe, and even a certain peace. For us, grief became an attitude, a belief system, a doctrine — a conscious inhabiting of our vulnerable selves, protected and enriched by the absence of the one we loved and that we lost.

In the end, grief is an entirety. It is doing the dishes, watching Netflix, reading a book, Zooming friends, sitting alone or, indeed, shifting furniture around. Grief is all things reimagined through the ever emerging wounds of the world. It revealed to us that we had no control over events, and as we confronted our powerlessness, we came to see this powerlessness as a kind of spiritual freedom.

Susie’s grief has become part of her chemistry, it moves through her bloodstream like a force, and though she often inhabits the liminal space at the edge of dreams, she remains strong in her powerlessness and obstinately awed by the workings of the world.

Susie says to tell you she is very sorry to hear of your losses, very sorry, and looking at her now, I can only say to you both, that in time, there is a way, not out of grief, but deep within it.

With love to you both, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #95 / MAY 2020)

Read it in The Red Hand Files: https://www.theredhandfiles.com/create-meaning-through-devastation/

E1.5.C.4.3.b_REF2_PH OVER TIME, GRIEF CAN LEAD TO A PROFOUND AND UNEXPECTED APPRECIATION OF LIFE.
"Not a question at all.

On Sat the 30 December my beautiful 16yo son Murray took his own life. He was contacted online by what he believed was a girl he knew. He was extorted and then panicked, hanging himself. He was a wonderful guy who drew beautifully, played guitar and was a straight A student. He was private person and hated being the centre of attention. His world would have crashed around him at the thought of sexual pictures with his peer group. Our hearts are broken, literally agony.

The song we have chosen for the reflection piece at his funeral on Friday in the Cathedral is Distant Sky. In that space it should sound magnificent. I certainly hope so.

In writing this it helps to feel the reality of where we are as a family. We will keep going but fuck me it’s hard.
MARK, SCOTLAND

Dear Mark,

As confronting and difficult as it is to read, I am printing your letter in full. I receive letters like this all too often – each carrying its uniquely special heartbreak and each with its own tragic details, but all uniformly unjust and desperately sad. They course unabated through The Red Hand Files, in all their enormity, like a great sorrowing river. Your letter will be difficult for anyone to read, but it will also take many of us back, with a shudder of recognition, to our own times of sadness and loss.

We grievers know, Mark. We recognise in your letter the bottomless sorrow, the outrage, the desperation, the helplessness, the feelings of cosmic betrayal. We understand the sense of having nowhere to rest our minds that is not full of the darkest treachery. We know what it’s like to be confronted with the impossibility of a future life and the feeling that things will never be bearable again. Many of us also know the ghastly mechanics of planning the funeral of a child midst the zombied chaos of new grief. We know, Mark, and we are so very sorry.

But I want to say something, and even though it will doubtless mean little to you at this moment, I hope in time you will look back and know I spoke a kind of truth. Some years have now passed since the loss of my own sons, and though gone from this world, I have come to understand that they still travel with me – they are with me now – but more than that, they have become the active participants in a slow but certain awakening of the spirit. It saddens me deeply that they never lived their own full lives, but though I would give anything to have them back, these departed souls ultimately served as a kind of saving force that revealed the world to Susie and me as a thing of outrageous beauty. I have found my relationship to the world enriched in a way that I never dreamed possible. I know this to be true, but I also know it is a truth beyond understanding in your time of fresh grief, and so I say these things with extreme caution and pray it doesn’t come across as a kind of glibness uttered into your despair.

It seems like Murray was a beautiful young man, a sensitive and vital being, and these are the saddest and most hopeless days you will experience, but I want you and your family to know this – if you can just hold together, I believe that life will get better for you, in ways you cannot yet comprehend. One day you will find Murray travelling with you, not just as a grief or a memory, but as an animating and guiding principle, allowing you to experience joy in a way you have never experienced it before. Be kind and patient and gentle and merciful with one another. Stay close. Hold firm. Forgive. Grief prepares the way. Joy will in time find you. It is searching for you, in the impossible darkness, even now.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #270 / JANUARY 2024)

Read it in The Red Hand Files: https://www.theredhandfiles.com/not-a-question-at-all/

E1.5.C.4.3.b_REF3_PO "ONE ART

The art of losing isn’t hard to master;
so many things seem filled with the intent
to be lost that their loss is no disaster.

Lose something every day. Accept the fluster
of lost door keys, the hour badly spent.
The art of losing isn’t hard to master.

Then practice losing farther, losing faster:
places, and names, and where it was you meant
to travel. None of these will bring disaster.

I lost my mother’s watch. And look! my last, or
next-to-last, of three loved houses went.
The art of losing isn’t hard to master.

I lost two cities, lovely ones. And, vaster,
some realms I owned, two rivers, a continent.
I miss them, but it wasn’t a disaster.

—Even losing you (the joking voice, a gesture
I love) I shan’t have lied. It’s evident
the art of losing’s not too hard to master
though it may look like (Write it!) like disaster.
(Elizabeth Bishop, 1976)

E1.5.C.4.3.b_REF4_LIT "LIFE WILL BREAK YOU. Nobody can protect you from that, and living alone won’t either, for solitude will also break you with its yearning. You have to love. You have to feel. It is the reason you are here on earth. You are here to risk your heart. You are here to be swallowed up. And when it happens that you are broken, or betrayed, or left, or hurt, or death brushes near, let yourself sit by an apple tree and listen to the apples falling all around you in heaps, wasting their sweetness. Tell yourself that you tasted as many as you could."
(Louise Erdrich, The Painted Drum, 2005)

E1.5.C.4.3.b_REF5_LIT IN "THE JUDGMENT OF THE BIRDS" BY LOREN EISELEY, A GROUP OF SMALL BIRDS, INITIALLY ANGUISHED BY A RAVEN'S PREDATION, EVENTUALLY OVERCOME THEIR GRIEF AND RESUME SINGING. 
"Into the glade fluttered small birds of half a dozen varieties drawn by the anguished outcries of the tiny parents. No one dared to attack the raven. But they cried there in some instinctive common misery, the bereaved and the unbereaved. The glade filled with their soft rustling and their cries. They fluttered as though to point their wings at the murderer. There was a dim intangible ethic he had violated, that they knew. He was a bird of death. And he, the murderer, the black bird at the heart of life, sat on there, glistening in the common light, formidable, unmoving, unperturbed, untouchable. The sighing died. It was then I saw the judgment. It was the judgment of life against death. I will never see it again so forcefully presented. I will never hear it again in notes so tragically prolonged. For in the midst of protest, they forgot the violence. There, in that clearing, the crystal note of a song sparrow lifted hesitantly in the hush. And finally, after painful fluttering, another took the song, and then another, the song passing from one bird to another, doubtfully at first, as though some evil thing were being slowly forgotten. Till suddenly they took heart and sang from many throats joyously together as birds are known to sing. They sang because life is sweet and sunlight beautiful. They sang under the brooding shadow of the raven. In simple truth they had forgotten the raven, for they were the singers of life, and not of death."
(Loren Eiseley, The Judgment of the Birds, The Star Thrower, 1957)

E1.5.C.4.3.b_REF6_PH AMIDST THE WEIRDNESS, THE STRANGENESS, AND DEEP WITHIN THE DARKNESS, I AM MOSTLY HAPPY. I AM MOSTLY HAPPY BECAUSE BEAUTIFUL THINGS KEEP HAPPENING TO ME.
"We are some students in an elementary school, from 12 and 13 years. We have studied with our teacher about the death in your music. We’ve got some questions about your songs. How do you represent death through your songs? And have you some guilty about your tragic evenements in your life about the death? We found you sometimes weirdos, strange and dark in your differents songs, but we like it! So how do you see yourself in your songs? Are you happy sometimes?
CHILDREN FROM THE COLLEGE OF CORSICA, MOLTIFAO, FRANCE
Dear Children from the College of Corsica,

Thank you for your letter. I liked it a great deal. Your questions are so open, honest, curious and, well, weirdos! I’m impressed that your teacher is opening up this type of discussion.

Death, or rather the consequences of death - that sense of loss - runs through many of my songs. Perhaps this serves as my enduring theme. I suspect this is because I have always felt a certain yearning or longing, a sense that something is missing. I frequently perceive the world as dark, strange and unstable and even at your age, I found these darker themes compelling. In my earlier songs, these emotions were often represented through violent acts. However, I was not so much concerned with the violent acts themselves but with the void these acts left behind.

As you know, one of my children died in a terrible accident. Arthur was not much older than you. Some years later, another son, Jethro, passed away. This sense I’d always had of something missing became a painful reality. Even though I didn’t particularly want to write about these events, the feelings of loss and, yes, guilt ran through everything. I made a record called Ghosteen, and it felt as if all the songs were built around the shape of an invisible, absent boy, with every word and note pleading for forgiveness. Loss ceased to be merely my theme and transformed into a way of life.

As for being ‘weirdos, strange and dark’ - this is not only an accurate reflection of my songs but also describes me, or at least how I often feel. Yet, amidst the weirdness, the strangeness, and deep within the darkness, I am mostly happy. I am mostly happy because beautiful things keep happening to me, such as receiving your letter.

I’m glad you like the music, weirdos kids of Corsica. Stay strange, stay weird, stay dark, be happy, and above all, stay safe. We parents - we adults - love and need you and value you above all else, even though this love may sometimes feel imperfect. You are the best of us. You keep the sky from falling.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #310 / JANUARY 2025)

Read it on the Red Hand Files: https://www.theredhandfiles.com/students-in-an-elementary-school/

E1.5.C.4.3.b_REF7_PH “REAL AND PERSONAL ESTATE.—When life has treated us in true robber fashion, and has taken away all that it could of honour, joys, connections, health, and property of every kind, we perhaps discover in the end, after the first shock, that we are richer than before. For now we know for the first time what is so peculiarly ours that no robber hand can touch it, and perhaps, after all the plunder and devastation, we come forward with the airs of a mighty real estate owner.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 343, 1878)

E1.5.C.4.3.b_REF8_PO “GRATITUDE
It softens want
into nothing mean
and lack is not
so dark anymore.
Things can be
a little dim,
less than ideal
and still amaze,
as when there’s been
enough grief
and you aren’t any longer
bowing to it.
One day,
the pain having stopped,
isn’t a moment.
It isn’t brief.
It keeps going.”
(Lia Purpura, It shouldn’t have been beautiful, 2015)

E1.5.C.4.3.c. "BECAUSE OUR FORMATIVE ATTACHMENTS SHAPE HOW WE LOVE, [BEING ABLE TO LOVE] MAY OFTEN REQUIRE UNLEARNING DAMAGING MODELS AND GRIEVING THE DAMAGE."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.5.C.4.3.c_REF1_LIT "WE CAN NEVER GO BACK. I know that now. We can go forward. We can find the love our hearts long for, but not until we let go grief about the love we lost long ago… All the years of my life I thought I was searching for love I found, retrospectively, to be years where I was simply trying to recover what had been lost, to return to the first home, to get back the rapture of first love. I was not really ready to love or be loved in the present. I was still mourning — clinging to the broken heart of girlhood, to broken connections. When that mourning ceased I was able to love again."
(Bell Hooks,  All About Love, 2000)

E1.5.C.4.3.c_REF2_PH THERE IS PROFOUND LONELINESS AND SOCIETAL DISCOMFORT SURROUNDING GRIEF. It is difficult to talk about it as it makes others uncomfortable.
"Grief I find people have a hard time talking about my pain, lost my husband of 45 years. I want to talk about him, it makes people nervous. What can I do?
NOREEN, PORTLAND, USA

Dear Noreen,

There is an uneasy truth that collects like a shadow over every long-term and loving relationship – that one must stay and the other depart. And that ultimate and inevitable departure of the other takes with it a fundamental piece of ourselves, a part of our being, leaving us with a terrible feeling of incompleteness. Loss brings its unhappy vacuum, and in our loneliness we reach out to people for comfort. But in our state of mourning we often find that not only have we lost the one we loved, but also those we reach for, as they instinctively recoil from our suffering. We have a desperate desire to talk about the person who has left us, to keep their memory alive, but at the time of our greatest need the world shrinks back as it sees in us that cold and uncomfortable truth – life is loss. As the nervous world retracts, we are left alone with the fading spirit of our beloved.
 
As the poet, Louise Glück, who died last week, aged 80, wrote in her beautiful poem, Averno –

It is terrible to be alone.
I don’t mean to live alone –
To be alone, where no one hears you.

Thank you for reaching out, Noreen, and I’m so sorry that you have lost your husband. That you were married for 45 years is an inspiring testament to the enduring potential of love, and a joyful affirmation to those of us who value the institution of marriage. What an extraordinary accomplishment. If it helps, and if you feel like doing so, please do write to me and tell me about your husband. I’d be happy to hear from you again.

Love, Nick"
(The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #257 / OCTOBER 2023)

E1.5.C.4.3.d. CHAOS IS ABOUT THE BREAKDOWN OF OUR ABILITY TO FORECAST FOR MORE THAN A SHORT TIME.
Our lives are complex, with infinite variables to notice. We create stories to make sense of our trajectories through these variables, but they always miss some elements. Loss appears as a jump in the trajectory of our story. By focusing on certain subspaces, we can reduce the magnitude of the jumps and confront emotional loss.

E1.5.C.4.3.d_REF1_PH OUR LIVES ARE RICH WITH COUNTLESS VARIABLES, BUT WE FOCUS ON A FEW AT A TIME, CREATING SIMPLIFIED STORIES THAT MISS SOME EXPERIENCES. Irreversible loss appears as a discontinuity and disproportionate event  in these stories. By focusing on the whole story, we can reduce the perceived impact of loss. 
"All moments of our lives are immensely rich, with many — perhaps infinitely many — variables we could notice.
We can view our lives as trajectories, parameterized by time, through story space.
We can never simultaneously view all of the possible variables; rather, we focus on a few variables at a time, restricting our attention to a low-dimensional subspace of story space.
Our trajectories through these subspaces are the stories we tell ourselves about our lives; they are how we make sense of our lives, but always they miss some elements of our experiences.
Irreversible loss appears as a discontinuity, a jump, in our path through story space.
By focusing on certain subspaces, by projecting our trajectories into these spaces, we can reduce the apparent magnitude of the jumps, and consequently find a way to confront the emotional loss and perhaps reduce its impact. [...]
Small changes may not cause large differences, but small changes, invisible because of our inability to measure exactly, can mask our ability to predict whether, when, and where large differences can occur. Chaos is about the breakdown of our ability to forecast for more than a short time."
(Michael Frame, Geometry of Grief: Reflections on Mathematics, Loss, and Life)

E1.5.C.4.3.e. STILL, IT'S EASIER SAID THAN DONE WHEN IT'S TIME TO GO OR WHEN YOU JUST LOST A LOVED ONE...

E1.5.C.4.3.e_REF1_PO "FAREWELL

I will leave the world in a fury.
No matter what seems to happen,
if I retire gracefully.

For
at that moment
will be severing from me
  roots as deep
As these Brazilian skies.
In an uproar of people and draughts
Eyes that I loved
friendly faces afternoons and summers memories
will be screaming in my ears
 stay
 stay

I will not cry.
There is no greater sobbing than saying goodbye to life."
(Ferreira Gullar, Noises, 1980-1987)

E1.5.C.4.3.e_REF2_PO WONDERFUL READING & ANIMATION OF ONE OF EDNA ST. VINCENT MILLAY'S POEM
This poem was written immediately after the death of a loved one. Even the wisest dearly feel the loss! But with time, we resign.

"DIRGE WITHOUT MUSIC

I am not resigned to the shutting away of loving hearts in the hard ground.
So it is, and so it will be, for so it has been, time out of mind:
Into the darkness they go, the wise and the lovely. Crowned
With lilies and with laurel they go; but I am not resigned.

Lovers and thinkers, into the earth with you.
Be one with the dull, the indiscriminate dust.
A fragment of what you felt, of what you knew,
A formula, a phrase remains, — but the best is lost.

The answers quick and keen, the honest look, the laughter, the love,—
They are gone. They are gone to feed the roses. Elegant and curled
Is the blossom. Fragrant is the blossom. I know. But I do not approve.
More precious was the light in your eyes than all the roses in the world.

Down, down, down into the darkness of the grave
Gently they go, the beautiful, the tender, the kind;
Quietly they go, the intelligent, the witty, the brave.
I know. But I do not approve. And I am not resigned."
(Edna St. Vincent Millay)

Watch the animation on Vimeo: https://vimeo.com/685662758

E1.5.C.4.3.e_REF3_PO "AS THE TIME DRAWS NIGH
As the time draws nigh glooming a cloud,
A dread beyond of I know not what darkens me.
I shall go forth,
I shall traverse the States awhile, but I cannot tell whither or how long,
Perhaps soon some day or night while I am singing my voice will suddenly cease.
O book, O chants! must all then amount to but this?
Must we barely arrive at this beginning of us? —and yet it is enough, O soul;
O soul, we have positively appear’d—that is enough."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.5.C.4.3.e_REF3.1_PO "THE PALLID WREATH
Somehow I cannot let it go yet, funeral though it is,
Let it remain back there on its nail suspended,
With pink, blue, yellow, all blanch’d, and the white now gray and ashy,
One wither’d rose put years ago for thee, dear friend;
But I do not forget thee. Hast thou then faded?
Is the odor exhaled? Are the colors, vitalities, dead?
No, while memories subtly play—the past vivid as ever;
For but last night I woke, and in that spectral ring saw thee,
Thy smile, eyes, face, calm, silent, loving as ever:
So let the wreath hang still awhile within my eye-reach,
It is not yet dead to me, nor even pallid."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.5.C.4.3.e_REF4_PH EMBRACING CHALLENGING RESPONSIBILITIES CAN LEAD TO PERSONAL TRANSFORMATION AND GROWTH THAT REVEALS A STRONGER VERSION OF ONESELF "I have recently had some difficult news as my father has recently had a stroke. This is his worst nightmare, as a normally free man is restricted to a bed with no movement or speech.
He can hear well and after putting on Test Match Special his smile grew my next choice for him was ‘Dig Lazarus Dig’ hoping for some miracle/ biblical come back.
This did not happen (obviously) but the smile and joy of him hearing ‘Midnight Man’ is hopefully a sign of recovery.
My question is how did you deal with suddenly everyone looking for you as a point of strength, I have gone from looking after myself and being self-absorbed with everyday life to suddenly my whole family looking to me for guidance through this difficult time. I am only a week into this but feel so emotionally drained that I will just implode.
Any tips appreciated.
ZACK, LEEDS, UK

Dear Zack,

I am sorry to hear about your father’s stroke, and that you are going through a challenging time, but I have found that embedded within these challenges there is almost always the opportunity for renewal or transformation. That is the plain but uncomfortable truth. I say this with a much conflicted heart, but it seems clear to me that the heartbreaks that routinely befall us – personally, societally or universally – are, in fact, the necessary gifts of change. These painful upheavals always provide us with the option for self-destruction or for transcendence. Heartbreak can be the engine of obliteration or growth. The choice is ours.

You are being called to remake yourself, to not be the self-absorbed individual you were. You are the one your family are depending upon for guidance, and although this can feel overwhelming and an almost impossible – perhaps even thankless – task, it will be a defining experience for you. True growth comes when we accept the mantle of that which we feel is beyond us. If you can grasp it, Zack, and stay steady under the weight of the expectations placed upon you, you’ll be able to look back on this, not just as someone who made things better for your father and your family, but from the perspective of a version of yourself you never knew was possible.

I say this as much to myself as I do to you, but being looked to for guidance is a privilege – uncomfortable, baffling and sometimes overwhelming, but a privilege just the same. We are all being called forth in the service of something.

Zack, please send my love and thoughts to your father.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files)

E1.5.C.4.3.e_REF5_PO 'THAT TIME
I thought I could not
go any closer to grief
without dying

I went closer,
and I did not die.
Surely God
had his hand in this,

as well as friends.


Still, I was bent,
and my laughter,
as the poet said,

was nowhere to be found.
Then said my friend Daniel,
(brave even among lions),
“It’s not the weight you carry

but how you carry it–
books, bricks, grief–
it’s all in the way
you embrace it, balance it, carry it

when you cannot, and would not,
put it down.”


So I went practicing.
Have you noticed?

Have you heard
the laughter
that comes, now and again,
out of my startled mouth?

How I linger
to admire, admire, admire
the things of this world
that are kind, and maybe

also troubled –
roses in the wind,
the sea geese on the steep waves,
a love
to which there is no reply?'
(Mary Oliver)

E1.5.C.4.3.e_REF6_PO "ALL SOULS DAY

Death
atones
by living
Giuseppe Ungaretti, “I am a creature”

Death was near 
and so life 
took its revenge: 
increasing our hunger 
the desire for beer 
and spices 
the desire to spend the day out in the sun. 
Your shirts in the closets 
now only dress themselves. 
One should wear them, take them out for a walk, 
stain them with coffee, paint, grease, 
deodorant, sweat. 
An offense against death 
a challenge. 
Who knows everything that died 
with whom they died? 
A book never written 
a new love 
a thought that will remain 
unthought.
Who knows what this death 
has brought to life?
The colorful
houses
are cheerful for no reason.”
(Ana Martins Marques, Risque esta Palavra [Cross out this Word], 2021)


"FINADOS

A morte
se expia
vivendo
Giuseppe Ungaretti, "Sou uma criatura"

Estava a morte por perto 
e por isso a vida 
armou sua vingança: 
aumentando-nos a fome 
a vontade de cerveja 
e condimentos 
o desejo de gastar o dia ao sol. 
Tuas camisas nos armários 
agora apenas vestem a si mesmas. 
Seria preciso usá-las, levá-las para passear, 
manchá-las de café, tinta, graxa, 
desodorante, suor. 
Uma ofensa à morte 
um desafio. 
Quem sabe tudo o que morreu 
com quem morreu? 
Um livro nunca escrito 
um novo amor 
um pensamento que permanecerá 
impensado.
Quem sabe o que essa morte 
trouxe à vida?
As casas
coloridas
estão alegres sem motivo."
(Ana Martins Marques, Risque esta Palavra, 2021)

E1.5.C.4.3.e_REF7_PH THE ECHO IS NOT EMPTY, NOT IN THE SLIGHTEST - WE CALL OUT, AND GIVEN TIME, THE ECHO COMES BACK BEARING THE ENTIRETY OF THE WORLD.
“I was recently listening to Skeleton Tree and realised all these years I’d misheard one of your lyrics. I always heard…’but the echo comes back EMPTY.’ 
This line always struck a chord in my heart. I’d recently lost my wife to cancer, left to cope with two beautiful young children and I often imagined calling across the water to her but the echo coming back empty. I’d never dare suggest that my lyric is better, but would you agree that it might be almost as good as yours? 
RUSSELL, CHELSMFORD, USA 

Dear Russell,  A dark cloud hangs over the album Skeleton Tree. I have always felt it to be a record that possessed a shocking, premonitory energy, like a curse. We began recording the album just before Arthur died and completed it shortly after, and I haven’t listened to the record properly since - I prefer not to go back there.  I remember it as such a raw, unadorned and desolate thing. Songs like ‘Jesus Alone’, ‘Magneto’, ‘Anthracene’, and ‘Girl in Amber’ felt like they possessed a malevolent force at their core, foreshadowing the devastation that would visit my home. The song ‘Skeleton Tree’ itself was added later. It was the first song I wrote after Arthur’s death, so it was with some trepidation that I listened to it to check on your supposed mishearing of the lyrics.

I played the song and was genuinely surprised by how lovely it was - a gorgeous, lilting piano line and a beautiful vocal melody resting on a strange, mismatched chord structure. It is full of demonic imagery, yet also beautiful - A jittery TV glowing white like fire. The title, ‘Skeleton Tree’, was a bleak crucifixion image, the tree upon which no one is redeemed. It is a desperate song, filled with desperate images from a desperate time, yet touched with feelings of hope that I could not begin to see back then. As I listened, I thought of you, Russell, new to grief, navigating a life without your partner, a life you did not anticipate or choose - a father dying daily in sacrificial love for his beautiful children. Your reading of the lyric was correct.   

I call out, I call out 

Right across the sea 

But the echo comes back empty 

Nothing is for free   Ultimately, 

I found the echo I had thought to be empty was not empty at all, it was simply drowned in the roar of grief. As the grief retreated, I came to understand that the presence of the departed resonated through those left behind. Your children, Russell, carry their mother in their bones, in their souls and in their cells, the maternal bond never truly severed.   When I wrote ‘Skeleton Tree’, I could not perceive any hope in the song at all. It was a vacuum, all nihilism and void. Listening to it now, years later, I can hear its insistent beauty loud and clear. The echo is not empty, Russell, not in the slightest - we call out, and given time, the echo comes back bearing the entirety of the world.   

Love, Nick”

(Nick Cave, The Red Hand File, ISSUE #317 / March 2025)

Listen to Skeleton Tree on YouTube: 
https://youtu.be/U9-SMngWeyc?si=_9SYg3JlNP1HIfq0

Read it on the Red Hand File:
https://www.theredhandfiles.com/skeleton-tree-lyrics/

E1.5.C.4.3.e_REF8_PO “LIFE IS BEAUTIFUL, MY CHILD
Life is beautiful, my child,
Though many things go wrong,
And you may hear much sadness in
Its strange and lovely song.
Though friends and loved ones die, my child,
They're never really gone.
Nor more nor less than yesterday,
In you they will live on.
They will live on in you, my child,
As everything you see,
Though it must vanish, will remain
Alive in memory.
Alive in what you think and feel
And dream and say and do,
For all who ever were still are
Upon this earth in you.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E1.5.C.5. WOULDN'T THE FEAR OF DEATH BE RATHER THE FEAR OF ALL THE SUFFERING THAT LIFE CAN BRING? An anguish at the realization of the finitude of everything.

E1.5.C.5.1. IN THEIR FEAR OF DEATH, THE LIVING FEAR LIFE ITSELF
What's the point of running away from death, pain and danger, if I carry myself with me?

E1.5.C.5.1_REF1_PH "IN THEIR FEAR OF DEATH, THOSE LIVING FEAR LIFE ITSELF, a life that is doomed to die… The mode in which life knows and perceives itself is worry. Thus the object of fear comes to be fear itself. Even if we should assume that there is nothing to fear, that death is no evil, the fact of fear (that all living things shun death) remains. [...]
What prevents man from « living »  in the timeless present is life itself, which never « stands still. »  The good for which love craves lies beyond all mere desires. If it were merely a question of desiring, all desires would end in fear. And since whatever confronts life from the outside as the object of its craving is sought for life’s sake (a life we are going to lose), the ultimate object of all desires is life itself. Life is the good we ought to seek, namely true life."
(Hannah Arendt,  Love and Saint Augustine, 1929)

E1.5.C.5.1_REF2_CUR WHY SHOULD I RUN AWAY FROM DEATH, PAIN AND DANGER, IF I TAKE MYSELF WITH ME. Needles suspended by ultrathin nylon yarn, hang over a pillow of flesh-colored polyurethane, placed on a small shelf. On the bottom shelf painted in gold, one can read a lyric poem by Camões: "De que me serve fugir de morte, dor e perigo, se me eu levo comigo? (Why should I run away from death, pain and danger, if I take myself with me).

E1.5.C.5.1_REF3_PH "THE CHIEF PREVENTION AGAINST GETTING OLD IS TO REMAIN ASTONISHED."
(Kevin Kelly, Excellent Advice for Living: Wisdom I Wish I’d Known Earlier)

E1.5.C.5.1_REF4_LIT “HOW TO DIE — but first, how not to:

Not in a smelly old bloody-gutted bed in a rest-home room drowning in the damp wash from related souls groping around you in an ocean heavy with morbid fascination with agony, sin and guilt, expiated, with clinical faces and automatic tear glands functioning perfunctorily and a fat priest on the naked heart.

Not in snowy whiteness under arc lights and klieg lights and direct television hookup. No never under clinical smells and sterilized medical eyes cool with detail calculated needle-prolonged agonizing, stiff and starchy in the white monastic cell, no.

Not in the muddymire of battle blood commingled with charnel-flesh and others’ blood, guts, bones, mud and excrement in the damp smell of blasted and wrung-out air; *nor* in the mass-packed weight of the cities atomized while masonry topples and chandeliers crash clashing buried with a million others, no.

Not the legal murder either — too grim and ugly such a martyrdom — down long aisled with chattering Christers chins on shoulders under bright lights again a spectacle an entertainment grim sticky-quiet officialdom and heavy-booted policemen guiding the turning of a pubic hair gently grinding in a knucklebone an arm hard and obscene fatassed policemen everywhere under the judicial — not to be murdered so, no never.

But how to:

Alone, elegantly, a wolf on a rock, old pale and dry, dry bones rattling in the leather bag, eyes alight, high, dry, cool, far off, dim distance alone, free as a dying wolf on a pale dry rock gurgling quietly alone between the agony-spasms of beauty and delight; when the first flash of hatred comes to crawl, ease off casually forward into space the old useless body, falling, turning, glimpsing for one more time the blue evening sky and the far distant lonesome rocks below — before the crash, before…

With none to say no, none.

Way off yonder in the evening blue, in the gloaming.”
(Edward Abbey, Confessions of a Barbarian, 1986)

E1.5.C.5.1_REF5_PH OUR FEAR OF DEATH IS ACTUALLY A FEAR OF LIFE.
“We think that if we just meditated enough or jogged enough or ate perfect food, everything would be perfect. But from the point of view of someone who is awake, that's death. Seeking security or perfection, rejoicing in feeling confirmed and whole, self-contained and comfortable, is some kind of death. It doesn't have any fresh air. There's no room for something to come in and interrupt all that. We are killing the moment by controlling our experience. Doing this is setting ourselves up for failure, because sooner or later, we're going to have an experience we can't control: our house is going to burn down, someone we love is going to die, we're going to .find out we have cancer, a brick is going to fall out of the sky and hit us on the head, somebody's going to spill tomato juice all over our white suit, or we're going to arrive at our favorite restaurant and discover that no one ordered produce and seven hundred people are coming for lunch.
The essence of life is that it's challenging. Sometimes it is sweet, and sometimes it is bitter. Sometimes your body tenses, and sometimes it relaxes or opens. Sometimes you have a headache, and sometimes you feel roo percent healthy. From an awakened perspective, trying to tie up all the loose ends and .finally get it together is death, because it involves rejecting a lot of your basic experience. There is something aggressive about that approach to life, trying to flatten out all the rough spots and imperfections into a nice smooth ride.
To be fully alive, fully human, and completely awake is to be continually thrown out of the nest. To live fully is to be always in no-man's-land, to experience each moment as completely new and fresh. To live is to be willing to die over and over again. From the awakened point of view, that's life. Death is wanting to hold on to what you have and to have every experience confirm you and congratulate you and make you feel completely together. So even though we say the yama mara is fear of death, it's actually fear of life.
We want to be perfect, but we just keep seeing our imperfections, and there is no room to get away from that, no exit, nowhere to run. That is when this sword turns into a flower. We stick with what we see, we feel what we feel, and from that we begin to connect with our own wisdom mind.”
(Pema Chodron,When Things Fall Apart Heart Advice for Difficult Times, 1996)

E1.5.C.5.2. PLAY AND THEATER AS METAPHORS TO HELP US COPE WITH FINITUDE

E1.5.C.5.2_REF1_PO "IN GENUINE TRAGEDY
it’s not the fine hero that finally dies, it seems,
but, from constant wear and tear, night after night,
the old stage set itself, giving way at the seams."
(Joseph Brodsky, Collected poems in English, Lullaby of Cape Cod, 1975)

E1.5.C.5.2_REF1_PH SUFFERING IS THEREFORE THE PRICE WE PAY FOR EXISTING. Existence, as exemplified by games, presupposes the definition of limits and the respect of certain rules. Limitation is the price to pay for life and limits imply suffering (because they contradict our desires). Suffering is therefore the price we pay for existing: being at peace with the fact that suffering is part of life helps us to live with it in part.

E1.5.C.5.3. HOW DO YOU LIVE WHEN YOU KNOW YOU'RE DYING OF AN INCURABLE DISEASE?

E1.5.C.5.3_REF1_PO "IT IS A STRANGE THING TO STOP LIVING WHILE YOU ARE STILL ALIVE.
The white nettle blooms all around the barn".
(Serge Sautreau, The Antagony, 2007-2008)

E1.5.C.5.3_REF1.1_PO “FOR TODAY I KNOW. 
I know today. 
I know today is.
I know today is the first. 
I know today is the first day. 
I know today is the first day of what we have left 
To live. 
I know that I thank Guy Benoît for pointing out this verse by Gregory Corso. 
I know that I thank Gregory Corso for writing these words. 
I know, but I don't know anything. 
I know nothing about today. 
I know nothing about the last day. 
I don't know how to stay alive. 
I don't know how to live. 
I don't know how to die. 
I don't know the secret that. 
I don't know the how. 
The why exasperates me. 
But I'm going, for sure I'm going. ”
(Serge Sautreau, The Antagony, 2007-2008)

E1.5.C.5.3_REF1.2_PO "ONCE, FORMERLY, I HAD A LIFE. Something that looked like a life. Which could even, given its proximity, its immediacy, pass for “mine”, my life. 
Today, I'm alive. In something that resembles life. There's life here. The place I occupy in it is shrinking. I am no longer anything but this extra.”
(Serge Sautreau, The Antagony, 2007-2008)

E1.5.C.5.3_REF1.3_PO "LUCIDITY KEEPS YOU AT A DISTANCE.
Lucidity pierces everything. 
Lucidity does not see the light that it is. 
Lucidity sees the light that it is not. 
Lucidity does not see itself. 
Lucidity knows itself to be mortal. 
Lucidity does not care about being immortal. 
Lucidity plays and does not play with eternity. 
Lucidity is immediate, or never. 
Lucidity is inspired by the currents, to go. 
Lucidity runs against the current, to return and not. 
Lucidity grants itself rights, lightning bolts, freedoms. 
Lucidity does not ask itself if it is free. 
Lucidity, what does it seek? 
Does it seek, does it want, does it create?
Does it kill? 
Is lucidity only a beacon in the night? 
Lucidity, find me one, only one 
At noon."
(Serge Sautreau, The Antagony, 2007-2008)

E1.5.C.5.3_REF2_PO “I HAVE PRACTICED HERESIES, practiced beliefs, practiced distances, practiced silences, practiced practices. Happy times. Here I am without practice, without silence, without distance, without belief, without heresy, and yet sea levels, climates dismasted, the Gulf Stream upside down, continents changing address, the end of times, all against all in darkness - with unlikely stubborn happiness seekers who will opt for intense light and will discover it.”
(Serge Sautreau, The Antagony, 2007-2008)

E1.5.C.6. FOR THOSE WHO ARE INCONDITIONAL ADVOCATES OF THE "REMEMBRANCE SELF", death carries less weight if you're satisfied with your life.

E1.5.D. HOW MUCH FREE WILL DO WE HAVE?
According to Baruch Spinoza, free will paves a challenging path to joy. Even though we are finite beings and not the cause of ourselves, thus subject to necessity and determinism, the freedom we can achieve is considered a form of participation in nature. Nearly four centuries after Spinoza, what is the scientific perspective on free will? Regardless of whether we possess free will or not, how is our belief in free will connected to happiness?

E1.5.D.1. WHEN WE PARTICIPATE "ONLY IN OURSELVES", WE ARE NEVER FREE. We attain freedom when we participate in nature, that is, in a power greater than ourselves.

E1.5.D.1.1. ONE IS NEVER ENTIRELY FREE. 
The soul is an idea of the body - which is itself infinitely complex, so that we don't know what a body can do - or what the idea of that body can do. This opacity is unsurpassable.
The good faith of the free man in part 4 of the Ethics is not fooled by the fact that consciousness lies to itself. Even the wise man in Part 5 is just as subject to affects as the others.

E1.5.D.1.1_REF1_PH "PROPOSITION 32
Will cannot be called a free cause, but only a necessary cause.

PROOF
Will is only a particular mode of thinking, like intellect ; therefore [...] no volition can exist, nor be conditioned to act, unless it be conditioned by some cause other than itself, which cause is conditioned by a third cause, and so on to infinity. But if will be supposed infinite, it must also be conditioned to exist and act by God, not by virtue of his being substance absolutely infinite, but by virtue of his possessing an attribute which expresses the infinite and eternal essence of thought [...]. Thus, however it be conceived, whether as finite or infinite, it requires a cause by which it should be conditioned to exist and act. Thus [...] it cannot be called a free cause, but only a necessary or constrained cause.

COROLLARY 1
Hence it follows, first, that God does not act according to freedom of the will.

COROLLARY 2
It follows secondly, that will and intellect stand in the same relation to the nature of God as do motion, and rest, and absolutely all natural phenomena, which must be conditioned by God (Prop. 29) to exist and act in a particular manner. For will, like the rest, stands in need of a cause, by which it is conditioned to exist and act in a particular manner. And although, when will or intellect be granted, an infinite number of results may follow, yet God cannot on that account be said to act from freedom of the will, any more than the infinite number of results from motion and rest would justify us in saying that motion and rest act by free will. Wherefore will no more appertains to God than does anything else in nature, but stands in the same relation to him as motion, rest, and the like, which we have shown to follow from the necessity of the divine nature, and to be conditioned by it to exist and act in a particular manner."
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics, Part One, Proposition 32)

E1.5.D.1.1_REF1.1_PH "PROPOSITION 28
Every individual thing, or everything which is finite and has a conditioned existence, cannot exist or be conditioned to act, unless it be conditioned for existence and action by a cause other than itself, which also is finite, and has a conditioned existence ; and likewise this cause cannot in its turn exist, or be conditioned to act, unless it be conditioned for existence and action by another cause, which also is finite, and has a conditioned existence, and so on to infinity.."
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics, Part One, Proposition 28)

Read the Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.5.D.1.1_REF1.2_PH "DEFINITION 7
That thing is called free, which exists solely by the necessity of its own nature, and of which the action is determined by itself alone. On the other hand, that thing is necessary, or rather constrained, which is determined by something external to itself to a fixed and definite method of existence or action.."
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics, Part One, Définition 7)

Read the Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.5.D.1.1_REF1.3_PH "PROPOSITION 29
Nothing in the universe is contingent, but all things are conditioned to exist and operate in a particular manner by the necessity of the divine nature."
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics, Part One, Proposition 29)

Read the Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.5.D.1.1_REF1.3.a_PH “HAVING FORGOTTEN THE VIOLENCE OF COMMITMENT, WE LIE TO OURSELVES, persuading ourselves that we have freely deliberated, and finally opted for the choice that seemed most reasonable. But, in truth, there's nothing of the sort: we chose because we intimately felt the imperative that commanded us to do so.”
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the Plenitude of this World, 2- The Critique of Superstitions, 2017)

E1.5.D.1.1_REF1.3.a.i_PH “TO EARN MONEY BUT RISK WASTING YOUR LIFE, OR TO SEEK THE TRUE LIFE BUT RISK LIVING IN RELATIVE POVERTY - this is the highly philosophical dilemma facing everyone who stands on the threshold of the true life. This is what Spinoza himself tells us, in a little treatise he composed later, around 1660, after the leap had been made: Tractatus de intellectus emendatione, Treatise on the reformation (almost restoration) of the intelligence, or faculty of discernment. The opening lines beautifully set out the alternative we've just been talking about: “I decided to investigate whether there wasn't something that was a true good, capable of communicating itself, that the soul, rejecting everything else, could be affected by alone; something whose discovery and acquisition would give me for eternity the enjoyment of a supreme and continuous joy (in aeternum fruerer laetitia). I say 'finally I made up my mind': at first sight, indeed, it seemed unreasonable to want to give up something certain for something uncertain. I saw the advantages that honors and riches give us; but I also saw that I had to give up the pursuit of them if I wanted to apply myself seriously to this other and new search. Now I could see that if ever supreme felicity were contained in honors and riches, I would have to be deprived of it; but if, on the other hand, it were not contained in them and I pursued them exclusively, I would deprive myself of supreme felicity forever.” Spinoza would not have become himself if he had chosen business and dropped philosophy, but neither would he have acted in accordance with himself if he had chosen otherwise than he did. This is how we become only in order to understand what we have always been, and how true freedom lies not in offering choices, but on the contrary in obeying the inner determination that orders us to become what we are: “That thing is said to be free which exists by the mere necessity of its nature and determines by itself alone to act” (Eth. I, def. 7). Later, having forgotten the violence of commitment, we lie to ourselves, persuading ourselves that we have freely deliberated, and finally opted for the choice that seemed most reasonable. But, in truth, there's nothing of the sort: we chose because we intimately felt the imperative that commanded us to do so, and which is truly, according to Spinoza, the voice of God, or of nature. And if we had to do it all over again, we'd do it all over again. There is nothing more necessary than the choices of freedom. ”
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the Plenitude of this World, 2- The Critique of Superstitions, 2017)

E1.5.D.1.1.4_REF1_PH "APPENDIX
[...] all men are born ignorant of the causes of things, all have the desire to seek for what is useful to them, and they are conscious of such desire. Herefrom it follows first, that men think themselves free, inasmuch as they are conscious of their volitions and desires, and never even dream, in their ignorance, of the causes which have disposed them to wish and desire. Secondly, that men do all things for an end, namely, for that which is useful to them, and which they seek. Thus it comes to pass that they only look for a knowledge of the final causes of events, and when these are learned, they are content, as having no cause for further doubt. If they cannot learn such causes from external sources, they are compelled to turn to considering themselves, and reflecting what end would have induced them personally to bring about the given event, and thus they necessarily judge other natures by their own. [...]"
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics, Part One, Appendix of Proposition 36)

Read the Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.5.D.1.1_REF1.5_PH "PROPOSITION 48
In the mind there is no absolute or free will ; but the mind is determined to wish this or that by a cause, which has also been determined by another cause, and this last by another cause, and so on to infinity."
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics, Part Two)

Read the Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.5.D.1.1_REF2_PH WE HAVE THE ILLUSION OF FREEDOM
The feeling of freedom when we are subject to affects, as when we feel free to love someone, is an illusion. Only an active joy that is not accompanied by the idea of an external cause lasts.

E1.5.D.1.1_REF2.1_PH "PROPOSITION 43
Stimulation may be excessive and bad ; on the other hand, grief may be good, in so far as stimulation or pleasure is bad.

PROOF
Localized pleasure or stimulation (titillatio) is pleasure, which, in so far as it is referred to the body, consists in one or some of its parts being affected more than the rest [...] ; the power of this emotion may be sufficient to overcome other actions of the body [...], and may remain obstinately fixed therein, thus rendering it incapable of being affected in a variety of other ways : therefore [...] it may, be bad. Again, grief, which is pain, cannot as such be good [...]. But, as its force and increase is defined by the power of an external cause compared with our own [...], we can conceive infinite degrees and modes of strength in this emotion [...] ; we can, therefore, conceive it as capable of restraining stimulation, and preventing its becoming excessive, and hindering the body's capabilities ; thus, to this extent, it will be good.

PROPOSITION 44
Love and desire may be excessive.

PROOF
Love is pleasure, accompanied by the idea of an external cause [...] ; therefore stimulation, accompanied by the idea of an external cause is love [...] ; hence love maybe excessive [...]. Again, the strength of desire varies in proportion to the emotion from which it arises [...]. Now emotion may overcome all the rest of men's actions [...] ; so, therefore, can desire, which arises from the same emotion, overcome all other desires, and become excessive, as we showed in the last Proposition concerning stimulation."
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics, Part Four)

Read the Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.5.D.1.1_REF2.1.a_PH EXEMPLE OF AN ORIGINALLY PASSIVE JOY TURNED ACTIVE:
"I wandered
lonely as a cloud
That floats on high o’er vales and hills,

When all at once I saw a crowd,

A host, of golden daffodils;

Beside the lake, beneath the trees,

Fluttering and dancing in the breeze.

 

Continuous as the stars that shine

And twinkle on the milky way,

They stretched in never-ending line

Along the margin of a bay:

Ten thousand saw I at a glance,

Tossing their heads in sprightly dance.

 

The waves beside them danced; but they

Out-did the sparkling waves in glee:

A poet could not but be gay,

In such a jocund company:

I gazed—and gazed—but little thought

What wealth the show to me had brought:

 

For oft, when on my couch I lie

In vacant or in pensive mood,

They flash upon that inward eye

Which is the bliss of solitude;

And then my heart with pleasure fills,

And dances with the daffodils."

(William Wordsworth )

Listen to the poem: https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/45521/i-wandered-lonely-as-a-cloud

E1.5.D.1.1_REF2.2_PH A THEORY OF EMOTIONS IN ANIMATED PICTURE
Inside Out: Emotional Theory Comes Alive (how accurate is the emotional theory that underlies the animated picture?) - 0 to 4'50" & 5'40"
Each day corresponds to discrete moments coloured by the 5 emotions: Fear, Sadness, Joy, Anger, Disgust - based on the work of psychologist Paul Eckman (who computes 7 basic emotions - surprise and contempt were cut in the film).
The film seems to pause that the child's behavior will be defined by whichever emotion is at the helm and also that overall personality is determined by core memories as emotional drivers. This theory runs counter to psychoanalysis that postulates that emotions can be driven by the unconscious. Manifestations of emotions are often far removed from their causes; understanding them as entities is troublesome because they are often motivated by something else - being driven, not drivers.
But it is not science, it's a kids movie, a comedy! The film encourages us to feel what needs to be felt - because it is a part of life - even when it hurts. If it helps kids to better expect and accept sadness, it is a good thing (although Joy and Sadness are not discrete things). The film also has the merit of inspiring emotional intelligence, as paradoxically incarnated by Joy herself, who - as a discrete emotion in the film - is subject to all the other emotions.
(NERDWRITER FILM & ART CRITIC: Inside Out: Emotional Theory Comes Alive)

Watch the video on YouTube:
https://youtu.be/xXYhua4IwoE

E1.5.D.1.1_REF3_PH VARIATIONS ON SPINOZA
Although he is a great admirer of Spinozist philosophy, Robert Misrahi believes that Spinoza was mistaken in positing that man is never totally free. He founds a Spinozist philosophy of happiness that blends with Sartrian existentialism.

E1.5.D.1.1_REF3.1_PH "FOR ROBERT MISRAHI, HAPPINESS IS A JOURNEY THROUGH THE FOUR ACTS OF JOY: FOUNDING, LOVING, DREAMING, AND ACTING. It's a philosophy based on the subject as the source of all his actions. The ultimate joy is to create yourself. At some point you reach your greatest desire and you can say to yourself, 'Now I can die.'"
(Robert Misrahi, philosopher of happiness in Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 12/28/2018)

Listen to the podcast: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/profession-philosophe-1742-robert-misrahi-philosophe-du-bonheur

E1.5.D.1.2. SPINOZA'S AMBITION IS FOR US TO UNDERSTAND OURSELVES WITHIN THE NATURAL ORDER IN ORDER TO REFORM OUR LIVES. 
The challenge of the Ethics is to build a behavior based on the mourning of our illusions: I transition from the desires I take for reality to the reality I take for my desire. Finding a way to make ordinary affects make us happy: this is the most direct route to lasting joy.

E1.5.D.1.2.a. "PART THREE: THE ORIGIN AND NATURE OF FEELINGS
Most of those who have written about the feelings and ways of life of men seem to deal, not with natural things that follow the common laws of Nature, but with things that are outside Nature. What's more, they seem to conceive of man in Nature as an empire within an empire. For they believe that man disturbs the order of Nature rather than follows it, that he has absolute power over his actions, and that he determines himself from no other source than himself."
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics, Part Three).

Read the Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.5.D.1.2.b. ACCEPTING REALITY AS ONE'S DESIRE DOESN'T MEAN WE NO LONGER SUFFER FROM SADNESS, FEAR OR LOSS.

E1.5.D.1.2.b_REF1_PH THE BOOK OF DELIGHTS "Each day, beginning on his forty-second birthday and ending on his forty-third, Gay composed one miniature essay — “essayettes,” he calls them, in that lovely poet’s way of leavening meaning with makeshift language — about a particular delight encountered that day, swirled around his consciousness to extract its maximum sweetness. (Delight, he tells us, means “out from light,” sharing etymological roots with delicious and delectable.) What emerges is not a ledger of delights passively logged but a radiant lens actively searching for and magnifying them, not just with the mind but with the body as an instrument of wonder-stricken presence "
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings, review on Ross Gay´s The book of Delights, 2019)

E1.5.D.1.2.b_REF1.1_PH DEVELOPING OF A DELIGHT MUSCLE "It didn’t take me long to learn that the discipline or practice of writing these essays occasioned a kind of delight radar. Or maybe it was more like the development of a delight muscle. Something that implies that the more you study delight, the more delight there is to study… I felt my life to be more full of delight. Not without sorrow or fear or pain or loss. But more full of delight. I also learned this year that my delight grows — much like love and joy — when I share it."
(Ross Gay, The book of Delights, 2019)

E1.5.D.1.2.b_REF2_PO "WILD GEESE

You do not have to be good.
You do not have to walk on your knees
For a hundred miles through the desert, repenting.
You only have to let the soft animal of your body
love what it loves.
Tell me about despair, yours, and I will tell you mine.
Meanwhile the world goes on.
Meanwhile the sun and the clear pebbles of the rain
are moving across the landscapes,
over the prairies and the deep trees,
the mountains and the rivers.
Meanwhile the wild geese, high in the clean blue air,
are heading home again.
Whoever you are, no matter how lonely,
the world offers itself to your imagination,
calls to you like the wild geese, harsh and exciting —
over and over announcing your place
in the family of things."
(Mary Oliver, Dream work, 1986)

E1.5.D.1.2.c. JOHNS COWPER POWYS SHARES A CLOSE LINK TO SPINOZA'S INTUITION OF ETERNITY AND ACTIVE JOY

E1.5.D.1.2.c_REF1_LIT JOHN COWPER POWYS DESCRIBES THE PROFOUND SENSATIONS AND THOUGHTS HE EXPERIENCED DURING SOLITARY WALKS, WHERE HE FELT A MYSTERIOUS CONNECTION WITH NATURE AND OBJECTS AROUND HIM. These walks induced a state where past memories fused with the present, creating a sense of timelessness and contentment, devoid of future desires.
"Did I share at such times the sub-thoughts, or over-thoughts, that the old earth herself has, as she turns upon her axis, or that the vast volume of the ocean has, as his tide gathers along his beaches or draws back hoarsely into his gulfs? 
They were at any rate what might be called sensation-thoughts. [...] What I would like to emphasize just here is that the pleasure I got from these things of my solitary walks did not present itself to me as an aesthetic pleasure, nor did it call up in my mind the idea of beauty. What gave me these sensations seemed to be some mysterious “rapport” between myself and these things. It was like a sudden recognition of some obscure link, some remote identity, between myself and these objects. Posts, palings, hedges, heaps of stones —they were part of my very soul.
But the mere movement of walking, the mere contact with earth and air and the breath of the free wind as I left the town behind, always seemed able to engender in me a mood in which the present took to itself a sort of winnowed essence of similar memories from the past and thus became a continuity of half-forgotten feelings that welled up in my consciousness and reduced the future to complete non-existence. I thus became on these lonely walks like one who has found the clue to the obliteration of the future; and although I did not feel as though I touched the Eternal, I certainly felt as though I ceased to want anything or wish for anything that I did not already possess. What I possessed was in fact—if I may put it so—a sort of half-eternity, made up of a fusion of past and present, with the future, and all its wants and wishes, totally annihilated."
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber, p. 169-170)

E1.5.D.1.2.d. THIS OBJECT CONSISTS OF A BOOK THAT LOOKS LIKE A SKY ATLAS. However, the representation of stars and galaxies is presented in intersecting plans, suggesting that there are multiple dimensions. On the open atlas is a shiny metal structure that sketches straight lines that one can imagine extending indefinitely in our dimension. The object seems to be a call for us to project ourselves outside of ourselves, beyond local "truths" and determinisms that obstruct our freedom to think.

E1.5.D.1.3. FOR SPINOZA, EVERY REALITY IS SUBJECT TO WONDER, because it is the result of innumerable circumstances. The error consists in taking ourselves to be the center of the world and judging the world. Spinozism is a devaluation of consciousness and a deconstruction of subjectivity, without dissolving our essence: when we participate "only in ourselves", we are never free - we become free when we participate in nature, i.e. in a power greater than ourselves.

E1.5.D.1.3.a. WE MUST LEARN TO SEE THE WORLD SEPARATELY FROM OUR NEED FOR IT.
Friedrich Nietszche said that it's by forgetting ourselves enough that we produce Le Gai Savoir. We must learn to see the world separately from our need for it, by fighting our natural tendency to limit our freedom and joy: "Man is a worshipping animal".

E1.5.D.1.3.a_REF1_CUR THE LIBRARY OF LOVE is a collection of artists' books on the theme of love, featuring the work of 200 artists gathered under the initiative of Sandra Cinto. Victor Leguy presents two books lying flat on a table, separated by a frame placed at right angles between them. Since the cover of one of the books appears to be the mirror image of the other, we get the impression that the frame contains a mirror, but it's actually an empty frame. There are in fact two books, and not one a reflection of the other. Thanks to this device, Leguy makes us think that "Insacro" [the non-sacred] is the opposite or mirror image of "Narciso" [Narcissus]. Is it because Narcissus sacralizes his own image, whereas joy blossoms when we are in love and consider as sacred what is outside ourselves?

E1.5.D.1.3.a_REF2_LIT "I HAD JUST BEGUN TO PONDER OVER THE FACT THAT ALL THE THINGS WHICH I HAD FOUND TO BE SOURCES OF HAPPINESS seemed to depend upon the capacity to relax all straining, to widen my attention beyond the circle of personal interest, and to look detachedly at my own experience. I had just realized that this relaxing and detachment must depend on a fundamental sense of security, and yet that I could apparently never feel safe enough to do it, because there was an urge in me which I had dimly perceived but had never yet been able to face. It was then that the idea occurred to me that until you have, once at least, faced everything you know — the whole universe — with utter giving in, and let all that is “not you” flow over and engulf you, there can be no lasting sense of security."
(Marion Milner,  A Life of One’s Own, 1934)

E1.5.D.1.3.a_REF3_PO "DIARY (SUMMER 2007) 

[...]

The 14th, morning 
as I read on the balcony 
several horses pass in front of the house 
black horses, solid, fast 
I would love to ask them 
what to do with my desire."
(Ana Martins Marques, the other night, Life under water, 2009

E1.5.D.1.3.a_REF4_PH VERMEER'S ART IS CHARACTERIZED BY ITS FOCUS ON OBJECTS RATHER THAN EVENTS, CAPTURING THE ESSENCE OF REALITY WHERE NOTABLE EVENTS ARE SECONDARY. His work, devoid of ego and self-portraits, reflects a joy of existence and indifference to self, making the invisible visible.
"One of the characteristics of Vermeer's art - as perhaps of all art that has reached a certain degree of nobility - is that he paints things, not events. The world that Vermeer perceives is not that of insignificant events, forever mute, but that of matter, eternally rich and alive. The anecdotal, one might say, has driven out the anecdotal: the random occurrence of a moment in the day, in a room where nothing of importance is happening, appears as the essential of a reality of which seemingly notable events are, on the contrary, the accessory part. The ego is absent from the reality Vermeer captures, because the ego is just one event among others, like them mute and like them insignificant. Moreover, there is no self-portrait by Vermeer, and the painter's biography consists of ten anodyne verses. However, Vermeer does seem to have painted himself once. In a game of double mirrors: in this painting without a precise name, now called The Studio. But from behind, as an ordinary painter, who could be any other person busy with his canvas. There is nothing in the painter's costume, stature or attitude that could be considered a distinctive sign, nothing that would indicate any complacency on the part of the painter with regard to his own person. At the same time, this Studio - like all Vermeer's canvases - seems rich in a joy of existence that radiates from all sides and immediately seizes the viewer, testifying to a perpetual jubilation at the sight of things: judging by this moment of happiness, it's easy to convince oneself that whoever did this, if he captured only one moment of his joy on canvas, would have gladly done the same for the moment before and the moment after. He only lacked the time to celebrate all moments and all things. 
It would certainly be an exaggeration to derive this joy solely from the abandonment of one's own specificity, from the discovery that the self, as a singular being, is of interest not only to no one else, but not even to myself, who can only benefit from dispensing with my image. This indifference to oneself is more effect than cause here: it signals bliss rather than provokes it. But the link between the enjoyment of life and indifference to self is no less clear. 
In a way, the painter of the Studio has made the invisible visible: he has painted his absence, better rendered in this way than if he had simply renounced any form of self-portraiture. When nothing is said, it's always possible to imagine some ulterior motive. This is not the case here: nothingness is said here in full, and spread out in full view on the canvas. If not nothingness, at least a very little, a notable something."
(Clément Rosset, Reality and its double, 1976)

E1.5.D.1.3.b. HE WHO INTERROGATES HIMSELF ALWAYS GETS THE WRONG ANSWER. Thought that only contemplates itself is only boredom, or sadness, or anxiety, or impatience. Give it a try.

E1.5.D.1.3.b_REF1_PH ALAIN CRITICIZES EXCESSIVE INTROSPECTION AS A SOURCE OF BOREDOM AND SADNESS, and insists on the importance of the will to transform desire into action. 
"Hegel says that the immediate or natural soul is always shrouded in melancholy and overwhelmed. This seemed very profound to me. When self-reflection doesn't clear things up, it's a nocive game. And those who question themselves always give bad answers. Thought that only contemplates itself is nothing but boredom or sadness or worry or impatience. Try it. Ask yourself: "What could I read to pass the time?" You're already yawning. It's time to start. Desire fades if it doesn't end in will. And these remarks are enough to condemn the psychologists who would have us all curiously study our own thoughts, as if we were studying herbs or shells. But to think is to will. [...]
Why should love be any different? Love is not natural; and desire itself is not natural for long. But real feelings are works of art. You don't play cards and throw them away at the first sign of impatience or boredom; and no one ever had the idea of playing the piano at random. Music, in fact, is the best example of all; for it is maintained, even in song, only by the will, and grace comes afterwards, as theologians have sometimes said, without really knowing what they were talking about.
(Alain, On Happiness, September 10, 1913)

E1.5.D.1.3.b_REF1.1_CUR IN THIS SURREALIST PAINTING, Ismael Nery shows us a silhouette with a sad attitude that seems to embrace itself. The result is eerie. Is it, as Alain tells us, because "those who question themselves always give bad answers. Thought that only looks at itself is nothing but boredom or sadness or worry or impatience. Try it."
(Alain, On Happiness, 1913)

E1.5.D.1.3.c. "NOR IS THERE COMPLETE SATISFACTION WHEN ONE CONCEIVES THE WORLD AS RAW MATERIAL FOR THE GLORIFICATION OF ONE'S OWN SELF."

E1.5.D.1.3.c_REF1_PH “ALEXANDER THE GREAT PSYCHOLOGICALLY BELONGED TO THE SAME TYPE AS THE LUNATIC, although he possessed the talent necessary to realize the lunatic's dream. He was unable, however, to realize his own aspirations, whose scope widened as they were realized. When he saw that he was the most illustrious conqueror in the world, he concluded that he was a god. Was he happy? His drunkenness, his fits of rage, his indifference to women, all suggest otherwise. There is no complete satisfaction in cultivating one element of human nature at the expense of all the others, nor is there complete satisfaction in conceiving the world as raw material for the glorification of one's own self.”
(Bertrand Russell, The Conquest of Happiness, 1962)

E1.5.D.1.3.c_REF2_PH ERICH FROMM ARGUES THAT TRUE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REQUIRES SHIFTING FROM A POSSESSION-CENTERED TO AN ACTIVITY-CENTERED ORIENTATION, EMPHASIZING SOLIDARITY AND ALTRUISM.
"The full humanization of man requires the breakthrough from the possession-centered to the activity-centered orientation, from selfishness and egotism to solidarity and altruism.[...]
Even if we had no theoretical knowledge about the reasons for the norms that are conducive to man’s optimal growth and functioning, experience tells us just as much as it tells the gardener. Therein lies the reason that all great teachers of man have arrived at essentially the same norms for living, the essence of these norms being that the overcoming of greed, illusions, and hate, and the attainment of love and compassion, are the conditions for attaining optimal being. Drawing conclusions from empirical evidence, even if we cannot explain the evidence theoretically, is a perfectly sound and by no means “unscientific” method, although the scientists’ ideal will remain, to discover the laws behind the empirical evidence."
(Erich Fromm, The Art of Being)

E1.5.D.1.3.c_REF2.1_PH ERICH FROMM ARGUES THAT TRUE LIBERATION INVOLVES FREEING ONESELF FROM BOTH EXTERNAL AND INTERNAL CHAINS. While political and social liberation addresses external forces like feudalism, capitalism, and imperialism, internal chains are more insidious as they are embedded within one's desires and thoughts, often without awareness. 
"Liberation has been exclusively applied to liberation from outside forces; by the middle class from feudalism, by the working class from capitalism, by the peoples in Africa and Asia from imperialism. [...]
This is the case in Western democracy, where political liberation hides the fact of dependency in many disguises… Man can be a slave even without being put in chains… The outer chains have simply been put inside of man. The desires and thoughts that the suggestion apparatus of society fills him with, chain him more thoroughly than outer chains. This is so because man can at least be aware of outer chains but be unaware of inner chains, carrying them with the illusion that he is free. He can try to overthrow the outer chains, but how can he rid himself of chains of whose existence he is unaware?
Any attempt to overcome the possibly fatal crisis of the industrialized part of the world, and perhaps of the human race, must begin with the understanding of the nature of both outer and inner chains; it must be based on the liberation of man in the classic, humanist sense as well as in the modern, political and social sense… The only realistic aim is total liberation, a goal that may well be called radical (or revolutionary) humanism. [...]
If “well-being” — [defined as] functioning well as a person, not as an instrument — is the supreme goal of one’s efforts, two specific ways stand out that lead to the attainment of this goal: Breaking through one’s narcissism and breaking through the property structure of one’s existence."
(Erich Fromm, The Art of Being, 1989)

E1.5.D.1.3.c_REF2.2_PH THE NARCISSISTIC PERSON HAS BUILT AN INVISIBLE WALL AROUND HIMSELF. Narcissism is an orientation in which all one’s interest and passion are directed to one’s own person: one’s body, mind, feelings, interests… For the narcissistic person, only he and what concerns him are fully real; what is outside, what concerns others, is real only in a superficial sense of perception; that is to say, it is real for one’s senses and for one’s intellect. But it is not real in a deeper sense, for our feeling or understanding. He is, in fact, aware only of what is outside, inasmuch as it affects him. Hence, he has no love, no compassion, no rational, objective judgment. The narcissistic person has built an invisible wall around himself. He is everything, the world is nothing. Or rather: He is the world. Fromm writes:
"A person living in this mode is not necessarily very narcissistic. He may have broken through the shell of his narcissism, have an adequate appreciation of reality outside himself, not necessarily be “in love with himself”; he knows who he is and who the others are, and can well distinguish between subjective experience and reality. Nevertheless, he wants everything for himself; has no pleasure in giving, in sharing, in solidarity, in cooperation, in love. He is a closed fortress, suspicious of others, eager to take and most reluctant to give."
(Erich Fromm, The Art of Being reviewed by Maria Popova, Brain Pickings)

E1.5.D.1.3.c_REF2.3_PH "IF A PERSON HAS THE WILL AND THE DETERMINATION TO LOOSEN THE BARS OF HIS PRISON OF NARCISSISM AND SELFISHNESS, when he has the courage to tolerate the intermittent anxiety, he experiences the first glimpses of joy and strength that he sometimes attains. And only then a decisive new factor enters into the dynamics of the process. This new experience becomes the decisive motivation for going ahead and following the path he has charted… [An] experience of well-being — fleeting and small as it may be — … becomes the most powerful motivation for further progress…
Awareness, will, practice, tolerance of fear and of new experience, they are all necessary if transformation of the individual is to succeed. At a certain point the energy and direction of inner forces have changed to the point where an individual’s sense of identity has changed, too. In the property mode of existence the motto is: “I am what I have.” After the breakthrough it is “I am what I do” (in the sense of unalienated activity); or simply, “I am what I am.”"
(Erich Fromm, The Art of Being)

E1.5.D.1.3.c_REF2.4_CUR EVERYTHING THAT IS USUALLY AT THE CENTER IS TURNED AROUND. Jana Euler explains what guided the construction of this painting: "Everything that is usually at the center is turned around; the center begins beyond the borders of my own vision".

E1.5.D.1.3.c_REF3_PH "MAKE YOUR INTERESTS GRADUALLY WIDER AND MORE IMPERSONAL, until bit by bit the walls of the ego recede, and your life becomes increasingly merged in the universal life. An individual human existence should be like a river — small at first, narrowly contained within its banks, and rushing passionately past rocks and over waterfalls. Gradually the river grows wider, the banks recede, the waters flow more quietly, and in the end, without any visible break, they become merged in the sea, and painlessly lose their individual being."
(Bertrand Russell, “How to Grow Old,” Portraits from Memory and Other Essays, 1956)

E1.5.D.1.3.c_REF4_PO "TO OLD AGE
I see in you the estuary that enlarges and spreads itself grandly as it pours in the great sea."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.5.D.1.3.d. YET IT'S SO HARD TO GIVE UP ON THE SELF...

E1.5.D.1.3.d.i. "I KNOW, I GIVE UP EVERYTHING, I DON'T GIVE UP MY “SELF”. IT'S THE CONTRARY OF WHAT I SHOULD BE DOING. [...]
This "I" should renounce, it should abdicate. One should let oneself go. "I" is prevented from letting go; desires arise despite myself, an anxious "me" stands against the serene "me", in which "me" am I? I want to know. I am driven to know. I can't help but desire to know. I am not the master of my desires or my sadness or my anxiety. Or, my anxieties, my nostalgias, my distresses are a self refusing to be serene. Is my anxiety another’s, is my anxiety myself? [...]
I declare that knowledge is useless. I declare that the sciences do not penetrate the essence of being. I don't care about not knowing anything because knowledge is "worldly". The worldly does not interest me: it is what is done, it is what is made, it is what moves. The mechanism of restlessness does not interest me: what is behind, it's Him or It, the Unknown which is alone worthy of our interest. Not science, knowledge. Knowledge is impossible. But I can't resign myself to only knowing the walls of the prison."
(Eugène Ionesco, Journal en miettes [Diary in shreds], 1967)

E1.5.D.1.3.d.ii. PRISONERS OF SUBJECTIVITY
According to Rousseau, the pre-social savage harbored a sense of existence within himself, unaffected by the perceptions of others. In contrast, civilized man only experiences this sense of existence externally, constantly seeking approval from others. He is, therefore, a prisoner of subjectivity.

E1.5.D.1.3.d.iii. THE FAILURE OF THOSE WHO CANNOT FORGET THEMSELVES OUT OF PRIDE

E1.5.D.1.3.d.iii_REF1_PH ACUTELY AWARE OF THE FUTILITY OF HUMAN RESTLESSNESS, OBLOMOV CHOOSES TO LIVE IN STILLNESS IN ORDER TO PRESERVE HIS ESSENCE. Oblomov's failure lies in his inability to distance himself from his "self" and fully embrace the human condition.
"Fatigue - Goncharov's Oblomov, the Lying Man
Seemingly burlesque, as in Beckett, the nonsense of Oblomov's behavior - the man who lives lying down on his sofa - conceals the tragedy of his realization of human nature. The man who sleeps is truly and completely himself. As long as he is only a critical, intensified consciousness, he has not yet become fundamentally human. The mockery he displays is very Russian: it testifies to his determination never to forget what's essential. Grief is at the heart of his character; he can't get rid of it, and that's why he won't marry Olga, with whom he's in love - but who would deprive him of living out his anguished essence. He's not a lazy man, he's someone who's aware that he's been slowly fading since birth, and he's weighed down by nothing, nothing holds him. He suffers from inner annihilation when he realizes that the end of the restlessness of others is only rest. So what's the point? French literature prefers to be clever with Voltaire and Marivaux. But isn't Oblomov right in his awareness that even in a purely rationalist attitude we are constantly under attack, humiliated, tired, exhausted? At the end of his life, Oblomov decides to take refuge in the loveless everyday life of his landlady. He has decided to stop experiencing "flashes of great joy" because he can no longer bear the pain that follows. With extreme awareness, he renounces what he once believed in. He renounces his human condition, that which is superior in man. He lies down in 'the spacious coffin of the rest of his days'. In the novel, however, Olga is joyful-enchanted by the simplicity of things-even as she is overcome by melancholy and the question of whether things will always satisfy her at the end of the novel. She has less pride than Oblomov, and she accuses him of renouncing their love out of pride. Is thiss the key: is the failure to distance himself from his 'self' Oblomov's great failure?"
(Pierre Cahné on Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 12/19/2017)

Listen to the Podcast: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/oblomov-de-gontcharov-l-homme-couche-8192866

E1.5.D.2. IF WE ARE DETERMINED, HOW CAN WE BRING ABOUT CHANGE?
Instead of thinking in terms of self, consider the whole. This shift in perspective requires a leap that comes with knowledge.

E1.5.D.2.1. THE MORE WE UNDERSTAND OUR DETERMINATIONS, THE FREER WE ARE TO NO LONGER BE BOUND BY THEM.
Spinoza's Ethics is a journey. The wise man, though still subject to alienation, possesses more adequate ideas. We never cease to think autonomously about ourselves, others, and the world. Until we have traversed the path set out in Ethics, we exist not in immanence but in a form of transcendence. Immanence is not an innate state. Transcendence is a common illusion, and immanence must be achieved. We need to rekindle our intuition of nature as a unity.

E1.5.D.2.1.a. FREEDOM IS THE INCREASE IN POWER THAT FREES US FROM DETERMINISM: in the Ethics, Spinoza explains how the joy born of knowledge enables us to gradually reduce the burden of sad affects.

E1.5.D.2.1.a_REF1_PH For BARUCH SPINOZA, it's not about climbing the mountain of self-liberation through willpower, but rather about emotional intelligence. When I understand something that is accompanied by affect - and not just in an intellectual mode - I develop an understanding that increases my power to act; I'm less affected by sadness, and so I'm freer. The joy born of knowledge is stronger than the sad affect - and so, through intelligence, the latter has less and less hold on me. Lu Yang's Power of Will illustrates the limits of voluntary knowledge.

E1.5.D.2.1.a_REF2_PH "PROPOSITION 14
A true knowledge of good and evil cannot check any emotion by virtue of being true, but only in so far as it is considered as an emotion.

PROOF
An emotion is an idea, whereby the mind affirms of its body a greater or less force of existing than before (by the General Definition of the Emotions) ; therefore it has no positive quality, which can be destroyed by the presence of what is true ; consequently the knowledge of good and evil cannot, by virtue of being true, restrain any emotion. But, in so far as such knowledge is an emotion [...] if it have more strength for restraining emotion, it will to that extent be able to restrain the given emotion [...]"
(Baruch Spinoza, The Ethics, Part Four)

Read the Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.5.D.2.1.a_REF3_PH FREEDOM IS THE GAIN IN POWER THAT LIBERATES US FROM DETERMINISM. SPINOZA EXPLAINS HOW THE JOY ARISING FROM KNOWLEDGE ENABLES US TO GRADUALLY LESSEN THE WEIGHT OF NEGATIVE EMOTIONS.
"PROPOSITION 6
The mind has greater power over the emotions and is less subject thereto, in so far as it understands all things as necessary.

PROOF
The mind understands all things to be necessary [...] and to be determined to existence and operation by an infinite chain of causes [...]; therefore [...], it thus far brings it about, that it is less subject to the emotions arising therefrom, and [...] feels less emotion towards the things themselves."
(Baruch Spinoza, The Ethics, Part Five)

PROPOSITION 7
Emotions which are aroused or spring from reason, if we take account of time, are stronger than those, which are attributable to particular objects that we regard as absent.

PROOF
We do not regard a thing as absent, by reason of the emotion wherewith we conceive it, but by reason of the body, being affected by another emotion excluding the existence of the said thing [...]. Wherefore, the emotion, which is referred to the thing which we regard as absent, is not of a nature to overcome the rest of a man's activities and power [...], but is, on the contrary, of a nature to be in some sort controlled by the emotions, which exclude the existence of its external cause [...]. But an emotion which springs from reason is necessarily referred to the common properties of things [...], which we always regard as present (for there can be nothing to exclude their present existence), and which we always conceive in the same manner [...]. Wherefore an emotion of this kind always remains the same ; and consequently [...] emotions, which are contrary thereto and are not kept going by their external causes, will be obliged to adapt themselves to it more and more, until they are no longer contrary to it ; to this extent the emotion which springs from reason is more powerful."

Read the Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.5.D.2.1.b. FREEING OURSELVES FROM COLLECTIVE THOUGHT AND FROM MEMORY (PAST THOUGHTS AND PAST FEELINGS)

E1.5.D.2.1.b_REF1_PH DAVID BOHM DISCUSSES THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN "THINKING" (AN ACTIVE PRESENT PROCESS) AND "THOUGHT" (A PAST PARTICIPLE THAT ACTS AUTOMATICALLY FROM MEMORY). He extends this to "feeling" and introduces "felts" as recorded feelings from the past. Bohm emphasizes that thoughts and felts are intertwined processes originating from memory, affecting both intellectual and physical states, and critiques the cultural misconception that they can be separated and controlled independently.
"In our language we have a distinction between « thinking » and « thought ». « Thinking » implies the present tense — some activity going on which may include critical sensitivity to what can go wrong. [...] "Thought" is the past participle of that. We have the idea that after we have been thinking something, it just evaporates. But thinking doesn't disappear. It goes somehow into the brain and leaves something — a trace — which becomes thought. And thought then acts automatically. So thought is the response from memory from the past, from what has been done. Thus we have thinking and thought. We also have the word « feeling." Its present tense suggests the active present, that the feeling is directly in contact with reality. But it might be useful to introduce the word « felt », to say there are « feelings » and « felts ». That is, "felts" are feelings which have been recorded. A traumatic experience in the past can make you feel very uncomfortable when remembered. Nostalgic feelings are also from the past. A lot of the feelings that come up are really from the past, they're "felts." But if they are just a recording being replayed, they don't have as much significance as if they were a response to the present immediate situation.
It's really very important to see that our culture gives us a wrong lead about thoughts and felts. It constantly tends to imply that they could be separated and that one could control the other. But thoughts and felts are one process; they are not two. They both come from the memory; in the memory they are probably all mixed. Memory also affects the physical body. It affects the sensations. You can produce states of stress in the body from memory of states of stress. Therefore, when memory acts you cannot separate the intellectual function, the emotional function, the chemical function, the muscular function — because this tacit knowledge is also a kind of memory — they're all there." 
(David Bohm, On dialogue, 1996)

E1.7.C.3.1.b_REF4_SCI.wE1.5.D.2.1.b_REF1_PH

E1.5.D.2.1.b_REF2_PH "THE NATURE OF COLLECTIVE THOUGHT [...]
The real crisis is not in these events which are confronting us, like wars and crime and drugs and economic chaos and pollution; it's really in the thought which is making it — all the time. [...]
The kind of thought that's going on all around us begins to take over in every one of us, without our even noticing it. It's spreading like a virus and each one of us is nourishing that virus. Do we have a kind of immune system that stops it ? The only way to stop it is to recognize it, to acknowledge it, to see what it is. [...]
We may imagine that the source of the problem is that somebody "over there" is thinking these wrong thoughts or that a lot of people are. But the source of the problem is much deeper. It is that something is going wrong in the whole process of thought, which is collective, which belongs to all of us. [...]

Further, in our language we have a distinction between "thinking" and "thought." "Thinking" implies the present tense — some activity going on which may include critical sensitivity to what can go wrong. Also there may be new ideas, and perhaps occasionally perception of some kind inside. "Thought" is the past participle of that. We have the idea that after we have been thinking something, it just evaporates. But thinking doesn't disappear. It goes somehow into the brain and leaves something — a trace — which becomes thought. And thought then acts automatically. So thought is the response from memory from the past, from what has been done. Thus we have thinking and thought. We also have the word "feeling." Its present tense suggests the active present, that the feeling is directly in contact with reality. But it might be useful to introduce the word "felt," to say there are "feelings" and "felts." That is, "felts" are feelings which have been recorded. A traumatic experience in the past can make you feel very uncomfortable when remembered. Nostalgic feelings are also from the past. A lot of the feelings that come up are really from the past, they're "felts." But if they are just a recording being replayed, they don't have as much significance as if they were a response to the present immediate situation.
It's really very important to see that our culture gives us a wrong lead about thoughts and felts. It constantly tends to imply that they could be separated and that one could control the other. But thoughts and felts are one process; they are not two. They both come from the memory; in the memory they are probably all mixed. Memory also affects the physical body. It affects the sensations. You can produce states of stress in the body from memory of states of stress. Therefore, when memory acts you cannot separate the intellectual function, the emotional function, the chemical function, the muscular function-because this tacit knowledge is also a kind of memory — they're all there." 
(David Bohm, On dialogue, 1996)

E1.5.D.2.1.b_REF2.1_PH "THE NATURE OF COLLECTIVE THOUGHT
The real crisis is not in these events which are confronting us, like wars and crime and drugs and economic chaos and pollution; it's really in the thought which is making it — all the time. [...]
The kind of thought that's going on all around us begins to take over in every one of us, without our even noticing it. It's spreading like a virus and each one of us is nourishing that virus. Do we have a kind of immune system that stops it ? The only way to stop it is to recognize it, to acknowledge it, to see what it is. [...]
We may imagine that the source of the problem is that somebody "over there" is thinking these wrong thoughts or that a lot of people are. But the source of the problem is much deeper. It is that something is going wrong in the whole process of thought, which is collective, which belongs to all of us."
(David Bohm, On dialogue, 1996)

E1.5.D.2.2. EVERYONE MUST INVENT THEIR OWN WAY, as Spinoza provides a guide to understanding one's own emotions, rather than emotions in general. This is not a prescriptive path, even though it's a philosophy that offers little freedom outside its outlined route. This is done explicitly to achieve freedom.

E1.5.D.2.2.a. AN EVER-INCREASING ADHERENCE TO THE LIFE THAT EXPRESSES ITSELF IN OUR INDIVIDUALITY.
"Spinoza signifies that an infinite intensification of our body's consciousness is possible by writing that Desire is the consciousness of Appetite, or of the need expressed by the Body. Despite being only a part of Nature, we can continually elevate our adherence to the life that expresses itself in our individuality."

E1.5.D.2.2.a_REF1_PH "EVENTUALLY THE SADNESS WILL BECOME SECONDARY. If I try to fight it, I'm just adding to it. I'm angry, I don't want to be angry - I'm angry at my anger, and it's kind of a vicious cycle. Instead of focusing on my anger, I'm going to talk to this person I love, I'm going to read these texts that nourish me, and as a result, the sad passion will take up less and less space in my existence. When we achieve bliss, other affects will actually take up less space in our lives without us even having to think about them - and especially if we don't think about them at all. It's not a command to be joyful. If we try to be joyful, we miss out on joy, and we even run the risk of encountering sadness (because we can't make ourselves happy). It's not a matter of willpower, it's a matter of encounters, and joy will come if we do certain things. We begin by proposing to ourselves - and to others - possibilities and rules for living that become habits and bring joy. Spinoza says in Part 3 of the Ethics that in order for something to be possible for oneself, it must already be imagined as possible. What is good is what we know to be useful for ourselves (and not what we believe to be useful for ourselves), that is, what increases our power to act. This is the connection between virtue and bliss."
(Julie Henry on Les Chemins de la Philosophie, France Culture, 06/05/2020)

E1.5.D.2.2.a_REF1.1_PH "BEATITUDE IS NOT THE PRICE OF VIRTUE, BUT VIRTUE ITSELF.
"Beatitude is the keystone of this text. The term 'pedagogy' is something we find in Part 5 of the Ethics. When we talk about eternity, Spinoza tells us that it hasn't begun - by definition it can't have a beginning - and at the same time we're going to pretend that it has a beginning, because that's what will actually enable us to imagine or better understand the path to beatitude. The end of the Ethics helps us to understand the path that Spinoza has been leading us on throughout the first 4 parts of the Ethics. If, to be precise, 'beatitude is not the reward of virtue, but virtue itself,' then the end was not something far away, ahead of us, that we could hope to reach someday, and perhaps not even in this life. It was something that had been with us all along the way, and this is perhaps the first connection between joy and beatitude. If joy is the passage to a higher perfection, then it's that joy that has been with us all along the way, with the idea that beatitude is not a state in which we rest - as if there's some kind of movement and then we settle down and are in eternal rest - but rather something that has guided us and continues to guide us. In fact, I find that the end of Ethics is also like a new beginning, inviting us to continue. 

On the last page of the Ethics, Spinoza distinguishes between the wise and the ignorant. To what extent is this distinction a distinction of nature, or a matter of degree? Can the ignorant that we are ever claim to be wise? I find it very interesting that at the very end of the text Spinoza speaks of a 'path' - what he has shown us is not a model to follow, but rather a kind of path we can follow. He says it is difficult, and it is difficult even for the wise. In part 5, he says that the wise man knows the turmoil of emotions, that he is likely to have moments of doubt, and that he can be overwhelmed by his passions: 'Because they are wise, they are no less men;' this could be the epitaph of ethics... We can all progress toward a certain wisdom, and at the same time the ignorant man is still not as worthy as the wise man. This is not to say that the ignorant are unworthy human beings - it's all part of nature - but in the Treatise on Political Theology he tells us that the ignorant have as much right to live according to their ignorance as the wise have to live according to their wisdom. But it's true that he invites us to walk a certain path with him, to take us by the hand, as it were, especially when he uses the personal pronoun 'we,' which gives us the impression that we are all part of the same community and that we can progress with him. It's not something that's absolutized or substantiated - there's not the wise man on one side and the ignorant man on the other.

We've insisted on Spinoza's willingness to take man as he is, never a god or an animal; he is truly a man, pervaded by all the passions that constitute him. Isn't there a discrepancy between this ultimately realistic concern and the geometric form of ethics? There's something very logical, almost dry, that doesn't seem to fit with who we are - because we're not made of reason and logic alone.

I have the impression that there's a double register: it's true that there's something cold in the form, but at the same time it's quite logical, because Spinoza says that human passions can be studied like other natural phenomena. There's a logic to the way they work, so there's no point in laughing at people or despising them. Just as big fish eat little fish, so men are what they are. At the same time, I find that in the Scolies, with the examples of the everyday that he takes - the chicken in the neighbor's coop, the apple I'm holding, etc. - There's a way to make sense of the mundane. - There's a way to be sensitive to a discourse that may not seem to us to be addressed to us. There's always this attention to people - to what they do, to what they are, to what they can do - and at the same time always a demand; with attention to the human being and his resources - Spinoza tells us: we can do something even if we are determined by nature, thanks to the work of reason. It's through the same movement that we come to know ourselves and nature, so that we can learn to act differently. 

For Spinoza, salvation is immanent. Beatitude, eternity, salvation, these 3 concepts go together, and I find it a little less difficult to understand if we focus on the concept of eternity. It would be paradoxical to say to ourselves: 'I will have access to eternity after my death,' because eternity has no before or after. Spinoza's eternity is the exact opposite of the fear of dying and the hope that it will continue after death. Spinoza suggests that we encounter eternity in this life. Thus, to attain bliss is to enter eternity: bliss is a form of eternal joy. Since joy is always the passage to a higher perfection, and beatitude is perfection, it's as if beatitude were a form of joy anchored in eternity. A joy that would know no variation or increase, for it would be perfection itself. It remains to be seen whether we can encounter bliss in this world... In my opinion, we can, in the same way that we encounter eternity, i.e. not as something that is built up by degrees - a plateau to which we gain access - but rather as something of the order of an encounter. The mistake is to think that adding more and more accumulated time will result in eternity, whereas eternity has nothing to do with time in the sense of something that can have a before and an after.

In the 11th proposition of the third part of the Ethics, Spinoza speaks of tickling, which immediately evokes something physical. Does tickling gradually bring us closer to pleasure? The Latin term titillatio refers to a stimulation that's irritating because it appeals to one part of the body to the detriment of the others. Joy, on the other hand, increases my capacity to act. Joy is the passage to a higher perfection, and for Spinoza, being and perfection are one and the same-not in the sense of being satisfied with what is, which would be paradoxical with the path ethics shows us-but in the sense that our being, our conatus, tends to increase our power to act. It is a power that is not power. Power, potestas in Latin, is something that is 'exercised over' and contains the idea of taking possession of another, a form of authority that is not always benevolent. Potency, potencia in Latin, 'is exercised with'. When I increase my potency of being, I don't decrease yours. I increase my ability to be influenced by you and to influence you, so that together we can have even greater power. While power is usually exercised at the expense of others, potency is really about openness. As potency is expressed, it is shared with others.

This is a very important point, because we might think that the journey Spinoza invites us to take in slow steps is all about the self, whereas he's telling us that understanding relationships with others is indispensable for access to that very beatitude; without it, my potency will be inferior. I'm referring to another text - the Treatise on the Reform of the Understanding - where he says: 'The true and supreme good, that is the end to which I must tend. To acquire this superior human nature, and to make every effort that many others may acquire it with me. [...] It is important for my happiness that many others rise with me to the same thoughts as I do, so that their thoughts and understanding are in harmony with mine.' It's up to each of us to make the journey for ourselves, but it will be easier if we are accompanied by others. 

Eventually the sadness will become secondary. If I try to fight it, I'm just adding to it. I'm angry, I don't want to be angry - I'm angry at my anger, and it's kind of a vicious cycle. Instead of focusing on my anger, I'm going to talk to this person I love, I'm going to read these texts that nourish me, and as a result, the sad passion will take up less and less space in my existence. When we achieve bliss, other affects will actually take up less space in our lives without us even having to think about them - and especially if we don't think about them at all. It's not a command to be joyful. If we try to be joyful, we miss out on joy, and we even run the risk of encountering sadness (because we can't make ourselves happy). It's not a matter of willpower, it's a matter of encounters, and joy will come if we do certain things. We begin by proposing to ourselves - and to others - possibilities and rules for living that become habits and bring joy. Spinoza says in Part 3 of the Ethics that in order for something to be possible for oneself, it must already be imagined as possible. What is good is what we know to be useful for ourselves (and not what we believe to be useful for ourselves), that is, what increases our power to act. This is the connection between virtue and bliss.

Spinoza's presupposition of the love of existence is not self-evident - an unquestioned potency of affirmation. Spinoza does not believe that we can act against ourselves with full knowledge of the facts. There's no room for disgust with existence, or even for neutrality - there's always movement in Spinoza, and little room for chosen rest - to continue to be, you have to keep increasing your potency to act.
(Julie Henry on Les Chemins de la Philosophie, France Culture, 06/05/2020)

Listen to the Podcast :
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/quatre-malentendus-spinozistes-34-la-beatitude-nest-pas-le-prix-de-la-vertu-mais-la-vertu-elle-meme

E1.5.D.2.2.a_REF2_PH SPINOZA CRITICIZES THE CARTESIAN CONCEPTION OF IDEAS AS IMAGES, EMPHASIZING THAT EVERY IDEA IS AN AFFIRMATION AND NOT A MERE VISION. Spinoza introduces the concept of 'the idea of the idea' to denote the awareness of an idea by a higher-order idea, implying an infinity of degrees of awareness, always partial and perfectible.
"To take ideas for images, as Descartes does, is to confuse the knowledge of understanding with the knowledge, always mutilated and confused, of imagination. Every idea is an affirmation, an act of definition and determination, in other words, a conception, and not merely a vision of a form, even if it is the pure ideality of thought: 'Those who regard ideas as consisting in the images formed in us by the encounter of bodies [...] regard ideas as dumb pictures on a panel and, with their minds occupied by this prejudice, do not see that an idea, insofar as it is an idea, contains an affirmation or a negation" (Note in the demonstration of the corollary of Proposition 49, Part II).
What then of desire, which is appetite with consciousness of itself? To denote consciousness, Spinoza most often uses a singular expression that, as far as I know, belongs to him alone: the idea that has become conscious of itself is 'the idea of the idea'. By this Spinoza means that the idea, in order to become conscious of itself, must make itself the object of a higher-order idea. In this sense, we could say that consciousness is a metapsychology, i.e. a reflection not on psychology but on psychology itself, in the sense that we still speak of 'meta-linguistics' or 'meta-economics'. In this way, a reflection on the geometric order adopted in the Ethics could be said to constitute a kind of 'meta-ethics' (an outline of which can indeed be found in the Treatise on the Reform of Understanding). By preferring this formula ('idea of the idea') to the word 'consciousness,' which has nevertheless been adopted by the philosophical tradition, Spinoza affirms that intellectual evidence is never a perfect vision, but that, on the contrary, there are an infinite number of degrees of consciousness, depending on whether we rise to the level of the idea of the idea, or to the higher level of the idea of the idea of the idea, and so on ad infinitum. Contrary to Descartes' claims, there is no such thing as a perfect act of consciousness, except in God, insofar as He expresses Himself under the attribute of thought. Our consciousness, which is only a part of the immense nature, is always and necessarily partial, and therefore always perfectible. We could say, in this sense, that the idea of the idea is the idea squared, that is, to the power of two, and that the continuation of this power immediately affirms its infinity, hence the possibility of raising the idea to the power of n, as n increases toward infinity. In this way, we can think of the exaltation of the spirit that takes place in God. When Spinoza writes that desire is the consciousness of the appetite, or the need expressed by the body, he means that an infinite intensification of the consciousness we have of our body is possible, an ever greater elevation of our adherence to the life that is expressed in our individuality, we who are nevertheless only a part of nature.
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the Fullness of this World, 4-"Desire is the essence of man", 2017)

Read the essay in full: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Spinoza/Introduction/Introd4.html

E1.5.D.2.2.a_REF2.1_PH SPINOZA, EXPLAINS THAT OUR ATTACHMENT TO BEING CAN GROW IN INTENSITY INDEFINITELY. Life becomes more assertive as the conscious animal becomes more aware of its potency.
"Thus, our adherence to Being is likely to grow in intensity without it being possible to set a limit to this elevation to higher potency. To live and to exist, which are the names of the Absolute, since life that is in God or in nature has no other end than itself, is therefore an act that is capable of asserting itself more and more in the animal endowed with consciousness, and thus of exalting itself in the knowledge of its own potency. Of course, the mind is not free to act as it wishes, since all our actions are determined by the dense causality of nature, the full expression of God's creative infinity. That's why ethics does not lay down the maxims to be obeyed by righteous action taken with a view to the good: rather, it leads us to an ever brighter and stronger awareness of the necessity in which our individual existence is immersed. And the more we are aware of the conatus that lifts us up and makes us live, the more we adhere to the life that blossoms in our unique individuality, in our own personality. It is not up to us to change the course of things, but it is up to us to approve it, to participate in its creative impulse, to enjoy more and more this infinite affirmation of the Being that surrounds us and animates us within: 'This teaching is useful in that it teaches us that we act by the sole act of God (ex solo dei nutu) and that we share in the divine nature, and this all the more as we do more perfect acts and know God more and more' (Ethics, II, scolie of prop. 49)."
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the fullness of this world, 4-“Desire is the very essence of man”, 2017)

Read the essay in full: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Spinoza/Introduction/Introd4.html

E1.5.D.2.2.a_REF2.1.a_PH "THIS ENDLESS COLUMN is the earliest extant version of a motif to which Brâncuşi would return over the course of his career. In previous years Brâncuşi had used a doubled pyramid as a base for his sculptures, but he eventually realized that this abstract block could be multiplied into a pillar form, a fully realized work in its own right. Carved from oak, this succession of pyramids has a rhythmic, undulating geometry that suggests the possibility of infinite expansion."
(Curatorship, MomA, NYC)

E1.5.D.2.2.a_REF3_PH "FREEDOM CANNOT CONSIST IN THE NEGATION OF NECESSITY - ON THE CONTRARY, IT IS PURE AFFIRMATION, and there is nothing negative about it - it consists, on the contrary, in the affirmation of this same necessity, in the joyful and powerful participation in the divine necessity that never ceases to recreate the world, and this with no other end in view than that of expressing its infinite, eternal and gratuitous nature. [...]
I am free insofar as I know the world in the same sense as the swimmer knows the wave, that is, from an intuitive, non-discursive knowledge, from a single point of view and not according to the progression of demonstration."
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the fullness of this world, 4-“Desire is the very essence of man”, 2017)

E1.5.D.2.2.a_REF3.1_PH ACCORDING TO JACQUES DARRIULAT, SPINOZA'S FREEDOM IS NOT IN OPPOSITION TO NATURE, BUT IN PARTICIPATION IN THE IMMANENT DYNAMISM OF THE UNIVERSE. Freedom is the affirmation of divine necessity, an intuitive and non-discursive experience in which man, as part of nature, expresses his power to act in harmony with the universe.
"Perhaps we are now in a better position to understand in what sense participation in the universal life, which overflows on earth as in the universe - 'All things are animated in varying degrees', writes Spinoza (II, 13, scolie), which must be understood in the sense that all things, from stone to man, are lifted up, This is to be understood in the sense that all things, from stone to man, are animated by the impulse of the conatus, which is the life of God, or rather the activity of the living God, which is existence itself - in this sense, this infinite, living necessity does not contradict the experience of freedom, but, on the contrary, is its very object. For the body, whose radius of action expands in an environment without which it could not live, as well as the mind, which also thinks in an intellectual environment that nourishes and stimulates it, is not limited to itself, but is open to immensity, and expresses its own power to act all the more the greater this openness is. According to Spinoza, freedom does not consist in the act of opposing nature and, through one's work, seeking to domesticate it and subject it to one's own interests; on the contrary, it consists in participating in the immanent dynamism that lifts up the universe, not through the will to transform it, but rather through the will to communicate with the infinite life that runs through and through it. Therefore, freedom cannot consist in the negation of necessity - on the contrary, it is pure affirmation, and there is nothing negative about it - it consists, on the contrary, in the affirmation of this same necessity, in the joyful and powerful participation in the divine necessity that never ceases to recreate the world, and this with no other end in view than that of expressing its infinite, eternal and gratuitous nature. [...]
Man, part of nature, is nature itself, immersed in the immense universe. Freedom is the experience of necessity, an internal necessity expressed by the use of my power to act in the proper degree, and an external necessity resulting from the pressure of events that put me in a position to act. Freedom does not consist in the indifference of choice but, on the contrary, in the extreme determination of the act. I am free insofar as I know the world in the same sense as the swimmer knows the wave, that is, from an intuitive, non-discursive knowledge, from a single point of view and not according to the progression of demonstration. The highest knowledge, which is reason, knows the part through the whole, through the adjustment of each of the singular divisions in the whole of the symphony, and not the whole through the concatenation of the parts, which is knowledge of understanding, the constellation of propositions, but not the intuition of the totality".
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the fullness of this world, 4-“Desire is the very essence of man”, 2017)

Read the essay in full: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Spinoza/Introduction/Introd4.html

E1.5.D.2.2.b. INDIVIDUAL HAPPINESS CAN ONLY BE HINDERED AND BLOCKED BY EXTERNAL PRECEPTS

E1.5.D.2.2.b_REF1_PH “AS LONG AS HE WANTS HIS HAPPINESS, ONE MUST NOT GIVE THE INDIVIDUAL PRECEPTS CONCERNING THE WAY TO HAPPINESS: for individual happiness springs from laws unknown to all, and can only be hindered and stopped by external precepts. - The precepts we call “moral” are really directed against the individual, and have absolutely no desire for happiness. These precepts have just as little to do with 'the happiness and prosperity of mankind' - for it is absolutely impossible to connect these terms with rigorous concepts, and even less possible to use them as a lantern over the obscure ocean of moral aspirations.” 
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Aurora, 1881)

E1.5.D.2.2.b_REF2_PH “IT TAKES SO MANY YEARS FOR THE TRUTHS WE'VE MADE FOR OURSELVES TO BECOME OUR VERY FLESH.”
(Paul Valéry, Dialog of the tree, 1943)

E1.5.D.2.2.c. "DRAWING ON OUR INMOST VITALITY"

E1.5.D.2.2.c_REF1_LIT “WHAT I MEAN IS THAT OUR MODERN PSEUDO-SCIENCE AND PSEUDO-REALISM TEND TO CORRUPT THE UP-MOUNTING SPRING OF LIFE-ACCEPTANCE IN US, which keeps us going in spite the “urchins” of the First Cause. The old religious faith gave our forefathers the stoical habit of drawing their life-energy not from external conditions but from within. That they called this power, welling up from inside themselves by the name of “God” had an historical justification which is lacking to-day. But that is no reason for deserting the living well-spring of mysterious magic within us. Never mind the name! The point is that we have the power of re-creating the universe from the depths of ourselves. In doing so we share the creative force that started the whole process. It is personality, the out-rushing energy of living organisms, that underlies all the criss-cross currents of the world. Every time a living being gathers itself grimly together, and draws on its inmost vitality to be happy in spite of all, it is doing what our sturdy ancestors called “praying”. “ 
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber, p. 361)

E1.5.D.2.2.c_REF2_LIT MENTAL INDEPENDENCE "My whole art of self-expression in lecturing was as a matter of fact based upon a certain kind of mental independence, an independence which I was always desperately trying to convey to others, for I regarded it—and do still regard it—as one of the most important elements in human happiness and by no means exclusive of the devotion of a scholar to the Past." 
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934)

E1.5.D.3. "THE PARADOX OF FREEWILL: WHAT DOES SCIENCE SAYS ABOUT FREE WILL?
“Nothing is more unbearable, once one has it, than freedom,” James Baldwin observed in recognizing how limited our freedom is and how illusory our choices, for he knew that “people can’t, unhappily, invent their mooring posts, their lovers and their friends, anymore than they can invent their parents.”

And yet we move through the world with an air of agency, without which life would feel unlivable — a gauntlet of causality stretching all the way back to the Big Bang, into which we are hurled as helpless pawns in some cosmic game that has already played out. It is a disquieting notion — one we have countered with our dream of free will, continually mistaking the feeling of freedom for the fact of freedom

But even within the presets and parameters conferred upon us by the cosmic and cultural forces that made us, there exists a margin of movement in which notions like control, agency, and moral responsibility live. In that margin, we become fully human.

In this fascinating BBC documentary, journalist Melissa Hogenboom and a constellation of neuroscientists, physicists, and philosophers explore the science and subtleties of the free will question — a question that remains not only unanswered but a testament to Hannah Arendt’s astute observation that “to lose the appetite for meaning we call thinking and cease to ask unanswerable questions [would be to lose] the capacity to ask all the answerable questions upon which every civilization is founded.”
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

Watch the documentary Free Will on Vimeo: https://vimeo.com/557541237

E1.5.D.4. THE LINK BETWEEN BELIEF IN FREE WILL AND LIFE SATISFACTION
"The link between your belief in free will, and your happiness: The Freedom to Pursue Happiness: Belief in Free Will Predicts Life Satisfaction and Positive Affect.
At present, the researchers have identified a correlation between a belief in free will and happiness but they plan to investigate if a belief in free will directly causes happiness in the Chinese population. Future investigations on such causal links will involve assessing behavior after producing a change in a belief in free will.

“We are currently conducting investigations on the potential for causality between these two variables,” says Li. “We plan to change participants’ belief in free will in the laboratory by exposing them to materials that either support or disprove the existence of free will, and then observe whether their happiness levels change,” he explains.

If a causal link can be found, why might believing in free will help someone to be happier? A belief that someone can act freely to achieve their goals and desires may increase levels of perceived autonomy and help facilitate self-control and deliberate effort to achieve goals, leading to successful outcomes. If it can be shown that strengthening a belief in free will can help people to pursue happiness, then psychologists could develop training programs with this in mind."
(The World Economic Forum)

Read the full article:
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2017/02/the-link-between-your-belief-in-free-will-and-your-happiness/

E1.5.D.5. ISN'T FREEDOM ITSELF HAPPINESS? IT'S MORE ACCURATE TO SAY THAT ONE MUST BE FREE IN ORDER TO BE HAPPY.
"It is [...] the desire for happiness that is the foundation and the ultimate goal of the desire for freedom [...] Freedom (in the ordinary sense) is never more than the means or the condition for the existence and realization of happiness".
(Robert Misrahi)

E1.5.D.5_REF1_PH "WE MUST PRIVILEGE [THE] EXPERIENCE OF DELIGHT IN THE SETTING UP OF ANY PROBLEMATIC OF ACTION. Only the constitution of delight as the fundamental fact of activity can enlighten us on the problem of the passage from alienation to the desire for freedom. 
Only the reflexive experience of delight can account for the movement toward freedom. [...]
As reflexivity is, moreover, perpetually capable of constituting itself as reflection (i.e., as a methodical and exploratory doubling of itself), we can see that the passage from reflexivity to reflection is rigorously contemporary with the very desire for plenitude when it becomes aware of the present but provisional absence of this plenitude. [...]
It is the very structures of the subject that lead to the notion of happiness. [...]
We must first recognize that only freedom can desire freedom: this is why the activity of desire must be conceived as a reflexivity; only a reflexivity can constitute itself as a giver of meaning, and consequently also as both a free and negative affirmation of an alienation “to be overcome”.
Next, we must recognize that only the opposition of practical reflexivity and secondary reflection can account for the opposition of the two stages of freedom and the passage from one to the other, i.e. from alienation to independence. 
Finally, we must recognize that only a desire for delight-plenitude (i.e., a dynamic, already-experienced qualitative content) can motivate the desire for freedom, which is consequently only one of the indispensable means for obtaining a deeper, non-repetitive delight. It is therefore the desire for happiness that is the foundation and purpose of the desire for freedom: freedom is not its own end. [...]
So we can say: the real stake in action (and its real foundation) is not freedom as form, but happiness as content. Freedom (in the ordinary sense) is never more than the means or condition for the existence and realization of happiness; it is reflection that has a privileged relationship with freedom.”
(Robert Misrahi, The Acts of Joy, 1987)

E1.5.E. THE DESIRE TO ESCAPE DETERMINATIONS
We are free to step away from the utilitarian flow of life, which is simply survival: but we must desire to do so! In peaceful times, and as long as we are not subjected to the agonies of poverty or the pains of ill-health, our freedom to seek joy is limitless.

E1.5.E.1. "I'M AN IDLE MAN IN A TIME OF PEACE" WHO "'WITH A LAUGH BREAKS THE FALSE WEIGHTS AND MEASURES APPLIED TO MEN AND THINGS" AND ATTEMPTS TO LIVE AS A POET.

E1.5.E.1.1. I'M AN IDLE MAN IN A TIME OF PEACE...

E1.5.E.1.1_REF1_PH “DO YOU ABUSE YOUR POOR UNDERSTANDING 
by the idea of the enigma of eternity? 
Why not lie under the high plane trees or here 
under the pines?
(Horace, Odes, II, 11)”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human, Aphorism 109, 1878)

E1.5.E.1.1_REF2_PH I AM AN IDLE MAN IN A TIME OF PEACE "Let us hope, however, that in the future [...] we shall have to expect nothing more than the more or less contemptuous scorn of honest people, when they ask us incredulously, as is their custom, about what they consider to be our strange activities, we shall have the spirit to remember what Ryokan, the Zen monk, used to answer on such occasions:
"...in the springtime of a hundred flowers, on the wide paths 
I play ball
if on the way a passer-by questions me, I answer 
"I am an idle man in a time of peace.
(Lin Yu Tang)

E1.5.E.1.1_REF3_LIT AN INVENTED WORD TO DESCRIBE THE DESIRE TO CARE LESS ABOUT THINGS
“liberosis n. the desire to care less about things—to loosen your grip on your life, to stop glancing behind you every few steps, afraid that someone will snatch it from you before you reach the end zone—rather to hold your life loosely and playfully, like a volleyball, keeping it in the air, with only quick fleeting interventions, bouncing freely in the hands of trusted friends, always in play.”
(John Koenig, The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021)

E1.5.E.1.1_REF4_PH SCHILLER ARGUES THAT A PERSON IS ONLY COMPLETELY A MAN WHEN HE PLAYS, REDEFINING PLAY NOT AS A FRIVOLOUS ACTIVITY, BUT AS THE HIGHEST STATE OF BEING WHERE HUMANITY'S RATIONAL AND SENSUOUS NATURES ARE UNIFIED THROUGH THE EXPERIENCE OF BEAUTY.
“Is not the beautiful degraded by this, that it is made a mere play? and is it not reduced to the level of frivolous objects which have for ages passed under that name? Does it not contradict the conception of the reason and the dignity of beauty, which is nevertheless regarded as an instrument of culture, to confine it to the work of being a mere play? and does it not contradict the empirical conception of play, which can coexist with the exclusion of all taste, to confine it merely to beauty?

But what is meant by a mere play, when we know that in all conditions of humanity that very thing is play, and only that is play which makes man complete and develops simultaneously his twofold nature? What you style limitation, according to your representation of the matter, according to my views, which I have justified by proofs, I name enlargement. Consequently I should have said exactly the reverse: man is serious only with the agreeable, with the good, and with the perfect, but he plays with beauty. In saying this we must not indeed think of the plays that are in vogue in real life, and which commonly refer only to his material state. But in real life we should also seek in vain for the beauty of which we are here speaking. The actually present beauty is worthy of the really, of the actually present play-impulse; but by the ideal of beauty, which is set up by the reason, an ideal of the play-instinct is also presented, which man ought to have before his eyes in all his plays.

Therefore, no error will ever be incurred if we seek the ideal of beauty on the same road on which we satisfy our play-impulse. We can immediately understand why the ideal form of a Venus, of a Juno, and of an Apollo, is to be sought not at Rome, but in Greece, if we contrast the Greek population, delighting in the bloodless athletic contests of boxing, racing, and intellectual rivalry at Olympia, with the Roman people gloating over the agony of a gladiator. Now the reason pronounces that the beautiful must not only be life and form, but a living form, that is, beauty, inasmuch as it dictates to man the twofold law of absolute formality and absolute reality. Reason also utters the decision that man shall only play with beauty, and he shall only play with beauty.

For, to speak out once for all, man only plays when in the full meaning of the word he is a man, and he is only completely a man when he plays. This proposition, which at this moment perhaps appears paradoxical, will receive a great and deep meaning if we have advanced far enough to apply it to the twofold seriousness of duty and of destiny. I promise you that the whole edifice of aesthetic art and the still more difficult art of life will be supported by this principle. But this proposition is only unexpected in science; long ago it lived and worked in art and in the feeling of the Greeks, her most accomplished masters; only they removed to Olympus what ought to have been preserved on earth. Influenced by the truth of this principle, they effaced from the brow of their gods the earnestness and labor which furrow the cheeks of mortals, and also the hollow lust that smoothes the empty face. They set free the ever serene from the chains of every purpose, of every duty, of every care, and they made indolence and indifference the envied condition of the godlike race; merely human appellations for the freest and highest mind. As well the material pressure of natural laws as the spiritual pressure of moral laws lost itself in its higher idea of necessity, which embraced at the same time both worlds, and out of the union of these two necessities issued true freedom. Inspired by this spirit the Greeks also effaced from the features of their ideal, together with desire or inclination, all traces of volition, or, better still, they made both unrecognizable, because they knew how to wed them both in the closest alliance. It is neither charm, nor is it dignity, which speaks from the glorious face of Juno Ludovici; it is neither of these, for it is both at once. While the female god challenges our veneration, the godlike woman at the same time kindles our love. But while in ecstacy we give ourselves up to the heavenly beauty, the heavenly self-repose awes us back. The whole form rests and dwells in itself—a fully complete creation in itself—and as if she were out of space, without advance or resistance; it shows no force contending with force, no opening through which time could break in. Irresistibly carried away and attracted by her womanly charm, kept off at a distance by her godly dignity, we also find ourselves at length in the state of the greatest repose, and the result is a wonderful impression for which the understanding has no idea and language no name.”
(Friedrich Schiller, The Aesthetical Essays, 1875)

E1.5.E.1.1_REF5_SOC GREG LUKIANOFF ARGUES THAT THE SHARP DECLINE IN UNSUPERVISED FREE PLAY—A BIOLOGICALLY ESSENTIAL ACTIVITY FOR WIRING A CHILD'S BRAIN FOR SOCIAL AND PHYSICAL COMPETENCE—HAS BEEN DRIVEN BY PARENTAL FEARS AND INCREASED ACADEMIC PRESSURE, CONTRIBUTING TO RISING RATES OF ANXIETY AND RISK AVERSION IN YOUNG PEOPLE.
“The Decline of Play […]
When seen from a distance, child’s play is a strange thing. Peter LaFreniere, a developmental psychologist at the University of Maine, notes that children’s play “combines the expenditure of great energy with apparently pointless risk.” But if nearly all mammals do it, and if some of them get injured or eaten while doing it, it must offer some pretty powerful benefits to compensate for the risks.
It does. Play is essential for wiring a mammal’s brain to create a functioning adult. Mammals that are deprived of play won’t develop to their full capacity. In one experiment demonstrating this effect, rat pups were raised in one of three conditions: (1) totally alone in a cage;(2) alone except for one hour a day with a normal, playful young rat, during which time normal rough-and-tumble play occurred; and (3) same as condition 2, except that the visiting young rat was treated with a drug that knocked out rough-and-tumble play while leaving other social behaviors, such as sniffing and nuzzling. When the young rats were later put into new situations, those that had engaged in rough-and-tumble play showed fewer signs of fearfulness and engaged in more exploration of the new environment.
A key concept from developmental biology is “experience-expectant development.” Human beings have only about 22,000 genes, but our brains have approximately 100 billion neurons, with hundreds of trillions of synaptic connections. Our genes could never offer a codebook or blueprint for building anything so complex. Even if a blueprint could be passed down in our genes, it would not be flexible enough to build children who were well adapted to the vast range of environments and problems that our wandering species has gotten itself into. Nature found a better way to wire our large brains, and it goes like this: Genes are essential for getting the various cell lines started in the embryo, and genes guide brain development toward a “first draft” in utero. But experience matters, too, even while the baby is in the uterus; and after birth, it matters enormously. Experience is so essential for wiring a large brain that the “first draft” of the brain includes a strong motivation to practice behaviors that will give the brain the right kind of feedback to optimize itself for success in the environment that happens to surround it. That’s why young mammals are so keen to play, despite the risks.
It’s easy to see how this works with language in humans: The genes get the ball rolling on the development of brain structures for language, but the child must actually encounter and practice a language to finish the process. The linguistic brain is “expecting” certain kinds of input, and children are therefore motivated to engage in back-and-forth reciprocal exchanges with others in order to get that input. It’s fun for them to exchange sounds, and later, real words, with other people. A child who was deprived of these linguistic interactions until puberty would be unable to fully acquire a language or learn to speak normally, having missed the “critical period” for language learning that is part of the normal developmental process.
It’s the same logic for physical skills (such as fleeing from predators) and social skills (such as negotiating conflicts and cooperation). The genes get the ball rolling on the first draft of the brain, but the brain is “expecting” the child to engage in thousands of hours of play—including thousands of falls, scrapes, conflicts, insults, alliances, betrayals, status competitions, and acts of exclusion—in order to develop. Children who are deprived of play are less likely to develop into physically and socially competent teens and adults.
Research on play has increased rapidly since 1980. Evidence for the benefits of play is now strong, and there’s a growing body of scholarship—suggestive though not conclusive—linking play deprivation to later anxiety and depression. As stated in one review of this literature:
‘Research has shown that anxious children may elicit overprotective behavior from others, such as parents and caretakers, and that this reinforces the child’s perception of threat and decreases their perception of controlling the danger. Overprotection might thus result in exaggerated levels of anxiety. Overprotection through governmental control of playgrounds and exaggerated fear of playground accidents might thus result in an increase of anxiety in society. We might need to provide more stimulating environments for children, rather than hamper their development.’
Given this research, and given the rising levels of adolescent anxiety, depression, and suicide, which we described in chapter 7, our educational system and parenting practices should offer kids more time for free play. But in fact, the opposite has happened.
In this chapter, we investigate why the most beneficial forms of play have declined sharply since the 1970s, and we ask what effects this change in childhood might have on teens and college students. The decline of unsupervised free play—including ample opportunities to take small risks—is our fourth explanatory thread.
The Decline of Free Play
Peter Gray, a leading researcher of play, defines “free play” as
“activity that is freely chosen and directed by the participants and undertaken for its own sake, not consciously pursued to achieve ends that are distinct from the activity itself.” Piano lessons and soccer practice are not free play, but goofing around on a piano or organizing a pickup soccer game are. Gray and other researchers note that all play is not equal. Vigorous physical free play—outdoors, and with other kids—is a crucial kind of play, one that our evolved minds are “expecting.” It also happens to be the kind of play that kids generally say they like the most. (There is also a good case to be made for the importance of imaginative or pretend play, which is found not only in less rambunctious kinds of indoor free play but often in rough-and-tumble outdoor free play as well.)
Gray notes the tendency of kids to introduce danger and risk into outdoor free play, such as when they climb walls and trees, or skateboard down staircases and railings:
‘They seem to be dosing themselves with moderate degrees of fear, as if deliberately learning how to deal with both the physical and emotional challenges of the moderately dangerous conditions they generate. . . . All such activities are fun to the degree that they are moderately frightening. If too little fear is induced, the activity is boring; if too much is induced, it becomes no longer play but terror. Nobody but the child himself or herself knows the right dose.’
nfortunately, outdoor physical play is the kind that has declined the most in the lives of American children. The study that offers the clearest picture of the relevant trends was carried out in 1981 by sociologists at the University of Michigan, who asked parents of children under thirteen to keep detailed records of how their kids spent their time on several randomly chosen days. They repeated the study in 1997, and found that time spent in any kind of play went down 16% overall, and much of the play had shifted to indoor activities, often involving a computer and no other children. This kind of play does not build physical strength and is not as effective at building psychological resilience or social competence, so the drop in real, healthy, sociable free play was much greater than 16%. That study compared Generation X (who were kids in 1981) to Millennials (who were kids in 1997). Twenge’s analysis of iGen, the current generation of kids, shows that the drop in free play has accelerated. Compared with Millennials, iGen spends less time going out with friends, more time interacting with parents, and much more time interacting with screens (which can be a form of social interaction but can have some negative effects, as we discussed in chapter 7).
Compared with previous generations, members of iGen have therefore had much less of the kind of unsupervised free play that Gray says is most valuable. They have been systematically deprived of opportunities to “dose themselves” with risk. Instead of enjoying a healthy amount of risk, this generation is more likely than earlier ones to avoid it. Twenge shows how responses have changed to the survey question “I get a real kick out of doing things that are a little dangerous.” From 1994 through 2010, the percentage of adolescents who agreed with that question held steady, in the low 50s. But as iGen enters the dataset, agreement drops, dipping to 43% by 2015. If members of iGen have been risk-deprived and are therefore more risk averse, then it is likely that they have a lower bar for what they see as daunting or threatening. They will see more ordinary life tasks as beyond their ability to handle on their own without help from an adult. It should not surprise us that anxiety and depression rates began rising rapidly on campus as soon as iGen arrived.
In contrast to the decreased time spent in play between 1981 and 1997, that same time-use study found that time spent in school went up 18%, and time spent doing homework went up 145%. Research by Duke University psychologist Harris Cooper indicates that while there are benefits to homework in middle school and high school, provided it’s relevant and in the right amount, achievement benefits in elementary school are smaller, and homework that isn’t realistic in length and difficulty can even decrease achievement. Yet elementary school students have seen an increase in homework over the past twenty years. Some schools even assign homework in kindergarten.(Lenore Skenazy told us that when she asked her son’s teacher why homework was being assigned in kindergarten, the teacher responded, “So they will be ready for homework in first grade.”)
Why is this happening? Why have we deprived kids of the healthiest forms of play and given them more homework and more supervision instead? One of the major reasons for the decline of all forms of unsupervised outdoor activity is, of course, the unrealistic media-amplified fear of abduction, which we described in the previous chapter. In one large survey, published in 2004, 85% of mothers said that their children played outdoors less frequently than they themselves had played when they were the same age. When asked to select reasons to explain why their children didn’t spend more time on outdoor play, 82% of the mothers chose “safety concerns,” including the fear of crime.
But there’s a second reason, a second fear that haunts American parents and children—particularly those in the middle class and above—far more than it did in the late twentieth century: the college admissions process. […]”
(Greg Lukianoff, The Coddling of the American Mind, 2018)

E1.5.E.1.1_REF5.1_SOC GREG LUKIANOFF ARGUES THAT THE DECLINE OF UNSUPERVISED FREE PLAY POSES A DIRECT THREAT TO LIBERAL DEMOCRACIES BY DEPRIVING CHILDREN OF THE OPPORTUNITY TO DEVELOP THE CRUCIAL "ART OF ASSOCIATION," THEREBY FOSTERING A DANGEROUS DEFAULT OF APPEALING TO THIRD-PARTY COERCION FOR CONFLICT RESOLUTION.
“Childhood as Democracy Prep
The effects of play deprivation and oversupervision may extend far beyond college. Steven Horwitz, an economist at Ball State University in Indiana, took the same research on play that we have reviewed in this chapter and worked out some possible consequences for the future of liberal democracies. He drew on the work of political scientists Elinor Ostrom and Vincent Ostrom, both of whom studied how self-governing communities resolve conflicts peacefully. Successful democracies do this by developing a variety of institutions and norms that enable people with different goals and conflicting desires to resolve their problems while rarely appealing to the police or the state to coerce their fellow citizens. This is the “art of association” that so impressed Alexis de Tocqueville when he traveled through the United States in 1835.
Citizens of a democracy don’t suddenly develop this art on their eighteenth birthday. It takes many years to cultivate these skills, which overlap with the ones that Peter Gray maintains are learned during free play. Of greatest importance in free play is that it is always voluntary; anyone can quit at any time and disrupt the activity, so children must pay close attention to the needs and concerns of others if they want to keep the game going. They must work out conflicts over fairness on their own; no adult can be called upon to side with one child against another.
Horwitz points out that when adult-supervised activities crowd out free play, children are less likely to develop the art of association:
‘Denying children the freedom to explore on their own takes away important learning opportunities that help them to develop not just independence and responsibility, but a whole variety of social skills that are central to living with others in a free society. If this argument is correct, parenting strategies and laws that make it harder for kids to play on their own pose a serious threat to liberal societies by flipping our default setting from “figure out how to solve this conflict on your own” to “invoke force and/or third parties whenever conflict arises.” This is one of the “vulnerabilities of democracies” noted by Vincent Ostrom.’
The consequences for democracies could be dire, particularly for a democracy such as the United States, which is already suffering from ever-rising cross-party hostility and declining trust in institutions. Here is what Horwitz fears could be in store:
‘A society that weakens children’s ability to learn these skills denies them what they need to smooth social interaction. The coarsening of social nteraction that will result will create a world of more conflict and violence, and one in which people’s first instinct will be increasingly to invoke coercion by other parties to solve problems they ought to be able to solve themselves.’
This is what Greg began to see around 2013: increasing calls from students for administrators and professors to regulate who can say what, who gets to speak on campus, and how students should interact with one another, even in private settings. The calls for more regulation and the bureaucratic impulse to provide that regulation are the subject of our next chapter.
We end this chapter, however, on a more positive note. In contrast to all the unwisdom kids are exposed to in the form of the three Great Untruths, here is a better way to frame the experiences of childhood and adolescence. In June 2017, John Roberts, the chief justice of the United States, was invited to be the commencement speaker at his son’s graduation from middle school. Like Van Jones (whom we quoted in chapter 4), Roberts understands antifragility. He wishes for his son’s classmates to have the sorts of painful experiences that will make them better people and better citizens. Here is an excerpt from his speech:
‘From time to time in the years to come, I hope you will be treated unfairly, so that you will come to know the value of justice. I hope that you will suffer betrayal because that will teach you the importance of loyalty. Sorry to say, but I hope you will be lonely from time to time so that you don’t take friends for granted. I wish you bad luck, again, from time to time so that you will be conscious of the role of chance in life and understand that your success is not completely deserved and that the failure of others is not completely deserved either. And when you lose, as you will from time to time, I hope every now and then, your opponent will gloat over your failure. It is a way for you to understand the importance of sportsmanship. I hope you’ll be ignored so you know the importance of listening to others, and I hope you will have just enough pain to learn compassion. Whether I wish these things or not, they’re going to happen. And whether you benefit from them or not will depend upon your ability to see the message in your misfortunes.’”
(Greg Lukianoff, The Coddling of the American Mind, 2018)

E1.5.E.1.2. WHO WITH A LAUGH BREAKS THE FALSE WEIGHTS AND MEASURES APPLIED TO MEN AND THINGS...

E1.5.E.1.2_REF1_LIT HE LAUGHINGLY SHATTERS THE FALSE WEIGHTS AND MEASURES APPLIED TO MEN AND THINGS. "The honest man, disabused of all illusions, is the man par excellence. As long as he is witty, his company is very agreeable. He can't be pedantic and doesn't attach importance to anything. He is indulgent because he remembers that he once had illusions, as do those who still have them. It's an effect of his carelessness to be sure in business, not to allow himself repetition or trouble. If someone is unfair to him, he forgets or scorns him. He must be more cheerful than most, for he is constantly in a state of teasing his fellow-men. He is in the right and laughs at the mistakes of those who grope their way through falsehood. He is a man who, from a lighted place in a darkened room, sees the ridiculous gestures of those who wander there at random. He breaks with laughter the false weights and measures that are applied to men and things.
(Chamfort, Maxims and Thoughts, Characters and Anecdotes, n°338, 1857)

E1.5.E.1.2_REF2_PH REMIND YOURSELF, SON, THAT IN ALL CIRCUMSTANCES OF HISTORY, THERE HAVE ALWAYS BEEN ANGLERS "My father, when I was a teenager and he saw me preoccupied by I don't know what turn of events, used to repeat to me: « Remind yourself, son, that in all circumstances of history, there have always been anglers. » [...]
After a long exploration of Chinese literature and philosophy, I have come to the conclusion that their highest ideal has always been a man detached (Ta Kuan) from life and wisely disenchanted. This wisdom generates a certain height of character that enables one to go through life with tolerant irony, to escape the temptations of fame, wealth, and achievement, and finally to accept events. From this detachment also comes the sense of freedom, the love of wandering, of pride, of nonchalance. For only the sense of freedom and idleness allows one to attain the joy of living intensely [...] The enjoyment of an idle life is not expensive. The true taste for idleness has been lost in the wealthy classes and is now found only in people who have a supreme contempt for money. It comes from an intimate richness of the soul in a man who loves the simple life and is impatient of having to earn it. There will always be enough life to enjoy, for a man who is determined to do so."
(Lin Yu Tang, The Importance of Living, quoted by Denis Grozdanovitch in A Short Treatise on Casualness, 2002)

E1.5.E.1.2_REF2.1_MU NORAH JONES, PEACE

Listen on Youtube: https://youtu.be/Tr2QF6ZZVFA

E1.5.E.1.2_REF3_PH "UN HOMME AFFRANCHI DES LIENS ACCOUTUMÉS DE LA VIE, à point qu’il ne continue à vivre qu’en vue d’améliorer sans cesse sa connaissance, doit renoncer, sans envie ni dépit, à beaucoup de choses : presque à tout ce qui a de la valeur chez les autres hommes ; il doit être satisfait comme de la situation la plus souhaitable, de planer ainsi librement, sans crainte, au-dessus des hommes, des mœurs, des lois et des évaluations traditionnelles des choses. Il aime à communiquer le contentement que lui donne cette situation et il peut n’avoir rien d’autre à communiquer — en quoi il aura, il est vrai, une privation, une abdication de plus. Si, malgré tout, on veut tirer de lui davantage, il renverra, d’un hochement de tête bienveillant, à son frère, le libre homme d’action, sans peut-être celer un peu de raillerie, car cette « liberté » a sa conjoncture propre."

E1.5.E.1.2_REF3.1_PH "SOME REASSURANCE. But does not our philosophy then turn into tragedy? Does not truth become an enemy of life, an enemy of what is better? A question seems to weigh down our tongues, and yet not want to be uttered: whether one is capable of consciously remaining in untruth, or, if one had to do so, whether death would not be preferable? For there is no "ought" anymore. Morality to the extent that it was an "ought" has been destroyed by our way of reflection, every bit as much as religion. Knowledge can allow only pleasure and unpleasure, benefit and harm, as motives. But how will these motives come to terms with the feeling for truth? These motives, too, have to do with errors (to the extent that inclination and disinclination, and their very unfair measurements, essentially determine, as we have said, our pleasure and unpleasure). All human life is sunk deep in untruth; the individual cannot pull it out of this well without growing profoundly annoyed with his entire past, without finding his present motives (like honor) senseless, and without opposing scorn and disdain to the passions that urge one on to the future and to the happiness in it. If this is true, is there only one way of thought left, with despair as a personal end and a philosophy of destruction as a theoretical end?
I believe that a man's temperament determines the aftereffect of knowledge; although the aftereffect described above is possible in some natures, I could just as well imagine a different one, which would give rise to a life much more simple, more free of affects than the present one. The old motives of intense desire would still be strong at first, due to old, inherited habit, but they would gradually grow weaker under the influence of cleansing knowledge. Finally one would live among men and with oneself as in nature, without praise, reproaches, overzealousness, delighting in many things as in a spectacle that one formerly had only to fear. One would be free of appearance and would no longer feel the goading thought that one was not simply nature, or that one was more than nature. Of course, as I said, a good temperament would be necessary--a secure, mild, and basically cheerful soul; such a disposition would not need to be on guard for tricks and sudden explosions, and its expressions would have neither a growling tone nor sullenness--those familiar bothersome traits of old dogs and men who have lain a long time chained up. Rather, a man from whom the ordinary chains of life have fallen in such measure that he continues to live on only to better his knowledge must be able to renounce without envy and chagrin much, indeed almost everything, that other men value. He must be content with that free, fearless hovering over men, customs, laws and the traditional evaluations of things, which is for him the most desirable of states. He is glad to communicate his joy in this state, and perhaps he has nothing else to communicate, which is, to be sure, one renunciation, one self-denial the more. But if one nevertheless wants more from him, with a benevolent shake of the head he will indicate his brother, the free man of action, and perhaps not conceal a little scorn: for that man's "freedom" is another matter entirely."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain, aphorisme 34, 1878)

E1.5.E.1.2_REF4_PO “THE BEST ADVICE WE HAVE FOR ANYONE ELSE IS ALWAYS ADVICE TO OURSELVES, honed on the sincerity of living, learned through life’s best teaching tool: suffering. Otherwise it becomes that most untrustworthy of transmissions: preaching. It is in speaking to ourselves that we practice speaking the truth — the unflattering truth, the incongruous truth, the truth trembling with all the terror and tenderness of knowing ourselves in order to know the world, of loving ourselves in order to love the world.” 
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.5.E.1.2_REF4.1_PO “ADVICE TO MYSELF #2: RESISTANCE
Resist the thought that you may need a savior,
or another special being to walk beside you.
Resist the thought that you are alone.
Resist turning your back on the knife
of the world’s sorrow,
resist turning that knife upon yourself.
Resist your disappearance
into sentimental monikers,
into the violent pattern of corporate logos,
into the mouth of the unholy flower of consumerism.
Resist being consumed.
Resist your disappearance
into anything except
the face you had before you walked up to the podium.
Resist all funding sources but accept all money.
Cut the strings and dismantle the web
that needing money throws over you.
Resist the distractions of excess.
Wear old clothes and avoid chain restaurants.
Resist your genius and your own significance
as declared by others.
Resist all hint of glory but accept the accolade
as tributes to your double.
Walk away in your unpurchased skin.
Resist the millionth purchase and go backward.
Get rid of everything.
If you exist, then you are loved
by existence. What do you need?
A spoon, a blanket, a bowl, a book —
maybe the book you give away.
Resist the need to worry, robbing everything
of immediacy and peace.
Resist traveling except where you want to go.
Resist seeing yourself in others or them in you.
Nothing, everything, is personal.
Resist all pressure to have children
unless you crave the torment of joy.
If you give in to irrationality, then
resist cleaning up the messes your children make.
You are robbing them of small despairs they can fix.
Resist cleaning up after your husband.
It will soon replace having sex with him.
Resist outrageous charts spelling doom.
However you can, rely on sun and wind.
Resist loss of the miraculous
by lowering your standards
for what constitutes a miracle.
It is all a fucking miracle.
Resist your own gift’s power
to tear you away from the simplicity of tears.
Your gift will begin to watch you having your emotions,
so that it can use them in an interesting paragraph,
or to get a laugh.
Resist the blue chair of dreams, the red chair of science, the black chair of the humanities, and just be human.
Resist all chairs.
Be the one sitting on the ground
or perching on the beam overhead
or sleeping beneath the podium.
Resist disappearing from the stage,
unless you can walk straight into the bathroom and resume the face,
the desolate face, the radiant face, the weary face, the face
that has become your own, though all your life
you have resisted it.” 
(Louise Erdrich)

Listen to the poem read by Maria Popova on YouTube: https://youtu.be/JJb0sYmRqxI

E1.5.E.1.2_REF4.2_LIT D.H. LAWRENCE TO HIS FRIEND CYNTHIA ASQUITH, WHO DESPITE HER TALENT AND HER PASSION, FELT TRAPPED IN HER CIRCUMSTANCES — a marriage too small for her, to which she felt tethered by her children, in a country still too corseted by Victorian mores to allow a woman the full freedom to claim her life:
“You must get the intrinsic reality clear within your soul — even if you betray it in reality, yet know it: that is everything. And know that in the end, always you keep the ultimate choice of your destiny: to abide by the intrinsic reality, or by the extrinsic: the choice is yours, do not let it slide from you, keep it always secure, reserved… Keep the choice of the right always in your own hands. Never admit that it is taken from you… Keep the choice of life… always in your hands: *don’t* ever relinquish it.”
(D.H. Lawrence, Letters, 1932)

E1.5.E.1.2_REF5_LIT ANNE MORROW LINDBERGH REFRAMES MIDDLE AGE NOT AS A PERIOD OF DECLINE, BUT AS A POTENTIAL "SECOND FLOWERING" WHERE, BY SHEDDING YOUTHFUL AMBITIONS AND CORRECTLY INTERPRETING FEELINGS OF DISCONTENT AS SIGNS OF GROWTH, ONE CAN BECOME FREE TO PURSUE A MORE AUTHENTIC SPIRITUAL AND PERSONAL DEVELOPMENT.
“Perhaps middle age is, or should be, a period _ of shedding shells; the shell of ambition, the shell of material accumulations and possessions, the shell of the ego. Perhaps one can shed at this stage in life as one sheds in beach-living; one’s pride, one’s false ambitions, one’s mask, one’s armor. Was that armor not put on to protect one from the competitive world? If one ceases to compete, does one need it? Perhaps one can at last in middle age, if not earlier, be completely oneself. And what a liberation that would be!
It is true that the adventures of youth are less open to us. Most of us cannot, at this point, start a new career or raise a new family. Many of the physical, material, and worldly ambitions are less attainable than they were twenty years ago. But is this not often a relief? “I no longer worry about being the belle of Newport,” a beautiful woman, who had become a talented artist, once said to me. And I always liked that Virginia - Woolf hero who meets middle age admitting: “Things have dropped from me. I have outlived certain desires . . . I am not so gifted as at one time seemed likely. Certain things lie beyond my scope. I shall never understand the harder problems of philosophy. Rome is the limit of my travelling . . . I shall never see savages in Tahiti spearing fish by the light of a blazing cresset, or a lion spring in the jungle, or a naked man eating raw flesh ...” (Thank God! you can hear him adding under his breath.)
The primitive, physical, functional pattern of the morning of life, the active years before forty or fifty, is outlived. But there is still the afternoon opening up, which one can spend not in the feverish pace of the morning but in having time at last for those intellectual, cultural, and spiritual activities that were pushed aside in the heat of the race. We Americans, with our terrific emphasis on youth, action, and material success, certainly tend to belittle the afternoon of life and even to pretend it never comes. We push the clock back and try to prolong the morning, over-reaching and overstraining ourselves in the un-natural effort. We do not succeed, of course. We cannot compete with our sons and daughters. And what a struggle it is to race with these over-active and under-wise adults! In our breathless attempts we often miss the flowering that waits for afternoon.
For is it not possible that middle age can be looked upon as a period of second flowering, second growth, even a kind of second adolescence? It is true that society in general does not help one accept this interpretation of the second half of life. And therefore this period of expanding is often tragically misunderstood. Many people never climb above the plateau of forty-to-fifty. The signs that presage growth, so similar, it seems to me, to those in early adolescence: discontent, restlessness, doubt, despair, longing, are interpreted falsely as signs of decay. In youth one does not as often misinterpret the signs; one accepts them, quite rightly, as growing pains. One takes them seriously, listens to them, follows where they lead. One is afraid. Naturally. Who is not afraid of pure space—that breath-taking empty space of an open door? But despite fear, one goes through to the room beyond.
But in middle age, because of the false assumption that it is a period of decline, one interprets these life-signs, paradoxically, as signs of approaching death. Instead of facing them, one runs away; one escapes—into depressions, nervous breakdowns, drink, love affairs, or frantic, thoughtless, fruitless overwork. Anything rather than face them. Anything, rather than stand still and learn from them. One tries to cure the signs of growth, to exorcise them, as if they were devils, when really they might be angels of annunciation.
Angels of annunciation of what? Of a new stage in living when, having shed many of the physical struggles, the worldly ambitions, the material encumbrances of active life, one might be free to fulfill the neglected side of one’s self. One might be free for growth of mind, heart, and talent; free at last for spiritual growth; free of the clamping sunrise shell. Beautiful as it was, it was still a closed world one had to out-grow. And the time may come when—comfortable and adaptable as it is—one may outgrow even the oyster shell.”
(Anne Morrow Lindbergh, Gift from the sea, 1955)

E1.5.E.1.2_REF6_PO “THE SHEIKH WHO PLAYED WITH CHILDREN
A certain young man was asking around,
"I need to find a wise person. I have a problem."

A bystander said, "There's no one with intelligence
in our town except that man over there
playing with the children,
the one riding the stick-horse.

He has keen, fiery insight and vast dignity
like the night sky, but he conceals it
in the madness of child's play."

The young seeker approached the children, "Dear father,
you who have become as a child, tell me a secret."

"Go away. This is not a day
for secrets."
            "But please! Ride your horse this way,
just for a minute."
            The sheik play-galloped over.
"Speak quickly. I can't hold this one still for long.
Whoops. Don't let him kick you.
                              This is a wild one!" […]

"What is it? Quickly! That rider over there needs me.
I think I'm in love."
                    "What is this playing that you do?
Why do you hide your intelligence so?"
                                "The people here
want to put me in charge. They want me to be
judge, magistrate, and interpreter of all the texts.

The knowing I have doesn't want that. It wants to enjoy itself.
I am a plantation of sugarcane, and at the same time
I'm eating the sweetness."
                          Knowledge that is acquired
is not like this. Those who have it worry if
audiences like it or not.
                          It's a bait for popularity.
Disputational knowing wants customers.
It has no soul.
                          Robust and energetic
before a responsive crowd, it slumps when no one is there.
The only real customer is God.
                          Chew quietly
your sweet sugarcane God-Love, and stay
playfully childish.
                          Your face
will turn rosy with illumination
like the redbud flowers.”
(Rumi, The essential, translated by Coleman Barks, 1207-1273)

E1.5.E.1.2_REF7_CUR PLAY: AN ACT OF CREATIVITY, FREEDOM, AND RESILIENCE
“In his series "The Nature of the Game," Francis Alÿs sees playing as a fundamental, universal, and "gratuitous" act of creativity, freedom, and resilience.

He films children's street games around the world—often in places of social or political conflict—to reveal how play is a primary way children make sense of their environment and negotiate their reality on their own terms.”

Watch all the videos of the Series: https://francisalys.com/category/childrens-games/

E1.5.E.1.2_REF8_PO LI BAI´S "OTHER WORLD" IS THE INNER WORLD OF HIS "HEART AT EASE." IT'S A WORLD WHERE THE VALUES OF THE CITY (AMBITION, RECOGNITION) ARE MEANINGLESS, AND THE VALUES OF NATURE (PEACE, SIMPLICITY, THE FLOW OF TIME) ARE ALL THAT MATTER.

“They ask me why I live in the
green mountain. I smile and don’t reply; my
Heart’s at ease.
Peach blossom flow downstream,
leaving no trace - 
And there are other earths and
skies than these”
(Li Bai, 701-761)

E1.5.E.1.2_REF9_PH “FOUR PRECEPTS: To break off customs; to shake off spirits ill-disposed; to meditate on youth; to do nothing against one’s genius.”
(Nathaniel Hawthorne)

E1.5.E.1.2_REF10_LIT MY MIGHT BE CALLED “AFFECTED,” THOUGH REALLY THEY ARE NO MORE AFFECTED THAN THE FEELINGS AND GESTURES OF A MONK WHO WISHES TO LIVE THE SAINTLY LIFE
"Not since those years when I was eight and nine at Dorchester, [did I ] realize[d] to the full limit, my identity, my native peculiarities, my cherished manias, my sweet superstitions. Yes, I have had, in “up-state” New York, what is seldom allowed to mortal man upon this earth—I have had the full unhindered swing of my personality. I expect it is for no other reason than to get this very “swing” that so many of us individualistic Englishmen leave the island, whose bones are in our bones, and settle down in such far-off alien spots. We carry our ways with us, our turns of speech, our traditional routine, our rock-bound prejudices. We are all so eccentric that penned up close together we lack space wheren to expand. And so we sail away, to have our fling among less crowded, less furiously egoistic, less obstinate, less self-righteous, less adventurous natives! 

How could I expand freely, how could I be the unmitigated, unqualified, unconscionable “Cowperist” I wanted to be, when I had all round me the class-distinctions, the class-prejudices, the back-bitings, the obsequiousnesses, the superciliousnesses, the superiorities, the perpetual psychic question, “Is he a gentleman? Has he been to a decent school?”

It must have been a considerable moment in my youthful life for instance, when hidden once behind the laurel-hedge above the road to the station we heard Mr. Phelips say to some guest at Montacute House: “Yes, that’s the Vicarage; Powys is the name; a very good family.” 

But here in these hills, with an “aura” around me of Mohawk chiefs, as formidable as any Owen Glendower, these hard-working descendants of old Dutch “Patroons” and old German and English settlers take me at my face value. I don’t need to hide behind any un-mortar’d wall, or any criss-cross fence, to learn what my status is among such as eat bread upon the earth. I am a man. In the city I confess I fall below that  level, and become a “guy.” But here in “up-state” New York I feel I can say, even as the Lord of Hosts said to his questioner, “I am that I am. [...] 

A Taoist is what I really am; but a Taoist uninfluenced by that later Buddhistic element, that indifference to pleasure and pain, which is such an un-Homeric treachery to our life’s Trojan War. 

Suppose one of the most exacting demands of my life-illusion is that I should feel as well as act in a poetical way. Thus though many of my deliberately forced feelings and gestures might be called “affected,” though really they are no more affected than the feelings and gestures of a monk who wishes to live the saintly life, no one could say that the urge behind them, the urge that drives me to them, is anything but the deepest impulse of my nature."
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber, p.622-652)

E1.6.C.1.5.b.iv_REF2_PH.wE1.5.E.1.2

E1.5.E.1.3. AND ATTEMPTS TO LIVE AS A POET

E1.5.E.1.3_REF1_PO "THIS IS WHAT YOU SHALL DO: Love the earth and sun and the animals, despise riches, give alms to every one that asks, stand up for the stupid and crazy, devote your income and labor to others, hate tyrants, argue not concerning God, have patience and indulgence toward the people, take off your hat to nothing known or unknown or to any man or number of men, go freely with powerful uneducated persons and with the young and with the mothers of families, read these leaves in the open air every season of every year of your life, re-examine all you have been told at school or church or in any book, dismiss whatever insults, [then] your own soul, and your very flesh shall be a great poem and have the richest fluency not only in its words but in the silent lines of its lips and face and between the lashes of your eyes and in every motion and joint of your body."
(Walt Whitman, Preface to the first edition of Leaves of Grass, 1855)

E1.5.E.2. LIVING "À PROPOS " - WITH PRESENCE
Use our time to do more of the things we love - and live these moments with presence of mind: Montaigne already said that we need to "live à propos". But this requires courage and willpower.

E1.5.E.2.1. AND WHAT IF THE TIME SAVED THROUGH SPEED WAS USELESS FOR HAPPINESS?

E1.5.E.2.1_REF1_LIT " ... WHEN WE HAVE TO GIVE UP SPEED, for example, when we have to leave the car and walk, we are struck by the fact that the sensations, although fewer in number, have become denser, more real, richer, and we have the impression that we have gained something. The sensations have lost in quantity, but they've gained an extra dimension. They are thrown at us less like powder and confetti, but we hold them better. "A bird in the hand, we're told, is worth two in the bush. Are not sensations multiplied by speed eternal promises that never unfold?"
(Charles Baudouin, The Myth of Modernity, Édition du Mont blanc, 1946, p. 154, quoted in Denis Grozdanovitch's Small Treatise on Casualness, 2002)

E1.5.E.2.1_REF2_LIT “AH! THEIR REASON, SAD DILAPIDATED MACHINE,
Torturing the tree to get its fruit sooner, 
Digging holes in space and duration, 
To fill them with the ashes of boredom!”
(Armand Godoy, Bréviaire quoted in Denis Grozdanovitch's Small treatise on casualness, 2002)

E1.5.E.2.1_REF3_LIT "GREAT MASSES OF PEOPLE THESE DAYS LIVE OUT THEIR LIVES IN A DULL AND LOVELESS STUPOR. Sensitive persons find our inartistic manner of existence oppressive and painful, and they withdraw from sight… I believe what we lack is joy. The ardor that a heightened awareness imparts to life, the conception of life as a happy thing, as a festival… But the high value put upon every minute of time, the idea of hurry-hurry as the most important objective of living, is unquestionably the most dangerous enemy of joy. [...]
Our ways of enjoying ourselves are hardly less irritating and nerve-racking than the pressure of our work. “As much as possible, as fast as possible” is the motto. And so there is more and more entertainment and less and less joy… This morbid pursuit of enjoyment [is] spurred on by constant dissatisfaction and yet perpetually satiated. [...]
Our eyes, above all those misused, overstrained eyes of modern man, can be, if only we are willing, an inexhaustible source of pleasure. When I walk to work in the morning I see many workers who have just crawled sleepily out of bed, hurrying in both directions, shivering along the streets. Most of them walk fast and keep their eyes on the pavement, or at most on the clothes and faces of the passers-by. Heads up, dear friends! [...]
Just try it once — a tree, or at least a considerable section of sky, is to be seen anywhere. It does not even have to be blue sky; in some way or another the light of the sun always makes itself felt. Accustom yourself every morning to look for a moment at the sky and suddenly you will be aware of the air around you, the scent of morning freshness that is bestowed on you between sleep and labor. You will find every day that the gable of every house has its own particular look, its own special lighting. Pay it some heed if you will have for the rest of the day a remnant of satisfaction and a touch of coexistence with nature. Gradually and without effort the eye trains itself to transmit many small delights, to contemplate nature and the city streets, to appreciate the inexhaustible fun of daily life. From there on to the fully trained artistic eye is the smaller half of the journey; the principal thing is the beginning, the opening of the eyes. [...]
My advice to the person suffering from lack of time and from apathy is this: Seek out each day as many as possible of the small joys, and thriftily save up the larger, more demanding pleasures for holidays and appropriate hours. It is the small joys first of all that are granted us for recreation, for daily relief and disburdenment, not the great ones."
(Hermann Hesse, On Little Joys, 1905 - found in My Belief: Essays on Life and Art)

E1.5.E.2.1_REF4_PSI "TO GET PLEASURE FROM EATING, FOR EXAMPLE, YOU MUST NOTICE THAT YOU ARE DOING IT. We found that French and American women spent about the same amount of time eating, but for Frenchwomen, eating was twice as likely to be focal as it was for American women. The Americans were far more prone to combine eating with other activities, and their pleasure from eating was correspondingly diluted. 
These observations have implications for both individuals and society. The use of time is one of the areas of life over which people have some control. Few individuals can will themselves to have a sunnier disposition, but some may be able to arrange their lives to spend less of their day commuting, and more time doing things they enjoy with people they like. [...]  It is only a slight exaggeration to say that happiness is the experience of spending time with people you love and who love you. [...] “The easiest way to increase happiness is to control your use of time. Can you find more time to do the things you enjoy doing?” 
(Daniel Kahneman, Thinking Fast and Slow, 2011)

E1.5.E.2.1_REF5_CUR PASSIVE RESISTANCE RATHER THAN WAITING “Waiting - Edward Hopper paints time as it stretches out
Hopper is the painter of passive resistance rather than melancholy or alienation. He paints characters who are perhaps not victims of the society in which they live, but rather resistants. Yves Bonnefoy has written of Hopper's painting that it deals with 'annunciations without theology or promise'. Hopper's characters reconnect with their inner selves, in opposition to the speed and flux of American society. There is no narrative in his painting (the action is not caught between a before and an after), but rather he represents a suspension of all action. This gesture of suspension is also that of the creative process of Hopper, who painted only 100 pictures; each one a long decantation of the feeling of necessary reflection, of necessary inaction to produce an autonomous thought. In 'an atom of time', the essence of thought, which needs context and solitude, is reduced. See Paul Valéry's text on “A throw of the dice will never abolish chance”, a poem by Mallarmé that was important to Hopper.
Eward Hopper, Sunday, 1926: A worker interrupts the frenzy of work by smoking a cigar in the sun. 
André Breton likened the painting New York Movie (1939) to that of Giorgio de Chirico, The Child's Brain, 1914 - noting the reference to interiority shared by both paintings. 
To illustrate that we have the memory of a better life, Hopper draws on the classical paintings he has long admired in European museums. One of the paintings that has had the greatest impact on Hopper is the Philosopher in Meditation from the Louvre collection - which eerily dialogues with many of his meditative figures:
See Cape Cod morning, 1950; Morning sun, 1952; Office in a small city, 1953; Rembrandt, Philosopher in meditation, 1632 & Salomon Koninck, Philosopher with opened book, 1645.
The golden rain that falls on Hopper's female figures is reminiscent of Renaissance paintings that deal with the myth of Danae. Danae is the daughter of the king of Argos, Acrisios, and Eurydicé. Her father had been warned by an oracle that he would one day be killed by his daughter's child, so he locked Danae in a bronze tower so that no one could approach her. But Zeus, infatuated with the young woman, turns into a shower of gold and, in this form, crosses the roof of his prison to unite with her. 
See Jan Gossaert, Danaé, 1527; Rembrandt, Danaé, 1636; Edward Hopper, Summertime, 1943; Edward Hopper, Morning sun, 1952
Is this light that calls out to Hopper's characters the call of life, to which they are still sensitive despite the alienation that the painter condemns in American society?

Can we draw a parallel between Edward Hopper's People in the Sun (1963) and Thomas Mann's The Magic Mountain, which we know Hopper admired enormously? In Mann's novel, the same resistance to the frenzy of force was at play in Hitler's Germany. In this context, Mann's novel shows us characters who are valued for their weakness. The sickest are the wisest, whose example we follow.

Hopper's last painting, Two Comedians (1966,) may be related to Jean-Antoine Watteau's Gilles' haggard figure (1718) - a figure exposed naked to its viewers. In Two Comedians, we can recognize in the face of one of the pierrots the features of Hopper himself, who identified himself at the end of his life with the figure of the haggard clown (indomitable in etymology: fierce, wild in the German root of the word): Last moment of resistance. 
He also pays tribute to his wife Joe, with whom he had a stormy relationship, but who nonetheless encouraged him throughout his life.
(Didier Ottinger, specialist in modern and contemporary painting, deputy director of the Centre Pompidou in Paris, interviewed for the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, “Edward Hopper, peindre le temps qui s'étire”, broadcast on 12/20/2018)

Listen to the podcat:
https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/edward-hopper-peindre-le-temps-qui-s-etire-2566341

E1.5.E.2.1_REF5.1_CUR HOPPER'S NIGHTHAWKS: LOOK THROUGH THE WINDOW
(NERDWRITER FILM & ART CRITIC: NIGHTHAWKS BY EDWARD HOPPER)

Watch the video on YouTube:
https://youtu.be/7j5pUtRcNX4?list=PLwg4AG1KkgLwP5FuUIiVEy-ILMD23AN1v

E1.5.E.2.1_REF6_LIT "SYLVAIN TESSON COMMENTS ON THE FORM OF NOMADISM HE PRACTICES - that of a joyfully persevering vagabond, and recounts how, through it, he experiences another dimension of space and time." 
(Pages arrachées à Sylvain Tesson - Episode 1: Se mettre en marche, broadcast on France Culture on 10/07/2019)

Listen to the podcast :
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/fictions-le-feuilleton/pages-arrachees-a-sylvain-tesson-15-se-mettre-en-marche

E1.5.E.2.1_REF7_CUR "WITH HIS RAW AND EXPRESSIVE PORTRAITS OF CHARACTERS IN UNEXPECTED SHAPES AND POSTURES (gaunt faces, angular bodies, flayed skeletons...), Thomas Houseago presents figures that are powerful yet fragile, and somewhere between the abstract and figurative.
For materials, he combines less traditional ones - like steel rods, concrete or burlap - with the more conventional stuff of sculpture.
L'Homme pressé (man in a hurry) represents a giant, 5-metre (16 ft) hybrid of man mons- ter, and robot that walks with a determined gait, whose irresistible forward movement seems to stem from its incompleteness."
(Curatorship: Voyage à Nantes, 2023)

E1.5.E.2.1_REF8_LIT "ALTHOUGH WE TRY TO CONTROL IT IN A MILLION DIFFERENT WAYS, the only thing you can ever really do to time is enjoy it or waste it."
(A.J. Compton)

E1.5.E.2.1_REF9_PH "THE FARCE OF MANY INDUSTRIOUS PERSONS.—By an excess of effort they win leisure for themselves, and then they can do nothing with it but count the hours until the tale is ended."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 47, 1878)

E1.5.B.4_REF5_TH.wE1.5.E.2.1

E1.5.E.2.2. THE MOMENT IS ALL, IN ALL NOBLE RELATIONS

E1.5.E.2.2_REF1_PH "LIFE GOES HEADLONG. EACH OF US IS ALWAYS TO BE FOUND HURRYING HEADLONG in the chase of some fact, hunted by some fear or command behind us. Suddenly we meet a friend. We pause. Our hurry & embarrassment look ridiculous. Now pause, now possession is required, and the power to swell the moment from the resources of our own heart until it supersedes sun & moon & solar system in its expanding immensity. The moment is all, in all noble relations.  [...]
That Spirit which alone suffices to quiet hearts & which seems to come forth to such from every dry knoll of sere grass, from every pine stump & half-embedded stone on which the dull March sun shines will come forth only to the poor & hungry & such as are of simple taste. If thou fillest thy brain with Boston & New York, with fashion & covetousness, and wilt stimulate thy jaded senses with wine & French coffee thou shalt find no radiance of Wisdom in the lonely waste by the pinewoods.[...]
In New York lately, as in cities generally, one seems to lose all substance, & become surface in a world of surfaces. Everything is external, and I remember my hat & coat, and all my other surfaces, & nothing else. If suddenly a reasonable question is addressed to me, what refreshment & relief! I visited twice & parted with a most polite lady without giving her reason to believe that she had met any other in me than a worshipper of surfaces, like all Broadway. It stings me yet."    
(Ralph Waldo Emerson,  Selected Journals: 1841–1877)

E1.5.E.2.2_REF2_PH "SHAMS AND DELUSIONS ARE ESTEEMED FOR SOUNDEST TRUTHS, WHILE REALITY IS FABULOUS. If men would steadily observe realities only, and not allow themselves to be deluded, life, to compare it with such things as we know, would be like a fairy tale and the Arabian Nights’ Entertainments. If we respected only what is inevitable and has a right to be, music and poetry would resound along the streets. When we are unhurried and wise, we perceive that only great and worthy things have any permanent and absolute existence, that petty fears and petty pleasures are but the shadow of the reality. This is always exhilarating and sublime. By closing the eyes and slumbering, and consenting to be deceived by shows, men establish and confirm their daily life of routine and habit everywhere, which still is built on purely illusory foundations."
(Henry David Thoreau, Walden, 1854)

E1.5.E.2.2_REF3_PH EVENT VS. TRANSITIONS "Mythology of the event: The basis of wisdom is no longer to be found in the detachment from the exceptional and this 'complementarity' that the event represents with respect to the given, but rather in the occurrence of each 'moment', timely as it comes, which one must learn to welcome. That is to say, first of all, to be on an equal footing with others, without privileging or singling out any one of them, so true is it that through its patent features one can already perceive its latent reversal to come. Thus, wisdom never ceases to teach that "every moment is the right moment."

E1.5.E.2.2_REF3.1_PH FRANÇOIS JULLIEN EXPLORES THE CONCEPT OF THE EVENT, HIGHLIGHTING ITS IMPORTANCE IN EUROPEAN CULTURE, WHERE IT STRUCTURES NARRATIVES AND CREATES PATHOS. He contrasts this with Chinese thought, which dissolves the event by valuing each moment equally, without privileging the exceptional, and focusing on constant transitions.
"Mythology of the event 
An event, in fact, is not just any moment, but emerges and stands out from this continuous renewal from which duration is born. [...]
Now I come to doubt whether such an event really exists, that is, other than in the mode of a fictional, mythological representation? Or is it only the visible outbreak, like a streak of foam, of transformations that remain invisible, like the buried, underlying movement of a wave of water? [...]
For the event is not only what attracts our attention, it is also what structures the narrative and serves to dramatize it. In this way, it is the constitutive element of a muthos [the realm of false opinion, rumor, and the discourse of circumstance]. Now, because it has developed its basic representations through the great narratives, that is, in a mythological-logical mode, I think that European culture could be defined as a culture of the event. By virtue of the rupture it produces and all the unheard-of things it opens up, by virtue of what it makes possible in terms of focus, and therefore tension, and therefore pathos, the event has a prestige that European culture has never been able to relinquish. Because it is passionately attached to it, it has never been able to renounce the fascinating-inspiring character of the event. Isn't it just its belief in absolute events? The eternal intersects with the temporal, and the result is a complete breakthrough: Creation, Incarnation, Resurrection, etc. For Christianity is that strange religion in which its prophet is God on earth, and his life becomes the event that cuts through all history and reshapes time. - On our literary scene, too, everything has conspired to emphasize the attractive, subjugating vertigo of the event. Whether Homer, Pindar or the tragedies, they all aim to introduce an irreducible event that cannot be understood within the memorable framework of cycles and episodes, and is not the particular case of something more general: an incomparable, unintegratable, boundary-breaking event - a source both of sublimation and of endless questioning. [...]
Isn't the essence of Chinese thought - and, more generally, of that which is so feebly called 'wisdom' in the face of philosophy - to dissolve the event? [...]
What constitutes a resource and on which wisdom is based, then, is no longer to be found in the detachment of the exceptional and the 'addition' of the event to the given, but in the occurrence of each "moment", timely as it comes, which we must learn to welcome. That is to say, first of all, to place it on an equal footing with the others, without privileging it or excluding it from them all, so much so that through its obvious features we can already perceive its latent reversal to come. Thus, wisdom never ceases to teach that every moment is the right moment [...].
By focusing on the transitional phenomena taking place at any given moment, Chinese thought could only tend to diminish the prestige of the event. Let's not forget that ancient China did not write epics or theatrical dramas: it sacrificed its exceptionalism for the sake of constant adaptation to the moment".
(François Jullien, The Silent Transformations, 2009)

E1.5.E.2.2_REF3.2_PH “FREEDOM OF THE WILL AND THE ISOLATION OF FACTS.—Our ordinary inaccurate observation takes a group of phenomena as one and calls them a fact. Between this fact and another we imagine a vacuum, we isolate each fact. In reality, however, the sum of our actions and cognitions is no series of facts and intervening vacua, but a continuous stream. Now the belief in free will is incompatible with the idea of a continuous, uniform, undivided, indivisible flow. This belief presupposes that every single action is isolated and indivisible; it is an atomic theory as regards volition and cognition.—We misunderstand facts as we misunderstand characters, speaking of similar characters and similar facts, whereas both are non-existent. Further, we bestow praise and blame only on this false hypothesis, that there are similar facts, that a graduated order of species of facts exists, corresponding to a graduated order of values. Thus we isolate not only the single fact, but the groups of apparently equal facts (good, evil, compassionate, envious actions, and so forth). In both cases we are wrong.—The word and the concept are the most obvious reason for our belief in this isolation of groups of actions. We do not [pg 192]merely thereby designate the things; the thought at the back of our minds is that by the word and the concept we can grasp the essence of the actions. We are still constantly led astray by words and actions, and are induced to think of things as simpler than they are, as separate, indivisible, existing in the absolute. Language contains a hidden philosophical mythology, which, however careful we may be, breaks out afresh at every moment. The belief in free will—that is to say, in similar facts and isolated facts—finds in language its continual apostle and advocate.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human III, Aphorism 11, 1878)

E1.5.E.2.2_REF3.3_PH “THE FUNDAMENTAL ERRORS.—A man cannot feel any psychical pleasure or pain unless he is swayed by one of two illusions. Either he believes in the identity of certain facts, certain sensations, and in that case finds spiritual pleasure and pain in comparing present with past conditions and in noting their similarity or difference (as is invariably the case with recollection); or he believes in the freedom of the will, perhaps when he reflects, “I ought not to have done this,” “This might have turned out differently,” and from these reflections likewise he derives pleasure and pain. Without the errors that are rife in every psychical pain and pleasure, humanity would never have developed. For the root idea of humanity is that man is free in a world of bondage—man, the eternal wonder-worker, whether his deeds be good or evil—man, the amazing exception, the super-beast, the quasi-God, the mind of creation, the indispensable, the key-word to the cosmic riddle, the mighty lord of nature and despiser of nature, the creature that calls its history “the history of the world”! Vanitas vanitatum homo.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human III, Aphorism 12, 1878)

E1.5.E.2.2_REF3.4_PH “THE HABIT OF CONTRASTS.—Superficial, inexact observation sees contrasts everywhere in nature (for instance, “hot and cold”), where there are no contrasts, only differences of degree. This bad habit has induced us to try to understand and interpret even the inner nature, the intellectual and moral world, in accordance with such contrasts. An infinite amount of cruelty, arrogance, harshness, estrangement, and coldness has entered into human emotion, because men imagined they saw contrasts where there were only transitions.
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human III, Aphorism 67, 1878)

E1.5.E.2.2_REF3.5_PH "INSTINCT, INTELLIGENCE, AND ANXIETY
The type of intelligence that we have cultivated brings anxiety for at least three principal reasons. The first is that intelligent thinking works by dividing the world of experience into separate facts and events, simple enough for conscious attention to focus upon them one at a time. But there are innumerable ways of dividing and selecting for attention the facts and events, the data, required for any prediction or decision, and thus when the moment comes for a choice there is always the rankling doubt that important data may have been overlooked. There is therefore no complete assurance that an important decision is right. Thus the ever frustrated effort to gain complete assurance by reviewing the data becomes the special anxiety which we call a sense of responsibility. The second is that the sense of responsibility goes hand in hand with a heightened sense of being an independent individual - a source of action which cannot depend upon simple instinct or spontaneity for doing the appropriate thing. The intelligent man therefore feels independent of or cut off from the rest of nature, and in trying, ever frustratedly, to figure nature out with sufficient accuracy he acquires a feeling of fear and hostility toward everything outside his own will and its full control. The third is that conscious attention reviews facts and events in series, even though they may be happening all together at once. Thinking about them in series and making predictions and decisions about the future course of the series gives the intelligent man a vivid awareness of time. It appears to him as a basic life process which he must work against. He knows that he must calculate rapidly to forestall it, though reviewing nature analytically, piece by piece, is not conducive to speed. Furthermore, knowledge of the future brings about emotional reactions to future events before they happen, and thus anxiety because, for example, one may get sick or will eventually die. And apparently this does not trouble the creatures who act by instinct."
(Alan Watts, This is it, 1958)

E1.5.E.2.2_REF4_CUR DIGITAL ADDICTION ONLY YOU CAN'T SEE IT

E1.5.E.2.3. AN INSPIRATION IS A HAPPY MOMENT THAT TAKES US BY SURPRISE

E1.5.E.2.3_REF1_LIT "AN INSPIRATION IS A HAPPY MOMENT THAT TAKES US BY SURPRISE. Many people are so startled by an inspiration or a condition of inspiration, which is so different from daily care, that they think that they are unique in having had it. Nothing could be further from the truth. Inspiration is there all the time for anyone whose mind is not covered over with thoughts and concerns, and [it is] used by everyone whether they realize it or not. […]
It is an untroubled state of mind. Of course, we know that an untroubled state of mind cannot last, so we say that inspiration comes and goes, but it is there all the time waiting for us to be untroubled again. We can therefore say that it is pervasive. [...]
“The light was extraordinary, the feeling was extraordinary” is the way in which many adults describe moments of inspiration. Although they have had them all their lives they never really recall them and are always taken by surprise. Adults are very busy, taught to run all the time. You cannot run and be very aware of your inspirations."
(Agnes Martin, Paintings, Writings, Remembrances - edited by Arne Glimcher)

E1.5.E.2.3_REF2_PSI TIME PERCEPTION CAN BE SUBJECTIVE, INFLUENCED BY OUR CONSCIOUSNESS AND ATTENTION. THE ANCIENT GREEKS DISTINGUISHED BETWEEN CHRONOS (OBJECTIVE, MEASURED TIME) AND KAIROS (SUBJECTIVE, SIGNIFICANT MOMENTS). To increase the ratio of Kairos to Chronos, focus on the present moment through deep work, challenging activities, and new experiences, thereby enriching our lives and stretching our perception of time.
"Elasticity

We’ve all felt it - time seems to speed up and slow down, depending on what we do and who we’re with. Objectively
speaking, of course, that’s not true - astronomical time at sea level is, for practical purposes, the same for everyone.
And yet, the concept of flow has shown that there is a second, subjective perception of time that is all too important.

Our consciousness and attention direction allow for a magic trick that can stretch and compress time in our
subjective reality, allowing time to flow differently. Therefore, the ability to get “more time” can be achieved by
putting more years into our lives and more life into our years by compressing and expanding time.
Enter Chronos and Kairos, the two words the Ancient Greeks had for time, representing the two sides of a period.
While Chronos is consistent and predictable, Kairos describes the moments in life with elevated importance
relative to most. These are the moments where we have an increased awareness of being and a tighter connection with the universe.

"Chronos is clocks, deadlines, watches, calendars, agendas, planners, schedules, beepers. Kairos is the moment of indeterminate time in which everything happens."
(Leonard Sweet)

The critical thing about Kairos is that it is purely subjective. An identical situation is Chronos for most, but Kairos for
some. This mental model is about finding and being intentional about the Kairos moment. 
So, how do we increase our Kairos-to-Chronos ratio? We do so by diverting attention to the present moment.
One way is to do “deep work” - a very engaging hobby or a gratifying activity where the process of achieving means more than the achievement itself.
Another approach is to do hard things - the friction of doing something hard tends to slow time down. 2 minutes is a very long time if you hold a handstand, and nothing if you scroll on Instagram.
Finally, what is vital to slow time down is having new experiences - some get more out of a week than many out of a year’s worth of Chronos.

"Time you enjoy wasting is not wasted time."
(Marthe Troly-Curtin)"
(Ivan Vatchkov)

Read the full article on Linkedin:
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/how-you-use-your-four-thousand-weeks-ivan-vatchkov-rfhgc?trk=public_profile_article_view

E1.5.E.2.3_REF2.1_PO “THE CONSENT
Late in November, on a single night
Not even near to freezing, the ginkgo trees
That stand along the walk drop all their leaves
In one consent, and neither to rain nor to wind
But as though to time alone: the golden and green
Leaves litter the lawn today, that yesterday
Had spread aloft their fluttering fans of light.
What signal from the stars? What senses took it in?
What in those wooden motives so decided
To strike their leaves, to down their leaves,
Rebellion or surrender? and if this
Can happen thus, what race shall be exempt?
What use to learn the lessons taught by time,
If a star at any time may tell us: Now.”
(Howard Nemerov)

E1.5.E.2.4. TAKING CARE OF ONESELF

E1.5.E.2.4_REF1_PH "SOCRATES: "TAKE CARE OF YOURSELF.
It's a strange request. Every society asks us to devote ourselves to it, sometimes to the point of sacrifice, and here's this man asking us to take care of ourselves. The Athenians were so angry about this that they put Socrates to death. Education is supposed to produce efficient workers who are immediately available on the job market, not free people who think for themselves.
Unfortunately, this statement has led to two misunderstandings that have completely distorted its meaning. The first is that self-care means cutting oneself off from the world and taking refuge in what the Stoics called 'the inner fortress'. Socrates urged us to engage with the world, not run away from it. The other mistake is to make self-care a form of control over impulses and affects. In Socrates' case, self-care is not about mastery, but about liberating release. Socrates is not trying to bring you into a wise and serene security, but to shake up your position in existence from top to bottom. When Socrates was in trouble, he would place himself for a moment in the center of his trouble, without doing anything, without looking for a solution. To place oneself in this state of non-knowledge, to think philosophically, is not to have answers for everything, but to be seized by the staggering demand to think what matters right here, right now, for oneself.
(Fabrice Midal, 3 Minutes of Philosophy to Become Human Again)

Listen to the podcast: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/3-minutes-de-philosophie-pour-redevenir-humain/socrate-prends-souci-de-toi-meme

E1.5.E.2.5. COURAGE, MASTERPIECE OF PRESENCE

E1.5.B.1.3.c_REF1_PH.wE1.5.E.2.5.

E1.5.E.2.5_REF1_PO ”A PARROT TO AN EAGLE CAME.
And boasted that he knew 
The language and the ways of men,
And things both old and new. 
The eagle looked him up and down 
With eyes of burning coal: 
« Fly with me then towards the sun 
And hear the thunders roll! »
« I am afraid, » the parrot said. 
The eagle laughed full high: 
« That is a word I have not read 
In earth, or sea, or sky. 
Back to your perch! These lonely heights 
Were not for parrots made. 
I would not leave my eagle flights 
To learn to be afraid! »"
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934)

E1.5.E.2.6. CHOOSING ONE'S "SECOND LIFE"

E1.5.E.2.6_REF1_PO "LIFE WHILE-YOU-WAIT

Life While-You-Wait.
Performance without rehearsal.
Body without alterations.
Head without premeditation.

I know nothing of the role I play.
I only know it’s mine. I can’t exchange it.

I have to guess on the spot
just what this play’s all about.

Ill-prepared for the privilege of living,
I can barely keep up with the pace that the action demands.
I improvise, although I loathe improvisation.
I trip at every step over my own ignorance.
I can’t conceal my hayseed manners.
My instincts are for happy histrionics.
Stage fright makes excuses for me, which humiliate me more.
Extenuating circumstances strike me as cruel.

Words and impulses you can’t take back,
stars you’ll never get counted,
your character like a raincoat you button on the run —
the pitiful results of all this unexpectedness.

If only I could just rehearse one Wednesday in advance,
or repeat a single Thursday that has passed!
But here comes Friday with a script I haven’t seen.
Is it fair, I ask
(my voice a little hoarse,
since I couldn’t even clear my throat offstage).

You’d be wrong to think that it’s just a slapdash quiz
taken in makeshift accommodations. Oh no.
I’m standing on the set and I see how strong it is.
The props are surprisingly precise.
The machine rotating the stage has been around even longer.
The farthest galaxies have been turned on.
Oh no, there’s no question, this must be the premiere.
And whatever I do
will become forever what I’ve done."
(Wisława Szymborska)

E1.5.E.2.6_REF1.1_PO KNOWING THINGS EXIST AND NOT KNOWING ANYTHING ABOUT THEM IS KNOWLEDGE? “I like the poem you sent me very much. I know it and sometimes I read it to remind myself of the non-existent rules of life (Is a rule that doesn't exist still a rule? I think so).
It's very interesting - knowing that things exist and knowing almost nothing or little about them (our life). Is it still wisdom? I think so. It may even be superior.”
(Eliza Piotrowska on Life While-you-wait by Wisława Szymborska)

E1.5.E.2.6_REF1.2_LIT AN INVENTED WORD TO ENCAPSULATE THE SENSE THAT THE FUTURE IS ARRIVING AHEAD OF SCHEDULE
“adomania
n. the sense that the future is arriving ahead of schedule, that all those years with fantastical names like '2013' are bursting from their hypothetical cages into the arena of the present, furiously bucking the grip of your expectations while you lean and slip in your saddle, one hand reaching for reins, the other waving up high like a schoolkid who finally knows the answer to the question.”
(John Koenig, The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021)

E1.5.E.2.6_REF2_PH "IF THERE IS NO NEW LIFE, IT IS IN THE TURN-AROUND OF ONE'S OWN LIFE, that by correcting what was perhaps poorly chosen in one's life, but above all by putting oneself in the position of being able to choose what was not, one can begin to 'stand outside' - ex-sistere, as the Latin says - outside what conditioned and contained one's life within limits one did not even know one was undergoing: that we can begin to free ourselves from limits we thought were inherently or fatally imposed, and thus begin - in the literal sense of the word - to 'ex-ist. ' "
(François Jullien, A Second Life, 2017)

E1.5.E.2.6_REF2.1_PH "IF THE QUESTION IS: TO WHAT EXTENT CAN WE REGAIN THE INITIATIVE IN LIFE BY STRIPPING IT OF WHAT IT ONCE WAS? - the question itself must be postponed. Or, if this 'regaining initiative' is problematic in itself, have we ever known a first initiative? For if there had to be such a thing as a beginning (an initium), how much of the subject's 'initiative' did it allow? Not only was such a 'subject' under influence (environment, language, education, etc.: all that Descartes' cogito could free itself from), but when we 'entered life,' as we say, we were unable to choose how to live, and had little experience of a first beginning. Or, when we had to make what were then objectified as 'choices' (the way of life, the profession, the love...), we chose mostly blindly: not only did we not know what we were choosing, but above all, we didn't know that we were choosing. There was never that first - terribly abstract - moment when we really began to choose what we 'wanted' to live. Because those 'first' choices we made were only 'choices' in retrospect, they were rather terminal; and what led us to those choices - and first that there was a choice (beginning) there - eluded us".
(François Jullien, A Second Life, 2017)

E1.5.E.2.6_REF2.2_PH BY REVISITING LIFE WITHOUT THE IMPATIENCE OF WHAT'S TO COME, WE BECOME RECEPTIVE TO DETAILS AND INCONGRUITIES, GIVING NEW DEPTH AND A FINER UNDERSTANDING OF EXISTENCE. "But the same is true of the second life: it's in the resumption of the second life that I actually begin to uncover what I'm experiencing, i.e. to pull it out from under that which has obscured it through hasty projection and normalization designed to reassure me. I'm no longer in a hurry to find out what comes next, since I now know roughly what the end is; I'm no longer interested in the events of life and its twists and turns. Just as rereading is no longer about what comes next, but takes its time in the present of the page, second life is no longer about the happening and the impatience of what comes next. It begins to experience the present moment for itself and to hold on to it ("I retaste it," "I hold on to it," as Montaigne said in his last essay). Not only has it become receptive to details and incongruities, no longer overstepping the line, but it has also begun to explore them. For more than the major events of life, which are always the same story, or the general truths about life, which merely repeat the same old wisdom, it is the infinitesimal and the singular that attract and provoke thought - until they finally seem unheard of. For I thought I knew life as well as I thought I knew this novel. But the more I think about it, the more I invest myself in it, the more I realize that I've only glimpsed it in a hasty flight. In the light of the second life, I realize how much life had eluded me before.
(François Jullien, A Second Life, 2017)

E1.5.E.2.6_REF2.3_PH "I'M GOING TO BE MORE CAREFUL OF THE EXPERIENCE I'M GOING TO TAKE, because I'm relying on what the experience I've already gone through, accumulated, has secretly developed in me. In other words, I'm more aware of the difficulties I'll have to face and the resources I'll have to mobilize - in a way that's more in tune with the reality I've already come into contact with. Instead of accepting the stage I've reached, I pull myself together and raise my standards in the light of what I've done. This verb, it's true, is unpretentious. But it is without remorse or resignation, and it is even imbued with hope - hope that is not easy, but that is justified by what I have already done: because I am no longer in the projected intention, but I have already gained a foothold in the actual experience. [...] "
(François Jullien, Une seconde vie, 2017)

E1.5.E.2.7. BUYING TIME

E1.5.E.2.7_REF1_PSI WHILE BUYING TIME MAY INCREASE HAPPINESS FOR AFFLUENT POPULATIONS, IT MAY NOT HAVE THE SAME EFFECT IN FINANCIALLY CONSTRAINED SETTINGS. "Reducing Unpleasant Time Use
Subtracting unpleasant tasks from one's day may be an effective, and underutilized, strategy for promoting happiness. For example, household chores (such as cleaning or mowing the lawn) tend to rank among the least happy activities of the day in descriptive studies of time use (e.g., Han & Kaiser 2022, Kahneman et al. 2004). One way to reduce the time devoted to such tasks would be to simply give up on doing them (or on doing them well), but a more practical strategy may lie in paying for time-saving services. Whillans et al. (2017) tested the potential happiness benefits of this strategy in a within-subject study conducted on two consecutive weekends with 60 working adults in Canada. On one weekend, participants received $40 to spend on any purchase that would save them time, while on another weekend, participants received $40 to spend on a material purchase. Participants reported more positive affect and less negative affect at the end of the day when they made a time-saving purchase compared to the day when they made a material purchase. Participants also reported feeling less pressed for time on the day when they made a time-saving purchase, and this reduction in time stress mediated the effect of spending on mood. Although mediation analyses should always be interpreted with caution, this pattern of results is consistent with the idea that cutting back on unpleasant activities may promote happiness by reducing feelings of time pressure. These benefits do not seem particularly surprising, but when Whillans et al. (2017) asked 98 working adults in Canada how they would spend a $40 windfall, only 2% said they would choose to make a time-saving purchase. This suggests that reducing unpleasant time use, like other forms of subtraction, may be an underutilized strategy in daily life.

Would the documented benefits of buying time extend beyond relatively affluent populations? To put this question to the test, as part of a registered report, Whillans & West (2022) conducted a field experiment with a large sample of working mothers in an urban slum of Kenya (n’s ≈ 360). One group of women received vouchers for laundry services or prepared meals that they could redeem each week for 3 consecutive weeks, saving recipients an average of 3 to 7 hours per week. Meanwhile, a control group of women received no benefit, aside from being paid to complete surveys (a third group received additional money, as discussed in our section below on cash transfers). Using Bayesian analyses, the researchers found evidence supporting the null hypothesis: Women who received time-saving vouchers did not show greater improvements on SWB the week after the intervention ended, compared to women in the control condition. Interestingly, however, exploratory analyses showed that women in both conditions exhibited substantial increases in SWB over the course of the study, perhaps because the additional money all participants earned for completing surveys was sufficient to enhance their happiness. In any case, this carefully conducted registered report provides some important “evidence of absence”: In a severely disadvantaged population, time-saving services did not raise SWB above and beyond the benefits of receiving cash payments for survey completion.

In summary, these two experiments suggest that eliminating unpleasant daily tasks by buying time may be an effective route to increasing happiness for busy working adults in wealthy countries like Canada, but this insight may not generalize well to more financially constrained populations."
(Dunigan Folk and Elizabeth Dunn, How Can People Become Happier? A Systematic Review of Preregistered Experiments, 2023)

Read the full article: https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.1146/annurev-psych-022423-030818#abstractSection

E1.5.E.3. TIME : AN "AUTONOMOUS INSTANCE DOMINATING BEINGS" IN WESTERN CIVILISATIONS

E1.5.E.3.1. TIME : AN "AUTONOMOUS INSTANCE DOMINATING BEINGS" IN WESTERN CIVILISATIONS
Western thought, through the construction of Greco-Latin languages, has made time an "autonomous instance dominating beings", as François Jullien helps us to think. By exploring the "differential" of Chinese thought, which had not developed the concept of time until the first contacts with Europe, he helps us to become aware of this determinism, and to move away from the utilitarian "Western" way of life.

E1.5.E.3.1_REF1_PH WESTERNERS CONSIDER TIME in terms of movement and in contrast to eternity, with a morphological structure of past, present and future. Chinese thought, based on the yin-yang polarity, does not conceive of time as a separate entity, but focuses on the processes and transitions of things without wrapping them in a separate notion of time.
"Greece had to think about time for at least three reasons that China lacked. The first of these stems from the bias of its physics (Aristotle, Physics IV): approaching 'nature', phusis, in terms of bodies in motion, it brings in 'time' to account for the movement of a mobile from point A to point B, points of departure and arrival, as we have seen, as 'numbers of movement according to before and after'. But the Chinese approached what we call 'nature' not in terms of bodies in motion or elements, but in terms of correlating factors (yin and yang) from whose polarity all creation flows. Another Greek entry into the concept of time, which rivals the previous one, lies in its metaphysics, which contrasts time with eternity: no longer as a divisible and continuous greatness, but in the combined aspects of succession and infinite change. While only being is eternal, 'always existing', aei ôn, everything 'becomes' in time, the 'moving image' of eternity, at least if we read the formula in this way, whose time has 'fallen' (Plato - Plotinus). China, however, did not think of the 'eternal' of what would always be identical to itself, but of the 'endless' or the 'inexhaustible' (wu qiong) that allows the invested capacity to renew itself without ever running dry - such is the Chinese 'sky' as the background to the process of things. 
Finally, or rather first and foremost, European languages conjugate. They morphologically separate tenses: past/present/future; and thus conceive of time primarily as the passage from one time to another... [...]. The Chinese language, however, does not conjugate: it has possible markers for the past or the near future, but it does not distinguish between specified tenses by conjugation. Its basic representation in this respect is actually two terms rather than three - always polarity - which I'll translate most literally: 'going away: past/present: coming' (wang gu jin lai). The past never stops going / the present never stops coming. Back to transition. 
Chinese thought has not had to turn time into a 'question' by bypassing these (European) approaches to the question of time. Instead, it has examined the processes of things and behaviors, both in their tendency and in their mode of use (generically called tao in Chinese), from the smallest to the largest scale - the duration of a life or a world - to test their coherence. But it has not, despite all this, posited 'time' as that which envelops them all and, detached from both their duration and their simultaneity, constitutes its own entity to serve as an a priori framework for our perception of change (or a priori form of our sensibility, according to Kant)".
(François Jullien, The Silent Transformations, 2009)

E1.5.E.3.1_REF1.1_PH FRANÇOIS JULLIEN SUGGESTS THAT THE WESTERN CONSTRUCTION OF TIME AS A TOTAL SUBJECT IS DUE TO AN INABILITY TO RECOGNIZE THE SILENT TRANSFORMATIONS OBSERVED IN CHINESE THOUGHT.
"When the logos of philosophy prevails, it can only inherit time, hypostasized as an autonomous instance that dominates beings. And even, more precisely, more sovereignly, the 'being' of beings; and this is true even of the least mythological of Greek thinkers, Aristotle. After having analytically conceived of time in terms of its measuring function, in relation to number, his thinking suddenly shifts to the point of considering that for all things 'to be in time' means to be measured by time, not only in their movement, but also in their 'being'. But why this shift? Why must time, from being the measure of movement, become that 'by which' the 'existence of things' in general is measured, if not because the analysis of physical time, even in Aristotle, is overwhelmed by this cultural representation of a tutelary time that recaptures, in this abstract mode, the omnipotence of religion? [...]
Why, then, has European thought, which throughout its history has tried so hard to contradict and criticize itself, which has never stopped, in other words, to disengage from itself, never thought to get out of this rut of "time", which is buried in language, but which, unlike China, is so singular and culturally marked? "Time", trapped in the metaphysical opposition of being and becoming, and in its globally explanatory role as the omnipotent subject serving as the ultimate avatar of divinity [...]
Is it not the case, then, that we have set up time as a total subject, easily assignable and therefore conveniently invocable, because, failing to give sufficient status to the silent transformations, we had to invoke a great agent responsible for both the emergence of things in the visible and their invisible resorption?
(François Jullien, The Silent Transformations, 2009)

E1.5.E.3.2. THE DOMINATION OF TIME BEGINS WITH PLATO
It was Platonism that froze categories. For Heraclitus, everything was becoming, and even for Parmenides, everything was mixed. 

E1.5.E.3.2_REF1_PH PARMENIDES CRITICIZES HUMANITY FOR FAILING TO SEE THE UNITY IN OPPOSITES. Language isolates opposites, but sensitive experience shows that they are always intermingled.
"Mortals would have erred had they not allowed one form to exist without the other, and thus seen the connection and unity of the two. This unity, on the other hand, is what Parmenides accuses them of failing to see because they "set the signs apart". What Parmenides wants to say, Simplicius observes, is that "those who do not see unity in the opposition of the elements that cause generation are mistaken" [...].
Mortals have named two forms, and they cannot be proved wrong: they are fire and light on the one hand, and night on the other. There is fire and light; there is night. But what mortals have separated, the two Forms they have distinguished 'according to body,' they have failed to unite. And yet, without unification, there can be no generation; mortals, at least non-philosophical mortals, are incapable of understanding the genesis of the world. There is light and there is night, that's all. Now everything that is - is the result of becoming. 
Philosophers have shown this. They first separate the opposites, but they do not leave them in their separateness. They see 'unity in opposition' and thus create realities out of opposites. At the origin of the world, we have Anaximander's opposition of hot and cold, Anaximenes' opposition of the 'dense', which corresponds to 'cold', and the 'rare' or 'relaxed', which is hot, with the Pythagoreans, for whom everything is number, that of the 'finite' and the 'unlimited', elements of number: so that for them, as for the Mimesians, 'opposites are the principles of being'. As Heraclitus explains, nature, the φύσις [fýsis], works by uniting opposites, but not without a rule, but 'always respecting a law of proportion, measure and balance'. In this way, says Philolaus, following Heraclitus, 'harmony is born of the opposition of opposites' - harmony without which there would be no stability for the world. Such harmony, he adds, is defined rather as the 'unification' of a 'mixture of diverse elements.' It is such a unity that ordinary people fail to perceive, confining themselves to seeing opposites juxtaposed, which we would have to see as one in order to grasp the world in its genesis and not simply as a result.
The fundamental opposition out of which the world must be created is that of fire and night. For 'night' means darkness, fire that gives light rather than heat. [...]
For the ordinary man - and the philosopher is first and foremost an ordinary man - there is chiaroscuro between light and darkness, between day and night twilight, between cold and hot lukewarm, between light and heavy many degrees. The 'ethereal fire of the flame' is said to be 'the same everywhere as itself' and night is 'without clarity': light is only light and night is only night. Now, in sensible experience, a flame is more or less luminous, which implies, within clarity, the presence of its opposite; and night is never quite black, this blackness being softened only by the 'obscure clarity that falls from the stars.' How is it, then, that each of these opposites is posited as exclusive of the other, when sensible experience is that of a gradual passage from one to the other? Is such a logicalization the work of the philosopher, who isolates entities before thinking of them together in a controlled union? Not at all. Such an operation is inherent in the mortal naming of forms: for as soon as I say 'light,' I don't say 'darkness,' and as soon as I say 'night,' I don't say 'clarity'-all nuance has disappeared. Sensible night is never without some "obscure clarity," but named night, reduced to its concept, is only 'night' and nothing more. If we are to form and represent the mortal world, we must begin with the words that mortals use. But words separate what does not exist separately in the sensory world. The word "light" distinguishes light from night; similarly, words distinguish "rare" from "dense," "cold" from 'hot,' 'light' from 'heavy'. But in the sensible, light cannot exist without shadow, rarefaction without concentration and therefore rare without dense, heat without warming or cooling and therefore hot without cold, and so on. In short, sensible becoming mixes and combines entities that words had set apart. [...]

FRAGMENT 9 [...].

But since all things have been called light and night,
which have been given names according to their own powers
one or the other, all things are at the same time full of light 
of light and of night without light, both equally, 
for there is nothing that has no part in either. [...]"
(Parmenides, The Poem: Fragments, lecture and commentary by Marcel Conche, 1996)

E1.5.E.4. CONTEMPLATION VS. ACTION: 
A question of temperament or life experience?

E1.5.E.4_REF1_PH "AT NOON. - He who has been granted an active and storm-filled morning of life is overcome at the noontide of life by a strange longing for repose that can last for months or years. It grows still around him, voices recede into the distance; the sun shines down on him from high overhead. Upon a concealed woodland meadow he sees great Pan sleeping; all things of nature have fallen asleep with him, an expression of eternity on their face - that is how it seems to him. He wants nothing, he is troubled by noth- ing, his heart stands still, only his eyes are alive - it is a death with open eyes. Then the man sees many things he never saw before, and for as far as he can see everything is enmeshed in a net of light and as it were buried in it. He feels happy as he gazes, but it is a heavy, heavy happi- ness. - Then at length the wind rises in the trees, noon has gone by, life again draws him to it, life with unseeing eyes, its train of followers sweeping along behind it: desire, deception, forgetfulness, destruction, transience. And thus evening rises up, more active and more storm-filled even than the morning. - To truly active men the more long enduring states of knowledge seem almost uncanny and morbid, but not unpleasant."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Humain II, Aphorism 308, 1878)

E1.5.E.5. IS BEING CONTEMPLATIVE NECESSARILY BEING SELFISH?
And what's the difference between being selfish and "egotistical"?

E1.5.E.5_REF1_PH "IN THE MIRROR OF NATURE. - Has a man not been fairly exactly described when one hears that he likes to wander between fields of tall yellow corn, that he prefers the colors of the woods and flowers in glowing and golden autumn because they intimate greater beauty than ever nature achieved, that he feels quite at home among great thick-leaved nut-trees as though among his blood relations, that in the mountains his greatest joy is to encounter those remote little lakes out of which solitude itself seems to gaze up at him, that he loves that gray reposefulness of twilight mist that creeps up to the windows on autumn and early winter evenings and shuts out every soulless sound as though with velvet curtains, that he feels the unhewn rocks to be unwillingly mute witnesses to times primeval and has revered them from a child, and finally that the sea, with its rippling snake-skin and beast-of-prey beauty, is and remains alien to him? - Yes, something of this man has therewith been described, to be sure, but the mirror of nature says nothing of the fact that the same man, with all his idyllic sensibility (and not even 'in spite of it'), could be somewhat loveless, niggardly and conceited. Horace, who understood such things as this, placed the tenderest feeling for country life in the mouth and soul of a Roman usurer, in the celebrated 'beatus ille qui procul negotiis'." (1)
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Humain II, Aphorisme 49, 1878)

Note:
(1) Beatus ille qui procul negotiis, quote from the Roman poet Horace, Epodes, 2, 1, meaning “Blessed is he who stays out of trouble."

E1.5.E.5_REF2_LIT EGOISM VS. EGOTISM "Egoism, in the new psychological sense of the word, may be regarded as the deliberate attempt in an individual's life to throw the chief interest and emphasis of his days upon the inward, personal, subjective impressions produced by the world, rather than upon outward action or social progress. Egoism does not necessarily imply the invidious stigma of selfishness. Goethe, the greatest of all egoists, was notoriously free from such a vice. « Who, » cried Wieland, when they first met at Weimar, « who can resist the unselfishness of this man? »
Egoism does not necessarily imply « egotism » [...] Egoism is an intellectual gesture, a spiritual attitude, a temperamental atmosphere. It is a thing which implies a certain definite philosophical mood in regard to the riddle of existence"
(John Cowper Powys, Suspended Judgments, 1916)

E1.5.E.5_REF3_LIT "IN THE FIRST PLACE WHAT IS THE DEEPEST, SECRETEST PURPOSE OF MY LIFE? I can answer categorically: “To enjoy the sensations that I like enjoying, when I am most entirely and shamelessly myself.” Now I know, not only from looking in the looking-glass when I shave, but from certain realistic photographs, that there is an unmistakable ninny-look or zany-look in my face. This look answers to what I feel, and to what I let myself feel, and to what I maliciously encourage myself to feel! And why not? Why should I devote myself to feeling and expressing only noble, monumental and dignified sentiments?"
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934)

E1.5.E.5_REF4_LIT "BY SLOW DEGREES IT HAS MADE ITSELF MANIFEST TO ME THAT THE PURPOSE OF MY LIFE was to dodge — when I could get leave of absence from my exacting conscience — all obligations to humanity, and to cultivate certain totally useless, purposeless, unprofitable feelings. These feelings, which to me have come to be precious beyond any power of description, are regarded by many as pathetically colourless and sapless, by others as a kind of wilful insanity, by a few as a damnable affectation! “
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934)

E1.5.F. THERAPY AS A PATH FROM UNHAPPINESS
Does therapy aim to transition us from a state of discomfort to a more bearable reality? This process may risk revealing the truth of our desires, which could be overwhelming...

E1.5.F.1. "REMEDY 
[...] As for the health of the soul, it now has its own therapists, who are not philosophers but psychologists or psychiatrists. That's for the better. Health is the ordinary state of life. Wisdom is not. 
Psychoanalysis," said Freud, "is not about making us happy. It's about shifting from neurotic suffering to banal unhappiness. A considerable advance, which makes psychoanalysis, when it succeeds, what it claims to be: a cure for neurosis. In other words, banal or normal unhappiness is not, or no longer, a matter for psychoanalysis. It's a matter for action. It's a matter for philosophy, which begins where psychotherapy ends (because we're more or less cured) or isn't necessary (because we're more or less healthy). There's no need for remedies: reason and willpower are enough, which are not there to cure, but to understand and act."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.5.F.1_REF1_SCI WHAT HAPPENS IN THE BRAIN TO CAUSE DEPRESSION?
Drugs that target the neurotransmitter serotonin have long been prescribed to treat depression. Now the spotlight is turning to other aspects of brain chemistry.
(John Krystal speaks with Steven Strogatz, The Joy of Why, Quantamagazine, May 23,2024)

Listen to the Podcast or read the full transcript of the interview:
https://www.quantamagazine.org/what-happens-in-the-brain-to-cause-depression-20240523/?mc_cid=89594a7485&mc_eid=de38e9b771

E1.5.F.1_REF2_SCI LISA FELDMAN BARRETT REDEFINES DEPRESSION NOT AS A DISORDER OF THOUGHT, BUT AS A DISORDER OF PREDICTION WHERE THE BRAIN BECOMES LOCKED IN A SELF-PERPETUATING CYCLE OF MISMANAGING THE BODY BUDGET BASED ON PAST EXPERIENCES AND THEN FAILING TO CORRECT ITSELF WITH INPUT FROM THE PRESENT.
“Depression is  —  you guessed it —  a concept. It is a population of diverse instances, so there are many degenerate paths to depression, many of which begin with an imbalanced body budget. If depression is a disorder of affect, and affect is an integrated summary of how your body budget is doing (answer: pretty poorly), then depression may actually be a disorder of misbudgeting and prediction.
We know that your brain continually predicts your body’s energy needs based on past experience. Under normal circumstances, your brain also corrects its predictions based on actual sensory information from your body. But what if this correction wasn’t working properly? Your momentary experience would be constructed from the past but not corrected by the present. In general terms, that’s what I think is happening in depression. Your brain is continually mispredicting your metabolic needs. Your body and brain therefore act as if you were fighting off an infection or healing from a wound when none exists, as in chronic stress or pain. As a result, your affect is out of whack: you experience debilitating misery, fatigue, or other symp-toms of depression. Simultaneously, your body is quickly metabolizing un-necessary glucose to meet those high yet nonexistent energy needs, leading to weight problems and leaving you at risk for other metabolic-related ill-nesses that co-occur with depression, including diabetes, heart disease, and cancer.
The traditional view of depression is that negative thoughts cause nega-tive feelings. I’m suggesting it’s the other way around. Your feelings right now drive your next thought, as well as your perceptions, as predictions. So a depressed brain relentlessly keeps making withdrawals from the bud-get, basing its predictions on similar withdrawals from the past. This means constantly reliving difficult, unpleasant events. You wind up in a cycle of budgeting imbalances, unbroken by prediction error because it is ignored, gets tuned down, or doesn’t make it to the brain. In effect, you’re locked into a cycle of uncorrected predictions, trapped in an adverse past when your metabolic needs were high.
A depressed brain is effectively locked into misery. It’s like a brain in chronic pain, ignoring prediction error, but on a much larger scale that shuts you down. It puts your budget chronically in debt, so your brain tries to cut spending. What’s the most efficient way to do that? Stop moving and don’t pay attention to the world (prediction error). That is the unrelenting fatigue of depression.”
(Lisa Feldman Barrett, How Emotions Are Made - The Secret Life of the Brain, 2017)

E1.6.A.1.11_REF1_SCIwE1.5.F.1. CAN PSYCHEDELICS IMPROVE MENTAL HEALTH?

E1.5.F.2. SIGNS OF DEPRESSION

E1.5.F.2_REF1_PH "A MASTER PAINTING WHERE HUMAN DESPAIR INVADES LIFE and a branch of grapes becomes a pistol" (Mineta House)
"Depression is distinguished from unhappiness by its causes, which are psychological or morbid: it is a kind of endogenous and pathological grief. Depression can be treated; unhappiness can be fought. This does not mean that there are not, between the two, all sorts of intermediate degrees and reciprocal actions (depression makes one unhappy, unhappiness depresses one), which may justify prescribing antidepressants, sometimes, to someone who is simply unhappy not because his suffering would be pathological, but to avoid, perhaps, that it becomes pathogenic."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.5.F.2_REF2_CUR "THE "BOX" THAT ENCLOSES EGON SCHIELE AND FRANCIS BACON'S CHARACTERS in their paintings touches me deeply and reminds me of how lucky I am to be little subject to the existential doubt that tortured these two great artists - « executioners of themselves » (as Baudelaire would have said) all their lives. Even in the mountains, nested in nature, there is no possible escape by dissolution in the landscape - the stranglehold continues to oppress them (see the imaginary lines around the hut in Schiele's 'Landscape with Crows' or those around the head of the character in Bacon's 'Character in a mountain landscape'). One would have to be as free as the grains of sand in a sand dune (see Bacon's 'Sand Dune') not to be subject to this evil and to succeed in « pulling oneself together » (at Schiele seems trying to do in 'Male nude propping himself up'), when one is born with the genes and has led the life of these two artists."
(Pierre Schindler)

E1.5.F.2_REF3_CUR SELF-EXECUTIONER "Since photography, painting has changed drastically. Now to do what is called realism, you have to distort the images because we are now so stultified by images, by everything we see on posters, movies and television. So you have to make an image that - we can use the word - that shocks you. The purpose is not to shock, but to open the roads through which what I call realism can be expressed." (Francis Bacon)
What fascinates Bacon is this torsion that he imposes on images, he often paints from photos like this one from Eadweard Muybridge that he distorts for our surprise.
But isn't it also a violence that Bacon inflicts on himself? He was often angry with himself. Was he a « self-executioner » as Baudelaire puts it in the poem L'Héautontimorouménos:
« Am I not a false chord
In the divine symphony,
Due to the voracious irony
That shakes and devores me? [...]
I am the wound and the knife!
I am the slap and the cheek,
I am the limbs and the wheel,
The victim and the executioner! [...] »
This violence seems to reside in his gaze rather than in reality -  in his psyche marked by a hard life of rejections (the non-recognition of his sexual preference by his family for example)."
(Pierre Schindler)

E1.5.F.2_REF4_SCI "THE CAUSE OF DEPRESSION IS PROBABLY NOT WHAT YOU THINK
Depression has often been blamed on low levels of serotonin in the brain. That answer is insufficient, but alternatives are coming into view and changing our understanding of the disease."
(Quanta Magazine, January 26, 2023)

Listen to the podcast or read the article:
https://www.quantamagazine.org/the-cause-of-depression-is-probably-not-what-you-think-20230126/?mc_cid=3f0bc80c10&mc_eid=de38e9b771#0

E1.5.F.2_REF4.1_SCI "HOW LONELINESS RESHAPES THE BRAIN
Feelings of loneliness prompt changes in the brain that further isolate people from social contact."
(Quanta magazine, February 28, 2023)

Listen to the podcast or Read the article:
https://www.quantamagazine.org/how-loneliness-reshapes-the-brain-20230228/

E1.5.F.2_REF5_PSI OF COURSE YOU MESSED UP
(The school of life)

Watch it on Youtube: https://youtu.be/Mk_rbJ4lBYM

E1.5.F.2_REF6_PSI OVERCOMING BAD INNER VOICES
(The school of life)

Watch it on Youtube: https://youtu.be/gGuZVuUBeiQ

E1.5.F.2_REF7_PSI THE DANGERS OF THINKING TOO MUCH AND TOO LITTLE
(The school of life)

Watch it on Youtube: https://youtu.be/p5zLY3Wi8Uk

E1.5.F.2_REF8_PSI THE TRUE AND FALSE SELF
(The school of life)

Watch it on Youtube: https://youtu.be/A02Ucd6monY

E1.5.F.2_REF9_PSI HOW WE LIE TO OURSELVES
(The school of life)

Watch it on Youtube: https://youtu.be/steu0fYGqhQ

E1.5.F.2_REF10_PO "I TIE MY HAT - I CREASE MY SHAWL -
Life’s little duties do - precisely -
As the very least 
Were infinite - to me -

I put new Blossoms in the Glass -
And throw the Old - away -
I push a petal from my Gown 
That anchored there - I weigh 
The time ‘twill be till six o’clock -
So much I have to do -
And yet - existence - some way back -
Stopped - struck - my ticking - through -

We cannot put Ourself away 
As a completed Man 
Or Woman - When the errand’s done 
We came to Flesh - opon -
There may be - Miles on Miles of Nought -
Of Action - sicker far -
To simulate - is stinging work -
To cover what we are 
From Science - and from Surgery -
Too Telescopic eyes 
To bear on us unshaded -
For their - sake - Not for Our’s -
Therefore - we do life’s labor -
Though life’s Reward - be done -
With scrupulous exactness -
To hold our Senses - on -"
(Emily Dickinson, 1863)

E1.5.F.2_REF11_PO "IT WAS NOT DEATH, FOR I STOOD UP,
And all the Dead, lie down -
It was not Night, for all the Bells 
Put out their Tongues, for Noon. 

It was not Frost, for on my Flesh 
I felt Siroccos - crawl -
Nor Fire - for just my marble feet 
Could keep a Chancel, cool -

And yet, it tasted, like them all, 
The Figures I have seen 
Set orderly, for Burial, 
Reminded me, of mine -

As if my life were shaven,
And fitted to a frame, 
And could not breathe without a key,
And ‘twas like Midnight, some -

When everything that ticked - has stopped -
And Space stares - all around -
Or Grisly frosts - first Autumn morns,
Repeal the Beating Ground -

But, most, like Chaos - Stopless - cool -
Without a Chance, of spar -
Or even a Report of Land -
To justify - Despair."
(Emily Dickinson, 1862)

1.5.F.2_REF12_LIT YOU CANNOT RUN AWAY FROM YOURSELF

“Hello, Robert,” I said. “Did you come in to cheer me up?”

“Would you like to go to South America, Jake?” he asked.

“No.”

“Why not?”

“I don’t know. I never wanted to go. Too expensive. You can see all the
South Americans you want in Paris anyway.”

“They’re not the real South Americans.”

“They look awfully real to me.”

I had a boat train to catch with a week’s mail stories, and only half of
them written.

“Do you know any dirt?” I asked.

“No.”

“None of your exalted connections getting divorces?”

“No; listen, Jake. If I handled both our expenses, would you go to South
America with me?”

“Why me?”

“You can talk Spanish. And it would be more fun with two of us.”

“No,” I said, “I like this town and I go to Spain in the summer-time.”

“All my life I’ve wanted to go on a trip like that,” Cohn said. He sat
down. “I’ll be too old before I can ever do it.”

“Don’t be a fool,” I said. “You can go anywhere you want. You’ve got
plenty of money.”

“I know. But I can’t get started.”

“Cheer up,” I said. “All countries look just like the moving pictures.”

But I felt sorry for him. He had it badly.

“I can’t stand it to think my life is going so fast and I’m not really
living it.”

“Nobody ever lives their life all the way up except bull-fighters.”

“I’m not interested in bull-fighters. That’s an abnormal life. I want to
go back in the country in South America. We could have a great trip.”

“Did you ever think about going to British East Africa to shoot?”

“No, I wouldn’t like that.”

“I’d go there with you.”

“No; that doesn’t interest me.”

“That’s because you never read a book about it. Go on and read a book
all full of love affairs with the beautiful shiny black princesses.”

“I want to go to South America.”

He had a hard, Jewish, stubborn streak.

“Come on down-stairs and have a drink.”

“Aren’t you working?”

“No,” I said. We went down the stairs to the café on the ground floor. I
had discovered that was the best way to get rid of friends. Once you had
a drink all you had to say was: “Well, I’ve got to get back and get off
some cables,” and it was done. It is very important to discover graceful
exits like that in the newspaper business, where it is such an important
part of the ethics that you should never seem to be working. Anyway, we
went down-stairs to the bar and had a whiskey and soda. Cohn looked at
the bottles in bins around the wall. “This is a good place,” he said.

“There’s a lot of liquor,” I agreed.

“Listen, Jake,” he leaned forward on the bar. “Don’t you ever get the
feeling that all your life is going by and you’re not taking advantage
of it? Do you realize you’ve lived nearly half the time you have to live
already?”

“Yes, every once in a while.”

“Do you know that in about thirty-five years more we’ll be dead?”

“What the hell, Robert,” I said. “What the hell.”

“I’m serious.”

“It’s one thing I don’t worry about,” I said.

“You ought to.”

“I’ve had plenty to worry about one time or other. I’m through
worrying.”

“Well, I want to go to South America.”

“Listen, Robert, going to another country doesn’t make any difference.
I’ve tried all that. You can’t get away from yourself by moving from one
place to another. There’s nothing to that.”

“But you’ve never been to South America.”

“South America hell! If you went there the way you feel now it would be
exactly the same. This is a good town. Why don’t you start living your
life in Paris?”

“I’m sick of Paris, and I’m sick of the Quarter.”

“Stay away from the Quarter. Cruise around by yourself and see what
happens to you.”

“Nothing happens to me. I walked alone all one night and nothing
happened except a bicycle cop stopped me and asked to see my papers.”

“Wasn’t the town nice at night?”

“I don’t care for Paris.”

So there you were. I was sorry for him, but it was not a thing you could
do anything about, because right away you ran up against the two
stubbornnesses: South America could fix it and he did not like Paris. He
got the first idea out of a book, and I suppose the second came out of a
book too.”
(Ernest Hemingway, The Sun Also Rises, 1926)

E1.5.F.3. PSYCHOANALYSIS IS NOT A RECIPE FOR TRANQUILLITY
"Psychoanalysis is not what a vain people think, a recipe for quietude or well-being, but a restless and perilous negotiation, the diplomacy of the balance of terror, which gropingly adjusts the tragic, fragile and ever-threatening balance of the human and the inhuman, the conscious and the unconscious, the Symbolic and the Real."

“Psychotherapy [can] give great gifts to tortured and overwhelmed people and even added dignity to anyone who values and can use self-knowledge. Psychotherapy can allow people to affirm themselves, to smash idols that constrict the self-esteem, to lift the load of neurotic guilt—the extra guilt piled on top of natural existential guilt. It can clear away neurotic despair—the despair that comes from a too-constricted focus for one’s safety and satisfactions. When a person becomes less fragmented, less blocked and bottled up, he does experience real joy: the joy of finding more of himself, of the release from armor and binding reflexes, of throwing off the chains of uncritical and self-defeating dependency, of controlling his own energies, of discovering aspects of the world, intense experience in the present moment that is now freer of prefixed perceptions, new possibilities of choice and action, and so on. Yes, psychotherapy can do all these things, but there are many things it cannot do, and they have not been aired widely enough. Often psychotherapy seems to promise the moon: a more constant joy, delight, celebration of life, perfect love, and perfect freedom. It seems to promise that these things are easy to come by, once self-knowledge is achieved, that they are things that should and could characterize one’s whole waking awareness. As one patient said, who had just undergone a course in “primal scream” therapy: “I feel so fantastic and wonderful, but this is only a beginning—wait till you see me in five years, it’ll be tremendous!” We can only hope that she won’t be too unhappy. Not everyone is as honest as Freud was when he said that he cured the miseries of the neurotic only to open him up to the normal misery of life. Only angels know unrelieved joy—or are able to stand it. Yet we see the books by the mind-healers with their garish titles: “Joy!” “Awakening,” and the like; we see them in person in lecture halls or in groups, beaming their peculiar brand of inward, confident well-being, so that it communicates its unmistakable message: we can do this for you, too, if you will only let us. I have never seen or heard them communicate the dangers of the total liberation that they claim to offer; say, to put up a small sign next to the one advertising joy, carrying some inscription like “Danger: real probability of the awakening of terror and dread, from which there is no turning back.” It would be honest and would also relieve them of some of the guilt of the occasional suicide that takes place in therapy.”
(Ernest Becker, The Denial of Death, 1973)

E1.5.F.3.1. THE UNNAMEABLE AND THE DOUBLE THREATEN OUR KINGDOM
Just as there are two kingdoms at the center of which the subject constructs and affirms itself, so there will be two realities that pose a muted threat at their borders: at the limit of the Symbolic, the Thing (das Ding) is erected, which words fail to name, the unnameable that our discourse always misses; at the limit of the Imaginary, the Double appears, in which the subject loses himself without recognizing himself, like Narcissus drowning in his reflection. The Thing and the Double are the two steles that stand at the border of our two worlds. 

E1.5.F.3.1_REF1_PH ACCORDING TO LACAN, PSYCHOANALYSIS IS A DANGEROUS NEGOTIATION BETWEEN THE CONSCIOUS AND THE UNCONSCIOUS. At the borders of the symbolic and the imaginary, two realities threaten: the unnameable thing and the double in which the subject loses itself.
"Lacan clearly understood that Greek tragedy is based first and foremost on a topology, a rigorous and unchanging structure of space: two "antigonic", even more than antagonistic, realms, between which the balance can only be one of terror: that of the human world, on the one hand, where Logos reigns, that word of which the free and conscious subject is the sole master, and on the other, the sacred realm, where the gods reign, imperiously demanding that mortals pay their dues through the gift of sacrifice. In order for the human world to be protected from the threat of the inhuman or superhuman that always lurks on the sacred side, mortals must ensure that the rites are scrupulously performed. The slightest error, the slightest blunder, would upset the balance and sweep it away in a tragic earthquake. [Lacan is fascinated by the heroism of Antigone, who risks the limit - the threshold of madness - to put an end to tragic destabilization and restore the peace of sharing. Psychoanalysis is not, as the vain think, a recipe for tranquility or well-being, but an anxious and dangerous negotiation, the diplomacy of the balance of terror, which gropingly adjusts the fragile and ever threatening tragic equilibrium between the human and the inhuman, the conscious and the unconscious, the symbolic and the real. [...]
Just as there are two realms at the center of which the subject constructs and affirms itself, so there will be two realms that pose a muted threat at their borders: at the limit of the symbolic, there is the thing that words cannot name, the unnameable that our discourses always miss; at the limit of the imaginary, there is the double, in which the subject loses itself without recognizing itself, like Narcissus drowning in his reflection. The Thing and the Double are the two steles that stand at the border between worlds. Beyond this, every object tends to dissolve into the indeterminate, whether it has been posited in the symbolic by the act of definition, inserted into the network of signifiers, or manifested in the imaginary by the encounter with a stranger who is another myself, from nowhere, forever unique".
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Listen to Madness, III- The Real, 2019)

Read the essay in full: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Lacan/Ecouterlafolie/Ecouterlafolie3.html

E1.5.F.3.1.a. REALITY IS THE SYMBOLIC SYSTEM IN WHICH WE TRY TO IMPRISON THE REAL
"What is Real is not reality, in the sense that what we call reality is a symbolic system made up of values and rituals that structure a community and govern discourse and laws. Reality is ordered; only the Real is pure presence. [...] Reality is thus the symbolic system in which we strive to imprison the Real, which will nevertheless always find the opportunity to show itself through the gaps in our discourse, where words fail us. [...]
The symbolic system represses a world - that of the Real - and defines another - that of reality - in which it is possible for man to live and exercise his control."
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Listen to Madness, III - The Real, 2019)

Read the essay in full: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Lacan/Ecouterlafolie/Ecouterlafolie3.html

E1.5.F.3.1.a_REF1_PH ACCORDING TO LACAN, THE REAL IS A PURE PRESENCE THAT ESCAPES THE SYMBOLIC STRUCTURES OF A REALITY ORDERED BY VALUES AND RITUALS. Language, while essential to the structuring of Reality, cannot fully capture the Real, which manifests itself in the gaps and ambiguities of discourse. The power of language allows us to master the symbolic world, but the real always remains partially out of reach, appearing in dreams, fantasies, and hallucinations.
"Let us begin, then, with the Real that besieges the symbolic world, before moving on to encounter the other Real, at the point where the imaginary comes to a standstill, transfixed by the encounter with the double. As Lacan repeatedly emphasizes, the Real is not reality in the sense that what we call reality is a symbolic system of values and rituals that structure a community and govern discourse and laws. Reality is ordered; only the Real is pure presence. When parents tell their children that they must have a 'sense of reality,' they simply mean that they must obey the laws and customs of their country. But in the presence of the Real, there is no longer any discourse that holds, and the subject is reduced to silence. But there is no language that does not, through its slips of the tongue, its denials, its ambiguities, its silences, like a fabric through its holes or tears, hint at the Real that its web seeks to suppress and master. Reality, then, is the symbolic system in which we try to imprison the Real, which will nevertheless always find the opportunity to show itself through the gaps in our discourse, where words fail us. We can know everything about the objects of experience, except for the act of presence that makes them real and gives them the power of the Real. [...] What escapes our experience of reality is precisely what is obscured by the fact that we have put the Real under the yoke or 'halter' of the signifier. For words do not leave the things they designate untouched, and, as magic has always anticipated, they cast a spell over them, appropriating them symbolically. [...]
'The trap,' says Lacan, 'the hole we must not fall into, is to believe that the signified are objects, things. The signified is something else entirely - it's signification, which I've explained [...] always refers back to another signification. The system of language, no matter how well you understand it, never results in an index directly directed to a point of reality; it is the whole of reality that is covered by the whole network of language'. By giving the creature made in his image the names of the animals, God enables Adam to overcome the fear of the real, to evade its threat, and gives him all power over them. It was the power of language, of thought and its cunning, and not sheer force, that enabled man to cage the lions. It was the power of the signifier, Lacan teaches in his first seminar, that enabled the first hunters to capture the mammoth, the most formidable of the pachyderms. Nothing was more dangerous and nothing less useful, since the meat of the beast, which could not be preserved, was destined to rot on the spot. By killing his prey, the hunter experiments with and verifies the omnipotence of language. [...] The symbolic system suppresses one world - that of the real - and defines another - that of reality - in which it is possible for man to live and exercise his mastery. [...]
Lacan's designation of the real with this substantive adjective is a strange one, closer to what everyday language calls the unreal than to reality, which we also know to be an effect of language. The real is neither the external world, nor the universe, nor the field of experience, all of which are invested by the discipline of language. The Thing, this emissary of the Real, is beyond meaning, it tears at the fragile fabric of words and appears only on the stage of dreams, for example, or through fantasy or hallucination. [...]"
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Listen to Madness, III - The Real, 2019)

Read the essay in full: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Lacan/Ecouterlafolie/Ecouterlafolie3.html

E1.5.F.3.1.a_REF1.1_PH "IF THE CARAVAGO FRUIT BIN IS SO SUPERBLY PRESENT, it's because the fruit is unreal, swollen with juice, standing out fantastically against the luminous background, seeming to detach itself from the wall and fall into our outstretched hand. It's not imitation that gives us a sense of presence, but hallucination, insofar as it expresses the tension of desire. And for the trap to be even more effective, a detail must stand out, like the fly on the coquette's cheek or the wormhole on the shining apple in the Ambrosian basket. Hallucination brings the eye into the painting and places the viewer under a meditative gaze. [...] The real is not descriptive, it is hallucinatory and metonymic. And there is no more powerful affirmation of the Real than the appearance of the thing where words are lacking, in the hollowness of the unnamed".
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Listen to Madness, III - The Real, 2019)

Read the essay in full: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Lacan/Ecouterlafolie/Ecouterlafolie3.html

E1.5.F.3.1.b. THE FASCINATION OF THE DOUBLE: WHEN THE IMAGINARY HYPNOTIZES US
"What now of the Real in the other dimension that gives rise to it, no longer at the limit of the Symbolic, where words are lacking to express it, but at the limit of the Imaginary, where the Double becomes a hypnotist and Narcissus drowns in the water of his reflection?  If the child constructs the schema of his own body through the image that the mirror reveals to him, it could be that the same child loses himself and forgets himself - another form of aphanisis, of the fainting of the subject transfixed by the appearance of a great Other - fascinated by the imaginary creature, buried in the water of the mirror, watching him from the other world. [...]
This specular inversion, which turns the reflection into a real being and the subject into a virtual creature, is based on the original alienation of the little human, whose prematurity renders him incapable of autonomy, and who must find or lose himself in an Other before finding himself. [...]
In disappearing, the object opens a gaping chasm in the subject, its "shadow", as Freud famously put it, "falls on the ego", its "shadow", that is, the outline of an absence, the present trace of a past presence.  [...]
In a world without consistency, where all presence is abolished by the feeling of absence, there is no longer any action that is worthwhile, being or not being are confused, and dying is better than living. [...]
It seems that, for Lacan, once the mirror of fantasy has been shattered, all that remains of being is incomprehensible chaos.
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Listen to Madness, III - The Real, 2019)

Read the essay in full: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Lacan/Ecouterlafolie/Ecouterlafolie3.html

E1.5.F.3.1.b_REF1_PH LACAN EXAMINES THE ALIENATION OF THE SUBJECT, THE MECHANISM OF TRANSFERENCE, AND THE PHANTASM OF THE DOUBLE. He describes a world in which existence dissolves into the infra-real, a zone of indeterminacy in which the real dissolves and the subject is confronted with a profound nihilism and horror of the human condition.
"What then of the Real in the other dimension that produces it, no longer at the limit of the Symbolic, where words fail to express it, but at the limit of the Imaginary, where the Double becomes the hypnotist and Narcissus drowns in the water of his reflection? If the child constructs the schema of its own body through the image that the mirror reveals to it, it could be that the same child loses itself and forgets itself - another form of aphanisis, the fainting of the subject transfixed by the appearance of a great Other - fascinated by the imaginary creature buried in the water of the mirror, watching it from the other world. [...]
This mirroring inversion, which turns the reflection into a real being and the subject into a virtual creature, is based on the original alienation of the infant, whose prematurity renders him incapable of autonomy and who must find or lose himself in an Other before he can find himself. The mechanism of transference, to which we'll return when we question the figure of the master, is decisive in the fantasy of the double. [...]
By disappearing, the object opens a yawning chasm in the subject; its 'shadow,' as Freud famously put it, 'falls on the self,' its 'shadow,' that is, the outline of an absence, the present trace of a past presence. The ideal ego that the neurotic subject hallucinates in the formidable image of the Great Other is followed by a melancholic depression that plunges the subject into the nothingness that lies at the heart of himself and makes him experience the living pain, not of dying, but of living as a dead person. Here begins the land at the end of the world, barren and deserted, shrouded in mist, where form dissolves into formlessness, where existence liquefies into empty time, where being drowns in nothingness. To describe this beyond of the Imaginary and the Symbolic, which is more than real and less than being, we need to invent a new category: the Infra-real. Lacan often ventures into this zone of indeterminacy, but he never names it. Hamlet, prince of melancholy, reigns over this realm of limits, overwhelmed by the double grief of a murdered father and a defiled mother. [...] The story of this dark, orphaned, inconsolable prince is a slow suicide in a setting of ruins that desire has abandoned: Ophelia, the object of his love, is a chimera disintegrating in the waters of the river, the murdered father a groaning avenger not worth the price of revenge, the desecrated mother a slut abandoned to the usurper, the throne a shadow theater where all is pretense. In a world without consistency, where all presence is abolished by the feeling of absence, there is no longer any action worth taking, being and not being are confused, and dying is better than living. In Hamlet, the totem of the Nom-du-Père and the fetish of the phallic mother, which had taken the place of reality, dissolve into hollow dreams and vain phantasmagorias: 'The meaning of what Hamlet learns from this father is there, before us, very clear. It is the irreparable, absolute, unfathomable betrayal of love - of the purest love, the love of this king, who, of course, like all men, may have been a great scoundrel, but who, with this being who was his wife, went so far as to turn the winds of heaven from his face - at least according to what Hamlet says. This is the absolute falsehood of what seemed to Hamlet to be the very testimony of beauty, truth, and essence. Therein lies the answer. Hamlet's truth is a hopeless truth. There is no trace in Hamlet of elevation to something beyond, of salvation or redemption. [...] For Lacan, Hamlet is the brother of the old, blind Oedipus, whom the young Antigone leads to Colone at the end of his exile: "It is better never to be born (mê phunai),' laments the chorus, 'and if we must see the light of day, it is still better to return as quickly as possible to whence we came'. This lament recurs like a leitmotif in Lacan's meditations, not as the death that frightens the living, who live only so as not to die, but as that 'second death' which is the sinister temptation of nothingness, the swampy lands of the Infra-real, where grief and melancholy slowly sink. [...] In this 'nothingness of existence,' this taedium vitae that is as much self-hatred as it is hatred of life, this despair that does not even have the energy to commit suicide, the spectrum that made up the subject's identity is terribly decomposed by the superimposition of successive identifications, like so many masks that fall and, as they fall, reveal the profound misery and radical impoverishment that are the hallmark of the human beast. The image of the body itself dissolves beyond the Real, in the Infra-real, where nothing has any consistency, in front of a mirror that is nothing but darkness, leaving room for that which no longer has a name in any language: a decomposing corpse. [...] Bossuet: 'What good will it do you to have written so much in this book, to have filled all its pages with beautiful characters, when in the end a single erasure must wipe it all out? Even an erasure would at least leave a few traces of itself; instead, this last moment, which will erase your whole life in a single stroke, will be lost, along with everything else, in the great abyss of nothingness. There will be no trace left on earth of what we are: the flesh will change its nature; the body will have another name; even that of the corpse will not last long: it will become, says Tertullian, a je ne sais quoi that has no name in any language'. In the Infra-real, the Real dissolves like a dream or a phantom, and all existence dissolves into the uncertainty of the formless or the vanity of the fickle. There is a profound nihilism in Lacan, a horror of the human condition that is undoubtedly the flip side of the unconditionality of desire that lies at the heart of the ethics of psychoanalysis [...] It seems that for Lacan, once the mirror of fantasy has been shattered, all that remains of being is an incomprehensible chaos.
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Listen to Madness, III - The Real, 2019)

Read the essay in full: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Lacan/Ecouterlafolie/Ecouterlafolie3.html

E1.5.F.3.1.b_REF2_PH JACQUES DARRIULAT DISCUSSES LACAN'S IDEAS ON THE INTERPLAY BETWEEN REALITY, THE SYMBOLIC, AND THE IMAGINARY. He explores how the child's self-concept is influenced by the mirror image, leading to potential self-alienation. This specular inversion creates a dynamic where the real and virtual selves are intertwined, rooted in the child's initial dependency and immaturity. Darriulat highlights Freud's notion of the object's shadow impacting the self, resulting in a pervasive sense of absence. Ultimately, he suggests that once the fantasy mirror is shattered, what remains is an incomprehensible chaos.
"What about Reality in the other dimension where it can be found, no longer at the limit of the Symbolic, where words are lacking to evocate it, but at the limit of the Imaginary, where the Double image becomes a hypnotist and where Narcissus drowns in the water of his own reflection?  If the child constructs his own body's schema based on the image revealed to him by the mirror, it can also be the opposite; that the same child loses himself and forgets himself - another form of aphanisis, of the fainting of the subject meditated by the appearance of a great Other - fascinated by the imaginary creature, buried in the water of the mirror, which looks at him from the other world. [...]
This specular inversion, which makes a real being out of the reflection and a virtual creature out of the subject, is based on the original alienation of the little man incapable of autonomy because of his lack of maturity, so that he must find or lose himself in an Other before finding himself. [...]
The object, by eclipsing itself, opens in the subject a gaping chasm, its « shadow », according to a famous formula of Freud, « falls on the self », its « shadow », that is to say the outline of an absence, the present trace of a past presence.  [...]
In a world without consistency, where all presence is abolished by the feeling of  absence, there is no more action which is worth living, to be or not to be are confused and to die is better than to live. [...]
It seems that, for Lacan, once the mirror of fantasy has been broken, all that remains of a being is an incomprehensible chaos."
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Listening to Madness, III - The Real, 2019)

Read the essay in full: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Lacan/Ecouterlafolie/Ecouterlafolie3.html

E1.5.F.3.2. WE WILL BE HUMAN, NOT BY ATTRIBUTING TO OURSELVES A MORE-THAN-HUMAN FREEDOM, BUT BY RECOGNIZING THE BACKGROUND OF NOTHINGNESS AGAINST WHICH OUR DESTINIES TAKE SHAPE.
 Analytical work in no way aims to restore primitive freedom to the insane, whom madness would have accidentally reduced to servitude; conversely, it leads the analysand to recognize the incurable nothingness that opens up at the heart of his being. For Lacan, as for Pascal, there is no greatness in man other than the knowledge of his misery. [...] And it is in this way that we will become human, not by attributing to ourselves a more than human freedom - a Promethean chimera - but by recognizing the background of nothingness against which our destinies take shape.

E1.5.F.3.2_REF1_PH "ON THE 'PSY' MARKET, PSYCHANALYSIS DISTINGUISHES ITSELF IN THAT IT DOES NOT PROMISE HAPPINESS, but rather presents itself as an exercise in lucidity. If, in the end, it merely returns the subject to his indescribable solitude - which, incidentally, is the best way to enable him to meet others, i.e. to see them for what they are - it also places the conduct of his life in his hands, since he is now placed at the center of what Montaigne called 'the nihilism of the human condition' (Essays, Book II, Chapter III, 'On Exercise'). We recall that Valéry concluded The Fixed Idea, which is a dialogue, with this disenchanted formula: 'A man alone is always in bad company'. That may be, although it's not unreasonable to suspect that the worst is not always certain. But there is another truth that cannot be denied: better the solitude of consciousness than the predatory obsession of fantasy. [...]
Language itself is born of the abolition of the subject in the field of the signifier: the subject of utterance is not the subject of utterance, the I of discourse is different from the I that holds the discourse, that speaks. This is why the liar's paradox is not a paradox at all. In fact, I can say without contradiction, 'I lie,' because the one who says it is not the one who lies. I speak only by withdrawing, by abstaining from the discourse I am holding, like a representation that I distance myself from in order to contemplate it better, like my image in the mirror that I understand all the better the more I stand back. In this sense, while the subject's dissociation from itself opens the abyss of melancholy and mourning, this same opening of the field allows for a distancing without which language and conscious representation could not be achieved. The object of fantasy closes this window and silences the subject by bringing into its frame the spectre of the Master, who is all the more venerated because he promises to fill the void and alleviate the suffering. But the remedy is imaginary: the Master is merely the positive image onto which we transfer the negative of our own deficiency. Analytic work, by reconstructing the world of signs that we ourselves have elaborated in order to better protect ourselves from the world of things, allows us to return to ourselves, to recognize and accept the incompleteness that is the source of all desire in us - precisely what Montaigne called the 'nihility' of our human condition. Analytical work, then, is not about restoring the primitive freedom of the alienated person whom madness has inadvertently reduced to servitude; on the contrary, it leads the analyst to recognize the incurable nothingness that opens up at the heart of his being. For Lacan, as for Pascal, there is no greatness in man except the knowledge of his misery. [...] And this is how we become human, not by attributing to ourselves a more than human freedom - a Promethean chimera - but by recognizing the background of absence against which our destinies take shape".
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Listen to Madness, V - The Master, 2019)

Read the essay in full: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Lacan/Ecouterlafolie/Ecouterlafolie5.html

E1.5.F.3.2_REF1.1_PH  THE "I AM LYING" STATEMENT IS PERFECTLY VALID DESPITE ITS PARADOX "... the absurdities introduced by excessively formal logicistic thinking, which sees an antinomy of reason in the statement I am lying, when everyone knows that there is none. It is completely wrong to respond to this I'm lying by saying that if you say I'm lying, then you're telling the truth, and therefore you're not lying, and so on. It's quite clear that the I'm lying, despite its paradox, is perfectly valid. In fact, the I that speaks, the I of the utterance, is not the same as the I of the statement, i.e., the shifter that designates it in the statement. Consequently, from the point at which I enunciate, it is perfectly possible for me to formulate in a valid way that the I - the I who at that moment formulates the utterance - is lying, that he lied shortly before, that he is lying afterwards, or even that, by saying I lie, he affirms that he intends to deceive". 
(Jacques Lacan, Seminar XI, The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis (1964), April 22, 1964, Seuil, 1973, p. 127)

E1.5.F.4. USING THE RUSE OF FREE ASSOCIATION, ANALYSIS FLUSHES OUT THE TRUTH, AS THE MIRROR OF FANTASIES SHATTERS INTO A THOUSAND PIECES
"Using the ruse of free association, analysis flushes out the truth. As the mirror of fantasies shatters into a thousand pieces, the analysand discovers life's enigma, in its nakedness, in its indifference and in its inhumanity, within which all choices, if there is still time, are still possible, depending on whether one chooses to be reborn to life, or to renounce living. [... This] tragedy is [...] at the same time distressing because what one believed to be collapses, and intoxicating because of the hope of what one can still possibly become".
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Listening to Madness, IV - The Truth, 2019)

Read the essay in full: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Lacan/Ecouterlafolie/Ecouterlafolie4.html

E1.5.F.4_REF1_PH LACAN'S INTEREST IN TRAGEDY IS TIED TO HIS VIEW OF THE ANALYTIC EXPERIENCE, AKIN TO THE MECHANICS OF TRAGIC DRAMA. Tragedy, according to Aristotle, involves a system of actions with three stages: the knot, the coup de théâtre, and the closing, each associated with specific tragic passions. This framework illustrates how tragedy stages a reversal of situations, altering the order of the world and the fates of characters.
"That truth is of the order of the event and not of discourse allows us to better understand Lacan's interest in tragedy. [...] This emphasis on the tragic does not, however, in any way depart from the analytic experience, insofar as this experience is, in Lacan's eyes, a test of truth, similar in several respects to the mechanics of the tragic drama: « The ethics of analysis is not a speculation on the ordering, the arrangement of what I call the service of goods [by which Lacan means the system of exchange values]. It involves, strictly speaking, the dimension that is expressed in what is called the tragic experience of life. It is in the tragic dimension that actions are inscribed, and in which we are solicited to locate ourselves regarding values ». We know that, according to Aristotle, tragedy composes a « system of actions » that are rigorously linked, and is played out in three stages: the knot that has been tightening for a long time, the coup de théâtre that reverses the meaning of the action and the closing that sees the birth of a new world on the ruins of the old one, three moments that can be linked to the three tragic passions, terror during the knotting, pity when the blow of divine justice falls with the coup de théâtre, and finally purification that soothes the fears of the closing period  and teaches us to rejoice in the one that is coming. This tragic scheme allows us to understand that all tragedy consists in the staging of a reversal of situation, which reverses the order of the world and inverts the sign that the gods had attributed to mortals, making some characters to go from misfortune to happiness, and others from fortune to misfortune."
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Listening to Madness, IV - The Truth, 2019)

Read the essay in full: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Lacan/Ecouterlafolie/Ecouterlafolie4.html

E1.5.F.4_REF2_PH THE ANALYST'S ROLE IS TO PROMOTE THE LIBERATION OF SPEECH “The analyst, according to Lacan, must know how to be discreet: on the lookout for the word that hits the nail on the head, invisible to the analysand's eyes, he is content to put his finger on the point of padding that fixes desire, on those kernels of meaning that make the folds of fantasy converge, thus provoking the liberation of speech, and leaving to the analysand's care the art of building a new edifice of words where it will be better to live. The truth does not lie in interpretation; it lies in discerning the sensitive points that give rise to full speech, which brings the subject's identity into play and enables him or her to rebuild.”
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Listening to Madness, IV - The Truth, 2019)

Read the essay in full: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Lacan/Ecouterlafolie/Ecouterlafolie4.html

E1.5.F.4_REF2.1_PH PSYCHOANALYSTS MUST AVOID GIVING IN TO THEIR PENCHANT TO WANT THE GOOD OF THEIR PATIENTS TOO QUICKLY "The psychoanalyst's weakness, his penchant, he knows very well that he mustn't give in to it, and in everyday practice, of course, he keeps it to himself. On the other hand, psychoanalysts who are part of a group, or psychoanalysts when there's a crowd of them, want us to know that they're there for the good of all. 
But they're very careful not to focus too quickly on the good of the individual, on the good of the person they're dealing with, because they know very well that it's not by wanting the good of people that you achieve it, and most of the time it's quite the opposite. Fortunately, it's an idea they've acquired through experience. 
It's not as if they're real propagandists of psychoanalysis out there, although it would be salutary if more people knew that it's not by wanting too much good for your fellow man that you do him any good. It could be useful.
(Jacques Lacan, My Teaching, Place, Origin and End of My Teaching, 1967)

E1.5.F.4_REF2.2_CUR THESE SKETCHES WERE PUBLISHED IN DALI'S AUTOBIOGRAPHY THE SECRET LIFE OF SALVADOR DALÍ (1942). Here Dalí explains that a dinner of snails revealed to him "the morphological secret of Freud."
"Freud's cranium is a snail ! His brain is in the form of a spiral - to be extracted with a needle ! This discovery strongly influenced the portrait drawing which I later made from life, a year before his death."
(from the curatorship of Freud´s Museum, London)

E1.5.F.4_REF3_PH LACAN'S INTEREST IN TRAGEDY STEMS FROM ITS ALIGNMENT WITH THE ANALYTICAL EXPERIENCE, VIEWING IT AS A TEST OF TRUTH. TRAGEDY INVOLVES A REVERSAL OF SITUATIONS, REFLECTING THE SHIFTS IN HUMAN FORTUNE. Through free association in therapy, individuals uncover truths, shattering fantasies and revealing life's enigma.
"That truth is of the order of events and not that of discourse allows us to better understand Lacan's interest in the tragedy. [...] Emphasis placed on the tragic does not depart from the analytical experience, insofar as this experience is in Lacan's eyes a test of truth, similar in many ways to the mechanics of the tragic drama: « Actions inscribe themselves in the tragic dimension, when we are asked to find our bearings in terms of values ». [...] All tragedy consists in the staging of a reversal of situation, which reverses the order of the world and inverts the sign that the gods assign to mortals, making some pass from misfortune to happiness, and others from fortune to misfortune. [...]
Using the trick of free association, therapy uncovers the truth. As it shatters his mirror of fantasy into a thousand pieces, the analysed discovers the enigma of life, in its nudity, in its indifference and in its inhumanity, within which all the choices, if there is still time, are still possible, depending on whether one decides to be reborn to life or to give up living. [...] The end of the tragedy is complex, ambivalent, both distressing in the collapse of what one believed to be, and intoxicating with the hope of what is still allowed to live and accomplish."
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Listening to madness, IV - Truth, 2019)

E1.5.C.1.1_REF3_PH.wE1.5.F.4.

E1.5.F.5. THE SIGN THAT SOMETHING DOES MATTER TO US IS THAT WE LOSE OUR STEADINESS
"We should not, perhaps, underestimate our wish to lose our balance, even though it’s often easier to get up than to fall over. Indeed, the sign that something does matter to us is that we lose our steadiness."

E1.5.F.5_REF1_PH THE SIGN THAT SOMETHING DOES MATTER TO US IS THAT WE LOSE OUR STEADINESS "With an eye to John Stuart Mill’s 1834 proclamation that “there seems to be something singularly captivating in the word balance, as if, because anything is called a balance, it must, for that reason, be necessarily good,” Phillips writes:

     'The people we fall in love with we find singularly captivating, as are any of the people (or ideas) that inspire us, for better or for worse. What is strange about Mill’s simple observation is that it is the singularly captivating that tends to make us lose our balance. Mill intimates with his peculiar logic that the idea of balance can unbalance us.'

Like anger, beneath which David Whyte has so poetically observed lies an indication of what really matters to us, these unbalancing acts, Phillips argues, are a vital and indicative part of our aliveness:

      'We should not, perhaps, underestimate our wish to lose our balance, even though it’s often easier to get up than to fall over. Indeed, the sign that something does matter to us is that we lose our steadiness.'

Phillips considers the necessary excess of optimism and why an artificial balance is sometimes more dangerous than surrendering to such “singularly captivating” loss of steadiness:

      'We can only be really realistic after we have tried our optimism out. It is not always clear in which areas of our lives it is realistic (or even optimistic) to aspire to the balanced view; or indeed in which parts of our lives the balanced view helps us to get the lives that we want. Balancing acts are entertaining because they are risky, but there are situations in which it is more dangerous to keep your balance than to lose it.'

In one of the most rousingly and rewardingly unbalancing essays in the book, titled “On Being Too Much for Ourselves,” Phillips considers an especially anguishing aspect of our relationship with excess, fueled largely by our pathological busyness."
(Maria Popova's review on Adam Phillips' On Balance, 2010 - in The Marginalian)

E1.5.F.5_REF1.1_PH FEELING OVERWHELMED OR EXCESSIVE IS A COMMON HUMAN EXPERIENCE. What we often label as "overreactions" are actually valid and meaningful responses, for our emotions frequently convey more than we intend, reflecting deeper truths. 
"It is not unusual for us to feel that life is too much for us. And it is not unusual to feel that we really should be up to it; that there may be too much to cope with — too many demands — but that we should have the wherewithal to deal with it. Faced with the stresses and strains of everyday life it is easy now for people to feel that they are failing; and what they are failing at, one way or another, is managing the ordinary excesses that we are all beset by: too much frustration, too much bad feeling, too little love, too little success, and so on. One of the things people most frequently say in psychoanalysis is, ‘Perhaps I am overreacting, but . . .’; and one of the commonest complaints today is about feeling too much or feeling too little. I want to suggest that we are simply too much for ourselves, but that this too-muchness is telling us something important… My proposition is that it is impossible to overreact. That when we call our reactions overreactions what we mean is just that they are stronger than we would like them to be. In other words, we sometimes call ourselves and other people excessive as a way of invalidating or tempering the truths we tell ourselves or that other people tell us. It is impossible to overreact. [...]

When we make Freudian slips we try to cover our tracks by claiming that we have said more than we mean, when in fact we have meant more than we had wanted to say… We may feel like we are saying too much, but we may be saying just the right amount; adding things to the conversation that are worth talking about and trying out. We can’t decide not to make Freudian slips; but even when we use ordinary language intentionally, we often say more than we intend. If I say to you that I am a great admirer of your work, I am telling you about my greatness as well as yours; when I say, “See you tomorrow,” I am assuming I know what isn’t going to happen in the interim. Our language, without which we couldn’t imagine our lives, is too much for us in the sense that it can surprise us: we hear in it — and we say in it — more than we intend to. And more than we attend to. [...]

We have all had the experience, as children, of being too much for someone; of making someone feel things that they didn’t want to feel… Everyone starts with the experience of being too much for someone else; not only with that experience, but with that experience somewhere in the mix of who one is. Before we acquire the limiting and limited excesses of language we have lived with the excesses of need. If, even only occasionally as a child, you are too much for your parents — which then means you are too much for yourself — what can you do?

The child who experiences himself as being too much for his parents — all children to some extent — experiences himself as in some way harming them. And as the child’s survival depends upon his parents, or those who look after him, this puts him in mortal danger. For this reason alone it is very difficult for the child — and for the adult that he will become — to think of his too-muchness as anything other than a problem. And yet, of course, parents are there to absorb, and be absorbed in, their children’s excesses (and vice versa). Indeed, people know that they are in a relationship when they become a problem to each other (or, to put it slightly differently, if you want to have a relationship with someone you have to become a problem for them)."
(Adam Phillips, On Balance, 2010)

Watch the performance Oxigênio, by Lillian Vidigal and Maurizio Mancioli: https://www.instagram.com/p/CKHHmO6HTQT/?utm_source=ig_web_button_share_sheet&igsh=MzRlODBiNWFlZA==

E1.5.F.5_REF2_PH “WHEN YOU FEEL THE SOMATIC EXPERIENCE OF ANGER, you throw things, you shout (perhaps at the people you love), you’re on the floor (metaphorically, physically). And then, after a while, you have to get up. You have to feed your dog, answer emails, meet a student — in other words, you have to move towards care… For me, care is anger improved. It’s part of the same ecosystem. And I’m interested in dismantling the border between these two things, because we’re told that they’re two opposite sides of a spectrum, but I think they’re actually very close together. They inform each other. […]

Writers have produced incredible amounts of work with the energy of rage and anger. But, for me, that care that I have to give the sentence is then the medic — it almost calms me down. It’s hard to be rageful when you’re working with something that needs your care. If each word is a citizen in this world of the text, they are so dependent on me to think clearly and with restraint and with a sense of compassion and dignity to them. And I would lose their confidence in me, in a way, if I were to approach it with too much of myself. […]

If you’re not awake, you wouldn’t feel angry. But to be alive in American bones is to be enraged by what’s happening. And, of course, I feel anger. But I will say… I’m not proud of many things… but I’m incredibly proud that not a single sentence or page I’ve ever written in my work was written out of anger… It’s not that I’m not angry, but I’m not useful — as a writer, as an artist — when I’m angry.”
(Ocean Vuong,  speaking at San Francisco’s City Arts & Lectures, 2023)

Listen to the entire podcast: https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/encore-ocean-vuong/id1436346407?i=1000705169659

E1.5.F.6. DON'T INTERPRET, DON'T GET ANALYZED, SAYS DELEUZE
For Deleuze, the unconscious is not a theater, but a factory that produces by feeding on multiple factors, not on the reductive factors of the familiar world as psychoanalysis posits. "Don't interpret, don't get analyzed," says Deleuze, "but rather look for the arrangements, the formulations, the territories, the situations that suit you. Deleuze gives the unconscious an immanent dimension without introducing transcendent elements, as psychoanalysis does with the father and mother.

E1.5.F.6_REF1_PO "[...] ONLY WHEN THE FULCRUM IS SOLIDLY PLACED
CAN A PERSON LIFT, BY ARCHIMEDEAN LAWS,
the weight of this world. And only that body whose weight
is balanced at right angles to the floor
can manage to walk about and navigate. [...]"
(Joseph Brodsky, Collected poems in English, Lullaby of Cape Cod, 1975)

E1.5.F.6_REF2_PSI "VICTIM OR SURVIVOR MINDSET
"I think that there are two ways of looking at things that have happened to you. You can be a victim or you can be a survivor. Those are two very different cognitive positions. You can’t control what happens to you in either circumstance, but one is very powerful. You have overcome. One is you have had something happen to you and you are under that thing for quite some period of time. For me, if I hear someone and I hear that helplessness, one is that I want to reframe that experience. I want to tell a different story. I want them to tell a different narrative to themselves. I want them to rewrite that. In some ways, you want them to rewrite that narrative to survivorship and overcoming and what it took. You ask the right questions to get them to see that their own throughway in that case is based on their strength and ability. You want them to see those things rather than seeing the helplessness and powerlessness."
(Dr. Julie Gurner interviewed by FS | BRAIN FOOD, No. 531 — July 2, 2023)

E1.5.F.6_REF3_PSI “A TASTE OF HOW IT FEELS TO BE FREE: PIONEERING PSYCHOANALYST KAREN HORNEY ON OUR INNER CONFLICTS, THE PSYCHOLOGY OF HOPELESSNESS, AND THE PATH TO WHOLENESS
To be human is to be divided yet indivisible — a totality of personhood constantly sundered by conflicting impulses and desires, violently pulling us in opposite directions, paralyzing us with the inability to move ahead toward happiness and wholeness. “When we are in conflict we tend to make such sharp oppositions between ideas and attitudes and get caught and entangled in what seems to be a hopeless choice,” Anaïs Nin wrote in her diary as she contemplated inner conflict and the measure of maturity, “but when the neurotic ambivalence is resolved one tends to move beyond sharp differences, sharply defined boundaries and begins to see the interaction between everything, the relation between everything.”
The supreme challenge of human life is that we are much more opaque to ourselves than we like to admit — mighty subterranean rivers of emotion and motive course beneath the reasoned surface of our conscious beliefs, values, and desires. Neurosis might be an old-fashioned word, but it is useful shorthand for the tension that arises from these conflicting facets of our experience that leave us unsure of what we want, what to want. For all his groundbreaking contribution to the understanding of those subterranean currents, Freud’s great error was his pessimism about the mutability and treatment of our neuroses — to him, the cards were dealt in early childhood and the game of life played out deterministically. His tragedy was his lack of faith in human growth and human goodness — Freud was the supreme cynic of the psyche.
A counterpoint to his view of human nature and potential comes from the work of the pioneering German psychoanalyst Karen Horney (September 16, 1885–December 4, 1952), nowhere more insightfully than in her book Our Inner Conflicts: A Constructive Theory of Neurosis (public library), based on a series of lectures she delivered in 1943, as the world itself was being sundered by human nature’s warring factions. What emerges is a radical effort to allay neurotic hopelessness and contour the route to wholeness, governed by Horney’s conviction that we have both the will and the capacity to develop our potential for happiness and goodness, and that rather than living as victims of some deterministic pathology, we go on changing for as long as we live.”
(Maria Popova's review of Karen Horney's Our Inner Conflicts: A Constructive Theory of Neurosis, 1943 - in The Marginalian)

E1.5.F.6_REF3.1_PSI NEUROTIC CONFLICTS CANNOT BE RESOLVED THROUGH RATIONAL DECISION-MAKING BUT BY ALTERING THE UNDERLYING PERSONALITY CONDITIONS. “Neurotic conflicts cannot be resolved by rational decision. The neurotic’s attempts at solution are not only futile but harmful. But these conflicts can be resolved by changing the conditions within the personality that brought them into being. […]

It is not neurotic to have conflicts. At one time or another our wishes, our interests, our convictions are bound to collide with those of others around us. And just as such clashes between ourselves and our environment are a commonplace, so, too, conflicts within ourselves are an integral part of human life. […]

To experience conflicts knowingly, though it may be distressing, can be an invaluable asset. The more we face our own conflicts and seek out our own solutions, the more inner freedom and strength we will gain. Only when we are willing to bear the brunt can we approximate the ideal of being the captain of our ship [...]

Compulsive drives are specifically neurotic; they are born of feelings of isolation, helplessness, fear and hostility, and represent ways of coping with the world despite these feelings; they aim primarily not at satisfaction but at safety; their compulsive character is due to the anxiety lurking behind them.”
(Karen Horney, Our Inner Conflicts: A Constructive Theory of Neurosis, 1943)

E1.5.F.6_REF3.1.a_PSI KAREN HORNEY IDENTIFIES FOUR NEUROTIC ATTEMPTS TO RESOLVE INNER CONFLICTS: eclipsing part of the conflict by emphasizing its opposite, detaching emotionally from others, creating an idealized self-image to escape the actual self, and externalizing inner processes to distance from the self further. Each method temporarily alleviates conflict but ultimately generates new issues.
“The initial attempt [Horney saw among her patients'attempts to resolve their inner conflicts] was to eclipse part of the conflict and raise its opposite to predominance. The second was to “move away from” people. The function of neurotic detachment now appeared in a new light. Detachment was part of the basic conflict — that is, one of the original conflicting attitudes toward others; but it also represented an attempt at solution, since maintaining an emotional distance between the self and others set the conflict out of operation. The third attempt was very different in kind. Instead of moving away from others, the neurotic moved away from himself. His whole actual self became somewhat unreal to him and he created in its place an idealized image of himself in which the conflicting parts were so transfigured that they no longer appeared as conflicts but as various aspects of a rich personality… The need for perfection now appeared as an endeavor to measure up to this idealized image; the craving for admiration could be seen as the patient’s need to have outside affirmation that he really was his idealized image. And the farther the image was removed from reality the more insatiable this latter need would logically be. Of all the attempts at solution the idealized image is probably the most important by reason of its far-reaching effect on the whole personality. But in turn it generates a new inner rift, and hence calls for further patchwork. The fourth attempt at solution seeks primarily to do away with this rift, though it helps as well to spirit away all other conflicts. Through what I call externalization, inner processes are experienced as going on outside the self. If the idealized image means taking a step away from the actual self, externalization represents a still more radical divorce. It again creates new conflicts, or rather greatly augments the original conflict — that between the self and the outside world.”
(Karen Horney, Our Inner Conflicts: A Constructive Theory of Neurosis, 1943)

E1.5.F.6_REF3.1.a.i_PSI “THE KIND, SCOPE, AND INTENSITY OF SUCH CONFLICTS ARE LARGELY DETERMINED BY THE CIVILIZATION IN WHICH WE LIVE. If the civilization is stable and tradition bound, the variety of choices presenting themselves are limited and the range of possible individual conflicts narrow. Even then they are not lacking. One loyalty may interfere with another; personal desires may stand against obligations to the group. But if the civilization is in a stage of rapid transition, where highly contradictory values and divergent ways of living exist side by side, the choices the individual has to make are manifold and difficult.”
(Karen Horney, Our Inner Conflicts: A Constructive Theory of Neurosis, 1943)

E1.5.F.6_REF3.1.a.ii_PSI TO SOLVE AN INNER CONFLICT, WE MUST BE WILLING AND ABLE TO RENOUNCE ONE OF THE TWO CONTRADICTORY DESIRES “We must be aware of what our wishes are, or even more, of what our feelings are. [And yet] we do not know what we really feel or want. […]

Even if we recognize a conflict as such, we must be willing and able to renounce one of the two contradictory issues. But the capacity for clear and conscious renunciation is rare, because our feelings and beliefs are muddled, and perhaps because in the last analysis most people are not secure and happy enough to renounce anything. [...]

To make a decision presupposes the willingness and capacity to assume responsibility for it. This would include the risk of making a wrong decision and the willingness to bear the consequences without blaming others for them.”
(Karen Horney, Our Inner Conflicts: A Constructive Theory of Neurosis, 1943)

E1.5.F.6_REF3.1.a.iii_PSI NEUROTIC INDIVIDUALS OFTEN SEEK EXTERNAL CHANGES TO ALLEVIATE THEIR DISTRESS BUT ULTIMATELY CARRY THEIR UNRESOLVED CONFLICTS INTO NEW SITUATIONS, LEADING TO A CYCLE OF HOPELESSNESS. As people age and external hopes fade, they may begin to recognize their internal sources of distress. Hopelessness arises from unresolved conflicts and repeated failures, which intensify the sense of being trapped and alienated from oneself.
“Human beings can apparently endure an amazing amount of misery as long as there is hope; but neurotic entanglements invariably generate a measure of hopelessness… It may be deeply buried: superficially the neurotic may be preoccupied with imagining or planning conditions that would make things better… The neurotic expects a world of good from external changes, but inevitably carries himself and his neurosis into each new situation.

Hope that rests on externals is naturally more prevalent among the young… As people grow older and one hope after another fades, they are more willing to take a good look at themselves as a possible source of distress. [...]

Hopelessness is an ultimate product of unresolved conflicts, with its deepest root in the despair of ever being wholehearted and undivided. A mounting scale of neurotic difficulties leads to this condition. Basic is the sense of being caught in conflicts like a bird in a net, with no apparent possibility of ever extricating oneself. On top of this come all the attempts at solution which not only fail but increasingly alienate the person from himself. Repetitive experience serves to intensify the hopelessness — talents that never lead to achievement, whether because again and again energies are scattered in too many directions or because the difficulties arising in any creative process are enough to deter the person from further pursuit. This may apply as well to love affairs, marriages, friendships, which are shipwrecked one after another. Such repeated failures are as disheartening as is the experience of laboratory rats when, conditioned to jump into a certain opening for food, they jump again and again only to find it barred.”
(Karen Horney, Our Inner Conflicts: A Constructive Theory of Neurosis, 1943)

E1.5.F.6_REF3.1.a.iv_PSI FEELINGS OF HOPELESSNESS STEM FROM AN UNCHANGEABLE STATUS QUO AND ONE'S ATTITUDE TOWARDS IT. Resolving internal conflicts requires altering the personality conditions that created them. The ultimate therapeutic goal is striving for wholeheartedness, which involves emotional sincerity and fully committing to one's feelings, work, and beliefs.
“[Your] situation is hopeless only so long as the status quo persists and is regarded as unchangeable… What makes it hopeless is your own attitude toward it. If you would consider changing your claims on life there would be no need to feel hopeless. [...]

The conflicts can be resolved only by changing those conditions within the personality that brought them into being. This is a radical way, and a hard one. In view of the difficulties involved in changing anything within ourselves, it is quite understandable that we should scour the ground for short cuts. […]

The most comprehensive formulation of therapeutic goals is the striving for wholeheartedness: to be without pretense, to be emotionally sincere, to be able to put the whole of oneself into one’s feelings, one’s work, one’s beliefs. It can be approximated only to the extent that conflicts are resolved.”
(Karen Horney, Our Inner Conflicts: A Constructive Theory of Neurosis, 1943)

E1.5.F.7. "SPIRITUALITY AND PSYCHOTHERAPY

How do we define [the boundary between spiritual practice and psychotherapy]? Both aim to bring about inner change, but how far does this similarity go? In an interview Paul Watzlawick granted me for the now-defunct magazine City, the best-known representative of the Palo Alto School, acknowledged that there were "certain parallels" between Zen and the psychotherapy he and his colleagues practiced. The Zen master," he told me, "leads his disciple to the point where the latter abandons all his plans, programs and intentions (including that of achieving enlightenment). However, he does not sink into a deep depression, quite the contrary; in the awakening of a sudden awareness, he discovers himself in the very essence of Being." [...]

Are they then, under different names, the same technique of the self? I wouldn't go that far: I'd simply point out that spiritual learning, particularly Zen, and certain forms of therapy call upon fundamental psychic operators in their own field, which do not belong specifically to either of these fields. And I would add that a fundamental difference lies in their objective. Psychotherapy, recognizing that the patient's suffering is linked to the framework in which he or she is enclosed, helps him or her to change that framework; spiritual practice is more radical: it seems to call into question all framing and all reference points. The frame we're trying to break out of can't simply be replaced by another one, as this would imply that spirituality, too, provides a new one - which is certainly a failing into which it often falls, but one that risks fundamentally distorting it. For a framework affects what it encompasses, impoverishes its diversity and hinders its transcendence - and in this respect, the term "spirituality" is no better than any other, since it similarly places inner experience under the sign of the ego, from which it is precisely trying to free itself.

On the contrary, it is to a life without reference points, to the outpouring of pure experience, to an unframed and unlabeled lived experience, that the spiritual seeker seems, by the very nature of his practice, to be led."
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond wisdom, How to live?, 2023)

E1.5.F.7_REF1_PH "WHAT IS OUTSIDE THE FRAME?

A FIRST APPROACH TO ORDINARY AWAKENING

When the spiritual seeker renounces framing and labeling, his perception of the world changes. Colors become more vivid, sounds sharper. The situation around him appears. He begins to welcome the absolute presence of the present, purified of all that had dulled its radiance, and feels the urge to settle into it, even if it means stepping away from his plans and hopes.

Entering the present seems to him the best way to define the spiritual quest. It sounds banal, but in fact it refers to an almost inaccessible psychological state, because in ordinary perception the present, true to its name, doesn't present itself; it has to be strongly allowed to happen - in order for it to happen a little, and that's no easy feat - it can only happen slowly, meticulously, cautiously. [...]

The spiritual seeker visits what he sees, observes what he does, explores what he thinks, attends to the spectacle of his interiority. He rests in the lightness of being, staying a little ahead of the passage of time. In this interior position, he can accompany time, giving it the slowness in which he himself settles, slowing down the course of the moment and expanding his attention to an astonishing degree. Steps become ends in themselves, means become achievements, and all details take on greater importance. The present, always reluctant to fully establish itself, emerges in a series of moments, multiple touches, flashes of intensity. While remaining punctual, it becomes an expanse. A little of the present bursts out, then more and more, until this moment, which occupies the whole scene, comes to a virtual standstill. 'We can never get rid of the present,' wrote Georges Braque, 'because the present is eternal': spirituality is perhaps above all the continuing event of its birth."
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond Wisdom, How to Live?, 2023)

E1.5.F.7_REF1.1_PH IN IN SPIRITUAL AWAKENING, THE SEEKER RENOUNCES LABELS AND MENTAL FRAMEWORKS, ALLOWING FOR A MORE VIVID PERCEPTION OF THE PRESENT. Giribone likens spiritual emptiness to psychoanalytic lack. While lack denotes the absent object that weighs as such, emptiness requires nothing specific and can coexist with objects, offering a broader and deeper perspective on life.

"THE FLAW IN THE WORLD
Having reached this stage [of ordinary awakening], the [spiritual] seeker perceives with greater clarity the starting point of his own quest. It is because something was missing that he undertook this journey - that something which is always missing in the present: I don't know what consistency, a sparkle, perhaps the famous 'soul supplement,' that would give him completeness. Common wisdom identifies this flaw  as the gap that separates our hopes or 'dreams' from a reality that could never fulfill them. Psychoanalysis goes much further, demonstrating the fundamental, unsurpassable unreality of the object of desire. Spiritual practice, for its part, is not incompatible with this conception, but it sees the flaw from a different angle - it appears as an intrinsic weakness of the present, or rather, as Midal puts it, of the presence that is consubstantial with it and in a way defines it.

Ordinary existence passes by as if the essential were happening elsewhere; it unfolds like a prolonged exile, on the edge of a land that looks very exciting but into which we never penetrate; the colors of life lack intensity, things shine dimly, moments lack sufficient brilliance, and this disappointment is so constant that we no longer pay attention to it. A permanent dissatisfaction pushes us toward the future, 'we are never at home,' wrote Montaigne; and Pascal brilliantly evokes this blind dynamic that constantly projects us toward the next moment. All this has always been known, observed, and repeated, and the spiritual seeker already knew it, like everyone else - but now he sees it. And most importantly, he understands the reason for this essential flaw - what he perceives only happens within the straitjacket of the coordinates he has placed on the world, and all his questions, answers, expectations, fears, and theorizations form a screen that obscures the simple, rich unfolding of what is. 

EMPTINESS AND LACK
These considerations may seem banal, and indeed they are. But if we look at them closely, if we take them seriously, we break through their banality. Then we reach the empty place that lies beneath mental superimpositions and psychological scaffolding. This emptiness, which sometimes appears beneath the meaning we try to give to our existence, is at the very center of life; it appears when the constructions we have placed over it collapse, fade away, or reveal their fragility. [...]

This observation does not imply, however, that we should deprive ourselves, for supposedly spiritual reasons, of the satisfaction that objects give us. Ascetics live their lives in perpetual tension, and the constant struggle they wage against "temptation" becomes the great business of their existence. [The spiritual seeker does not choose this path. He does not strive to deny the pleasure of objects or activities, but to perceive and consider the emptiness that lies beneath.

This emptiness plays in the spiritual perspective much the same role as lack in psychoanalysis, and the similarity between these two central concepts is illuminating: both seem to call for a filling that proves impossible. But lack designates the absent object, which weighs as such, whereas emptiness does not require anything specific; therefore it can coexist with the object when the latter no longer obscures it. The struggle that always reduces the world to its scale is then replaced by access to a wider perspective, to a more penetrating gaze, where what we see, think or do finds its rightful place and a new depth".
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond Wisdom, How to Live?, 2023)


E1.5.F.7_REF1.1.a_PH "MEANING, DEPRESSION, JOY

The fact remains that the experience of emptiness has revealed the essential fragility of meaning. Everyone knows those moments when life is empty, when every act becomes a futile act and its succession an absurd repetition [...].

Depression is the evil of the century, which is to our time what the spleen was to the Romantics. The [spiritual] seeker sometimes rubs shoulders with it, because his quest, which also has to do with the core of life, is paradoxically close to it; but above all, he understands that depression has a spiritual dimension, because it is an involuntary but radical exploration of this vacillation of meaning, the modern version, dull and unadorned, of the mystical "dark night" in which the fragility of everything on which man relies is revealed. [...]

Unbelievers and believers alike are familiar with that sudden exaltation when a sensation, out of nowhere, takes on immense dimensions. Music sometimes provokes it. In these privileged moments, darkness is obscured, lack is absent, meaninglessness is extinguished. Not because meaning has arrived, but because the very question of it is obscured by a light more intense than it, which takes its place and makes it disappear. This luminous experience may be profane, secular, non-religious, and terms other than 'joy,' such as 'ecstasy,' may be used to describe it; but whatever name we give it and whatever scope we give it, it lies at the heart of spiritual experience, whose quintessence it brilliantly exposes-or so the seeker thinks when he or she experiences it.

THE RETURN OF FRAMEWORKS AND POINTS OF REFERENCE

Gradually, however, the need for meaning returns, as if anchored in his psyche by the deepest aspect of our culture, what we might call our metapsychological formation. Ecstasy occurs only in the dwelling place of the moment; and even if these moments are multiple, their succession is not enough to establish continuity. Normally, we resign ourselves to this transience ('it can't last'), but our researcher is not satisfied with this resignation. He realizes that a collection of brilliant moments is not enough to make the need for continuity disappear; and he wonders whether, once the exhilaration has passed, unless one is an avowed mystic, one can really settle down in the fiery place of ecstasy".
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond Wisdom, How to Live?, 2023)

E1.5.F.7_REF2_PH THE EXPERIENCE OF INTERIORITY IN THE SPIRITUAL APPROACH DIFFERS FROM PSYCHOLOGY AND PSYCHOANALYSIS IN THAT IT FOCUSES ON CHANGING THE INNER POSITION TO SUFFER LESS, RATHER THAN ON UNDERSTANDING SYMPTOMS OR DISORDERS. It aims to study life in depth, to create space for seeing and experiencing problems differently, and to transform the enjoyment of life into an autonomous experience detached from various events.
"Inner Anthropology

A TERRAIN CALLED "I" [...].

THE ANTHROPOLOGY OF INTERIORITY

The way in which the researcher looks at himself [...] is not merely psychological - it is rather an anthropology of interiority. It differs from egoism in the absence of self-love. It's not about cultivating one's uniqueness, which is seen as something only one can possess; it's about 'simply' changing one's internal position. What's the point? Above all, to suffer less. Lacan said that 'wanting to know oneself' is a bad reason for analysis. One speaks where one suffers, he wrote. To this observation, however, the spiritual seeker adds his curiosity, intensified by his practice, for the inner machinery of man - that is, for each and every one of us, if indeed you and I are, as Montaigne says, bearers of the human condition.

Then it's easier to see what distinguishes spiritual research from psychotherapy or psychoanalysis. For the spiritual seeker, it's not a matter of understanding a symptom or overcoming a disorder, but of endlessly studying the problem that is life, of thinking about it over and over again without hoping to emerge from this study and thinking, of connecting with this problem and thus creating a space that allows us to see and experience it differently, a place from which to traverse the vicissitudes and uncertainties of existence, an observation post that leads to a lesser degree of blindness. For him, 'enjoying life' ceases to be an imperative, as banal as it is unattainable; and spirituality appears as the experience through which this delightful experience detaches itself from the diversity of events in order to blossom as an autonomous register".
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond Wisdom, How to Live?, 2023)

E1.5.F.7_REF2.1_PH "REVOLUTION IN ONE'S OWN INWARDNESS

In the inner place that the [spiritual] seeker then reaches, which one sutra describes as the 'refuge of salvation,' the four essential questions - Where do I come from? Where am I going? Where am I? What am I? - are unified. They 'appear,' Suzuki writes, as 'one and the same, differently stated'. Let's leave aside for the moment the first two, which belong to what we in the West call 'metaphysics,' and concentrate on the last two. 'Where am I?' and 'What am I?' become two formulations of the same question, because by offering me a place to live, spiritual practice encourages me to become fully I. It's this inner position that needs to be reached, and 'practicing' consists of understanding and constructing it, including through our bodies, to make it our refuge.

We can better understand the nature of this change by referring to psychoanalysis as Lacan reformulates it, despite the differences mentioned. In both cases, it's not simply a matter of changing the profile of the ego or its psychological content, i.e. acquiring or losing qualities, but of saying 'I' in a different place, which only happens when the ego no longer monopolizes my speech and my vision. Of course, like psychoanalysis, the revolution brought about by the spiritual quest has psychological and, ultimately, behavioral consequences, but it is above all topological - the inner space is transformed and the seeker's perception of himself is greatly affected. In a strange way, he experiences a dual feeling - of having given the word 'I' its full value, and at the same time of being nothing, or almost nothing, a straw, a Shakespearean nothingness 'woven of the stuff dreams are made of'. When I was in psychoanalysis, I felt as if I no longer had a shadow. As the ego loosened its grip, my reflection faded for me and, to paraphrase Cocteau, mirrors began to reflect before sending back my image... Well, the spiritual quest is also, but in a completely different way, an apprenticeship in which the heavy characteristics of the ego appear ridiculous and in which the ego, without disappearing, detaches itself from the seeker. All that's left for the latter is a pronoun that designates him, but this pronoun becomes absolutely personal. For individual particularity is not abolished in some kind of fusion with the 'Great Whole'; it is reinstalled and transposed to a place other than the self. It's here, in this upstream I, that the researcher finds his footing, or, to use an equestrian term, his seat for straddling existence.
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond Wisdom, How to Live?, 2023)

E1.5.F.8. LETTING GO OF THE PAST: EMDR AS THERAPY FOR TRAUMA (Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing)
"EMDR HELPS TO MAKE PAINFUL RE-CREATIONS OF THE TRAUMA A THING OF THE PAST. My introduction to this method came through Maggie, a spunky young psychologist who ran a halfway house for sexually abused girls. Maggie got into one confrontation after another, clashing with nearly everybody—except the thirteen-and fourteen-year-old girls she cared for. She did drugs, had dangerous and often violent boyfriends, had frequent altercations with her bosses, and moved from place to place because she could not tolerate her roommates (nor they her). I never understood how she had mobilized enough stability and concentration to earn a PhD in psychology from a reputable graduate school.
Maggie had been referred to a therapy group I was running for women with similar problems. During her second meeting she told us that her father had raped her twice, once when she was five years old and once when she was seven. She was convinced it had been her fault. She loved her daddy, she explained, and she must have been so seductive that he could not control himself. Listening to her I thought, “She might not blame her father, but she sure is blaming just about everybody else”—including her previous therapists for not helping her get better. Like many trauma survivors, she told one story with words and another in her actions, in which she kept replaying various aspects of her trauma.
Then one day Maggie came to the group eager to discuss a remarkable experience she’d had the previous weekend at an EMDR training for professionals. At that time I’d heard only that EMDR was a new fad in which therapists wiggled their fingers in front of patients’ eyes. To me and my academic colleagues, it sounded like yet another of the crazes that have always plagued psychiatry, and I was convinced that this would turn out to be another of Maggie’s misadventures.
Maggie told us that during her EMDR session she had vividly remembered her father’s rape when she was seven—remembered it from inside her child’s body. She could feel physically how small she was; she could feel her father’s huge body on top of her and could smell the alcohol on his breath. And yet, she told us, even as she relived the incident she was able to observe it from the point of view of her twenty-nine-year-old self. She burst into tears: “I was such a little girl. How could a huge man do this to a little girl?” She cried for a while and then said: “It’s over now. I now know what happened. It wasn’t my fault. I was a little girl and there was nothing I could do to keep him from molesting me.”
I was astounded. I had been looking for a long time for a way to help people revisit their traumatic past without becoming retraumatized. It seemed that Maggie had had an experience as lifelike as a flashback and yet had not been hijacked by it. Could EMDR make it safe for people to access the imprints of trauma? Could it then transform them into memories of events that had happened far in the past?
Maggie had a few more EMDR sessions and remained in our group long enough for us to see how she changed. She was much less angry, but she kept that sardonic sense of humor that I enjoyed so much. A few months later she got involved with a very different kind of man than she’d ever been attracted to before. She left the group, announcing that she’d resolved her trauma, and I decided it was time for me to get trained in EMDR. [...]

I left my EMDR training preoccupied with three issues that fascinate me to this day:
- EMDR loosens up something in the mind/brain that gives people rapid access to loosely associated memories and images from their past. This seems to help them put the traumatic experience into a larger context or perspective.
- People may be able to heal from trauma without talking about it. EMDR enables them to observe their experiences in a new way, without verbal give-and-take with another person.
- EMDR can help even if the patient and the therapist do not have a trusting relationship. This was particularly intriguing because trauma, understandably, rarely leaves people with an open, trusting heart.
In the years since, I have done EMDR with patients who spoke Swahili, Mandarin, and Breton, all languages in which I can say only, “Notice that,” the key EMDR instruction. (I always had a translator available, but primarily to explain the steps of the process.) Because EMDR doesn’t require patients to speak about the intolerable or explain to a therapist why they feel so upset, it allows them to stay fully focused on their internal experience, with sometimes extraordinary results. [...]

EXPLORING THE SLEEP CONNECTION
Shortly after learning about EMDR I was asked to speak about my work at the sleep laboratory headed by Allan Hobson at the Massachusetts Mental Health Center. Hobson (together with his teacher, Michel Jouvet) was famous for discovering where dreams are generated in the brain, and one of his research assistants, Robert Stickgold, was just then beginning to explore the function of dreams. I showed the group a videotape of a patient who had suffered from severe PTSD for thirteen years after a terrible car accident and who, in only two sessions of EMDR, had transformed from a helpless panicked victim into a confident, assertive woman. Bob was fascinated.
A few weeks later a friend of Stickgold’s family became so depressed after the death of her cat that she had to be hospitalized. The attending psychiatrist concluded that the cat’s death had triggered unresolved memories of the death of the woman’s mother when she was twelve, and he connected her with Roger Solomon, a well-known EMDR trainer, who treated her successfully. Afterward she called Stickgold and said, “Bob, you have to study this. It’s really strange—it has to do with your brain, not your mind.”
Soon afterward an article appeared in the journal Dreaming suggesting that EMDR was related to rapid eye movement (REM) sleep—the phase of sleep in which dreaming occurs. Research had already shown that sleep, and dream sleep in particular, plays a major role in mood regulation. As the article in Dreaming pointed out, the eyes move rapidly back and forth in REM sleep, just as they do in EMDR. Increasing our time in REM sleep reduces depression, while the less REM sleep we get, the more likely we are to become depressed.
Of course, PTSD is notoriously associated with disturbed sleep, and self-medication with alcohol or drugs further disrupts REM sleep. During my time at the VA my colleagues and I had found that the veterans with PTSD frequently woke themselves up soon after going into REM sleep—probably because they had activated a trauma fragment during a dream. Other researchers have also noticed this phenomenon, but thought that it was irrelevant to understanding PTSD.
Today we know that both deep sleep and REM sleep play important roles in how memories change over time. The sleeping brain reshapes memory by increasing the imprint of emotionally relevant information while helping irrelevant material fade away. In a series of elegant studies Stickgold and his colleagues showed that the sleeping brain can even make sense out of information whose relevance is unclear while we are awake and integrate it into the larger memory system.
Dreams keep replaying, recombining, and reintegrating pieces of old memories for months and even years. They constantly update the subterranean realities that determine what our waking minds pay attention to. And perhaps most relevant to EMDR, in REM sleep we activate more distant associations than in either non-REM sleep or the normal waking state. For example, when subjects are wakened from non-REM sleep and given a word-association test, they give standard responses: hot/cold, hard/soft, etc. Wakened from REM sleep, they make less conventional connections, such as thief/wrong. They also solve simple anagrams more easily after REM sleep. This shift toward activation of distant associations could explain why dreams are so bizarre.
Stickgold, Hobson, and their colleagues thus discovered that dreams help to forge new relationships between apparently unrelated memories. Seeing novel connections is the cardinal feature of creativity; as we’ve seen, it’s also essential to healing. The inability to recombine experiences is also one of the striking features of PTSD. While Noam in chapter 4 could imagine a trampoline to save future victims of terrorism, traumatized people are trapped in frozen associations: Anybody who wears a turban will try to kill me; any man who finds me attractive wants to rape me.
Finally, Stickgold suggests a clear link between EMDR and memory processing in dreams: “If the bilateral stimulation of EMDR can alter brain states in a manner similar to that seen during REM sleep then there is now good evidence that EMDR should be able to take advantage of sleep-dependent processes, which may be blocked or ineffective in PTSD sufferers, to allow effective memory processing and trauma resolution.” The basic EMDR instruction, “Hold that image in your mind and just watch my fingers moving back and forth,” may very well reproduce what happens in the dreaming brain.

ASSOCIATION AND INTEGRATION
Unlike conventional exposure treatment, EMDR spends very little time revisiting the original trauma. The trauma itself is certainly the starting point, but the focus is on stimulating and opening up the associative process. As our Prozac/EMDR study showed, drugs can blunt the images and sensations of terror, but they remain embedded in the mind and body. In contrast with the subjects who improved on Prozac—whose memories were merely blunted, not integrated as an event that happened in the past, and still caused considerable anxiety—those who received EMDR no longer experienced the distinct imprints of the trauma: It had become a story of a terrible event that had happened a long time ago. As one of my patients said, making a dismissive hand gesture: “It’s over.”
While we don’t yet know precisely how EMDR works, the same is true of Prozac. Prozac has an effect on serotonin, but whether its levels go up or down, and in which brain cells, and why that makes people feel less afraid, is still unclear. We likewise don’t know precisely why talking to a trusted friend gives such profound relief, and I am surprised how few people seem eager to explore that question
Clinicians have only one obligation: to do whatever they can to help their patients get better. Because of this, clinical practice has always been a hotbed for experimentation. Some experiments fail, some succeed, and some, like EMDR, dialectical behavior therapy, and internal family systems therapy, go on to change the way therapy is practiced. Validating all these treatments takes decades and is hampered by the fact that research support generally goes to methods that have already been proven to work. I am much comforted by considering the history of penicillin: Almost four decades passed between the discovery of its antibiotic properties by Alexander Fleming in 1928 and the final elucidation of its mechanisms in 1965."
(Bessel Van Der Kalk, The Body Keeps the Score, 2014)

E1.5.F.9. BESSEL VAN DER KALK ARGUES THAT MANY PSYCHIATRIC PROBLEMS ARE NOT PERMANENT DISABILITIES BUT ARE ACTUALLY ADAPTIVE SURVIVAL STRATEGIES DEVELOPED BY DIFFERENT PARTS OF THE SELF TO COPE WITH TRAUMA, AND THAT TRUE RECOVERY REQUIRES REVISITING AND RECONFIGURING THESE NOW-MALADAPTIVE DEFENSIVE HABITS.

“DESPERATE TIMES REQUIRE DESPERATE MEASURES
We all know what happens when we feel humiliated: We put all our energy into protecting ourselves, developing whatever survival strategies we can. We may repress our feelings; we may get furious and plot revenge. We may decide to become so powerful and successful that nobody can ever hurt us again. Many behaviors that are classified as psychiatric problems, including some obsessions, compulsions, and panic attacks, as well as most self-destructive behaviors, started out as strategies for self-protection. These adaptations to trauma can so interfere with the capacity to function that health-care providers and patients themselves often believe that full recovery is beyond reach. Viewing these symptoms as permanent disabilities narrows the focus of treatment to finding the proper drug regimen, which can lead to lifelong dependence—as though trauma survivors were like kidney patients on dialysis.
It is much more productive to see aggression or depression, arrogance or passivity as learned behaviors: Somewhere along the line, the patient came to believe that he or she could survive only if he or she was tough, invisible, or absent, or that it was safer to give up. Like traumatic memories that keep intruding until they are laid to rest, traumatic adaptations continue until the human organism feels safe and integrates all the parts of itself that are stuck in fighting or warding off the trauma.
Every trauma survivor I’ve met is resilient in his or her own way, and every one of their stories inspires awe at how people cope. Knowing how much energy the sheer act of survival requires keeps me from being surprised at the price they often pay: the absence of a loving relationship with their own bodies, minds, and souls.
Coping takes its toll. For many children it is safer to hate themselves than to risk their relationship with their caregivers by expressing anger or by running away. As a result, abused children are likely to grow up believing that they are fundamentally unlovable; that was the only way their young minds could explain why they were treated so badly. They survive by denying, ignoring, and splitting off large chunks of reality: They forget the abuse; they suppress their rage or despair; they numb their physical sensations. If you were abused as a child, you are likely to have a childlike part living inside you that is frozen in time, still holding fast to this kind of self-loathing and denial. Many adults who survive terrible experiences are caught in the same trap. Pushing away intense feelings can be highly adaptive in the short run. It may help you preserve your dignity and independence; it may help you maintain focus on critical tasks like saving a comrade, taking care of your kids, or rebuilding your house.
The problems come later. After seeing a friend blown up, a soldier may return to civilian life and try to put the experience out of his mind. A protective part of him knows how to be competent at his job and how to get along with colleagues. But he may habitually erupt in rage at his girlfriend or become numb and frozen when the pleasure of surrendering to her touch makes him feel he is losing control. He probably will not be aware that his mind automatically associates passive surrender with the paralysis he felt when his friend was killed. So another protective part steps in to create a diversion: He gets angry and, having no idea what set him off, he thinks he’s mad about something his girlfriend did. Of course, if he keeps blowing up at her (and subsequent girlfriends), he will become more and more isolated. But he may never realize that a traumatized part is triggered by passivity and that another part, an angry manager, is stepping in to protect that vulnerable part. Helping these parts to give up their extreme beliefs is how therapy can save people’s lives.
As we saw in chapter 13, a central task for recovery from trauma is to learn to live with the memories of the past without being overwhelmed by them in the present. But most survivors, including those who are functioning well—even brilliantly—in some aspects of their lives, face another, even greater challenge: reconfiguring a brain/mind system that was constructed to cope with the worst. Just as we need to revisit traumatic memories in order to integrate them, we need to revisit the parts of ourselves that developed the defensive habits that helped us to survive.”

(Bessel Van Der Kalk, The Body Keeps the Score, 2014)

E1.5.F.9.1. BESSEL VAN DER KALK EXPLAINS THE INTERNAL FAMILY SYSTEMS (IFS) MODEL, WHICH VIEWS THE MIND AS A MOSAIC OF PARTS THAT, IN RESPONSE TO TRAUMA, BECOME POLARIZED INTO EXTREME ROLES LIKE EXILES AND PROTECTORS, ARGUING THAT THE KEY TO HEALING IS TO COLLABORATE WITH ALL OF THESE PARTS BY UNDERSTANDING THEIR ORIGINALLY PROTECTIVE, RATHER THAN PATHOLOGICAL, FUNCTION

“THE MIND IS A MOSAIC
We all have parts. Right now a part of me feels like taking a nap; another part wants to keep writing. Still feeling injured by an offensive e-mail message, a part of me wants to hit “reply” on a stinging put-down, while a different part wants to shrug it off. Most people who know me have seen my intense, sincere, and irritable parts; some have met the little snarling dog that lives inside me. My children reminisce about going on family vacations with my playful and adventurous parts.
When you walk into the office in the morning and see the storm clouds over your boss’s head, you know precisely what is coming. That angry part has a characteristic tone of voice, vocabulary, and body posture—so different from yesterday, when you shared pictures of your kids. Parts are not just feelings but distinct ways of being, with their own beliefs, agendas, and roles in the overall ecology of our lives.
How well we get along with ourselves depends largely on our internal leadership skills—how well we listen to our different parts, make sure they feel taken care of, and keep them from sabotaging one another. Parts often come across as absolutes when in fact they represent only one element in a complex constellation of thoughts, emotions, and sensations. If Margaret shouts, “I hate you!” in the middle of an argument, Joe probably thinks she despises him—and in that moment Margaret might agree. But in fact only a part of her is angry, and that part temporarily obscures her generous and affectionate feelings, which may well return when she sees the devastation on Joe’s face.
Every major school of psychology recognizes that people have subpersonalities and gives them different names. In 1890 William James wrote: “[I]t must be admitted that . . . the total possible consciousness may be split into parts which coexist, but mutually ignore each other, and share the objects of knowledge between them.” Carl Jung wrote: “The psyche is a self-regulating system that maintains its equilibrium just as the body does,” “The natural state of the human psyche consists in a jostling together of its components and in their contradictory behavior,” and “The reconciliation of these opposites is a major problem. Thus, the adversary is none other than ‘the other in me.’”
Modern neuroscience has confirmed this notion of the mind as a kind of society. Michael Gazzaniga, who conducted pioneering split-brain research, concluded that the mind is composed of semiautonomous functioning modules, each of which has a special role. In his book The Social Brain (1985) he writes,  “But what of the idea that the self is not a unified being, and there may exist within us several realms of consciousness? . . . From our [split-brain] studies the new idea emerges that there are literally several selves, and they do not necessarily ‘converse’ with each other internally.” MIT scientist Marvin Minsky, a pioneer of artificial intelligence, declared: “The legend of the single Self can only divert us from the target of that inquiry. . . . [I]t can make sense to think there exists, inside your brain, a society of different minds. Like members of a family, the different minds can work together to help each other, each still having its own mental experiences that the others never know about.”
Therapists who are trained to see people as complex human beings with multiple characteristics and potentialities can help them explore their system of inner parts and take care of the wounded facets of themselves. There are several such treatment approaches, including the structural dissociation model developed by my Dutch colleagues Onno van der Hart and Ellert Nijenhuis and Atlanta-based Kathy Steel, that is widely practiced in Europe and Richard Kluft’s work in the United States.
Twenty years after working with Mary, I met Richard Schwartz, the developer of internal family systems therapy (IFS). It was through his work that Minsky’s “family” metaphor truly came to life for me and offered a systematic way to work with the split-off parts that result from trauma. At the core of IFS is the notion that the mind of each of us is like a family in which the members have different levels of maturity, excitability, wisdom, and pain. The parts form a network or system in which change in any one part will affect all the others.
The IFS model helped me realize that dissociation occurs on a continuum. In trauma the self-system breaks down, and parts of the self become polarized and go to war with one another. Self-loathing coexists (and fights) with grandiosity; loving care with hatred; numbing and passivity with rage and aggression. These extreme parts bear the burden of the trauma.
In IFS a part is considered not just a passing emotional state or customary thought pattern but a distinct mental system with its own history, abilities, needs, and worldview. Trauma injects parts with beliefs and emotions that hijack them out of their naturally valuable state. For example, we all have parts that are childlike and fun. When we are abused, these are the parts that are hurt the most, and they become frozen, carrying the pain, terror, and betrayal of abuse. This burden makes them toxic—parts of ourselves that we need to deny at all costs. Because they are locked away inside, IFS calls them the exiles.
At this point other parts organize to protect the internal family from the exiles. These protectors keep the toxic parts away, but in so doing they take on some of the energy of the abuser. Critical and perfectionistic managers can make sure we never get close to anyone or drive us to be relentlessly productive. Another group of protectors, which IFS calls firefighters, are emergency responders, acting impulsively whenever an experience triggers an exiled emotion.
Each split-off part holds different memories, beliefs, and physical sensations; some hold the shame, others the rage, some the pleasure and excitement, another the intense loneliness or the abject compliance. These are all aspects of the abuse experience. The critical insight is that all these parts have a function: to protect the self from feeling the full terror of annihilation.
Children who act out their pain rather than locking it down are often diagnosed with “oppositional defiant behavior,” “attachment disorder,” or “conduct disorder.” But these labels ignore the fact that rage and withdrawal are only facets of a whole range of desperate attempts at survival. Trying to control a child’s behavior while failing to address the underlying issue—the abuse—leads to treatments that are ineffective at best and harmful at worst. As they grow up, their parts do not spontaneously integrate into a coherent personality but continue to lead a relatively autonomous existence.
Parts that are “out” may be entirely unaware of the other parts of the system. Most of the men I evaluated with regard to their childhood molestation by Catholic priests took anabolic steroids and spent an inordinate amount of time in the gym pumping iron. These compulsive bodybuilders lived in a masculine culture of sweat, football, and beer, where weakness and fear were carefully concealed. Only after they felt safe with me did I meet the terrified kids inside.
Patients may also dislike the parts that are out: the parts that are angry, destructive, or critical. But IFS offers a framework for understanding them—and, also important, talking about them in a nonpathologizing way. Recognizing that each part is stuck with burdens from the past and respecting its function in the overall system makes it feel less threatening or overwhelming.
As Schwartz states: “If one accepts the basic idea that people have an innate drive toward nurturing their own health, this implies that, when people have chronic problems, something gets in the way of accessing inner resources. Recognizing this, the role of therapists is to collaborate rather than to teach, confront, or fill holes in your psyche.” The first step in this collaboration is to assure the internal system that all parts are welcome and that all of them—even those that are suicidal or destructive—were formed in an attempt to protect the self-system, no matter how much they now seem to threaten it.”
(Bessel Van Der Kalk, The Body Keeps the Score, 2014)

E1.5.F.9.1_REF1_PO “FIELD, LATE FALL
Where the light’s from
isn’t clear, but
illumination as
bestowed
insists.
I’m more inclined
to think
from within
(each blade
of grass
its own fire,
the whole field
blazing up
like a rough lake,
or scrap pile).
Without or within,
pain, too, is good
at blurring
its origins.”
(Lia Purpura, It shouldn’t have been beautiful, 2015)



