E1.6. ARE THERE ACTIVITIES THAT PREDISPOSE US TO HAPPINESS?

E1.6.A. LOVE AND FRIENDSHIP
Joy in love comes from sharing experiences 
with chosen and loved ones.

E1.6.A.1 DOES LOVE MAKE US HAPPY?

E1.6.A.1.1. TRUE LOVE RESONATES IN THE WORLD
We marvel at the unending renewal of true love. This sense of wonder applies both to the love for a person and the love for the world - from one, we transition to the other. The love for a man or a woman nurtures and is nurtured by the love for the world. In "infinite resonance", the fruit of our interaction with others and the world offers an "infinite flavor", even though "each of us is finite". This is because "Fundamental happiness relies more than anything on what may be referred to as a friendly interest in beings and things". This love can be enriched by a love relationship, but it transcends it. Baruch Spinoza refers to this expansive love as beatitude, or "Intellectual Love of God" or Nature. Prior to the 20th century, in the West, Spinoza was perhaps the only one who could articulate this love, which feels like an "awakening", and which Asian philosophies have spoken of eloquently for centuries.

E1.6.A.1.1.a. ECHOES OF HUMANITY: CELEBRATING LOVE, CONNECTION, AND SHARED EXISTENCE

E1.5.C.4.1.a_REF2_PO.wE1.6.A.1.1.a.

E1.5.C.4.1.a_REF1_PO.wE1.6.A.1.1.a.

E1.6.A.1.1.a_REF2_CUR RENOIR'S "PICKING FLOWERS" REFLECTS THE JOY OF BEING TOGETHER AND OPENNESS TO THE WORLD AROUND US. "In Renoir's Picking Flowers, the two girls are really together because they are friends. How does the painter make us feel this?
By the way he arranges his figures in the space of the picture. We can clearly see that they are not two young girls indifferent to each other, sitting casually next to each other. The relationship between their bodies is harmonious, and the bouquet of white flowers in the centre of the picture is a sign of this union. The two girls are musically attuned to him. But it's not just the composition that brings out this unity. The way Renoir unleashes the full effect of colour plays an important role. Colour dissolves lines and contours to become emotion. The airy feeling of true ternity.
This radiant deployment shows us the joy of being together as one of the most important ways of being open to trees and flowers, grasses and wind - to the inviting landscape of an advanced spring. Friendship, by keeping us together, one beside the other, opens us to the world".
(Fabrice Midal, 3 minutes of philosophy to become human again)

E1.6.A.1.1.a_REF3_PO "SWIFTS TURN IN THE HEIGHTS OF THE AIR; 
HIGHER STILL TURN THE INVISIBLE STARS.
When day withdraws to the ends of the earth 
their fires shine on a dark expanse of sand...

We live in a world of motion and distance.
The heart flies from tree to bird, 
from bird to distant star, 
from star to love; and love grows 
in the quiet house, turning and working, 
servant of thought, holding a lamp in one hand."
(Philippe Jaccottet)

E1.6.A.1.1.a_REF4_LIT IN A MARRIAGE, "THIRD THINGS" SUCH AS OBJECTS, PRACTICES, ARTS, OR INSTITUTIONS ARE ESSENTIAL AS THEY PROVIDE A SHARED FOCUS AND JOINT CONTENTMENT, BRINGING THE COUPLE TOGETHER IN SHARED ATTENTION.
"We did not spend our days gazing into each other’s eyes. We did that gazing when we made love or when one of us was in trouble, but most of the time our gazes met and entwined as they looked at a third thing. Third things are essential to marriages, objects or practices or habits or arts or institutions or games or human beings that provide a site of joint rapture or contentment. Each member of a couple is separate; the two come together in double attention. Lovemaking is not a third thing but two-in-one. John Keats can be a third thing, or the Boston Symphony Orchestra, or Dutch interiors, or Monopoly. [...]

We had our summer afternoons at the pond, which for ten years made a third thing. After naps we loaded up books and blankets and walked across Route 4 and the old railroad to the steep slippery bank that led down to our private beach on Eagle Pond. Soft moss underfoot sent little red flowers up. Ghost birches leaned over water with wild strawberry plants growing under them. Over our heads white pines reared high, and oaks that warned us of summer’s end late in August by dropping green metallic acorns. Sometimes a mink scooted among ferns… Jane dozed in the sun as I sat in the shade reading and occasionally taking a note in a blank book. From time to time we swam and dried in the heat."
(Donald Hall, The Third Thing, 2004)

E1.6.A.1.1.a_REF5_PH TRUE INTIMACY IN RELATIONSHIPS ENABLES PURE PERCEPTION AND SPONTANEOUS RESPONSE, FOSTERING A DEEP SENSE OF ELATION AND AWARENESS. Trust between partners allows them to share their inner worlds without fear, enhancing their mutual experience.
"Most human beings never really see another person after they are five years old. In an intimate relationship, each party returns to the original naïve Child ego state, where he is free of such Parental prohibitions and Adult requirements, and can see, hear, and taste in its purest form what the world has to offer. This freedom of the Child is the essential part of intimacy, and it turns the whole universe, including the sun, moon, and stars, into a golden apple for both parties to enjoy. […]

Once the Child is free of Adult caution and Parental criticism, he has a sense of elation and awareness. He begins to see and hear and feel the way he really wants to, the way he originally did before he was corrupted by his living parents. In this autonomous state, he no longer has to name things, as is usually required by his Adult, nor account for his behavior, as demanded by his Parent. He is free to respond directly and spontaneously to what he sees and hears and feels. Because the two parties trust one another, they freely open up their secret worlds of perception, experience, and behavior to each other, asking nothing in return except the delight of opening the gates without fear."
(Eric Berne, Sex in Human Loving)

E1.6.A.1.1.a_REF6_PO EXTREME LOVE IS A FEELING OF WONDER AND INCREDIBILITY IN FRONT OF THE LOVED ONE'S EXISTENCE "Extreme love is the feeling of the impossibility of the loved one's existence, so touching, so ravishing, and such that it arouses a strange joy or desire, a kind of nervous infinity, in the finite form of an object, an inexhaustible sensitive treasure. 
At the same time, this existing impossibility becomes divinity. Sensual satisfaction is no more than a more or less happy circumstance in the relations between the idol and the idolater, but not an essential event as in ordinary love.
Is it possible that you exist? YOU ARE, that is an inconceivable miracle. YOU ARE, and this amazes all that I am, transforms all values, turns the stones around you into gold, colours things that are dead and worthless, cancels the steps that go towards you and the fatigues, measures the times that are far from you with quite different measures [...]. 
'YOU EXIST, YOU ARE,' says love, and with its eyes it expresses its amazement, its impossibility of believing that what is absolutely desired, wanted, necessary, is real, is at the same time a being and an idea, its own creation and the offering of destiny. And we observe the strangeness that it takes faith to believe in what is, to accept the existence and presence of the inestimable object, as well as to give substance and power to what is merely fantasy and the production of hope or despair".
(Paul Valéry, Mélanges, 1939)

E1.6.A.1.1.a_REF6.1_PO "A TENDERNESS THAT BECAME DEMENTIA,
A weakness with I know not what vastness 
That you yourself, all of you, and even your last kiss 
cannot quite quench;
A thirst that does not extinguish the supreme chalice,
And even on the summit, where moans delight,
A silent wish, a mad need to have more than you 
Than you, than your life and mine, and our whys;
A thirst, a hunger, fatal, absolute,
Tantalus' living presence and intimate grape, 
Tending to weep at the fall of day 
If he lost this day without biting into some love...
This thirst, this hunger, this pain of an extreme soul. 
It's me, my dear hell, your work and my poem.
And it's you, your looks, your mouth with its voice 
All that I hold by you fingertips, 
All that I possess as well as escapes me,
You, my source, my fruit, my torment and my grape,
It is we of whom since dawn, alas, I speak
Before my enigma and your mysteries".
(Paul Valéry, poem to Mrs Jean Voilier, unpublished)


E1.6.A.1.1.a_REF6.2_PH "LOVE AND DUALITY.—What else is love but understanding and rejoicing that another lives, works, and feels in a different and opposite way to ourselves? That love may be able to bridge over the contrasts by joys, we must not remove or deny those contrasts. Even self-love presupposes an irreconcileable duality (or plurality) in one person.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 75, 1878)

E1.6.A.1.1.a_REF7_CUR WE MARVEL AT THE INFINITE RENEWAL OF TRUE LOVE. This capacity for wonder is that of the love of a person, but also of the love of the world - from one we go to the other - the love of a man or a woman nourishes and is nourished by the love of the world. In “infinite resonance”, the fruit of our encounter with the other and with the world offers an “infinite flavour”, according to François Cheng. Walter Sickert's painting of his wife (Lainey) in their garden seems to us to illustrate this point perfectly.

E1.6.A.1.1.a_REF8_PH “THE NEED FOR INTIMACY IN A HUMAN LIFE AND IN A HUMAN SOCIAL LIFE IS AS FOUNDATIONAL AS OUR DAILY HUNGER AND OUR NEVER ENDING THIRST, and needs to be met in just the same practical way, every day, just as necessarily and just as frequently: in touch, in conversation, in listening and in seeing, in the back and forth of ideas; intimate exchanges that say I am here and you are here and that by touching our bodies, our minds or our shared work in the world, we make a world together… Intimacy is our evolutionary inheritance, the internal force that has us returning to another and to the world from our insulated aloneness again and again, no matter our difficulties and no matter our wounds.”
Intimacy finds its ultimate expression in all the forms of surrender human beings find difficult to embrace. [...]

Intimacy always carries the sense of something hidden about to be felt and known in surprising ways; something brought out and made visible, that previously could not be seen or understood. In intimacy what is hidden will become a gift, discovered and rediscovered again and again in the eyes of both giver and receiver. […]

To become human is to become visible, while carrying what is hidden as a gift to others.”
(David Whyte, Consolations II, 2024)

E1.6.A.1.1.b. FUNDAMENTAL HAPPINESS DEPENDS MORE THAN ANYTHING ELSE UPON WHAT MAY BE CALLED A FRIENDLY INTEREST IN PERSONS AND THINGS.
A love that can be nourished by a love relationship, but that goes beyond it. This broader love goes against the doxa that to love is to choose, to eliminate and therefore to destroy the "rest".

E1.6.A.1.1.b_REF1_PH "FUNDAMENTAL HAPPINESS DEPENDS MORE THAN ANYTHING ELSE UPON WHAT MAY BE CALLED A FRIENDLY INTEREST IN PERSONS AND THINGS.
A friendly interest in persons is a form of affectionateness, but not the form which is grasping and possessive and seeking always an emphatic response. This latter form is very frequently a source of unhappiness. The kind that makes for happiness is the kind that likes to observe people and finds pleasure in their individual traits, that wishes to afford scope for the interests and pleasures of those with whom it is brought into contact without desiring to acquire power over them or to secure their enthusiastic admiration. The person whose attitude towards others is genuinely of this kind will be a source of happiness and a recipient of reciprocal kindness. His relations with others, whether slight or serious, will satisfy both his interests and his affections; he will not be soured by ingratitude, since he will seldom suffer it and will not notice when he does. The same idiosyncrasies which would get on another man’s nerves to the point of exasperation will be to him a source of gentle amusement. He will achieve without effort results which another man, after long struggles, will find to be unattainable. Being happy in himself, he will be a pleasant companion, and this in turn will increase his happiness. But all this must be genuine; it must not spring from an idea of self-sacrifice inspired by a sense of duty. A sense of duty is useful in work, but offensive in personal relations. People wish to be liked, not to be endured with patient resignation. To like many people spontaneously and without effort is perhaps the greatest of all sources of personal happiness. [...]"
(Bertrand Russell, The conquest of happiness, 1962)

E1.6.A.1.1.b_REF2_PH "TO PAINT IS TO LOVE AGAIN. It’s only when we look with eyes of love that we see as the painter sees. His is a love, moreover, which is free of possessiveness. What the painter sees he is duty-bound to share. Usually he makes us see and feel what ordinarily we ignore or are immune to. His manner of approaching the world tells us, in effect, that nothing is vile or hideous, nothing is stale, flat and unpalatable unless it be our own power of vision. To see is not merely to look. One must look-see. See into and around. [...]
The practice of any art demands more than mere savoir faire. One must not only be in love with what one does, one must also know how to make love. In love self is obliterated. Only the beloved counts. Whether the beloved be a bowl of fruit, a pastoral scene, or the interior of a bawdy house makes no difference. One must be in it and of it wholly. Before a subject can be transmuted aesthetically it must be devoured and absorbed. If it is a painting it must perspire with ecstasy."
(Henry Miller, To paint is to love again, 1963)

E1.6.A.1.1.b_REF3_TH SIGMUND FREUD EXPLORES THE PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS THROUGH LOVE, POINTING OUT THAT SEXUAL LOVE PROVIDES AN INTENSE SENSE OF PLEASURE AND SERVES AS A MODEL FOR OUR PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS. However, he notes the vulnerability to suffering that this quest engenders, especially when the loved object or one's own love is lost.
"I am, of course, speaking of the way of life which makes love the centre of everything, which looks for all satisfaction in loving and being loved. A psychical attitude of this sort comes naturally enough to all of us; one of the forms in which love manifests itself—sexual love—has given us our most intense experience of an overwhelming sensation of pleasure and has thus furnished us with a pattern for our search for happiness. What is more natural than that we should persist in looking for happiness along the path on which we first encountered it? The weak side of this technique of living is easy to see; otherwise no human being would have thought of abandoning this path to happiness for any other. It is that we are never so defenceless against suffering as when we love, never so helplessly unhappy as when we have lost our loved object or its love. But this does not dispose of the technique of living based on the value of love as a means to happiness. There is much more to be said about it."
(Sigmund Freud, Civilization and its Discontents, 1930)

E1.6.A.1.1.b_REF3.1_TH FREUD DISCUSSES THE ABILITY OF SOME PEOPLE TO FIND HAPPINESS BY LOVING UNIVERSALLY RATHER THAN SEEKING TO BE LOVED, BY REDIRECTING LOVE FROM ITS SEXUAL AIMS TO AN EQUANIMOUS TENDERNESS. He cites St Francis of Assisi as an extreme example of this approach. Freud raises two objections: non-selective love loses its value, and not all people deserve to be loved.
“A small minority are enabled by their constitution to find happiness, in spite of everything, along the path of love. But far-reaching mental changes in the function of love are necessary before this can happen. These people make themselves independent of their object's acquiescence by displacing what they mainly value from being loved on to loving; they protect themselves against the loss of the object by directing their love, not to single objects but to all men alike; and they avoid the uncertainties and disappointments of genital love by turning away from its sexual aims and transforming the instinct into an impulse with an inhibited aim. What they bring about in themselves in this way is a state of evenly suspended, steadfast, affectionate feeling, which has little external resemblance any more to the stormy agitations of genital love, from which it is nevertheless derived. Perhaps St. Francis of Assisi went furthest in thus exploiting love for the benefit of an inner feeling of happiness. Moreover, what we have recognized as one of the techniques for fulfilling the pleasure principle has often been brought into connection with religion; this connection may lie in the remote regions where the distinction between the ego and objects or between objects themselves is neglected. According to one ethical view, whose deeper motivation will become clear to us presently, this readiness for a universal love of mankind and the world represents the highest standpoint which man can reach. Even at this early stage of the discussion I should like to bring forward my two main objections to this view. A love that does not discriminate seems to me to forfeit a part of its own value, by doing an injustice to its object; and secondly, not all men are worthy of love.”
(Sigmund Freud, Civilization and its Discontents, 1930)

E1.6.A.1.1.b_REF3.2_TH FOR ALL FREUD'S GENIUS, isn't his inability to extend his subjectivity in an "oceanic" way, as his friend Romain Rolland wrote, at the root of his resistance to the possibility of universal love? It could also be argued that an "oceanic love" doesn't have to go to the extreme of loving all men - it's enough for intense happiness to extend one's love to a wider circle - it seems to us that when Freud uses the example of the sublime, he denies himself the possibility of thinking about extended love - a middle ground between possessive sexual love and unattainable universal love; a middle ground, but not inferior in the strength of the joy that such an approach can bring us.

E1.6.A.1.1.b_REF4_PH ""IMAGES OF THE NEUTRAL

1) DEPRECIATIVE IMAGES

With the exception of a few philosophers and Blanchot, i.e. everywhere in the doxa, Neutral has bad press: images of Neutral are depreciative. Every bad image is encapsulated in a bad adjective (again, the pernicious role of the adjective). Here's [one] of those bad adjectives:

Flaccid 
Fichte (Lesson VII): contemptuous description of the skeptic who doesn't want true knowledge: 'In this flabby, distended, multiple false being, a multitude of antitheses, contradictions, live peacefully side by side. In it, nothing is distinguished or separated, but everything is confused, everything is intertwined. These people hold nothing to be true and nothing to be false; they love nothing and hate nothing. They neither love nor hate, because for cognition, for love, for hate, for every affection, they need that energetic concentration of which they are incapable, because they must distinguish and separate in the bosom of the manifold, and choose the single object of their cognition and affection.' The very endoxal idea that to love is to choose, to eliminate and thus to destroy the 'rest' + assimilation of the multiplicity of desires to indecision and thus to softness, to the flaccid vitalist idea: only that which destroys what surrounds it lives, is alive. (To which one could reply that to embrace the Neutral would, on the contrary, represent an extreme concentration of energy, if only that which is necessary to endorse precisely the (false, but unavoidable) image of the flaccid!)".
(Roland Barthes, The Neutral, course at the Collège de France, 1977-1978)

E1.6.A.1.1.b_REF5_PO "“JE COMME JE COMME je commence là (nulle part partout 
    ailleurs toujours)
Je comme personne je comme tout le monde et je comme 
    quoi
Je tire la langue et je m'explique avec amour commence par 
    ah! soupir par vent figure par figue ma joue comme joie 
    nous toi et moi
Les jeux de nous et rire encore qu'il meuve qu'il plouille ou 
    mille soleils
Rire encore sans savoir trop bien d'où cela nous vient de si 
    loin
(Grenouille ou singe devenu fou et dieu alors un poisson 
    saoul?)
Mares   marelles   croisons   marrons-nous   connaissons-nous 
    inventons-nous du premier couac à la parole”
(Valérie Rouzeau, 2019)

E1.6.A.1.1.b_REF6_PH I DO NOT THINK THAT LOVE IS “JUST AN EMOTION,” BUT THAT IT IS CONSTITUTIVE IN OUR WHOLE MENTAL STRUCTURE (AND, THEREFORE, IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF OUR BRAINS).
“I do not (at least consciously) have a steady sense of life’s meaning. I keep losing it, and having to re-achieve it, again and again. I can only re-achieve (or “remember”) it when I am “inspired” by things or events or people, when I get a sense of the immense intricacy and mystery, but also the deep ordering positivity, of Nature and History.
I do not believe in, never have believed in, any “transcendental” spirit above Nature; but there is a spirit in Nature, a cosmogenic spirit, which commands my respect and love; and it is this, perhaps most deeply, which serves to “explain” life, give it “meaning.” […]
I think “the meaning of life” is something we have to formulate for ourselves, we have to determine what has meaning for us… It clearly has to do with love — what and whom and how one can love. […]
I do not think that love is “just an emotion,” but that it is constitutive in our whole mental structure (and, therefore, in the development of our brains).”
(Oliver Sacks, Letter to Hugh S. Moorhead, 1990 - Published in Letters from Oliver Sacks)

E1.6.A.1.1.b_REF7_PO ”BY THE TULIPS
By the tulips people stop to take
Pictures. One wonders which are more
Beautiful: the people or the tulips?
Lush, almost flourescent, like cups,
Like vases, like wet crimson towels
Hanging loose about the naked style.
Or an Annamese girl in striped mini
Just below her drawers, on her forehead
A pale red moon. Or two Indian women
In brilliant prints and gold nose pellets,
Nipples pressing through silk. Or an old
Man with his mother, identical blue chips
Glinting through corrugated skin. Families
Like flower beds, varieties of love
And anguish, phenotype and genotype,
And Babel, magnificent garden!
Or the glory of laughter, that needs
No language, the glee of children racing
Away, the silence of tulips calling
Wildly, pouring out love in perfume.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E1.6.A.1.1.b_REF8_PO “KISS
When Lynne saw the lizard floating
in her mother-in-law’s swimming pool,
she jumped in. And when it wasn’t
breathing, its body limp as a baby
drunk on milk, she laid it on her palm
and pressed one fingertip to its silky breast
with just about the force you need
to test the ripeness of a peach, only quicker,
a brisk little push with a bit of spring in it.
Then she knelt, dripping wet in her Doc Martens
and camo T-shirt with the neck ripped out,
and bent her face to the lizard’s face,
her big plush lips to the small stiff jaw
that she’d pried apart with her opposable thumb,
and she blew a tiny puff into the lizard’s lungs.
The sun glared against the turquoise water.
What did it matter if she saved one lizard?
One lizard more or less in the world?
But she bestowed the kiss of life,
again and again, until
the lizard’s wrinkled lids peeled back,
its muscles roused its own first breath
and she set it on the hot cement
where it rested a moment
before darting off.”
(Ellen Bass)

Listen to the poem read by Maria Popova:
https://youtu.be/pU95Lv6Fzmk

E1.6.A.1.1.b_REF9_CUR BRÍGIDA BALTAR (1959–2022): TO MAKE THE WORLD A SHELTER
“Arguably one the finest Brazilian artists of her generation, Baltar kept herself devoted to uncompromised poetics, embracing her life and body with her aesthetic ambition to grasp the world as an extension of her intimacy. Dealing with the notion of shelter, and the nostalgia of both home and origin, Baltar’s work was as eloquent as subtle, grounded in the idea of a ceaseless metamorphosis, and truthful to a sense of closeness the artist stood out against the backdrop of a futile culture of hyper-exposure.”
(Nara Roesler New York)

Watch the video on YouTube: https://youtu.be/wVoNYVmLgoI?si=wK7a0fFBLfBe34iM

E1.6.A.1.1.c. BARUCH SPINOZA REFERS TO THIS EXPANDED LOVE AS BEATITUDE, OR THE "INTELLECTUAL LOVE OF GOD" OR OF NATURE.
In the West, prior to the 20th century, Spinoza was one of the few who spoke about this type of love, often compared to an "awakening," a concept frequently discussed in Asian philosophies for centuries. Thankfully, in the 20th century, connections were made with the East, and schools of thought such as phenomenology and the Palo Alto school started to articulate concepts in line with Spinoza's ideas.

E1.6.A.1.1.c.i. THE SOUL'S SUPREME VIRTUE IS TO KNOW THINGS THROUGH THE THIRD KIND OF KNOWLEDGE, WHICH LEADS TO BLISS
Spinoza's Ethics posits that beatitude, or bliss, stems from an intuitive understanding of God's presence within us. Proposition 25 (Part V) indicates that the soul's highest virtue lies in knowing things through this third kind of knowledge, leading to beatitude. This bliss is not an emotion driven by external factors but the result of fulfilling our inherent nature. Unlike spiritual deification, which involves renouncing the self and the world, Spinoza's concept of beatitude is rooted in self-affirmation and the joy of being alive in the human world.

E1.6.A.1.1.c.i_REF1_PH UNLIKE SPIRITUAL DEIFICATION, WHICH IMPLIES A RENUNCIATION OF THE EGO, THE SPINOZIST BEATITUDE AFFIRMS AND CULTIVATES OUR EMBODIED INDIVIDUALITY, ROOTING US IN OUR EARTHLY EXISTENCE. This beatitude stems from an intuitive knowledge of the divine life within us, distinct from traditional mystical ecstasy. 
"In the Ethics, from the note of v. 23 (GF p. 325), 'We feel and we know by experience that we are eternal,' the whole sequence to the end (prop. 42) is a long, almost hymn-like development on the beatitude we derive from intuitive knowledge of God's life within us. Prop. 25: 'The highest effort (conatus) of the soul and its highest virtue (virtus) is to know things by the third kind of knowledge' (GF 325). We understand that it's no longer a question of knowledge, but of beatitude, of the closest proximity of God's life to the very heart of our life, like a focus of eternity that radiates throughout our being, at least as long as we keep ourselves alive, as long as we persevere in existing. And so Spinoza, the atheist, finds himself in the tradition of mystical experience, the third kind of knowledge being strangely similar to the unitive fruition of the soul, lovingly united with the God who creates it and brings it into being, with the difference that it is not the soul alone that enjoys this union (as in the case of the mystics): Ecstasy is rapture, the body is abandoned like an inert, unnecessarily heavy disguise), but indifferently - for the one and the other are two expressions of one and the same substance - of the spirit (Mens is the creator of concepts, producer of its own rationality, while Anima only makes itself available for the gift of grace, receptive rather than productive) as well as of the body, which is also raised to blissful life, in glory and great health. It is an earthly beatitude that does not elevate us to the third heaven, as Paul of Tarsus was happy to envision (2 Cor 12), but rather keeps our feet firmly on the ground, affirming and cultivating our incarnate individuality, our own will, the nature that is expressed in us in a singular and unique way. This is why the Spinozan beatitude must be distinguished from the spiritual divinization that takes place in holy souls who have been able to empty themselves, to make themselves capable of receiving divinity at the cost of their own destruction, according to the teaching of Eckhart, so alive in the northern countries, the beguinage countries, and this, even if Spinoza's words sometimes seem to recall this wisdom, because the beatitude of the fifth book of the Ethics is that of self-affirmation, not of renunciation, an exultation of experiencing oneself alive on the earth of men, not that of detachment, which renounces oneself as well as the world and surrenders to rapture in the hereafter. "
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the Fullness of this World, 6-"We feel and experience that we are eternal", 2017)

Read the full essay: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Spinoza/Introduction/Introd6.html

E1.6.A.1.1.c.i_REF1.1_PH FOR SPINOZA, BEATITUDE COMES FROM THE INTUITIVE AND IMMEDIATE UNDERSTANDING OF THINGS THROUGH THE THIRD KIND OF KNOWLEDGE, WHICH LEADS TO THE INTELLECTUAL LOVE OF GOD [OR NATURE]. This beatitude is not an outward passion, but an inward fulfillment of one's nature. Spinoza distinguishes this beatitude from joy, which depends on external causes, and emphasizes that God [or Nature] is an immanent, not a transcendent cause.
"It is the supreme effort of the mind and its sovereign virtue to understand things by the third kind of knowledge that produces 'the intellectual love of God' (Prop. 33 to 37; Prop. 33): 'The intellectual love of God that comes from the third kind of knowledge is eternal,' which leads to beatitude (prop. 38 at the end, i.e., prop. 42; prop. 38): 'The more the mind understands through the second and third kinds of knowledge, the less it suffers from feelings that are evil, and the less it apprehends death'. The enigmatic theme of immediate, intuitive knowledge that has been emerging since the earliest writings thus finds its crowning, speculative fulfillment in the last book of the Ethics: the whole of this meditation tends only toward this ultimate goal. By beatitude Spinoza - who borrows the word from the vocabulary of theologians, who use it to designate the perfect enjoyment of the blessed, who are received into paradise and immersed in the face vision of the divinity - does not mean a passion due to an external cause, but, on the contrary, the fulfillment (gaudium) of our own nature, apprehended from the source that gives us life. In contrast to the joy (laetitia) we derive from the encounter with an external cause, which increases our power to act, beatitude (beatitudo) has its source in ourselves, and it is from ourselves, insofar as we experience ourselves as existing, that we draw the power to elevate ourselves to beatitude. And if Spinoza can write that this supreme pleasure derives from our union with God [or Nature], then we must make it clear that this God [or Nature] is an immanent cause, not a transitive or transcendent one, internal and not external (I, 18: 'God is the immanent but non-transitive cause of all things')".
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the Fullness of this World, 6-"We feel and experience that we are eternal", 2017)

Read the full essay: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Spinoza/Introduction/Introd6.html

E1.6.A.1.1.c.i_REF1.2_PH FOR SPINOZA, LIFE IS WORTH LIVING NOT BECAUSE OF CHOICES BASED ON IMAGINARY FREEDOM, BUT BECAUSE OF THE EXPERIENCE OF PARTICIPATING IN DIVINE LIFE [OR NATURE], WHICH MAKES US FEEL AND EXPERIENCE OUR ETERNITY INDEPENDENT OF TIME.
"Life is not worth living because of the choices we might make, based on an imaginary freedom that we attribute to ourselves only because we ignore the true causes that determine us and the necessity that leads us as if by the hand. Life is worthwhile in that it offers us the experience - limited, it is true, in time and space - of participating in the life that is in God [or in Nature], of feeling ourselves to be eternal, by the very fact of the essence that gives us existence: 'We feel and experience that we are eternal [...] We feel that our spirit, insofar as it surrounds the essence of the body under the aspect of eternity - sub aeternitatis specie - is eternal, and that its existence cannot be defined by time, that is, explained by duration' (V, scolie de 23)."
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the Fullness of this World, 6-"We feel and experience that we are eternal", 2017)

Read the full essay: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Spinoza/Introduction/Introd6.html

E1.6.A.1.1.c.i_REF1.3_PH “WHAT IT IS — IS WHAT ELSE IT IS. NOT JUST THAT THIS AFTERNOON’S THICK, BOULDER-CLOUDS RESEMBLE THE MOUNTAINS I LOVED AS A CHILD, BUT THAT THE ONE SCENE COLLAPSES IN ON THE OTHER, TIME REWORKS AND FOLDS TOGETHER. AND I LIVE IN BOTH PLACES.
What it is — is what else it is. For this reason I am often startled by the simplest gestures of things: a leaf scratching along sideways moves as a crab does, so much so that the animal’s likeness comes powerfully in, and the shock of seeing a crab on the sidewalk trumps reason. And though I tell myself “it’s fall; leaves *dry*, scratch and blow, not *crabs*,” I’m jittery walking down the street — not frightened exactly, I can’t say afraid — but always the scene I’m in breaks open and floods. The stuff of an *elsewhere* comes in, as when, among the dried, speckled shells of crabs this summer, a snowball rolled oceanward before returning itself to a clump of sea-foam. The flap of an awning blows in wind — and it’s a low-flying bird’s wing. The dark underside of a mushroom’s gills, grown tiered and up-curved after rain, makes a tiny Sydney Opera House. Right there, hillside of the reservoir. Australia, just a few blocks from home. […]
These moments of recurrence/concurrence are not messages fluttering toward, bearing secrets, but stories in which we are part of the telling. We are, for a spell, of the path where shape forms, where flux assembles, briefly, a center. And there are so many centers.”

(Lia Purpura, On Looking)

“The sun
The moon
The stars

And
The rain
The wind
The rainbow
The echoes in the mountains

Why are
Only the oldest
Always the newest?”

(Michio Mado)

E1.6.A.1.1.c.ii. INTUITIVE KNOWLEDGE OF THE ESSENCE OF LIFE LEADS TO THE HIGHEST ENJOYMENT
Every individual possesses the gift of existence and the strength to persevere in life. This allows them to find contentment within themselves and enjoy their existence. Happiness is present in the here and now, and divine activity can be experienced through meditation and awareness. Understanding the essence of life intuitively leads to supreme enjoyment. Life is its own objective and conclusion, and happiness is virtue itself. Life is an invaluable gift, and there is no need to seek salvation to experience the greatest joy.

E1.6.A.1.1.c.ii_REF1_PH ACCORDING TO SPINOZA, LIFE HAS NO END OTHER THAN ITSELF AND THE INTUITIVE KNOWLEDGE OF THE INFINITE POWER THAT SUSTAINS IT. Beatitude lies in the awareness of this infinite existence, with no need for reward beyond. Virtue and beatitude are inseparable, and eternity is found in the present life, perceived by the very essence of existence.
"All men are born and die. But it is up to them, as long as they are granted the gift of Being and continue in its glory, to reconcile with themselves and enjoy the flame that burns within them, to quench their thirst at the Source of Life that radiates within them and grants them the infinite potency of Existence. And to enjoy this eternity, we don't have to prolong our existence indefinitely. On the contrary, it's in the here and now that this beatitude is given to us, provided that we become aware of this life-giving potency within us, and according to the depth that the practice of meditation will be able to give to the intuitive knowledge of this infinite life of which we are a singular expression. For infinity is an intensive magnitude, not an extensive one, and there is no limit to the intensity with which we can participate, through the exercise of attention, through the penetration of consciousness, in the divine activity that brings us into existence and continually perseveres in that impulse. Indeed, as we have seen, it is the hallmark of intuitive knowledge to be able, through practice, to expand the field of its investigation, the radius of its horizon of evidence. This knowledge, or awareness, is accompanied by the highest pleasure, for it makes us inwardly experience the act of divine causation, which does not affect us passionately, through the effect of an external cause, but fills us inwardly, through the intuition of our own essence. Only the creature enjoys the infinite potrncy of existence, since it receives it from the immanent God who gives it life, and not God Himself, who gives existence by the necessity of His infinite power, and therefore cannot experience this power as a gift that fills it, since it is its own nature: 'We conclude that a created thing can be said to enjoy existence, because indeed existence is not of its essence, but God cannot be said to enjoy existence, for God's existence is God himself; so also is his essence; from which it follows that created things enjoy duration, but God in no way enjoys it. '(Metaphysical Thoughts, II, 1; GF I, 359). This suggests that the status of the creature is perhaps more enviable than that of God, who eternally and out of his own necessity produces, without being able to enjoy or even be aware of it, the generation of bodies in matter and the continuation of ideas in minds. [...] Spinoza's God generates and produces; he neither loves nor knows (or rather, he loves only himself, insofar as he is the cause of himself and thus affects himself by giving himself existence). But it's very important for our beatitude that we know Him [God or Nature] - intuitively, not deductively, subjectively, not objectively, with an all-intellectual love that has its source in the depths of ourselves, and not in the imprint or image that clouds our reason with the shock of an alienating encounter. The 'intellectual love of God [or Nature]' from which we derive the beatitude of feeling and experiencing ourselves as eternal is not the passion of love of the imagination; it is an 'intellectual' love born of the intuitive knowledge of the mind of its essence as of the essence of the body of which it is the idea, knowledge of the conatus that sustains all existence in the effort it exerts to persevere in existing. [...] 
Thus, according to Spinoza, life has no end other than itself and the intuitive knowledge of the infinite potency that brings it into existence. It has neither meaning nor purpose, since it is its own meaning and purpose. So there is no need for any reward in the hereafter, for there is no gift or reward more wonderful than existence itself and the beatitude it inspires in the mind that knows how to be attentive to its continuous activity. It's enough to live and be aware of the infinity of this gift. And it is futile to hope for salvation as the price of this gift, which is already supreme and inestimable in itself: 'Beatitude is not the reward of virtue, but virtue itself' (Prop. 42, last proposition of the Ethics). Paradoxically, this extraordinary work teaches us that we live in paradise and enjoy eternity. In fact, we need only this world to find the eternity and perfection that man has only been able to imagine in another world. For, as it says on the very first page of Book I of the Ethics: 'By eternity I mean existence itself, insofar as it is conceived as necessarily following from the sole definition of an eternal thing' (I, def. 8), i.e., insofar as it is known by its very essence, the effect of the infinite potency of divine causation; and in another way, on the very first page of Book II: 'By reality and by perfection I mean the same thing.' This world is perfect. All is accomplished."
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the Fullness of this World, 6-"We feel and experience that we are eternal", 2017)

Read the full essay: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Spinoza/Introduction/Introd6.html

E1.6.A.1.1.c.ii_REF1.1_PH "PROPOSITION 36
The intellectual love of the mind towards God is that very love of God whereby God loves himself, not in so far as he is infinite, but in so far as he can be explained through the essence of the human mind regarded under the form of eternity ; in other words, the intellectual love of the mind towards God is part of the infinite love wherewith God loves himself.

Proof.
This love of the mind must be referred to the activities of the mind [...] ; it is itself, indeed, an activity whereby the mind regards itself accompanied by the idea of God as cause[...] ; that is [...], an activity whereby God, in so far as he can be explained through the human mind, regards himself accompanied by the idea of himself ; therefore (by the last Prop.), this love of the mind is part of the infinite love wherewith God loves himself. Q.E.D.

COROLLARY
Hence it follows that God, in so far as he loves himself, loves man, and, consequently, that the love of God towards men, and the intellectual love of the mind towards God are identical.

SCHOLIUM
From what has been said we clearly understand, wherein our salvation, or blessedness, or freedom, consists: namely, in the constant and eternal love towards God, or in God's love towards men. "
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics part 5)

Read the Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.6.A.1.1.c.ii_REF1.2_PH FOR SPINOZA, BEATITUDE IS IN REALITY A METAPHOR OF PERFECT LOVE “We know that, for Spinoza, beatitude is, as joy, an ‘intellectual love of God’, the latter being Nature itself as a unified totality. And man's love for 'God' is part of the love by which 'God' (i.e. Nature and mankind) loves himself (Spinoza, Eth., V, 36). It is a cosmic, reflexive joy. It is, in fact, a metaphor for perfect love.”
(Robert Misrahi, The Acts of Joy, 1987)

E1.6.A.1.1.d. LOVE THOROUGHLY SOLVED EVERYTHING
Two or three times in my life I discovered love. 
Each time it seemed to solve everything. 
Each time it solved a great many things 
    but not everything.
Yet left me as grateful as if it had indeed, and 
thoroughly, solved everything."
(Mary Oliver)

E1.6.A.1.1.d_REF1_PO "SOMETIMES

[...]

2.

Sometimes 
melancholy leaves me breathless.

3.

Later I was in a field full of sunflowers. 
I was feeling the heat of midsummer. 
I was thinking of the sweet, electric 
    drowse of creation,

when it began to break.

In the west, clouds gathered. 
Thunderheads. 
In an hour the sky was filled with them.

In an hour the sky was filled 
    with the sweetness of rain and the blast of lightning. Followed by the deep bells of thunder.

Water from the heavens! Electricity from the source! 
Both of them mad to create something!

The lightning brighter than any flower. 
The thunder without a drowsy bone in its body.

4.

Instructions for living a life: 
Pay attention. 
Be astonished. 
Tell about it.

5.

Two or three times in my life I discovered love. 
Each time it seemed to solve everything. 
Each time it solved a great many things 
    but not everything.
Yet left me as grateful as if it had indeed, and 
thoroughly, solved everything."
(Mary Oliver, Red bird, 2008)

E1.6.A.1.1.d_REF2_PO WHAT YOU REALLY WANT IS LOVE'S CONFUSING JOY
“If you want what visible reality
can give, you're an employee.

If you want the unseen world,
you're not living your truth.

Both wishes are foolish,
but you'll be forgiven for forgetting
that what you really want is
love's confusing joy.”
(Rumi, The essential, translated by Coleman Barks, 1207-1273)

E1.6.A.1.2. IF EQUAL AFFECTION CANNOT BE, LET THE MORE LOVING ONE BE ME.
This is how W.H. Auden encapsulates the generosity of a lover of life. Similarly, Bertrand Russell suggests, "Love at its fullest is an indissoluble combination of the two elements, delight and well-wishing."

E1.6.A.1.2_REF1_PO "THE MORE LOVING ONE

Looking up at the stars, I know quite well
That, for all they care, I can go to hell,
But on earth indifference is the least
We have to dread from man or beast.

How should we like it were stars to burn
With a passion for us we could not return?
If equal affection cannot be,
Let the more loving one be me.

Admirer as I think I am
Of stars that do not give a damn,
I cannot, now I see them, say
I missed one terribly all day.

Were all stars to disappear or die,
I should learn to look at an empty sky
And feel its total dark sublime,
Though this might take me a little time."
(W.H. Auden)

E1.6.A.1.2_REF2_PH "THE GOOD LIFE IS ONE INSPIRED BY LOVE AND GUIDED BY KNOWLEDGE. Neither love without knowledge, nor knowledge without love can produce a good life. [...]
Love is a word which covers a variety of feelings; I have used it purposely, as I wish to include them all. Love as an emotion — which is what I am speaking about, for love “on principle” does not seem to me genuine — moves between two poles: on one side, pure delight in contemplation; on the other, pure benevolence. Where inanimate objects are concerned, delight alone enters in; we cannot feel benevolence towards a landscape or a sonata. This type of enjoyment is presumably the source of art. It is stronger, as a rule, in very young children than in adults, who are apt to view objects in a utilitarian spirit. It plays a large part in our feelings towards human beings, some of whom have charm and some the reverse, when considered simply as objects of aesthetic contemplation. [...]
Love at its fullest is an indissoluble combination of the two elements, delight and well-wishing. The pleasure of a parent in a beautiful and successful child combines both elements; so does sex-love at its best. But in sex-love benevolence will only exist where there is secure possession, since otherwise jealousy will destroy it, while perhaps actually increasing the delight in contemplation. Delight without well-wishing may be cruel; well-wishing without delight easily tends to become cold and a little superior. A person who wishes to be loved wishes to be the object of a love containing both elements."
(Bertrand Russell, What I believe, 1925)

E1.6.A.1.2_REF3_PO "THERE IS ONLY ONE QUESTION;
HOW TO LOVE THIS WORLD."
(Mary Oliver, Spring, House of light, 1990)

E1.6.A.1.2_REF4_PO "AFTER THE MOVIE

My friend Michael and I are walking home arguing about the movie.
He says that he believes a person can love someone
and still be able to murder that person.

I say, No, that’s not love. That’s attachment.
Michael says, No, that’s love. You can love someone, then come to a day

when you’re forced to think “it’s him or me”
think “me” and kill him.

I say, Then it’s not love anymore.
Michael says, It was love up to then though.

I say, Maybe we mean different things by the same word.
Michael says, Humans are complicated: love can exist even in the murderous
heart.

I say that what he might mean by love is desire.
Love is not a feeling, I say. And Michael says, Then what is it?

We’re walking along West 16th Street—a clear unclouded night—and I hear
my voice
repeating what I used to say to my husband: Love is action, I used to say to
him.

Simone Weil says that when you really love you are able to look at someone
you want to eat and not eat them.

Janis Joplin says, take another little piece of my heart now baby.

Meister Eckhart says that as long as we love any image we are doomed to live
in purgatory.

Michael and I stand on the corner of 6th Avenue saying goodnight.
I can’t drink enough of the tangerine spritzer I’ve just bought—

again and again I bring the cold can to my mouth and suck the stuff from
the hole the flip top made.

What are you doing tomorrow? Michael says.
But what I think he’s saying is “You are too strict. You are a nun.”

Then I think, Do I love Michael enough to allow him to think these things of
me even if he’s not thinking them?

Above Manhattan, the moon wanes, and the sky turns clearer and colder.
Although the days, after the solstice, have started to lengthen,

we both know the winter has only begun."
(Marie Howe)

E1.6.A.1.2_REF5_PH THAT GOTAMA REGARDS THE HIGHEST GOOD TO BE CARE IS CONSISTENT WITH HIS FAMOUS LAST WORDS: “THINGS FALL APART; TREAD THE PATH WITH CARE.”
“Gotama […] says that all skillful states “are rooted and converge in care, and care is considered the chief among them.” [”Just as the footprints of all living beings that walk fit into the
footprint of an elephant”]. Another way of phrasing the question would be, “What, in the
dharma, constitutes the highest good?” That Gotama regards the highest good to be care is consistent with his famous last words: “Things fall apart; tread the path with care.” […]

[This attempt at translating appamada as care fails] to communicate that appamada is a negative term like the English “impeccability,” which is also a negative (im/in = without + peccare = sin), although we tend not to notice the negative and consider impeccability a wholly positive attribute. The first a- of appamada is also a privative (“not”); pamada means something like “negligence” or “indolence”. […] It suggests that we spend a great deal of time stumbling about distracted, veering
from one thought to the next, forgetting what we had intended to do as soon as a more diverting possibility presents itself. 
When rendered as “care,” we can understand appamada to include both a vigilant attention (being care-full) and a heartfelt concern for the well-being of oneself and others (being caring)  […].
(Stephen Batchelor, After Buddhism, rethinking the dharma for a secular age, 2016)

E1.6.A.1.2_REF5.1_PH “AS THE PERSPECTIVE OF ONE PURSUING A PATH, CARE IS AN EXISTENTIAL SENSIBILITY RATHER THAN A DISCRETE MENTAL ACT. Buddhist analyses of care describe it as a configuration of different interwoven elements. Such care is grounded in an energetic state of contentment, kindness, and clarity. When this careful caring is activated, greed, hatred, and confusion are (for the time being) suspended. The twelfth-century Tibetan lama Thogmé Zangpo defined care as “a keen concern for engagement and letting go.” Care is that which cherishes and cultivates virtues while also relinquishing compulsive behavior. As an awareness of one’s values and a diligent commitment to realize them, it deprives Mara of a foothold, thereby guarding one against his attacks.
Such a path of vigilant care is not an exclusively Buddhist concern. Whatever sheds light on impermanence, suffering, contingency, and emptiness can contribute to a path that inclines toward nirvana, even if it originates in a secular tradition that is skeptical of religion, or in a religion that denies the validity of Buddhism. In recognizing the existence of “solitary buddhas” (paccekabuddha), who gain insight into the nature of contingency independently of a teacher or Buddhist community, Buddhism affirms that the attainment of nirvana can occur outside of a Buddhist context. Job and Jesus, Pascal and Montaigne, evolutionary biology and neuroscience, Roland Barthes and William Blake offer glimpses of self and world that illuminate the path opened up by Buddha.
Although a devout Buddhist, Shantideva aspires “always to be a student of everyone, respectfully accepting unsolicited words which are of help, openly rejoicing in whatever is well said.” To enclose oneself in the confines of a tradition and community where one feels at home and unthreatened cuts one off from the myriad sources of awakening that are everywhere present, were one only prepared to reach out and embrace them. “There is nothing whatsoever,” affirms Shantideva, “that is not to be learned by one who aspires to awaken.”
In such encounters between traditions are the seeds of a contemporary culture of awakening likely to germinate. This culture might already be fermenting in the dialogues and exchanges between declared Buddhists and “solitary buddhas” who, unbeknown to themselves, are gouging pathways to nirvana. It can embrace both secular and religious elements while in itself being neither secular nor religious.”
(Stephen Batchelor, Living with the Devil, 2004)

E1.6.A.1.3. LOVE REALLY IS A UNIQUE TRUST PLACED IN CHANCE
Love really is a unique trust placed in chance. It takes us into key areas of the experience of what is difference and, essentially, leads to the idea that you can experience the world from the perspective of difference and transformation. Security in a relationship lies neither in looking back to what it was in nostalgia, nor forward to what it might be in dread or anticipation, but living in the present relationship and accepting it as it is now

E1.6.A.1.3_REF1_PH "LOVE REALLY IS A UNIQUE TRUST PLACED IN CHANCE. It takes us into key areas of the experience of what is difference and, essentially, leads to the idea that you can experience the world from the perspective of difference. [...]
Love… is a quest for truth… truth in relation to something quite precise: what kind of world does one see when one experiences it from the point of view of two and not one? What is the world like when it is experienced, developed and lived from the point of view of difference and not identity? That is what I believe love to be. [...]
To make a declaration of love is to move on from the event-encounter to embark on a construction of truth. The chance nature of the encounter morphs into the assumption of a beginning. And often what starts there lasts so long, is so charged with novelty and experience of the world that in retrospect it doesn’t seem at all random and contingent, as it appeared initially, but almost a necessity. That is how chance is curbed: the absolute contingency of the encounter with someone I didn’t know finally takes on the appearance of destiny. The declaration of love marks the transition from chance to destiny, and that’s why it is so perilous and so burdened with a kind of horrifying stage fright. […]
The locking in of chance is an anticipation of eternity… The problem then resides in inscribing this eternity within time. Because, basically, that is what love is: a declaration of eternity to be fulfilled or unfurled as best it can be within time: eternity descending into time. […]
Happiness in love is the proof that time can accommodate eternity. And you can also find proof … in the pleasure given by works of art and the almost supernatural joy you experience when you at last grasp in depth the meaning of a scientific theory."
(Alain Badiou, In Praise of Love, 2009)

E1.6.A.1.3_REF2_PO "THERE IS A FAITH IN LOVING FIERCELY
THE ONE WHO IS RIGHTFULLY YOURS,
especially if you have
waited years and especially
if part of you never believed
you could deserve this
loved and beckoning hand
held out to you this way. [...]
so that when
we finally step out of the boat
toward them, we find
everything holds
us, and everything confirms
our courage"
(David Whyte)

E1.6.A.1.3_REF2.1_PO "THE TRUELOVE

There is a faith in loving fiercely
the one who is rightfully yours,
especially if you have
waited years and especially
if part of you never believed
you could deserve this
loved and beckoning hand
held out to you this way.

I am thinking of faith now
and the testaments of loneliness
and what we feel we are
worthy of in this world.

Years ago in the Hebrides,
I remember an old man
who walked every morning
on the grey stones
to the shore of baying seals,
who would press his hat
to his chest in the blustering
salt wind and say his prayer
to the turbulent Jesus
hidden in the water,

and I think of the story
of the storm and everyone
waking and seeing
the distant
yet familiar figure
far across the water
calling to them

and how we are all
preparing for that
abrupt waking,
and that calling,
and that moment
we have to say yes,
except it will
not come so grandly
so Biblically
but more subtly
and intimately in the face
of the one you know
you have to love

so that when
we finally step out of the boat
toward them, we find
everything holds
us, and everything confirms
our courage, and if you wanted
to drown you could,
but you don’t
because finally
after all this struggle
and all these years
you simply don’t want to
any more
you’ve simply had enough
of drowning
and you want to live and you
want to love and you will
walk across any territory
and any darkness
however fluid and however
dangerous to take the
one hand you know
belongs in yours."
(David Whyte)

Listen to the poem read by David Whyte:
https://soundcloud.app.goo.gl/KJnug

E1.6.A.1.3_REF2.2_CUR THE EXPECTATION OF AN ENCOUNTER
“This work by André Breton is an autobiographical narrative, focused on the "events of objective chance" which led him to his decisive encounter in 1934 with his future wife Jacqueline Lamba, whose "scandalous beauty" was immortalised by Dora Maar. The work illustrated with photographs by Dora Maar, Brassaï, Henri Cartier-Bresson, Rogi André, and Man Ray. The photograph of The Invisible Object, a sculpture by Alberto Giacometti, was taken in the artist's studio by Dora Maar in 1934. Between its empty hands, the figure seems to be holding "an invisible, yet present object," the expectation of an encounter”. For Breton, it represents "the emanation itself of the desire to love and be loved seeking its genuine human purpose and in its painful ignorance”
(Curatorship: Centre Pompidou, Paris)

E1.6.A.1.3_REF3_LIT GOOD RELATIONSHIP ARE AKIN TO A DANCE, WHERE PARTNERS MOVE TOGETHER WITH A LIGHT TOUCH, LIVING IN THE MOMENT AND ALLOWING FOR GROWTH AND CHANGE. True security in relationships comes from accepting their fluidity and present state, rather than clinging to past forms or fearing future changes.
"The pure relationship, how beautiful it is! How easily it is damaged, or weighed down with irrelevancies — not even irrelevancies, just life itself, the accumulations of life and of time. For the first part of every relationship is pure, whether it be with friend or lover, husband or child. It is pure, simple and unencumbered. It is like the artist’s vision before he has to discipline it into form, or like the flower of love before it has ripened to the firm but heavy fruit of responsibility. Every relationship seems simple at its start. The simplicity of first love, or friendliness, the mutuality of first sympathy seems, at its initial appearance — even if merely in exciting conversation across a dinner table — to be a self-enclosed world. Two people listening to each other, two shells meeting each other, making one world between them… It is free of ties or claims, unburdened by responsibilities, by worry about the future or debts to the past. And then how swiftly, how inevitably the perfect unity is invaded; the relationship changes; it becomes complicated, encumbered by its contact with the world. [...]

We mistakenly feel that failure to maintain its exact original pattern is tragedy. It is true, of course, the original relationship is very beautiful. Its self-enclosed perfection wears the freshness of a spring morning. Forgetting about the summer to come, one often feels one would like to prolong the spring of early love, when two people stand as individuals, without past or future, facing each other. One resents any change, even though one knows that transformation is natural and part of the process of life and its evolution. Like its parallel in physical passion, the early ecstatic stage of a relationship cannot continue always at the same pitch of intensity. It moves to another phase of growth which one should not dread, but welcome as one welcomes summer after spring. [...]

One learns to accept the fact that no permanent return is possible to an old form of relationship; and, more deeply still, that there is no holding of a relationship to a single form. This is not tragedy but part of the ever-recurrent miracle of life and growth. All living relationships are in process of change, of expansion, and must perpetually be building themselves new forms. But there is no single fixed form to express such a changing relationship. [...]

One comes in the end to realize that there is no permanent pure-relationship and there should not be. It is not even something to be desired. The pure relationship is limited, in space and in time. In its essence it implies exclusion. It excludes the rest of life, other relationships, other sides of personality, other responsibilities, other possibilities in the future. It excludes growth. [...]

A good relationship has a pattern like a dance and is built on some of the same rules. The partners do not need to hold on tightly, because they move confidently in the same pattern… To touch heavily would be to arrest the pattern and freeze the movement, to check the endlessly changing beauty of its unfolding. There is no place here for the possessive clutch, the clinging arm, the heavy hand; only the barest touch in passing. Now arm in arm, now face to face, now back to back… Because they know they are partners moving to the same rhythm, creating a pattern together, and being invisibly nourished by it.

The joy of such a pattern is not only the joy of creation or the joy of participation, it is also the joy of living in the moment. Lightness of touch and living in the moment are intertwined. One cannot dance well unless one is completely in time with the music, not leaning back to the last step or pressing forward to the next one, but poised directly on the present step as it comes. [...]

When you love someone you do not love them all the time, in exactly the same way, from moment to moment. It is an impossibility. It is even a lie to pretend to. And yet this is exactly what most of us demand. We have so little faith in the ebb and flow of life, of love, of relationships. We leap at the flow of the tide and resist in terror its ebb. We are afraid it will never return. We insist on permanency, on duration, on continuity; when the only continuity possible, in life as in love, is in growth, in fluidity — in freedom, in the sense that the dancers are free, barely touching as they pass, but partners in the same pattern. The only real security is not in owning or possessing, not in demanding or expecting, not in hoping, even. Security in a relationship lies neither in looking back to what it was in nostalgia, nor forward to what it might be in dread or anticipation, but living in the present relationship and accepting it as it is now."
(Anne Morrow Lindbergh, Gift from the Sea, 1955)

E1.6.A.1.3_REF4_PO "
« WHY DO I LOVE » YOU, SIR ? 
Because -
The Wind does not require the Grass 
To answer - Wherefore when He pass 
She cannot keep Her place. 

Because He knows - and 
Do not You -
And We know not -
Enough for Us 
The Wisdom it be so -

The Lightning - never asked an Eye 
Wherefore it shut - when He was by -
Because He knows it cannot speak -
And reasons not contained - Of Talk -
There be - preferred by Daintier Folk -
The Sunrise - Sir - compelleth Me -
Because He’s Sunrise - and I see -
Therefore - Then -
I love Thee -"
(Emily Dickinson, 1862)

E1.6.A.1.3_REF5_F “In Christopher Nolan's film Interstellar, there appears to be a contradiction in the plot: Cooper transmits the message "STAY" via gravity from inside the black hole—attempting to tell his daughter Murph to convince his past self not to leave her. Yet he also transmits the coordinates of NASA's secret base, which ultimately leads him to embark on the interstellar mission. Once inside the black hole, Cooper understands that his journey's purpose was to collect quantum data and transmit it to Murph to save humanity trapped on Earth. If he knew he had to go, why did he also send the contradictory message "STAY"?

That's an excellent question that gets to the absolute heart of *Interstellar*'s emotional and philosophical core. No, it is not a contradiction or a plot hole, but rather a deliberate and crucial part of the story that highlights the conflict between Cooper the father and Cooper the savior of humanity.

Here’s a breakdown of why he sends both messages:

---

### ## The Two Coopers: Emotional vs. Rational

Inside the Tesseract, Cooper is a being who exists across time, and we see him act in two distinct phases: first as a father driven by emotion, and second as a man driven by rational purpose.

1. **The "STAY" Message (The Father's Love):** This is Cooper's immediate, raw, and intensely human reaction. He is forced to re-watch the single most painful moment of his life: abandoning his beloved daughter. Overwhelmed by love, regret, and the pain in her eyes, his first instinct is to try and stop it. He's not yet thinking about the mission or saving humanity; he is simply a father desperately wanting to undo his greatest mistake. This is his **heart** speaking.
2. **The NASA Coordinates (The Savior's Duty):** After this emotional outburst, and with the help of TARS, Cooper begins to understand the mechanics of the Tesseract and his true purpose there. The "Bulk Beings" (future humans) didn't bring him there to change the past, but to *fulfill* it. He realizes that for Murph—and humanity—to survive, he *must* leave. Accepting his destiny, he rationally and methodically sends the NASA coordinates, ensuring the loop of events happens as it must. This is his **head** speaking.

He doesn't send both messages at the same time. He sends "STAY" in a moment of pure anguish, and then, upon understanding the bigger picture, he sends the coordinates to complete his mission.

---

### ## It's a Bootstrap Paradox, Not a Contradiction

The film operates on a **Bootstrap Paradox**, also known as a causal loop. This means an event has no clear origin because it is its own cause.

- Future Cooper (the "ghost") is the reason past Cooper leaves on the mission.
- Past Cooper leaving is the reason he can become the "ghost" in the future.

In this model, **you cannot change the past; you can only be the cause of it.** The "STAY" message was *always* part of the history Murph experienced. Cooper doesn't have a choice to *not* send it; he is simply fulfilling his role as the "ghost" she remembered from her childhood. He has to play out the entire sequence of events exactly as they happened, which includes both sending the "STAY" message and the coordinates.

---

### ## The Power of Love as a Physical Force

Ultimately, the film's central theme, as stated by Dr. Brand, is that **love is the one force that can transcend time and space.** The Tesseract itself is the ultimate proof of this. The Bulk Beings constructed this complex, five-dimensional space centered on one specific point: Murph's childhood bedroom. They did this because they knew the only thing powerful enough to guide Cooper to the right moments in time was his profound love and connection to his daughter.

His "STAY" message is the purest demonstration of that love. It is the very force that the entire solution to saving humanity is built upon.”
(Gemini, September 24, 2025)

Watch the scene: https://youtu.be/GtTkcM9BfXM?si=xikpGR3_HCMzor2t

E1.6.A.1.4. WHO WE ARE AND WHO WE BECOME DEPENDS, IN PART, ON WHOM WE LOVE

E1.6.A.1.4_REF1_PH EMOTIONS REVIVE PAST MEMORIES, CREATING MULTI LAYERED EXPERIENCES INFLUENCED BY PREVIOUS FEELINGS. HUMAN MINDS, SHAPED BY NEURAL MEMORIES, TEND TO REPEAT FAMILIAR THOUGHTS AND PERCEPTIONS. Limbic resonance connects individuals, allowing emotional states to influence each other. Relationships involve mutual emotional influence, where each partner's mind and heart can reshape the other's emotional pathways, demonstrating the concept of limbic revision.
"When an emotional chord is struck, it stirs to life past memories of the same feeling. […]
A particular emotion revives all memories of its prior instantiations. Every feeling (after the first) is a multilayered experience, only partly reflecting the present, sensory world. [...]
Because human beings remember with neurons, we are disposed to see more of what we have already seen, hear anew what we have heard most often, think just what we have always thought. Our minds are burdened by an informational inertia whose headlong course is not easy to slow… No individual can think his way around his own Attractors (*), since they are embedded in the structure of thought… Because limbic resonance and regulation join human minds together in a continuous exchange of influential signals, every brain is part of a local network that shares information — including Attractors. […]
Through the limbic transmission of an Attractor’s influence, one person can lure others into his emotional virtuality. All of us, when we engage in relatedness, fall under the gravitational influence of another’s emotional world, at the same time that we are bending his emotional mind with ours. Each relationship is a binary star, a burning flux of exchanged force fields, the deep and ancient influences emanating and felt, felt and emanating. [...]
In a relationship, one mind revises another; one heart changes its partner. This astounding legacy of our combined status as mammals and neural beings is limbic revision: the power to remodel the emotional parts of the people we love, as our Attractors activate certain limbic pathways, and the brain’s inexorable memory mechanism reinforces them. Who we are and who we become depends, in part, on whom we love."
(*) An attractor network is a network of neurons often recurrently connected, whose time dynamics settle to a stable pattern.
(Thomas Lewis, Fari Amini, and Richard Lannon, A General Theory of Love, 2001)

E1.6.A.1.4_REF2_LIT THERE IS A COMPLEXITY AND INHERENT DISSATISFACTION IN HUMAN RELATIONSHIPS, WHERE INDIVIDUALS ARE CONSTANTLY TORN BETWEEN SEEKING CONNECTION AND DESIRING ESCAPE. These hidden emotional currents, more than external events, shape our happiness and unhappiness.
"One realizes that even in harmonious families there is this double life: the group life, which is the one we can observe in our neighbor’s household, and, underneath, another — secret and passionate and intense — which is the real life that stamps the faces and gives character to the voices of our friends. Always in his mind each member of these social units is escaping, running away, trying to break the net which circumstances and his own affections have woven about him. One realizes that human relationships are the tragic necessity of human life; that they can never be wholly satisfactory, that every ego is half the time greedily seeking them, and half the time pulling away from them. [...]
In those simple relationships of loving husband and wife, affectionate sisters, children and grandmother, there are innumerable shades of sweetness and anguish which make up the pattern of our lives day by day, though they are not down in the list of subjects from which the conventional novelist works…
These secret accords and antipathies which lie hidden under our everyday behavior … more than any outward events make our lives happy or unhappy."
(Willa Cather, Not Under Forty, 1936)

E1.6.A.1.4_REF2.1_LIT "“TO LOVE WITHOUT KNOWING HOW TO LOVE WOUNDS THE PERSON WE LOVE,” the great Zen teacher Thich Nhat Hahn wrote in his short, potent meditation on how to love. Developmentally, we humans learn — or mislearn — how to love through our formative attachment patterns, modeled by and cultivated within the family — patterns that imprint our emotional identity and shape the defaults of how we connect, be they wounding or harmonizing. Family dynamics thus become inseparable from our sense of identity, and although we might eventually rewire our attachment patterns through new relationships and ample self-work, we can never fully unmoor ourselves from those formative affections, for they are woven into the mysterious thread that makes us and our childhood selves one person."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.6.A.1.4_REF3_CUR "SLEEPING FIGURE belongs to the Personages, a group of more than eighty totemic wood sculptures Bourgeois made between 1945 and 1950. The artist characterized these works as surrogates for family and friends, many of whom she left behind in France when she moved to New York in 1938. In this case, she reduced the human figure to three long oval shapes, flanked by thin poles. She once said of her sculptures, "The look of my figures is abstract, and to the spectator they may not appear to be figures at all. They are the expression, in abstract terms, of emotions and states of awareness.""
(Curatorship, MomA, NYC)

E1.6.A.1.4_REF4_CUR THE SISTERS' EXPRESSIONS SHOW US HOW SAFE THEY FEEL TOGETHER "The painting is unfinished and the outlines of a cat are just visible in the younger girl's lap; her sister Mary is tweaking its tail. Mary is shown here aged about nine or ten; Margaret is eight or nine.
This tender portrait of two young girls by their father quietly celebrates their enduring sibling bond. A young recent visitor to the National Gallery said that the sisters' expressions show us how safe they feel together. Physically and emotionally close, their gentleness with each other invites us to reflect on relationships in which we feel most supported, comfortable and loved"
(Curatorship: National Gallery, London)

E1.6.A.1.4_REF5_PO [EN] “I THINK OF THE WONDERFUL PEOPLE IN MY LIFE I think [...]

I think about the wonderful people in my life I think about 
their handshakes I think of their kicks in the sun 
neck cut and fuck me again I think of their backstrokes 
I think of their dice rolls

I think of the people who have made my life wonderful 
today and until tomorrow the wonder of their voices 
of their laughter and sorrow I think of them for a long time I think of
them very quickly I think of her too I think of him everywhere

I think of the people in my life wonderfully 
I think wonderfully of the people in my life because 
I don't forget anyone, nobody not even myself I think of
everyone and find myself included I think of myself who thinks of 
you in wonder”.
(Valérie Rouzeau, Va où [Go where], 2002)

[FR] “JE PENSE AUX PERSONNES MERVEILLEUSES DE MA VIE je pense […]

  Je pense aux personnes de merveilleuses à vie je pense à 
leurs coups de mains je pense à leurs coups de pieds au soleil 
cou coupé et à baise m'encore je pense à leurs coups de reins 
je pense à leurs coups de dés

  Je pense aux personnes qui me merveillent la vie d'hier à 
aujourd'hui et jusqu'au lendemain la merveille de leurs voix 
de leurs rires et chagrins je pense à eux longtemps je pense à 
eux très vite je pense à elles aussi je pense partout à lui

  Je pense aux personnes dans ma vie merveilleusement 
je pense merveilleusement aux personnes de ma vie car je 
n'oublie personne personne et pas même moi je pense à tout 
le monde et m'y trouve comprise je pense à moi qui pense à 
vous et à merveille”
(Valérie Rouzeau, Va où, 2002)

E1.6.A.1.5. AN INNATE PREDISPOSITION TO A CERTAIN EMOTIONAL "TEMPERATURE"
Why do numerous couples separate and miss out on the happiness they initially aspired to? It appears that an inherent predisposition to a certain emotional "temperature" can make some couples' relationships more challenging.

E1.6.A.1.5_REF1_SCI “AN HONORABLE HUMAN RELATIONSHIP — that is, one in which two people have the right to use the word ‘love’ — is a process, delicate, violent, often terrifying to both persons involved, a process of refining the truths they can tell each other,” Adrienne Rich wrote in her stunning meditation on relationships. A happy human relationship, it turns out, is contingent not upon the nature and delivery process of these truths, particularly the difficult truths, but upon the nature of the hearer — upon our emotional orientation and sensitivity, which appears to be encoded in our DNA via a particular gene that regulates serotonin in the brain. So indicates the fascinating research of U.C. Berkeley psychophysiologist and behavioral neuroscientist Robert Levenson.
Known as 5-HTTLPR (serotonin-transporter-linked polymorphic region) and located on chromosome 17 of your DNA, this gene comes in two varieties — one with a short allele and the other with a long allele. Decades of research have revealed a strong positive correlation between the short-allele type and a high precedence of depression, anxiety, and attention disorders, suggesting that people with the short allele respond more negatively to emotional friction within a relationship and seeding the assumption that having this gene is plainly problematic for one’s psychoemotional health. But Levenson’s lab uncovered a much more nuanced and surprisingly optimistic reality — rather than predisposing to more negative emotional responses, the short allele appears to predispose simply to more emotional responses, serving as a kind of psychoemotional magnifying glass that renders all emotions, the lows as well as the highs, more deeply and intensely felt."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings on Robert Levenson's research at U.C. Berkley)

Read more on Brain Pickings:
https://www.brainpickings.org/?s=robert+levenson%27s

Watch Robert Levenson explain on Youtube:
https://youtu.be/xn38OsTeXlk

E1.6.A.1.5_REF2_LIT BUT BEFORE
“She left the house slamming the door. But before that, he had told her to fuck off. But before that, she'd asked him to at least clean up the mess he'd made. But before that, he had spilled wine on the carpet. But before, she had doubted that he would spill all the wine on the carpet. But before, he had said he would spill all the wine on the carpet. But before, she had said that it wasn't her fault that he didn't have a job. But before that, he had said that she didn't have to tell him that he couldn't even afford a rug. But before that, she had said that her mother deserved respect, after all, she was the one who had furnished the apartment, from the fan to the carpet. But before that, he had said that her mother was a cow. But before that, her mother had left the apartment slamming the door. But before that, he had asked her mother to leave, preferably without slamming the door. But before that, her mother had said that he was fatter. But before that, he had said that her mother was older. But before that, her mother had asked if he'd gotten the job. But before that, he had said that her mother arriving by surprise was just what was needed. But before that, her mother had arrived by surprise. But before that, they had kissed and apologized and promised not to fight. But before that, he had asked why nothing he does is ever right. But before that, she had complained that he didn't even know how to open a wine. But before that, he had tried to open a wine. But before that, she had suggested that he open the wine. But before, they had kissed. But before, they had left their children at his sister's house. But before, they had said it would be a beautiful evening. But before, they had gone to the supermarket and bought the best wine. But before, she had said that she was very proud of the husband he was. But before that, he had cried because it wasn't how he imagined himself at 35. But before that, he had been turned down for a job interview. But before, she had said that she trusted him blindly. But before that, he had said that it was just a job interview, and that nothing was certain yet. But before that, they had agreed to celebrate both their anniversary and their new job. But before, they had woken up and realized that, that night, they would be celebrating seven years together. But before, they had been happy. That was before.”
(Gregorio Duvivier, 2013)

E1.6.A.1.5_REF2.1_LIT BUT AFTER
“They woke up and realized that that night they would be celebrating seven years together. They agreed to celebrate both: the anniversary and the new job. He said it was just an interview and that nothing was certain yet. She said she trusted him blindly. But he was turned down at the interview. He cried. She said she was very proud of the husband he was. They went to the supermarket and bought the best wine. They said it would be a beautiful evening. They left their children at his sister's house. They kissed. She suggested he open the wine. He tried and she complained that he doesn't even know how to open a wine. He asked why nothing he does is ever good. They kissed and apologized and promised not to fight. Her mother arrived by surprise. He said that was all he needed. Her mother asked if he had passed the job interview. He said she was an old woman. She said he'd put on weight. He asked his mother-in-law to leave, preferably without slamming the door. He said her mother was a cow. She said that her mother deserved respect, after all, she was the one who furnished the house: from the fan to the carpet. He said she didn't have to tell him that he couldn't afford a carpet. She said it wasn't her fault that he didn't have a job. He said he would spill all the wine on the carpet. She doubted it. He did. She asked him to clean up his mess. He told her to fuck off. She left the house slamming the door.”
(Rewind to forward translation of Gregorio Duvivier's text "But Before", 2013)

E1.6.A.1.5_REF3_CUR MUSE "Andrew Wyeth devoted some 240 paintings and drawings to Helga Testorf, his neighbor in Chadds Ford, Pennsylvania, who served as his secret muse, model, and companion between 1971 and 1985. In Refuge, the artist captures a pensive, solitary moment after a storm. Unbeknownst to the sitter, this was Wyeth's final work in the series, as Testorf's depression had taken a significant toll on Wyeth's ability to work with her. The artist noted, "I felt that with less 'composition' I could achieve the truth of a certain deep sadness that seemed to be always with Helga." To Wyeth, the snow clinging to the shellbark hickory tree represented the mysterious nature of Testorf's increasingly inward, distant relationship to the artist."
(Curatorship, Bruce Museum)

E1.6.A.1.6. IT IS SIMPLY THAT WE KNOW, BUT WE CANNOT BEAR TO SEE
"Everything is there on view, in fact, everything is visible very early on in a relationship just as it is in all honest, straightforward stories, you just have to look to see it, one single moment encapsulates the germ of many years to come, of almost our whole history — one grave, pregnant moment — and if we want to we can see it and, in broad terms, read it, there are not that many possible variations, the signs rarely deceive if we know how to read their meanings, if you are prepared to do so — but it is so difficult and can prove catastrophic; [...] it is simply that we know, but hate knowing; we cannot bear to see."

E1.6.A.1.6_REF1_LIT "EVERYTHING IS THERE ON VIEW, in fact, everything is visible very early on in a relationship just as it is in all honest, straightforward stories, you just have to look to see it, one single moment encapsulates the germ of many years to come, of almost our whole history — one grave, pregnant moment — and if we want to we can see it and, in broad terms, read it, there are not that many possible variations, the signs rarely deceive if we know how to read their meanings, if you are prepared to do so — but it is so difficult and can prove catastrophic; one day you spot an unmistakable gesture, see an unequivocal reaction, hear a tone of voice that says much and presages still more, although you also hear the sound of someone biting their tongue — too late; you feel on the back of your neck the nature or propensity of a look when that look knows itself to be invisible and protected and safe, so many are involuntary; you notice sweetness and impatience, you detect hidden intentions that are never entirely hidden, or unconscious intentions before they become conscious to the person who should be concealing them, sometimes you foresee what someone will do before that person has foreseen or known or even become aware of what this will be, and you can sense the betrayal as yet unformulated and the scorn as yet unfelt; and the feelings of irritation you provoke, the weariness you cause or the loathing you inspire, or perhaps the opposite, which is not necessarily any better: the unconditional love they feel for us, the other person’s ridiculously high hopes, their devotion, their eagerness to please and to prove themselves essential to us in order to supplant us later on and thus become who we are; and the need to possess, the illusions built up, the determination of someone to be or to stay by your side, or to win your heart, the crazed, irrational loyalty; you notice when there is real enthusiasm and when there is only flattery and when it is mixed (because nothing is pure), you know who isn’t trustworthy and who is ambitious and who has no scruples and who would walk over your dead body having first run you down, you know who has a candid soul and what will happen to these last when you meet them, the fate that awaits them if they don’t mend their ways, but grow still worse and even if they do mend their ways: you know if they will be your victims When you are introduced to a couple, married or not, you see who will one day abandon whom and you see this at once, as soon as you say hello, or, at least, by the end of the evening. You detect too when something is going wrong or falling apart, or flips right over and the tables are turned, when everything is collapsing, at what moment we stop loving as we once did or they stop loving us, who will or will not go to bed with us, and when a friend will discover his own envy, or, rather, decide to give in to it and allow himself to be led and guided from that moment on by envy alone; when it starts to ooze out or grow heavy with resentment; we know what it is about us that exasperates and infuriates and what condemns us, what we should have said, but did not, or what we should have kept silent about, but did not, why it is that suddenly one day they look at us with different eyes — dark or angry eyes: they already bear a grudge — when we disappoint or when we irritate because we do not as yet disappoint and so do not provide the desired excuse for our dismissal; we know the kind gesture that is suddenly no longer bearable and that signals the precise hour when we will become utterly and irredeemably unbearable; and we know, too, who is going to love us, until death and beyond and, much to our regret sometimes, beyond their death or mine or both… against our will sometimes… But no one wants to see anything and so hardly anyone ever sees what is there before them, what awaits us or will befall us sooner or later. [...]

This has nothing to do with premonitions, there is nothing supernatural or mysterious about it, what’s mysterious is that we pay no heed to it. And the explanation must be a simple one, since it is something shared by so many: it is simply that we know, but hate knowing; we cannot bear to see."
(Javier Marías, Your Face Tomorrow, 2002)

"Commenting on this text with my friend Eduardo Andrade, he noted that it is easy, after the fact of separation, to find indicators that would have predicted the outcome. However, when you are in the relationship, such readings are very difficult to make."
(Pierre Schindler)

E1.6.A.1.7. THE SOCIOLOGY OF LOVE
Eva Illouz argues that difficulties in modern romantic relationships are not just due to individual psychological issues, but also the systems and institutions influencing modern identities. She posits that sociology can effectively examine how modern life has changed the romantic self. Illouz suggests that the rise of secular culture in place of religion has affected the ideals and personal experience of love, which has led to less stable and secure romantic relationships. The emphasis on individualism and self-fulfillment in today's society has added to this instability, making it harder to find and maintain love.

E1.6.A.1.7.a. WHY LOVE HURTS
The Sociology of How Our Institutions Rather Than Our Personal Psychological Failings Shape the Romantic Agony of Modern Life [...] : When relationships do get formed, agonies do not fade away, as one may feel bored, anxious, or angry in them; have painful arguments and conflicts; or, finally, go through the confusion, self-doubts, and depression of break-ups or divorces…. Despite the widespread and almost collective character of these experiences, our culture insists they are the result of faulty or insufficiently mature psyches.

E1.6.A.1.7.a_REF1_PH "WHY LOVE HURTS: THE SOCIOLOGY OF HOW OUR INSTITUTIONS RATHER THAN OUR PERSONAL PSYCHOLOGICAL FAILINGS SHAPE THE ROMANTIC AGONY OF MODERN LIFE
In Why Love Hurts: A Sociological Explanation (public library), French-Moroccan sociologist Eva Illouz examines how the social organization of modern life has profoundly altered the hues and texture of our experience of romantic agony by transforming three elemental aspects of the self: “the will (how we want something), recognition (what matters for our sense of worth), and desire (what we long for and how we long for it).”
Although unrequited love and the anguish of longing have a perennial place in our experience of romantic pain, Illouz is concerned with the pain that lives within actualized romantic relationships. She writes:

"When relationships do get formed, agonies do not fade away, as one may feel bored, anxious, or angry in them; have painful arguments and conflicts; or, finally, go through the confusion, self-doubts, and depression of break-ups or divorces…. Despite the widespread and almost collective character of these experiences, our culture insists they are the result of faulty or insufficiently mature psyches."

The rise of clinical psychology in the twentieth century only solidified and granted scientific legitimacy to this notion that our romantic misery is a function of our psychological failings — an idea that caught on in large part because implicit to it was the promise that those failings can be deconditioned. And yet, Illouz argues, such overemphasis on individual shortcomings gravely warps the broader reality — a reality in which the systems, institutions, and social contracts that govern our existence seed the core ambivalence of love and life: what we really want. She writes:

"In the same way that at the end of the nineteenth century it was radical to claim that poverty was the result not of dubious morality or weak character, but of systematic economic exploitation, it is now urgent to claim not that the failures of our private lives are the result of weak psyches, but rather that the vagaries and miseries of our emotional life are shaped by institutional arrangements… What is wrong are not dysfunctional childhoods or insufficiently self-aware psyches, but the set of social and cultural tensions and contradictions that have come to structure modern selves and identities. […]
The reason why love is so central to our happiness and identity is not far from the reason why it is such a difficult aspect of our experience: both have to do with the ways in which self and identity are institutionalized in modernity… Love contains, mirrors, and amplifies the “entrapment” of the self in the institutions of modernity, institutions, to be sure, shaped by economic and gender relations." [...]

What Marx demonstrated about commodities in the marketplace Illouz aims to demonstrate about the economy of love:
"[Love] is shaped and produced by concrete social relations [and] circulates in a marketplace of unequal competing actors… Some people command greater capacity to define the terms in which they are loved than others."

Illouz argues that sociology — a discipline, more than any other, “born out of a frantic and anxious questioning about the meaning and consequences of modernity” — is the most revelatory lens through which to examine how modern life, marked by the period beginning at the end of WWI, has restructured the romantic self. Nearly a century after Bertrand Russell’s inquiry into why religion arose in human life and what is supplanting it, she considers how the displacement of religion by secular culture has impacted our ideals and our interior experience of love:

"Modernity sobered people up from the powerful but sweet delusions and illusions that had made the misery of their lives bearable. Devoid of these fantasies, we would lead our lives without commitment to higher principles and values, without the fervor and ecstasy of the sacred, without the heroism of saints, without the certainty and orderliness of divine commandments, but most of all without those fictions that console and beautify.
Such sobering up is nowhere more apparent than in the realm of love, which for several centuries in the history of Western Europe had been governed by the ideals of chivalry, gallantry, and romanticism. The male ideal of chivalry had one cardinal stipulation: to defend the weak with courage and loyalty. The weakness of women was thus contained in a cultural system in which it was acknowledged and glorified because it transfigured male power and female frailty into lovable qualities… Women’s social inferiority could thus be traded for men’s absolute devotion in love, which in turn served as the very site of display and exercise of their masculinity, prowess, and honor. More: women’s dispossession of economic and political rights was accompanied (and presumably compensated) by the reassurance that in love they were not only protected by men but also superior to them. It is therefore unsurprising that love has been historically so powerfully seductive to women; it promised them the moral status and dignity they were otherwise denied in society and it glorified their social fate: taking care of and loving others, as mothers, wives, and lovers. Thus, historically, love was highly seductive precisely because it concealed as it beautified the deep inequalities at the heart of gender relationships. […]
To perform gender identity and gender struggles is to perform the institutional and cultural core dilemmas and ambivalence of modernity, dilemmas that are organized around the key cultural and institutional motives of authenticity, autonomy, equality, freedom, commitment, and self-realization. To study love is not peripheral but central to the study of the core and foundation of modernity."

As sexuality became unmoored from morality, love became a currency for social mobility. Illouz places this shift alongside the Scientific Revolution, the invention of the printing press, and the rise of capitalism in its effects on our lives and our basic experience of identity. She writes:

"While love has played a considerable role in the formation of what historians call “affective individualism,” the story of love in modernity tends to present it as a heroic one, from bondage to freedom. When love triumphs, so this story goes, marriages of convenience and interest disappear, and individualism, autonomy, and freedom are triumphant. Nevertheless, while I agree that romantic love challenged both patriarchy and the family institution, the “pure relationship” also rendered the private sphere more volatile and the romantic consciousness unhappy. What makes love such a chronic source of discomfort, disorientation, and even despair … can be adequately explained only by sociology and by understanding the cultural and institutional core of modernity. […]
By juxtaposing the ideal of romantic love with the institution of marriage, modern polities embed social contradictions in our aspirations, contradictions which in turn take a psychological life. The institutional organization of marriage (predicated on monogamy, cohabitation, and the pooling of economic resources together in order to increase wealth) precludes the possibility of maintaining romantic love as an intense and all-consuming passion. Such a contradiction forces agents to perform a significant amount of cultural work in order to manage and reconcile the two competing cultural frames. This juxtaposition of two cultural frames in turn illustrates how the anger, frustration, and disappointment that often inhere in love and marriage have their basis in social and cultural arrangements."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings, review on Eva Illouz's Why Love Hurts: A Sociological Explanation, 2013)

E1.6.A.1.7.a_REF2_MU "MODERN LOVE" BY DAVID BOWIE, DESPITE ITS UPBEAT AND DANCEABLE SYNTH-POP SOUND, CARRIES A MESSAGE OF SKEPTICISM AND DISILLUSIONMENT WITH CONTEMPORARY RELATIONSHIPS and perhaps even modern life in general. The lyrics express a struggle to connect authentically in a world increasingly characterized by superficiality and fleeting connections.

Here's a breakdown of the key themes and messages:

Superficiality and Lack of Depth: The lines "There's no sign of life / It's just the power to charm" and "It's not really work / It's just the power to charm" suggest a critique of relationships built on mere charisma and outward appeal rather than genuine emotional investment and effort. The speaker observes a certain hollowness beneath the surface.

Resistance to Modern Love: The repeated refrain "Never gonna fall for (modern love)" is a clear declaration of the speaker's refusal to engage with or believe in this contemporary form of love. He sees it as something that "walks beside me," present in his environment, but ultimately "walks on by," never truly connecting.

The Conflicting Pull of Societal Norms: The lines associated with "church on time" ("Gets me to the church on time / Terrifies me / Makes me party") highlight the confusing and often contradictory pressures of modern society and relationships. The church, traditionally a symbol of commitment, is juxtaposed with terror and the fleeting pleasure of partying, suggesting a superficial adherence to societal expectations that lacks genuine conviction.

Rejection of Traditional Structures: The "God and man" lines ("Puts my trust in God and man / No confessions / No religion") indicate a rejection of traditional religious structures and perhaps even conventional human relationships as sources of solace or guidance. The speaker seems to be navigating a world where these traditional frameworks no longer provide meaningful answers.

A Sense of Isolation and Effort in Vain: Despite the speaker's attempts to engage ("But I never wave bye-bye / But I try / I try"), there's a sense of persistent isolation ("I'm standing in the wind"). His efforts to connect or conform seem futile in the face of this "modern love" he doesn't believe in.

The Catch-22 of Modern Connection: The song implies a paradox: modern love is all around, yet it feels inauthentic and ultimately unfulfilling. The speaker is aware of it, even participates on a surface level, but fundamentally rejects its premise.

In essence, "Modern Love" is a complex and somewhat cynical commentary on the nature of relationships in a rapidly evolving world. It captures a feeling of alienation and a yearning for something more genuine than the superficial connections the speaker observes and resists. The upbeat music creates an interesting tension with the lyrical content, perhaps mirroring the way people might outwardly engage in "modern love" while harboring deeper reservations."
(Gemini, interpretation of Modern Love by David Bowie, 15/05/2025)

E1.6.A.1.7.a_REF2.1_MU MODERN LOVE
"I know when to go out
And when to stay in
Get things done
I catch a paper boy
But things don't really change
I'm standing in the wind
But I never wave bye-bye
But I try
I try
There's no sign of life
It's just the power to charm
I'm lying in the rain
But I never wave bye-bye
But I try
I try
Never gonna fall for (modern love)
Walks beside me (modern love)
Walks on by (modern love)
Gets me to the church on time (church on time)
Terrifies me (church on time)
Makes me party (church on time)
Puts my trust in God and man (God and man)
No confessions (God and man)
No religion (God and man)
Don't believe in modern love
It's not really work
It's just the power to charm
I'm still standing in the wind
But I never wave bye-bye
But I try
I try
Never gonna fall for (modern love)
Walks beside me (modern love)
Walks on by (modern love)
Gets me to the church on time (church on time)
Terrifies me (church on time)
Makes me party (church on time)
Puts my trust in god and man (God and man)
No confessions (God and man)
No religion (God and man)
I don't believe in modern love
Modern love (modern love)
Modern love (modern love)
Modern love (modern love)
Modern love (modern love)
Modern love (modern love)
Modern love (modern love)
Modern love (modern love)
Modern love (modern love)
Modern love
Modern love
Modern love
Modern love
Modern love walks beside me (modern love)
Modern love walks on by (modern love)
Modern love walks beside me (modern love)
Modern love walks on by (modern love)
Never gonna fall for (modern love)
Modern love, modern love"
David Bowie, Modern Love (I Try, extended version), 1983

Listen to the song on YouTube: https://youtu.be/HivQqTtiHVw?si=9sUWTtD9i1e8P4ap

E1.6.A.1.7.b. LOVE IS OFTEN INFLUENCED BY SOCIAL CONVENTIONS AND SUBJECTED TO THE EXPECTATIONS OF OTHERS, WHICH CAN DICTATE OUR BEHAVIOR.

E1.6.A.1.7.b_REF1_PO "RATHER THAN THE MOORINGS OF FALSE LOVE that lasts
at anchor,
sheltered by calcified tenderness,
welcome to floating anchors, 
companions of drift, 
under the cold glance of the lighthouse's beam which winks in our sails. 
Rather than the sobbing hearts that remained on land in their brine,
in the embrace of forever friendly greetings 
welcome to the provisional bitter-loves."
(Michel Baglin, Alcohol of the Winds, 2010)

E1.6.A.1.7.b_REF2_SCI “MEN ACTUALLY CRAVE ROMANTIC RELATIONSHIPS MORE THAN WOMEN DO

Multiple-study analysis looks at why men’s emotional intimacy is much more difficult outside of romantic relationships.
Do you think women are more invested in romance than men? Rom-coms and women’s magazines may push this stereotype, but psychological research is increasingly telling a different story: multiple studies have suggested that men may actually place a greater importance on romantic relationships. Now researchers have identified a key behavioral factor that explains this surprising difference.
Drawing on more than 50 studies of mixed-gender relationships, researchers at Humboldt University of Berlin, the University of Minnesota and Vrije University Amsterdam proposed that men, compared with women, expect to gain more from being in a romantic relationship and are thus more motivated to find a partner. According to multiple anonymous surveys, men also tend to experience greater mental and physical health benefits from being in a relationship, are less likely to initiate breakups and struggle more with the emotional toll of a breakup, the researchers wrote in Behavioral and Brain Sciences.  Elaine Hoan, who studies social psychology at the University of Toronto, says these observations align with a trend she has seen in her own research: “that single men are typically less happy with their singlehood than single women, even across different Western and Eastern cultural contexts.”  The authors of the new paper suggest that men’s greater dependence on romantic relationships stems from differences in emotional expression, which can often be traced back to childhood. One study in the analysis found that U.S. adults view three-year-old boys who are described as caring and emotional as less likable than boys with stereotypically-masculine traits. Other studies showed that parents emphasize language related to sadness and emotions more with daughters and reward them for expressing sadness while punishing sons for the same behavior.

“From an early age, boys are discouraged from expressing vulnerability,” says Humboldt University social psychologist Iris Wahring, lead author of the new Behavioral and Brain Sciences paper. And this social norm “continues into adulthood.” This makes men less likely to seek emotional support from friends and family compared with women. As a result, men rely more heavily on their romantic partners to fulfill these needs. Women, on the other hand, seek emotional support from a wider social network and tend to be less reliant on romantic partners.

Mariko Visserman, a psychologist at the University of Sussex in England, says the review “does a wonderful job in explaining how gendered norms and experiences early in life can set the stage for the differences between men and women’s relationship benefits and vulnerabilities later on.”

The key takeaway is “that we all need to feel embedded in a supportive network of relationships,” Visserman says. She adds that it’s wise to invest in relationships beyond romantic partnerships—both to have a support system when a romantic relationship goes through a rough patch or ends and to meet various emotional needs.

An important implication of these findings is the need to foster a culture in which men feel encouraged to build strong, emotionally supportive friendships outside of romance, Hoan says—noting that “this means challenging traditional gender norms that stigmatize male vulnerability and promoting the value of more meaningful friendships for men.”
(Clarissa Brincat, Scientific American, February 14, 2025)

Read it in Scientific American: https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/men-actually-crave-romantic-relationships-more-than-women-do/?ref=refind

E1.6.A.1.7.c. ANOTHER CONVENTION WHICH IS A TRAP IS THAT OF THE RELATIONSHIP LIMITED TO SEXUAL INTERCOURSE

E1.6.A.1.7.c_REF1_CUR JENNY HOLZER INTERPELLE LE PASSANT DANS UNE RUE DE NEW YORK en l'adjoignant de se demander quelle désir pourra nous sauver maintenant que le sexe ne le peut plus? 
Après la libération sexuelle des années 60-70, force est de constater qu'aussi profond que puisse être l'état érotique, il n'est pas une garantie de réalisation de soi - pas une garantie d'un amour pérenne qui nous sauverait: "La grande, la tragique illusion des âmes aimantes, c'est de voir dans la profondeur de l'état erotique une garantie pour sa durée." (Ludwig Klages) 

E1.6.A.1.8. WITHOUT CONSTRUCTION, LOVE NEVER LASTS
Rainer Maria Rilke asserts that lovers risk getting lost in conventions unless they individually strive to transform their love "into a relation that is meant to be of one human being to another, no longer of man to woman". This transformation requires continual work and growth.

E1.6.A.1.8_REF1_LIT "TO LOVE IS GOOD, TOO: LOVE BEING DIFFICULT. For one human being to love another: that is perhaps the most difficult of all our tasks, the ultimate, the last test and proof, the work foj which all other work is but preparation. For this reason young people, who are beginners in everything, cannot yet know love: they have to learn it. With their whole be ing, with all their forces, gathered close about their lonely, timid, upward-beating heart, they must learn to love. But leaming-time is always a long, secluded time, and so loving^ for a long while ahead and far od into life, is—solitude, intensified and deepened loneness for him who loves. Love is at first not anything that means merging, giving over, and uniting with another (for what would a union be of something unclarified and unfinished, still subordinate—?), it is a high inducement to the individual to ripen, to become something in him self, to become world, to become world for him self for another’s sake, it is a great exacting claim upon him, something that chooses him out and calls him to vast things. Only in this sense, as the task of working at themselves (“to hearken and to hammer day and night”), might young people use the love that is given them. Merging and sur rendering and every kind of communion is not for them (who must save and gather for a long, long time still), is the ultimate, is perhaps that for which human lives as yet scarcely suffice.
But young people err so often and so grievously in this: that they (in whose nature it lies to have no patience) fling themselves at each other, when love takes possession of them, scatter themselves, just as they are, in all their untidiness, disorder, confusion. . . . And then what? What is life to do to this heap of half-battered existence which they call their communion and which they would gladly call their happiness, if it were possible, and their future? Thus each loses himself for the sake of the other and loses the other and many others that wanted still to come. And loses the expanses and the possibilities, exchanges the approach and flight of gentle, divining things for an unfruitful perplexity out of which nothing can come any more, nothing save a little disgust, disillusionment and poverty, and rescue in one of the many conventions that have been put up in great number like public refuges along this most dangerous road. No realm of human experience is so well provided with conventions as this: life-preservers of most varied invention, boats and swimming-bladders are here; the social conception has managed to supply shelters of every sort, for, as it was disposed to take love-life as a pleasure, it had also to give it an easy form, cheap, safe and sure, as public pleasures are. It is true that many young people who love wrongly, that is, simply with abandon and unsoli- tarily (the average will of course always go on doing so), feel the oppressiveness of a failure and want to make the situation in which they have landed viable and fruitful in their own personal way—; for their nature tells them that, less even than all else that is important, can questions of love be solved publicly and according to this or that agreement; that they are questions, intimate questions from one human being to another, which in any case demand a new, special, only personal answer—: but how should they, who have already flung themselves together and no longer mark off and distinguish themselves from each other, who therefore no longer possess anything of their own selves, be able to find a way out of themselves, out of the depth of their already shattered solitude?
They act out of common helplessness, and then, if, with the best intentions, they try to avoid the convention that occurs to them (say, marriage), they land in the tentacles of some less loud, but equally deadly conventional solution; for then everything far around them is—convention; where people act out of a prematurely fused, turbid com munion, every move is convention: every rela tion to which such entanglement leads has its con vention, be it ever so unusual (that is, in the or dinary sense immoral); why, even separation would here be a conventional step, an impersonal chance decision without strength and without fruit Whoever looks seriously at it finds that neither for death, which ls difficult, nor for difficult love has any explanation, any solution, any hint or way yet been discerned; and for these two problems that we carry wrapped up and hand on without opening, it will not be possible to discover any general rule resting in agreement But in the same measure in which we begin as individuals to put life to the test, we shall, being individuals, meet these great tilings at closer range. The demands which the difficult work of love makes upon our development are more than life-size, and as be ginners we are not up to them. But if we never theless hold out and take this love upon us as bur den and apprenticeship, instead of losing ourselves in all the light and frivolous play, behind which people have hidden from the most earnestness of their existence—then a little progress and an alleviation will perhaps be perceptible to those who come long after us; that would be much. [...]
This advance will (at first much against the will of the outstripped men) change the love-experience, which is now full of error, will alter it from the ground up, reshape it into a relation that is meant to be of one human being to another, no longer of man to woman. And this more human love (that will fulfill itself, infinitely considerate and gentle, and kind and clear in binding and releas ing) will resemble that which we are preparing with struggle and toil, the love that consists in this, that two solitudes protect and border and salute each other. 59And this further: do not believe that that great love once enjoined upon you, the boy, was lost; can you say whether great and good desires did not ripen in you at the time, and resolutions by which you are still living today? I believe that that love remains so strong and powerful in your memory be cause it was your first deep being-alone and the first inward work you did on your life."
(Rainer-Maria Rilke, Letter to a young poet, 1903-1908)

E1.6.A.1.8_REF2_PH "LOVING-KINDNESS IS NOT ONLY THE DESIRE TO MAKE SOMEONE HAPPY, to bring joy to a beloved person; it is the ability to bring joy and happiness to the person you love, because even if your intention is to love this person, your love might make him or her suffer.

Training is needed in order to love properly; and to be able to give happiness and joy, you must practice deep looking directed toward the person you love. Because if you do not understand this person, you cannot love properly. Understanding is the essence of love. If you cannot understand, you cannot love. That is the message of the Buddha."
(Thich Nhat Hanh, True Love: A Practice for Awakening the Heart, 1997)

E1.6.A.1.8_REF2.1_PH "WHILE MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING IS THE WELLSPRING OF LOVE, the turbid confusion of understanding ourselves often stands in its way. “It is a fault to wish to be understood before we have made ourselves clear to ourselves,” Simone Weil admonished in her superb meditation on the paradoxes of friendship. “If you don’t understand yourself you don’t understand anybody else,” the young Nikki Giovanni told James Baldwin in their forgotten conversation about the language of love. Nothing does more damage in love than a paucity of self-knowledge. (“To love without knowing how to love wounds the person we love,” Thich Hhat Hanh would later caution.) Without self-knowledge, so much of what we mistake for desire, for devotion, for understanding is mere projection, a chimera of our patterned past keeping us from true presence with the reality of the other.

In Buddhist practice, nothing removes the screen of confusion and anneals the mind more effectively than meditation — the supreme instrument of self-understanding, out of which springs the unselfing necessary for true love."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.6.A.1.8_REF2.2_PH "MEDITATION IS THE PRACTICE OF LOOKING DEEPLY INTO THE NATURE OF YOUR SUFFERING AND YOUR JOY. Through the energy of mindfulness, through concentration, looking deeply into the nature of our suffering makes it possible for us to see the deep causes of that suffering. If you can keep mindfulness and concentration alive, then looking deeply will reveal to you the true nature of your pain. And freedom will arise as a result of your sustaining a deep vision into the nature of your pain. Solidity, freedom, calm, and joy are the fruits of meditation."
(Thich Nhat Hanh, True Love: A Practice for Awakening the Heart, 1997)

E1.6.A.1.8_REF3_PH PERSONAL IDENTITY THROUGH LIFE STAGES, EVOLVES FROM EXTERNAL PROJECTIONS TO SELF-AWARENESS IN MIDLIFE. This shift involves recognizing and reclaiming unacknowledged parts of oneself, particularly in the context of love.
"Hollis envisions [our] shifting identities as a change of axes, moving from the parent-child axis of early life to the ego-world axis of young adulthood to the ego-Self axis of the Middle Passage — a time when “the humbled ego begins the dialogue with the Self.” [...]

These shifting axes are marked by several “sea-changes of the soul,” the most important of which is the withdrawal of projections — those mental figments that “embody what is unclaimed or unknown within ourselves,” born of the tendency to superimpose the unconscious on external objects, nowhere more pronounced than in love: What is so often mistaken for love of another is a projection of the unloved parts of oneself.

Drawing on the work of Jungian psychologist Marie-Louise von Franz, Hollis describes the five stages of projection — a framework strikingly similar to the seven stages of falling in and out of love that Stendhal outlined two centuries ago. "
(Maria Popova's review on James Hollis's The Middle Passage: From Misery to Meaning in Midlife, in The Marginalian)

E1.6.A.1.8_REF3.1_PH WHEN AN INDIVIDUAL’S TRANSFORMATIVE PROCESS INVOLVES ACKNOWLEDGING THE DISCREPANCY BETWEEN REALITY AND PROJECTED IMAGES, ACCEPTING PERSONAL ERRORS, AND SEEKING THE ORIGIN OF THESE PROJECTIONS WITHIN ONESELF, our relationships with others improve as we improve our relationship with ourselves. By letting go of projections, individuals can appreciate their partners' otherness, creating a relationship that transcends individual limitations and fosters inner growth.
"First, the person is convinced that the inner (that is, unconscious) experience is truly outer. Second, there is a gradual recognition of the discrepancy between the reality and the projected image… Third, one is required to acknowledge this discrepancy. Fourth, one is driven to conclude one was somehow in error originally. And, fifth, one must search for the origin of the projection energy within oneself. This last stage, the search for the meaning of the projection, always involves a search for a greater knowledge of oneself. [...]

The loss of hope that the outer will save us occasions the possibility that we shall have to save ourselves… Life has a way of dissolving projections and one must, amid the disappointment and desolation, begin to take on the responsibility for one’s own life… Only when one has acknowledged the deflation of the hopes and expectations of childhood and accepted direct responsibility for finding meaning for oneself, can the second adulthood begin. [...]

We learn through the deflation of the persona world that we have lived provisionally; the integration of inner truths, joyful or unpleasant, is necessary to bring new life and the restoration of purpose. […]

The truth about intimate relationships is that they can never be any better than our relationship with ourselves. How we are related to ourselves determines not only the choice of the Other but the quality of the relationship… All relationships… are symptomatic of the state of our inner life, and no relationship can be any better than our relationship to our own unconscious. [...]

When one has let go of the projections and the great hidden agenda, then one can be enlarged by the otherness of the partner. One plus one does not equal One, as in the fusion model; it equals three — the two as separate beings whose relationship forms a third which obliges them to stretch beyond their individual limitations. Moreover, by relinquishing projections and placing the emphasis on inner growth, one begins to encounter the immensity of one’s own soul. The Other helps us expand the possibilities of the psyche. […]

Loving the otherness of the partner is a transcendent event, for one enters the true mystery of relationship in which one is taken to the third place — not you plus me, but we who are more than ourselves with each other."
(James Hollis, The Middle Passage: From Misery to Meaning in Midlife, 1993) 

E1.6.A.1.8_REF4_PH “Whether a relationship ends up rewiring or deepening unhealthy attachment patterns encoded early in life depends largely on the expectations we bring to it, and can change from one to the other as the expectations change. When we approach one another with curiosity and care without the expectation of curing each other, something paradoxical and miraculous may happen — the care may become the cure. The Latin of the word “cure” — cūra* — means “anxiety,” which is also the root of “care” (to have cares, to be anxious), “curiosity” (an anxious inquisitiveness), and “secure” (without anxiety and care). […]

Winnicott placed at the center of a healthy and secure relationship — between a therapist and a patient, as much as between two private human beings — what he termed *care-cure*.  […] In spelling out the primary qualities of a true care-cure relationship — it must be non-moralistic, truthful, and reliable — Winnicott places especial emphasis on reliability as a way of protecting the other from unpredictability, since the root of suffering for many is that “they have been subjected as part of the pattern of their lives to the unpredictable.” 

Winnicott considers the cost of unpredictability:
”Behind unpredictability lies mental confusion, and behind that there can be found chaos in terms of somatic functioning, i.e. unthinkable anxiety that is physical.”

To be capable of a care-cure relationship, with all its requisite predictability, one must therefore be free of mental confusion and balanced enough to show up in a reliable way. Winnicott offers a definition of a healthy mind that doubles as a fundamental definition of healthy love:

“A sign of health in the mind is the ability of one individual to enter imaginatively and yet accurately into the thoughts and feelings and hopes and fears of another person; also to allow the other person to do the same to us.”

This imaginative interpenetration of experience is necessary for the greatest challenge of consciousness — understanding what it is like to be another. Without it, there can be no love, for we cannot love whom we do not understand — then we are pseudo-loving a projection. A sign of healthy love, therefore, is the ability to be reliable and responsible with — which is different from being responsible for — the thoughts and feelings and hopes and fears of the other.”
(Maria Popova’s review of Donald Winnicott’s Home Is Where We Start from: Essays by a Psychoanalyst, 2021 in The Marginalian)

E1.6.A.1.8_REF5_PH “HOW TO SEE MORE CLEARLY AND LOVE MORE PURELY: IRIS MURDOCH ON THE ANGST OF NOT KNOWING OURSELVES AND EACH OTHER. One of the hardest things to learn in life is that the heart is a clock too fast not to break. We lurch into loving, only to discover again and again that it takes a long time to know people, to understand people — and [“understanding is love’s other name.”]Even without intentional deception, people will surprise you, will shock you, will hurt you — not out of malice, but out of the incompleteness of their own self-knowledge, which continually leads them to surprise themselves. More often than not, when someone breaks a promise, it is because they believed themselves to be the kind of person who could keep it and found themselves to be a person who could not. If we live long enough and honestly enough, we will all find ourselves in that position eventually, for in the lifelong project of understanding ourselves, we are all reluctant visitors to the dusky and desolate haunts of our own nature, where shadows we do not want to meet dwell. But in any human association that has earned the right use the word love, we must be in relationship with both the light and the shadow in ourselves and each other. All authentic relationship is therefore a matter of clear sight — of seeing through the shining pane of the other’s self-concealment and removing the mirror of our own projections. […]
It is, of course, impossible to ever fully know what it is like to be someone else — this is the cost of consciousness, singular and secretive as it is; impossible, too, to fully convey to another what it is like to be you. The dream of perfectly clear vision is indeed just a dream. But we can always see a little more clearly in order to love a little more purely. Paradoxically, while our illusions about ourselves and others are the work of fantasy, seeing clearly is the work of the imagination — of the willingness to investigate imaginatively what lives behind the masks people wear, what hides in our own blind spots.”
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

“People are so very secretive. Sometimes it is said, “Those characters and that novel are purely fantastic — nobody in real life is like that.” But people in real life are very, very odd, as soon as one gets to know them at all well, and they conceal this fact because they are frightened of appearing eccentric or shocking… What are other people really like? What goes on inside their minds? What goes on inside their houses? […]
Imagination, as opposed to fantasy, is the ability to see the other thing, what one might call, to use those old-fashioned words, nature, reality, the world… Imagination is a kind of freedom, a renewed ability to perceive and express the truth. […]
(Iris Murdoch, Existentialists and Mystics: Writings on Philosophy and Literature)

E1.6.A.1.8_REF6_PO “PROVERBS OF HAPPINESS
1. Happiness is another term for inner peace.
2. One achieves inner peace through harmony between
what one does and what one believes.
3. Thus while outer events might make one happy or
sad, happiness itself is entirely internal, and at all
times completely within one's power.
4. This does not mean, however, that happiness is easy.
It requires wisdom, discipline, and love.
5. Wisdom comes slowly, through the scrupulous
pursuit of truth over time. Thus what one believes is
never certain, but can always be sincere.
6. Discipline enables one to acquire habits in tune
with one's beliefs. Behavior flows from character,
which, like a mansion, is built of thousands of details,
or acts, each judged not only for itself but for its
contribution to the whole.
7. Love is the choice to open one's arms to life,
enabling one to embrace imperfection. From it flow
empathy, compassion, generosity, and acceptance. The
opposite of love is fear.
8. To be happy, one must love oneself as well as others.
9. Because inner peace or harmony is never perfect,
happiness is never achieved, and is always a question
of more or less.
10. The inner and outer worlds are mirrors. How one
shapes one's inner world through will shapes one's
perception of the outer world. Thus an unhappy
person is likely to perceive a world of lust, greed, and
lies, whereas a happy one is likely to perceive a world
of people struggling in the grip of love.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E1.6.A.1.9. SEPARATIONS AND UNREQUITED LOVE
The generous individual understands that suffering is part of a good life, and thus can endure the pain of separations and unrequited love.
Intimate relationships inherently carry risks due to the vulnerability and lack of control they involve. The potential for serious harm is ever-present, making anger a common human temptation. If vulnerability is a necessary side effect of valuing love, then grief is often justified and valuable. However, this does not necessarily mean that anger is justified.

E1.6.A.1.9_REF1_PH "HEARTBREAK is unpreventable; the natural outcome of caring for people and things over which we have no control…
Heartbreak begins the moment we are asked to let go but cannot, in other words, it colors and inhabits and magnifies each and every day; heartbreak is not a visitation, but a path that human beings follow through even the most average life. Heartbreak is an indication of our sincerity: in a love relationship, in a life’s work, in trying to learn a musical instrument, in the attempt to shape a better more generous self. Heartbreak is the beautifully helpless side of love and affection and is [an] essence and emblem of care… Heartbreak has its own way of inhabiting time and its own beautiful and trying patience in coming and going. [...]
Heartbreak is how we mature; yet we use the word heartbreak as if it only occurs when things have gone wrong: an unrequited love, a shattered dream… But heartbreak may be the very essence of being human, of being on the journey from here to there, and of coming to care deeply for what we find along the way. […]
There is almost no path a human being can follow that does not lead to heartbreak. [...]
Realizing its inescapable nature, we can see heartbreak not as the end of the road or the cessation of hope but as the close embrace of the essence of what we have wanted or are about to lose."
(David Whyte , Consolations: The Solace, Nourishment and Underlying Meaning of Everyday Words)

E1.6.A.1.9_REF2_PH "UNREQUITED love is the love human beings experience most of the time. The very need to be fully requited may be to turn from the possibilities of love itself. Men and women have always had difficulty with the way a love returned hardly ever resembles a love given, but unrequited love may be the form that love mostly takes; for what affection is ever returned over time in the same measure or quality with which it is given? … And whom could we know so well and so intimately through all the twists and turns of a given life that we could show them exactly, the continuous and appropriate form of affection they need? […]
The great discipline seems to be to give up wanting to control the manner in which we are requited, and to forgo the natural disappointment that flows from expecting an exact and measured reciprocation. [...]
We seem to have been born into a world where love, except for brilliant, exceptional moments, seems to exist from one side only, ours — and that may be the difficulty and the revelation and the gift — to see love as the ultimate letting go and through the doorway of that affection, make the most difficult sacrifice of all, giving away the very thing we want to hold forever. [...]
Love may be sanctified and ennobled by its commitment to the unconditional horizon of perfection, but what makes love real in the human world seems to be our moving, struggling conversation with that wanted horizon rather than any possibility of arrival. The hope for, or the declaration of a purely spiritual, unconditional love is more often a coded desire for immunity and safety, an attempt to forgo the trials of vulnerability, powerlessness and the exquisite pain to which we apprentice ourselves in a relationship, a marriage, in raising children, in a work we love and desire. […]
The hope for unconditional love is the hope for a different life than the one we have been given. Love is the conversation between possible, searing disappointment and a profoundly imagined sense of arrival and fulfillment; how we shape that conversation is the touchstone of our ability to love in the real inhabited world. The true signature and perhaps even the miracle of human love is helplessness, and all the more miraculous because it is a helplessness which we wittingly or unwittingly choose; in our love of a child, a partner, a work, or a road we have to take against the odds."
(David Whyte , Consolations: The Solace, Nourishment and Underlying Meaning of Everyday Words)

E1.6.A.1.9_REF3_PO "SOMETIMES WITH ONE I LOVE
Sometimes with one I love I fill myself with rage for fear I effuse unreturn’d love,
But now I think there is no unreturn’d love, the pay is certain one way or another,
(I loved a certain person ardently and my love was not return’d,
Yet out of that I have written these songs.)"
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.6.A.1.9_REF4_PH TRUST INVOLVES THE BELIEF THAT SOMEONE WILL FULFILL THEIR COMMITMENTS and the emotional recognition of their importance for one's well-being. However, it also involves a degree of vulnerability and helplessness. Trust can evoke emotions such as hope, fear, and grief if things go wrong. Anger is often a reaction to feelings of helplessness and vulnerability but can hinder the process of mourning and moving forward if it becomes a substitute for grief. Insecurity and a desire for control can also contribute to anger in relationships, yet attempting to control others only amplifies insecurity. The ability to trust and be vulnerable is important in intimate relationships, but maintaining them can be challenging and requires effort.

E1.6.A.1.9_REF4.1_PH TRUST INVOLVES A DEEP EMOTIONAL INVESTMENT AND THE RISK OF BETRAYAL, LEADING TO PROFOUND HARM. "Trust … is different from mere reliance. One may rely on an alarm clock, and to that extent be disappointed if it fails to do its job, but one does not feel deeply vulnerable, or profoundly invaded by the failure. Similarly, one may rely on a dishonest colleague to continue lying and cheating, but this is reason, precisely, not to trust that person; instead, one will try to protect oneself from damage. Trust, by contrast, involves opening oneself to the possibility of betrayal, hence to a very deep form of harm. It means relaxing the self-protective strategies with which we usually go through life, attaching great importance to actions by the other over which one has little control. It means, then, living with a certain degree of helplessness.

Is trust a matter of belief or emotion? Both, in complexly related ways. Trusting someone, one believes that she will keep her commitments, and at the same time one appraises those commitments as very important for one’s own flourishing. But that latter appraisal is a key constituent part of a number of emotions, including hope, fear, and, if things go wrong, deep grief and loss. Trust is probably not identical to those emotions, but under normal circumstances of life it often proves sufficient for them. One also typically has other related emotions toward a person whom one trusts, such as love and concern. Although one typically does not decide to trust in a deliberate way, the willingness to be in someone else’s hands is a kind of choice, since one can certainly live without that type of dependency… Living with trust involves profound vulnerability and some helplessness, which may easily be deflected into anger. [...]

Anger is such a large and corrosive problem that much of the literature focuses on how to manage it so that it does not destroy one’s entire life. And it is especially here that there’s a widespread feeling that, bad though anger is, people (and women especially) owe it to their self-respect to own, nourish, and publicly proclaim their anger. [...]
Such breakdowns typically, and rightly, involve deep grief, and grief needs to be dealt with. Grief is amply warranted: intimate relationships are very important parts of a flourishing life. (Here the Stoics are wrong.) But grief, and the helplessness it typically brings with it, are usually not well addressed by allowing anger to take the center of the stage. All too often, anger becomes an alluring substitute for grieving, promising agency and control when one’s real situation does not offer control… The way to deal with grief is just what one might expect: mourning and, eventually, constructive forward-looking action to repair and pursue one’s life. Anger is often well-grounded, but it is too easy for it to hijack the necessary mourning process. So a Transition from anger to mourning — and, eventually, to thoughts of the future — is to be strongly preferred to anger nourished and cultivated. [...]

It’s clear that there will be more strains when people are inflexible and intolerant, seeing every divergence from what they want as a threat… Anger will also be more common when one or more of the parties feels a lot of insecurity, because so many things can seem threatening, including, indeed, the sheer independent existence of the other person. (Proust makes the point that for a deeply insecure person, the other person’s very independent will is a source of torment and, often, rage.) A good deal of marital anger is really about this desire for control — and since such projects are doomed, that sort of anger is likely to be especially hard to eradicate. Intimacy is scary, and it makes people helpless, since deep hurt can be inflicted by the independent choices of someone else; so, as with other forms of helplessness, people respond by seeking control through anger. People never dispel their own insecurity by controlling someone else or making that person suffer, but many people try — and try again. Furthermore, people are adept rationalizers, so insecure people seeking control are good at coming up with a rational account of what the other person has done wrong… [...]

[Anger] diverts one’s thoughts from the real problem to something in the past that cannot be changed. It makes one think that progress will have been made if the betrayer suffers, when, in reality, this does nothing to solve the real problem. It eats up the personality and makes the person quite unpleasant to be with. It impedes useful introspection. It becomes its own project, displacing or forestalling other useful projects. And importantly, it almost always makes the relationship with the other person worse. There was something likable about the person, and even if marriage is no longer possible or desirable, some other form of connection might still be, and might contribute to happiness. Or it might not. But the whole question cannot be considered if angry thoughts and wishes fill up the mental landscape. Far from being required in order to shore up one’s own self-respect, anger actually impedes the assertion of self-respect in worthwhile actions and a meaningful life. [...]

Being heard and acknowledged is a reasonable wish on the part of the wronged party, and asking for truth and understanding is not the same thing as asking for payback. Indeed, it often helps the Transition. However, often the extraction of acknowledgment shades over unpleasantly into payback and even humiliation, and this temptation should be avoided. [...]

Intimate relationships are perilous because of the exposure and lack of control they involve. Being seriously wronged is a constant possibility, and anger, therefore, a constant and profoundly human temptation. If vulnerability is a necessary consequence of giving love its proper value, then grief is often right and valuable. It does not follow, however, that anger is so."
(Martha Nussbaum, Anger and Forgiveness: Resentment, Generosity, Justice)

E1.6.A.1.9_REF4.2_PH "THE WEIGHT OF THE WORLD
           IS LOVE.
Under the burden
          of solitude, 
under the burden 
          of dissatisfaction 
          the weight,
the weight we carry 
          is love."
(Allen Ginsberg, Song, San Jose, 1954)

E1.6.A.1.9_REF5_LIT "YOU ARE BORN ALONE. YOU DIE ALONE. THE VALUE OF THE SPACE IN BETWEEN IS TRUST AND LOVE. That is why geometrically speaking the circle is a one. Everything comes to you from the other. You have to be able to reach the other. If not you are alone…"
(Louise Bourgeois, Diary)

E1.6.A.1.9_REF6_LIT "HOW MUCH TRUST AND LOVE WE WREST FROM LIFE AND LAVISH UPON LIFE IS LARGELY A MATTER OF HOW WELL WE HAVE BEFRIENDED OUR EXISTENTIAL LONELINESS — a fundamental fact of every human existence that coexists with our delicate interconnectedness, each a parallel dimension of our lived reality, each pulsating beneath our days."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.6.A.1.9_REF7_LIT BELL HOOKS DESCRIBES HER PROFOUND GRIEF AND DESPAIR AFTER HER LONG-TERM PARTNER LEFT HER, EXPRESSING A DEEP FEAR THAT LOVE MAY NOT EXIST OR BE FOUND AGAIN [After her partner of fifteen years left her, Bell Hooks goes through a period of heartache amplified by the doubt that love may not exist.]:
"My grief was a heavy, despairing sadness caused by parting from a companion of many years but, more important, it was a despair rooted in the fear that love did not exist, could not be found. And even if it were lurking somewhere, I might never know it in my lifetime. It had become hard for me to continue to believe in love’s promise when everywhere I turned the enchantment of power or the terror of fear overshadowed the will to love."
(Bell Hooks,  All About Love, 2000)

E1.6.A.1.9_REF8_PO "WHEN THE ROSES SPEAK, I PAY ATTENTION

"As long as we are able to 
be extravagant we will be 
hugely and damply
 extravagant. Then we will drop 
foil by foil to the ground. This 
is our unalterable task, and we do it 
joyfully."

And they went on. "Listen, 
the heart-shackles are not, as you think, 
death, illness, pain, 
unrequited hope, not loneliness, but

lassitude, rue, vainglory, fear, anxiety, 
selfishness."

Their fragrance all the while rising 
from their blind bodies, making me 
spin with joy."
(Mary Oliver, Thirst, 2006)

E1.6.A.1.9_REF9_PH ON THE IMPORTANCE OF CHANGING ONE'S SELF-PERCEPTION TO OVERCOME FEELINGS OF BEING BURDENED BY PAST TREACHERY IN A RELATIONSHIP "If, for decades, an anchor served a ship, which one day decided to cut its chains and sail away, can the drowning anchor grow wings? And if so, will the anchor always be burdened by the weight of having been used?
TOM, TEL AVIV, ISRAEL

Dear Tom,

An anchor without a ship is just a useless lump of iron that lies at the bottom of the sea. An anchor serves no purpose once the ship has set sail.

In my song ‘Waiting for You’ I wrote —

 

Your body is my anchor

I never asked to be freed

 

— and even though the context is different I understand the painful place you are in and I in no way want to diminish it, however, your current state is ultimately unsustainable and, well, seeing as we are dealing in metaphors there is no reason we can’t at least entertain the possibility that you might be a ship that just thinks it is an anchor.

The revealing part of your question is the last few words “burdened by the weight of having been used”. If you continue to see yourself in this self-defeating light, whether it is true or not, you will remain that twisted lump of metal at the bottom of the ocean.

My wish for you, my friend — and all the other abandoned anchors that write to me from the ocean floor — is that a time will come when you can reimagine yourself, not as the poor old stalwart anchor rusting on the sea bottom, but as a fucking ship and get back on the surface of the water and do what ships do — venture forth and begin again the strange, dangerous, glorious, storm-tossed voyage of life!

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #114 / SEPTEMBER 2020)

Read it on the The Red Hand Files: https://www.theredhandfiles.com/anchor-grow-wings/

E1.6.A.1.9_REF10_PH THE ONLY WAY TO AVOID HEARTBREAK IS TO AVOID LOVE ENTIRELY, BUT DOING SO WOULD MEAN REJECTING LIFE ITSELF. Loving deeply and recklessly is a fundamental human duty that enriches life and the world.
"I'm 17 years old, what can you tell me about love?
MAURO, LEUVEN, BELGIUM

How do I not have my heart broken?
JENNY, PARIS, FRANCE

Dear Mauro and Jenny,

The surest way to avoid a broken heart is to love nothing and no-one — not your partner, your child, your mother or father, your brothers or sisters; not your friends; not your neighbour; not your dog or your cat; not your football team, your garden, your granny or your job. In short, love not the world and love nothing in it. Beware of the things that draw you to love — music, art, literature, cinema, philosophy, nature and religion. Keep your heart narrow, hard, cynical, invulnerable, impenetrable, and shun small acts of kindness; be not merciful, forgiving, generous or charitable — these acts expand the heart and make you susceptible to love — because as Neil Young so plainly and painfully sings, 'Only love can break your heart.' In short, resist love, because real love, big love, true love, fierce love, is a perilous thing, and travels surely towards its devastation. A broken heart — that grief of love — is always love’s true destination. This is the covenant of love.

However, Mauro, to resist love and inoculate yourself against heartbreak is to reject life itself, for to love is your primary human function. It is your duty to love in whatever way you can, and to move boldly into that love — deeply, dangerously and recklessly — and restore the world with your awe and wonder. This world is in urgent need — desperate, crucial need — and is crying out for love, your love. It cannot survive without it.

To love the world is a participatory and reciprocal action — for what you give to the world, the world returns to you, many fold, and you will live days of love that will make your head spin, that you will treasure for all time. You will discover that love, radical love, is a kind of supercharged aliveness, and all that is of true value in the world is animated by it. And, yes, heartache awaits love’s end, but you find in time that this too is a gift — this little death — from which you are reborn, time and again. I have only one piece of advice for you both, and it is the very best that I can give. Love. The world is waiting.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, #177 / DECEMBER 2021)

Read it on the The Red Hand Files: https://www.theredhandfiles.com/are-you-honest-with-yourself/

E1.6.A.1.9_REF11_CUR "SO MUCH ORIGINALITY IN THIS STILL LIFE! The woman hidden behind her fan - legs crossed to illustrate her refusal - seems to be the object of the painter's unsatisfiable desire. She takes refuge out of reach in a boudoir whose door is ajar for the time of the portrait - a bunch of keys are still in the lock. The painter is condemned to look at her from afar - like Saturn that he observes through a telescope; his desire remains gaping like the screaming mouth of the phallic-like vase lying on the ground. The title of the work carefully avoids saying the essential - reality is too frustrating."
(Pierre Schindler)

E1.6.A.1.9_REF12_PO "I GOT SO I COULD TAKE HIS NAME -
Without - Tremendous gain -
That Stop-sensation - on my Soul -
And Thunder - in the Room -

I got so I could walk across 
That Angle in the floor,
Where he turned so, and I turned - how -
And all our Sinew tore -

I! got so I could stir the Box -
In which his letters grew 
Without that forcing, in my breath -
As Staples - driven through - [...]"
(Emily Dickinson, 1862)

E1.6.A.1.9_REF13_PO LIFE'S JOY AND LOVE EMERGE FROM DEVASTATING LOSSES "God and I have always been very tight; even in hard times when I’ve been furious at God, God now feels absent.
Very heavy things have happened throughout my life, but I always had an optimism that I could do the work to improve things. [ ] But losing young friends to illness, losing a love to some very serious circumstances, some big consequences for doing work that holds people accountable, I’m feeling very heartbroken about the world. It’s the lack of justice that really breaks me and the feeling of helplessness despite all the work I’ve done.
Your work and this beautiful newsletter have been a lifeline for so many. You’re also sensitive to God in the many ways God may show up for us, so I’d love to know how to find my way back.
LOOKING FOR MY OLD FRIEND GOD, LONDON, ENGLAND
Dear LFMOFG,

A well-known couplet from Leonard Cohen’s song, Anthem, goes, ‘There is a crack, a crack in everything/ That’s how the light gets in.’ These words had always sounded like a platitude and a little corny to me, but a long, dark journey made me better understand their radical and unsettling nature - that God is often most acutely found in His absence.

This realisation shook me to the core, that the meaning of life - its joy, boundless beauty and love - emerges out of our most devastating losses. I learned that without the savagery of life, love has no true domain, and the relational quality of joy and beauty has no natural way to express itself. I came to understand that although the world’s energising principle is love, joy ultimately declares itself most intensely through our heartbreaks.

As I said, it took a prolonged and painful journey to arrive at this insight, and perhaps that is the road you are on now. The idea that ‘God is love’ is a hard-earned truth, and it can be discomforting to think that His presence is at its most resonant in life’s darkest and cruellest moments.

Understandably, you feel heartbroken about the world - it can feel like a ruthless place, vindictive, and sometimes it seems personal. But I have realised that it is a moral error to compulsively fixate on the world's troubles, to elevate ‘the crack in everything’ and not acknowledge ‘the light getting in.’ Our pleasures and joys are not a negation of humanity's suffering, a betrayal of those we have lost, or the denial of our various griefs. They are the bright, necessary, God-filled articulations of our humanness. We humans are our own howling voids – cracked and beautiful things pierced by light. Faith is not something we find, it is bestowed upon us as a consolatory gift. LFMOFG, there is no need to find your way back. You are already there.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #285 / MAY 2024)

Read it in The Red Hand Files: https://www.theredhandfiles.com/god-and-i-have-always-been-very-tight/

E1.6.A.1.9_REF14_PH CHARLES PÉPIN POSITS THAT TRUE LOVE OF PEOPLE OR OF LIFE CANNOT EXIST WITHOUT ITS SHARE OF SUFFERING. 

Listen to the interview: https://www.instagram.com/reel/C48YS4oIabr/?igsh=bWNwYmIyOHhtc2R6

E1.6.A.1.9_REF15_PH THIS MATRIX IS WORTHWHILE “I’m having a bit of trouble in my teen years… someone I hold dear very dear has gone. She’s gone and I’m still here and she’s not dead or deceased but I’m unable to get in contact with her for reasons the cosmic universe chose for me. We very much love each other but it was time to part. She’s reminded me that this matrix is worthwhile and she’s shown me that I’m worth it too. Dear Nick,I miss her. I miss her, I miss her.
HAJRA, LONDON, UK

Dear Hajra,

This brave and beautiful letter is full of youthful longing and preternatural wisdom. Your understanding that ‘this matrix is worthwhile’ is an insight it took many of us a lifetime to figure out. You seem to comprehend and accept the wayward mechanics of love—frequently unfair, even cruel, but the animating principle of the world nonetheless. Ultimately, a broken heart or an obstructed love is proof of life, for there is nothing as wildly expansive as the yearning heart. It proclaims our existence as part of the universe. We hurt deeply because we love deeply. The dead heart, the dull heart, the cynical heart, the unimaginative heart, the unredeemed heart, resides outside the law of life, disconnected and unnatural, for we are creatures made to love, duty-bound to do so.

I’m sorry you miss your friend, Hajra, but I am pleased that in your temporary pain (your heart will mend in time) you have not rejected the world but live inside its broken poetry. This distressing but sometimes necessary place teaches us that, as you so powerfully put it, ‘this matrix is worthwhile’. This is as lovely a thought as it is possible to have. I wish you well and thank you for your beautiful words.

Love, Nick”
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, Issue #293 / July 2024)

Read it in The Red Hand Files: https://www.theredhandfiles.com/trouble-in-my-teen-years/

E1.6.A.1.9_REF16_PO ”HOW NOT TO BREAK YOUR OWN HEART. There are many things we mistake for love — infatuation, admiration, need — but there is no error of the heart graver than making another our higher power. This may seem inevitable — because to love is always to see the divine in each other, because all love is a yearning for the sacred, within us and between us. And yet the moment we cast the other as our savior, our redeemer, the arbiter of our significance, we have ceased loving — for we have ceased seeing the living human being.
The tragic part, the touching part, the strangely assuring part is that we have been doing this since consciousness — that synaptic hammock of yearning — first crowned the human animal. We have suffered in the same way across cultures and civilizations, and have transmuted that singular, commonplace suffering into some of our most enduring works of art. (“You think your pain and your heartbreak are unprecedented in the history of the world,” James Baldwin observed in his finest interview, “but then you read.”)

Centuries ago, John Donne (1572–1631) channeled the complex interplay between eros and the divine, the confusion of it and the transcendence of it, in the most eternal of his Holy Sonnets. Composed in his late thirties and published shortly after his death, it is read here by nineteen-year-old artist and poetry-lover Rose Hanzlik to the sound of Bach’s Goldberg Variations”
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

“Batter my heart, three-person’d God, for you

As yet but knock, breathe, shine, and seek to mend;

That I may rise and stand, o’erthrow me, and bend

Your force to break, blow, burn, and make me new.

I, like an usurp’d town to another due,

Labor to admit you, but oh, to no end;

Reason, your viceroy in me, me should defend,

But is captiv’d, and proves weak or untrue.

Yet dearly I love you, and would be lov’d fain,

But am betroth’d unto your enemy;

Divorce me, untie or break that knot again,

Take me to you, imprison me, for I,

Except you enthrall me, never shall be free,

Nor ever chaste, except you ravish me.”
(John Donne from the Holy Sonnets)

Listen to the poem: https://youtu.be/Cc8T4a-la5s

E1.6.A.1.9_REF17_PO [EN] WHO LIVES TO LIVE LIFE TO THE FULLEST 
HE LIVES EVERYTHING, THE SWEET AND THE BITTER 
AND THE CRUEL AS WELL AS THE TENDER.

“TITYRE 

Listen then. This is what comes to me:
LOVE is nothing unless it grows to the extreme:
To grow is its law; it dies from remaining the same, 
And dies in that which does not die of love. 
Alive with unquenchable thirst, 
Tree in the soul with roots of flesh 
Who lives to live life to the fullest
Lives everything, the sweet and the bitter 
And the cruel as well as the tender. 
Great Tree of Love, that never ceases spreading
In my weakness a strange vigour,
A thousand moments that the heart keeps 
Are your foliage and arrows of light! 
But in the sun of happiness 
In the gold of day your joy blossoms,
Your same deepening thirst,
Draws from the shadows at the source of tears...”
(Paul Valéry, Dialog of the tree, 1943)

[FR] QUI VIT DE VIVRE AU PLUS VIF DE LA VIE 
IL VIT DE TOUT, DU DOUX ET DE L'AMER 
ET DU CRUEL TOUT AUTANT QUE DU TENDRE.

"TITYRE 

Écoute donc. Voici ce qui me vient:
AMOUR n'est rien qu'il ne croisse à l'extrême:
Croître est sa loi ; il meurt d'être le même, 
Et meurt en qui ne meure point d'amour. 
Vivant de soif toujours inassouvie, 
Arbre dans l'âme aux racines de chair 
Qui vit de vivre au plus vif de la vie 
Il vit de tout, du doux et de l'amer 
Et du cruel tout autant que du tendre. 
Grand Arbre Amour, qui ne cesse d'étendre 
Dans ma faiblesse une étrange vigueur,
Mille moments que se garde le cœur 
Te sont feuillages et flèches de lumière! 
Mais cependant qu'au soleil du bonheur 
Dans l'or du jour s'épanouit ta joie,
Ta même soif qui gagne en profondeur,
Puise dans l'ombre à la source des pleurs..."
(Paul Valéry, Dialogue de l'arbre, 1943)

E1.6.A.1.9_REF18_LIT “MY DEAR — :
… YOU MUST GIVE IF YOU EXPECT TO RECEIVE — give happiness, friendship, love, joy, and you will find them floating back to you. Sometimes you will give more than you receive. We all do that in some of our relations, but it is as true a pleasure often to give without return as life can afford us. We must not make bargains with the heart, as we would with the butcher for his meat. Our business is to give what we have to give — what we can get to give. The return we have nothing to do with… One will not give us what we give them — others will more than we can or do give them — and so the accounts will balance themselves. It is so with my loves and friendships — it is so with everybody’s.”
(Samuel Bowles, letter sent to unknown recipient that might have been Emily Dickinson - comforting her after the unrequited love relationship with Kate Scott Anthon, 1860-61)

E1.6.A.1.9_REF19_LIT AN UNREQUITED LOVE CAN STILL BE AN EXPERIENCE OF SALVATION

“If Sydney Carton ever shone anywhere, he certainly never shone in the
house of Doctor Manette. He had been there often, during a whole year,
and had always been the same moody and morose lounger there. When he
cared to talk, he talked well; but, the cloud of caring for nothing,
which overshadowed him with such a fatal darkness, was very rarely
pierced by the light within him.

And yet he did care something for the streets that environed that house,
and for the senseless stones that made their pavements. Many a night
he vaguely and unhappily wandered there, when wine had brought no
transitory gladness to him; many a dreary daybreak revealed his solitary
figure lingering there, and still lingering there when the first beams
of the sun brought into strong relief, removed beauties of architecture
in spires of churches and lofty buildings, as perhaps the quiet time
brought some sense of better things, else forgotten and unattainable,
into his mind. Of late, the neglected bed in the Temple Court had known
him more scantily than ever; and often when he had thrown himself upon
it no longer than a few minutes, he had got up again, and haunted that
neighbourhood.

On a day in August, when Mr. Stryver (after notifying to his jackal
that “he had thought better of that marrying matter”) had carried his
delicacy into Devonshire, and when the sight and scent of flowers in the
City streets had some waifs of goodness in them for the worst, of health
for the sickliest, and of youth for the oldest, Sydney’s feet still trod
those stones. From being irresolute and purposeless, his feet became
animated by an intention, and, in the working out of that intention,
they took him to the Doctor’s door.

He was shown up-stairs, and found Lucie at her work, alone. She had
never been quite at her ease with him, and received him with some little
embarrassment as he seated himself near her table. But, looking up at
his face in the interchange of the first few common-places, she observed
a change in it.

“I fear you are not well, Mr. Carton!”

“No. But the life I lead, Miss Manette, is not conducive to health. What
is to be expected of, or by, such profligates?”

“Is it not--forgive me; I have begun the question on my lips--a pity to
live no better life?”

“God knows it is a shame!”

“Then why not change it?”

Looking gently at him again, she was surprised and saddened to see that
there were tears in his eyes. There were tears in his voice too, as he
answered:

“It is too late for that. I shall never be better than I am. I shall
sink lower, and be worse.”

He leaned an elbow on her table, and covered his eyes with his hand. The
table trembled in the silence that followed.

She had never seen him softened, and was much distressed. He knew her to
be so, without looking at her, and said:

“Pray forgive me, Miss Manette. I break down before the knowledge of
what I want to say to you. Will you hear me?”

“If it will do you any good, Mr. Carton, if it would make you happier,
it would make me very glad!”

“God bless you for your sweet compassion!”

He unshaded his face after a little while, and spoke steadily.

“Don’t be afraid to hear me. Don’t shrink from anything I say. I am like
one who died young. All my life might have been.”

“No, Mr. Carton. I am sure that the best part of it might still be; I am
sure that you might be much, much worthier of yourself.”

“Say of you, Miss Manette, and although I know better--although in the
mystery of my own wretched heart I know better--I shall never forget
it!”

She was pale and trembling. He came to her relief with a fixed despair
of himself which made the interview unlike any other that could have
been holden.

“If it had been possible, Miss Manette, that you could have returned the
love of the man you see before yourself--flung away, wasted, drunken,
poor creature of misuse as you know him to be--he would have been
conscious this day and hour, in spite of his happiness, that he would
bring you to misery, bring you to sorrow and repentance, blight you,
disgrace you, pull you down with him. I know very well that you can have
no tenderness for me; I ask for none; I am even thankful that it cannot
be.”

“Without it, can I not save you, Mr. Carton? Can I not recall
you--forgive me again!--to a better course? Can I in no way repay your
confidence? I know this is a confidence,” she modestly said, after a
little hesitation, and in earnest tears, “I know you would say this to
no one else. Can I turn it to no good account for yourself, Mr. Carton?”

He shook his head.

“To none. No, Miss Manette, to none. If you will hear me through a very
little more, all you can ever do for me is done. I wish you to know that
you have been the last dream of my soul. In my degradation I have not
been so degraded but that the sight of you with your father, and of this
home made such a home by you, has stirred old shadows that I thought had
died out of me. Since I knew you, I have been troubled by a remorse that
I thought would never reproach me again, and have heard whispers from
old voices impelling me upward, that I thought were silent for ever. I
have had unformed ideas of striving afresh, beginning anew, shaking off
sloth and sensuality, and fighting out the abandoned fight. A dream, all
a dream, that ends in nothing, and leaves the sleeper where he lay down,
but I wish you to know that you inspired it.”

“Will nothing of it remain? O Mr. Carton, think again! Try again!”

“No, Miss Manette; all through it, I have known myself to be quite
undeserving. And yet I have had the weakness, and have still the
weakness, to wish you to know with what a sudden mastery you kindled me,
heap of ashes that I am, into fire--a fire, however, inseparable in
its nature from myself, quickening nothing, lighting nothing, doing no
service, idly burning away.”

“Since it is my misfortune, Mr. Carton, to have made you more unhappy
than you were before you knew me--”

“Don’t say that, Miss Manette, for you would have reclaimed me, if
anything could. You will not be the cause of my becoming worse.”

“Since the state of your mind that you describe, is, at all events,
attributable to some influence of mine--this is what I mean, if I can
make it plain--can I use no influence to serve you? Have I no power for
good, with you, at all?”

“The utmost good that I am capable of now, Miss Manette, I have come
here to realise. Let me carry through the rest of my misdirected life,
the remembrance that I opened my heart to you, last of all the world;
and that there was something left in me at this time which you could
deplore and pity.”

“Which I entreated you to believe, again and again, most fervently, with
all my heart, was capable of better things, Mr. Carton!”

“Entreat me to believe it no more, Miss Manette. I have proved myself,
and I know better. I distress you; I draw fast to an end. Will you let
me believe, when I recall this day, that the last confidence of my life
was reposed in your pure and innocent breast, and that it lies there
alone, and will be shared by no one?”

“If that will be a consolation to you, yes.”

“Not even by the dearest one ever to be known to you?”

“Mr. Carton,” she answered, after an agitated pause, “the secret is
yours, not mine; and I promise to respect it.”

“Thank you. And again, God bless you.”

He put her hand to his lips, and moved towards the door.

“Be under no apprehension, Miss Manette, of my ever resuming this
conversation by so much as a passing word. I will never refer to it
again. If I were dead, that could not be surer than it is henceforth. In
the hour of my death, I shall hold sacred the one good remembrance--and
shall thank and bless you for it--that my last avowal of myself was made
to you, and that my name, and faults, and miseries were gently carried
in your heart. May it otherwise be light and happy!”

He was so unlike what he had ever shown himself to be, and it was so
sad to think how much he had thrown away, and how much he every day kept
down and perverted, that Lucie Manette wept mournfully for him as he
stood looking back at her.

“Be comforted!” he said, “I am not worth such feeling, Miss Manette. An
hour or two hence, and the low companions and low habits that I scorn
but yield to, will render me less worth such tears as those, than any
wretch who creeps along the streets. Be comforted! But, within myself, I
shall always be, towards you, what I am now, though outwardly I shall be
what you have heretofore seen me. The last supplication but one I make
to you, is, that you will believe this of me.”

“I will, Mr. Carton.”

“My last supplication of all, is this; and with it, I will relieve
you of a visitor with whom I well know you have nothing in unison, and
between whom and you there is an impassable space. It is useless to say
it, I know, but it rises out of my soul. For you, and for any dear to
you, I would do anything. If my career were of that better kind that
there was any opportunity or capacity of sacrifice in it, I would
embrace any sacrifice for you and for those dear to you. Try to hold
me in your mind, at some quiet times, as ardent and sincere in this one
thing. The time will come, the time will not be long in coming, when new
ties will be formed about you--ties that will bind you yet more tenderly
and strongly to the home you so adorn--the dearest ties that will ever
grace and gladden you. O Miss Manette, when the little picture of a
happy father’s face looks up in yours, when you see your own bright
beauty springing up anew at your feet, think now and then that there is
a man who would give his life, to keep a life you love beside you!”

He said, “Farewell!” said a last “God bless you!” and left her.”
(Charles Dickens, A Tale of Two Cities, 1859)

E1.5.B.1.3.b.wE1.6.A.1.9. THE COURAGE TO LOVE LIFE, INCLUDING ITS LOSSES AND SHORTCOMINGS

E1.6.A.1.10. IF LOVE IS SO COMPLICATED, CAN WE DO WITHOUT IT?
Philosophies advocating solitude have never swayed the masses. When we probe deeper, we find that love is unavoidable.
"Love, of any kind, necessitates sacrifice; a sacrifice we willingly choose. This is the enigma of freedom… In essence, love is the embodiment of freedom, freedom manifested in a body and soul. [...] Despite all the hardships and misfortunes it invites, we perpetually strive to love and be loved. Love is the closest thing on earth to the bliss of the blessed."

E1.6.A.1.10_REF1_PH BERTRAND RUSSELL CRITICIZES SOLITARY PHILOSOPHIES, SUCH AS THOSE OF THE STOICS AND EARLY CHRISTIANS, WHICH HOLD THAT GOOD CAN BE ACHIEVED INDIVIDUALLY. He argues that man is dependent on his fellow men, and that cooperation, brought about by emotions such as love, is essential.
"There
have been in the world at various times various solitary philosophies, some very noble, some less so. The Stoics and the early Christians believed that a man could realise the highest good of which human life is capable by means of his own will alone, or at any rate without human aid; others again have regarded power as the end of life, and yet others mere personal pleasure. All these are solitary philosophies in the sense that the good is supposed to be something realisable in each separate person, not only in a larger or smaller society of persons. All such views, to my mind, are false, and not only in ethical theory, but as expressions of the better part of our instincts. Man depends upon cooperation, and has been provided by nature, somewhat inadequately, it is true, with the instinctive apparatus out of which the friendliness required for cooperation can spring. Love is the first and commonest form of emotion leading to cooperation, and those who have experienced love with any intensity will not be content with a philosophy that supposes their highest good to be independent of that of the person loved. [...]
I do not pretend
that love in its highest form is common, but I do maintain that in its highest form it reveals values which must otherwise remain unknown, and has itself a value which is untouched by scepticism, although sceptics who are incapable of it may falsely attribute their incapacity to their scepticism. [...]"
(Bertrand Russell, The Conquest of Happiness, 1962)

E1.6.A.1.10_REF2_LIT "CAUSALITY AND CHANCE … ARE THE SAME THINGS LOOKED AT TWO WAYS. Of course we are rather mechanical, and psychoanalysis can offer us some useful generalities about ourselves. But everything that is important and valuable and good belongs with the little piece of us which is not mechanical and no one who is not bemused by philosophy or a youthful mood really doubts the existence of this piece.

I think the sage who saw us as naturally reaching out towards the good had got something. We know, in the best part of ourselves, to use Platonic language, that great art is good, that work is often good and love often good. And if we have any certainties in the human condition these are they, and much more evident certainties than semi-philosophical stuff about all is flux. Of course much is flux, perhaps most is flux — but there is the other small thing and by this and in this one lives — I think almost involuntarily. (It’s very bad really to believe that certain aspects of love in one’s life are meaningless or worthless.)"
(Iris Murdoch, Living on Paper: Letters from Iris Murdoch, 1934–1995)

E1.6.A.1.10_REF3_LIT "ONE REALIZES THAT EVEN IN HARMONIOUS FAMILIES THERE IS THIS DOUBLE LIFE: the group life, which is the one we can observe in our neighbor’s household, and, underneath, another — secret and passionate and intense — which is the real life that stamps the faces and gives character to the voices of our friends. Always in his mind each member of these social units is escaping, running away, trying to break the net which circumstances and his own affections have woven about him. One realizes that human relationships are the tragic necessity of human life; that they can never be wholly satisfactory, that every ego is half the time greedily seeking them, and half the time pulling away from them. [...]
In those simple relationships of loving husband and wife, affectionate sisters, children and grandmother, there are innumerable shades of sweetness and anguish which make up the pattern of our lives day by day, though they are not down in the list of subjects from which the conventional novelist works…
These secret accords and antipathies which lie hidden under our everyday behavior … more than any outward events make our lives happy or unhappy."
(Willa Cather, Not Under Forty, 1936)

E1.6.A.1.10_REF3.1_LIT "“TO LOVE WITHOUT KNOWING HOW TO LOVE WOUNDS THE PERSON WE LOVE,” the great Zen teacher Thich Nhat Hahn wrote in his short, potent meditation on how to love. Developmentally, we humans learn — or mislearn — how to love through our formative attachment patterns, modeled by and cultivated within the family — patterns that imprint our emotional identity and shape the defaults of how we connect, be they wounding or harmonizing. Family dynamics thus become inseparable from our sense of identity, and although we might eventually rewire our attachment patterns through new relationships and ample self-work, we can never fully unmoor ourselves from those formative affections, for they are woven into the mysterious thread that makes us and our childhood selves one person."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.6.A.1.10_REF4_PH IF YOU WANT TO HAVE A RELATIONSHIP WITH SOMEONE YOU HAVE TO BECOME A PROBLEM FOR THEM
"It is not unusual for us to feel that life is too much for us. And it is not unusual to feel that we really should be up to it; that there may be too much to cope with — too many demands — but that we should have the wherewithal to deal with it. Faced with the stresses and strains of everyday life it is easy now for people to feel that they are failing; and what they are failing at, one way or another, is managing the ordinary excesses that we are all beset by: too much frustration, too much bad feeling, too little love, too little success, and so on. One of the things people most frequently say in psychoanalysis is, ‘Perhaps I am overreacting, but . . .’; and one of the commonest complaints today is about feeling too much or feeling too little. I want to suggest that we are simply too much for ourselves, but that this too-muchness is telling us something important… My proposition is that it is impossible to overreact. That when we call our reactions overreactions what we mean is just that they are stronger than we would like them to be. In other words, we sometimes call ourselves and other people excessive as a way of invalidating or tempering the truths we tell ourselves or that other people tell us. It is impossible to overreact. [...]

When we make Freudian slips we try to cover our tracks by claiming that we have said more than we mean, when in fact we have meant more than we had wanted to say… We may feel like we are saying too much, but we may be saying just the right amount; adding things to the conversation that are worth talking about and trying out. We can’t decide not to make Freudian slips; but even when we use ordinary language intentionally, we often say more than we intend. If I say to you that I am a great admirer of your work, I am telling you about my greatness as well as yours; when I say, “See you tomorrow,” I am assuming I know what isn’t going to happen in the interim. Our language, without which we couldn’t imagine our lives, is too much for us in the sense that it can surprise us: we hear in it — and we say in it — more than we intend to. And more than we attend to. [...]

We have all had the experience, as children, of being too much for someone; of making someone feel things that they didn’t want to feel… Everyone starts with the experience of being too much for someone else; not only with that experience, but with that experience somewhere in the mix of who one is. Before we acquire the limiting and limited excesses of language we have lived with the excesses of need. If, even only occasionally as a child, you are too much for your parents — which then means you are too much for yourself — what can you do?

The child who experiences himself as being too much for his parents — all children to some extent — experiences himself as in some way harming them. And as the child’s survival depends upon his parents, or those who look after him, this puts him in mortal danger. For this reason alone it is very difficult for the child — and for the adult that he will become — to think of his too-muchness as anything other than a problem. And yet, of course, parents are there to absorb, and be absorbed in, their children’s excesses (and vice versa). Indeed, people know that they are in a relationship when they become a problem to each other (or, to put it slightly differently, if you want to have a relationship with someone you have to become a problem for them)."
(Adam Phillips, On Balance, 2010)

Watch the performance Oxigênio, by Lillian Vidigal and Maurizio Mancioli: https://www.instagram.com/p/CKHHmO6HTQT/?utm_source=ig_web_button_share_sheet&igsh=MzRlODBiNWFlZA==

E1.6.A.1.10_REF5_PH LOVE IS A TRANSFORMATIVE FORCE THAT INTERTWINES THE FREEDOMS OF TWO INDIVIDUALS. LOVE IS A COMPLEX, PARADOXICAL EXPERIENCE THAT INVOLVES BOTH SUPREME HAPPINESS AND SUPREME MISFORTUNE, CONSTANTLY OSCILLATING BETWEEN CONTRADICTORY EMOTIONS. It is a profound mystery that transcends time, offering a fleeting victory over the temporal nature of existence. Love is a unique, ephemeral experience that embodies the essence of human freedom and connection.
"In love, predestination and choice, objective and subjective, fate and freedom intersect. [...]

Love is a bet, a wild one, placed on freedom. Not my own; the freedom of the Other. […]

Love… transforms the subject and object of the erotic encounter into unique persons… Its cornerstone is freedom: the mystery of the person. 
[…]

The transformation of the erotic object into a person immediately makes the person a subject who possesses free will. The object I desire becomes a subject who desires me — or rejects me. The giving up of personal sovereignty and the voluntary acceptance of servitude involves a genuine change of nature: by way of the bridge of mutual desire the object becomes desiring subject and the subject becomes desiring object. Love, then, is represented in the form of a knot. A knot made of two intertwined freedoms. [...]

Whether the relationship is the result of accident or predestination, to reach fulfillment the complicity of our will is required. Love, any love, implies a sacrifice; and we choose that sacrifice without batting an eye. This is the mystery of freedom… In short, love is freedom personified, freedom incarnated in a body and a soul. [...]

How precarious and elusive are the ideas with which we attempt to explain the mystery of love. A mystery that is part of a greater one: the human being, who, suspended between chance and necessity, transforms his predicament into freedom. […]

There is an intimate, causal relation between love and freedom. [...]

True love consists precisely of the transformation of the appetite for possession into surrender. [...]

Love is life to the full, at one with itself: the opposite of separation. In the sensation of the carnal embrace the union of the couple becomes feeling, and feeling in turn becomes awareness; love is the discovery of the unity of life. But in that instant the compact unity is broken in two, and time reappears: it is a great hole that swallows us… Total fusion includes the acceptance of death. Without death, life — ours, here on this earth — is not life. Love does not vanquish death but makes it an integral part of life. [...]

Like all the great creations of humanity, love is twofold: it is the supreme happiness and the supreme misfortune… Lovers pass constantly from rapture to despair, from sadness to joy, from wrath to tenderness, from desperation to sensuality… The lover is perpetually driven by contradictory emotions. Popular language, in all times and all places, abounds in expressions that describe the vulnerability of a person in love: love is a wound, an injury. But as St. John of the Cross says, it is “a wound that is a gift,” a “gentle cautery,” a “delightful wound.” Yes, love is a flower of blood. It is also a talisman: the vulnerability of lovers protects them. Their shield is their lack of defense; their armor is their nakedness. […]

Yet despite all the ills and misfortunes it brings, we always endeavor to love and be loved. Love is the closest thing on this earth to the beatitude of the blessed. [...]

Love does not preserve us from the risks and misfortunes of existence. No love, not even those that are most peaceful and happy, escapes the disasters and calamities of time. Love, any love, is made up of time, and no love can avoid the great catastrophe: the beloved is subject to the assaults of age, infirmity, and death. [...]

We are time and cannot escape its dominion. We can transfigure it but not deny it or destroy it. This is what the great artists, poets, philosophers, scientists, and certain men of action have done. Love, too, is an answer: because it is time and made of time, love is at once consciousness of death and an attempt to make of the instant an eternity. All loves are ill-starred, because all are made of time, all are the fragile bond between two temporal creatures who know they are going to die. In all loves, even the most tragic, there is an instant of happiness that it is no exaggeration to call superhuman: it is a victory over time, a glimpse of the other side, of the there that is a here, where nothing changes and everything that is, truly is. [...]

Love does not defeat death; it is a wager against time and its accidents. Through love we catch a glimpse, in this life, of the other life. Not of the eternal life, but… of pure vitality. […]

Love is not eternity; nor is it the time of calendars and watches, successive time. The time of love is neither great nor small; it is the perception of all times, of all lives, in a single instant. It does not free us from death but makes us see it face to face… We are the theater of the embrace of opposites and of their dissolution, resolved in a single note that is not affirmation or negation but acceptance… the presence that dissolves into splendor: pure vitality, a heartbeat of time."
(Octavio Paz, The Double Flame: Love and Eroticism, 1996)

E1.6.A.1.10_REF6_LIT "LIFE WILL BREAK YOU. Nobody can protect you from that, and living alone won’t either, for solitude will also break you with its yearning. You have to love. You have to feel. It is the reason you are here on earth. You are here to risk your heart. You are here to be swallowed up. And when it happens that you are broken, or betrayed, or left, or hurt, or death brushes near, let yourself sit by an apple tree and listen to the apples falling all around you in heaps, wasting their sweetness. Tell yourself that you tasted as many as you could."
(Louise Erdrich, The Painted Drum, 2005)

E1.6.A.1.10_REF7_PO “WE, UNACCUSTOMED TO COURAGE

EXILES FROM DELIGHT

live coiled in shells of loneliness

until love leaves its high holy temple

and comes into our sight

to liberate us into life.

Love arrives

and in its train come ecstasies

old memories of pleasure

ancient histories of pain.

Yet if we are bold,

love strikes away the chains of fear

from our souls.

We are weaned from our timidity

In the flush of love's light

we dare be brave

And suddenly we see

that love costs all we are

and will ever be.

Yet it is only love

which sets us free.”
(Maya Angelou)

E1.6.A.1.11. PSYCHEDELIC REVELATION
The belief that love is more crucial than anything else is a perspective that certain psychedelic substances can help foster... but beware of addiction!

E1.6.A.1.11_REF1_SCI CAN PSYCHEDELICS IMPROVE MENTAL HEALTH?

Research suggests that psychedelic drugs can reopen critical periods of brain development to create opportunities for re-learning and psychological healing.

“LEVIN: Now, your work on psychedelics eventually led you to the insight that, among other things, the drugs seem to affect what behavioral biologists call critical periods in brain development. I’d love to hear your brief explanation for our audience on what a critical period is and why it’s so important.

DÖLEN: Yeah. So critical periods are a phenomenon that was described in 1935 by [Konrad Lorenz](https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/1973/lorenz/biographical/). And the first critical period he described was imprinting behavior in snow geese, where, right after hatching, the baby birds will form a long-lasting attachment to whatever is moving around in their environment. And typically this would be their mother. But if their mother isn’t there, if it’s another animal, if it’s a crazy scientist, then they’ll form that attachment to that other moving object. And that 48 hours during which they are incredibly sensitive to anything moving around in their environment and they’re able to form this long-lasting learned attachment is what Konrad Lorenz calls the critical period.

Since then, we’ve discovered literally dozens of other critical periods. Probably most people will be familiar with the critical period for language. So it’s much easier to learn a language when you’re a kid. If you try and learn a second language as an adult, you’re always going to have an accent; it’s really hard to learn. And that’s because there’s a critical period for language learning. And as an adult, you’re just no longer in that window anymore. […]

LEVIN: Now, why is it valuable that psychedelics reopen critical periods in adulthood?

DÖLEN: I think neuroscientists have had the insight, for almost a hundred years, that the ability to reopen critical periods would radically improve our ability to cure diseases of the brain. The reason that we think critical periods exist is because there just isn’t enough space in the genome to encode every single behavior as a gene. And so instead, what’s encoded is the ability to learn from your environment. And so most of our behavior is learned behavior. And it has to be learned at the right time, in the right order, and paying attention to the right stimuli. And that’s what the critical periods are. They’re just the ability to learn. […]

So since we’re talking about mental health, let’s use the example of PTSD [post-traumatic stress disorder]. If you had an injury or a traumatic event that happened when you were a child, and then that critical period relevant to the PTSD is closed, then the therapy that we do later on in life is minimally effective in its ability to change the memories around that trauma. […]

LEVIN: So, if in your youth, when the critical periods are naturally open, you have a traumatic experience and you learn to distrust people, and then it closes in your whole life, you’re in this loop. Here’s an opportunity to reopen that critical period and learn a different association. It’s very interesting. People say things like very few psychological problems are defects of understanding. Actually, there’s something biologically paralyzed, is what you’re describing.

DÖLEN: Yeah. The way that I’m thinking about it now is that, really, in psychedelics and psychiatry, there is a Tesla-versus-Edison kind of debate happening between the biochemical imbalance model and the learning model, right? And so SSRIs and 40 years of Big Pharma has been really operating under the [biochemical imbalance model](https://www.quantamagazine.org/what-happens-in-the-brain-to-cause-depression-20240523/) of neuropsychiatric disease — that when you’re depressed, it’s just because you have [an imbalance in serotonin](https://www.quantamagazine.org/the-cause-of-depression-is-probably-not-what-you-think-20230126/), and you give a pill, and it just restores that imbalance, and then you just take the pill to keep your serotonin balanced, and that’s it, right?

And what we’re finding with the psychedelics and with this critical period idea — it’s learning, and these things that people learned when they were traumatized were adaptive in the moment, right? It saved them in the moment, it allowed them to survive the traumatic event. But that learned pattern of behavior is no longer adaptive as they get older. And they need to adjust and adapt to their new circumstances, and start to behave the way that they should if there isn’t an immediate threat to their lives. What psychedelics are showing is that, actually, you can give these drugs, and if you pair them with psychotherapy, then you can create a change in the brain and the mind of the person that is durable and that only requires, one, two, maybe three doses of the drug. And that once that change has happened because of whatever the drug is doing, the patient maintains that cured state for very long periods of time. And so, I think this learning model is very powerful and is a challenge to the way that we’ve been operating and seeing neuropsychiatric disease. […]”
(Janna Levin speaks with Gül Dölen, The Joy of Why, Quantamagazine, 6 June 2024)

Listen to the podcast or read the full transcipt of the interview:
https://www.quantamagazine.org/can-psychedelics-improve-mental-health-20240606/?mc_cid=41f90cc084&mc_eid=de38e9b771

E1.6.A.1.11_REF2_PH THE CHALLENGE OF ARTICULATING PSYCHEDELIC EXPERIENCES, IS THEIR INEFFABLE NATURE AND THE DIFFICULTY OF EXPRESSING THE PROFOUND EMOTIONS AND TRUTHS ENCOUNTERED DURING SUCH JOURNEYS, PARTICULARLY AFTER USING LSD.
"It embarrasses me to write these words; they sound so thin, so banal. This is a failure of my language, no doubt, but perhaps it is not only that. Psychedelic experiences are notoriously hard to render in words; to try is necessarily to do violence to what has been seen and felt, which is in some fundamental way pre- or post-linguistic or, as students of mysticism say, ineffable. Emotions arrive in all their newborn nakedness, unprotected from the harsh light of scrutiny and, especially, the pitiless glare of irony. Platitudes that wouldn’t seem out of place on a Hallmark card glow with the force of revealed truth.
Love is everything."
(After a psychedelic journey on the drug LSD - Michael Pollan, How to Change Your Mind: What the New Science of Psychedelics Teaches Us About Consciousness, Dying, Addiction, Depression, and Transcendence)

E1.6.A.1.11_REF3_PH THE BELIEF THAT ADDICTION IS NECESSARY FOR ARTISTIC CREATIVITY IS A MISCONCEPTION, FOR TRUE AND MEANINGFUL SUFFERING BEGINS WITH SOBRIETY. Life in sobriety can be complex, nuanced, and deeply creative, contrary to the belief that drugs and alcohol are essential for producing great art.
"Marilyn Manson said in an interview:
‘I was in a drug rehab program once, but they kicked me out. That bored me to death. I asked the therapist if he could name a single artist who made more exciting art after rehab. He then sent me to a psychiatrist, who told me he didn’t treat artists, that was hopeless: they needed the ups and downs for their art, I should just make sure that I had more ups. It’s a constant struggle. Many great musicians, actors, painters or writers have suffered throughout their lives – and great art has emerged from their pain.’
What do you think about that? [ ]
CHRISTOPHER, MUNICH, GERMANY

My life is a mess. I am a drug addict now for fifteen years. I am worried about giving it up because I am an artist, a painter, and I don’t want to lose my edge. I can’t create without it.
THOM, BRISTOL, UK

Dear Christopher and Thom,

The idea that if you stop drinking or taking drugs then you stop making interesting art is a delusional claim. It is one routinely made by those who have not really experienced the full reach of life, that is to say those who have only really experienced the addicted life. If I correctly understand some of what Marilyn Manson is saying then I can tell you that in my younger, addicted days I most likely shared a similar view. I don’t know when Marilyn Manson said this, it could well be a quote from his younger days too. It certainly feels like it. What I myself did not understand at that time was that true suffering, or rather, meaningful suffering, only begins when we stop taking drugs. It is then that we are forced to live life on life’s terms, without the insulating effects of alcohol or drugs. We learn, in sobriety, our true and complex relationship to the world, and the profound nature of suffering. We also find, to our surprise, that happiness is possible as life broadens into something intricate and nuanced and interesting and strange, and potentially deeply creative. Life in sobriety becomes, as the greatly missed comic genius, Barry Humphries, once said, ‘funny’. The cossetted, flattened, self-obsessed life of the alcoholic or drug addict knows little of these things.

We often hear the grandiose presumption that the artist-addict experiences a kind of ‘holy ’suffering, that their struggle is special or somehow elevated beyond the ordinary heartache of the world. This is simply not the case and indicates little understanding of the nature of suffering or addiction or, indeed, art. The artist-addict, cocooned within their addiction, always has the validating recourse of their art, whilst the ordinary person, dealing with the hardships and devastations of life, must deal with raw existence simply as it comes. I find there is considerable courage, beauty and humanity in that common struggle.

Art is the agent best equipped to bring light to the world. That is its purpose. That is its promise. That it is predicated upon a unique suffering that is somehow linked to drink and drugs is self-serving, self-piteous nonsense. Don’t fall for it.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #234 / APRIL 2023)

E1.6.A.1.11_REF4_LIT THE MOTIVATION FOR UNDERTAKING A JOURNEY INTO ALTERED STATES OF CONSCIOUSNESS IS TO OVERCOME THE LIMITATIONS OF ORDINARY PERCEPTION AND TO "KNOW, FROM THE INSIDE, WHAT THE VISIONARY, THE MEDIUM, EVEN THE MYSTIC WERE TALKING ABOUT." Was the author´s experience impaired by a condition we now call Aphasia (a neural disposition that incapacitates one’s visualization of mental images)?
“It had always seemed to me possible that, through hypnosis, for example, or autohypnosis, by means of systematic meditation, or else by taking the appropriate drug, I might so change my ordinary mode of consciousness as to be able to know, from the inside, what the visionary, the medium, even the mystic were talking about.
From what I had read of the mescalin experience I was convinced in advance that the drug would admit me, at least for a few hours, into the kind of inner world described by Blake and AE. But what I had expected did not happen. I had expected to lie with my eyes shut, locking at visions of many-colored geometries, of animated architectures, rich with gems and fabulously lovely, of landscapes with heroic figures, of symbolic dramas trembling perpetually on the verge of the ultimate revelation. But I had not reckoned, it was evident, with the idiosyncrasies of my mental make-up, the facts of my temperament, training and habits.
I am and, for as long as I can remember, I have  always been a poor visualizer. Words, even the pregnant words of poets, do not evoke pictures in my mind. No hypnagogic visions greet me on the verge of sleep. When I recall something, the memory does not present itself to me as a vividly seen event or object. By an effort of the will, I can evoke a not very vivid image of what happened yesterday afternoon, of how the Lungarno used to look before the bridges were destroyed, of the Bayswater Road when the only buses were green and tiny and drawn by aged horses at three and a half miles an hour. But such images have little substance and absolutely no autonomous life of their own. They stand to real, perceived objects in the same relation as Homer's ghosts stood to the men of flesh and blood, who came to visit them in the shades. Only when I have a high temperature do my mental images come to independent life. To those in whom the faculty of visualization is Strong my inner world must seem curiously drab, limited
and uninteresting. This was the world—a poor thing but my own—which I expected to see transformed into something completely unlike itself. The change which actually took place in that world was in no sense revolutionary. Half an hour after swallowing the drug I became aware of a slow dance of golden lights. A little later there were sumptuous red surfaces swelling and expanding from bright nodes of energy that vibrated with a continuously changing, patterned life. At another time the closing of my eyes revealed a complex of gray structures, within which pale bluish spheres kept emerging into intense solidity and, having emerged, would slide noiselessly upwards, out of sight. But at no time were there faces or forms of men or animals. I saw no landscapes, no enormous spaces, no magical growth and metamorphosis of buildings, nothing remotely like a drama or a parable. The other world to which mescalin admitted me was not the world of visions; it existed out there, in what I could see with my eyes open. The great change was in the realm of objective fact. What had happened to my subjective universe was relatively unimportant.
(Aldous Huxley, The doors of perception, 1954)

E1.6.A.1.11_REF4.1_LIT ALDOUS HUXLEY PROVIDES A CLEAR ACCOUNT OF THE INNER TRANSFORMATION THAT OCCURS IN A TRIP UNDER MESCALIN, A PSYCHEDELIC. The "undernourished ego grows weak," the goal-oriented "will suffers a profound change," and perception is returned to an "innocence of childhood," free from the domination of concepts. This culminates in a state of "egolessness" and an "obscure knowledge that All is in all." 
“What happens to the majority of the few who have taken mescalin under supervision can be summarized as follows.
( 1 ) The ability to remember and to "think straight" is little if at all reduced. (Listening to the recordings of my conversation under the influence of the drug, I cannot discover that I was then any stupider than I am at ordinary times.)
(2) Visual impressions are greatly intensified and the eye recovers some of the perceptual innocence of childhood, when the sensum was not immediately and automatically subordinated to the concept. Interest in space is diminished and interest in time falls almost to zero.
(3) Though the intellect remains unimpaired and though perception is enormously improved, the will suffers a profound change for the worse. The mescalin taker sees no reason for doing anything in particular and finds most of the causes for which, at ordinary times, he was prepared to act and suffer, profoundly uninteresting. He can't be bothered with them, for the good reason that he has better things to think about.
(4) These better things may be experienced (as I experienced them) "out there," or "in here," or in both worlds, the inner and the outer, simultaneously or successively. That they are better seems to be self-evident to all mescalin takers who come to the drug with a sound liver and an untroubled mind.
These effects of mescalin are the sort of effects you could expect to follow the administration of a drug having the power to impair the efficiency of the cerebral reducing valve. When the brain runs out of sugar, the undernourished ego grows weak, can't be bothered to undertake the necessary chores, and loses all interest in those spatial and temporal relationships which mean so much to an organism bent on getting on in the world. As Mind at Large seeps past the no longer watertight valve, all kinds of biologically useless things start to happen.
In some cases there may be extra-sensory perceptions. Other persons discover a world of visionary beauty. To others again is revealed the glory, the infinite value and meaningfulness of naked existence, of the given, unconceptualized event. In the final stage of egolessness there is an "obscure knowledge" that All is in all—that All is actually each. This is as near, I take it, as a finite mind can ever come to "perceiving everything that is happening everywhere in the universe."
(Aldous Huxley, The doors of perception, 1954)

E1.6.A.1.11_REF4.2_LIT HUXLEY MAKES IT CLEAR THAT THE INNER TRANSFORMATION OFFERED BY THE DRUG IS POWERFUL BUT PARTIAL. IT GIVES "ACCESS TO CONTEMPLATION" BUT IT IS "INCOMPATIBLE WITH ACTION AND EVEN WITH THE WILL TO ACTION." 
“How was this cleansed perception to be reconciled with a proper concern with human relations, with the necessary chores and duties, to say nothing of charity and practical compassion? The age-old debate between the actives and the contemplatives was being renewed—renewed, so far as I was concerned, with an unprecedented poignancy. For until this morning I had known contemplation only in its humbler, its more ordinary forms—as discursive thinking; as a rapt absorption in poetry or painting or music; as a patient waiting upon those inspirations, without which even the prosiest writer cannot hope to accomplish anything; as occasional glimpses, in Nature, of Wordsworth's "something far more deeply interfused"; as systematic silence leading, sometimes, to hints of an "obscure knowledge." But now I knew contemplation at its height. At its height, but not yet in its fullness. For in its fullness the way of Mary includes the way of Martha and raises it, so to speak, to its own higher power. Mescalin opens up the way of Mary, but shuts the door on that of Martha. It gives access to  contemplation—but to a contemplation that is incompatible with action and even with the will to action, the very thought of action. In the intervals between his revelations the mescalin taker is apt to feel that, though in one way everything is supremely as it should be, in another there is something wrong. His problem is essentially the same as that which confronts the quietist, the arhat and, on another level, the landscape painter and the painter of human still lives. Mescalin can never solve that problem; it can only pose it, apocalyptically, for those to whom it had never before presented itself. The full and final solution can be found only by those who are prepared to implement the right kind of Weltanschauung by means of the right kind of behavior and the right kind of constant and unstrained alertness. Over against the quietist stands the active-contemplative, the saint, the man who, in Eckhart's phrase, is ready to come down from the  seventh heaven in order to bring a cup of water to his sick brother. Over against the arhat, retreating from appearances into an entirely transcendental Nirvana, stands the Bodhisattva, for whom Suchness and the world of contingencies are one, and for whose boundless compassion every one of those contingencies is an occasion not only for transfiguring insight, but also for the most practical charity. And in the universe of art, over against Vermeer and the other painters of human still lives, over against the masters of Chinese and Japanese landscape painting, over against Constable and Turner, against Sisley and Seurat and Cezanne, stands the all-inclusive art of Rembrandt. These are enormous names, inaccessible eminences. For myself, on this memorable May morning, I could only be grateful for an experience which had shown me, more clearly than I had ever seen it before, the true nature of the challenge and the completely liberating response.
Let me add, before we leave this subject, that there is no form of contemplation, even the most quietistic, which is without its ethical values. Half at least of all morality is negative and consists in keeping out of mischief. The Lord's Prayer is less than fifty words long, and six of those words are devoted to asking God not to lead us into temptation. The one-sided contemplative leaves undone many things that he ought to do; but to make up for it, he refrains from doing a host of things he ought not to do. The sum of evil, Pascal remarked, would be much diminished if men could only learn to sit quietly in their rooms. The contemplative whose perception has been cleansed does not have to stay in his room. He can go about his business, so completely satisfied to see and be a part of the divine Order of Things that he will never even be tempted to indulge in what Traherne called "the dirty Devices of the world." When we feel ourselves to be sole heirs of the universe, when "the sea flows in our veins . . . and the stars are our jewels," when all things are perceived as infinite and holy, what motive can we have for covetousness or self-assertion, for the pursuit of power or the drearier forms of pleasure? Contemplatives are not likely to become gamblers, or procurers, or drunkards; they do not as a rule preach intolerance, or make war; do not find it necessary to rob, swindle or grind the faces of the poor. And to these enormous negative virtues we may add another which, though hard to define, is both positive and important. The arhat and the quietist may not practice contemplation in its fullness; but if they practice it at all, they may bring back enlightening reports of another, a transcendent country of the mind; and if they practice it in the height, they will become conduits through which some beneficent influence can flow out of that other country into a world of darkened selves, chronically dying for lack of it."
(Aldous Huxley, The doors of perception, 1954)

E1.6.A.1.11_REF4.3_LIT HUXLEY PROPOSES A CONTROVERSIAL BUT CLEAR TECHNIQUE FOR INSTIGATING ENLIGHTENMENT. HE ARGUES THAT INTELLECTUALS ("ANGELS") SHOULD BE "URGED TO TAKE AN OCCASIONAL TRIP THROUGH SOME CHEMICAL DOOR IN THE WALL." This use of a psychedelic is framed as a specific educational and spiritual technique. 
“To be enlightened is to be aware, always, of total reality in its immanent otherness—to be aware of it and yet to remain in a condition to survive as an animal, to think and feel as a human being, to resort whenever expedient to systematic reasoning. Our goal is to discover that we have always been where we ought to be. Unhappily we make the task exceedingly difficult for ourselves. Meanwhile, however, there are gratuitous graces in the form of partial and fleeting realizations. Under a more realistic, a less exclusively verbal system of education than ours, every Angel (in Blake's sense of that word) would be permitted as a sabbatical treat, would be urged and even, if necessary, compelled to take an occasional trip through some chemical Door in the Wall into the world of transcendental experience. If it terrified him, it would be unfortunate but probably salutary. If it brought him a brief but timeless illumination, so much the better. In either case the Angel might lose a little of the confident insolence sprouting from systematic reasoning and the consciousness of having read all the books. Near the end of his life Aquinas experienced Infused Contemplation. Thereafter he refused to go back to work on his unfinished book. Compared with this, everything he had read and argued about and written—Aristotle and the Sentences, the Questions, the Propositions, the majestic Summas—was no better than chaff or straw. For most intellectuals such a sit-down strike would be inadvisable, even morally wrong. But the Angelic Doctor had done more systematic reasoning than any twelve ordinary Angels, and was already ripe for death. He had earned the right, in those last months of his mortality, to turn away from merely symbolic straw and chaff to the bread of actual and substantial Fact. For Angels of a lower order and with better prospects of longevity, there must be a return to the straw. But the man who comes back through the Door in the Wall will never be quite the same as the man who went out. He will be wiser but less cocksure, happier but less self-satisfied, humbler in acknowledging his ignorance yet better equipped to understand the relationship of words to things, of systematic reasoning to the unfathomable Mystery which it tries, forever vainly, to comprehend.”
(Aldous Huxley, The doors of perception, 1954)

E1.6.A.1.12. AND WHEN HELL IS OTHER PEOPLE...

E1.6.A.1.12.a. WHY DOES SARTRES SAY: "HELL IS OTHER PEOPLE"?
It's not because they are bad, but because they assign us a fixed identity. We all wrestle with the unchosen qualities that are apparent and constantly mirrored back to us through the eyes of others, despite feeling we are so much "more" than that.

E1.6.A.1.12.a_REF1_PH "HOW CAN ONE NOT FEEL OBJECTIFIED, REIFIED, WHEN ONE IS THUS EXPOSED? « Since the Others exist, writes Sartre in Being and Nothingness, then I have an outside, I have a nature; my primal fall is the existence of the others, and shame is - like pride - the apprehension of myself as nature. » This is why, according to the famous formula of Huis Clos, « Hell is other people »: not because they would be bad, but because they assign me a fixed identity. We all struggle against the qualities not borrowed, but apparent, which are relentlessly assigned to us by the gaze of the others, even though we have the feeling of being much « more » than that. This « more » is the emergence of consciousness, the infinity of possibilities which are offered to me at every moment and which allow me to become different from what I am (Sartre would say: nihilation)."
(Gaspard Koenig, TimeToPhilo, 03/01/2019)

E1.6.A.1.12.a_REF2_PH SELF-LOVE VS. PRIDE :
"I have never had much inclination to pride, but this factitious passion was exalted in me in the world, and especially when I was an author; I had perhaps less of it than another, but I had still plenty of it. The terrible lessons I received soon confined it to its first limits; it began by revolting against injustice, but ended by despising it. By withdrawing into my soul and cutting off the external relations that made it demanding, by renouncing comparisons and preferences, it was content that I felt good with myself; then, becoming self-love again, it returned to the order of nature and freed me from the yoke of opinion."
(Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Reveries of the Solitary Walker, Eighth walk)

E1.6.A.1.12.a_REF3_LIT “TO THE DEGREE THAT WE LET OTHERS PROJECT UPON US ERRONEOUS OR UNBALANCED CONCEPTIONS OF OUR NATURES, we may unconsciously reshape our own image to less pleasing forms. It is one thing to be “realistic,” as many are fond of saying, about human nature. It is another thing entirely to let that consideration set limits to our spiritual aspirations or to precipitate us into cynicism and despair. We are protean in many things, and stand between extremes. There is still great room for the observation of John Donne, made over three centuries ago, however, that “no man doth refine and exalt Nature to the heighth it would beare.””
(Loren Eiseley, The Unexpected Universe, 1969)

E1.6.A.1.12.a_REF4_LIT AN INVENTED WORD TO DESCRIBE THE FRUSTRATION OF KNOWING HOW EASILY YOU FIT INTO A STEREOTYPE
“mimeomia n. the frustration of knowing how easily you fit into a stereotype, even if you never intended to, even if it's unfair, even if everyone else feels the same way—each of us trick-or-treating for money and respect and attention, wearing a safe and predictable costume because we're tired of answering the question, "What are you supposed to be?"
(John Koenig, The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021)

E1.6.A.1.12.b. FOR FREUD, AGGRESSION IS AN INSTINCTIVE PART OF BEING HUMAN
It can disrupt our relationships and threaten the stability of society. Civilization attempts to repress this aggression through mechanisms such as promoting love and limiting sexual activity. However, this repression comes at the expense of human happiness. While civilized humans have traded a degree of happiness for a measure of security, not all individuals have benefitted equally from this curtailed freedom of instincts.

E1.6.A.1.12.b_REF1_TH ACCORDING TO SIGMUND FREUD, INNATE HUMAN AGGRESSION DISRUPTS SOCIAL RELATIONS AND THREATENS THE COHESION OF CIVILIZATION. He asserts that civilization must erect barriers against these aggressive instincts, but notes that these efforts have not yet succeeded in eliminating manifestations of violence and aggression.
"The element of truth behind all this, which people are so ready to disavow, is that men are not gentle creatures who want to be loved, and who at the most can defend themselves if they are attacked; they are, on the contrary, creatures among whose instinctual endowments is to be reckoned a powerful share of aggressiveness. As a result, their neighbour is for them not only a potential helper or sexual object, but also someone who tempts them to satisfy their aggressiveness on him, to exploit his capacity for work without compensation, to use him sexually without his consent, to seize his possessions, to humiliate him, to cause him pain, to torture and to kill him. Homo homini lupus. […]
The existence of this inclination to aggression, which we can detect in ourselves and justly assume to be present in others, is the factor which disturbs our relations with our neighbour and which forces civilization into such a high expenditure [of energy]. In consequence of this primary mutual hostility of human beings, civilized society is perpetually threatened with disintegration. The interest of work in common would not hold it together; instinctual passions are stronger than reasonable interests. Civilization has to use its utmost efforts in order to set limits to man's aggressive instincts and to hold the manifestations of them in check by psychical reaction-formations. Hence, therefore, the use of methods intended to incite people into identifications and aim-inhibited relationships of love, hence the restriction upon sexual life, and hence too the ideal's commandment to love one's neighbour as oneself—a commandment which is really justified by the fact that nothing else runs so strongly counter to the original nature of man. In spite of every effort, these endeavours of civilization have not so far achieved very much. It hopes to prevent the crudest excesses of brutal violence by itself assuming the right to use violence against criminals, but the law is not able to lay hold of the more cautious and refined manifestations of human aggressiveness."
(Sigmund Freud, Civilization and its Discontents, 1930)

E1.6.A.1.12.b_REF1.1_TH SIGMUND FREUD EXPLAINS THAT CIVILIZATION IMPOSES GREAT SACRIFICES ON MAN'S SEXUALITY AND AGGRESSIVENESS, MAKING HAPPINESS DIFFICULT TO ACHIEVE. Prehistoric man enjoyed more instinctive freedom, but with less security - this instinctive freedom was reserved for the head of the family, while others lived under oppression. Civilization traded a share of possible happiness for more security. 
"If civilization imposes such great sacrifices not only on man's sexuality but on his aggressivity, we can understand better why it is hard for him to be happy in that civilization. In fact, primitive man was better off in knowing no restrictions of instinct. To counterbalance this, his prospects of enjoying this happiness for any length of time were very slender. Civilized man has exchanged a portion of his possibilities of happiness for a portion of security. We must not forget, however, that in the primal family only the head of it enjoyed this instinctual freedom; the rest lived in slavish suppression. In that primal period of civilization, the contrast between a minority who enjoyed the advantages of civilization and a majority who were robbed of those advantages was, therefore, carried to extremes."
(Sigmund Freud, Civilization and its Discontents, 1930)

E1.6.A.1.12.c. LACK OF LOVE AS A CHILD
If we lacked love as a child to such an extent that we no longer recognize the individuality of others, we risk becoming detrimental to them. We may impose our desires on everyone without the restraint that a sense of love and respect for others would have instilled in us.

E1.6.A.1.12.c_REF1_PH THE EMOTIONAL WARMTH WE RECEIVE IN CHILDHOOD PREVENTS US FROM BUILDING A WORLD WITHOUT OTHERNESS, DOMINATED BY INDIVIDUAL DESIRE.
For Boris Cyrulnik, the sun is a metaphor for the emotional warmth of a person who warms us in tender childhood. 
Psychologically, we are shaped by others: their smiles and their stories. To activate one brain, you need another, as neuroimaging has shown.
Nietzsche wrote: 'I want to create my own sun' in Gaia Cienza. We have to build happiness for ourselves and for others. We are co-authors of the happiness of others as we shape it through interaction. 
Perversion, as defined by Deleuze or Lacan, is a world without otherness, in which my desire reigns supreme.
(Boris Cyrulnik in Les chemins de la philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on June 24, 2019)

Listen to the podcast: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/boris-cyrulnik-la-nuit-j-ecrirai-des-soleils-9219339

E1.6.A.1.12.c_REF2_PH WITHOUT LOVE AND HUMAN INTIMACY, BROADER EFFORTS FOR HUMANITY BECOME ABSTRACT AND SELF-SERVING. Genuine self-realization involves both personal goodness and broader altruism, which are interconnected aspects of the same choice.
"The « great » commitment all too easily obscures the little one. But without the humility and warmth which you have to develop in your relations to the few with whom you are personally involved, you will never be able to do anything for the many. Without them, you will live in a world of abstractions, where your solipsism, your greed for power, and your death-wish lack the one opponent which is stronger than they—love. Love, which is without an object, the outflowing of a power released by self-surrender, but which would remain a sublime sort of superhuman self-assertion, powerless against the negative forces within you, if it were not tamed by the yoke of human intimacy and warmed by its tenderness. It is better for the health of the soul to make one man good than “to sacrifice oneself for mankind.” For a mature man, these are not alternatives, but two aspects of self-realization, which mutually support each other, both being the outcome of one and the same choice."
(Dag Hammarskjöld, Markings, 1963)

E1.6.A.1.12.c_REF3_PH LEVINAS ARGUES THAT THE OTHER REPRESENTS AN ABSOLUTE TRANSCENDENCE AND AN IRREDUCIBLE SINGULARITY THAT COMMANDS OUR MORAL ATTENTION. "Whereas Heidegger's philosophical approach was the search for the meaning of the verb « to be » , the starting point for Levinas is no longer subjectivity, it is the other human being. He shifts from ontology to ethics. Ontology assumes that philosophy is an enterprise of knowledge. For Levinas, the other is an escape from the state of thing.
For Levinas, we all have a need for the absolute, for transcendence, an aspiration to something absolutely other. This need is fulfilled by how others surprise us. Otherness without transcendence is what one can reduce to a common kind: we are all of the human kind, we are a community, however the other is absolutely other in relation to me. He is an irreducible singularity that constitutes a phenomenologically describable experience. The other bursts in, disturbs me by transcendence, and must obsess me with his need. For Levinas, the other is not only the one I discover, but also the one who imposes a commandment, the one to whom the self submits. Everyday life brings us back to transcendence towards being; yet we must morally always put others before ourselves. 
However, in order to put others before ourselves, must we not have been the object of another's attention ourselves? Shouldn't the self be constructed first and then eclipsed making room for the injunction of the other? For Levinas, the great errors of humanity, such as Nazism, can be explained by philosophical errors about the right place of ontology. But Freud also tells us that there are negative forces in the human psyche and that, in order to escape them, our parents, our loves, must keep us in the positivity of life so that we can in turn open ourselves to others. We must therefore perhaps make some amendments to the Levinasian ethical requirement."
(Frédéric Worms in the program Les chemins de la philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 02/04/2019)

E1.6.A.1.12.c_REF4_PH HOW A MESSED UP CHILDHOOD AFFECTS YOU IN ADULTHOOD
(TedEd, The school of life)

Watch this TedED episod on YouTube:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IgUlowmSeHo

E1.6.A.1.12.c_REF5_CUR IN MARCEL CARNÉ'S 1945 MOVIE "THE CHILDREN OF PARADISE," GARANCE EXEMPLIFIES THE POSITIVE IMPACT OF MATERNAL LOVE, REMAINING JOYFUL DESPITE LIFE'S CHALLENGES, while Baptiste, who suffered abuse and devaluation from his father, struggles with his desires and idealizes love, leading to dramatic consequences for both characters.
Garance is the example of a human being who has been « warmed » by maternal love and who, even when life gets tough, continues to be joyful. She describes the deep impact this childhood loving environment had on her to Baptiste on their first evening out together. In contrast, Baptiste has been beaten and devalued his whole life by a stupid father whom we get to know during the film, as father and son play at the Funambule theater. The impact of being created in a loving environment in childhood has a profound impact on the way the two characters are able to love a partner in adulthood. While Garance welcomes her desire and trusts her intuition, Baptiste who has learned to protect himself, disguises his desire as an unattainable ideal which will have dramatic consequences for him and for Garance.

E1.6.A.1.12.c_REF5.1_CUR PIERRE-FRANÇOIS LACENAIRE IS ANOTHER CHARACTER WHO WASN'T “WARMED OVER” IN HIS YOUTH. He “went into himself never to come out again”, and “who doesn't love anyone” as he describes himself.

Watch Pierre-François Lacenaire's monologue in The Children of Paradise on YouTube: https://youtu.be/GEAvriLChiM?feature=shared

E1.6.A.1.12.c_REF5.1.a_CUR LET'S STUDY THE TRANSPARENCY OF DESIRE IN EACH OF THE MAIN CHARACTERS OF MARCEL CARNE'S "THE CHILDREN OF PARADISE" (1945); the transparency of their desire for themselves and for others.

GARANCE & BAPTISTE
The first time Baptiste is with Garance, he tells her: 'I'm trembling because I'm happy, and I'm happy because you're here beside me. I love you, and you, Garance, do you love me?'; Garance protests that he's 'talking like a child, we love like that in books and in dreams, but not in life!' A little later, she's more explicit: 'Please, Baptiste, don't be so serious, you're freezing me. You mustn't be angry with me, but I'm not... as you dream. You must understand me, I'm simple, so simple. I like to please whoever I please, that's all. And when I feel like saying yes, I don't know how to say no'.
Baptiste disguises his desire for an ideal; he's in love with an image of Garance, and for that he'll let her slip away.

FRÉDÉRICK LEMAÎTRE
Throughout the film, he appears to be a truly fulfilled libertine - completely transparent to himself and his partners about the freedom he allows himself and them - but on two occasions an incompleteness manifests itself. First, Garance forces him to admit that neither he nor she is truly happy in their loveless couple. Years later, when Frédérick finds Garance in the dressing room of the Funambule theater and realizes that she comes incognito every night to see Bapstiste's show because she loves him, he is overwhelmed by a sense of inadequacy and confesses to Garance: he has never experienced that feeling of full love and regrets it. Wasn't he really transparent with himself all this time?


NATHALIE
Like Garance, Nathalie is transparent about her desire for Baptiste. What changes everything is that Baptiste doesn't idealize her the way he idealizes Garance. It's a mistake to confuse her with the image of the housewife - she fights courageously for her love, not out of convention, but out of real passion.

LACENAIRE
"Édward Turk pointed out that Lacenaire represents an idealization for Carné. Carné 'always wears a mask that doesn't correspond to his real identity. His aggressive, authoritarian behavior on the set was a strategy to divert the attention of those outside the studio who would tend to stigmatize his deviations from the dominant criteria of masculinity'.

Lacenaire is probably also homosexual [...]. Perhaps this would have been more obvious if Carné hadn't cut a more explicit scene between Lacenaire and Garance, in which Garance asks Lacenaire: 'What have women ever done to you?' and Lacenaire defends himself: 'Nothing, absolutely nothing!' Garance: 'And you, what have you done to women, Pierre-François? Not much, no doubt!' Arletty punctuates this last sentence with a 'little contemptuous laugh'.
(https://www.marcel-carne.com/les-films-de-marcel-carne/1945-les-enfants-du-paradis/analyse-du-film-les-enfants-du-paradis-par-philippe-morisson/)

In fact, Lacenaire's only desire is to be recognized as a great villain - he knows from the start that he'll end up on the scaffold - so after the Comte's murder, he savors the success of his macabre plan and patiently waits for the police instead of fleeing. Unable to act on his desire, he destroys those who despise him.

THE COUNT OF MONTRAY
As Garance says, the Count doesn't need Garance to show him love, as long as she keeps up appearances in society. The Count's desire is to appear to others to have conquered Garance - he's all social identity and completely opaque to his deepest desire.

Watch Pierre-François Lacenaire's monologue in The Children of Paradise on YouTube: https://youtu.be/GEAvriLChiM?feature=shared

E1.6.A.1.12.c_REF6_CUR RICHARD LINKLATER'S "BOYHOOD" (2014) COULD BE CALLED “PARENTHOOD”, or how a broken family model can make life difficult for children. “life, what for?” says Mason to his father as he becomes a young adult. It's love for the world and for someone else that will save him. To be able to pursue happiness, you first have to want it!

E1.6.A.1.12.c_REF7_THR IN PEDRO CALDERÓN DE LA BARCA'S PLAY LIFE IS A DREAM, 1635 - THE PRINCE HAS BEEN LOCKED UP IN A DUNGEON SINCE BIRTH BY HIS FATHER, the king, who fears that his son will be a tyrant. Lack of love forces the prophecy to come true when the old king tests his son at court, removing him from his dungeon to “make sure” he hasn't made a mistake in dismissing his son in this way. Put to the test of reality, the son's behavior is savage, but brought into contact with his father's love and that of a woman, the son learns magnanimity and in his coronation declares the greatest victory that can be, “that of self-conquest”.

E1.6.A.1.12.c_REF8_LIT BELL HOOKS ARGUES THAT CELEBRATING FUNCTIONAL FAMILIES, WHICH RESOLVE CONFLICT CONSTRUCTIVELY WITHOUT ABUSE, IS CRUCIAL FOR COLLECTIVE HEALING AS THEY PROVIDE A HOPEFUL ALTERNATIVE TO THE LASTING TRAUMA INFLICTED BY DYSFUNCTIONAL ONES.
“I am always particularly grateful
to meet people who do not feel their childhoods were
marked by unnecessary pain and suffering, by lovelessness.

Their presence reminds me that we do not need to
undergo anything dreadful to feel deeply, that we never
need suffering to be imposed upon us by acts of violence
and abuse. At times we will all be confronted with suffering,
an unexpected illness, a loss. That pain will come
whether we choose it or not and not one of us can escape
the presence of pain in our lives is not an indicator of
dysfunction. Not all families are dysfunctional. And while
it has been crucial for collective self-recovery that we have
exposed and continue to expose dysfunction, it is equally
important to revel in and celebrate its absence.

Unless we can all imagine a world in which the family
is not dysfunctional but is instead a place where love
abounds, we doom family life to be always and only a site
of woundedness. In functional families individuals face
conflict, contradictions, times of unhappiness, and suffering
just like dysfunctional families do; the difference lies
in how these issues are confronted and resolved, in how
everyone copes in moments of crisis. Healthy families
resolve conflict without coercion, shaming, or violence.
When we collectively move our culture in the direction of
love, we may see these loving families represented more
in the mass media. They will become more visible in all
walks of daily life. Hopefully, we will then listen to these
stories with the same intensity that we have when we listen
to narratives of violent pain and abuse. When this happens,
the visible happiness of functional families will become
part of our collective consciousness.

In The Family: A Revolutionary Way of Self-Discovery,
John Bradshaw offers this definition: "A functional healthy
family is one in which all the members are fully functional
and all the relationships between the members are fully
functional. As human beings, all family members have
available to them the use of all their human power. They
use these powers to cooperate, individuate and to get their
collective and individual needs met. A functional family is
the healthy soil out of which individuals can become mature
human beings." In the functional family self-esteem
is learned and there is a balance between autonomy and
dependency.

Long before the terms "functional" and "dysfunctional"
were used to identify types of families, those of us
who were wounded in childhood knew it because we were
in pain. And that pain did not go away even when we left
home. More than our pain, our self-destructive, self-betraying
behavior trapped us in the traumas of childhood.

We were unable to find solace or release. We could
not choose healing because we were not sure we could
ever mend, that the broken bits and pieces could ever be
put together again. We comforted ourselves by acting out.
But this comfort did not last. It was usually followed by
depression and overwhelming grief. We longed to be rescued
because we did not know how to save ourselves.
More often than not we became addicted to living dangerously.
Clinging to this addiction made it impossible for
us to be well in our souls. As with all other addiction,
letting go and choosing wellness was our only way of rescue
and recovery.”
(Bell Hooks, All about love, 2000)

E1.6.A.1.12.c_REF9_TH BESSEL VAN DER KALK USES A CASE STUDY OF A WOMAN WHO SELF-HARMS TO ARGUE THAT SEVERE EMOTIONAL NEGLECT IS AS DEVASTATING AS PHYSICAL ABUSE, EXPLAINING THAT SUCH DESTRUCTIVE BEHAVIORS ARE NOT SUICIDAL BUT ARE DESPERATE, SELF-LEARNED ATTEMPTS TO SELF-REGULATE AND FEEL ALIVE WHEN ONE HAS NEVER BEEN SHOWN LOVE OR COMFORT BY A CAREGIVER.
“Over the years our research team has repeatedly found that chronic emotional abuse and neglect can be just as devastating as physical abuse and sexual molestation. Sherry turned out to be a living example of these findings: Not being seen, not being known, and having nowhere to turn to feel safe is devastating at any age, but it is particularly destructive for young children, who are still trying to find their place in the world.
Sherry had graduated from college, but she now worked in a joyless clerical job, lived alone with her cats, and had no close friends. When I asked her about men, she told me that her only “relationship” had been with a man who’d kidnapped her while she was on a college vacation in Florida. He’d held her captive and raped her repeatedly for five consecutive days. She remembered having been curled up, terrified and frozen for most of that time, until she realized she could try to get away. She escaped by simply walking out while he was in the bathroom. When she called her mother collect for help, her mother refused to take the call. Sherry finally managed to get home with assistance from a domestic violence shelter.
Sherry told me that she’d started to pick at her skin because it gave her some relief from feeling numb. The physical sensations made her feel more alive but also deeply ashamed—she knew she was addicted to these actions but could not stop them. She’d consulted many mental health professionals before me and had been questioned repeatedly about her “suicidal behavior.” She’d also been subjected to involuntary hospitalization by a psychiatrist who refused to treat her unless she could promise that she would never pick at herself again. However, in my experience, patients who cut themselves or pick at their skin like Sherry, are seldom suicidal but are trying to make themselves feel better in the only way they know.
This is a difficult concept for many people to understand. As I discussed in the previous chapter, the most common response to distress is to seek out people we like and trust to help us and give us the courage to go on. We may also calm down by engaging in a physical activity like biking or going to the gym. We start learning these ways of regulating our feelings from the first moment someone feeds us when we’re hungry, covers us when we’re cold, or rocks us when we’re hurt or scared.
But if no one has ever looked at you with loving eyes or broken out in a smile when she sees you; if no one has rushed to help you (but instead said,
“Stop crying, or I’ll give you something to cry about”), then you need to discover other ways of taking care of yourself.”
(Bessel Van Der Kalk, The Body Keeps the Score, 2014)

E1.6.A.1.12.d. LIVING APART FROM THE WORLD?
Is it possible for most people to live apart from the world, excluding hermits? One might imagine a life of solitude punctuated by regular interruptions, a blend of aloneness and shared distance, a utopia of spatial regulation. However, it seems more realistic to follow Montaigne's advice: "We must reserve a backroom, entirely our own and totally free, where we establish our true liberty and our main retreat and solitude. The greatest thing in the world is to know how to be on your own".

E1.6.A.1.12.d_REF1_PH "WE MUST RESERVE A BACK SHOP WHOLLY OUR OWN, entirely free, in which we establish our true liberty and principal retreat and solitude. The greatest thing in the world is to know how to belong to oneself." (Montaigne)

E1.6.A.1.12.d_REF2_CUR ] THE LIFE OF SAINT SIMEON THE STYLITE (389-459) SHOWS THAT WE CAN WITHDRAW FROM THE WORLD OUT OF LOVE RATHER THAN HATRED OF OTHERS.
"St. Simeon the Stylite (389-459) is remarkable for the radical nature of his life. He spent thirty-nine years at the top of a stone pillar to escape the world and live in almost constant prayer. He entered a monastery at the age of 16 and lived in seclusion in a hut for several years. Crowds of pilgrims began to gather around him. To escape them, Simeon had the idea of climbing a column six cubits high (about 2.70 m), then twelve cubits high (about 5.40 m), then twenty-two cubits high (about 10 m), and finally forty cubits high (about 18 m).
He lived there continuously, covered only by his hood, and withstood the heat of summer and the freezing cold of winter. Twice a day he would speak and teach, encouraging his visitors to practice the virtues.
In short, it's a retreat from people into their midst. So we can withdraw from the world out of love, not just out of hatred of others.
In this painting, Ivar Gotkovsky says he tries 'not to give the subject primary importance, but rather to treat it as bait'. Does joyful solitude attract crowds?"
(Pierre Schindler)

E1.6.A.1.12.d_REF3_PH “MY FANTASY: IDIORRYTHMIA (1)

A fantasy (or at least what I call it): a return of desires, of images, that lurk and search within you, sometimes for a lifetime, and often crystallize only through a word. The word, a major signifier, induces fantasy through its exploration. Exploiting it through different bits of knowledge = research. Phantasm is thus exploited like an open-air mine.

For me, the phantasm I was looking for had nothing to do with the subject of the last two years (The Discourse of Love). It wasn't the exploitation of a fantasy (To Live Together). Here, it's not the Living-in-couple, the simili-conjugal discourse miraculously succeeding the Discourse of Love. [It's] a fantasy of life, diet, kind of life. Neither dual nor plural (collective). Something like a solitude interrupted in a regulated way: the paradox, the contradiction, the aporia of a pooling of distances, the utopia of a socialism of distances (Nietzsche speaks highly of non-gregarious epochs, such as the Renaissance, of a pathos of distances). (All this is still approximate.)

Now this fantasy, on the occasion of a free reading (Lacarrière, L'Été grec), met the word that made it work. On Mount Athos: cenobitic convents + monks both isolated and linked within a certain structure (the elements of this structure will be described in their own time) = idiorrhythmic agglomerates. Each subject has its own rhythm (2).

Notes:
(1) Word formed from the Greek idios (proper, particular) and rhuthmos (rhythm).

(2) The Holy Mountain has given rise to a particular way of life, known as idiorythmy. These Athonite monasteries belong to two different types. Those known as cenobitic, in other words communal, where everything - meals, liturgies and work - is carried out in community. And those known as idiorythmic, where each person literally lives at his or her own pace. Here, monks have their own cells, eat their meals at home (with the exception of certain annual feasts) and can keep the possessions they had at the time of their vows. [...] Even liturgies, in these strange communities, remain optional, with the exception of the night service (J. Lacarrière, L'Été grec, op. cit., p. 40).”
(Roland Barthes, How to Live Together, course at the Collège de France, 1976-1977)

Listen to an extract from Shuta Hiraki & Shuma Ando's “idiorrythmie”, 2023: https://zappak.bandcamp.com/album/idiorrythmie

E1.6.A.1.12.d_REF3.1_PH ROLAND BARTHES EXPLORES THE CONCEPT OF IDIORHYTHM, WHICH COMBINES THE NOTIONS OF INDIVIDUAL RHYTHM AND COMMUNAL LIFE. He criticizes extreme forms of solitude and strict communal life and proposes an intermediate and utopian form. 
"This etymological memory is important for us:
1. Idiorhythm, almost a pleonasm, because the rhuthmos is by definition individual: interstices, fugacity of the code, of the way in which the subject fits into the social (or natural) code. 
2. Refers to the subtle forms of lifestyle: moods, unstable configurations, depressive or elated phases; in short, the very opposite of a harsh, implacable cadence of regularity. It is because rhythm has taken on a repressive meaning (see the rhythm of the life of a coenobite or a phalansterian, who must act to the nearest quarter of an hour) that it has been necessary to add idios (9):

idios is different from rythm,
idios = rhuthmos (10).

In its original place (Athos), idiorrhythmia precisely highlights the proportion of fantasized community, and therein lies its advantage, its driving force (for me). [...]

Let's say it again: we are looking for a zone between two excessive forms: 

a negative excessive form: solitude, hermitage, 
an integrative excessive form: the coenobium (secular or not), 
a median, utopian, Edenic, idyllic form: idiorhythmia. Note that this form is very eccentric [...]

To conclude this first presentation of the idiorrhythmia, I would like to mention a feature that I think characterizes the problem in a topical way. From my window (December 1, 1976), I saw a mother holding her child's hand and pushing the empty stroller in front of her. She was walking unperturbed at her own pace, while the child was being pulled, shaken and forced to walk all the time, like an animal or a victim being whipped in a sadist's game. She goes at her own pace, unaware that the child's pace is different. And yet she is his mother! → Power and the subtlety of power comes through dysrhythmia, heterorhythmia (11).

Notes:
(9) Idios (Greek): proper, particular.

(10) [Orally, Barthes explains his diagram: "Idios is opposed to rythm, but it is in a sense the same as rhuthmos."] Rhuthmos refers to any object that involves movement: the drape of a garment, the stroke of a letter (cf. É. Benveniste, Problèmes de linguistique générale, Paris, Gallimard, vol. I, 1966, p. 330), the instability of mood.

(11) [Barthes' oral clarification: "It is by bringing together two different rhythms that profound disturbances are created."] (Roland Barthes, How to Live Together, course at the Collège de France, 1976-1977)

E1.6.A.1.12.d_REF3.2_PH ROLAND BARTHES EXPLORES THE IDEA OF AN IDIORHYTHMIC LIFE, A UTOPIA WHERE EACH INDIVIDUAL MAINTAINS THEIR OWN RHYTHM, BETWEEN EXTREME SOLITUDE AND TOTAL INTEGRATION.
"I have a fantasy of life, of a regime, of a lifestyle, of a duality, of a diet. Neither a duel nor a plural (collective). Something like a solitude interrupted in a regulated way: the paradox, the contradiction, the aporia of a pooling of distances, the utopia of a socialism of distances [or] each subject has its own rhythm. [...] Let's say again: we are looking for a zone between two excessive forms: 
- a negative excessive form: solitude, hermitage, 
- an integrative excessive form: the coenobium (secular or otherwise), 
- a median, utopian, Edenic, idyllic form: idiorhythmia [the very opposite of a harsh, implacable cadence of regularity]. Note that this form is very eccentric."
(Roland Barthes, How to Live Together, course at the Collège de France, 1976-1977)

E1.6.A.1.12.d_REF3.3_PH "POWER

[...] The only stable principle: negative relation to power. Once again, we reflect: consubstantial connection between power and rhythm. What power imposes above all is rhythm (of all things: of life, of time, of thought, of discourse). The demand for idiorhythmia [one's own rhythm] is always made against power. Let us remember the mother and her child: she imposes her walking rhythm on him, creating a rhythmic disturbance. Let us also remember our distinction: rhythm rhuthmos. Idiorhythmia: protection of the rhuthmos, that is, of the flexible, available, mobile rhythm; a temporary form, but a form nonetheless. Cf. in music, metronomic rhythm rhuthmos. Rhuthmos = swing (the rhythm is qualitatively not musical). Hence: antinomic category of the power of music, provided it is defined by rhuthmos - and not by rhythm. Rhuthmos: it is the rhythm that admits a plus or a minus, an imperfection, an addition, a lack, an idios: that which does not enter the structure or would enter it by force. Remember Casals' word: Rhuthmos is delay. But only a subject (idios) can delay the rhythm - that is, perform it (1).

Note: (1) Barthes explains his thinking orally: "To make music is not to go at a metronomic pace, it is to go, if you will, in a regular, rhythmic way, but with an extra or a lack, a delay, if you will, or with a slight haste that defines the rhuthmos."
(Roland Barthes, How to Live Together, course at the Collège de France, 1976-1977)

E1.6.A.1.12.e. CHOSEN VS. FORCED SOLITUDE
Chosen solitude, of course, is entirely different from the forced solitude one can experience even in the midst of a crowd.

E1.6.A.1.12.e_REF1_LIT "THERE IS A KIND OF LONELINESS THAT LODGES ITSELF IN THE PSYCHE AND NEVER FULLY LEAVES, a loneliness most anguishing not in solitude but in companionship and amid the crowd. If solitude fertilizes the imagination, loneliness vacuums it of vitality and sands the baseboards of the spirit with the scratchy restlessness of longing — for connection, for communion, for escape. And yet it is out of this restlessness that so many great works of art are born.
« We have all known the long loneliness », Dorothy Day wrote, but some — artists, perhaps — know it more intimately than others".
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings)

"These October days are to me a little strained and surrounded with silence. What I mean by this last word I don’t quite know, since I have never stopped « seeing » people… No, it’s not physical silence; it’s some inner loneliness."
(Virginia Woolf , A Writer’s Diary)

E1.6.A.1.12.e_REF2_SCI HOW LONELINESS RESHAPES THE BRAIN
Feelings of loneliness prompt changes in the brain that further isolate people from social contact.
(Quanta magazine, February 28, 2023)

Listen to the podcast or Read the article:
https://www.quantamagazine.org/how-loneliness-reshapes-the-brain-20230228/

E1.6.A.1.12.e_REF3_PH “SOLITUDE IS A CONDITION OF PEACE THAT STANDS IN DIRECT OPPOSITION TO LONELINESS. Loneliness is like sitting in an empty room and being aware of the space around you. It is a condition of separateness. Solitude is becoming one with the space around you. It is a condition of union.”
(Kent Nerburn)

E1.6.A.1.12.f. WE TEND TO CONSIDER OURSELVES EXEMPLARY AND FIND THAT THE OTHERS DO NOT COMPLY TO THE LEVEL WE SET. Are we fair with oursleves and with the others?

E1.6.A.1.12.f_REF1_SOC FRENCH DRIVERS PERCEIVE THEMSELVES AS CAREFUL AND CALM, BUT CONSIDER OTHER DRIVERS TO BE AGGRESSIVE, IRRESPONSIBLE AND DANGEROUS. "Vinci Autoroutes has published its annual Responsible Driving Barometer, and the answer is simple: when asked about our driving habits, we are beyond reproach! What distinguishes us is our vigilance (for 75% of us) and our serenity (mentioned by 55%). In general, when asked to describe their driving, 96% of French people use at least one positive adjective and only 20% use at least one negative adjective. Exemplary, we hear you say!

The problem? In the car, as in everything, the others are hell. For 37% of the French, other drivers are "aggressive", for 38% "irresponsible" and for 41% "dangerous".

So convinced are we of our own righteousness that 67% of us admit to swearing at other drivers and 20% (1 in 5!) have already stopped to get out of their car and explain themselves. Politely, of course!

In Europe, 52% of drivers admit to swearing at other people on the road. We are 15 points ahead of the European record holders in this area. Have a nice trip, you idiots;)"
(TTSO, May 7, 2024)

Watch a scene from the film The Mad Adventures of Rabbi Jacob (Gérard Oury, 1973):
https://youtu.be/Vni3gzzhRrA?feature=shared

E1.6.A.2. LONG LIVE FRIENDSHIP!

E1.6.A.2.1. FRIENDSHIP IS LOVING WHAT YOU DON'T MISS. FRIENDSHIP IS A HAPPY LOVE.
Friendship is a happy love, or the happy becoming of love. 
We can be in love with someone who doesn't love us, but not friends with someone we wouldn't believe to be ours. In this sense, there is no such thing as an unhappy friendship.
Friendship is a reciprocal joy, which each of us derives from the other's existence and love. 
Friendship, even reciprocal friendship, "consists more in loving than in being loved", which is why "to love is the virtue of friends". 

E1.6.A.2.1_REF1_PH "FRIENDSHIP The joy of loving, or love as a joy that cannot be reduced to either lack or passion. Not that it excludes them: one can lack one's friends as one can lack anything, and it is not uncommon to love them passionately. But this is not always the case - there are full and gentle friendships, all the stronger for being serene, which means that friendship (philia) cannot be confused with lack or passion (eros). There is no love that is happy as long as it is lacking, or serene as long as it is passionate. On the other hand, friendship is love that delights, fulfills, or soothes us. It is the love of what is not lacking or no longer lacking. Friendship is a happy love, or the becoming happy of love. 
Another difference is the necessary reciprocity. We can be in love with someone who does not love us, but we cannot be friends with someone we do not consider our friend. In this sense, there can be no unhappy friendship (unhappiness only comes to friendship from the outside, or from its end), nor, without doubt, happiness without friendship. "To love is to rejoice," writes Aristotle brilliantly. This, which is not always true of passion, on the contrary, says the essence of friendship: that it is a mutual joy that each derives from the existence and love of the other. That is why friends enjoy getting to know each other, spending time together, talking to each other, helping each other... Without this joy, who would find life pleasant? Friendship is the most necessary thing for living, writes Aristotle, because without friends no one would choose to live" (Nicomachean Ethics, VIII). I don't know if that's entirely true. But nothing makes me like Aristotle and friendship more. 
There is no need to choose between friendship and passion, since the latter usually tends toward the former. This is the case in a couple or a family ("The family is a friendship," wrote Aristotle) when they are happy. 
Nor is it a question of desire and friendship, since there is nothing to prevent one from desiring one's friends, and since friendship, as the philosopher also says, "is desirable in itself. 
But neither passion nor sexual desire is necessary nor sufficient. Nothing is enough except love. Friendship, even mutual friendship, "consists rather in loving than in being loved," as the Nicomachean Ethics insists, and here "love is the virtue of friends. Friendship is both a pleasure and an act, a virtue and a joy. Who can say better? It is not love that takes (eros), nor only love that gives (agape). It is love that rejoices and shares.
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionnary, 2013)

E1.6.A.2.1_REF2_LIT "WHAT SAVED ME WAS THAT I FOUND GENTLE, LOYAL AND HILARIOUS COMPANIONS, which is at the heart of meaning: maybe we don’t find a lot of answers to life’s tougher questions, but if we find a few true friends, that’s even better. They help you see who you truly are, which is not always the loveliest possible version of yourself, but then comes the greatest miracle of all — they still love you."
(Anne Lamott, Stitches: A Handbook on Meaning, Hope and Repair)

E1.6.A.2.1_REF3_PO "WHAT THINK YOU I TAKE MY PEN IN HAND?
What think you I take my pen in hand to record?
The battle-ship, perfect-model’d, majestic, that I saw pass the offing
     to-day under full sail?
The splendors of the past day? or the splendor of the night that envelops me?
Or the vaunted glory and growth of the great city spread around me? —no;
But merely of two simple men I saw to-day on the pier in the midst of
     the crowd, parting the parting of dear friends,
The one to remain hung on the other’s neck and passionately kiss’d him,
While the one to depart tightly prest the one to remain in his arms."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.6.A.2.2. ACCORDING TO ARISTOTLE, TRUE HAPPINESS DEPENDS ON THE GOOD WE DO FOR OURSELVES AND FOR OTHERS
This form of happiness is relational and is experienced through the reciprocation of good deeds. Is this a standard way to cultivate virtue? Aristotle proposed two models: one suggests that the happiness of the majority relies on collective action; the other argues that only the contemplative sage is self-sufficient. The forms of friendship Aristotle developed have been adapted and interpreted differently over the centuries.

E1.6.A.2.2.a. THE HAPPINESS OF THE GREATEST NUMBER LIES IN COLLECTIVE ACTION
There are two models, one of which is the prudent man who values collective activity. Despite achieving a level of material comfort that grants him independence, the prudent man continues to rely on his fellow men. This is because his happiness is derived from collective action.

E1.6.A.2.2.a_REF1_PH THE PERFECTLY HAPPY MAN NEEDS VIRTUOUS FRIENDS "We have said at the outset that happiness is an activity; and activity plainly comes into being and is not present at the start like a piece of property. If happiness lies in living and being active, and the good man's activity is virtuous and pleasant in itself, as we have said at the outset, and a thing's being one's own is one of the attributes that make it pleasant, and we can contemplate our neighbours better than ourselves and their actions better than our own, and if the actions of virtuous men who are their friends are pleas-ant to good men (since these have both the attributes that are naturally pleasant), if this be so, the supremely happy man will need friends of this sort, since his purpose is to contemplate worthy actions and actions that are his own, and the actions of a good man who is his friend have both these qualities.

Further, men think that the happy man ought to live pleasantly. Now if he were a solitary, life would be hard for him; for by oneself it is not easy to be continuously active; but with others and towards others it is easier. With others therefore his activity will be more continuous, and it is in itself pleasant, as it ought to be for the man who is supremely happy [...]

A certain training in virtue arises also from the company of the good, as Theognis has said before us. [...]

If then, being is in itself desirable for the supremely happy man (since it is by its nature good and pleasant), and that of his friend is very much the same, a friend will be one of the things that are desirable. Now that which is desirable for him he must have, or he will be deficient in this respect. The man who is to be happy will therefore need virtuous friends. [...]
(Aristotle, Nicomachen Ethics)

E1.6.A.2.2.b. FOR THE CONTEMPLATIVE SAGE, HAPPINESS LIES IN INTELLECTUAL ACTIVITY
The other model is that of the contemplative sage - who pursues intellectual activities - reserved for the few.
There is a tension in the text between practical life and contemplative life, which can both be fully satisfying. Aristotle does not overcome this contradiction. A simplistic view would be to say that there is a hierarchy - yet what Aristotle seems to be suggesting is that both kinds of life are fully legitimate.

E1.6.A.2.2.b_REF2_PH IN ETHICS TO NICOMACHUS, ARISTOTLE EXPLAINS THAT ALTHOUGH THE WISE ACHIEVE A FORM OF SELF-SUFFICIENCY, THEY NEED FRIENDS BECAUSE THE FRIEND IS "ANOTHER SELF. By contemplating the actions of his friend, the wise man is able to contemplate himself, which brings pleasure and learning.
"In ancient Athens, practicing wisdom and philosophy did not mean being alone. Solitude was not a human horizon at all. We see Aristotle going through some interesting contortions in the Nicomachean Ethics, Book IX, ch. IV, to explain that although the sage achieves a form of autarky and self-sufficiency, since the divine is always the horizon of the philosopher in antiquity - and the characteristic of the divine is that it is absolutely self-sufficient - it lacks nothing, so the god has no need of a friend - to transpose this to the human realm is unthinkable for a Greek. The need for a friend has to be integrated into a system in which the sage is supposed to be self-sufficient. Aristotle justifies that the friend is "another self," so that when I contemplate the actions of my friend, I contemplate myself and derive pleasure and learning from it. So Aristotle reinvests the need of the other, while the wise man already possesses himself."
(Anne Merker on the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 03/19/2019)

Listen to the podcast in French:
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/philosophes-et-amis-24-aristote-et-platon-faut-il-preferer-la-verite-a-lamitie

E1.6.A.2.2.b_REF3_CUR HOW DID THIS WARRIOR KING, CONSIDERED THE MOST POWERFUL OF THE KHMER KINGS, reconcile the practical life of a monarch with his devotion to Buddhism? 
Ten centuries earlier, the Roman emperor and philosopher Marcus Aurelius testified in his “Thoughts for Myself” to the difficulty of reconciling these two aspects of his life, and it seems that he often carried out his duties as a monarch with resignation and reluctance.

E1.6.A.2.2.c. THE 3 PILLARS OF FRIENDSHIP ACCORDING TO ARISTOTLE: 
VIRTUE, PLEASURE AND UTILITY

E1.6.A.2.2.c_REF1_PH “ACCORDING TO ARISTOTLE, THERE ARE THREE TYPES OF FRIENDSHIP - PERFECT FRIENDSHIP MEETS ALL 3 CONDITIONS:

1. That which is based on virtue;
2. That which is based on pleasure and
3. That which is based on interest/usefulness

Unlike Plato, who argues that only the first kind can be called friendship, Aristotle wants to keep everything, by creating degrees. The second and third types are degraded models of the first type, which serves as a model for the others. Pleasure is still a facet of the good - “it is the good insofar as it appears to the senses”, as Plato puts it - a phenomenal good. True friendship is bound to the person, second friendships are not.”
(Anne Merker on the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 03/19/2019)

Listen to the podcast in French:
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/philosophes-et-amis-24-aristote-et-platon-faut-il-preferer-la-verite-a-lamitie

E1.6.A.2.2.c_REF2_PH ARISTOTLE'S 3 PILLARS ARTICULATED FOR MODERN TIMES BY ALEXANDRE DE BOTTON:
Fun (shared pleasure), (Shared virtue) reassurance,(shared utility) clarifying our minds & Networking

Watch this episode of The school of life, on YouTube:
https://youtu.be/aGedUxTAfBk

E1.6.A.2.2.c_REF3_PH DISAGREEMENTS IN RELATIONSHIPS CAN BE STRENGTHENING AND ENERGIZING RATHER THAN DETRIMENTAL. True relationships allow for differing opinions without fear of harm, and forgiveness is crucial in maintaining and deepening these bonds. 
"These are terrible times. My friend, actually my best friend, and I don’t see eye to eye about the current political situation. We have ended up actually arguing about these things which is not like us and this is threatening our relationship? What do I do? Do you ever argue with your friends?
ANDREAS, PORTSMOUTH, UK

Dear Andreas,

Personally, I like a certain amount of disagreement in a relationship. I find it can be a strengthening and energising force. I don’t think it is coincidental that my most cherished friends – friends that I know love me, want the best for me, and have my back – are the ones I find myself disagreeing with the most.

Our truest and deepest relationships allow us the freedom to voice an opinion without fear of it being detrimental to the partnership. Disagreement tests the resilience and complexity of our relationships and need not be a destabilising force, it can instead be the thing that both toughens and softens the bond between two people. Often, to our surprise, we find that our most heated arguments are the upward sparks created by two colliding virtues.

A relationship dependent on a state of agreement, two people just smiling and nodding at each another – be it a marriage, a friendship, a partnership or any other relationship – is probably dysfunctional, impermanent, and almost certainly boring.

But, beyond disagreement, the fortifying agent in any relationship is forgiveness – the ability to expand one’s heart in order to accommodate the infractions, perceived or otherwise, of the other. If you can do that in good faith, Andreas, and listen to what your friend has to say, it may inspire them to do the same and your relationship will be all the better for it. A society stripped of the churn of differing opinions would be its own kind of anodyne hell, so don’t be afraid to disagree, but be ready to forgive and be forgiven, and let love and understanding reach audaciously across the divide.

Love, Nick"
(Nich Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #264 / DECEMBER 2023)

E1.6.A.2.2.d. FOR ARISTOTLE, FRIENDSHIP IS A POLITICAL NECESSITY THAT EVEN SURPASSES JUSTICE, AS FRIENDS DO NOT HARM EACH OTHER.

E1.6.A.2.2.d_REF1_PH PHILIA, ACCORDING TO PLATO, IS A NON-PHYSICAL DESIRE THAT CONCERNS NOT ONLY INDIVIDUALS BUT ALSO PEOPLES AND CITIES. It is essential in politics because it deals with the articulation of the multiple into unity, a fundamental political problem.
"Philia is also a desire for Plato, but unlike Eros, it is a desire that does not manifest itself through physical pathos. For the Greeks, Philia is not just between two individuals. Philia is also between peoples, between cities. If the Athenians had included the phrase "liberty, equality, fraternity", they would surely have changed the last term to "friendship". Philia is a major concern. Philia is about the articulation of the multiple in unity; it is the political problem par excellence, because there is no politics without plurality".
(Anne Merker on the programme Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 19/03/2019)

Listen to the podcast in French:
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/philosophes-et-amis-24-aristote-et-platon-faut-il-preferer-la-verite-a-lamitie

E1.6.A.2.2.d_REF1.1_PH "I DIDN'T UNDERSTAND WHAT ARISTOTLE MEANT BY PHILIA, 'a political necessity that surpasses even justice', when I first visited Egypt in June 2023. In this dictatorship, where justice is far from perfect, the Egyptian people compensate for injustice with philia: an immense kindness in the relationship between strangers; so different from the relationship we have in affluent, much more individualistic Western societies".
(Pierre Schindler)

E1.6.A.2.2.e. EACH FRIEND VIEWS THE OTHER AS THE FULFILLMENT OF THEIR DESIRES - I WISH WELL FOR MY FRIEND FOR HIS OWN SAKE.

E1.6.A.2.2.e_REF1_PH ACCORDING TO PLATO, ONLY THE VIRTUOUS CAN BE FRIENDS, BUT THE PERFECTLY VIRTUOUS DOES NOT NEED A FRIEND, CREATING AN APORIA. "In Plato's Lysis, the latter oscillates between the friend as similar and the friend as complementary - without resolution, ending the text in aporia. Lysis means 'the act of untying' - every time he reaches a conclusion, he unties it again. Only the virtuous can be friends with each other (like-minded people), yet we look to our friends to complement us, because the most similar things are the most jealous, "it is from his opposite that each feels desire, and not from his like". But Plato concludes that the wicked cannot be friends with the wicked. We go from one to the other, we become an aporia. The problem is ultimately one of goodness - of virtue - and of friendship. The perfectly virtuous person has no need of a friend, hence the aporia. Another question: do I really have a relationship with another person in friendship, or do I have a relationship with myself through another person?
This question is developed at length by Aristotle, who has the formula "a friend is another self", with perhaps a solution to the aporia. If the other is also virtuous, a kind of projection can take place - a disengagement of affect - a mutual intentionality. Each friend takes the other as the end of his or her desires - I wish my friend well for his or her own sake (whereas desire outside friendship has a structure of desire for oneself).
(Anne Merker in the programme Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 19/03/2019)

Listen to the podcast in French:
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/philosophes-et-amis-24-aristote-et-platon-faut-il-preferer-la-verite-a-lamitie

E1.6.A.2.2.e_REF2_LIT AN INVENTED WORD TO DESCRIBE THE SURGE OF ENERGY UPON CATCHING A GLANCE FROM SOMEONE YOU LIKE
“ecstatic shock n. the surge of energy upon catching a glance from someone you like—a thrill that starts in your stomach, arcs up through your lungs and flashes into a spontaneous smile—which scrambles your ungrounded circuits and tempts you to chase that feeling with a kite and a key.”
(John Koenig, The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021)

E1.6.A.2.3. THE CONTENTED MAN, IF HE IS ALONE, SOON FORGETS THAT HE IS CONTENTED
"All his joy is soon put to sleep; he comes to a kind of stupidity and almost insensibility. Inner feeling needs outer movement."

E1.6.A.2.3_REF1_PH "THERE ARE WONDERFUL JOYS IN FRIENDSHIP. This is easy to understand when we realise that joy is contagious. It is enough for my presence to give my friend a little real joy, for the sight of that joy to make me feel joy in return; in this way the joy that each one gives is returned to him; at the same time treasures of joy are set free and both say to themselves: I had happiness within me that I did nothing with.
The source of joy is within, I agree; and nothing is more sad than to see people dissatisfied with themselves and everything, tickling each other to make themselves laugh. But it must also be said that a contented man, if he is alone, soon forgets that he is contented; all his joy is soon lulled to sleep; he becomes a kind of stupor and almost insensitive. Inner feeling needs outer exercise. If a tyrant were to imprison me in order to teach me to respect power, I should make it a rule of my health to laugh to myself every day; I should exercise my joy as I exercise my legs. [...] This is the way to put yourself in the mood to awaken joy. When a little child laughs for the first time, his laughter expresses nothing at all; he does not laugh because he is happy; I would say he is happy because he is laughing; he enjoys laughing like he enjoys eating; but first he has to eat. This is not only true of laughter; we also need words to express what we are thinking. As long as we are alone, we cannot be ourselves. The silly moralists say that to love is to forget oneself; too simple a view; the more we get out of ourselves, the more we are ourselves; the better we feel alive. Don't let your wood rot in the cellar."
(Alain, On Happiness, 1907)

E1.6.A.2.3_REF2_CUR HAPPINESS ONLY REAL WHEN SHARED. The conclusion of Sean Penn's film “Into the Wild” (2007): “Happiness only real when shared”. Christopher regrets not having someone to share it with. There is no real happiness without sharing.

Watch the ending on YouTube, Ending "Happiness Is Only Real When Shared": https://youtu.be/x2k-oo2TT-0

E1.6.A.2.3_REF3_PH "I SAW IN LOUISIANA A LIVE-OAK GROWING
I saw in Louisiana a live-oak growing,
All alone stood it and the moss hung down from the branches,
Without any companion it grew there uttering joyous of dark green,
And its look, rude, unbending, lusty, made me think of myself,
But I wonder’d how it could utter joyous leaves standing alone there
without its friend near, for I knew I could not,
And I broke off a twig with a certain number of leaves upon it and
    twined around it a little moss,
And brought it away, and I have placed it in sight in my room,
It is not needed to remind me as of my own dear friends,
(For I believe lately I think of little else than of them,)
Yet it remains to me a curious token, it makes me think of manly love;
For all that, and though the live-oak glistens there in Louisiana solitary
    in a wide in a wide flat space,
Uttering joyous leaves all its life without a friend a lover near,
I know very well I could not."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.6.A.2.3_REF4_LIT AN INVENTED WORD TO DESCRIBE WHEN WE FEEL THE TRANQUIL PLEASURE OF BEING NEAR A GATHERING BUT NOT QUITE IN IT
“midding v. intr. feeling the tranquil pleasure of being near a gathering but not quite in it—hovering on the perimeter of a campfire, chatting outside a party while others dance inside, resting your head in the backseat of a car listening to your friends chatting up front—feeling blissfully invisible yet still fully included, safe in the knowledge that everyone is together and everyone is okay, with all the thrill of being there without the burden of having to be.”
(John Koenig, The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021)

E1.6.A.2.4. FRIENDSHIP IS ROOTED IN EMPATHY, NOT LOGIC
People often desire to be correct in their interactions, which can lead to conflict. Friendship, in constrast, is centered on empathy rather than logic. Epicurean wisdom suggests acquiring amiable friends for happiness instead of pursuing logical debates. On this matter, Montaigne aligns more with the Epicureans than the Stoics.

E1.6.A.2.4_REF1_PH ACCORDING TO EPICUREAN WISDOM, FRIENDSHIP IS THE GREATEST GOOD THAT WISDOM PROVIDES, OFFERING PEACE OF MIND AND SUPPORT TO THE HUMAN BEING. It is a relationship in which the contentious logic of human interaction ceases to dominate, fostering peace and joy. 
"Man always wants to be right because he is an animal endowed with reason, and therein lies the automatic contentious logic of any relationship with another. Therefore, since it is ultimately impossible to overcome the dispute once it has taken root, even minimally - especially minimally - it is necessary to avoid entering into it at all costs. 
Friendship is that intimacy with the other in which the logic of association, in its perverse definition, no longer has the upper hand. Given its empathic definition, peace comes at the price of friendship. It is therefore not difficult: it is enough never to share anything other than the empathy of the pleasure of seeing and spending time with those one loves, to let the only connecting factors take their course. That is why the wise person pays close attention to his surroundings. It is the greatest of all "talents", says Maxime XLIV, to provide a friendly environment. As much as possible, no doubt. But we know that in this matter we often give the stick to beat ourselves. Do not see those whom you do not wish to see, as much as possible. Happiness can come from good company. As they say, it's better to be alone than in bad company. Besides, we don't know what else to say: there is no Epicurean doctrine of friendship, but an invitation to let oneself go down the slope of pleasant company. It can't be that difficult. Hence the supreme simplicity of Epicurean wisdom: "Of all the goods that wisdom offers man to make him happy, there is none greater than friendship. In friendship man, limited as he is by nature, finds security and support. (Maxim XXXll.)"
(Guillaume Badoual, alain Chareyre-Méjan, Charles Floren, Elsa Grasso et Guillaume Pigeard de Gurbert (Collective), Epicurus or straightforward happiness, 1993)

E1.6.A.2.4_REF2_PH "I SHUN MELANCHOLY, crabbed men, as I would the plague; and in matters I cannot talk of without emotion and concern I never meddle, if not compelled
by my duty:
"Melius non incipient, quam desinent."
["They had better never to begin than to have to desist."
—Seneca, Ep., 72.]

The surest way, therefore, is to prepare one's self beforehand for occasions.
I know very well that some wise men have taken another way, and have not feared to grapple and engage to the utmost upon several subjects these are confident of their own strength, under which they protect themselves in all ill successes, making their patience wrestle and contend with disaster:
"Velut rupes, vastum quae prodit in aequor, Obvia ventorum furiis, expostaque ponto, Vim cunctam atque minas perfert coelique marisque; Ipsa immota manens."
["As a rock, which projects into the vast ocean, exposed to the furious winds and the raging sea, defies the force and menaces of sky and sea, itself unshaken."—Virgil, Eneid, x. 693.]

Let us not attempt these examples; we shall never come up to them. They set themselves resolutely, and without agitation, to behold the ruin of their country, which possessed and commanded all their will: this is too much, and too hard a task for our commoner souls. Cato gave up the noblest life that ever was upon this account; we meaner spirits must fly from the storm as far as we can; we must provide for sentiment, and not for patience, and evade the blows we cannot meet."
(Montaigne, Essays, Of Managing The Will, III, X)

E1.6.A.2.4_REF2.1_PH "THERE CAN BE NO PLEASURE TO ME WITHOUT COMMUNICATION: there is not so much as a sprightly thought comes into my mind, that it does not grieve me to have produced alone, and that I have no one to communicate it to:
 
"Si cum hac exceptione detur sapientia, ut illam inclusam teneam, nec enuntiem, rejiciam."
["If wisdom be conferred with this reservation, that I must keep it to myself, and not communicate it to others, I would none of it." —Seneca, Ep., 6.]

This other has strained it one note higher:

"Si contigerit ea vita sapienti, ut ommum rerum afliuentibus copiis, quamvis omnia, quae cognitione digna sunt, summo otio secum ipse consideret et contempletur, tamen, si solitudo tanta sit, ut hominem videre non possit, excedat a vita."
["If such a condition of life should happen to a wise man, that in the greatest plenty of all conveniences he might, at the most undisturbed leisure, consider and contemplate all things worth the knowing, yet if his solitude be such that he must not see a man, let him depart from life."—Cicero, De Offic., i. 43.]

But yet 'tis much better to be alone than in foolish and troublesome company."
(Montaigne, Les Essais, Of Vanity, III, IX)

E1.6.A.2.4_REF3_PH FRIENDSHIP HAS NO SURVIVAL VALUE; RATHER IT IS ONE OF THOSE THINGS WHICH GIVE VALUE TO SURVIVAL. "Lovers seek for privacy. Friends find this solitude about them, this barrier between them and the herd, whether they want it or not. […]

In a circle of true Friends each man is simply what he is: stands for nothing but himself. No one cares twopence about anyone else’s family, profession, class, income, race, or previous history. Of course you will get to know about most of these in the end. But casually. They will come out bit by bit, to furnish an illustration or an analogy, to serve as pegs for an anecdote; never for their own sake. That is the kingliness of Friendship. We meet like sovereign princes of independent states, abroad, on neutral ground, freed from our contexts. This love (essentially) ignores not only our physical bodies but that whole embodiment which consists of our family, job, past and connections. At home, besides being Peter or Jane, we also bear a general character; husband or wife, brother or sister, chief, colleague, or subordinate. Not among our Friends. It is an affair of disentangled, or stripped, minds. Eros will have naked bodies; Friendship naked personalities.

Hence (if you will not misunderstand me) the exquisite arbitrariness and irresponsibility of this love. I have no duty to be anyone’s Friend and no man in the world has a duty to be mine. No claims, no shadow of necessity. Friendship is unnecessary, like philosophy, like art, like the universe itself… It has no survival value; rather it is one of those things which give value to survival."
(C.S. Lewis, The Four Loves, 1960)

E1.6.A.2.4_REF3.1_PH DO YOU SEE THE SAME TRUTH? "Do you see the same truth? In a circle of true Friends each man is simply what he is: stands for nothing but himself. No one cares twopence about any one else's family, profession, class, income, race, or pre- vious history. Of course you will get to know about most of these in the end. But casually. They will come out bit by bit, to furnish an illustration or an analogy, to serve as pegs for an anecdote; never for their own sake. That is the kingliness of Friendship. We meet like sovereign princes of independent states, abroad, on neutral ground, freed from our contexts. This love (essentially) ignores not only our physical bodies but that whole embodiment which consists of our family, job, past and connections. At home, besides being Peter or Jane, we also bear a general character; husband or wife, brother or sister, chief, colleague or subordinate. Not among our Friends. It is an affair of disentangled, or stripped, minds. Eros will have naked bodies; Friendship naked personalities.

Hence (if you will not misunderstand me) the exquisite arbitrariness and irresponsibility of this love. I have no duty to be anyone's Friend and no man in the world has a duty to be mine. No claims, no shadow of necessity. Friendship is unnecessary, like philosophy, like art, like the universe itself (for God did not need to create). It has no survival value; rather it is one of those things which give value to survival"
(C.S. Lewis, The four loves, 1960)

"E1.6.A.2.4_REF3.1.a_PH "FEW VALUE FRIENDSHIP BECAUSE FEW EXPERIENCE IT. And the possibility of going through life without the experience is rooted in that fact which separates Friendship so sharply from both the other loves. Friendship is in a sense not at all derogatory to it - the least natural of loves; the least instinctive, organic, biological, gregarious and necessary. It has least commerce with our nerves; there is nothing throaty about it; nothing that quickens the pulse or turns you red and pale. It is essentially between individuals; the moment two men are friends they have in some degree drawn apart together from the herd. Without Eros none of us would have been begotten and without Affection none of us would have been reared; but we can live and breed without Friendship. The species, biologically considered, has no need of it. The pack or herd - the community - may even dislike and distrust it."
(C.S. Lewis, The four loves, 1960)

E1.6.A.2.4_REF4_LIT "IN THE CELTIC TRADITION, THERE IS A BEAUTIFUL UNDERSTANDING OF LOVE AND FRIENDSHIP. One of the fascinating ideas here is the idea of soul-love; the old Gaelic term for this is anam cara. Anam is the Gaelic word for soul and cara is the word for friend. So anam cara in the Celtic world was the “soul friend.” In the early Celtic church, a person who acted as a teacher, companion, or spiritual guide was called an anam cara. It originally referred to someone to whom you confessed, revealing the hidden intimacies of your life. With the anam cara you could share your inner-most self, your mind and your heart. This friendship was an act of recognition and belonging. When you had an anam cara, your friendship cut across all convention, morality, and category. You were joined in an ancient and eternal way with the “friend of your soul.” The Celtic understanding did not set limitations of space or time on the soul. There is no cage for the soul. The soul is a divine light that flows into you and into your Other. This art of belonging awakened and fostered a deep and special companionship. [...]

In this love, you are understood as you are without mask or pretension. The superficial and functional lies and half-truths of social acquaintance fall away, you can be as you really are. Love allows understanding to dawn, and understanding is precious. Where you are understood, you are at home. Understanding nourishes belonging. When you really feel understood, you feel free to release yourself into the trust and shelter of the other person’s soul… This art of love discloses the special and sacred identity of the other person. Love is the only light that can truly read the secret signature of the other person’s individuality and soul. Love alone is literate in the world of origin; it can decipher identity and destiny.[...]

The heart learns a new art of feeling. Such friendship is neither cerebral nor abstract. In Celtic tradition, the anam cara was not merely a metaphor or ideal. It was a soul-bond that existed as a recognized and admired social construct. It altered the meaning of identity and perception. When your affection is kindled, the world of your intellect takes on a new tenderness and compassion… You look and see and understand differently. Initially, this can be disruptive and awkward, but it gradually refines your sensibility and transforms your way of being in the world. Most fundamentalism, greed, violence, and oppression can be traced back to the separation of idea and affection.

The anam cara perspective is sublime because it permits us to enter this unity of ancient belonging. [...]

A friend is a loved one who awakens your life in order to free the wild possibilities within you. […]

The one you love, your anam cara, your soul friend, is the truest mirror to reflect your soul. The honesty and clarity of true friendship also brings out the real contour of your spirit."
(John O’Donohue, Anam Cara: A Book of Celtic Wisdom, 1997)

E1.6.A.2.4_REF5_LIT ONE SHOULD KEEP HIS FRIENDSHIP IN CONSTANT REPAIR. "He said to Sir Joshua Reynolds, ‘ If a man does not make new acquaintance as he advances through life, he will soon find himself left alone. A man. Sir, should keep his friendship in constant repair. ‘ "
(Boswell’s Life of Johnson, revised third edition 1799, first published in 1791)

E1.6.A.2.4_REF6_PO “I CHOOSE MY FRIENDS NOT BY THEIR SKIN OR OTHER ARCHETYPE, BUT BY THE PUPIL.
They have to have questioning shine and unsettled tone.
I'm not interested in the good spirits or the ones with bad habits.
I'll stick with the ones who make me being crazy and blessed.
From them, I don't want an answer, I want my opposite.
I want them to bring me doubts and fears and to tolerate the worst of me.
But that only being crazy.

I want saints, so they don’t doubt differences and ask for forgiveness for injustices.
I choose my friends for their clean face and their soul exposed.
I don't just want their shoulder and lap, I also want their greatest joy.
A friend that doesn't laugh together doesn't know how to cry together.
All my friends are like that, half foolish, half serious.
I don't want predictable laughter or cries full of pity.
I want serious friends, those that make reality their fountain of knowledge, but that fight to keep fantasy alive.
I don't want adult or boring friends.
I want half kids and half elderly.
Kids, so they don't forget the value of the wind blowing on their faces and elderly people so they're never in a hurry.
I have friends to know who I am.
Then seeing them as crazy and saints, clowns and serious, young and old, I will never forget that 'normality' is a sterile and imbecile illusion."
(Anonymous, sometimes attributed to Oscar Wilde)

E1.6.A.2.4_REF7_PH DESPITE MODERN NOTIONS OF SELF-WORTH BEING INDEPENDENT OF OTHERS' VALIDATION, HUMANS ARE INHERENTLY SOCIAL BEINGS WHO THRIVE ON RESPECT AND COMMENDATION. 
"I’m in my kitchen on Magnetic Island making fish wontons with Wild God on repeat. I love the song and the line that catches my attention each time is ‘wild God searching for what all wild Gods are searching for.’ What are all wild Gods searching for?
MADONNA, PICNIC BAY, AUSTRALIA

Do I even matter? Do you believe in me?
OLLIE, WILLIAMSBURG, USA
Dear Madonna and Ollie,
 
In the gospels, the miracles of Jesus add a weird and beautifully impossible patina to the New Testament stories. When I first encountered them, though, it was not Jesus’ supposed supernatural powers which I found compelling, but his acute humanness – his vulnerability, his ordinary fragility.
 
When Jesus talks to the multitudes by the sea at Capernaum he expounds a series of bizarre ideas that revolve around the eating of his flesh and drinking of his blood. This is all too strange for most of the onlookers and unconvinced they move away. Jesus turns to the disciples, his closest friends, and asks, "Will you too leave me?" Later, in the garden before he is crucified, he appeals to his friends to watch over him while he prays, but they fall asleep. "Could you not watch with me for an hour?" he laments. These poignant scenes of a sad and wounded Jesus show his deeply human need for the love of his friends. Time and again he asks his disciples to believe in him, for what is a friend if not someone who believes in you.
 
In the song, 'Wild God', the old man 'with the long trailing hair' has escaped his retirement home and is flying across the dying city, searching for someone to believe in him. He swoops over the land, the sky, the sea, through his history, through his memory, like a 'prehistoric bird', casting around for someone who will look upon him and believe. "Where are my people?" he cries. The wild god of my song is searching for what we all are searching for – not something to believe in, but rather someone to believe in us.
 
In this therapeutic age we are told that our self-worth should not be dependent on the validation of others, that it is an inside job, but the truth is that we are social animals who depend greatly on respect and commendation from others. This is what binds us together, it is what dignifies us – a true and common regard. Small acts of ordinary kindness or courtesy, or the simple gestures of appreciation toward each other, speak into our increasingly individualised world saying, "I believe in you."
 
Whether a wild god, the son of God or a mere mortal – we are all locked in a mutual dependency, supporting and lifting and seeing and believing in one another. The song 'Wild God' ultimately says, "Things truly matter. We are of enormous value. We believe." Perhaps all my songs say that.
 
So, Ollie, to answer your question, yes and yes.
 
Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #279 / APRIL 2024)

Read it on The Red Hand Files: https://www.theredhandfiles.com/im-in-my-kitchen-on-magnetic-island-making-fish-wontons-with-wild-god-on-repeat-i-love-the-song-and-the-line-that-catches-my-attention-each-time-is-wild-god-searching-for-what-all-w/

E1.6.A.2.4_REF8_LIT SOMETIMES OUR KNACK FRIENDSHIP: AN INVENTED WORD TO DESCRIBE THE INEXPLICABLE URGE TO PUSH PEOPLE AWAY
“Mauerbauertraurigkeit n. the inexplicable urge to push people away, even close friends who you really like—as if all your social tastebuds suddenly went numb, leaving you unable to distinguish cheap politeness from the taste of genuine affection, unable to recognize its rich and ambiguous flavors, its long and delicate maturation, or the simple fact that each tasting is double-blind.”
(John Koenig, The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021)

E1.6.A.2.5. FRIENDSHIP IS A MIRROR TO PRESENCE AND A TESTAMENT TO FORGIVENESS
"Friendship not only helps us see ourselves through another’s eyes, but can be sustained over the years only with someone who has repeatedly forgiven us for our trespasses as we must find it in ourselves to forgive them in turn."
Love is about acknowledging and forgiving each other's humanity through vigilant perception, recognizing and seeing the complexities of one's being. It is the presence of a migratory spirit of mercy and compassion. Love says, "I see you, I am beside you, look for me."

E1.6.A.2.5_REF1_PH "FRIENDSHIP is a mirror to presence and a testament to forgiveness. Friendship not only helps us see ourselves through another’s eyes, but can be sustained over the years only with someone who has repeatedly forgiven us for our trespasses as we must find it in ourselves to forgive them in turn. A friend knows our difficulties and shadows and remains in sight, a companion to our vulnerabilities more than our triumphs, when we are under the strange illusion we do not need them. An undercurrent of real friendship is a blessing exactly because its elemental form is rediscovered again and again through understanding and mercy. All friendships of any length are based on a continued, mutual forgiveness. Without tolerance and mercy all friendships die. [...]
In the course of the years a close friendship will always reveal the shadow in the other as much as ourselves, to remain friends we must know the other and their difficulties and even their sins and encourage the best in them, not through critique but through addressing the better part of them, the leading creative edge of their incarnation, thus subtly discouraging what makes them smaller, less generous, less of themselves. [...]
The dynamic of friendship is almost always underestimated as a constant force in human life: a diminishing circle of friends is the first terrible diagnostic of a life in deep trouble: of overwork, of too much emphasis on a professional identity, of forgetting who will be there when our armored personalities run into the inevitable natural disasters and vulnerabilities found in even the most average existence. […]
But no matter the medicinal virtues of being a true friend or sustaining a long close relationship with another, the ultimate touchstone of friendship is not improvement, neither of the other nor of the self, the ultimate touchstone is witness, the privilege of having been seen by someone and the equal privilege of being granted the sight of the essence of another, to have walked with them and to have believed in them, and sometimes just to have accompanied them for however brief a span, on a journey impossible to accomplish alone. [...]
(David Whyte , Consolations: The Solace, Nourishment and Underlying Meaning of Everyday Words)

E1.6.A.2.5_REF2_PH LOVE INVOLVES TRULY SEEING AND ACKNOWLEDGING OTHERS, WHICH BRINGS THEM FROM ISOLATION INTO THE OBSERVED WORLD. This act of witnessing is a form of compassion and forgiveness, recognizing our shared humanity.
"If you feel that he is beside you… and within you, why would you need to look for him? (This is not a challenge, there is no aggression in this question; I simply want you to think about it and elucidate).
TOM, MANCHESTER, UK

What is love for you?
PABLO, GUARDAMA DEL SEGURA, SPAIN

Dear Tom and Pablo,

The voice in ‘Ghosteen Speaks’ is not my own. It is the emergent expression of an invisible, migratory spirit — the Ghosteen. It is the spirit of love and mercy. Throughout the song, the Ghosteen announces its presence — I am beside you. Look for me.

It says — I am invisible, but I am here. Search for me, and you will find me.

It calls to the compassionate act of witnessing — of seeing.

Love has something to do with the notion of being seen — the opposite of invisibility. The invisible, the unwitnessed, the unacknowledged, the isolated, the lonely — these are the unloved. Loving attention illuminates the unseen, escorting them from the frontiers of lovelessness into the observed world. To truly see someone — anyone — is an act that acknowledges and forgives our common and imperfect humanity. Love enacts a kind of vigilant perception — whether it is to a partner, a child, a co-worker, a neighbour, a fellow citizen, or any other person one may encounter in this life. Love says softly — I see you. I recognise you. You are human, as am I.

To pay witness to another, in an alert and loving manner, is essentially an act of forgiveness for it is to acknowledge with compassion our mutual human capacity for all things, both good and evil.

When we reduce each other to symbols or representations, rather than see each other as the complex, flawed human beings that we are, we engage in the very antithesis of mercy — heartlessness, condemnation and sanctimoniousness. Within this baleful clamour the luminous spirits of compassion retreat.

I am beside you. Look for me — call the windswept voices of love, to all that have the forbearance to hear.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #103 / JULY 2020)

Read it on The Red Hand Files: https://www.theredhandfiles.com/if-he-is-beside-you/

E1.6.A.2.5_REF3_PH “WHEN YOU LOVE BEINGS… NOT FOR THEIR INTELLIGENCE, ETC., BUT FOR WHAT THEY HAVE IN THEIR VERY DEPTHS, FOR THEIR SOUL… YOU LOVE THEM EQUALLY: they are entireties, perfect inasmuch as they are (to be = perfection). Why then is there this desire to get closer? To know them, and thus to love them more perfectly for what they really are. What is surprising is not that we love them all, but rather that we prefer one of them. […] 

Something sharp runs through me which is my love for them [my friends]… This is not intellectual love. This is a love for souls, from all of me towards all of them in their entirety. […] 

What then is love? Not much, not much; I come back to this idea. Sensitivity, imagination, fatigue, and this effort to depend on another; the taste for the mystery of the other and the need to admire… What is worthwhile, is friendship… this profound mutual confidence between [two people], and this joy of knowing that the other exists. […] 

It seems to me that love should not make all else disappear but should simply tint it with new nuances; I would like a love that accompanies me through life, not that absorbs all my life.”
(Simone de Beauvoir, Diary of a philosophy student, 1928-1929)

E1.6.A.2.5_REF4_LIT WHEN FRIENDSHIP DIES: AN INVENTED WORD TO DESCRIBE A RELATIONSHIP OR FRIENDSHIP THAT YOU CAN'T GET OUT OF YOUR HEAD
“heartworm n. a relationship or friendship that you can't get out of your head, which you thought had faded long ago but is still somehow alive and unfinished, like an abandoned campsite whose smoldering embers still have the power to start a forest fire.”
(John Koenig, The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021)

E1.6.A.2.6. DO LOVE AND FRIENDSHIP HAVE DIFFERENT MEANINGS IN DIFFERENT CULTURES?

E1.6.A.2.6_REF1_SOC HAPPINESS SURVEYS INFLUENCED BY WESTERN SOCIAL SCIENCE OFTEN FOCUS ON INDIVIDUALISM AND PERSONAL LIBERTY, which may not accurately capture happiness in cultures like China, where family and social relationships are more important. 
"Another common problem with happiness surveys, says Hsu, is that they are heavily influenced by Western social science and particularly economics, which has a relatively individualistic and utilitarian view of human life. For Americans especially, the idea of the pursuit of happiness — enshrined in the Declaration of Independence — is often related to personal liberty and individualism.
Western-made surveys tend to ask about the individual person in isolation, and ignore their relationships — even as more and more research today suggests that social relationships are one of the most important factors in a person's well-being.
Hsu mentions Pew’s poll, which asks people to picture their position on a 10-step “ladder of life,” in which the bottom step represents the worst possible life for them and the top rung is their best possible life.
“It doesn’t make sense and it’s very individualistic, because you’re alone on this ladder!" Hsu says of the survey. "Where are all your people?"
The Western approach may not necessarily do a good job of capturing happiness in China — and other countries — where the collective concerns of a family often outrank individual ones. So Hsu’s surveys have focused much more on social relations — asking people who they ate dinner with last night, whether it was fun, and who they have given money to in the past month.
The research suggests that family is extremely important to happiness in China — even for young Chinese, whose consumerist tendencies and urban lives look similar to those in the West in other respects."
(Word Economic Forum)

Read the full article: https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/02/what-do-people-mean-when-they-say-they-re-happy-it-depends-where-you-live/

E1.6.A.3. WHAT ABOUT AFFECTION ?

E1.6.A.3_REF1_LIT "AFFECTION, AS I HAVE SAID, IS THE HUMBLEST LOVE. It gives itself no airs. People can be proud of being "in love," or of friendship. Affection is modest-even furtive and shame-faced. Once when I had remarked on the affection quite often found between cat and dog, my friend replied, "Yes. But I bet no dog would ever confess it to the other dogs." That is at least a good caricature of much human Affection. "Let homely faces stay at home," says Comus. Now Affection has a very homely face. So have many of those for whom we feel it. It is no proof of our refinement or perceptiveness that we love them; nor that they love us. What I have called Appreciative love is no basic element in Affection. It usually needs absence or bereavement to set us praising those to whom only Affection binds us. We take them for granted: and this taking for granted, which is an outrage in erotic love, is here right and proper up to a point. It fits the comfortable, quiet nature of the feeling. Affection would not be affection if it was loudly and frequently expressed; to produce it in public is like getting your household furniture out for a move. It did very well in its place, but it looks shabby or tawdry or grotesque in the sunshine. Affection almost slinks or seeps through our lives. It lives with humble, undress, private things; soft slippers, old clothes, old jokes, the thump of a sleepy dog's tail on the kitchen floor, the sound of a sewing-machine, a gollywog left on the lawn.

But I must at once correct myself. I am talking of Affection as it is when it exists apart from the other loves. It often does so exist; often not. As gin is not only a drink in itself but also a base for many mixed drinks, so Affection, besides being a love itself, can enter into the other loves and colour them all through and become the very medium in which from day to day they operate. They would not perhaps wear very well without it. To make a friend is not the same as to become affectionate. But when your friend has be- come an old friend, all those things about him which had originally nothing to do with the friendship be- come familiar and dear with familiarity. As for erotic love, I can imagine nothing more disagreeable than to experience it for more than a very short time with- out this homespun clothing of affection. That would be a most uneasy condition, either too angelic or too animal or each by turn; never quite great enough or little enough for man. There is indeed a peculiar charm, both in friendship and in Eros, about those moments when Appreciative love lies, as it were, curled up asleep, and the mere ease and ordinariness of the relationship (free as solitude, yet neither is alone) wraps us round. No need to talk. No need to make love. No needs at all except perhaps to stir the fire."
(C.S. Lewis, The four loves, 1960)

E1.6.A.3_REF1.1_LIT AFFECTION, A FORM OF LOVE THAT IS NOT PRIMARILY APPRECIATIVE OR DISCRIMINATING, CAN FOSTER DEEP APPRECIATION FOR PEOPLE WHO MIGHT OTHERWISE BE OVERLOOKED. Affection allows individuals to see value in others beyond their personal preferences, broadening their understanding and appreciation of human goodness and intelligence. 
"One of the most remarkable by-products of Affection has not yet been mentioned. I have said that is not primarily an Appreciative love. It is not discriminating. It can "rub along" with the most unpromising people. Yet oddly enough this very fact means that it can in the end make appreciations possible which, but for it, might never have existed. We may say, and not quite untruly, that we have chosen our friends and the woman we love for their various excellences for beauty, frankness, goodness of heart, wit, intelligence, or what not. But it had to be the particular kind of wit, the particular kind of beauty, the particular kind of goodness that we like, and we have our personal tastes in these matters. That is why friends and lovers feel that they were "made for one another." The especial glory of Affection is that it can unite those who most emphatically, even comically, are not; people who, if they had not found themselves put down by fate in the same household or community, would have had nothing to do with each other. If Affection grows out of this of course it often does not their eyes begin to open. Growing fond of "old so-and-so," at first simply because he happens to be there, I presently begin to see that there is "something in him" after all. The moment when one first says, really meaning it, that though he is not "my sort of man" he is a very good man "in his own way" is one of liberation. It does not feel like that; we may feel only tolerant and indulgent. But really we have crossed a frontier. That "in his own way" means that we are getting beyond our own idiosyncrasies, that we are learning to appreciate goodness or intelligence in themselves, not merely goodness or intelligence flavoured and served to suit our own palate.
"Dogs and cats should always be brought up together," said someone, "it broadens their minds so." Affection broadens ours; of all natural loves it is the most catholic, the least finical, the broadest. The people with whom you are thrown together in the family, the college, the mess, the ship, the religious house, are from this point of view a wider circle than the friends, however numerous, whom you have made for yourself in the outer world. By having a great many friends I do not prove that I have a wide appreciation of human excellence. You might as well say I prove the width of my literary taste by being able to enjoy all the books in my own study. The answer is the same in both cases-"You chose those books. You chose those friends. Of course they suit you." The truly wide taste in reading is that which enables a man to find something for his needs on the sixpenny tray outside any secondhand bookshop. The truly wide taste in humanity will similarly find something to appreciate in the cross-section of humanity whom one has to meet every day. In my experience it is Affection that creates this taste, teaching us first to notice, then to endure, then to smile at, then to enjoy, and finally to appreciate, the people who "happen to be there." Made for us? Thank God, no. They are themselves, odder than you could have believed and worth far more than we guessed."
(C.S. Lewis, The four loves, 1960)

E1.6.A.3_REF1.2_LIT AFFECTION ALONE IS INSUFFICIENT FOR PRODUCING HAPPINESS; it must be complemented by common sense, give and take, and decency, which involve reason, justice, and higher forms of love such as patience, self-denial, and humility. "Affection produces happiness if - and only if there is common sense and give and take and "decency.
" In other words, only if something more, and other, than Affection is added. The mere feeling is not enough. You need "common sense," that is, reason. You need "give and take"; that is, you need justice, continually stimulating mere Affection when it fades and restraining it when it forgets or would defy the art of love. You need "decency." There is no disguising the fact that this means goodness; patience, self-denial, humility, and the continual intervention of a far higher sort of love than Affection, in itself, can ever be. That is the whole point. If we try to live by Affection alone, Affection will "go bad on us.""
(C.S. Lewis, The four loves, 1960)

E1.6.A.3_REF2_PSI "BEING MORE SOCIABLE
According to two of the most influential theories of human motivation (Baumeister & Leary 1995, Ryan & Deci 2001), people have a core need to feel deeply connected with others. Such connections may have been critically important for the survival of our species across our evolutionary history, and thus humans likely evolved to find social interactions emotionally rewarding (e.g., Baumeister & Leary 1995).

Theoretically, the best way to satisfy our need to belong is through close relationships (Baumeister & Leary 1995), but even brief social interactions with strangers may provide emotional benefits. In a controlled lab context, American university students were instructed to spend 30 minutes interacting with fellow study participants or to stop interacting whenever they wanted and to spend the remaining time sitting in solitude (n’s ≈ 100; Kardas et al. 2022). Students who interacted with strangers for the entire 30 minutes enjoyed the time far more than participants who were allowed to spend some of the time in solitude. Schroeder and colleagues (2022) also examined the benefits of interacting with strangers but in a real-world context. During their commute, London residents were asked to spend their time talking with a stranger, spending their time as they typically would, or sitting quietly in solitude (n’s ≈ 128). Commuters who were asked to interact with a stranger were in a better mood during the commute compared to those who kept to themselves or behaved as they typically would.

Going beyond a single instance of socializing, Jacques-Hamilton and colleagues (2019) investigated the benefits of acting extraverted for 1 week. Australian adults were assigned either to act extraverted—bold, assertive, outgoing, and talkative—or to act introverted—quiet, sensitive, and calm (n’s ≈ 58). Throughout the week, people experienced more positive moods if they acted extraverted (versus introverted). Interestingly, this intervention appears to have improved positive mood by changing how people behaved during their social interactions rather than by increasing the frequency of their interactions.

Taken together, these three studies provide compelling initial support for the idea that behaving in a more sociable manner may boost positive feelings. Surprisingly, we could not find any preregistered experiments investigating the benefits of improving close relationships, despite the theoretical importance of these relationships for human well-being."
(Dunigan Folk and Elizabeth Dunn, How Can People Become Happier? A Systematic Review of Preregistered Experiments, 2023)

Read the full article: https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.1146/annurev-psych-022423-030818#abstractSection

E1.6.A.4. THE SMALLEST MEASURABLE UNIT OF HUMAN CONNECTION
AN INVENTED WORD TO DESCRIBE THE SMALLEST MEASURABLE UNIT OF HUMAN CONNECTION
“xeno n. the smallest measurable unit of human connection, typically exchanged between passing strangers—a flirtatious glance, a sympathetic nod, a shared laugh about some odd coincidence—moments that are fleeting and random but still contain powerful emotional nutrients that can alleviate the symptoms of feeling alone.”
(John Koenig, The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021)

E1.6.B. WORK AND ACTIVITY
Joy in activity. Chosen work, in the sense of an exercise of our creativity and a spiral of self-improvement, is an element that nourishes joy. But we need to know what we want and be able to work "at leisure"... 

E1.6.B.1. CREATIVITY
Joy can be found in creative activities that respond to an inner need to create

E1.6.B.1.1. EMBRACING THE CREATIVE PROCESS TO STAY TRUE TO ONESELF
The creator's responsibility lies not in the mundane obligations of daily life, but in their inner vision and creative power. Ignoring one's creative calling may ultimately lead to regret.

E1.6.B.1.1_REF1_PO WHILE ARTISTIC WORTH REQUIRES DEDICATION AND OCCASIONAL SACRIFICES, THE GREATEST REGRET COMES FROM IGNORING ONE'S CREATIVE CALLING. “It is six A.M., and I am working. I am absentminded, reckless, heedless of social obligations, etc. It is as it must be. The tire goes flat, the tooth falls out, there will be a hundred meals without mustard. The poem gets written. I have wrestled with the angel and I am stained with light and I have no shame. Neither do I have guilt. My responsibility is not to the ordinary, or the timely. It does not include mustard, or teeth. It does not extend to the lost button, or the beans in the pot. My loyalty is to the inner vision, whenever and howsoever it may arrive. If I have a meeting with you at three o’clock, rejoice if I am late. Rejoice even more if I do not arrive at all.

There is no other way work of artistic worth can be done. And the occasional success, to the striver, is worth everything. The most regretful people on earth are those who felt the call to creative work, who felt their own creative power restive and uprising, and gave to it neither power nor time.”
(Mary Oliver, Of Power and Time, in Upstream: Selected Essays)

E1.6.B.1.2. THE JOY OF IMMEDIATE CREATION
Boundless joy is achieved when creative activity is at its most intense, when we are absolutely in the moment. This is not the contemplation of a transcendental entity. It is through immediate adherence to the creative impulse that we experience a contact with ourselves and a disengagement from ourselves at the same time.

E1.6.B.1.2_REF1_PH "If time unspools interminably in boredom, it races so rapidly as to vanish during creative flow. In such a state, one experiences the positive counterpart to the dissolution of the self schizophrenic patients report. Wittmann limns the experience:
On the one hand we have achieved something that will be permanent — writing this text, solving a syntax problem in programming — but our life as a whole has almost disappeared for minutes or even hours. We were concentrating fully and completely on the matter at hand, but in doing so we did not notice ourselves: a loss of the experience of both self and time. Expressing it negatively this way also shows how the perception of self and that of time are jointly modulated."
(Marc Wittmann, Altered States of Consciousness: Experiences Out of Time and Self, 2018)

E1.6.B.1.2_REF2_CUR "THE PAINTING SHOWS A COOK from a three quarter angle as he is skinning an animal before roasting it. Because the whole painting is treated with red, orange, yellow, white and bluish grey hues similar to those of a wood-fired oven, it seems the fire is shining a direct light on most of the scene while the white-clad cook comes out as a dazzling ghost. 
The almost spiritual effect of this painting is akin to great Baroque painting, in particular that of Caravaggio, but rather than emulating the latter's chiaroscuros and his warm, dark, earthy colors and saturated reds, Luc Tuymans opted for inverting the contrasts in favor of white, cold light and hues that remind of sunset or a nuclear explosion, as he did for Sundown and Instant. Even though he regularly pays homage to the old masters, Tuymans is never ironical and doesn't parody. On the contrary, he builds on the heritage left by the elders in order to better revisit it in a contemporary light. In a way, this painting is as much a contemporary revisitation of the character of Vulcan—Peter Paul Rubens comes to mind, including the details of the hat, the horizontal working table and the diagonal at the right hand corner—as a portrait of one of those trendy chefs whose sophisticated cuisine Tuymans appreciates."
(Marc Donnadieu, from the catalogue of the La Pelle / Luc Tuymans exhibition at Palazzo Grassi, Venice, 2019)

E1.6.B.1.2_REF2.1_CUR DANS LA VERSION RETRAVAILLÉE DU TABLEAU DE RUBENS, nous nous sommes amusés à modifier la palette et la netteté du tableau de Rubens pour le rapprocher de celui de Luc Tuymans (Cook), afin de montrer comment Rubens a pu être une source d'inspiration pour l'artiste contemporain.

E1.6.B.1.2_REF3_PH FLOW: HAPPINESS IN SUPER FOCUS

Watch the 5 minute-video on YouTube :
https://youtu.be/dWcapC-kriY

E1.6.B.1.2_REF4_PH A WORK MUST INTEGRATE THE MOTIVATION FOR ITS CREATION IN ORDER TO BE COHERENT AND AUTHENTIC, BECOMING AN EXPRESSION OF THE DESIRE FOR JOY. "With the creation of a work [the traveller of Being] attains his own fullness, his own truth: it is the essence of the human individual to create himself by anticipating himself, and the fullest realisation of this movement of consciousness lies in creation. [...] This passage from consciousness to substantial being is not the effect of creation by its form alone, that is, the mere fact that it produces in the cultural space that objective and meaningful being which is a work of art. True satisfaction, assured of itself, would not result from this.
Since a work, as a creation and as a retroactive construction of the subject that creates it, is the source of a double joy, in order to be complete (that is, coherent and authentic) it must integrate this joy with the desire that gives rise to it, thus revealing itself as one of the expressions of the desire for joy. The fruit of the desire to enjoy the world, it must itself be the enjoyment of being and a reflection of that enjoyment. The greatest works are always circular because they are whole, containing in their very being the justification for their birth and for the joy they bring, evoke and express".
(Robert Misrahi, The acts of joy, 1987)

E1.6.B.1.2_REF5_PH "REACTION AGAINST THE CIVILISATION OF THE MACHINE. The machine, itself a product of the highest intellectual capacity, only brings out the inferior and thoughtless forces in the men who serve it. It is true that its action releases an enormous amount of power which would otherwise remain dormant; but it does not encourage one to rise, to improve, to become an artist. It makes one active and uniform, but in the long run this has the opposite effect: a desperate boredom takes hold of the soul, which learns to strive for an eventful inactivity through the machine. [...]" (Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human III, Aphorism 220, 1878)

E1.6.B.1.3. TO WANT WHAT YOU WANT FIERCELY, TO LOVE IT ABSOLUTELY, IS NOT A PERSONAL INDULGENCE IN HUBRIS OR DELUSION — IT IS THE FUEL FOR YOUR MOST GENEROUS CONTRIBUTION TO THE WORLD
By blocking this impulse, one risks losing a unique expression that can never be duplicated: "There is a vitality, a life force, an energy, a quickening that is translated through you into action, and because there is only one of you in all of time, this expression is unique. And if you block it, it will never exist through any other medium and it will be lost."

E1.6.B.1.3.a. "THERE IS A VITALITY, A LIFE FORCE, AN ENERGY, A QUICKENING THAT IS TRANSLATED THROUGH YOU INTO ACTION, and because there is only one of you in all of time, this expression is unique. And if you block it, it will never exist through any other medium and it will be lost. The world will not have it. It is not your business to determine how good it is nor how valuable nor how it compares with other expressions. It is your business to keep it yours clearly and directly, to keep the channel open. You do not even have to believe in yourself or your work. You have to keep yourself open and aware to the urges that motivate you."

E1.6.B.1.3.a_REF1_PH "I CONFESSED THAT I HAD A BURNING DESIRE TO BE EXCELLENT, BUT NO FAITH THAT I COULD BE.

Martha said to me, very quietly: “There is a vitality, a life force, an energy, a quickening that is translated through you into action, and because there is only one of you in all of time, this expression is unique. And if you block it, it will never exist through any other medium and it will be lost. The world will not have it. It is not your business to determine how good it is nor how valuable nor how it compares with other expressions. It is your business to keep it yours clearly and directly, to keep the channel open. You do not even have to believe in yourself or your work. You have to keep yourself open and aware to the urges that motivate you. Keep the channel open. As for you, Agnes, you have so far used about one-third of your talent.”

“But,” I said, “when I see my work I take for granted what other people value in it. I see only its ineptitude, inorganic flaws, and crudities. I am not pleased or satisfied.”

“No artist is pleased.”

“But then there is no satisfaction?”

“No satisfaction whatever at any time,” she cried out passionately. “There is only a queer divine dissatisfaction, a blessed unrest that keeps us marching and makes us more alive than the others.”
(Conversation between Agnes de Mille and Martha Graham, found in Martha: The Life and Work of Martha Graham by Agnes de Mille)

E1.6.B.1.3.b. "TO WANT WHAT YOU WANT SO FIERCELY, TO LOVE IT SO ABSOLUTELY, is not a personal indulgence in hubris or delusion — it is the fuel for your most generous contribution to the world"

E1.6.B.1.3.b_REF1_PO "TO WANT WHAT YOU WANT SO FIERCELY, TO LOVE IT SO ABSOLUTELY, is not a personal indulgence in hubris or delusion — it is, Butler affirms, the mightiest antidote to the terrors of being alive and, in consequence, the fuel for your most generous contribution to the world:
"And a sweet and powerful
Positive obsession
Blunts pain,
Diverts rage,
And engages each of us
In the greatest,
The most intense
Of our chosen struggles."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings, review on Octavia Butler's Parable of the Talents)

Watch a fragment of Guido van der Werve's Nummer acht, everything is going to be alright, 2007 on YouTube: https://youtu.be/OUq2nN6V6xU?feature=shared

E1.6.B.1.4. PROFESSIONAL ACTIVITY BRINGS A PARTICULAR SATISFACTION WHEN IT IS FREELY CHOSEN.
It thus makes it possible to exploit by sublimation certain pre-existing tendencies, certain impulses which are prolonged or, constitutionally, reinforced in it. And yet, work is hardly estimated by men as a way to happiness.

E1.6.B.1.4-REF1_TH SIGMUND FREUD MAINTAINS THAT PROFESSIONAL WORK, ALTHOUGH OFTEN PERCEIVED AS A NECESSITY RATHER THAN A SOURCE OF HAPPINESS, plays a crucial role in the libidinal economy and the integration of the individual into social reality.
"When there is no special disposition in a person which imperatively prescribes what direction his interests in life shall take, the ordinary professional work that is open to everyone can play the part assigned to it by Voltaire's wise advice [p. 75 above]. It is not possible, within the limits of a short survey, to discuss adequately the significance of work for the economics of the libido. No other technique for the conduct of life attaches the individual so firmly to reality as laying emphasis on work; for his work at least gives him a secure place in a portion of reality, in the human community. The possibility it offers of displacing a large amount of libidinal components, whether narcissistic, aggressive or even erotic, on to professional work and on to the human relations connected with it lends it a value by no means second to what it enjoys as something indispensible to the preservation and justification of existence in society. Professional activity is a source of special satisfaction if
it is a freely chosen one—if, that is to say, by means of sublimation, it makes possible the use of existing inclinations, of persisting or constitutionally
reinforced instinctual impulses. And yet, as a path to happiness, work is not highly prized by men. They do not strive after it as they do after other possibilities of satisfaction. The great majority of people only work under the stress of necessity, and this natural human aversion to work raises most difficult social problems."
(Sigmund Freud, Civilization and its Discontents, 1930)

E1.6.B.1.4-REF2_PH “WORK IS OFTEN SEEN AS A PAINFUL ACTIVITY TO WHICH ONE MUST RESIGN ONESELF. This deep prejudice comes a long way. Adam and Eve led an idle existence, but after tasting the forbidden fruit, they were driven out of the Garden of Eden and condemned to earn their bread through labor.
We find a comparable perspective among the Greeks who considered that the happy life is a life free from work which is the only regime allowing one to devote oneself to pure contemplation (theoria).
The idea that work is a misfortune, even a punishment, is so deeply rooted in our civilizations that we are inclined to portray Heaven as free from all pain and primarily from all activity. And we hope that one day we too will be rich enough to retire, buy a small house in the country - and thus be able to be happy. Work is therefore conceived as the antipodes of the perfect life.
However, the idea that real life is fulfilled outside of all work is a delusion. The poet Rainer Maria Rilke has written dazzling pages on this theme. It was in the company of the great sculptor Rodin - of whom he became the secretary - that he discovered the meaning of work. In a letter addressed to him, he said: "It was not just as part of a study that I came to you, it was to ask you: how should one live? And you answered me: by working. And I grasped it well. I feel now that to work is to live without dying."
What a turnaround! To live fully isn't to avoid work, but on the contrary to make work the very dimension in which life is truly fulfilled. Obviously with this turnaround, the meaning of work is completely rethought: it is no longer a grueling punishment, but what leads us, each one in his own way, to flourish and discover ourselves in our deepest truth."
(Fabrice Midal)

E1.6.B.1.5. IF ONE FOLLOWS THEIR INNER CALLING AND LIVES ACCORDING TO THEIR OWN PRINCIPLES, THEY WILL EVENTUALLY ACHIEVE SUCCESS AND TRANSCEND SOCIETAL NORMS AND LAWS.
Simplicity and confidence in one's vision can lead to a better understanding of the universe and a sense of fulfillment. Building castles in the sky is not a waste of time, as they can eventually be realized.

E1.6.B.1.5_REF1_PH "IF ONE LISTENS TO THE FAINTEST BUT CONSTANT SUGGESTIONS OF HIS GENIUS, which are certainly true, he sees not to what extremes, or even insanity, it may lead him; and yet that way, as he grows more resolute and faithful, his road lies. The faintest assured objection which one healthy man feels will at length prevail over the arguments and customs of mankind. No man ever followed his genius till it misled him. Though the result were bodily weakness, yet perhaps no one can say that the consequences were to be regretted, for these were a life in conformity to higher principles. If the day and the night are such that you greet them with joy, and life emits a fragrance like flowers and sweet-scented herbs, is more elastic, more starry, more immortal — that is your success. All nature is your congratulation, and you have cause momentarily to bless yourself. The greatest gains and values are farthest from being appreciated. We easily come to doubt if they exist. We soon forget them. They are the highest reality. Perhaps the facts most astounding and most real are never communicated by man to man. The true harvest of my daily life is somewhat as intangible and indescribable as the tints of morning or evening. It is a little star-dust caught, a segment of the rainbow which I have clutched."
(Henry David Thoreau, Walden, 1854)

E1.6.B.1.5_REF2_PH ADVANCE CONFIDENTLY IN THE DIRECTION OF YOUR DREAMS "I learned this, at least, by my experiment: that if one advances confidently in the direction of his dreams, and endeavors to live the life which he has imagined, he will meet with a success unexpected in common hours. He will put some things behind, will pass an invisible boundary; new, universal, and more liberal laws will begin to establish themselves around and within him; or the old laws be expanded, and interpreted in his favor in a more liberal sense, and he will live with the license of a higher order of beings. In proportion as he simplifies his life, the laws of the universe will appear less complex, and solitude will not be solitude, nor poverty poverty, nor weakness weakness. If you have built castles in the air, your work need not be lost; that is where they should be. Now put the foundations under them."
(Henry David Thoreau, Walden, 1854)

E1.6.B.1.5_REF3_PH AMBITION IS A DESIRE THAT TRANSFORMS INTO SET GOALS. It is vital for the young, but may become an obstacle in later life. Ambition distances us from the fundamental nature of the creative process. It's easily explained to others, yet a true vocation goes beyond and humbles us, exposing the hidden essence of the work. A true vocation is a discourse between the self, work, intellect, imagination, and a new world. Ambition demands willpower and continuous energy to stay on a chosen path, while a profound vocational calling needs constant attention to the unseen gravitational field that surrounds us and recharges us. A life's work is akin to an ocean crossing with no path, only a direction guided by conversation with the elements.

E1.6.B.1.5_REF3.1_PH "AMBITION

is a word that lacks any real ambition. Ambition is desire frozen, the current of a vocational life immobilised and over-concretised to set, unforgiving goals. Ambition may be essential for the young and as yet unrealised life, but becomes the essential obstacle of any mature life. Ambition abstracts us from the underlying elemental nature of the creative conversation while providing us the cover of a target that has become false through over-description, over-familiarity or too much understanding.

The ease of having an ambition is that it can be explained to others; the very disease of ambition is that it can be so easily explained to others. What is worthy of a life's dedication does not want to be known by us in ways that diminish its actual sense of presence. Everything true to itself has its own secret language and an internal intentionality with a secret, surprising flow, even to the person who supposedly puts it all in motion.

Ambition ultimately withers all secrets in its glare before those secrets have had time to come to life from within, and then thwarts the generosity and maturity that ripens the discourse of a lifetime's dedication to a work.

We may direct the beam of ambition to illuminate a certain corner of the future world, but ultimately it can reveal to us only those dreams with which we have already become familiar.
[...] a true vocation calls us out beyond ourselves, breaks our heart in the process and then humbles, simplifies and enlightens us about the hidden, core nature of the work that enticed us in the first place. We find that, all along, we had what we needed from the beginning and that in the end we have returned to its essence, an essence we could not understand until we had experienced the actual heartbreak of the journey.

No matter the self-conceited importance of our labours we are all compost for worlds we cannot yet imagine. Ambition takes us toward that horizon, but not over it that line will always recede before our controlling hands. But a calling is a conversation between our physical bodies, our work, our intellects and imaginations, and a new world that is itself the territory we seek. A vocation always includes the specific, heartrending way we will fail at our attempt to live fully. A true vocation always metamorphoses both ambition and failure into compassion and understanding for others.

Ambition takes willpower and constant applications of energy to stay on a perceived bearing; but a serious vocational calling demands a constant attention to the unknown gravitational field that surrounds us and from which we recharge ourselves, as if breathing from the atmosphere of possibility itself. A life's work is not a series of stepping-stones, onto which we calmly place our feet, but more like an ocean crossing where there is no path, only a heading, a direction, in conversation with the elements. Looking back, we see the wake we have left as only a brief glimmering trace on the waters."
(David Whyte, Consolations, The Solace, Nourishment and Underlying Meaning of Everyday Words, 2015)

E1.6.B.1.5_REF4_PH "TO BELIEVE YOUR OWN THOUGHT, to believe that what is true for you in your private heart is true for all men-that is genius. Speak your latent conviction, and it shall be the universal sense; for the inmost in due time becomes the outmost, and or first thought is rendered back to us by the trumpets of the Last Judgment. Familiar as the voice of the mind is to each, the highest merit we ascribe to Moses, Plato and Milton is that they set at naught books and traditions, and spoke not what men, but what they thought. A man should learn to detect and watch that gleam of light which flashes across his mind from within, more than the lustre of the firmament of bards and sages. Yet he dismisses without notice his thought, because it is his. In every work of genius we recognize our own rejected thoughts; they come back to us with a certain alienated majesty. Great works of art have no more affecting lesson for us than this. They teach us to abide by our spontaneous impression with good- humored inflexibility then most when the whole cry of voices is on the other side. Else to-morrow a stranger will say with masterly good sense precisely what we have thought and felt all the time, and we shall be forced to take with shame our own opinion from another.

There is a time in every man's education when he arrives at the conviction that envy is ignorance; that imitation is suicide; that he must take himself for better for worse as his portion; that though the wide universe is full of good, no kernel of nourish- ing corn can come to him but through his toil bestowed on that plot of ground which is given to him to till. The power which resides in him is new in nature, and none but he knows what that is which he can do, nor does he know until he has tried. Not for nothing one face, one character, one fact, makes much impression on him, and another none. This sculpture in the memory is not without preestablished harmony. The eye was placed where one ray should fall, that it might testify of that particular ray. We but half express ourselves, and are ashamed of that di- vine idea which each of us represents. It may be safely trusted as proportionate and of good issues, so it be faithfully imparted, but God will not have his work made manifest by cowards. A man is relieved and gay when he has put his heart into his work and done his best; but what he has said or done otherwise shall give him no peace. It is a deliverance which does not deliver. In the attempt his genius deserts him; no muse befriends; no invention, no hope.

Trust thyself: every heart vibrates to that iron string. Accept the place the divine providence has found for you, the society of your contemporaries, the connection of events. Great men have always done so, and confided themselves childlike to the genius of their age, betraying their perception that the absolutely trustworthy was seated at their heart, working through their hands, predominating in all their being. And we are now men, and must accept in the highest mind the same transcendent destiny; and not minors and invalids in a protected corner, not cowards fleeing before a revolution, but guides, redeemers and benefactors, obeying the Almighty effort and advancing on Chaos and the Dark."
(Ralph Waldo Emerson, Self-reliance, 1841)

E1.6.B.1.5_REF4.1_PH SELF-TRUST AND INTEGRITY OVER SOCIETAL EXPECTATIONS AND TRADITIONS "Ah, that he could pass again into his neutrality! Who can thus avoid all pledges and, having observed, observe again from the same unaffected, unbiased, unbribable, unaffrighted innocence - must always be formidable. He would utter opinions on all passing affairs, which being seen to be not private but necessary, would sink like darts into the ear of men and put them in fear. These are the voices which we hear in solitude, but they grow faint and inaudible as we enter into the world. Society everywhere is in conspiracy against the manhood of every one of its members. Society is a joint-stock company, in which the members agree, for the better securing of his bread to each shareholder, to surrender the liberty and culture of the eater. The virtue in most request is conformity. Self-reliance is its aversion. It loves not realities and creators, but names and customs. [...]

Whoso would be a man, must be a nonconformist. He who would gather immortal palms must not be hindered by the name of goodness, but must explore if it be goodness. Nothing is at last sacred but the integrity of your own mind. Absolve you to yourself, and you shall have the suffrage of the world. I remember an answer which when quite young I was prompted to make to a valued adviser who was wont to importune me with the dear old doctrines of the church. On my saying, "What have I to do with the sacredness of traditions, if I live wholly from within?" my friend suggested -"But these impulses may be from below, not from above." I replied, "They do not seem to me to be such; but if I am the Devil's child, I will live then from the Devil." No law can be sacred to me but that of my nature. Good and bad are but names very readily transferable to that or this; the only right is what is after my constitution; the only wrong what is against it. A man is to carry himself in the presence of all opposition as if every thing were titular and ephemeral but he. I am ashamed to think how easily we capitulate to badges and names, to large societies and dead institutions. Every decent and well-spoken individual affects and sways me more than is right. I ought to go upright and vital, and speak the rude truth in all ways."
(Ralph Waldo Emerson, Self-reliance, 1841)

E1.6.B.1.5_REF4.1.a_PH TRUE GREATNESS COMES FROM MAINTAINING PERSONAL INDEPENDENCE AND AUTHENTICITY IN THE FACE OF SOCIETAL PRESSURE TO CONFORM. "Few and mean as my gifts may be, I actually am, and do not need for my own assurance or the assurance of my fellows any secondary testimony.

What I must do is all that concerns me, not what the people think. This rule, equally arduous in actual and in intellectual life, may serve for the whole distinction between greatness and meanness. It is the harder because you will always find those who think they know what is your duty better than you know it. It is easy in the world to live after the world's opinion; it is easy in solitude to live after our own; but the great man is he who in the midst of the crowd keeps with perfect sweetness the independence of solitude.

The objection to conforming to usages that have become dead to you is that it scatters your force. It loses your time and blurs the impression of your character. If you maintain a dead church, contribute to a dead Bible-society, vote with a great party either for the government or against it, spread your table like base housekeepers-under all these screens I have difficulty to detect the precise man you are: and of course so much force is with- drawn from your proper life. But do your work, and I shall know you. Do your work, and you shall reinforce yourself. A man must consider what a blind-man's-buff is this game of conformity. If I know your sect I anticipate your argument. I hear a preacher announce for his text and topic the expediency of one of the institutions of his church. Do I not know beforehand that not possibly can he say a new and spontaneous word? Do I not know that with all this ostentation of examining the grounds of the institution he will do no such thing? Do I not know that he is pledged to himself not to look but at one side, the permitted side, not as a man, but as a parish minister? He is a retained attorney, and these airs of the bench are the emptiest affectation. Well, most men have bound their eyes with one or another hand- kerchief, and attached themselves to some one of these communities of opinion. This conformity makes them not false in a few particulars, authors of a few lies, but false in all particulars. Their every truth is not quite true. Their two is not the real two, their four not the real four; so that every word they say chagrins us and we know not where to begin to set them right. Meantime nature is not slow to equip us in the prison- uniform of the party to which we adhere. We come to wear one cut of face and figure, and acquire by degrees the gentlest asinine expression. There is a mortifying experience in particular, which does not fail to wreak itself also in the general history; I mean "the foolish face of praise," the forced smile which we put on in company where we do not feel at ease, in answer to conversation which does not interest us. The muscles, not spontaneously moved but moved by a low usurping wilfulness, grow tight about the outline of the face, with the most disagreeable sensation.

For nonconformity the world whips you with its displeasure. And therefore a man must know how to estimate a sour face. The by-standers look askance on him in the public street or in the friend's parlor. If this aversion had its origin in contempt and resistance like his own he might well go home with a sad countenance; but the sour faces of the multitude, like their sweet faces, have no deep cause, but are put on and off as the wind blows and a newspaper directs."
(Ralph Waldo Emerson, Self-reliance, 1841)

E1.6.B.1.5_REF4.1.b_PH A FOOLISH CONSISTENCY LIMITS GREAT MINDS. GENUINE ACTIONS, ALLOWING ONE'S CHARACTER TO GUIDE ACTIONS RATHER THAN ADHERING TO PAST STATEMENTS OR SOCIETAL EXPECTATIONS, will inherently align and justify themselves over time. True greatness often involves being misunderstood, as seen in historical figures like Socrates and Galileo.
"The other terror that scares us from self-trust is our consistency; a reverence for our past act or word because the eyes of others have no other data for computing our orbit than our past acts, and we are loth to disappoint them.

But why should you keep your head over your shoulder? Why drag about this corpse of your memory, lest you contradict some what you have stated in this or that public place? Suppose you should contradict yourself; what then? It seems to be a rule of wisdom never to rely on your memory alone, scarcely even in acts of pure memory, but to bring the past for judgment into the thousand-eyed present, and live ever in a new day. In your metaphysics you have denied personality to the Deity, yet when the devout motions of the soul come, yield to them heart and life, though they should clothe God with shape and color. Leave your theory, as Joseph his coat in the hand of the harlot, and flee.

A foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds, adored by little statesmen and philosophers and divines. With consistency a great soul has simply nothing to do. He may as well concern himself with his shadow on the wall. Speak what you think now in hard words and to-morrow speak what to-morrow thinks in hard words again, though it contradict every thing you said today. Ah, so you shall be sure to be misunderstood.'- Is it so bad then to be misunderstood? Pythagoras was misunderstood, and Socrates, and Jesus, and Luther, and Copernicus, and Galileo, and Newton, and every pure and wise spirit that ever took flesh. To be great is to be misunderstood.

I suppose no man can violate his nature. All the sallies of his will are rounded in by the law of his being, as the inequalities of Andes and Himmaleh are insignificant in the curve of the sphere. Nor does it matter how you gauge and try him. A character is like an acrostic or Alexandrian stanza; read it forward, back- ward, or across, it still spells the same thing. In this pleasing contrite wood-life which God allows me, let me record day by day my honest thought without prospect or retrospect, and, I cannot doubt, it will be found symmetrical, though I mean it not and see it not. My book should smell of pines and resound with the hum of insects. The swallow over my window should inter- weave that thread or straw he carries in his bill into my web also. We pass for what we are. Character teaches above our wills. Men imagine that they communicate their virtue or vice only by overt actions, and do not see that virtue or vice emit a breath every moment.

There will be an agreement in whatever variety of actions, so they be each honest and natural in their hour. For of one will, the actions will be harmonious, however unlike they seem. These varieties are lost sight of at a little distance, at a little height of thought. One tendency unites them all. The voyage of the best ship is a zigzag line of a hundred tacks. See the line from a sufficient distance, and it straightens itself to the average tendency. Your genuine action will explain itself and will explain your other genuine actions. Your conformity explains nothing. Act singly, and what you have already done singly will justify you now. Greatness appeals to the future. If I can be firm enough to-day to do right and scorn eyes, I must have done so much right before as to defend me now. Be it how it will, do right now. Always scorn appearances and you always may. The force of character is cumulative."
(Ralph Waldo Emerson, Self-reliance, 1841)

E1.6.B.1.5_REF4.1.c_PH AN INFLUENTIAL FIGURE TRANSCENDS TIME AND PLACE, SHAPING HIS ENVIRONMENT AND CIRCUMSTANCES THROUGH HIS CHARACTER AND ACTIONS "Let us affront and reprimand the smooth mediocrity and squalid contentment of the times, and hurl in the face of custom and trade and office, the fact which is the upshot of all history, that there is a great responsible Thinker and Actor working wherever a man works; that a true man belongs to no other time or place, but is the centre of things. Where he is, there is nature. He measures you and all men and all events. Ordinarily, every body in society reminds us of somewhat else, or of some other person. Character, reality, reminds you of nothing else; it takes place of the whole creation. The man must be so much that he must make all circumstances indifferent. Every true man is a cause, a country, and an age; requires infinite spaces and numbers and time fully to accomplish his design; and posterity seem to follow his steps as a train of clients."
(Ralph Waldo Emerson, Self-reliance, 1841)

E1.7.C.3.1.b_REF4_SCI.wE1.6.B.1.5_REF4.1.b

E1.6.B.1.5_REF4.1.d_PH “A LOT OF MISTAKES COME FROM COPYING PEOPLE PLAYING A DIFFERENT GAME THAN YOU.”
(FS Street, Brain food)

E1.6.B.1.5_REF4.1.e_PH “YOUR JOB, THROUGHOUT YOUR ENTIRE LIFE, IS TO DISAPPOINT AS MANY PEOPLE AS IT TAKES TO AVOID DISAPPOINTING YOURSELF.”
(Glennon Doyle)

E1.6.B.1.5_REF4.1.f_PO “ACCOUNT
The history of my stupidity would fill many volumes.

Some would be devoted to acting against consciousness,
Like the flight of a moth which, had it known,
Would have tended nevertheless toward the candle's flame.

Others would deal with ways to silence anxiety,
The little whisper which, though it is a warning, is ignored.

I would deal separately with satisfaction and pride,
The time when I was among their adherents
Who strut victoriously, unsuspecting.

But all of them would have one subject, desire,
If only my own -- but no, not at all; alas,
I was driven because I wanted to be like others.
I was afraid of what was wild and indecent in me.

The history of my stupidity will not be written.
For one thing, it's late.  And the truth is laborious.”
(Czeslaw Milosz)

E1.6.B.1.5_REF4.1.g_LIT JOHN STUART MILL ARGUES THAT THE FREEDOM TO EXPRESS ONE'S INDIVIDUALITY THROUGH DIVERSE "EXPERIMENTS OF LIVING" IS THE MOST ESSENTIAL INGREDIENT FOR BOTH PERSONAL WELL-BEING AND SOCIAL PROGRESS, A VITALITY DANGEROUSLY THREATENED BY THE HOMOGENIZING "DESPOTISM OF CUSTOM."
"OF INDIVIDUALITY, AS ONE OF THE ELEMENTS OF WELL-BEING.
Such being the reasons which make it imperative that human beings should
be free to form opinions, and to express their opinions without reserve;
and such the baneful consequences to the intellectual, and through that
to the moral nature of man, unless this liberty is either conceded, or
asserted in spite of prohibition; let us next examine whether the same
reasons do not require that men should be free to act upon their
opinions--to carry these out in their lives, without hindrance, either
physical or moral, from their fellow-men, so long as it is at their own
risk and peril. This last proviso is of course indispensable. No one
pretends that actions should be as free as opinions. On the contrary,
even opinions lose their immunity, when the circumstances in which they
are expressed are such as to constitute their expression a positive
instigation to some mischievous act. An opinion that corn-dealers are
starvers of the poor, or that private property is robbery, ought to be
unmolested when simply circulated through the press, but may justly
incur punishment when delivered orally to an excited mob assembled
before the house of a corn-dealer, or when handed about among the same
mob in the form of a placard. Acts, of whatever kind, which, without
justifiable cause, do harm to others, may be, and in the more important
cases absolutely require to be, controlled by the unfavourable
sentiments, and, when needful, by the active interference of mankind.
The liberty of the individual must be thus far limited; he must not make
himself a nuisance to other people. But if he refrains from molesting
others in what concerns them, and merely acts according to his own
inclination and judgment in things which concern himself, the same
reasons which show that opinion should be free, prove also that he
should be allowed, without molestation, to carry his opinions into
practice at his own cost. That mankind are not infallible; that their
truths, for the most part, are only half-truths; that unity of opinion,
unless resulting from the fullest and freest comparison of opposite
opinions, is not desirable, and diversity not an evil, but a good,
until mankind are much more capable than at present of recognising all
sides of the truth, are principles applicable to men's modes of action,
not less than to their opinions. As it is useful that while mankind are
imperfect there should be different opinions, so is it that there should
be different experiments of living; that free scope should be given to
varieties of character, short of injury to others; and that the worth of
different modes of life should be proved practically, when any one
thinks fit to try them. It is desirable, in short, that in things which
do not primarily concern others, individuality should assert itself.
Where, not the person's own character, but the traditions or customs of
other people are the rule of conduct, there is wanting one of the
principal ingredients of human happiness, and quite the chief ingredient
of individual and social progress.

In maintaining this principle, the greatest difficulty to be encountered
does not lie in the appreciation of means towards an acknowledged end,
but in the indifference of persons in general to the end itself. If it
were felt that the free development of individuality is one of the
leading essentials of well-being; that it is not only a co-ordinate
element with all that is designated by the terms civilisation,
instruction, education, culture, but is itself a necessary part and
condition of all those things; there would be no danger that liberty
should be under-valued, and the adjustment of the boundaries between it
and social control would present no extraordinary difficulty. But the
evil is, that individual spontaneity is hardly recognised by the common
modes of thinking, as having any intrinsic worth, or deserving any
regard on its own account. The majority, being satisfied with the ways
of mankind as they now are (for it is they who make them what they are),
cannot comprehend why those ways should not be good enough for
everybody; and what is more, spontaneity forms no part of the ideal of
the majority of moral and social reformers, but is rather looked on with
jealousy, as a troublesome and perhaps rebellious obstruction to the
general acceptance of what these reformers, in their own judgment, think
would be best for mankind. Few persons, out of Germany, even comprehend
the meaning of the doctrine which Wilhelm von Humboldt, so eminent both
as a *savant* and as a politician, made the text of a treatise--that
"the end of man, or that which is prescribed by the eternal or immutable
dictates of reason, and not suggested by vague and transient desires,
is the highest and most harmonious development of his powers to a
complete and consistent whole;" that, therefore, the object "towards
which every human being must ceaselessly direct his efforts, and on
which especially those who design to influence their fellow-men must
ever keep their eyes, is the individuality of power and development;"
that for this there are two requisites, "freedom, and a variety of
situations;" and that from the union of these arise "individual vigour
and manifold diversity," which combine themselves in "originality."[11]

Little, however, as people are accustomed to a doctrine like that of Von
Humboldt, and surprising as it may be to them to find so high a value
attached to individuality, the question, one must nevertheless think,
can only be one of degree. No one's idea of excellence in conduct is
that people should do absolutely nothing but copy one another. No one
would assert that people ought not to put into their mode of life, and
into the conduct of their concerns, any impress whatever of their own
judgment, or of their own individual character. On the other hand, it
would be absurd to pretend that people ought to live as if nothing
whatever had been known in the world before they came into it; as if
experience had as yet done nothing towards showing that one mode of
existence, or of conduct, is preferable to another. Nobody denies that
people should be so taught and trained in youth, as to know and benefit
by the ascertained results of human experience. But it is the privilege
and proper condition of a human being, arrived at the maturity of his
faculties, to use and interpret experience in his own way. It is for him
to find out what part of recorded experience is properly applicable to
his own circumstances and character. The traditions and customs of other
people are, to a certain extent, evidence of what their experience has
taught *them*; presumptive evidence, and as such, have a claim to his
deference: but, in the first place, their experience may be too narrow;
or they may not have interpreted it rightly. Secondly, their
interpretation of experience may be correct, but unsuitable to him.
Customs are made for customary circumstances, and customary characters:
and his circumstances or his character may be uncustomary. Thirdly,
though the customs be both good as customs, and suitable to him, yet to
conform to custom, merely *as* custom, does not educate or develop in
him any of the qualities which are the distinctive endowment of a human
being. The human faculties of perception, judgment, discriminative
feeling, mental activity, and even moral preference, are exercised only
in making a choice. He who does anything because it is the custom, makes
no choice. He gains no practice either in discerning or in desiring what
is best. The mental and moral, like the muscular powers, are improved
only by being used. The faculties are called into no exercise by doing a
thing merely because others do it, no more than by believing a thing
only because others believe it. If the grounds of an opinion are not
conclusive to the person's own reason, his reason cannot be
strengthened, but is likely to be weakened by his adopting it: and if
the inducements to an act are not such as are consentaneous to his own
feelings and character (where affection, or the rights of others, are
not concerned), it is so much done towards rendering his feelings and
character inert and torpid, instead of active and energetic.

He who lets the world, or his own portion of it, choose his plan of life
for him, has no need of any other faculty than the ape-like one of
imitation. He who chooses his plan for himself, employs all his
faculties. He must use observation to see, reasoning and judgment to
foresee, activity to gather materials for decision, discrimination to
decide, and when he has decided, firmness and self-control to hold to
his deliberate decision. And these qualities he requires and exercises
exactly in proportion as the part of his conduct which he determines
according to his own judgment and feelings is a large one. It is
possible that he might be guided in some good path, and kept out of
harm's way, without any of these things. But what will be his
comparative worth as a human being? It really is of importance, not only
what men do, but also what manner of men they are that do it. Among the
works of man, which human life is rightly employed in perfecting and
beautifying, the first in importance surely is man himself. Supposing it
were possible to get houses built, corn grown, battles fought, causes
tried, and even churches erected and prayers said, by machinery--by
automatons in human form--it would be a considerable loss to exchange
for these automatons even the men and women who at present inhabit the
more civilised parts of the world, and who assuredly are but starved
specimens of what nature can and will produce. Human nature is not a
machine to be built after a model, and set to do exactly the work
prescribed for it, but a tree, which requires to grow and develop
itself on all sides, according to the tendency of the inward forces
which make it a living thing.

It will probably be conceded that it is desirable people should exercise
their understandings, and that an intelligent following of custom, or
even occasionally an intelligent deviation from custom, is better than a
blind and simply mechanical adhesion to it. To a certain extent it is
admitted, that our understanding should be our own: but there is not the
same willingness to admit that our desires and impulses should be our
own likewise; or that to possess impulses of our own, and of any
strength, is anything but a peril and a snare. Yet desires and impulses
are as much a part of a perfect human being, as beliefs and restraints:
and strong impulses are only perilous when not properly balanced; when
one set of aims and inclinations is developed into strength, while
others, which ought to co-exist with them, remain weak and inactive. It
is not because men's desires are strong that they act ill; it is because
their consciences are weak. There is no natural connection between
strong impulses and a weak conscience. The natural connection is the
other way. To say that one person's desires and feelings are stronger
and more various than those of another, is merely to say that he has
more of the raw material of human nature, and is therefore capable,
perhaps of more evil, but certainly of more good. Strong impulses are
but another name for energy. Energy may be turned to bad uses; but more
good may always be made of an energetic nature, than of an indolent and
impassive one. Those who have most natural feeling, are always those
whose cultivated feelings may be made the strongest. The same strong
susceptibilities which make the personal impulses vivid and powerful,
are also the source from whence are generated the most passionate love
of virtue, and the sternest self-control. It is through the cultivation
of these, that society both does its duty and protects its interests:
not by rejecting the stuff of which heroes are made, because it knows
not how to make them. A person whose desires and impulses are his
own--are the expression of his own nature, as it has been developed and
modified by his own culture--is said to have a character. One whose
desires and impulses are not his own, has no character, no more than a
steam-engine has a character. If, in addition to being his own, his
impulses are strong, and are under the government of a strong will, he
has an energetic character. Whoever thinks that individuality of
desires and impulses should not be encouraged to unfold itself, must
maintain that society has no need of strong natures--is not the better
for containing many persons who have much character--and that a high
general average of energy is not desirable.

In some early states of society, these forces might be, and were, too
much ahead of the power which society then possessed of disciplining and
controlling them. There has been a time when the element of spontaneity
and individuality was in excess, and the social principle had a hard
struggle with it. The difficulty then was, to induce men of strong
bodies or minds to pay obedience to any rules which required them to
control their impulses. To overcome this difficulty, law and discipline,
like the Popes struggling against the Emperors, asserted a power over
the whole man, claiming to control all his life in order to control his
character--which society had not found any other sufficient means of
binding. But society has now fairly got the better of individuality; and
the danger which threatens human nature is not the excess, but the
deficiency, of personal impulses and preferences. Things are vastly
changed, since the passions of those who were strong by station or by
personal endowment were in a state of habitual rebellion against laws
and ordinances, and required to be rigorously chained up to enable the
persons within their reach to enjoy any particle of security. In our
times, from the highest class of society down to the lowest, every one
lives as under the eye of a hostile and dreaded censorship. Not only in
what concerns others, but in what concerns only themselves, the
individual, or the family, do not ask themselves--what do I prefer? or,
what would suit my character and disposition? or, what would allow the
best and highest in me to have fair-play, and enable it to grow and
thrive? They ask themselves, what is suitable to my position? what is
usually done by persons of my station and pecuniary circumstances? or
(worse still) what is usually done by persons of a station and
circumstances superior to mine? I do not mean that they choose what is
customary, in preference to what suits their own inclination. It does
not occur to them to have any inclination, except for what is customary.
Thus the mind itself is bowed to the yoke: even in what people do for
pleasure, conformity is the first thing thought of; they live in crowds;
they exercise choice only among things commonly done: peculiarity of
taste, eccentricity of conduct, are shunned equally with crimes: until
by dint of not following their own nature, they have no nature to
follow: their human capacities are withered and starved: they become
incapable of any strong wishes or native pleasures, and are generally
without either opinions or feelings of home growth, or properly their
own. Now is this, or is it not, the desirable condition of human nature?

It is so, on the Calvinistic theory. According to that, the one great
offence of man is Self-will. All the good of which humanity is capable,
is comprised in Obedience. You have no choice; thus you must do, and no
otherwise: "whatever is not a duty, is a sin." Human nature being
radically corrupt, there is no redemption for any one until human nature
is killed within him. To one holding this theory of life, crushing out
any of the human faculties, capacities, and susceptibilities, is no
evil: man needs no capacity, but that of surrendering himself to the
will of God: and if he uses any of his faculties for any other purpose
but to do that supposed will more effectually, he is better without
them. That is the theory of Calvinism; and it is held, in a mitigated
form, by many who do not consider themselves Calvinists; the mitigation
consisting in giving a less ascetic interpretation to the alleged will
of God; asserting it to be his will that mankind should gratify some of
their inclinations; of course not in the manner they themselves prefer,
but in the way of obedience, that is, in a way prescribed to them by
authority; and, therefore, by the necessary conditions of the case, the
same for all.

In some such insidious form there is at present a strong tendency to
this narrow theory of life, and to the pinched and hidebound type of
human character which it patronises. Many persons, no doubt, sincerely
think that human beings thus cramped and dwarfed, are as their Maker
designed them to be; just as many have thought that trees are a much
finer thing when clipped into pollards, or cut out into figures of
animals, than as nature made them. But if it be any part of religion to
believe that man was made by a good being, it is more consistent with
that faith to believe, that this Being gave all human faculties that
they might be cultivated and unfolded, not rooted out and consumed, and
that he takes delight in every nearer approach made by his creatures to
the ideal conception embodied in them, every increase in any of their
capabilities of comprehension, of action, or of enjoyment. There is a
different type of human excellence from the Calvinistic; a conception of
humanity as having its nature bestowed on it for other purposes than
merely to be abnegated. "Pagan self-assertion" is one of the elements of
human worth, as well as "Christian self-denial."[12] There is a Greek
ideal of self-development, which the Platonic and Christian ideal of
self-government blends with, but does not supersede. It may be better to
be a John Knox than an Alcibiades, but it is better to be a Pericles
than either; nor would a Pericles, if we had one in these days, be
without anything good which belonged to John Knox.

It is not by wearing down into uniformity all that is individual in
themselves, but by cultivating it and calling it forth, within the
limits imposed by the rights and interests of others, that human beings
become a noble and beautiful object of contemplation; and as the works
partake the character of those who do them, by the same process human
life also becomes rich, diversified, and animating, furnishing more
abundant aliment to high thoughts and elevating feelings, and
strengthening the tie which binds every individual to the race, by
making the race infinitely better worth belonging to. In proportion to
the development of his individuality, each person becomes more valuable
to himself, and is therefore capable of being more valuable to others.
There is a greater fulness of life about his own existence, and when
there is more life in the units there is more in the mass which is
composed of them. As much compression as is necessary to prevent the
stronger specimens of human nature from encroaching on the rights of
others, cannot be dispensed with; but for this there is ample
compensation even in the point of view of human development. The means
of development which the individual loses by being prevented from
gratifying his inclinations to the injury of others, are chiefly
obtained at the expense of the development of other people. And even to
himself there is a full equivalent in the better development of the
social part of his nature, rendered possible by the restraint put upon
the selfish part. To be held to rigid rules of justice for the sake of
others, develops the feelings and capacities which have the good of
others for their object. But to be restrained in things not affecting
their good, by their mere displeasure, develops nothing valuable, except
such force of character as may unfold itself in resisting the restraint.
If acquiesced in, it dulls and blunts the whole nature. To give any
fair-play to the nature of each, it is essential that different persons
should be allowed to lead different lives. In proportion as this
latitude has been exercised in any age, has that age been noteworthy to
posterity. Even despotism does not produce its worst effects, so long as
Individuality exists under it; and whatever crushes individuality is
despotism, by whatever name it may be called, and whether it professes
to be enforcing the will of God or the injunctions of men.

Having said that Individuality is the same thing with development, and
that it is only the cultivation of individuality which produces, or can
produce, well-developed human beings, I might here close the argument:
for what more or better can be said of any condition of human affairs,
than that it brings human beings themselves nearer to the best thing
they can be? or what worse can be said of any obstruction to good, than
that it prevents this? Doubtless, however, these considerations will not
suffice to convince those who most need convincing; and it is necessary
further to show, that these developed human beings are of some use to
the undeveloped--to point out to those who do not desire liberty, and
would not avail themselves of it, that they may be in some intelligible
manner rewarded for allowing other people to make use of it without
hindrance.

In the first place, then, I would suggest that they might possibly
learn something from them. It will not be denied by anybody, that
originality is a valuable element in human affairs. There is always need
of persons not only to discover new truths, and point out when what were
once truths are true no longer, but also to commence new practices, and
set the example of more enlightened conduct, and better taste and sense
in human life. This cannot well be gainsaid by anybody who does not
believe that the world has already attained perfection in all its ways
and practices. It is true that this benefit is not capable of being
rendered by everybody alike: there are but few persons, in comparison
with the whole of mankind, whose experiments, if adopted by others,
would be likely to be any improvement on established practice. But these
few are the salt of the earth; without them, human life would become a
stagnant pool. Not only is it they who introduce good things which did
not before exist; it is they who keep the life in those which already
existed. If there were nothing new to be done, would human intellect
cease to be necessary? Would it be a reason why those who do the old
things should forget why they are done, and do them like cattle, not
like human beings? There is only too great a tendency in the best
beliefs and practices to degenerate into the mechanical; and unless
there were a succession of persons whose ever-recurring originality
prevents the grounds of those beliefs and practices from becoming merely
traditional, such dead matter would not resist the smallest shock from
anything really alive, and there would be no reason why civilisation
should not die out, as in the Byzantine Empire. Persons of genius, it is
true, are, and are always likely to be, a small minority; but in order
to have them, it is necessary to preserve the soil in which they grow.
Genius can only breathe freely in an *atmosphere* of freedom. Persons of
genius are, *ex vi termini*, *more* individual than any other
people--less capable, consequently, of fitting themselves, without
hurtful compression, into any of the small number of moulds which
society provides in order to save its members the trouble of forming
their own character. If from timidity they consent to be forced into one
of these moulds, and to let all that part of themselves which cannot
expand under the pressure remain unexpanded, society will be little the
better for their genius. If they are of a strong character, and break
their fetters, they become a mark for the society which has not
succeeded in reducing them to commonplace, to point at with solemn
warning as "wild," "erratic," and the like; much as if one should
complain of the Niagara river for not flowing smoothly between its banks
like a Dutch canal.

I insist thus emphatically on the importance of genius, and the
necessity of allowing it to unfold itself freely both in thought and in
practice, being well aware that no one will deny the position in theory,
but knowing also that almost every one, in reality, is totally
indifferent to it. People think genius a fine thing if it enables a man
to write an exciting poem, or paint a picture. But in its true sense,
that of originality in thought and action, though no one says that it is
not a thing to be admired, nearly all, at heart, think that they can do
very well without it. Unhappily this is too natural to be wondered at.
Originality is the one thing which unoriginal minds cannot feel the use
of. They cannot see what it is to do for them: how should they? If they
could see what it would do for them, it would not be originality. The
first service which originality has to render them, is that of opening
their eyes: which being once fully done, they would have a chance of
being themselves original. Meanwhile, recollecting that nothing was ever
yet done which some one was not the first to do, and that all good
things which exist are the fruits of originality, let them be modest
enough to believe that there is something still left for it to
accomplish, and assure themselves that they are more in need of
originality, the less they are conscious of the want.

In sober truth, whatever homage may be professed, or even paid, to real
or supposed mental superiority, the general tendency of things
throughout the world is to render mediocrity the ascendant power among
mankind. In ancient history, in the middle ages, and in a diminishing
degree through the long transition from feudality to the present time,
the individual was a power in himself; and if he had either great
talents or a high social position, he was a considerable power. At
present individuals are lost in the crowd. In politics it is almost a
triviality to say that public opinion now rules the world. The only
power deserving the name is that of masses, and of governments while
they make themselves the organ of the tendencies and instincts of
masses. This is as true in the moral and social relations of private
life as in public transactions. Those whose opinions go by the name of
public opinion, are not always the same sort of public: in America they
are the whole white population; in England, chiefly the middle class.
But they are always a mass, that is to say, collective mediocrity. And
what is a still greater novelty, the mass do not now take their opinions
from dignitaries in Church or State, from ostensible leaders, or from
books. Their thinking is done for them by men much like themselves,
addressing them or speaking in their name, on the spur of the moment,
through the newspapers. I am not complaining of all this. I do not
assert that anything better is compatible, as a general rule, with the
present low state of the human mind. But that does not hinder the
government of mediocrity from being mediocre government. No government
by a democracy or a numerous aristocracy, either in its political acts
or in the opinions, qualities, and tone of mind which it fosters, ever
did or could rise above mediocrity, except in so far as the sovereign
Many have let themselves be guided (which in their best times they
always have done) by the counsels and influence of a more highly gifted
and instructed One or Few. The initiation of all wise or noble things,
comes and must come from individuals; generally at first from some one
individual. The honour and glory of the average man is that he is
capable of following that initiative; that he can respond internally to
wise and noble things, and be led to them with his eyes open. I am not
countenancing the sort of "hero-worship" which applauds the strong man
of genius for forcibly seizing on the government of the world and making
it do his bidding in spite of itself. All he can claim is, freedom to
point out the way. The power of compelling others into it, is not only
inconsistent with the freedom and development of all the rest, but
corrupting to the strong man himself. It does seem, however, that when
the opinions of masses of merely average men are everywhere become or
becoming the dominant power, the counterpoise and corrective to that
tendency would be, the more and more pronounced individuality of those
who stand on the higher eminences of thought. It is in these
circumstances most especially, that exceptional individuals, instead of
being deterred, should be encouraged in acting differently from the
mass. In other times there was no advantage in their doing so, unless
they acted not only differently, but better. In this age the mere
example of nonconformity, the mere refusal to bend the knee to custom,
is itself a service. Precisely because the tyranny of opinion is such as
to make eccentricity a reproach, it is desirable, in order to break
through that tyranny, that people should be eccentric. Eccentricity has
always abounded when and where strength of character has abounded; and
the amount of eccentricity in a society has generally been proportional
to the amount of genius, mental vigour, and moral courage which it
contained. That so few now dare to be eccentric, marks the chief danger
of the time.

I have said that it is important to give the freest scope possible to
uncustomary things, in order that it may in time appear which of these
are fit to be converted into customs. But independence of action, and
disregard of custom are not solely deserving of encouragement for the
chance they afford that better modes of action, and customs more worthy
of general adoption, may be struck out; nor is it only persons of
decided mental superiority who have a just claim to carry on their lives
in their own way. There is no reason that all human existences should be
constructed on some one, or some small number of patterns. If a person
possesses any tolerable amount of common-sense and experience, his own
mode of laying out his existence is the best, not because it is the best
in itself, but because it is his own mode. Human beings are not like
sheep; and even sheep are not undistinguishably alike. A man cannot get
a coat or a pair of boots to fit him, unless they are either made to his
measure, or he has a whole warehouseful to choose from: and is it easier
to fit him with a life than with a coat, or are human beings more like
one another in their whole physical and spiritual conformation than in
the shape of their feet? If it were only that people have diversities of
taste, that is reason enough for not attempting to shape them all after
one model. But different persons also require different conditions for
their spiritual development; and can no more exist healthily in the same
moral, than all the variety of plants can in the same physical,
atmosphere and climate. The same things which are helps to one person
towards the cultivation of his higher nature, are hindrances to another.
The same mode of life is a healthy excitement to one, keeping all his
faculties of action and enjoyment in their best order, while to another
it is a distracting burthen, which suspends or crushes all internal
life. Such are the differences among human beings in their sources of
pleasure, their susceptibilities of pain, and the operation on them of
different physical and moral agencies, that unless there is a
corresponding diversity in their modes of life, they neither obtain
their fair share of happiness, nor grow up to the mental, moral, and
aesthetic stature of which their nature is capable. Why then should
tolerance, as far as the public sentiment is concerned, extend only to
tastes and modes of life which extort acquiescence by the multitude of
their adherents? Nowhere (except in some monastic institutions) is
diversity of taste entirely unrecognised; a person may, without blame,
either like or dislike rowing, or smoking, or music, or athletic
exercises, or chess, or cards, or study, because both those who like
each of these things, and those who dislike them, are too numerous to be
put down. But the man, and still more the woman, who can be accused
either of doing "what nobody does," or of not doing "what everybody
does," is the subject of as much depreciatory remark as if he or she had
committed some grave moral delinquency. Persons require to possess a
title, or some other badge of rank, or of the consideration of people of
rank, to be able to indulge somewhat in the luxury of doing as they like
without detriment to their estimation. To indulge somewhat, I repeat:
for whoever allow themselves much of that indulgence, incur the risk of
something worse than disparaging speeches--they are in peril of a
commission *de lunatico*, and of having their property taken from them
and given to their relations.

There is one characteristic of the present direction of public opinion,
peculiarly calculated to make it intolerant of any marked demonstration
of individuality. The general average of mankind are not only moderate
in intellect, but also moderate in inclinations: they have no tastes or
wishes strong enough to incline them to do anything unusual, and they
consequently do not understand those who have, and class all such with
the wild and intemperate whom they are accustomed to look down upon.
Now, in addition to this fact which is general, we have only to suppose
that a strong movement has set in towards the improvement of morals,
and it is evident what we have to expect. In these days such a movement
has set in; much has actually been effected in the way of increased
regularity of conduct, and discouragement of excesses; and there is a
philanthropic spirit abroad, for the exercise of which there is no more
inviting field than the moral and prudential improvement of our
fellow-creatures. These tendencies of the times cause the public to be
more disposed than at most former periods to prescribe general rules of
conduct, and endeavour to make every one conform to the approved
standard. And that standard, express or tacit, is to desire nothing
strongly. Its ideal of character is to be without any marked character;
to maim by compression, like a Chinese lady's foot, every part of human
nature which stands out prominently, and tends to make the person
markedly dissimilar in outline to commonplace humanity.

As is usually the case with ideals which exclude one-half of what is
desirable, the present standard of approbation produces only an inferior
imitation of the other half. Instead of great energies guided by
vigorous reason, and strong feelings strongly controlled by a
conscientious will, its result is weak feelings and weak energies, which
therefore can be kept in outward conformity to rule without any strength
either of will or of reason. Already energetic characters on any large
scale are becoming merely traditional. There is now scarcely any outlet
for energy in this country except business. The energy expended in that
may still be regarded as considerable. What little is left from that
employment, is expended on some hobby; which may be a useful, even a
philanthropic hobby, but is always some one thing, and generally a thing
of small dimensions. The greatness of England is now all collective:
individually small, we only appear capable of anything great by our
habit of combining; and with this our moral and religious
philanthropists are perfectly contented. But it was men of another
stamp than this that made England what it has been; and men of another
stamp will be needed to prevent its decline.

The despotism of custom is everywhere the standing hindrance to human
advancement, being in unceasing antagonism to that disposition to aim at
something better than customary, which is called, according to
circumstances, the spirit of liberty, or that of progress or
improvement. The spirit of improvement is not always a spirit of
liberty, for it may aim at forcing improvements on an unwilling people;
and the spirit of liberty, in so far as it resists such attempts, may
ally itself locally and temporarily with the opponents of improvement;
but the only unfailing and permanent source of improvement is liberty,
since by it there are as many possible independent centres of
improvement as there are individuals. The progressive principle,
however, in either shape, whether as the love of liberty or of
improvement, is antagonistic to the sway of Custom, involving at least
emancipation from that yoke; and the contest between the two constitutes
the chief interest of the history of mankind. The greater part of the
world has, properly speaking, no history, because the despotism of
Custom is complete. This is the case over the whole East. Custom is
there, in all things, the final appeal; justice and right mean
conformity to custom; the argument of custom no one, unless some tyrant
intoxicated with power, thinks of resisting. And we see the result.
Those nations must once have had originality; they did not start out of
the ground populous, lettered, and versed in many of the arts of life;
they made themselves all this, and were then the greatest and most
powerful nations in the world. What are they now? The subjects or
dependants of tribes whose forefathers wandered in the forests when
theirs had magnificent palaces and gorgeous temples, but over whom
custom exercised only a divided rule with liberty and progress. A
people, it appears, may be progressive for a certain length of time, and
then stop: when does it stop? When it ceases to possess individuality.
If a similar change should befall the nations of Europe, it will not be
in exactly the same shape: the despotism of custom with which these
nations are threatened is not precisely stationariness. It proscribes
singularity, but it does not preclude change, provided all change
together. We have discarded the fixed costumes of our forefathers; every
one must still dress like other people, but the fashion may change once
or twice a year. We thus take care that when there is change, it shall
be for change's sake, and not from any idea of beauty or convenience;
for the same idea of beauty or convenience would not strike all the
world at the same moment, and be simultaneously thrown aside by all at
another moment. But we are progressive as well as changeable: we
continually make new inventions in mechanical things, and keep them
until they are again superseded by better; we are eager for improvement
in politics, in education, even in morals, though in this last our idea
of improvement chiefly consists in persuading or forcing other people to
be as good as ourselves. It is not progress that we object to; on the
contrary, we flatter ourselves that we are the most progressive people
who ever lived. It is individuality that we war against: we should think
we had done wonders if we had made ourselves all alike; forgetting that
the unlikeness of one person to another is generally the first thing
which draws the attention of either to the imperfection of his own type,
and the superiority of another, or the possibility, by combining the
advantages of both, of producing something better than either. We have a
warning example in China--a nation of much talent, and, in some
respects, even wisdom, owing to the rare good fortune of having been
provided at an early period with a particularly good set of customs, the
work, in some measure, of men to whom even the most enlightened European
must accord, under certain limitations, the title of sages and
philosophers. They are remarkable, too, in the excellence of their
apparatus for impressing, as far as possible, the best wisdom they
possess upon every mind in the community, and securing that those who
have appropriated most of it shall occupy the posts of honour and power.
Surely the people who did this have discovered the secret of human
progressiveness, and must have kept themselves steadily at the head of
the movement of the world. On the contrary, they have become
stationary--have remained so for thousands of years; and if they are
ever to be farther improved, it must be by foreigners. They have
succeeded beyond all hope in what English philanthropists are so
industriously working at--in making a people all alike, all governing
their thoughts and conduct by the same maxims and rules; and these are
the fruits. The modern *régime* of public opinion is, in an unorganised
form, what the Chinese educational and political systems are in an
organised; and unless individuality shall be able successfully to assert
itself against this yoke, Europe, notwithstanding its noble antecedents
and its professed Christianity, will tend to become another China.

What is it that has hitherto preserved Europe from this lot? What has
made the European family of nations an improving, instead of a
stationary portion of mankind? Not any superior excellence in them,
which, when it exists, exists as the effect, not as the cause; but their
remarkable diversity of character and culture. Individuals, classes,
nations, have been extremely unlike one another: they have struck out a
great variety of paths, each leading to something valuable; and although
at every period those who travelled in different paths have been
intolerant of one another, and each would have thought it an excellent
thing if all the rest could have been compelled to travel his road,
their attempts to thwart each other's development have rarely had any
permanent success, and each has in time endured to receive the good
which the others have offered. Europe is, in my judgment, wholly
indebted to this plurality of paths for its progressive and many-sided
development. But it already begins to possess this benefit in a
considerably less degree. It is decidedly advancing towards the Chinese
ideal of making all people alike. M. de Tocqueville, in his last
important work, remarks how much more the Frenchmen of the present day
resemble one another, than did those even of the last generation. The
same remark might be made of Englishmen in a far greater degree. In a
passage already quoted from Wilhelm von Humboldt, he points out two
things as necessary conditions of human development, because necessary
to render people unlike one another; namely, freedom, and variety of
situations. The second of these two conditions is in this country every
day diminishing. The circumstances which surround different classes and
individuals, and shape their characters, are daily becoming more
assimilated. Formerly, different ranks, different neighbourhoods,
different trades and professions, lived in what might be called
different worlds; at present, to a great degree in the same.
Comparatively speaking, they now read the same things, listen to the
same things, see the same things, go to the same places, have their
hopes and fears directed to the same objects, have the same rights and
liberties, and the same means of asserting them. Great as are the
differences of position which remain, they are nothing to those which
have ceased. And the assimilation is still proceeding. All the political
changes of the age promote it, since they all tend to raise the low and
to lower the high. Every extension of education promotes it, because
education brings people under common influences, and gives them access
to the general stock of facts and sentiments. Improvements in the means
of communication promote it, by bringing the inhabitants of distant
places into personal contact, and keeping up a rapid flow of changes of
residence between one place and another. The increase of commerce and
manufactures promotes it, by diffusing more widely the advantages of
easy circumstances, and opening all objects of ambition, even the
highest, to general competition, whereby the desire of rising becomes no
longer the character of a particular class, but of all classes. A more
powerful agency than even all these, in bringing about a general
similarity among mankind, is the complete establishment, in this and
other free countries, of the ascendency of public opinion in the State.
As the various social eminences which enabled persons entrenched on them
to disregard the opinion of the multitude, gradually become levelled; as
the very idea of resisting the will of the public, when it is positively
known that they have a will, disappears more and more from the minds of
practical politicians; there ceases to be any social support for
non-conformity--any substantive power in society, which, itself opposed
to the ascendency of numbers, is interested in taking under its
protection opinions and tendencies at variance with those of the public.

The combination of all these causes forms so great a mass of influences
hostile to Individuality, that it is not easy to see how it can stand
its ground. It will do so with increasing difficulty, unless the
intelligent part of the public can be made to feel its value--to see
that it is good there should be differences, even though not for the
better, even though, as it may appear to them, some should be for the
worse. If the claims of Individuality are ever to be asserted, the time
is now, while much is still wanting to complete the enforced
assimilation. It is only in the earlier stages that any stand can be
successfully made against the encroachment. The demand that all other
people shall resemble ourselves, grows by what it feeds on. If
resistance waits till life is reduced *nearly* to one uniform type, all
deviations from that type will come to be considered impious, immoral,
even monstrous and contrary to nature. Mankind speedily become unable to
conceive diversity, when they have been for some time unaccustomed to
see it.”
(John Stuart Mill, On Liberty, 1859)

E1.6.B.1.5_REF5_CUR "ONE DAY SOMEONE SAYS THE CREATIVE WORD, AND BY SAYING IT, HE RETROSPECTIVELY DEMONSTRATES THAT HE HAD SOMETHING TO SAY. Now, he was saying this word innocently: and it is in the future perfect only that a new evidence and a new style will have appeared; for the creator can only create in perfect innocence! It is by playing the zither that one becomes a zither player, and it is in the innocent movement of inspiration that man becomes a poet: for the poet is he who makes and follows the straight path without looking at himself."
(Vladimir Jankélévitch)

In this Container Zero, a mobile and self-contained architectural space, Jean Pierre Raynaud displays his own art or works borrowed from the Centre Pompidou since 1987. A museum within the Museum, it is in constant development, a perpetual cycle of new beginnings, of destruction and reconstruction. It is the artist's wish that upon his death a painting of white tiles be placed in it, an image of completion in echo to the title of the work, "zero" representing the space before the artwork's existence, at the moment of its emergence.

E1.6.B.1.5_REF6_PH “THE FUNCTION OF DIVERSION IS SIMPLY TO ANESTHETIZE THE INDIVIDUAL AS INDIVIDUAL, AND TO PLUNGE HIM IN THE WARM, APATHETIC STUPOR OF A COLLECTIVITY which, like himself, wishes to remain amused. […]

The solitary is one who is called to make one of the most terrible decisions possible to man: the decision to disagree completely with those who imagine that the call to diversion and self-deception is the voice of truth and who can summon the full authority of their own prejudice to prove it. […]

The break with the big group is compensated by enrollment in the little group. It is a flight not into solitude but into a protesting minority. Such a flight may be more or less honest, more or less honorable. Certainly it inspires the anger of those who believe themselves to be the “right thinking majority” and it necessarily comes in for its fair share of mockery on that account… [There is a] process of falsification and corruption which these groups almost always undergo. They abandon one illusion which is forced on everyone and substitute for it another, more esoteric illusion, of their own making. They have the satisfaction of making a choice, but not the fulfilment of having chosen reality.

The true solitary is not called to an illusion, to the contemplation of himself as solitary. He is called to the nakedness and hunger of a more primitive and honest condition. […]
[There are] sordid difficulties and uncertainties which attend the life of interior solitude… The disconcerting task of facing and accepting one’s own absurdity. The anguish of realizing that underneath the apparently logical pattern of a more or less “well organized” and rational life, there lies an abyss of irrationality, confusion, pointlessness, and indeed of apparent chaos… It cannot be otherwise: for in renouncing diversion, [the solitary] renounces the seemingly harmless pleasure of building a tight, self-contained illusion about himself and about his little world. He accepts the difficulty of facing the million things in his life which are incomprehensible, instead of simply ignoring them. Incidentally it is only when the apparent absurdity of life is faced in all truth that faith really becomes possible. Otherwise, faith tends to be a kind of diversion, a spiritual amusement, in which one gathers up accepted, conventional formulas and arranges them in the approved mental patterns, without bothering to investigate their meaning, or asking if they have any practical consequences in one’s life. […]

The true solitary is not one who simply withdraws from society. Mere withdrawal, regression, leads to a sick solitude, without meaning and without fruit. The solitary of whom I speak is called not to leave society but to transcend it. […]

If every society were ideal, then every society would help its members only to a fruitful and productive self-transcendence. But in fact societies tend to lift a man above himself only far enough to make him a useful and submissive instrument in whom the aspirations, lusts and needs of the group can function unhindered by too delicate a personal conscience. Social life tends to form and educate a man, but generally at the price of a simultaneous deformation and perversion. This is because civil society is never ideal, always a mixture of good and evil, and always tending to present the evil in itself as a form of good. […]

Often the lonely and the empty have found their way into this pure silence only after many false starts. They have taken many wrong roads, even roads that were totally alien to their character and vocation. They have repeatedly contradicted themselves and their own inmost truth. […]

One has to be born into solitude carefully, patiently and after long delay, out of the womb of society. […]
The price of fidelity in such a task is a completely dedicated humility — an emptiness of heart in which self-assertion has no place. For if he is not empty and undivided in his own inmost soul, the solitary will be nothing more than an individualist. And in that case, his non-conformity is nothing but an act of rebellion: the substitution of idols and illusions of his own choosing for those chosen by society. And this, of course, is the greatest of dangers… For to forget oneself, at least to the extent of preferring a social myth with a certain limited productiveness, is a lesser evil than clinging to a private myth which is only a sterile dream. […]

True solitude is not mere separateness. It tends only to *unity*. The true solitary does not renounce anything that is basic and human about his relationship to other men. He is deeply united to them — all the more deeply because he is no longer entranced by marginal concerns. What he renounces is the superficial imagery and the trite symbolism that pretend to make the relationship more genuine and more fruitful. […]

One who is called to solitude is not called merely to imagine himself solitary, to live as if he were solitary, to cultivate the illusion that he is different, withdrawn and elevated. He is called to emptiness. And in this emptiness he does not find points upon which to base a contrast between himself and others. On the contrary, he realizes, though perhaps confusedly, that he has entered into *a solitude that is really shared by everyone*. It is not that he is solitary while everybody else is social: but that everyone is solitary, in a solitude masked by that symbolism which they use to cheat and counteract their solitariness. […]

The solitary is one who is aware of solitude in himself as a basic and inevitable human reality, not just as something which affects him as an isolated individual. Hence his solitude is the foundation of a deep, pure and gentle sympathy with all other men, whether or not they are capable of realizing the tragedy of their plight.”
(Thomas Merto, Notes for a Philosophy of a Solitude, Disputed Questions, 1960)

E1.6.B.1.5_REF7_PH “WHEN IT IS TIME TO VOW FIDELITY TO ONESELF.—We sometimes go astray in an intellectual direction which does not correspond to our talents. For a time we struggle heroically against wind and tide, really against ourselves; but finally we become weary and we pant. What we accomplish gives us no real pleasure, since we think that we have paid too heavy a price for these successes. We even despair of our productivity, of our future, perhaps in the midst of victory.—Finally, finally we turn back—and then the wind swells our sails and bears us into our smooth water. What bliss! How certain of victory we feel! Only now do we know what we are and what we intend, and now we vow fidelity to ourselves, and have a right to do so—as men that know.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human III, Aphorism 329, 1878)

E1.6.B.1.6. WORK VS. LABOR
We aim to distinguish between work and labor. Work is an intended activity carried out through will, while labor follows its own schedule and pace. The rhythms of creative labor cannot be altered by technology. Creativity is undermined when the value of labor is expressed solely in terms of exchange value.

E1.6.B.1.6_REF1_PH LEWIS HYDE ON WORK VS. LABOR
"Work is what we do by the hour. It begins and, if possible, we do it for money. Welding car bodies on an assembly line is work; washing dishes, computing taxes, walking the rounds in a psychiatric ward, picking asparagus — these are work. Labor, on the other hand, sets its own pace. We may get paid for it, but it’s harder to quantify… Writing a poem, raising a child, developing a new calculus, resolving a neurosis, invention in all forms — these are labors.
Work is an intended activity that is accomplished through the will. A labor can be intended but only to the extent of doing the groundwork, or of not doing things that would clearly prevent the labor. Beyond that, labor has its own schedule. [...]
There is no technology, no time-saving device that can alter the rhythms of creative labor. When the worth of labor is expressed in terms of exchange value, therefore, creativity is automatically devalued every time there is an advance in the technology of work."
(Lewis Hyde, The Gift: Creativity and the Artist in the Modern World, 1979)

E1.6.B.1.6_REF2_PH CREATIVE WORK TRANSCENDS QUANTIFICATION AND COMMODIFICATION. "A decade ago, several years after I started writing The Marginalian (under the outgrown name Brain Pickings, in my twenties, while working four jobs), a musician friend gave me a book she said captured the animating spirit of my labor of love: The Gift: How the Creative Spirit Transforms the World by the poet Lewis Hyde, published a year before I was born.

Like a generation of creative people, I devoured it with a rare and rapturous sense of being seen in the elemental strata of my being. Here was shimmering affirmation that creative work gives something which cannot be quantified or commodified. Here was assurance that those whose lives it touches can give back to its makers in a way that is not a transaction but a bow of mutual appreciation, mutual respect, mutual cherishment. At the center of Hyde’s premise is that idea that creative works exist simultaneously in a market economy and a gift economy. “Only one of these,” Hyde writes, “is essential, however: a work of art can survive without the market, but where there is no gift there is no art.”"
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.6.B.1.7. WHAT ABOUT THE MYTH OF THE UNHAPPY CREATOR?
Art helps the artist to sublimate his pain; it helps us by his example to remind us of the legitimate place of suffering in a good life. It's not that artists suffer more than others, that one must suffer to be an artist, but the artist has a way of sublimating pain that others do not have. Artists have differents ways of struggling wih the "Daemon".

E1.6.B.1.7.a. THE STRUGGLE WITH THE DAEMON - STEFAN ZWEIG DEFINES THE "DAEMONIC" AS A DANGEROUS YET ESSENTIAL PRIMORDIAL CREATIVE FORCE THAT DRIVES ARTISTS TOWARD THE INFINITE, contrasting those who are tragically consumed by its chaotic power—such as Hölderlin, Kleist, and Nietzsche—with the figure of Goethe, who represents the triumph of the artist who masters this elemental energy to impose order and form. 

““Daemonic”—this word has had so many connotations imposed upon it, has been so variously interpreted, in the course of its wanderings from the days of ancient religious mythology into our own time, that I must explain the sense in which I shall use it in this book. I term “daemonic” the unrest that is in us all, driving each of us out of himself into the elemental. It seems as if nature had implanted into every mind an inalienable part of the primordial chaos, and as if this part were interminably striving—with tense passion—to rejoin the superhuman, suprasensual medium whence it derives. The daemon is the incorporation of that tormenting leaven which impels our being (otherwise quiet and almost inert) towards danger, immoderation, ecstasy, renunciation and even self-destruction. But in those of common clay, this factor of our composition which is both precious and perilous proves comparatively ineffective, is speedily absorbed and consumed. In such persons only at rare moments, during the crises of puberty or when, through love or the generative impulse, the inward cosmos is heated to boiling point, does the longing to escape from the familiar groove, to renounce the trite and the commonplace, exert its mysterious sway. At other times the average man keeps a tight hand on any stirrings of the Faustian impulse, chloroforming it with the dicta of conventional morality, numbing it with work, restraining its wild waters behind the dams of the established order. By temperament and training the humdrum citizen is an inveterate enemy of the chaotic, not only in the outer world, but in himself as well. In persons of finer type, however, and above all in those with strongly productive inclinations, the unrestful element is ever at work, showing itself as dissatisfaction with the daily round, creating that “higher heart which afflicts itself” (Dostoevsky), that questioning spirit which expands with its yearnings into the abysses of the limitless universe. Whatever strives to transcend the narrower boundaries of self, o’erleaping immediate personal interests to seek adventures in the dangerous realm of enquiry, is the outcome of the daemonic constituent of our being. But the daemon is not a friendly and helpful power unless we can hold him in leash, can use him to promote a wholesome tension and to assist us on our upward path. He becomes a menace when the tension he fosters is excessive, and when the mind is a prey to the rebellious and volcanically eruptive urge of the daemonic. For the daemon cannot make his way back to the infinite which is his home except by ruthlessly destroying the finite and the earthly which restrains him, by destroying the body wherein, for a season, he is housed. He works, as with a lever, to promote expansion, but threatens in so doing to shatter the tenement. That is why those of an exceptionally “daemonic temperament”, those who cannot early and thoroughly subdue the daemon within them, are racked by disquietude. Ever and again the daemon snatches the helm from their control and steers them (helpless as straws in the blast) into the heart of the storm, perchance to shatter them on the rocks of destiny. Restlessness of the blood, the nerves, the mind, is always the herald of the daemonic tempest—and that is why we call daemonic those women who diffuse unrest wherever they go and who open the sluices to let loose the waters of destruction. The daemonic bodes danger, carries with it an atmosphere of tragedy, breathes doom.
Thus it comes to pass that everyone whose nature excels the commonplace, everyone whose impulses are creative, wrestles perforce with his daemon. This is a combat of titans, a struggle between lovers, the most splendid contest in which we mortals can engage. Many succumb to the daemon’s fierce onslaught as the woman succumbs to the passion of the impetuous male; they are overpowered by his preponderant strength; they feel themselves joyfully permeated by the fertilising element. Many subjugate him; their cold, resolute, purposive will constrains his ardours to accept their guidance even while he animates their energies. Often the embrace which is a wrestle and the wrestle which is an embrace persist for a lifetime. In the artist and his work the great encounter becomes, as it were, symbolical; his every nerve is thrilled by the sensuous union between his spirit and its perpetual seducer. Only in the creative genius does the daemonic succeed in making its way out of the shadows of feeling into the regions of language and of light, and we discern the daemon’s passionate features most plainly in those who have been mastered by him, in the imaginative writers whom he leads whithersoever he wills—in such as the three men I have chosen as most typical of their kind in the German world—Hölderlin, Kleist and Nietzsche. For if in an imaginative writer the daemon rules autocratically, there flames up in him a peculiar kind of art; he becomes, as it were, drunken with his art; he gives himself up to a frenzied, febrile creation; there occurs in him a spasmodic exaltation of spirit, convulsive, explosive, orgiastic, the * of the Greeks, characteristic of the prophet and the pythoness. The measureless, the superlative, is the first unmistakable token of this form of art—an unceasing endeavour to outdo oneself in the effort to reach that limitless sphere to which the daemonic properly belongs. Hölderlin, Kleist and Nietzsche were of the Promethean race which is in revolt against customary forms and tends thereby to destroy itself. The uncanny light of the daemon flashes from their eyes, and it is he who speaks through their lips. He continues, indeed, to speak through their lips when otherwise they would be dumb, and his strength makes itself manifest in them when nothing else remains to quicken the spirit and when the bodily forces are far advanced in decay. Never is the dread guest more plainly perceptible than when the mind of the host, rent asunder by formidable tensions, has collapsed, and the onlooker catches a glimpse of the inmost abysses where the daemon lurks. In all three of those whom this book concerns, daemonic strength (previously veiled) became conspicuous when the guiding intelligence of the ordinary self had tottered and fallen.
To throw light upon the mysterious essence of the writer who has been overpowered by his daemon, to elucidate the true nature of the daemonic, I have (faithful to my method of comparison) inconspicuously delineated an opposing player, as counterpart to the three tragical heroes. But the counterpart to the writer who soars upon the pinions of an uncontrolled daemonism is not one who is himself undaemonic. There is no art worthy of the name without daemonism, no great art that does not voice the music of the spheres. No one ever bore more convincing testimony to this than the arch foe of all that was daemonic, the man who was so unsympathetic to the lives of Kleist and of Hölderlin, namely, Goethe, who said to Eckermann of the daemonic: “Productivity of the highest kind, every notable aperçu … is subject to no one’s control and is uplifted above earthly power.” Great art cannot exist without inspiration, and inspiration derives from an unknown, from a region outside the domain of the waking consciousness. For me, the true counterpart of the spasmodically exalted writer, divinely presumptuous, carried out of himself by the exuberance of uncontrolled forces, is the writer who can master these forces, the writer whose mundane will is powerful enough to tame and to guide the daemonic element that has been instilled into his being. To guide as well as to tame, for daemonic power, magnificent though it be and the source of creative artistry, is fundamentally aimless, striving only to re-enter the chaos out of which it sprang. Unquestionably great art, art nowise inferior to the daemonic, emerges when an artist wins mastery over this elemental force and imposes on it whatever direction he pleases, when he “commands” poesy as Goethe commanded it, and gives the “incommensurable” a definite form; when, in a word, he becomes the daemon’s master instead of the daemon’s thrall.
Goethe—there you have the name for the antithetical type which holds symbolical sway throughout this book. Not merely as a scientist, not merely as a geologist, was Goethe “an adversary of Vulcanism”; in art, likewise, he championed the evolutionary against the eruptive, fighting with unusual bitterness against the convulsive, the volcanic, the daemonic manifestations of genius. Yet the embitterment shows more clearly than anything else that for him, too, the contest with the daemon had been the decisive problem of his art. In this field had taken place the struggle for its existence. He could not have regarded the daemon as so terrible an enemy had he not himself wrestled with the fiend, and looked shudderingly into the gorgon’s face. Somewhere in the thorny thicket of his youth, Goethe must have fought the battle to a finish. We learn it from Werther, the book in which he prophetically averted from himself the fate of Kleist and of Tasso, of Hölderlin and of Nietzsche! The encounter must have been alarming, for throughout life Goethe retained a fierce respect for and was inspired with an unconcealed fear of the powers of his formidable adversary. With the diviner’s skill, he recognised his enemy through all disguises—in Beethoven’s music, in Kleist’s Penthesilea, in Shakespeare’s tragedies, which in later years he desisted from reading (“it would disturb me”), and the more his thoughts and energies were directed into constructive work and concerned with self-preservation, the more sedulous was he to escape every possibility of such “disturbance”. He knew what was the upshot when an artist surrendered to the daemon; that was why he was ever on the alert to defend himself, and why he warned others against the lion in the path—though his warnings were fruitless. Goethe manifested as much heroic energy in saving himself from surrender as do the daemonic display in their self-surrender. He, too, was striving for supreme freedom; he was fighting to sustain a measure amid the immeasurable, and to secure his own fulfilment, whereas those others were surrendering to the urge towards the infinite.
Only in this sense have I contraposed Goethe’s figure to those of the thralls of the daemon, those of Hölderlin, Kleist and Nietzsche; not in the sense of any active rivalry (though such a rivalry existed in their lives). I needed a great voice of the obverse kind, to make it clear that though I venerate the Bacchic, the hymnic, the titanic as set forth in my account of the three imaginative writers to whose life and work this book is devoted, I do not regard these qualities as necessarily characteristic of the most valuable or of the sublimest art. The contrast between the two kinds of art seems to me, indeed, to bring us face to face with an intensely interesting problem in spiritual polarity, and I shall do well to give a plain account of certain aspects of this immanent antithesis. With something that approaches the clarity of mathematical formulae, the contrast, beginning in the abstract realm of form, extends into the most trifling episodes of the protagonists’ bodily lives, so that nothing but a direct comparison between Goethe and his daemonic counterparts will serve—as a comparison between supreme but divergent kinds of mental achievement—to throw light upon the enigma.”
(Stefan Zweig, The Struggle with the Daemon, 1925)

E1.6.B.1.7.a_RERF1_LIT STEFAN ZWEIG CONTRASTS THE TRAGIC, ROOTLESS EXISTENCE OF "DAEMONIC" GENIUSES LIKE HÖLDERLIN, KLEIST, AND NIETZSCHE—WHOSE LIVES FOLLOW THE EXPLOSIVE, SELF-DESTRUCTIVE TRAJECTORY OF A PARABOLA IN THEIR CENTRIFUGAL PURSUIT OF THE INFINITE—with the rooted, "circular" stability of Goethe, who mastered the daemon through self-preservation and a reverence for reality, ultimately arguing that both opposing paths represent valid, magnificent forms of creative "super-health."

“The first thing that is obvious in Hölderlin, Kleist and Nietzsche is their detachment from the world. The daemon plucks away from realities those whom he holds in his grip. Not one of the three had wife or children, any more than had their congeners Beethoven and Michelangelo; they had neither fixed home nor permanent possessions, neither settled occupation nor secure footing in the world. They were nomads, vagrants, eccentrics; they were despised and rejected; they lived in the shadows. Not one of them ever had a bed to call his own; they sat in hired chairs, wrote at hired desks and wandered from one lodging house to another. Nowhere did they take root; not even Eros could establish binding ties for those whom the jealous daemon had espoused. Their friendships were transitory, their appointments fugitive, their work unremunerative; they stood ever in vacant spaces and created in the void. Thus their existence was like that of shooting stars, which flash on indeterminable paths, whereas Goethe circled in a fixed orbit. Or (to return to a previous metaphor) Goethe was firmly established upon solid earth, into which his roots spread ever wider and deeper. He had wife and children and grandchildren; women garlanded his life; intercourse with a small group of tried and trusted friends suffused his leisure with content. He lived in a large, well-appointed house, which he filled by degrees with rarities and art treasures; he was comforted by the warmth of an assured reputation, unchallenged for the half-century and more during which he survived as an acknowledged master. He had offices and dignities conferred upon him, was a privy councillor and was styled “His Excellency”, and, on gala occasions, orders innumerable glittered on his broad chest. While those others developed their capacities for wild flights in the mental empyrean, but on the earth grew more unstable as the years passed, running hither and thither like hunted beasts, Goethe, increasingly subject to the force of terrestrial gravity, became continually more steadfast. Where he stood was the centre of his ego, and at the same time the intellectual focus of the nation. From this fixed point his tranquil activities embraced the world, his ties extending far beyond human fellowship to form attachments with the lower animals, with plants and with inanimate nature, wedding him creatively to the foundations of mundane existence.
Like Dionysus, the thralls of the daemon were torn to pieces by the titans; whereas Goethe, having subdued the daemon, was self-controlled to the end. His career was a strategic conquest of the world; whilst they, fighting heroically but without set purpose, were driven forth from the world and had to flee into the infinite. They were constrained to drag themselves away from the terrene in order to merge themselves in the supramundane, but Goethe need take only one step from the earth in order to find himself in the limitless expanse, or could slowly and patiently draw the limitless into his finite grasp. His method was thus essentially capitalistic, the method of capitalist accumulation. Year after year he stored a definite amount of experience as intellectual profit, entering it like a careful bookkeeper in his “diaries” and “annals”, his life bearing interest as a tilled field bears fruit. Hölderlin, Kleist and Nietzsche, on the other hand, were gamblers, staking their all with magnificent indifference upon the turn of a single card, to win or to lose a measureless prize; for the daemon loathes the tedious heaping up of petty gains in a savings box. Experience, which for a Goethe is the very core of life, was for them of no account; their sufferings taught them only how to feel more intensely; and, a prey to fitful enthusiasms, they lost track of their own selves. In contrast with them, Goethe was the unceasing learner, the book of life was for him something to be mastered conscientiously, diligently, page after page and line upon line; always he continued to regard himself as a student, and not until old age was upon him did he venture the mystical utterance:
I have learnt how to live; grant me, ye gods, more time.
For Kleist, Hölderlin and Nietzsche living was not to be learnt, nor worth learning; their intuition of a loftier existence was of far more significance than perception and sensuous experience. What their genius did not give them freehandedly did not exist for them. They cared for nothing but that which was poured for them out of his horn of plenty, and they could be spurred to exertion only by impulses from within, by the ardour of their superheated feelings. Fire became their element; flame, their mode of activity; and their lives were perpetually scorched in the furnaces which alone made their work possible. As time went on they grew ever more lonely, more estranged from the world of men; whereas for Goethe, hour by hour, each moment that ticked away was richer than those which had gone before. The daemon within them grew stronger, the lure of the infinite more overpowering; there was privation of life in the beauty they fashioned, and beauty gushed forth from their lack of personal joys.
These polar differences in outlook explain why geniuses of the one group and of the other (despite the kinship which genius gives) differ so profoundly in their valuations of reality. To the daemonic temperament reality seems inadequate—Hölderlin, Kleist and Nietzsche, each in his own way, were rebels against the established order. They would rather break than yield, uncompromising even at pain of death and annihilation. This makes them superb figures of tragedy—indeed, their whole life is one long tragedy. Goethe conversely (how frankly he understands himself!) admits to Zelter that he does not feel himself born to be a tragic dramatist, “for my temperament is conciliatory”. He does not, like those others, want unending warfare; as a “preservative” and “pacifying force”, he wants compromise and harmony. With a sentiment to which one can only give the name of piety, he subordinates himself to life as to a higher power, as to the supreme power, which he reveres in all its forms and phases, saying: “Life is good, whatever turn it takes.” But from those who are tormented by the daemon, and hounded by him through the world, nothing is further than the thought of paying homage to reality. They do not value reality at a pin’s fee; they revere nothing but the infinite, and for them art is the only way of reaching it. That is why they esteem art more than life, poesy more than reality. Like Michelangelo in his blind ardour hewing at thousands of blocks of marble, with frenzied zeal they cut their way along the dark galleries of the innermost self towards the sparkling stone revealed to them in their dreams as present in the hidden depths; whereas Goethe (like Leonardo) feels that art is but one of the manifold forms of life, dear to him just as science and philosophy are dear, a fragment, a small and effective constituent of his life. That is why the forms of daemonic activity grow more intensive, whilst those of a Goethe grow more extensive. Hölderlin, Kleist and Nietzsche transform their being in the direction of an overwhelming particularity, ostensibly unconditioned; Goethe moves continually in the direction of an increasingly comprehensive universality.
A love for extant reality directs Goethe’s aims (the aims of the anti-daemonic genius) towards security, towards a wise self-preservation. By their contempt for reality the daemonic geniuses are impelled to take gamblers’ chances, to march towards danger, towards violent self-expansion, ending in self-destruction. In Goethe, all forces work centripetally, moving from the periphery towards the core; in the daemonics the will-to-power operates centrifugally, striving away from the innermost circle of life, inevitably disrupting it. This flight into fathomless space, this overflow into the formless, is sublimated most conspicuously in a fondness for music. There, where shore and shape are lacking, they can drift unguided into their proper element, so that in decay Hölderlin and Nietzsche, and even the harsher-fibred Kleist, gave themselves up to its magic. Understanding is resolved into ecstasy, language into rhythm. Always (in Lenau likewise) music heralds the onrush of the daemonic spirit. On the other hand Goethe’s attitude towards music is “cautious and reserved”. He dreads its beguiling force, its capacity to distract the will towards unessentials; in his hours of strength he forcibly represses his interest in it—even in Beethoven. Only in moments of weakness, when he is ailing or in love, does he surrender to its charm. He finds his true element in drawing, in the plastic arts; in all that offers concrete forms; in all that imposes limits upon the vague, the shapeless; in all that hinders the disintegration of matter. The daemonics love that which unbinds, that which confers freedom, that which leads back into the chaos of feeling—but he, with his scientific instinct for self-preservation, grasps at everything which furthers individual stability; he acclaims order, normality, form and law.
In a hundred other ways I could dilate upon this fruitful contrast between those who mastered the daemon and those whom he held in thrall, but shall content myself with a reference to the geometrical as the plainest of them all. The formula of Goethe’s life was the circle, a closed curve; that of an existence perfectly rounded and self-contained, with a boundary returning ever into itself, perpetually equidistant from the centre, developing steadily outwards from within. That is why there is no culminating point in Goethe’s career, no topmost summit of production. His nature grew equably on every side. But, as already indicated, the daemonics’ curve is the parabola—a steep, impetuous ascent, an uprush into limitless space, a brusque change of direction, followed by a no less steep, a no less impetuous decline. The climax, both in respect of imaginative creation and in respect of the artist’s personal life, is reached immediately before the fall. There is a strange coincidence here. The collapse of the daemonics’ career, the personal collapse of Hölderlin and Kleist and Nietzsche, is an integral constituent of their destiny. This collapse is needed to complete the picture, just as the descending limb of the parabola completes the geometrical figure. Goethe’s death, on the other hand, is an inconspicuous point in the circle, adding naught of moment to the story of his life. He dies, not like those others, a mysterious, heroic, quasi-legendary death; he dies a patriarch, in his bed, and vainly has the popular myth that he died with the words “More light” on his lips endeavoured to give a symbolic or prophetic significance to his last hour. Such a life ends only because it has been fulfilled, but the life of the daemonic terminates in an explosion or a conflagration. In the latter case death compensates for the material poverty of life, surrounding its close with an aura of mystery, and he whose career has been a tragedy is vouchsafed a hero’s end.
Passionate self-surrender to absorption into the elemental, on the one hand, and passionate self-maintenance with a stubborn insistence upon personal guidance, on the other—both forms of the struggle with the daemon need fortitude, and both are glorious victories in the realm of mind. Alike in Goethe’s fulfilment of life and in the creative self-immolation of the daemonics, there is achieved (though in different ways) the same task—that of making unbounded demands upon life. If, in this book, I have contrasted the divergent types of character, it has been in order to reveal the antithetic beauties of the two. It has never been my wish to establish rival scales of value, and still less to lend weight to the conventional, nay, trivial diagnosis, that Goethe represented health and the thralls of the daemon disease, that Goethe was normal whilst they were pathological. This word “pathological” applies only to the lower world, the world of the unproductive; for when illness creates the imperishable it is no longer illness but a form of super-health, the best health there is. Even though the daemonic is at the utmost marge of life, and passes beyond that marge into untrodden and unattainable fields, it is nonetheless part of the very substance of mankind and lies within the sphere of the natural. For Nature herself, who for millenniums has conferred upon the seed its miracle of growth and has granted the embryo power to develop in the mother’s womb, Nature herself, though subject to law, knows her daemonic moments, her phases of outbreak and excess, when (in thunderstorms, in cyclones, in cataclysms) she fiercely lavishes her forces and seems bent on self-destruction. She too at times—though rarely, just as persons of daemonic type are rare—ceases to move in accordance with her usual bland routine, but only then, only in her outbursts, do we become aware of her full might. Nothing but the exceptional makes adequate appeal to our senses; nothing but dread of unfamiliar forces sets our feelings puissantly athrill. That is why the extraordinary is always the standard of greatness. Invariably, even in its most perplexing and most dangerous manifestations, the creative genius has a value supreme over other values, a meaning profounder than that of all other meanings.
(Stefan Zweig, The Struggle with the Daemon, 1925)

E1.6.B.1.7.b. THE ARTIST'S COMPLAINT
The artist, through their heightened sensitivity, unveils reality to perceive both its beauty and horror, as suggested by Bergson. Gilles Deleuze refers to this clear understanding and emotional reaction to reality as "the complaint."

E1.6.B.1.7.b_REF1_LIT WESTERN CULTURE'S MYTH OF THE TORTURED GENIUS, INHERITED FROM THE ROMANTICS, SUGGESTS THAT SUFFERING IS ESSENTIAL FOR ARTISTIC CREATION. However, artists are simply individuals who deeply feel life's dualities—its tragedies and transcendence. 
"Coursing through every civilization are the myths that shape what its people come to believe about reality and possibility. Some of them are healing and some damaging. Some are easy to recognize for what they are — almost all isms are damaging myths. But some are more subtle, more pernicious, permeating the substratum of culture and the marrow of the psyche.

One of Western culture’s most damaging myths, largely inherited from the Romantics, is that of the tortured genius — the suffering artist who needs to have suffered and must go on suffering in order to create works of beauty and poignancy, portals to the sacred. The truth, of course, is far more nuanced — artists are simply people who feel life deeply in all of its dimensions, who are awake and alive to both its tragedy and its transcendence, who put their heightened sensitivity in the service of wakefulness and aliveness for others.

Virginia Woolf knew this when she wrote of the shock-receiving capacity necessary for being an artist. In his diary, Walt Whitman contemplated the superior porousness of the creative spirit to both life’s “sunny expanses and sky-reaching heights” and its “bare spots and darknesses,” believing that “no artist or work of the very first class may be or can be without them.”

These, of course, are the polarities we all live with, the polarities that live in us, which Maya Angelou channeled in her stunning poem “A Brave and Startling Truth.” The artist is humanity’s magnifying lens for the inherent dualities of human nature — something James Baldwin captured in his insistence that an artist’s role is “to make you realize the doom and glory of knowing who you are and what you are.” The measure of our creative vitality lies in how intimately we contact both the doom and the glory of being, what we make of the restless tension between our own poles, how we harmonize them into something beautiful.

In the interlude between two world wars, as humanity hungered for beauty to controvert its own brutality, Hermann Hesse (July 2, 1877–August 9, 1962) considered the inner life of the creative spirit in a poignant passage from his 1927 novel Steppenwolf (public library), painting the artist as a divided creature that yearns for wholeness and turns that yearning into the creative act"
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.6.B.1.7.b_REF1.1_LIT "MANY ARTISTS… HAVE TWO SOULS, TWO BEINGS WITHIN THEM. THERE IS GOD AND THE DEVIL IN THEM; the mother’s blood and the father’s; the capacity for happiness and the capacity for suffering; and in just such a state of enmity and entanglement towards and within each other as were the wolf and man. [...]

[Artists] live at times in their rare moments of happiness with such strength and indescribable beauty, the spray of their moment’s happiness is flung so high and dazzlingly over the wide sea of suffering, that the light of it, spreading its radiance, touches others too with its enchantment. Thus, like a precious, fleeting foam over the sea of suffering arise all those works of art, in which a single individual lifts himself for an hour so high above his personal destiny that his happiness shines like a star and appears to all who see it as something eternal and as a happiness of their own."
(Hermann Hess, Steppenwolf, 1927)

E1.6.B.1.7.c. THE LINKS BETWEEN ARTISTIC CREATIVITY AND MOOD DISORDERS
While some people are overwhelmed by suffering, others are dominated by wonder, despite their heightened sensitivity not making them immune to suffering. This gives rise to the myth that creativity stems from suffering. In reality, it arises from increased sensitivity and association capacity. Creation acts as a catharsis for both suffering and ecstasy. The question arises: Are there more artists in suffering than in joy? The evidence supporting a link between artistic creativity and mood disorders is substantial.

E1.6.B.1.7.c.i. SUCCESSFUL WRITERS WITH MOOD DISORDERS DID NOT SUCCEED BECAUSE OF THEIR STRUGGLES, BUT RATHER IN SPITE OF THEM. 
Nancy Andreasen's study delves into the intricate relationship between mental illness and creativity, debunking the "tortured genius" stereotype. Her findings indicate that these individuals' creative abilities were not permanently impaired during periods of depression or mania.
Andreasen's study brings forth divergent views on the nature of genius. On one hand, creative people are extraordinarily disciplined; on the other, they may also grapple with significant mood disorders. She differentiates between creativity and schizophrenia, implying the latter struggles with sustained attention.
The study further examines the delicate yet adaptable psychoemotional makeup of highly creative individuals and the cognitive processes they share with mental turmoil.

E1.6.B.1.7.c.i_REF1_SCI SUCCESSFUL WRITERS ACHIEVED THEIR CREATIVITY DESPITE, NOT BECAUSE OF, MENTAL ILLNESS "Did mental illness facilitate [these creators’] unique abilities, whether it be to play a concerto or to perceive a novel mathematical relationship? Or did mental illness impair their creativity after its initial meteoric burst in their twenties? Or is the relationship more complex than a simple one of cause and effect, in either direction? [...]"

this is where the monumental importance of her study shines: What Andreasen found wasn’t confirmation for the “tortured genius” myth — the idea that a great artist must have some dark, tragic pathology in order to create — but quite the opposite: these women and men had become successful writers not because of their tortuous mental health but despite it.

Andreasen reflects on the findings:

"Although many writers had had periods of significant depression, mania, or hypomania, they were consistently appealing, entertaining, and interesting people. They had led interesting lives, and they enjoyed telling me about them as much as I enjoyed hearing about them. Mood disorders tend to be episodic, characterized by relatively brief periods of low or high mood lasting weeks to months, interspersed with long periods of normal mood (known as euthymia to us psychiatrists). All the writers were euthymic at the time that I interviewed them, and so they could look back on their periods of depression or mania with considerable detachment. They were also able to describe how abnormalities in mood state affected their creativity. Consistently, they indicated that they were unable to be creative when either depressed or manic." [...]

More than that, her study confirmed two pervasive yet conflicting ideas about the relationship between creativity and mental illness:

"One point of view … is that gifted people are in fact supernormal or superior in many ways. My writers certainly were. They were charming, fun, articulate, and disciplined. They typically followed very similar schedules, getting up in the morning and allocating a large chunk of time to writing during the earlier part of the day. They would rarely let a day go by without writing. In general, they had a close relationship with friends and family. They manifested the Freudian definition of health: lieben und arbeiten, “to love and to work.” On the other hand, they also manifested the alternative common point of view about the nature of genius: that it is “to madness near allied.” Many definitely had experienced periods of significant mood disorder. Importantly, though handicapping creativity when they occurred, these periods of mood disorder were not permanent or long-lived. In some instances, they may even have provided powerful material upon which the writer could later draw, as a Wordsworthian “emotion recollected in tranquility.” [...]

Andreasen returns to the question of why mood disorders are so common among writers, but schizophrenia — which she initially expected to find — is not:

"The evidence supporting an association between artistic creativity and mood disorder is quite solid, as is the absence of an association with schizophrenia. The nature of artistic creativity, particularly literary creativity, is probably not compatible with the presence of an illness like schizophrenia, which causes many of its victims to be socially withdrawn and cognitively disorganized. An activity such as writing a novel or a play requires sustained attention for long periods of time and an ability to hold a complex group of characters and a plot line “in the brain” for as long as one or two years while the novel or play is being designed, written, and rewritten. This type of sustained concentration is extremely difficult for people suffering from schizophrenia.

Creativity in other fields may, however, be compatible with an illness like schizophrenia, particularly those fields in which the creative moment is achieved by flashes of insight about complex relationships or by exploring hunches and intuitions that ordinary folk might find strange or even bizarre."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings, Review on Nancy Andreasen's The Creating Brain: The Neuroscience of Genius, 2005)

E1.6.B.1.7.c.i_REF1.1_SCI HIGHLY CREATIVE INDIVIDUALS ARE OPEN TO NEW EXPERIENCES AND SHOW TOLERANCE FOR AMBIGUITY. THESE TRAITS ALLOW FOR FRESH, NOVEL PERCEPTIONS BUT ALSO CREATE A COMPLEX INNER WORLD THAT CAN LEAD TO DEPRESSION OR SOCIAL ALIENATION. Creative ideas emerge from a potentially dangerous mental state where brain associations fly freely and must self-organize. 
"Andreasen considers the unique psychoemotional constitution of the highly creative person, both its blessing and its curse:

"Many personality characteristics of creative people … make them more vulnerable, including openness to new experiences, a tolerance for ambiguity, and an approach to life and the world that is relatively free of preconceptions. This flexibility permits them to perceive things in a fresh and novel way, which is an important basis for creativity. But it also means that their inner world is complex, ambiguous, and filled with shades of gray rather than black and white. It is a world filled with many questions and few easy answers. While less creative people can quickly respond to situations based on what they have been told by people in authority — parents, teachers, pastors, rabbis, or priests — the creative person lives in a more fluid and nebulous world. He or she may have to confront criticism or rejection for being too questioning, or too unconventional. Such traits can lead to feelings of depression or social alienation. A highly original person may seem odd or strange to others. Too much openness means living on the edge. Sometimes the person may drop over the edge… into depression, mania, or perhaps schizophrenia." [...]

She considers the cognitive machinery common to both creative thinking and mental turmoil:

"Creative ideas probably occur as part of a potentially dangerous mental process, when associations in the brain are flying freely during unconscious mental states — how thoughts must become momentarily disorganized prior to organizing. Such a process is very similar to that which occurs during psychotic states of mania, depression, or schizophrenia. In fact, the great Swiss psychiatrist Eugen Bleuler, who gave schizophrenia its name, described a “loosening of associations” as its most characteristic feature: “Of the thousands of associative threads that guide our thinking, this disease seems to interrupt, quite haphazardly, sometimes single threads, sometimes a whole group, and sometimes whole segments of them.” [...]

When the associations flying through the brain self-organize to form a new idea, the result is creativity. But if they either fail to self-organize, or if they self-organize to create an erroneous idea, the result is psychosis. Sometimes both occur in the same person, and the result is a creative person who is also psychotic. As [schizophrenic mathematician John] Nash [who inspired the film A Beautiful Mind] once said: “the ideas I have about supernatural beings came to me the same way that my mathematical ideas did, so I took them seriously.”

This failure to self-organize stems from what cognitive scientists call input dysfunction — a glitch in the filtering system we use to tune out the vast majority of what is going on around us. Andreasen explains:

"All human beings (and their brains) have to cope with the fact that their five senses gather more information than even the magnificent human brain is able to process. To put this another way: we need to be able to ignore a lot of what is happening around us — the smell of pizza baking, the sound of the cat meowing, or the sight of birds flying outside the window — if we are going to focus our attention and concentrate on what we are doing (in your case, for example, reading this book). Our ability to filter out unnecessary stimuli and focus our attention is mediated by brain mechanisms in regions known as the thalamus and the reticular activating system." [...]

"Our ability to use our brains to get “outside” our relatively limited personal perspectives and circumstances, and to see something other than the “objective” world, is a powerful gift. Many people fail to realize that they even have this gift, and most who do rarely use it."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings, Review on Nancy Andreasen's The Creating Brain: The Neuroscience of Genius, 2005)

E1.6.B.1.7.c.ii. THERE'S A CONNECTION BETWEEN MADNESS AND CREATIVITY, BUT IT DOESN'T SIMPLY OVERLAP; IT'S MORE AKIN TO A FAMILY RELATIONSHIP. 
Epidemiology reveals that those with family members suffering from mental health issues are more likely to work in a creative field. There's also a genetic aspect to this, as some genes increasing the risk of mental health disorders are found in the section of the genome that differs from Neanderthals', who coexisted with humans until about 30,000 years ago. These genes might have been chosen as they enable creativity and the manipulation of world representations, but they also pose the risk of individuals losing themselves. Madness and creativity are connected at the very root of what makes us human, and it's crucial to recognize this connection as part of every human being's potential.

E1.6.B.1.7.c.ii_REF1_SCI EPIDEMIOLOGY SHOWS THAT RELATIVES OF PEOPLE WITH MENTAL DISORDERS ARE MORE LIKELY TO BE CREATIVE. THE LINK BETWEEN MADNESS AND CREATIVITY IS NOT DIRECT, BUT RATHER A SUBTLE KINSHIP. Genes for vulnerability to mental disorders have accompanied human evolution, exposing us to both mental risk and creative capacity. Human cerebral complexity, a source of creativity, also makes the brain more fragile and vulnerable to mental disorders.
"This connection, this hypothesis of a connection between madness and creativity, I have the impression that everyone has the intuition that there is something that connects madness and creativity. In the history of thought, this intuition takes different forms: melancholy in the ancient Greeks, the intensification of passions in the Romantics, the demand for absolute freedom in the Surrealists. I was very surprised to discover - and this is where science comes in - that this connection is not what we thought it was. It is not a superimposed link that makes madness = creativity; it is not the cliché "you have to be mad to be creative"; it is actually a family link. For example, epidemiology shows that the likelihood of working in a creative profession is higher among relatives (parents, siblings, children) of people with a mental disorder. There is a family resemblance that links madness and creativity, but it is not romantic madness. I think that is largely untrue, it is much more subtle than that.

We could also talk about genetics. It is quite amazing, if you go back in history to prehistory, that the genes for susceptibility to mental disorders, which increase the risk of having a mental disorder (there is no gene for schizophrenia or bipolar disorder; There is no gene for schizophrenia or bipolar disorder; there are genes that increase the risk) - and, curiously, they are in the part of the genome that is different from that of Neanderthals, with whom we lived until less than 30,000 years ago - as if these genes had accompanied us at the root of what makes us men of knowledge, Homo sapiens. Evolution would have selected for something that both exposes us to psychological risk and makes us the human beings that we are. Our psychological apparatus allows us to create endlessly, because we can manipulate representations of the world and enrich them infinitely, but it is also what exposes us to the risk of losing ourselves. Perhaps we could say that this access to representations of the world is really our fall from paradise; language in particular, of course - but also what makes us strong. There is a connection between madness and creativity; it is a connection that is at the root of what makes us human. I think we have to be able to see it as the potential of every human being. Compared to other primates, our brains are much more complex, but also more fragile - more susceptible to the madness bug. Our brain, with its enormous complexity, can no longer support itself. Following the same line of reasoning, it is highly probable that the proportion of people who will experience moments of suffering from the psychiatric register will increase as our brains become even more powerful in the future - perhaps even through the hybridisation they will undergo with machines. We are likely to pay an even higher price for increased complexity with the reality of mental disorders".
(Raphaël Gaillard, psychiatrist, interviewed for the program Les chemins de la philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on April 1, 2022)

E1.6.B.1.7.c.iii. IT IS THE NATURE OF AN ARTIST'S VOCATION TO GATHER IDEAS FROM BEYOND THE NORM AND PRESENT THEM BACK TO THE WORLD. THIS PROCESS MAY NECESSITATE A RECKLESS SPIRIT AND COULD POTENTIALLY RESULT IN SPENDING EXCESSIVE TIME ON THE OTHER SIDE.
Nick Cave posits that personal suffering can significantly influence an individual's ability to create and operate. He suggests that many outstanding artists tend to be solitary, using their art to connect with others and validate their uniqueness. However, he does not view mental illness as a prerequisite for creativity. Instead, he believes it is inherent in an artist's role to source ideas from outside the conventional and reintroduce them to the world. This might demand a daring spirit and possibly result in excessive time spent on the other side.

E1.6.B.1.7.c.iii_REF1_PH ON THE IMPORTANCE OF RECOGNIZING AND REMEMBERING HAPPINESS AMIDST PERVASIVE SUFFERING "In an interview from 1997 in Los Angeles, you introduced us to your “pet theory”: your creativity could only flourish in a state of loss and longing, and that it needed catastrophes in your life.
Finally, and this is what resonated with me the most, you stated that you could not get much substance out of living a life which was content. Do you still believe that?
A sincere and devoted admirer of yours who sort of struggles in a content life.
HYUN, SEOUL, SOUTH KOREA

Dear Hyun,

One of the truly humbling aspects of The Red Hand Files is the glimpse it has given me into the vast and varied sweep of human suffering. Letter after letter comes in, day after day, increasingly so during the pandemic and its recurring lockdowns, from people suffering distress due to very serious problems — mental health issues, loneliness, homelessness, physical and mental abuse, loss of jobs, loss of loved ones, loss of dreams, loss of meaning and loss of hope. It is a profound privilege to read these letters as it puts one’s own struggles into perspective, and is a reminder that despite our differences, no one is immune to suffering.

So, when I read the quote from a younger Nick Cave saying he needs catastrophes in his life to create, these words sound somewhat like the indulgent posturing of a man yet to discover the devastating effect true suffering can have on our ability to function, let alone to create. I am not only talking about personal grief, but also global grief, as the world is plunged deeper into this wretched pandemic. The pandemic is playing havoc with our lives – but so is the questionable response of the lockdowns. The letters I receive through The Red Hand Files are testament to the devastating and largely ignored effect of lockdowns, not just on the economy, but on the very soul of the world. From reading the data — and I say this with great caution — one can’t help but wonder if the collateral damage from the lockdowns, this closeting of our lives, will end up outweighing the benefits. 

Hyun, if you are living a life that is content my advice is to learn to live inside it, examine it, relish it, and most of all remember it — this extraordinary thing, a happy life — because there may come a time when something will present itself in the form of a misfortune, a transgression, an abuse, a failure, a humiliation, a loss, or, indeed, a global crisis where your life will turn, in an instant, from easy comfort to total chaos. It is happening all around us.

On one level, some of this incoming despair is the routine devastation of ordinary life — suffering is always with us. Still, I pray that, ultimately, we will step beyond this extraordinary harrowing of our time to a new way, a different way, a better way. I hope we will be afforded that opportunity. 

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #121 / OCTOBER 2020)

Read it on The Red Hand Files: https://www.theredhandfiles.com/pet-theory-your-creativity-flourish/

E1.6.B.1.7.c.iii_REF1.1_PH "DO YOU NEED TO BE HURT OR MENTALLY ILL TO BE A GREAT ARTIST?
LATABAN, ENSENADA, MEXICO

What makes a great song?
MILA, AMSTERDAM, HOLLAND

Dear Lataban and Mila,

It seems to me that many of the great artists, especially in music, appear to possess a wildly conflicted sense of themselves, yet persistently pursue their own uniqueness, even when it runs at odds with the orthodoxies of the day. They tend to be outliers, abyss-gazers and misfits, whose sense of isolation is further amplified by their notoriety, and who use their art as a way of connecting to people and legitimising their own strangeness. They understand, on some level, that it is the nature of their vocation to steal across the borders of convention, collect up ideas and bring them back to the world. This requires a certain reckless spirit and it may be that some spend too long on the other side and that it becomes difficult for them to return. However, whether any of this is actual mental illness, I don’t know. This term feels too elastic, too nebulous to comment.

Whether being hurt is a necessary requirement to creativity is only true in so much as to live is partly to suffer. You cannot create without suffering, because you cannot live without suffering. One of the jobs of a songwriter, as I see it, is to develop strategies to help people transcend their sorrows. This is the unique duality of a great song – that it can reflect back at the listener the extent of their own hurt, yet lift them beyond it at the same time. How often have we wept ourselves to transcendence through music?

Part of the process for the songwriter is to stay alert to the nature of their own wounds without indulging them, to gravitate towards happiness when possible, to venture beyond convention and acceptability without losing oneself, to understand that our most treasured beliefs exist on the far side of what we think we know, and to go there cautiously, yet fearlessly and, perhaps most importantly of all, to remember to return.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #81 / JANUARY 2020)

Read it on The Red Hand Files: https://www.theredhandfiles.com/do-you-need-to-be-hurt-or-mentally-ill-to-be-a-great-artist/

E1.6.B.1.7.c.iv. ALL THAT HAPPENS TO US, INCLUDING OUR HUMILIATIONS, OUR MISFORTUNES, OUR EMBARRASSMENTS, ALL IS GIVEN TO US AS RAW MATERIAL, AS CLAY, SO THAT WE MAY SHAPE OUR ART
"A writer — and, I believe, generally all persons — must think that whatever happens to him or her is a resource. All things have been given to us for a purpose, and an artist must feel this more intensely. All that happens to us, including our humiliations, our misfortunes, our embarrassments, all is given to us as raw material, as clay, so that we may shape our art."
(Luis Borges, from Twenty-Four Conversations with Borges: Including a Selection of Poems — the record of his dialogues with the Argentine journalist and poet Roberto Alifano, conducted in the final years of Borges’s life, by which point he had been blind for almost thirty years)

E1.6.B.1.7.c.v. ART'S PURPOSE IS TO ILLUMINATE THE WORLD, AND IT DOES NOT REQUIRE SUFFERING OR ADDICTION FOR INSPIRATION
In a recent interview, Marilyn Manson suggested that the "ups and downs" of addiction are necessary for creating great art. Contrarily, musician Nick Cave views this as a misguided belief. He suggests that genuine, significant suffering only commences when one ceases drug use. Cave proposes that sobriety fosters a detailed and sophisticated connection with the world, leading to potentially profoundly creative art. He also rejects the idea that artists' addiction is a "holy" form of suffering, instead highlighting the bravery, beauty, and humanity in the ordinary struggles of life.

E1.6.B.1.7.c.v_REF1_PH THE BELIEF THAT ADDICTION IS NECESSARY FOR ARTISTIC CREATIVITY IS A MISCONCEPTION, FOR TRUE AND MEANINGFUL SUFFERING BEGINS WITH SOBRIETY. Life in sobriety can be complex, nuanced, and deeply creative, contrary to the belief that drugs and alcohol are essential for producing great art.
"Marilyn Manson said in an interview:
‘I was in a drug rehab program once, but they kicked me out. That bored me to death. I asked the therapist if he could name a single artist who made more exciting art after rehab. He then sent me to a psychiatrist, who told me he didn’t treat artists, that was hopeless: they needed the ups and downs for their art, I should just make sure that I had more ups. It’s a constant struggle. Many great musicians, actors, painters or writers have suffered throughout their lives – and great art has emerged from their pain.’
What do you think about that? [ ]
CHRISTOPHER, MUNICH, GERMANY

My life is a mess. I am a drug addict now for fifteen years. I am worried about giving it up because I am an artist, a painter, and I don’t want to lose my edge. I can’t create without it.
THOM, BRISTOL, UK

Dear Christopher and Thom,

The idea that if you stop drinking or taking drugs then you stop making interesting art is a delusional claim. It is one routinely made by those who have not really experienced the full reach of life, that is to say those who have only really experienced the addicted life. If I correctly understand some of what Marilyn Manson is saying then I can tell you that in my younger, addicted days I most likely shared a similar view. I don’t know when Marilyn Manson said this, it could well be a quote from his younger days too. It certainly feels like it. What I myself did not understand at that time was that true suffering, or rather, meaningful suffering, only begins when we stop taking drugs. It is then that we are forced to live life on life’s terms, without the insulating effects of alcohol or drugs. We learn, in sobriety, our true and complex relationship to the world, and the profound nature of suffering. We also find, to our surprise, that happiness is possible as life broadens into something intricate and nuanced and interesting and strange, and potentially deeply creative. Life in sobriety becomes, as the greatly missed comic genius, Barry Humphries, once said, ‘funny’. The cossetted, flattened, self-obsessed life of the alcoholic or drug addict knows little of these things.

We often hear the grandiose presumption that the artist-addict experiences a kind of ‘holy ’suffering, that their struggle is special or somehow elevated beyond the ordinary heartache of the world. This is simply not the case and indicates little understanding of the nature of suffering or addiction or, indeed, art. The artist-addict, cocooned within their addiction, always has the validating recourse of their art, whilst the ordinary person, dealing with the hardships and devastations of life, must deal with raw existence simply as it comes. I find there is considerable courage, beauty and humanity in that common struggle.

Art is the agent best equipped to bring light to the world. That is its purpose. That is its promise. That it is predicated upon a unique suffering that is somehow linked to drink and drugs is self-serving, self-piteous nonsense. Don’t fall for it.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #234 / APRIL 2023°

E1.6.B.1.7.c.vi. "THERE IS A KIND OF LONELINESS THAT LODGES ITSELF IN THE PSYCHE AND NEVER FULLY LEAVES, a loneliness most anguishing not in solitude but in companionship and amid the crowd. If solitude fertilizes the imagination, loneliness vacuums it of vitality and sands the baseboards of the spirit with the scratchy restlessness of longing — for connection, for communion, for escape. And yet it is out of this restlessness that so many great works of art are born.
“We have all known the long loneliness,” Dorothy Day wrote, but some — artists, perhaps — know it more intimately than others and few artists have articulated this knowledge with more stunning and stirring lucidity than Virginia Woolf (January 25, 1882–March 28, 1941). Loneliness permeates A Writer’s Diary "
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings)

E1.6.B.1.7.d. THE WEST AND SUFFERING
Does Western culture deeply involve suffering, using art as one of the "most exquisite sources of suffering"?

E1.6.B.1.7.d.i. I CREATED MY BEST WORK WHEN I WAS UNHAPPY
"I created my best works (Rhythm 0, Balkan baroque, The Artist Is Present, Great Wall of China) when I was unhappy. The artist always creates from an unhappy state. Look at the history of art..."
(Mariana Abramovic, Interview)

E1.6.B.1.7.d.i_REF1_LIT "PAUL HOLDENGRÄBER: There’s a line which you like to quote which happened here on this stage when I brought Günter Grass together with Norman Mailer when Mailer said that “every one of my books has killed me a little more.”
ELIZABETH GILBERT: Honestly, that’s how I feel about that… I’m sorry: Norman Mailer was a great man, he was a great — well, he wasn’t a great man, he was a great writer in certain regards — but it just bores me. I find myself very gently falling asleep when I hear somebody like that, who lived a long, robust life…
PH: …very robust…
EG: …wrote a pile of books that made him famous, that made every woman in the world want to sleep with him — and he did — say that his work was killing him. I just, I’m like, pff, just boo, you know? I’m sorry, rest in peace, Norman, but you know.
PH: You’re writing against that.
EG: I am so vividly against that and I also just think, are you kidding? First of all, who are you kidding? You know, he was the biggest narcissist in the world — it gave him a platform, it gave him attention, it gave him fame, it gave him notoriety, it gave him a way to run for mayor of New York, it gave him everything: It gave him life. And the ingratitude of it is what irritates me, because I feel like if you’re lucky enough — if you’re lucky enough ever in your life to be able to walk in a creative path — then at least be grateful. And it sounds like an indignant, spoiled rich child to me, and I hate it… I just hate it.
And you know why? I don’t hate it for him — because I don’t really care about Norman Mailer’s life — I hate it for the people who were in that audience that night, and who thought, “Oh, yes, true,” you know, or “I’m an aspiring writer, and therefore I must feel that, I should be feeling that way too,” and he’s teaching that and perpetuating it. And it’s a cancer."
(Elizabeth Gilbert in her conversation with The New York Public Library’s Paul Holdengräber)

Listen to the Interview on Soundcloud: https://soundcloud.com/brainpicker/elizabeth-gilbert-on-norman-mailer-and-the-cancer-of-writerly-myths

E1.6.B.1.7.d.ii. THE CONCEPT THAT SUFFERING IS A CRUCIAL ELEMENT IN THE CREATION OF ART, AND THAT THE VALUE OF ART IS OFTEN GAUGED BY THE AMOUNT OF SUFFERING THE ARTIST HAS ENDURED, IS A DISTINCTLY MODERN AND CHRISTIAN SENSIBILITY.
The credibility of certain writers and artists stems from their self-sacrifice and dedication to their truths, despite their unhealthiness.

E1.6.B.1.7.d.ii_REF1_PH "THE ARTIST AS EXEMPLARY SUFFERER

[...] The writer is the exemplary sufferer because he has found both the deepest level of suffering and also a professional means to sublimate (in the literal, not the Freudian, sense of sublimate) his suffering. As a man, he suffers; as a writer, he transforms his suffering into art. The writer is the man who discovers the use of suffering in the economy of art - as the saints discovered the utility and necessity of suffering in the economy of salvation.

[...] Everyone knows that we have a different, much more emphatic view of love between the sexes than the ancient Greeks and the Orientals, and that the modern view of love is an extension of the spirit of Christianity, in however attenuated and secularized a form. [...] We do not find among the ancient Hebrews, Greeks, and the Orientals the same value placed on love because we do not find there the same positive value placed on suffering. Suffering was not the hallmark of seriousness; rather, seriousness was measured by one's ability to evade or transcend the penalty of suffering, by one's ability to achieve tranquility and equilibrium. In contrast, the sensibility we have inherited identifies spirituality and seriousness with turbulence, suffering, passion. For two thousand years, among Christians and Jews, it has been spiritually fashionable to be in pain. Thus it is not love which we overvalue, but suffering - more precisely, the spiritual merits and benefits of suffering.
The modern contribution to this Christian sensibility has been to discover the making of works of art and the venture of sexual love as the two most exquisite sources of suffering."
(Susan Sontag, The artist as exemplary sufferer, 1962)

E1.6.B.1.7.d.ii_REF1.1_PH SUSAN SONTAG ARGUES THAT CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY VALUES TRUTHS BORN FROM SUFFERING "Ours is an age which consciously pursues health, and yet only believes in the reality of sickness. The truths we respect are those born of affliction. We measure truth in terms of the cost to the writer in suffering - rather than by the standard of an objective truth to which a writer's words correspond. Each of our truths must have a martyr.

Such writers as Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Dostoevsky, Kafka, Baudelaire, Rimbaud, Genet - and Simone Weil - have their authority with us precisely because of their air of unhealthiness. Their unhealthiness is their soundness, and is what carries conviction.

Perhaps there are certain ages which do not need truth as much as they need a deepening of the sense of reality, a widening of the imagination. I, for one, do not doubt that the sane view of the world is the true one. But is that what is always wanted, truth? The need for truth is not constant; no more than is the need for repose. An idea which is a distortion may have a greater intellectual thrust than the truth; it may better serve the needs of the spirit, which vary. The truth is balance, but the opposite of truth, which is unbalanced, may not be a lie."
(Susan Sontag, Simone Weil, 1963)

E1.6.B.1.7.d.ii_REF1.2_PH SUSAN SONTAG ARGUES THAT MODERN VIEWS ON LOVE, INFLUENCED BY CHRISTIANITY, PLACE A HIGH VALUE ON SUFFERING, UNLIKE ANCIENT GREEKS, HEBREWS, AND ORIENTALS WHO VALUED TRANQUILITY AND EQUILIBRIUM. She suggests that contemporary culture sees spiritual and artistic endeavors, including sexual love, as significant sources of suffering, reflecting a long-standing tradition of associating spirituality with pain.
"Everyone knows that we have a different, much more emphatic view of love between the sexes than the ancient Greeks and the Orientals, and that the modern view of love is an extension of the spirit of Christianity, in however attenuated and secularized a form. [...] We do not find among the ancient Hebrews, Greeks, and the Orientals the same value placed on love because we do not find there the same positive value placed on suffering. Suffering was not the hallmark of seriousness; rather, seriousness was measured by one's ability to evade or transcend the penalty of suffering, by one's ability to achieve tranquillity and equilibrium. In contrast, the sensibility we have inherited identifies spirituality and seriousness with turbulence, suffering, passion. For two thousand years, among Christians and Jews, it has been spiritually fashionable to be in pain. Thus it is not love which we overvalue, but suffering - more precisely, the spiritual merits and benefits of suffering.
The modern contribution to this Christian sensibility has been to discover the making of works of art and the venture of sexual love as the two most exquisite sources of suffering."
(Susan Sontag, Against interpretation, The artist as exemplary sufferer, 1962)

E1.6.B.1.7.d.iii. SOME LIVES, SUCH AS SIMONE WEIL'S, ARE EXEMPLARY IN THEIR EXAGGERATIONS, SELF-MUTILATION AND DEDICATION TO MARTYRDOM, BUT ARE NOT MEANT TO BE IMITATED.
We find lives like these moving and we admire writers like Simone Weil for their personal authority and willingness to sacrifice themselves for their truths, not just their views. By respecting them, we acknowledge the presence of mystery in the world.

E1.6.B.1.7.d.iii_REF1_PH SUSAN SONTAG ARGUES THAT CONTEMPORARY ADMIRATION FOR EXTREME THINKERS like Simone Weil, Kierkegaard, and Nietzsche stems not from agreement with their ideas, but from respect for their personal authority, seriousness, and willingness to sacrifice for their truths.
"Thus I do not mean to decry a fashion, but to underscore the motive behind the contemporary taste for the extreme in art and thought. All that is necessary is that we not be hypocritical, that we recognize why we read and admire writers like Simone Weil. I can not believe that more than a handful of the tens of thousands of readers she has won since the posthumous publication of her books and essays really share her ideas. Nor is it necessary - necessary to share Simone Weil's anguished and unconsummated love affair with the Catholic Church, or accept her gnostic theology of divine absence, or espouse her ideals of body denial, or concur in her violently unfair hatred of Roman civilization and the Jews. Similarly, with Kierkegaard and Nietzsche; most of their modern admirers could not, and do not embrace their ideas. We read writers of such scathing originality for their personal authority, for the example of their seriousness, for their manifest willingness to sacrifice themselves for their truths, and - only piecemeal - for their "views." As the corrupt Alcibiades followed Socrates, unable and unwilling to change his own life, but moved, enriched, and full of love, so the sensitive modern reader pays his respect to a level of spiritual reality which is not, could not, be his own."
(Susan Sontag, Simone Weil, 1963)

E1.6.B.1.7.d.iii_REF1.1_PH "SOME LIVES ARE EXEMPLARY, OTHERS NOT; and of exemplary lives, there are those which invite us to imitate them, and those which we regard from a distance with a mixture of revulsion, pity, and reverence. It is, roughly, the difference between the hero and the saint (if one may use the latter term in an aesthetic, rather than a religious sense). Such a life, absurd in its exaggerations and degree of self-mutilation - like Kleist's, like Kierkegaard's - was Simone Weil's. I am thinking of the fanatical asceticism of Simone Weil's life, her contempt for pleasure and for happiness, her noble and ridiculous political gestures, her elaborate self-denials, her tireless courting of affliction; and I do not exclude her homeliness, her physical clumsiness, her migraines, her tuberculosis. No one who loves life would wish to imitate her dedication to martyrdom, or would wish it for his children or for anyone else whom he loves. Yet so far as we love seriousness, as well as life, we are moved by it, nourished by it. In the respect we pay to such lives, we acknowledge the presence of mystery in the world - and mystery is just what the secure possession of the truth, an objective truth, denies. In this sense, all truth is superficial; and some (but not all) distortions of the truth, some (but not all) insanity, some (but not all) unhealthiness, some (but not all) denials of life are truth-giving, sanity-producing, health-creating, and life-enhancing."
(Susan Sontag, Simone Weil, 1963)

E1.6.B.1.7.d.iv. ZEN AND CHINESE POETRY DEMONSTRATE THAT A TRULY CREATIVE PERSON IS MORE TRULY SANE; THAT THIS ROMANTIC VIEW OF CRAZY GENIUS IS JUST ANOTHER REFLECTION OF THE CRAZINESS OF OUR TIMES
“Poems that spring out fully armed; and those that are the result of artisan care. The contrived poem, workmanship; a sense of achievement and pride of craft; but the pure inspiration flow leaves one with a sense of gratitude and wonder, and no sense of “I did it” — only the Muse. *That* level of mind — the cool water — not intellect and not — (as romantics and after have confusingly thought) fantasy-dream world or unconscious. This is just the clear spring — it reflects all things and feeds all things but is of itself transparent. Hitting on it, one could try to trace it to the source; but that writes no poems and is in a sense ingratitude. Or one can see where it goes: to all things and in all things. The hidden water underground. Anyhow — one shouts for the moon in always insisting on it; and safer-minded poets settle for any muddy flow and refine it as best they can. […]

Comes a time when the poet must choose: either to step deep in the stream of his people, history, tradition, folding and folding himself in wealth of persons and pasts; philosophy, humanity, to become richly foundationed and great and sane and ordered. Or, to step beyond the bound onto the way out, into horrors and angels, possible madness or silly Faustian doom, possible utter transcendence, possible enlightened return, possible ignominious wormish perishing. […]

The model of a romantic, self-destructive, crazy genius that they and others provide us is understandable as part of the alienation of people from the cancerous and explosive growth of Western nations during the last one hundred and fifty years. Zen and Chinese poetry demonstrate that a truly creative person is more truly sane; that this romantic view of crazy genius is just another reflection of the craziness of our times… I aspire to and admire a sanity from which, as in a climax ecosystem, one has spare energy to go on to even more challenging — which is to say more spiritual and more deeply physical — things.”
(Gary Snyder, Earth House Hold, 1969)

”HOW POETRY COMES TO ME
It comes blundering over the
Boulders at night, it stays
Frightened outside the
Range of my campfire
I go to meet it at the
Edge of the light”
(Gary Snyder, No nature, 1992)

E1.6.B.1.7.e. DON'T LET YOURSELF BE CONTAMINATED!
Be careful not to be contaminated by the pathos of the artist!

E1.6.B.1.7.e_REF1_PH WE ARE NOT OBLIGED TO REMAIN FAITHFUL TO OUR MISTAKES. We must sometimes betray and abandon our ideals to free ourselves from the weight of promises made under the influence of passions.
"On convictions and justice.18 To carry out later, in coolness and sobriety, what a man promises or decides in passion: this demand is among the heaviest burdens oppressing mankind. To have to acknowledge for all duration the consequences of anger, of raging vengeance, of enthusiastic devotion—this can incite a bitterness against these feelings all the greater because everywhere, and especially by artists, precisely these feelings are the object of idol worship. Artists cultivate the esteem for the passions, and have always done so; to be sure, they also glorify the frightful satisfactions of passion, in which one indulges, the outbursts of revenge that have death,
mutilation, or voluntary banishment as a consequence, and the resignation of the broken heart. In any event, they keep alive curiosity about the passions; it is as if they wished to say: without passions you have experienced nothing at all.
Because we have vowed to be faithful, even, perhaps, to a purely imaginary being, a God, for instance; because we have given our heart to a prince, a party, a woman, a priestly order, an artist, or a thinker, in the state of blind madness that enveloped us in rapture and let those beings appear worthy of every honor, every sacrifice: are we then inextricably bound? Were we not deceiving ourselves then? Was it not a conditional promise, under the assumption (unstated, to be sure) that those beings to whom we
dedicated ourselves really are the beings they appeared to be in our imaginations? Are we obliged to be faithful to our errors, even if we perceive that by this faithfulness we do damage to our higher self? No—there is no law, no obligation of that kind; we must become traitors, act unfaithfully, forsake our ideals again and again. We do not pass from one period of life to another without causing these pains of betrayal, and without suffering from them in turn. Should we have to guard ourselves
against the upsurging of our feeling in order to avoid these pains? Would not the world then become too bleak, too ghostly for us? We want rather to ask ourselves whether these pains at a change of conviction are necessary, or whether they do not depend on an erroneous opinion and estimation. Why do we admire the man who remains faithful to his conviction and despise the one who changes it? I fear the answer must be that everyone assumes such a change is caused only by motives of baser advantage or personal fear. That is, we believe fundamentally that no one changes his opinions as long as they are advantageous to him, or at least as long as they do him no harm. But if that is the case, it bears bad testimony to the intellectual meaning of all convictions. Let us test how convictions come into being and observe whether they are not vastly overrated: in that way it will be revealed that the change of convictions too is in any case measured by false standards and that until now we have tended to suffer too much from such changes."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, all too human, aphorism 629, 1878)

E1.6.B.1.7.e_REF2_PH “DEPTH AND TROUBLED WATERS.—The public easily confounds him who fishes in troubled waters with him who pumps up from the depths.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 262, 1878)

E1.6.B.2. "EXERCISE SYSTEMS"
Joy can be derived from creating an "exercise system". This process allows an individual to enhance their skills through repeated tasks, acting as immune device and coping mechanism for life's lack of inherent meaning. In essence, it's through these exercise systems that one shapes their life.

E1.6.B.2.1. NOTHING IS SO PLEASANT AS A HARD-FOUGHT VICTORY, AS SOON AS THE BATTLE DEPENDS ON US.
Deep down, we only love empowerment. [...] Can you imagine a collector who hasn't made his collection?

E1.6.B.2.1.a. IT IS SAID THAT HAPPINESS ALWAYS ELUDES US. THIS IS TRUE OF GRANTED HAPPINESS, AS THERE IS NO SUCH THING AS GRANTED HAPPINESS.
However the happiness we create does not deceive us. [...] The misconception is in believing that action leads to pleasure; in reality, pleasure accompanies action.

E1.6.B.2.1.a_REF1_PH "THERE'S NOTHING SO GOOD AS A DIFFICULT VICTORY, once the fight depends on us. Deep down, all we like is power. [...] Can you imagine a collector who hasn't made his collection?"
(Alain, On Happiness, 1911)

E1.6.B.2.1.a_REF2_PH "IT IS SAID THAT HAPPINESS ALWAYS ELUDES US. THIS IS TRUE OF HAPPINESS RECEIVED, for there is no such thing as happiness received. But the happiness we create for ourselves is not deceptive. It is learning, and we are always learning. The more we know, the more we can learn. Hence the pleasure of being a Latinist, which has no end, but increases with progress. The pleasure of being a musician is the same. And Aristotle says this amazing thing, that the true musician is one who enjoys music, and the true politician is one who enjoys politics. "Pleasures," he says, "are the signs of power. These words resonate with the perfection of concepts that take us beyond doctrine; and if we want to understand this astonishing genius, so often and so vainly denied, this is where we must look. The sign of true progress in any work is the pleasure one takes in it. From this we see that work is the only pleasurable thing, and that is enough. I mean free work, both the effect of power and the source of power. Once again, not to suffer, but to act".
(Alain, On Happiness, September 15, 1924)

E1.6.B.2.1.a_REF3_PH ALAIN CRITICIZES THE WESTERN RELIGIOUS IDEA THAT MAN IS INHERENTLY SELFISH WITHOUT DIVINE INTERVENTION. HE SUGGESTS THAT MAN LOVES ACTION, ESPECIALLY ACTION FOR JUSTICE, MORE THAN PLEASURE. The egoist who seeks only pleasure misses the real pleasures that require effort and ends up being dominated by fear and despair.
"One of the errors of our Western religions, as Auguste Comte points out, is that they have taught that man is always and irremediably selfish, without divine help. This idea has infected everything, even devotion, so that among the most popular ideas, and even among the freest minds, we find the strange opinion that those who sacrifice themselves still seek their own pleasure. [...] And Pascal, the Catholic genius, Pascal wrote these words, which only seem profound: "We lose our lives with joy, provided that people talk about it." This is the same man who mocked the hunter who takes great pains to catch a hare that he would not want if it were given to him. The theological prejudice must be very strong to hide from human eyes that man loves action more than pleasure, regulated and disciplined action more than any other action, and action for justice above all. This undoubtedly results in immense pleasure; but the error is to believe that action follows pleasure; for pleasure accompanies action. The pleasures of love make one forget the love of pleasure. That is how this son of the earth, the god of dogs and horses, is built up.
The egoist, on the other hand, misses his destiny because of an error of judgment. He only wants to lift a finger when he sees a great pleasure to be had; but in this calculation the real pleasures are always forgotten, because the real pleasures first require pain; therefore, in the calculations of prudence, pain always wins; fear is always stronger than hope, and the selfish individual ends up considering sickness, old age, and inevitable death. And his despair proves to me that he misunderstood himself.”
(Alain, On Happiness, February 5, 1913)

E1.6.B.2.1.a_REF4_PH HAPPINESS IS AN UNEXPECTED REWARD FOR THOSE WHO DO NOT EXPLICITLY SEEK IT. It is often the result of discipline, perseverance, and active participation in activities that at first seem difficult or unappealing. 
"Once a man seeks happiness, he is doomed not to find it, and there is no mystery in that. Happiness is not like the object in the shop window, which you can choose, pay for, and take away; if you have looked at it carefully, it will be blue or red at home, just as it was in the shop window. Happiness, on the other hand, is happiness only when you have it; if you look for it in the world, outside yourself, nothing will ever have the appearance of happiness. In short, you cannot think about or predict happiness; you have to have it now. If it seems to be in the future, think about it carefully, it's because you already have it. To hope is to be happy. [...] It is impossible to pursue happiness except in words; and what saddens those who seek happiness around them most is that they are utterly incapable of wishing for it. Bridge doesn't appeal to me because I don't play it. The same is true of boxing and fencing. Music, too, can appeal only to those who have first overcome certain difficulties; the same goes for reading. You need courage to start Balzac; you start by being bored. The gesture of the lazy reader is quite pleasant; he leafs through, reads a few lines, throws the book away; the pleasure of reading is so unpredictable that it surprises even an experienced reader. Science is not pleasant in perspective; you have to get into it. And at the beginning there must always be a compulsion and a difficulty. Regular work and victory after victory is undoubtedly the formula for happiness. And when the action is shared, as in card games, or in music, or in war, then happiness is alive. [...]

In the real world, these pleasures, like all pleasures, cannot be tasted from afar; it is the collector who loves stamps, and I don't understand anything about it. Likewise, it's the boxer who loves boxing, the hunter who loves hunting, and the politician who loves politics. It's in free action that we're happy; it's in the rules we set for ourselves that we're happy; it's in the discipline we accept, in a word, either in the game of football or in the study of science. And these obligations, seen from afar, do not please, but on the contrary, displease. Happiness is a reward that comes to those who have not sought it".
(Alain, On Happiness, March 18, 1911)

E1.6.B.2.1.a_REF5_CUR FOR BARUCH SPINOZA, JOY IS NOT SELF-SATISFACTION, IT IS THE JOY OF CONQUEST. "One must neither laugh nor cry, one must know." To rejoice is to rejoice in being, to rejoice in having arrived where you are. The conquest of color.

E1.6.B.2.1.a_REF5.1_CUR DELACROIX'S MASTERY OF A COLOR PALETTE

E1.6.B.2.1.a_REF5.1.a_CUR WHEN COLORS FADE AND THEIR COLOR CREATES VOLUME... Filling a surface with multicolored lines that appear black or very dark at the beginning of the stroke, but gradually reveal themselves as color as they disappear. Two strokes in one.
(Bernard Frize, for the exhibition at the Centre Pompidou in 2019)

E1.6.B.2.1.a_REF6_PO “IF YOU'RE GOING TO TRY, GO ALL THE WAY. There is no other feeling like that. You will be alone with the gods, and the nights will flame with fire. You will ride life straight to perfect laughter. It's the only good fight there is.”
(Charles Bukowski, Factotum)

E1.6.B.2.1.a_REF7_PO  "I SLEPT AND DREAMT
THAT LIFE WAS JOY.
I awoke and saw
that life was duty.
I worked — and behold,
duty was joy."
(Rabindranath Tagore)

E1.6.B.2.1.a_REF8_PH ON FINDING THE PAIN YOU'RE COMFORTABLE WITH:
"Seinfeld: I'm never not working on material. Every second of my existence, I'm thinking, could I do something with that?

Howard Stern: That, to me, sounds torturous.

Seinfeld: Your blessing in life is when you find the torture you're comfortable with."
(Jerry Seinfeld talking with Howard Stern, Brain Food - FS, Farnam Street, Feb 18, 2024 | #564)

E1.6.B.2.1.a_REF9_PH “SO MUCH CAN BE ACCOMPLISHED IN ONE FOCUSED HOUR, especially when that hour is part of a routine, a sacred rhythm that becomes part of your daily life.”
(Dani Shapiro)

E1.6.B.2.1.a_REF10_PH “WORK. KEEP DIGGING YOUR WELL.
Don't think about getting off from work.
Water is there somewhere.

Submit to a daily practice.
Your loyalty to that
is a ring on the door.

Keep knocking, and the joy inside
will eventually open a window
and look out to see who's there.”
(Rumi, The essential, translated by Coleman Barks, 1207-1273)

E1.6.B.3.2.f_REF2_LIT.wE1.6.B.2.1.a

E1.6.B.2.1.b. PLEASURES ARE SIGNS OF EMPOWERMENT

E1.6.B.2.1.b.i. ALL PROFESSIONS ARE PLEASING INSOFAR AS ONE GOVERNS, AND DISPLEASING INSOFAR AS ONE OBEYS
So those who say that man seeks pleasure and shuns pain are mischaracterizing. Man is bored with received pleasure and much prefers pleasure he conquers; but above all he loves to act and conquer; he shuns suffering or constraints; and so he chooses pain with action rather than pleasure without action. Diogenes the paradoxical was fond of saying that it's the pain that's good; he meant the pain that's chosen and willed; for the pain that's undergone, nobody likes.

E1.6.B.2.1.b.i_REF1_PH "ALL TRADES ARE PLEASANT AS LONG AS YOU ARE IN CHARGE, and unpleasant when you are ordered about. [...] Those who say that man seeks pleasure and flees from pain are mistaken. Man is bored by pleasure received, and much prefers pleasure conquered; but above all he likes to act and to conquer; he does not like to suffer or to endure; therefore he prefers pain with action to pleasure without action. Diogenes, the paradoxical, liked to say that it is pain that is good; he meant pain that is chosen and desired; for no one likes pain that is suffered. [...]
The mountaineer develops his own strength and proves it to himself; he feels it and thinks it at the same time; this superior joy illuminates the snowy landscape. But the person who has been carried to a famous peak by an electric train will not find the same sun there. It is true, therefore, that the prospect of pleasure deceives us; but it deceives us in two ways; for the pleasure received never pays what it promises, while the pleasure of action, on the contrary, always pays more than it promises. The athlete trains with a view to winning the reward; but immediately, by the progress he makes and by the difficulty he overcomes, he wins another reward which is within him and which depends on him. And this is what the lazy man cannot imagine; for he sees only the pain and the other reward; he weighs both and cannot decide; but the athlete is already up and at work, uplifted by the previous day's exercise, and immediately enjoys his own will and power. So that the only pleasurable thing is work; but the lazy man does not know this, and cannot know it; or, if he knows it from hearsay or from memory, he cannot believe it; wherefore the calculation of pleasures always deceives, and boredom sets in.
(Alain, On Happiness, 1922)

E1.6.B.2.1.b.ii. IT'S POWER THAT PLEASES, NOT POWER AT REST

E1.6.B.2.1.b.ii_REF1_PH "IT IS GOOD TO HAVE A LITTLE TROUBLE IN LIFE, AND NOT TO FOLLOW A PATH THAT IS ALWAYS SMOOTH. I pity kings if they have only to wish; and the gods, if there are any, must be a little neurasthenic. [...]
Happiness undoubtedly always presupposes some anxiety, some passion, a touch of pain that awakens us to ourselves.
It is common for us to have more happiness through the imagination than through real possessions. This is because when we have real possessions, we think everything has been said, and we sit down instead of running. There are two kinds of wealth: the kind that makes you sit around and be bored; the kind that makes you happy is the kind that requires more projects and work, like a field that a farmer desires and of which he is the master; for it is power that makes you happy, not power at rest, but power in action. The man who does nothing loves nothing. Bring him ready-made happiness. He turns his head away like a sick man. Besides, who doesn't like making music better than listening to it? What is difficult is what is pleasant. Therefore, whenever there is an obstacle in the way, it whips the blood and rekindles the fire. Who would want an Olympic crown if it were won without difficulty? No one would. Who would want to play cards without ever risking losing? Here is an old king playing with courtiers; when he loses, he gets angry, and the courtiers know it well; since the courtiers have learned to play well, the king never loses. Look how he pushes the cards away. He gets up, mounts his horse, and goes hunting, but it is a king's hunt, the game comes right up to him; even the deer are courtiers.

I have known more than one king. They were small kings of a small kingdom; kings in their family, too loved, too flattered, too pampered, too well served. They had no time to covet. Watchful eyes read their thoughts. Well, these little Jupiters still wanted to throw lightning; they invented obstacles; they forged capricious desires, changed like a January sun, wanted to want at all costs, and fell from boredom into extravagance. May the gods, if they have not died of boredom, not give you such flat kingdoms to govern; may they lead you along mountain paths; may they give you as a companion a good mule from Andalusia, with eyes like wells, a forehead like an anvil, and who stops suddenly when she sees the shadow of her ears on the road."
(Alain, On Happiness, January 22, 1908)

E1.6.B.2.1.b.iii. THERE ARE TWO EXPERIENCES, ONE THAT WEIGHS YOU DOWN AND ONE THAT LIGHTENS YOU UP. LIKE THE HAPPY HUNTER AND THE SAD HUNTER
The sad hunter misses the hare and says, "There goes my luck," and soon says, "These things only happen to me." The cheerful hunter admires the hare's cunning, because he knows that it's not in the hare's vocation to run to the pot.

E1.6.B.2.1.b.iii_REF1_PH "I ADMIRE THIS: THOSE WHO LOOK FOR EXCUSES OUTSIDE THEMSELVES ARE NEVER HAPPY, while those who face their own fault and say, 'I was very foolish,' find strength and joy in the experience they have digested.
There are two experiences, one that weighs you down and one that lightens you up. Like there is the happy hunter and the sad hunter. The sad hunter misses the hare and says, "That's my luck," and soon, "These things only happen to me. The happy hunter admires the cunning of the rabbit, knowing full well that it is not in the rabbit's nature to run straight into trouble. The proverbs are full of this manly wisdom, and there's a lot of depth in what my grandmother used to say about larks, that they don't all get roasted. As you make your bed, so you must lie in it. "How I wish I could love music," says the fool; but you have to make the music; it doesn't just happen. 
Everything is against us; but let's put it better, everything is indifferent and indifferent; the face of the earth is bramble and pestilence without the work of man; not an enemy, but not favorable either. Only the work of man is for man. But it is hope that creates fear; therefore it is a very bad beginning when one succeeds by chance and blesses the gods who will soon curse him. [...] As soon as a being promises us benevolence, we are deprived of knowledge and have no recourse but hope. Beings are much more beautiful and friendly behind their shutters and in their rich existence than in these omens and reflections. I have noticed that energetic people love differences and varieties. Peace is between powers.
(Alain, On Happiness, 1922)

E1.6.B.2.1.c. THE GREATEST HUMAN PLEASURE IS UNDOUBTEDLY FOUND IN DIFFICULT AND VOLUNTARY WORK DONE IN COOPERATION, AS CLEARLY DEMONSTRATED BY GAMES 

E1.6.B.2.1.c_REF1_PH "THE GREATEST HUMAN PLEASURE IS UNQUESTIONABLY DIFFICULT AND FREELY CHOSEN WORK DONE IN COOPERATION, as games make clear enough.
There are teachers who would make children lazy for life, simply because they want them to be busy all the time; the child then gets used to working slowly, i.e., to working badly; the result is a kind of overwhelming fatigue, constantly mixed with work, instead of which, if work and fatigue are separated, both are pleasant. Tiring work is like going for a walk to get some fresh air. You're tired all the time you're walking; you're not tired when you come back. On the other hand, during the most arduous work, we feel tireless and light; then we enjoy a joint relaxation and finally a good sleep".
(Alain, On Happiness, November 6, 1911)

E1.6.B.2.1.d. THE MAN WHO EASILY ACQUIRES THINGS FOR WHICH HE FEELS ONLY A VERY MODERATE DESIRE, CONCLUDES THAT THE FULFILLMENT OF DESIRE DOES NOT BRING HAPPINESS

E1.6.B.2.1.d_REF1_PH "IT IS COMMON IN OUR DAY, as it has been in many other periods of the world’s history, to suppose that those among us who are wise have seen
through all the enthusiasms of earlier times and have become aware that there is nothing left to live for. The men who hold this view are genuinely unhappy, but they are proud of their unhappiness, which they attribute to the nature of the universe and consider to be the only rational attitude for an enlightened man. [...]"
(Bertrand Russell, The Conquest of Happiness, 1962)

E1.6.B.2.1.d_REF1.1_PH THE EASY SATISFACTION OF NATURAL NEEDS AND THE LACK OF EFFORT IN LIFE DUE TO GREAT WEALTH DEPRIVE MAN OF AN ESSENTIAL ELEMENT OF HAPPINESS. The renunciation of certain desired things is essential to happiness.
"The feeling is one born of a too easy satisfaction of natural needs. The human animal, like others, is adapted to a certain amount of struggle for life, and when by means of great wealth homo sapiens can gratify all his whims without effort, the mere absence of effort from his life removes an essential ingredient of happiness. The man who acquires easily things for which he feels only a very moderate desire concludes that the attainment of desire does not bring happiness. If he is of a philosophic disposition, he concludes that human life is essentially wretched, since the man who has all he wants is still unhappy."
(Bertrand Russell, The Conquest of Happiness, 1962)

E1.6.B.2.1.d_REF2_PH "SIGNS OF FREEDOM AND DEPENDENCE. - Satisfying one's most urgent needs as much as possible, even if imperfectly, is the way to achieve freedom of mind and person. Accepting the satisfaction of one's many and even superfluous needs, as perfectly as possible, ultimately leads to a state of dependence. The sophist Hippias, who had acquired and created everything he wore, both inside and out, is thus the representative of the current that leads to the highest freedom of mind and person. It does not matter that everything is equally well made, equally perfect: pride takes over where defects are found. [...]"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human III, Aphorism 318, 1878)

E1.6.B.2.1.e. IS A PROPER APPRECIATION OF ONE'S OWN ABILITIES NECESSARY FOR HAPPINESS?

E1.6.B.2.1.e._REF1_PH "THE PLEASURE OF CARRYING OUT A TASK REQUIRES SUCH DIFFICULTIES WHICH MAKES SUCCESS DOUBTFUL AT FIRST GLANCE, although it is ultimately usually attained. This is perhaps the main reason why a fair appreciation of one's own merits is necessary for happiness. The man who underestimates himself is always surprised by success, while the one who has excessive self-confidence is just as often surprised by failure. The first surprise is pleasant, the second is not. That is why, in order to be successful, wisdom demands that one be neither overly conceited nor too modest."
(Bertrand Russell, The conquest of happiness, 1962)

E1.6.B.2.1.e._REF2_PH ALAIN BADIOU MAINTAINS THAT IN ORDER TO PRESERVE THE HUMANITY IN YOU, IT IS CRUCIAL TO WANT TO CHANGE THE WORLD DESPITE THE CHALLENGES. Let us choose the risk of disaster, which includes the possibility of true happiness, over the "non-being" of an existence of survival and limited social satisfaction.
"The condition is that you never stop wanting what you want. So there comes a time when you have to want to change the world, to save the image of humanity that is in you, instead of giving in to the injunction of the impossible. [...]
Dissaster is better than "dis-being"... It is better to take the risk of disaster, and thus of true happiness, than to forbid it from the outset. I call "dis-being" that conservative disposition of the human subject that brings him back to his animal survival, to his sole satisfaction and to his social place. "Dis-being is what prevents a subject from experiencing what it is truly capable of.
(Alain Badiou)

E1.6.B.2.1.e._REF2.1_PH WLADEMIR DIAS PINO TELLS US THAT "FREEDOM IS ALWAYS EXPERIMENTAL.
Echoing this, for Alain Badiou, happiness is when we discover that we are capable of something we did not know we were capable of: it is enjoying the powerful and creative existence of something that seemed impossible.

E1.6.C.1.6_REF2.2_CUR.wE1.6.B.2.1.e. HUMANS HAVE A COMPLEX RELATIONSHIP WITH BOUNDARIES, SIMULTANEOUSLY SEEKING AND AVOIDING THEM. WE'RE DRAWN TO EDGES LIKE COASTLINES AND CLIFFS, COMPELLED BY THEIR POTENTIAL FOR BOTH SAFETY AND RISK. BOUNDARIES DEFINE OUR COMFORT ZONES, YET ALSO CHALLENGE US TO GROW BEYOND THEM. Edges represent life's core dilemma: balancing safety with growth. Limits test our courage and expand our abilities, with each conquered boundary revealing new horizons. In essence, edges are where we discover ourselves.

E1.6.B.2.1.f. WHO STILL AGREES WITH JOHNSON?
We don't agree with his position

E1.6.B.2.1.f_REF1_LIT JOHNSON COULD NOT RECONCILE WORK AND LEISURE AS COMPLEMENTARY PARTS OF THE SAME LIVING PROCESS
"Talking of trade, he observed, ‘ It is a mistaken notion that a vast deal of money is brought into a nation by trade. It is not so. Commodities come from commodities ; but trade produces no capital accession of wealth. However, though there should be little profit in money, there is a considerable profit in pleasure, as it gives to one nation the productions of another ; as we have wines and fruits, and many other foreign articles, brought to us.’ BOSWELL. ‘ Yes, Sir, and there is a profit in pleasure, by its furnishing occupation to such numbers of mankind.’ JOHNSON. ‘ Why, Sir, you cannot call that pleasure to which all are averse, and which none begin but with the hope of leaving off ; a thing which men dislike before they have tried it, and when they have tried it.’ BOSWELL. ‘ But, Sir, the mind must be employed, and we grow weary when idle.’ JOHNSON. ‘ That is, Sir, because others being busy, we want company ; but if we were all idle, there would be no growing weary ; we should all entertain one another. There is, indeed, this in trade :— it gives men an opportunity of improving their situation. If there were no trade, many who are poor would always remain poor. But no man loves labour for itself.’ BOSWELL. ‘ Yes, Sir, I know a person who does. He is a very laborious Judge, and he loves the labour.’ JOHNSON. ‘ Sir, that is because he loves respect and distinction. Could he have them without labour, he would like it less.’ BOSWELL. ‘ He tells me he likes it for itself.’ JOHNSON —’ Why, Sir, he fancies so, because he is not accustomed to abstract.’ "
(Boswell’s Life of Johnson, revised third edition 1799, first published in 1791)

E1.6.B.2.2. CELEBRATING LIFE BEYOND RESULTS
For those who no longer focus on results, only action matters. This mindset makes us more methodical, rigorous, and demanding than any result-oriented goal could. Unconstrained by the need for results, we act to celebrate and elevate life. Paradoxically, this freedom requires us to be more efficient than if we were solely focused on outcomes. We neither rejoice in success nor grieve in failure. The outcomes of our actions are intended for others, while their style and selflessness reflect our freedom.

E1.6.B.2.2_REF1_PH THE INDIFFERENCE TO THE RESULT FREES THE ACTION FROM THE FEAR OF FAILURE AND THE SEARCH FOR SUCCESS, ALLOWING A CELEBRATION OF LIFE AND A TRUE FREEDOM OF ACTION. Our action becomes freer and more disinterested, which paradoxically leads to greater efficiency and rigor.
"Spinoza records a very simple observation, so obvious that it is hardly noticed, and yet it is enough to denounce the most ordinary alienation of the contemporary world and its generalized hallucination. "The image that Peter has of Paul," he observes, "concerns Peter and not Paul. My image is not me: it is him. A second consequence is that it is enough for us to have become indifferent to our image for our actions to cease immediately to be mortgaged by concern for their outcome. As long as we believed that our character or reputation was involved in each of our undertakings, our image depended on their success or failure. To act was to risk our image: to expose ourselves, to take a chance, to give ourselves up. Although we led our action, we suffered it even more, because, the effect reacting to the cause, we became the result of our result. But from the moment we are no longer dominated or overpowered by our image, our action is freed from its result. At the same time, we are free to do all that duty commands us to do, and we are at the service of the world.

Far from exempting us from action, such indifference to the result encourages us to act, for we have nothing to fear from it. Far from making us inattentive, negligent, or casual, on the contrary, it compels us to a zeal, a fervor, a high standard, a tenacity, a scrupulousness that we would never have had if we had acted only for a result. Just as those who work for money measure their efforts by what they are paid, those whose actions are motivated by results are more concerned with the end than the means, with what they achieve than what they do. It is not the action that matters to them, but what it should bring them: not the dynamics of mediation, but the immediacy that follows. As Plato might have said, they are industrious only out of laziness, and devoted only out of self-interest. They also guard against the vice of giving more than they expect to receive, or ever doing more than the result requires. This, by the way, is how almost all slaves behave.

Conversely, for those for whom the result no longer matters, only the action matters. Our freedom therefore makes us more methodical, rigorous, and demanding through willpower than any desire for results ever could. Without worrying about the result, we then act to celebrate and glorify life. Paradoxically, our freedom also forces us to be more efficient than we could ever be if we were obsessed with results. Quite simply, we will be neither more joyful in the face of success nor more saddened by failure. For the result of our actions is only for others to see, while the style and selflessness of our actions are a commitment of our freedom.
(Nicolas Grimaldi, Ambiguities of freedom, PUF, 1999)

E1.6.B.2.2_REF2_PH "GOAL [vs. END]
What we strive for, what we pursue, what we want to achieve or obtain. 
The Stoics distinguished between the end (telos) and the goal (skopos). The goal is external to the action: it is, for example, the target at which the archer aims. The end is internal: it is not a question of hitting the target (it does not depend on us: a sudden gust of wind can cause the arrow to deviate), but of aiming at it correctly. The goal is always to come; the end is always present. The goal is the object of hope; the end, of will. 
The wise act without purpose (what the Orientals call "detachment from the fruit of the act"), but not without end. And they achieve the goal all the better because they do not care about achieving it. 
Action is enough for them.
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.6.B.2.2_REF3_PH A HEALTHY OBJECTIVE WOULD NOT BE TO ACHIEVE A SPECIFIC GOAL, BUT TO FOCUS ATTENTION ON BUILDING A PIECE OF WORK.
"I will be more vigilant in this experiment that I am about to undertake, because I am counting on the capacities that the experiences that I have already lived through and accumulated have secretly developed in me. In other words, I will know better what difficulties I will encounter and, in turn, what resources I can mobilize in a more appropriate way because I will be more familiar with the situation I am about to face. Instead of accepting the stage I have reached, I pull myself together and raise my standards in view of what I have done. This verb, it is true, is unpretentious. But it is without remorse or resignation, and it is even imbued with hope, not an easy hope, but an accredited hope, supported by what I have already done: because I am no longer in the projected intention, but I have already gained a foothold in this labor that is experience. [...]"
(François Jullien, A Second Life, 2017)

E1.6.B.2.2_REF4_PO "LOVE QUIETS FEAR.
And a sweet and powerful
Positive obsession
Blunts pain,
Diverts rage,
And engages each of us
In the greatest,
The most intense
Of our chosen struggles. [...]

Prodigy is, at its essence, adaptability and persistent, positive obsession. Without persistence, what remains is an enthusiasm of the moment. Without adaptability, what remains may be channeled into destructive fanaticism. Without positive obsession, there is nothing at all."
(Octavia Butler, Parable of the Talents, 1998)

E1.6.B.2.2_REF5_PH SISYPHUS SMILES AS HE DREAMS IN BLUE THE SKY: "After having laboriously climbed to the top of the mountain, the rock, by the grace of its equilibrium, stands still for a few moments and then rolls back down the slope. Sisyphus refrains from following it. Finally happy and breathing the fresh air of the mountain tops, he lies down on the soft grass, his back to the ground and his eyes to the sky. Sisyphus smiles as he dreams in the blue sky".
(Jacques Darriulat, Aphorisms, 2022)

E1.6.B.2.2_REF6_PH “The path to differentiated results looks like madness to the masses. As the adage goes, if you do what everyone else does, you'll get the same results everyone else gets. Extraordinary success requires misunderstood choices.”
(Farnam Street Brain Food)

E1.6.B.2.3. THE VALUE OF EXERCISE IS ITS EXPERIENCE
According to Peter Sloterdijk, humans create their lives through systems of exercise. These are operations that enhance a person's skills for the next performance of the same task, acting as immune devices that help manage the lack of meaning. While the value of work lies in its product, the value of exercise lies in its experience.

E1.6.B.2.3.a. WHEREAS THE VALUE OF WORK IS ITS PRODUCT, THE VALUE OF EXERCISE IS ITS EXPERIENCE. 

E1.6.B.2.3.a_REF1_PH THE MODERN WORLD IS CHARACTERIZED BY THE HIGHEST MOBILIZATION OF HUMAN FORCES FOR WORK AND PRODUCTION, WHEREAS THE ANCIENT WORLD FOCUSED ON EXERCISE AND PERFECTION OF BEING.
"If one were to summarize in one sentence the essential fundamental difference between the modern world and the ancient world, and define with the same sentence the two states of the world, it would be the following: is modern the epoch that has achieved the highest mobilization of human forces under the sign of work and production, while all the forms of life in which the most extreme mobilization took place in the name of exercise and perfection [of being] bear the qualifier of ancient. [...] Since the type of activity constituted by exercise has emerged from the shadow of work - together with the aesthetic game - a new type of ecosystem is developing on the modern front, composed of activities in which the absolute primacy of the value of the product is revised in favor of the values of exercise, the values of performance and the values of living.
No one, therefore, can be a credible contemporary today if he or she does not feel the extent to which the performance dimension is taking precedence over the work dimension."
(Peter Sloterdijk, You must change your life, 2009)

E1.6.B.2.3.a_REF1.1_PH "TO WORK IN ORDER TO PRODUCE OR TO EXERCISE ONESELF AIMING AT THE PERFECTION OF BEING?
In this painting, Tuymans is inspired by Rubens (we can see the similarity in the version of Rubens' painting in which we have modified the color spectrum to be closer to Tuymans'). Do both painters focus in their paintings on the action or on the actor?
"If one were to summarize in one sentence the essential fundamental difference between the modern world and the ancient world, and define with the same sentence the two states of the world, it would be the following: is modern the epoch that has achieved the highest mobilization of human forces under the sign of work and production, while all the forms of life in which the most extreme mobilization took place in the name of exercise and perfection [of being] bear the qualifier of ancient. [...] Since the type of activity constituted by exercise has emerged from the shadow of work - together with the aesthetic game - a new type of ecosystem is developing on the modern front, composed of activities in which the absolute primacy of the value of the product is revised in favor of the values of exercise, the values of performance and the values of living.
No one, therefore, can be a credible contemporary today if he or she does not feel the extent to which the performance dimension is taking precedence over the work dimension."
(Peter Sloterdijk, You must change your life, 2009)

E1.6.B.2.3.a_REF2_CUR "IS ZADRAZILS INTEREST IN THE SUBJECT OF THIS PAINTING DERIVED BY HIS FOCUS ON PRODUCTION AS A RESULT OF WORK OR ON EXERCISING AS A TECHNIQUE FOR SELF-PERFECTIONISM?
"On his walks through Brooklyn, Franz Zadrazil discovers an advertisement for the paint store chain "Pintchik" on the façade of a house. This quotes the farmer couple from the famous painting American Gothic (1930) by Grant Wood, one of the images most often staged by U.S. pop culture. Wood's farmer is holding a pitchfork, a sign of the hard work he must do. In the Pintchik ad, the pitchfork has become a paintbrush. To further emphasize what is being advertised, numerous oversized dummy paintbrushes are mounted on the roof of the building."
(Curatorship, Pinakothek der Moderne, Munich)

E1.6.B.2.3.a_REF3_PH  “RENOIR, THE PAINTER, IS BELIEVED TO HAVE SAID THIS MAGNIFICENT PHRASE: 'THIS DRAWING TOOK ME FIVE MINUTES BUT IT TOOK ME SIXTY YEARS TO GET THERE.'
Life grows at its own pace. Too often, I am thirsty for progress and change. I look for profit everywhere and cut myself off from what is abundantly lavished on me every moment. And what fruit has it given me today?
(Alexandre Jollien, La Pharmacopée n°35)

E1.6.B.2.3.a_REF4_PH "I DO NOT LIKE THE IDEA OF HAPPINESS — IT IS TOO MOMENTARY — I would say that I was always busy and interested in something — interest has more meaning to me than the idea of happyness."
(Georgia O’Keeffe)

E1.6.B.2.3.a_REF5_CUR HOWEVER, SOME WORKS ARE DIFFICULT TO TRANSFORM INTO A POETIC SPIRAL!
What is Beuys telling us with this zinc fleece of Jason's that looks like a manger? In the myth, the golden fleece is a solar symbol. Its conquest allows one to obtain the status of a hero and, for some of them, sovereignty, which is indeed Jason's destiny in the legend. The quest of modern man in the consumer society that Beuys denounces is less glorious: at best, can he hope to feed at the trough of the pigs that lead the horde?
In this society, the feminine element would intervene to calm the madness of men... this is how I interpret Bathtub for a Heroine: the effervescent masculine ardor plunging into the bathtub of the feminine in order to regain its spirits. That's how I see these enigmatic works. What do you think?

E1.6.B.2.3.a_REF6_LIT ON THE PLATEAU OF TALENT
“They can’t take it any further. And why not? Because they won’t put in the effort. Because they haven’t had the discipline pounded into them. They’ve been spoiled. They have just enough talent so they’ve been able to play things well without any effort and they’ve had people telling them how great they are from the time they’re little, so hard work looks stupid to them. They’ll take some piece another kid has to work on for three weeks and polish it off in half the time, so the teacher figures they’ve put enough into it and lets them go to the next thing. […] They never find out what it means to be hammered by the teacher; they lose out on a certain element required for character building. It’s a tragedy.”
(Haruki Murakami)

E1.6.B.2.3.a_REF7_PO “FLUENCY
To sew the blue-burnt
edges of a gunshot wound
together
should require only
concentration,
training, deftness,
ease with systems
awry and how to
stabilize, but
with good tools,
sharp blades,
bright lights,
I’m guessing
a material’s
qualities become
more.
Professionals
are adept
at covering it up, but
I’m pretty sure
pleasure insists.”
(Lia Purpura, It shouldn’t have been beautiful, 2015)

E1.6.B.2.3.b. SEEKING EASY RESULT IS THE ANTITHESIS OF THE POETIC SPIRAL

E1.6.B.2.3.b_REF1_PH "EVERYONE LOOKS FOR THE MIRACLE MOMENT – THE MOMENT WHEN SUCCESS HAPPENS.

We are drawn to these moments because we want to know the secret. We want to know the ingredient that we are missing. The ingredient that makes the recipe.

The problem is … there is no miracle moment. If you want to understand success, you can’t focus on what’s visible.

Results are simply one more step in a long chain of steps that led to that moment.

Nature offers a great example with bamboo, which takes ups up to 5 years to develop its roots. For years, to the outside observer, no visible progress has been made. Meanwhile, the bamboo grows below the surface, developing its roots and storing energy. Then, all at once, it starts to grow. Years of stored energy result in exponential growth, sometimes reaching over 50 feet in a matter of weeks.

That’s how results happen. Slowly and then all at once.

Everyone wants the results. No one wants the process that leads to them. That's boring.

There are two main lessons to take away:

Not all progress is visible. Don’t beat yourself up when things aren’t visible. One workout won't make you fit, but it is better than no workout. A small deposit in your bank account today won’t get you to your goal, but it moves you closer. The daily grind is part of the process.

Consistently doing boring things well leads to extreme outperformance. Most of the time, we know what we need to do. The problem is because we don't immediately see the results, we stop. It's as if we tell ourselves, "I ate healthily and went to the gym all week, and I'm still not as fit as I want, so what's the point?"

You have to be smart enough to know you're making progress without any obvious signs of progress.

Rome wasn’t built in a day, but it was built one brick at a time."
(Farnam Street - Brain food, november 2022)

E1.6.B.2.3.b_REF2_PH “PRACTICE UNTIL YOU GET IT RIGHT, AND YOU'LL NEED PERFECT CONDITIONS.
Practice until you can't get it wrong, and conditions no longer matter.”
(Shane Parrish, FS Brain Food, June 1, 2025)

E1.6.B.2.3.c. EXERCISE ARE IMMUNIZING DEVICES.
They enable groups to become organized, self-perpetuating "systems". They assist groups in becoming organized, self-sustaining "systems". Not only has humanity developed biological defense systems, but it has also established socio-immunological systems like justice and mutual aid, as well as psycho-immunological systems such as beliefs and rituals. These systems are designed to protect against both internal and external threats. Currently, these immune systems face challenges due to the anthropotechnical shift, which questions humanity's place in the world and its role as a creator of meaning.

E1.6.B.2.3.c_REF1_PH PETER SLOTERDIJK EXPLORES HOW IMMUNE SYSTEMS ENABLE ORGANISMS, CULTURES, AND SYSTEMS TO SUSTAIN AND REPRODUCE THEMSELVES IN CONSTANT INTERACTION WITH A POTENTIALLY INVASIVE ENVIRONMENT. He identifies three human immune systems: biological, socio-immunological (legal, solidaristic, military), and psycho-immunological (symbolic), and emphasizes the importance of cultural studies in understanding and managing these complex systems.
"Only immune systems enable systems to become systems, living beings to become living beings, and cultures to become cultures. Only by virtue of their immune qualities do they attain the status of self-organizing units that maintain and reproduce themselves in constant connection with a potentially and actually invasive and irritating environment. [...]
"Rilke says at the beginning of the Eighth Elegy: "With all its gaze, the living perceives the 'open'-life itself is an exodus that establishes a relationship between the interior and the environment. Although almost all organisms or integrities transcend into the spaces of surprise and conflict of the first level, which are always attributed to them as environments (even plants do it, and even more so animals), very few reach the movement of transcendence of the second level - as far as we know, only humans do so. It is this movement that opens the boundaries of the environment (Umwelt) to make it a world (Welt), as an integral composed of the manifest and the latent. The second stage is the work of language. Language not only builds the "house of being" - Heidegger borrowed this expression from Zarathustra's animals, who tell the convalescent: "The same house of being is being built forever" - it is also the vehicle for the tendencies to flee the house, with which man, by the force of his inner excesses, moves out into the open. There's no need to explain why it is only in the second transcendence that the oldest parasite of the world, the upper world, appears. [...]
In the human sphere, there are no less than three immune systems that operate in a strong cooperative interweaving and a strong functional complementarity: on top of the biological substrate, largely automated and independent of consciousness, two complementary systems have been formed in human beings in the course of their mental and socio-cultural evolution, aimed at treating injuries by anticipation: On the one hand, the socio-immunological practices, especially legal and solidaristic, but also military, with which man settles his confrontations with distant and alien aggressors and beings who, although they are his neighbors, are no less a cause of offense or nuisance in "society"; on the other hand, the symbolic or psycho-immunological practices with which man has always managed to control, more or less well, the vulnerability that fate has given him, including mortality, in the form of imaginary anticipations and mental armaments. One of the ironies of these systems is that they are capable of undergoing an explication of their hidden side, even though they exist from the outset in dependence on consciousness and consider themselves as phenomena transparent to themselves. They do not operate behind the backs of their subjects, but are fully integrated into their intentional behavior - yet it is possible to understand this behavior better than its naive agents. Because the non-naïve handling of symbolic immune systems has today become a condition for the survival of "cultures" themselves, "cultural studies" are necessary.  [...]"
(Peter Sloterdijk, You must change your life, 2009)

E1.6.B.2.3.c_REF2_PH PETER SLOTERDIJK'S "YOU MUST CHANGE YOUR LIFE" (2009) summarized in this 5'51" video

Watch it on YouTube:
https://youtu.be/K_M7GYpvo5E

E1.6.B.2.3.c_REF3_PH "DO I SPEND TOO MUCH TIME AT THIS EPHEMERAL TASK [GARDENING]? In spring, summer, and autumn I work harder at it than at writing, and I expect that looks crazy, but what it does is balance all the anxieties and tensions and keep me sane. Sanity (plus flowers) does make sense."
(May Sarton, The House by the Sea, 1977)

E1.6.B.2.3.d. FOR PETER SLOTERDIJK, THERE IS NO SUCH THING AS RELIGION, ONLY "MISUNDERSTOOD SYSTEMS OF SPIRITUAL EXERCISES".
These can be practiced collectively or individually. The distinction between believers and non-believers vanishes and is replaced by that between practitioners and non-practitioners. In his view, man produces man not through work or interaction, but through his life in "exercises", which are any operations that enhance a person's skills until their next performance of the same task.

E1.6.B.2.3.d_REF1_PH THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN TRUE RELIGION AND SUPERSTITION IS OBSOLETE. THE REAL FOCUS SHOULD BE ON THE ANTHROPOLOGICAL ASPECT OF HUMAN EXISTENCE, WHICH INVOLVES SYMBOLIC IMMUNE SYSTEMS AND RITUAL FRAMEWORKS. Human beings create themselves not through labor or self-improvement but through life exercises that stabilize or improve their qualifications.
"A movement back to religion is just as unlikely as a return to religion for the simple reason that there are no religions or « religions », but only systems of misunderstood spiritual exercises, whether these are practised in collectives - traditionally: church, order, ummah, sangha - or in personalised forms - in interaction with the personal god with whom the citizens of modernity take out private insurance. The unfortunate distinction between « true religion » and superstition thus loses its purpose. There are now only systems of practice more or less capable of spreading, more or less worthy of expansion. The false opposition between believers and nonbelievers also disappears, replaced by the distinction between practitioners and non-practitioners, or practitioners otherwise. [...] What really comes back and deserves all the intellectual attention has a more anthropological than « religious » twist - it is, in a word, to take into consideration the immune constitution of the human creature. After several centuries of experimentation with new forms of life, it has come to be understood that human beings, whatever their ethnic, economic and political conditions of existence, do not live only in « material situations », but also and rather in symbolic immune systems and ritual frameworks. [...]
Marx and the Young Hegelians expressed the thesis that man himself generates man. The meaning conveyed by this phrase was instantly disfigured by a chatter that spoke of labour as man's only essential action. But if man does indeed produce man, it is not precisely through work and its objective results, nor through that « work on oneself » which is in vogue today [...]: he does it through his life in exercises.
By « exercise » I mean any operation by which the qualification of the practitioner is stabilised or improved until the next performance of the same operation, whether or not it is declared as an exercise."
(Peter Sloterdijk, You must change your life, 2009)

E1.6.B.2.3.e. IN REPETITION, WE PROVIDE A NEW INFLECTION TO THE THE EXERCISE EACH TIME

E1.6.B.2.3.e_REF1_PH WALKING THE SAME ROUTES DAILY HELPS CLEAR THE MIND, FOSTERING A DEEPER AWARENESS AND CURIOSITY ABOUT THE WORLD, AKIN TO THE CONTINUOUS DISCOVERY AND RENEWAL FOUND IN LOVE. This process, much like the repetition of a declaration of love, maintains its freshness and intensity through constant reinterpretation.
"When I walk — which I do every day, as basic sanity-maintenance, whether in the forest or the cemetery or the city street — I walk the same routes, walk along loops, loops I often retrace multiple times in a single walk. This puzzles people. Some simply don’t get the appeal of such recursiveness. Others judge it as dull. But I walk to think more clearly, which means to traverse the world with ever-broadening scope of attention to reality, ever-widening circles of curiosity, ever-deepening interest in the ceaselessly flickering constellation of details within and without. In this respect, walking is a lot like love — for one human being to love another is to continually discover new layers of oneself while continuously discovering new layers of the other, and in them new footholds of love.
"I decide that [the declaration of love], though I repeat and rehearse it day by day through the course of time, will somehow recover, each time I utter it, a new state. Like the Argonaut renewing his ship during his voyage without changing its name, the subject in love will perform a long task through the course of one and the same exclamation, gradually dialecticizing the original demand though without ever dimming the incandescence of its initial address, considering that the very task of love and of language is to give to one and the same phrase inflections which will be forever new."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings' review of Roland Barthes' Roland Barthes by Roland Barthes, 1977)

E1.6.B.2.3.e_REF2_PH THE IDEA OF PROGRESS AND THE INTUITION OF DISCONTINUOUS TIME [...]

To fully grasp the meaning of habit, we must combine two seemingly contradictory concepts: repetition and beginning. However, this objection disappears when we recognize that every particular habit depends on the general, clear, and conscious habit that is the will. Therefore, we can define habit in its full sense by this formula, which reconciles the two opposites that are too quickly set against each other by criticism: Habit is the will to begin repeating oneself. [...]

Undoubtedly, the idea of eternal return occurred to Mr. Roupnel, but he immediately understood that this fruitful and true idea could not be absolute. By being reborn, we accentuate life. "For we do not rise again in vain! The beginning again is not an eternal, unchanging entity! Our mental acts and thoughts are repeated according to the ritual of ever-acquired habits and are invested with ever-increasing physical fidelity. If our faults worsen and clarify their disastrous contours, our useful and beneficial actions also leave firmer imprints on the trail of eternal footsteps. With each new beginning, a new firmness rests on the act, gradually bringing unknown abundance to the results. Let us not say that the act is permanent; rather, it is constantly enhanced by the precision of its origins and effects. We live each new life as a passing work, yet life bequeaths all its fresh impressions to life. The act revisits its intentions and consequences, ever more enamored of its rigor, and completes what never completes it. [...]
" Rather than a doctrine of eternal return, Roupen's thesis is a doctrine of eternal returns. [...]

"The idea of progress," he rightly says, "is logically associated with the idea of beginning again and repetition."

The habit itself implies progress. The repeated act, due to acquired habit, is performed with greater speed and precision. The gestures that execute it lose their excessive amplitude and unnecessary complexity. They become simpler and shorter. Superfluous movements disappear. The act reduces expenditure to the bare minimum: the energy and time required. As dynamism improves and becomes more precise, work and results are perfected. (5) [...]

This is "perfection, undoubtedly very slight, but logically undeniable and sufficient to introduce differentiation of moments and, consequently, the element of duration." Thus, we see that this duration is the expression of dynamic progress. Having reduced everything to dynamism, we can simply say that continuous duration, if it exists, is the expression of progress." (6).
We can understand that a scale of perfection can be applied to a group of moments brought together by active chronotropisms, or changes in rhythm. Through a strange reciprocity, progress in the aesthetic, moral, or religious sense allows us to be certain of the passage of time. Moments are distinct because they are fruitful. They are not fruitful because of the memories they can evoke, but because they are accompanied by a temporal novelty that is adapted to the rhythm of progress. [...]

Sensation is variety; memory is the only thing that makes things uniform. Therefore, there is always the same difference in method between Mr. Bergson and us. He considers time to be full of events at the level of consciousness of those events. Then, he gradually erases the events or the consciousness of those events. He believes that he will then reach time without events or the consciousness of pure duration. Conversely, we can only experience time by multiplying conscious moments. If we relax our meditation due to laziness, there may still be enough moments enriched by the life of the senses and flesh for us to have a vague feeling that we are lasting. However, if we want to clarify this feeling, we find this clarification only in a multiplication of thoughts. For us, the awareness of time is always an awareness of the use of moments; it is always active, never passive. In short, our awareness of duration is an awareness of the progress of our inner being, whether that progress is real, simulated, or imagined. This progression makes the complex clearer and simpler, and the well-renewed rhythm is more coherent than pure repetition. Moreover, if we achieve uniformity in our meditation through skillful construction, it seems like yet another conquest because we find this uniformity in an ordering of creative moments or in one of those general, fruitful thoughts that encompass a thousand dependent thoughts. Duration is a treasure that cannot be found through abstraction. We construct its framework by placing concrete moments rich in conscious, measured novelty one after the other without allowing them to touch. The coherence of duration is the coordination of a method of enrichment. [...]

Notes: (5) Siloë, p. 157. (6) Siloë, p. 158."
(Gaston Bachelard, Intuition of the Instant, Chapter III, 1931)


E1.6.B.2.3.f. THE ARTIST'S CREATIVE MISSION
Nietzsche believed that art is the will to turn the future into an endless realm of uplifting possibilities. He claimed that artists don't create from nothing, but rather, they build upon and transform what has come before. Creation, for him, is the elevation of the improbable. The artist has the metaphysical duty to continually increase this "mountain of the improbable".
According to Nietzsche, only a person free from resentment, who can accept the necessity of raising this cultural mountain higher with each generation, can truly embrace this concept. Such an individual would not impose his own imperfection as a duty upon his descendants, and would rather disappear than remain unchanged.

E1.6.B.2.3.f._REF1_PH "THE ARTIST´S METAPHYSICS
[...] "... there are always fewer who climb with me on ever higher mountains: I am raising a chain of ever holier mountains". [...] Only the building of new steeper walls can compensate for the flattening of the mountain due to the habit of living on it.
It is important to understand how much Nietzsche addresses himself here as an artist to other artists: the desire to raise improbability to the level of a mountain made of mountains expresses the most extreme point that an artistic confession can reach. Only the artistic will to transform the future into a space of infinite possibilities for the elevation of art makes the final sentence of the rule of reproduction we quoted understandable: "You must create a creator [...] a first movement, a wheel that rolls of its own accord". This rule contains nothing less than Nietzsche's theology after the death of God: there will continue to be God and gods, but they will only be immanent to man, and only insofar as there are creators who relate to what has been achieved and  go higher, faster and further. [...]
Only a man of this type would no longer take himself as the yardstick for the future of the next generation and a fortiori of his ancestors. Only he could [...] approve of the idea that the cultural mountain of the improbable will have to rise by one more level in each generation. He would not make his own imperfection a duty for his descendants. He would rather die for good than return unchanged. That, according to the law of the normalisation of the improbable, the previous peaks appear in the perception of his descendants as landscapes of hills or plains is for him as understandable as it is welcome. [...] What has existed  before is the base camp for the next departure. From this point on, only the acrobatic path remains.
(Peter Sloterdijk, You must change your life, 2009)

E1.6.B.2.3.f._REF2_PH TO BE HUMAN MEANS TO EXIST IN AN OPERATIONALLY CURVED SPACE WHERE ACTIONS ACT BACK ON THE ACTOR
"To be human means to exist in an operationally curved space where actions act back on the actor, the product of work on the worker, communications on the communicator, thoughts on the thinker, feelings on the feeler. All these species of feedback loops have, I assert, an ascetic character, that is, the character of exercise - though, as we have already said, they must be classified for the most part in the undeclared and unperceived ascetics, the hidden routines of training. Only openly practising human beings explicitly raise the ascetic circle of existence to the level of visibility. They create the self-referential relations that commit the individual to participate in his subjectivation. [...] « I want to renaturalize asceticism as well; instead of the intention of negation, the intention of strengthening » [...Friedrich Nietzsche, Posthumous Fragments, Autumn 1887].
The existence of the human being of tomorrow must be based entirely on exercise and mobility, including gymnastics of the will and tests of courage imposed on one's own strength. Nietzsche even envisages a training for moral virtues in which one proves one's « strength of keeping-his-word » [which] is a matter of training, discipline, education and of one's personal project - the « superman » [übermensch] does not imply a biological programme, but an artistic programme, not to say: an acrobatic one."
(Peter Sloterdijk, You must change your life, 2009)

E1.6.B.2.3.g. BY CONTEMPLATING A WORK OF ART, WE CAN "CLIMB ABOARD" THE ARTIST'S POETIC SPIRAL, OPENING UP NEW HORIZONS FOR US

E1.6.B.2.3.g_REF1_PO  "ARCHAIC TORSO OF APOLLO

We cannot know his legendary head
with eyes like ripening fruit. And yet his torso
is still suffused with brilliance from inside,
like a lamp, in which his gaze, now turned to low,

gleams in all its power. Otherwise
the curved breast could not dazzle you so, nor could
a smile run through the placid hips and thighs
to that dark center where procreation flared.

Otherwise this stone would seem defaced
beneath the translucent cascade of the shoulders
and would not glisten like a wild beast's fur:

would not, from all the borders of itself,
burst like a star: for here there is no place
that does not see you. You must change your life!"
(Rainer Maria Rilke)

E1.6.B.2.3.g_REF1.1_CUR “In his reliefs, Arp had eventually adopted the frame, using it to interrogate and undermine the conventions of painting. He likewise created sculptures, such as the multipart works and Human Concretions, that rejected both the pedestal and the verticality of the sculptural monolith, but he soon turned to these elements with similarly subversive results. In this early Torso, nearly half the sculpture is the large vertical block on which is anchored the titular twisting form. The block, which provides ballast to the soaring torso, may mimic a pedestal, but it does not quite perform like one, as it is too low to bring the torso to an appropriate viewing height.”
(Curatorship: Peggy Guggenheim Collection, Venice)

E1.6.B.2.3.g_REF2_LIT ENGAGING IN ACTIVITIES LIKE READING, DRAWING, OR MUSIC CONNECTS US TO SOMETHING GREATER, PROVIDING A SENSE OF MEANING AND HOMECOMING. When creators work with spirit and generosity, their art allows others to find their own sense of beauty and meaning.
"When you love something like reading — or drawing or music or nature — it surrounds you with a sense of connection to something great. If you are lucky enough to know this, then your search for meaning involves whatever that Something is. It’s an alchemical blend of affinity and focus that takes us to a place within that feels as close as we ever get to “home.” It’s like pulling into our own train station after a long trip — joy, relief, a pleasant exhaustion.
If a writer or artist creates from a place of truth and spirit and generosity, then I may be able to enter and ride this person’s train back to my own station. It’s the same with beautiful music and art.
Beauty is meaning."
(Anne Lamott, Stitches: A Handbook on Meaning, Hope and Repair)

E1.6.B.2.3.g_REF3_CUR "LUIZA CROSMAN’S VISUAL ESSAY “UNRAVELING INSTITUTIONAL DYNAMICS” LOOKS AT NEW WAYS TO THINK AND ACT within the frame of institutional critique through diagrams. It experiments with the relationship between art, economical, and social systems, and the idea of « production of subjectivity ». Authors quoted are: AA Bronson, Andrea Frasier, Luis Camnitzer, Hito Steyerl, Anton Vidokle, Suely Rolnik, and Kim Gordon."
Watching this presentation by Luiza Crosman, I realize that she is also in Peter Sloterdijk's line of thought : Life as an occupation that is justified in itself, a discipline of training, an artistic spiral that produces something in the end but which goal is not production in itself.

Watch the animation on Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/p/BwOqHMgB9Iq/?utm_source=ig_web_copy_link

E1.6.B.2.3.h. IS VIKTOR FRANKL'S LOGOTHERAPY AN EXERCISE SYSTEM?
Viktor Frankl's logotherapy emphasizes finding meaning in one's life, even amid severe difficulties such as those endured in Nazi concentration camps. Although Frankl used the term "meaning," could he be referring to the "poetic spiral" exercise, as defined by Peter Sloterdijk? Frankl stated, "[In the camps,] one could either transform one's experiences into triumphs, making one's life a victory over oneself, or simply ignore these challenges and vegetate".

E1.6.B.2.3.h_REF1_PH VIKTOR FRANKEL EXPLORES HOW EXPERIENCES IN EXTREME CIRCUMSTANCES, SUCH AS CONCENTRATION CAMPS, CAN PROVIDE AN OPPORTUNITY TO FIND DEEPER MEANING IN LIFE. He emphasizes that even without pleasure or creativity, suffering and death are an integral part of human life. How a person accepts and responds to his or her fate, with dignity and courage or not, determines the depth of his or her spirituality and humanity. 
"Experiences in a Concentration Camp

[...] An active life serves the purpose of giving man the opportunity to realize values in creative work, while a passive life of enjoyment affords him the opportunity to obtain fulfilment in experiencing beauty, art, or nature. But there is also purpose in that life which is almost barren of both creation and enjoyment and which admits of but one possibility of high moral behaviour: namely, in man's attitude to his existence, an existence restricted by external forces. A creative life and a life of enjoyment are banned to him. But not only creativeness and enjoyment are meaningful. If there is a meaning in life at all, then there must be a meaning in suffering. Suffering is an ineradicable part of life, even as fate and death. Without suffering and death human life cannot be complete.

The way in which a man accepts his fate and all the suffering it entails, the way in which he takes up his cross, gives him ample opportunity—even under the most difficult circumstances—to add a deeper meaning to his life. It may remain brave, dignified and unselfish. Or in the bitter fight for selfpreservation he may forget his human dignity and become no more than an animal. Here lies the chance for a man either to make use of or to forgo the opportunities of attaining the moral values that a difficult [...]

As we said before, any attempt to restore a man's inner strength in the camp had first to succeed in showing him some future goal. Nietzsche's words, "He who has a why to live for can bear with almost any how," could be the guiding motto for all psychotherapeutic and psychohygienic efforts regarding prisoners. Whenever there was an opportunity for it, one had to give them a why—an aim—for their lives, in order to strengthen them to bear the terrible how of their existence. Woe to him who saw no more sense in his life, no aim, no purpose, and therefore no point in carrying on. He was soon lost. The typical reply with which such a man rejected all encouraging arguments was, "I have nothing to expect from life any more." What sort of answer can one give to that?

What was really needed was a fundamental change in our attitude toward life. We had to learn ourselves and, furthermore, we had to teach the despairing men, that it did not really matter what we expected from life, but rather what life expected from us. We needed to stop asking about the meaning of life, and instead to think of ourselves as those who were being questioned by life—daily and hourly. Our answer must consist, not in talk and meditation, but in right action and in right conduct. Life ultimately means taking the responsibility to find the right answer to its problems and to fulfil the tasks which it constantly sets for each individual.

These tasks, and therefore the meaning of life, differ from man to man, and from moment to moment. Thus it is impossible to define the meaning of life in a general way. Questions about the meaning of life can never be answered by sweeping statements. "Life" does not mean something vague, but something very real and concrete, just as life's tasks are also very real and concrete. They form man's destiny, which is different and unique for each individual. No man and no destiny can be compared with any other man or any other destiny. No situation repeats itself, and each situation calls for a different response. Sometimes the situation in which a man finds himself may require him
to shape his own fate by action. At other times it is more advantageous for him to make use of an opportunity for contemplation and to realize assets in this way. Sometimes man may be required simply to accept fate, to bear his cross. Every situation is distinguished by its uniqueness, and there is always only one right answer to the problem posed by the situation at hand.

When a man finds that it is his destiny to suffer, he will have to accept his suffering as his task; his single and unique task. He will have to acknowledge the fact that even in suffering he is unique and alone in the universe. No one can relieve him of his suffering or suffer in his place. His unique opportunity lies in the way in which he bears his burden.

For us, as prisoners, these thoughts were not speculations far removed from reality. They were the only thoughts that could be of help to us. They kept us from despair, even when there seemed to be no chance of coming out of it alive. Long ago we had passed the stage of asking what was the meaning of life, a naive query which understands life as the attaining of some aim through the active creation of something of value. For us, the meaning of life embraced the wider cycles of life and death, of suffering and of dying.

Once the meaning of suffering had been revealed to us, we refused to minimize or alleviate the camp's tortures by ignoring them or harbouring false illusions and entertaining artificial optimism. Suffering had become a task on which we did not want to turn out backs. We had realized its hidden opportunities for achievement, the opportunities which caused the poet Rilke to write, "Wie viel ist aufzuleiden!"(How much suffering there is to get through!) Rilke spoke of "getting through suffering"
as others would talk of "getting through work." There was plenty of suffering for us to get through. Therefore, it was necessary to face up to the full amount of suffering, trying to keep moments of weakness and furtive tears to a minimum. But there was no need to be ashamed of tears, for tears bore witness that a man had the greatest of courage, the courage to suffer. Only very few realized that. Shamefacedly some confessed occasionally that they had wept, like the comrade who answered my question of how he had gotten over his oedema, by confessing, "I have wept it out of my system."[...]"
(Viktor Frankl, Man's Search for Meaning, 1946)

E1.6.B.2.3.h_REF2_PH VIKTOR FRANKL RECOUNTS HOW HE RISED FROM HIS SITUATION IN A CONCENTRATION CAMP by imagining himself giving a lecture on the psychology of prisoners, thus transforming his suffering into a subject for scientific study, in accordance with Spinoza's idea that suffering ceases when one has a clear and distinct understanding of it.
"I remember a personal experience. Almost in tears from pain (I had terrible sores on my feet from wearing torn shoes), I limped a few kilometres with our long column of men from the camp to our work site. Very cold, bitter winds struck us. I kept thinking of the endless little problems of our miserable life. What would there be to eat tonight? If a piece of sausage came as extra ration, should I exchange it for a piece of bread? Should I trade my last cigarette, which was left from a bonus I received a fortnight ago, for a bowl of soup? How could I get a piece of wire to replace the fragment which served as one of my shoelaces? Would I get to our work site in time to join my usual working party or would I have to join another, which might have a brutal foreman? What could I do to get on good terms with the Capo, who could help me to obtain work in camp instead of undertaking this horribly long daily march?

I became disgusted with the state of affairs which compelled me, daily and hourly, to think of only such trivial things. I forced my thoughts to turn to another subject. Suddenly I saw myself standing on the platform of a well-lit, warm and pleasant lecture room. In front of me sat an attentive audience on comfortable upholstered seats. I was giving a lecture on the psychology of the concentration camp! All that oppressed me at that moment became objective, seen and described from the remote viewpoint of science. By this method I succeeded somehow in rising above the situation, above the sufferings of the moment, and I observed them as if they were already of the past. Both I and my troubles became the object of an interesting psychoscientific study undertaken by myself. What does Spinoza say in his Ethics?—"Affectus, qui passio est, desinit esse passio simulatque eius claram et distinctam formamus ideam." Emotion, which is suffering, ceases to be suffering as soon as we form a clear and precise picture of it.[...]"
(Viktor Frankl, Man's Search for Meaning, 1946)

E1.6.B.2.3.h_REF3_PH VIKTOR FRANKL EMPHASIZES THE NEED TO MEET LIFE'S CHALLENGES WITH ACTION AND APPROPRIATE BEHAVIOR, AS EACH SITUATION IS UNIQUE AND REQUIRES A SPECIFIC RESPONSE. He emphasizes the importance of changing our attitude toward life, focusing on what life expects of us rather than the other way around.
"I remember two cases of would-be suicide, which bore a striking similarity to each other. Both men had talked of their intentions to commit suicide. Both used the typical argument—they had nothing more to expect from life. In both cases it was a question of getting them to realize that life was still expecting something from them; something in the future was expected of them. We found, in fact, that for the one it was his child whom he adored and who was waiting for him in a foreign country. For the other it was a thing, not a person. This man was a scientist and had written a series of books which still needed to be finished. His work could not be done by anyone else, any more than another person could ever take the place of the father in his child's affections.

This uniqueness and singleness which distinguishes each individual and gives a meaning to his existence has a bearing on creative work as much as it does on human love. When the impossibility of replacing a person is realized, it allows the responsibility which a man has for his existence and its continuance to appear in all its magnitude. A man who becomes conscious of the responsibility he bears toward a human being who affectionately waits for him, or to an unfinished work, will never be able to throw away his life. He knows the "why" for his existence, and will be able to bear almost any "how." [...]"
(Viktor Frankl, Man's Search for Meaning, 1946)

E1.6.B.2.3.h_REF4_PH VIKTOR FRANKL ARGUES THAT MENTAL HEALTH IS BASED ON A TENSION BETWEEN OUR ACCOMPLISHMENTS AND OUR FUTURE GOALS. THIS TENSION IS ESSENTIAL AND CANNOT BE AVOIDED BECAUSE IT MOTIVATES THE INDIVIDUAL TO ACHIEVE MEANINGFUL GOALS. Existential emptiness, on the other hand, can lead to the search for power or pleasure to compensate for the lack of meaning in life.
"Logotherapy in a Nutshell

[...] Thus it can be seen that mental health is based on a certain degree of tension, the tension between what one has already achieved and what one still ought to accomplish, or the gap between what one is and what one should become. Such a tension is inherent in the human being and therefore is indispensable to mental well-being. We should not, then, be hesitant about challenging man with a potential meaning for him to fulfil. It is only thus that we evoke his will to meaning from its state of latency. I consider it a dangerous misconception of mental hygiene to assume that what man needs in the first place is equilibrium or, as it is called in biology, "homeostasis," i.e., a tensionless state. What man actually needs is not a tensionless state but rather the striving and struggling for a worthwhile goal, a freely chosen task. What he needs is not the discharge of tension at any cost but the call of a potential meaning waiting to be fulfilled by him. What man needs is not homeostasis but what I call "nod-dynamics," i.e., the existential dynamics in a polar field of tension where one pole is represented by a meaning that is to be fulfilled and the other pole by the man who has to fulfil it. And one should not think that this holds true only for normal conditions; in neurotic individuals, it is even more valid. If architects want to strengthen a decrepit arch, they increase the load which is laid upon it, for thereby the parts are joined more firmly together. So if therapists wish to foster their
patients' mental health, they should not be afraid to create a sound amount of tension through a reorientation toward the meaning of one's life. [...]

THE EXISTENTIAL VACUUM

The existential vacuum is a widespread phenomenon of the twentieth century. This is understandable; it may be due to a twofold loss which man has had to undergo since he became a truly human being. At the beginning of human history, man lost some of the basic animal instincts in which an animal's behaviour is imbedded and by which it is secured. Such security, like Paradise, is closed to man forever; man has to make choices. In addition to this, however, man has suffered another loss in his more recent development inasmuch as the traditions which buttressed his behaviour are now rapidly diminishing. No instinct tells him. what he has to do, and no tradition tells him what he ought to do; sometimes he does not even know what he wishes to do. Instead, he either wishes to do what other people do (conformism) or he does what other people wish him to do (totalitarianism). [...]

The existential vacuum manifests itself mainly in a state of boredom. Now we can understand Schopenhauer when he said that mankind was apparently doomed to vacillate eternally between the two extremes of distress and boredom. In actual fact, boredom is now causing, and certainly bringing to psychiatrists, more problems to solve than distress. And these problems are growing increasingly crucial, for progressive automation will probably lead to an enormous increase in the leisure hours available to the average worker. The pity of it is that many of these will not know what to do with all their newly acquired free time. [...]

Moreover, there are various masks and guises under which the existential vacuum appears. Sometimes the frustrated will to meaning is vicariously compensated for by a will to power, including the most primitive form of the will to power, the will to money. In other cases, the place of frustrated will to meaning is taken by the will to pleasure. That is why existential frustration often eventuates in sexual compensation. We can observe in such cases that the sexual libido becomes rampant in the existential vacuum."
(Viktor Frankl, Man's Search for Meaning, 1946)

E1.6.B.2.3.h_REF5_PH VIKTOR FRANKL BELIEVES THAT EACH PERSON HAS A UNIQUE AND IRREPLACEABLE MISSION, AND THAT RESPONSIBILITY LIES AT THE HEART OF HUMAN EXISTENCE. The meaning of life is subjective, and varies according to individuals and their circumstances.
"THE MEANING OF LIFE

I doubt whether a doctor can answer this question in general terms. For the meaning of life differs from man to man, from day to day and from hour to hour. What matters, therefore, is not the meaning of life in general but rather the specific meaning of a person's life at a given moment. To put the question in general terms would be comparable to the question posed to a chess champion: "Tell me, Master, what is the best move in the world?" There simply is no such thing as the best or even a good move apart from a particular situation in a game and the particular personality of one's opponent. The same holds for human existence. One should not search for an abstract meaning of life. Everyone has his own specific vocation or mission in life to carry out a concrete assignment which demands fulfilment. Therein he cannot be replaced, nor can his life be repeated. Thus, everyone's task is as unique as is his specific opportunity to implement it.

As each situation in life represents a challenge to man and presents a problem for him to solve, the question of the meaning of life may actually be reversed. Ultimately, man should not ask what the meaning of his life is, but rather he must recognize that it is he who is asked. In a word, each man is questioned by life; and he can only answer to life by answering for his own life; to life he can only respond by being responsible. Thus, logotherapy sees in responsibleness the very essence of human existence.

THE ESSENCE OF EXISTENCE

This emphasis on responsibleness is reflected in the categorical imperative of logotherapy, which is: "Live as if you were living already for the second time and as if you had acted the first time as wrongly as you are about to act now!" It seems to me that there is nothing which would stimulate a man's sense of responsibleness more than this maxim, which invites him to imagine first that the present is past and, second, that the past may yet be changed and amended. Such a precept confronts him with life's finiteness as well as the finality of what he makes out of both his life and himself. [...] 

By declaring that man is responsible and must actualize the potential meaning of his life, I wish to stress that the true meaning of life is to be discovered in the world rather than within man or his own psyche, as though it were a closed system. I have termed this constitutive characteristic "the self-transcendence of human existence." It denotes the fact that being human always points, and is directed, to something, or someone, other than oneself—be it a meaning to fulfil or another human being to encounter. The more one forgets himself—by giving himself to a cause to serve or another person to love—the more human he is and the more he actualizes himself. What is called selfactualization is not an attainable aim at all, for the simple reason that the more one would strive for it, the more he would miss it. In other words, self-actualization is possible only as a side-effect of self-transcendence. [...]"
(Viktor Frankl, Man's Search for Meaning, 1946)

E1.6.B.2.3.h_REF6_PH VIKTOR FRANKL ASSERTS THAT EVEN IN DESPERATE SITUATIONS, IT IS POSSIBLE TO FIND MEANING IN EXISTENCE BY TRANSFORMING SUFFERING INTO PERSONAL FULFILLMENT.
"THE MEANING OF SUFFERING

We must never forget that we may also find meaning in life even when confronted with a hopeless situation, when facing a fate that cannot be changed. For what then matters is to bear witness to the uniquely human potential at its best, which is to transform a personal tragedy into a triumph, to turn one's predicament into a human achievement. When we are no longer able to change a situation — just think of an incurable disease such as inoperable cancer — we are challenged to change ourselves. [...]

Edith Weisskopf-Joelson, before her death professor of psychology at the University of Georgia, contended, in her article on logotherapy, that "our current mental-hygiene philosophy stresses the idea that people ought to be happy, that unhappiness is a symptom of maladjustment. Such a value system might be responsible for the fact that the burden of unavoidable unhappiness is increased by unhappiness about being unhappy."4 And in another paper she expressed the hope that logotherapy "may help counteract certain unhealthy trends in the present-day culture of the United States, where the incurable sufferer is given very little opportunity to be proud of his suffering and to
consider it ennobling rather than degrading" so that "he is not only unhappy, but also ashamed of being unhappy."

In accepting this challenge to suffer bravely, life has a meaning up to the last moment, and it retains this meaning literally to the end. In other words, life's meaning is an unconditional one, for it even includes the potential meaning of unavoidable suffering. [...]"
(Viktor Frankl, Man's Search for Meaning, 1946)


Solzhenitsyn, who lived through the Russian Gulag, also tells us that in extreme situations of slavery, believing that happiness is the goal of life reduces our ability to resist.

E1.6.B.2.3.h_REF6.1_PH THE ABILITY TO SUFFER WELL IS MORE THAN HALF OF LIFE
"Action and suffering, which together make up our lives, are a whole; they are one. A child suffers its begetting, it suffers its birth, its weaning; it suffers here and suffers there until in the end it suffers death. But all the good in a man, for which he is praised or loved, is merely good suffering, the right kind, the living kind of suffering, a suffering to the full. The ability to suffer well is more than half of life — indeed, it is all life. Birth is suffering, growth is suffering, the seed suffers the earth, the root suffers the rain, the bud suffers its flowering."
(Herman Hesse, Letter to a Young German, 1919 - later included in his 1946 anthology If the War Goes On…)

E1.6.B.2.3.h_REF7_PH "THE CASE FOR A TRAGIC OPTIMISM
Postscript 1984

LET US FIRST ASK OURSELVES WHAT SHOULD BE understood by "a tragic optimism." In brief it means that one is, and remains, optimistic in spite of the "tragic triad," as it is called in logotherapy, a triad which consists of those aspects of human existence which may be circumscribed by: (1) pain; (2) guilt; and (3) death. This chapter, in fact, raises the question, How is it possible to say yes to life in spite of all that? How, to pose the question differently, can life retain its potential meaning in spite
of its tragic aspects? After all, "saying yes to life in spite of everything," to use the phrase in which the title of a German book of mine is couched, presupposes that life is potentially meaningful under any conditions, even those which are most miserable. And this in turn presupposes the human capacity to creatively turn life's negative aspects into something positive or constructive. In other words, what matters is to make the best of any given situation. "The best," however, is that which in Latin is called optimum—hence the reason I speak of a tragic optimism, that is, an optimism in the face of tragedy and in view of the human potential which at its best always allows for: (1) turning suffering into a human achievement and accomplishment; (2) deriving from guilt the opportunity to change oneself for the better; and (3) deriving from life's transitoriness an incentive to take responsible action.

It must be kept in mind, however, that optimism is not anything to be commanded or ordered. One cannot even force oneself to be optimistic indiscriminately, against all odds, against all hope. And what is true for hope is also true for the other two components of the triad inasmuch as faith and love cannot be commanded or ordered either."
(Viktor Frankl, Man's Search for Meaning, 1946)

E1.6.B.2.4. WE CAN LOSE OUR TASTE FOR EXERCISE AND BECOME BORED.
This is acedia.

E1.6.B.2.4_REF1_PH "AKÈDIA / AKEDIA

Acedy

The feeling, the state of a monk who disinvests in asceticism, who can no longer bring himself to invest in it (≠ who loses his faith). It's not a loss of belief; it's a loss of investment. Depressive state: mel-ancholy, lassitude, sadness, boredom, loss of heart. Life (spiritual life) seems monotonous, aimless, impossible to bear, futile: the as-cetic ideal has been obscured, it has no appeal. Cassien (Institu-tions, 10):29 "<...> what the Greeks called Akedia 30 and what we might call boredom or anxiety of heart (taedium sive anxietas cor-dis)." Phenomenon that comes up fairly often in stories of oriental ermetism. [...]

It's a state (of decline as the result of a blockage) that's closer to aphanisis (notion introduced by Jones:36 state of non-desire, the fear of non-desire) than to castration (to the fear of castration). [...]

Robinson Crusoe, or rather Selkirk the sailor, gives a very good description of that process: "When those Appetites <needs> were satisfied, the Desire of Society was as strong a Call upon him, and he appeared to himself least necessitious when he wanted every-thing; for the Supports of his Body were easily attained, but the eager Longings for seeing again the Face of Man during the Interval of craving bodily Appetites, were hardly supportable. He grew de-jected, languid, and melancholy, scarce able to refrain from doing himself Violence <...>" [...]. »

I'm providing these references to Hans Castorp and Robinson Crusoe because I want suggest that acedy is not exclusively linked to the monastic state. We're not monks and yet we're interested in acedy. Acedy has a specific relation to a form of "asceticism," that is to say to the practice (in the etymological sense)42 of a particular lifestyle.43 What's at stake in acedy isn't belief, an idea, the option of faith (acedy isn't a "doubt"), it's no longer having any invest-ment in a way of life. Acedy: the repeated, extenuated, insistent moment when you find you've had enough of your way of life, of your relationship to the world (to the "worldly"). I can wake up in the morning, see the schedule for the week unfolding before my eyes, and feel hopeless. It's repetitive, it goes round and round: the same old tasks, the same old meetings, and yet there's no invest-ment whatsoever-irrespective of the fact that, when viewed sepa-rately, the different bits of that schedule are endurable, sometimes even pleasant. [...]

The relation between acedy and Living-Together? Historically, a notion with a particular link to eremitic asceticism: painful disin-vestment in the asceticism of solitude the eremite reenters the world. Coenobitism: in that it entails the monk's integration into a strong communal structure, was probably conceived at least in part-as a means of combating acedy. Acedy (modern acedy): no longer being capable of investing in other people, in Living-with-several-other-people and yet at the same time being incapable of investing in solitude. → Throwing it all away, but without even somewhere to throw it: waste without a waste bin."
(Roland Barthes, How to live together, Course at the Collège de France, 1976-1977)

E1.6.B.2.4_REF2_PSI DR. JULIE GURNER ON THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN DISCIPLINE AND MOTIVATION:
“Oftentimes people get the advice that you have to rely on discipline. ... one of the things that I find is that discipline requires a lot of push, right? “I’m very disciplined about my workout. I’m really going to push it.” Motivation is a pull. It is something that is internal that fuels you, that drives you. A number of the people that I tend to work with are very obsessed. You don’t have to push them to go to a meeting. [...]

I think that oftentimes discipline is very useful and I think it’s useful in a few different cases. If you want to get back on a virtuous cycle, maybe you’ve fallen out of your exercise routine and so you need to get back into it and you really do have to push yourself that day to get back to the gym. ... But I feel as though discipline is often really… I think it’s talked about because it feels tough to do. We’re doing the hard thing. We’re slogging through. But when we are at our best, we’re not slogging through. Great people are obsessed and they’re not slogging through either. They are driven. They are motivated. They are deeply, deeply engaged."
(Farnam Street, Brain food)

Listen to the entire episode on Apple podcasts:
https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/169-dr-julie-gurner-part-1-caring-deeply-challenging/id990149481?i=1000618441141

Spotify:
https://open.spotify.com/episode/4x5gbxlt2GQwsCxgV24fYi?si=ee6b47cf397243d2&nd=1&dlsi=600f8a4896f44111

or dive right into the start of the excerpt above on YouTube:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C5D6HAskUaE&t=25s

E1.6.B.2.5. ARE ALL EXERCISES THE SAME?
Susan Wolf suggests that a meaningful life doesn't necessarily equate to a happy or altruistic one. Instead, it is distinct from fulfillment or morality. It involves engaging in activities that have objective value. Such activities can relate to personal relationships or crafts, like cooking for the family or creating a Halloween costume. To identify what is objectively valuable, one can employ communal intuition, asking if the activity pursues knowledge or excellence, exhibits creativity or aesthetics, or serves others. Pursuing excellence in any domain, such as athletics, can be meaningful as it exemplifies virtues like discipline and teamwork to others.

E1.6.B.2.5._REF1_PH "WHAT MAKES A LIFE MEANINGFUL? IS THE CHOICE OF WHERE WE FIND MEANING COMPLETELY ARBITRARY? These questions are different from the question 'What is the meaning of life?'
The meaning of life is a metaphysical question - whether my life is meaningful is a different question. Meaning is one dimension of a good life, together with happiness/fulfillment and morality. Susan Wolf advocates that a meaningful life is not necessarily a happy one or one dedicated to others. Meaning is separate from fulfillment or morality: it requires one to have engagements that are objectively valuable. Even if Sisyphus was happy, Wolf argues stone pushing does not constitute an objectively valuable good even if it is subjectively valuable to Sisyphus. So what is objectively valuable? Activities that we engage in out of our personal relationship with others - such as cooking meals for the family or making a halloween costume - or out of relationship with a craft - such as putting in long hours of piano practice to attain excellence.
For Wolf, Sartre's existentialism collapses in the end if what you choose to spend your freedom on has no objective value. Finding your passion and going after it is not enough. 
What makes something objectively valuable then? We can use our communal intuition about what is valuable and what isn't. We can also ask if it is in the pursuit of knowledge or excellence? Is it creative or aesthetic? Does it provide a service to others?
The pursuit of excellence in any field (ex: athletic) is meaningful in that it poses the exercise of virtues as an example for others (discipline, team work, etc.) A recluse could do something that then goes to other people and becomes meaningful. Even if a beautiful work is destroyed and nobody ever has seen it except its creator, why is it we feel the life of this artist was still meaningful?
Like happiness that you attain better by not trying too hard to reach it, meaning is better achieved by not becoming obsessive about it."
(Susan Wolf on Meaning In Life, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: http://philosophybites.com/2010/07/susan-wolf-on-meaning-in-life.html

E1.6.B.2.6. WILL AUTOMATION TURN US ALL INTO ARTISTS?
Following the logic of the poetic spiral, it doesn't matter if machines can produce better than us. That's because it's the act of creation that brings us the most joy, not the output. If a universal income guarantees our comfort, we could all become artists... provided we have the required discipline.

E1.6.B.2.6_REF1_PH "THINKING AGAINST YUVAL HARARI’S THE RISE OF THE USELESS CLASS
Yuval Harari's perspective is intriguing in many ways, yet it has a significant limitation: he only considers outcomes, not processes. The pleasure of an artist lies not in the final product but in the process of creation. The significance of improving a task is not in the end product, but in the joy of achieving greater perfection in a specific process, whether it be a sport, cooking, gardening, or playing an instrument. The fact that machines may outperform humans in producing end results has no bearing on human happiness.

Indeed, if machines take over all the mundane jobs necessary for human survival and comfort, we could all potentially live an "artistic life", dedicating our time to improving practices we enjoy.

You could argue that many people do not know how or want to focus more on processes rather than outcomes. They continue to define themselves by their achievements (in terms of outcomes) rather than their activities (in terms of playful and leisurely practices). The fact that our culture hasn't fostered this shift in mentality is the real issue, not the threat posed by machines."
(Pierre Schindler)

Extracts of Yuval Harari’s book that exemplify our difference of perspective:

“So what will people do? Art is often said to provide us with our ultimate (and uniquely human) sanctuary. In a world where computers have replaced doctors, drivers, teachers and even landlords, would everyone become an artist? Yet it is hard to see why artistic creation would be safe from the algorithms. According to the life sciences, art is not the product of some enchanted spirit or metaphysical soul, but rather of organic algorithms recognizing mathematical patterns. If so, there is no reason why non-organic algorithms couldn’t master it. […]

The coming technological bonanza will probably make it feasible to feed and support people even without any effort from their side. But what will keep them occupied and content? One answer might be drugs and computer games. Unnecessary people might spend increasing amounts of time within 3D virtual-reality worlds that would provide them with far more excitement and emotional engagement than the drab reality outside. Yet such a development would deal a mortal blow to the liberal belief in the sacredness of human life and of human experiences. What’s so sacred about useless bums who pass their days devouring artificial experiences? […]”

E1.6.B.2.6_REF2_PH "THE HIGHEST AND HARDEST TASK OF LIFE MAY BE TO BECOME ENTIRELY OURSELVES — to continually purify and clarify who and what we are, shedding the shoulds of culture, convention, and expectation to discover the innermost musts: those deepest and truest callings of the authentic self, or what we might call soul. And yet the great paradox is that the self is not a fixity but a perpetual fluidity, reshaped by every experience we have: every love and every loss, every person we meet, every place we visit, and every book we read. And so it must be: “A self that goes on changing is a self that goes on living,” Virginia Woolf wrote, for she understood that the finest souls “are always the supplest.”

The exquisite challenge of becoming oneself but remaining supple is at the center of every life, but it is amplified in the creative life — there is no greater tragedy for an artist than to stagnate and stiffen into a fixity, a template of oneself that ceases to create and instead caters to a self-myth. “Are we going to ossify,” the young Emily Dickinson wrote rhetorically to her great love and muse at the outset of an uncommonly creative life, throughout which she refused to ossify, as a person and as an artist."

In Sweat — his magnificent history of exercise as a lens on the body and the soul — Bill Hayes offers an antidote to ossifying rooted in the parallels between creative practice and athletic training.

Drawing an analogy between the science of exercise and his own art — writing — he considers the six principles that sustain long-term personal fitness."
(Maria Popova's review on Bill Hayes' Sweat, 2022 - in The Marginalian)

E1.6.B.2.6_REF2.1_PH BILL HAYES' "SWEAT" OUTLINES SIX KEY TRAINING PRINCIPLES APPLICABLE TO BOTH PHYSICAL AND CREATIVE ENDEAVORS:
"1. The Principle of Specificity is the idea that “what you train for is what you get” — if your goal is endurance, train for endurance; if your goal is strength, train for strength; if you aim to make your prose more musical, train your mind’s ear on musical writing; if you want to write better observations, train to make better observations. “Be specific in your work goals as much as in your workouts,” Hayes writes.

2. The Overload Principle requires that you “train a part of the body above the level to which it is accustomed” — it is the practice of pushing yourself beyond your comfort zone and trying new things. Hayes calls its equivalent in the mind “creative cross-training.” Rilke understood this: “People are drawn to the easy and to the easiest side of the easy,” he wrote in contemplating creativity. “But it is clear that we must hold ourselves to the difficult.”

3. The Principle of Progression arises out of the Overload Principle, demanding that you move on as soon as you have mastered a new task. Georgia O’Keeffe knew this. “Making your unknown known is the important thing,” she wrote in her advice on being an artist, “and keeping the unknown always beyond you.”

4. The Principle of Accommodation takes effect in the absence of the Progression Principle: Without challenge, the body — or the spirit — settles into stagnation or, worse, complacency. David Bowie urged against this reflex toward comfort and homeostasis: “Always go a little further into the water than you feel you’re capable of being in,” he advised artists. “Go a little bit out of your depth, and when you don’t feel that your feet are quite touching the bottom, you’re just about in the right place to do something exciting.”

5. The Principle of Reversibility is an admonition against the trap of accommodation — when you cease challenging yourself, the arc of your progress bends backward, undoing your gains. It almost doesn’t matter what you do to keep your system from falling out of shape — it need not be your primary workout, or your primary work. Virginia Woolf felt that her informal diary writing “loosens the ligaments” for her formal literary writing. “One must do something, anything, to keep the creative and intellectual motors running,” Hayes writes.

6. The Principle of Rest may then seem like a paradox — but it is the final and in a sense the most foundational tenet of any sustained practice. Anyone who has suffered the aches and injuries of overtraining, anyone who has suffered the spiritual hollowing of burnout, knows the cost of not taking time to recover from exertion, to replenish the body’s energy and the soul’s store of creative vitality. “Just as the body needs time to rest,” writes Hayes, whose superb book The Anatomist demanded of him a three-year recovery, “so does an essay, story, chapter, poem, or especially, a book.”
(Maria Popova's review on Bill Hayes' Sweat, 2022 - in The Marginalian)

E1.6.B.2.7. DIFFERENCES AND SIMILARITIES BETWEEN SPIRITUAL PRACTICE AND OTHER FORMS OF EXERCISE
In traditional learning methods, such as learning a musical instrument, the student often imagines the end result. This perspective presents a clear path marked with sequential stages leading to the final goal. However, this approach is not applicable to spiritual practice.

E1.6.B.2.7.a. THE SPIRITUAL SEEKER'S ITINERARY LEADS THEM TO AN UNREPRESENTABLE FUTURE
It starts with a leap towards a mode of existence that can only be assumed.

E1.6.B.2.7.a_REF1_PH SPIRITUAL PRACTICE DIFFERS FROM ORDINARY EDUCATION IN THAT IT DOESN'T ALLOW US TO IMAGINE THE END OF THE PATH WE HAVE TAKEN UNTIL WE HAVE ACTUALLY EXPERIENCED IT.
"The frame and the leap

Jumping and self-invention

"WHAT IS IT?"
[...]

In the usual learning process, such as that of a musical instrument, the student can imagine, or thinks he can imagine, the end; as a result, the path appears to him as a series of listed stages that he will pass through, one after the other, until he reaches his goal. No such thing is possible here. When we begin a spiritual practice, it's certainly to bring about an inner change; but the end of the path, the state we're trying to reach, cannot be imagined until we've experienced it, because what we experience usually takes us further away from it. And even if we don't expect extreme joys or unheard-of raptures, this impossibility of imagining what is to come is the very mark of the quest we are engaged in. For its object is not given in advance - it is the search itself, as it unfolds, that constructs, refines, or reformulates it. On the spiritual path, we don't know where we are going; and we know it all the less because what we are looking for is not the stuff of knowledge and cannot be acquired theoretically. It is not an additional quality to be added to what we already have, a complement, a perfection, a completion: it doesn't exist yet and is not mentioned in any book, like the end of a psychoanalysis before we have reached it, or the end of a novel before it has been written."
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond Wisdom, How to Live, 2023)

E1.6.B.2.7.a_REF1.1_PH "EACH PERSON'S PATH IS THEREFORE, BY DEFINITION, A PERSONAL MATTER, and its unsurpassable particularity limits the scope of all general formulations, no matter how correct they may be in principle. Blindly following a recipe and believing that you can stop there means importing into your life a construct that is alien to who you are. The researcher must follow Montaigne's advice - "borrow nothing that is not yours"; he must make what he reads his own and reinvent it, because only the practice he constructs himself can be right for him. What he seeks is not a matter of application: it is a self-invention, enriched by advice and reading, but ultimately unique, as each of us is. The spiritual seeker relies on this future invention - forced to build his path as he goes along it, he realizes that there can be no other for him, and that to have a spiritual experience, as Michaux writes somewhere, one must "rely" on what one carries within oneself. Just as an artist is the only possible author of his work, so he is the only possible author of himself, and his journey is, whether he likes it or not, an adventure, because it leads him to an unrepresentable future and begins with a leap towards a way of being that he can only suppose".
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond Wisdom, How to Live, 2023)

E1.6.B.2.7.b. THE SPIRITUAL SEEKER ACCEPTS AND SETTLES INTO THE LOSS OF HIS BEARINGS
He chooses to inhabit a space that, devoid of familiar coordinates, exists beyond frames and labels.

E1.6.B.2.7.b_REF1_PH "THE JUMP

Many masters have spoken of this leap. It is a major theme in the teachings of the Tibetan Buddhist Chögyam Trungpa, and I refer the reader to his very rich books, to which my analyses owe much. The spiritual seeker, as Trungpa describes him, accepts the loss of orientation, comes to terms with this loss, and chooses to live in a space that, having lost its coordinates, unfolds outside of frames and labels. He gradually realizes that he has always been searching for a basis for his actions, for an external principle that gives them meaning, for some authority, some authorization, and that this search never succeeds, so that his search deepens the felt lack. The leap that he takes means that he sets out on his adventure without the security that such an authority would give him: he therefore sets out without the necessary equipment and, to use Pascal's word, realizes that he has "embarked" when he is already at sea.

By accepting this deficiency and settling into it, he does not cancel it out: he simply renounces, by an inner decision, the search for a complement. The figure that founds and authorizes is replaced by... its absence, and, like an artist, the researcher lets go of the idea that he can find the ultimate responsibility for his own actions elsewhere than in himself.

So he sets out on the path, he practices, he progresses, and he realizes that it takes a long time for inner peace to come. He wants the wound to heal, for things to settle down, and for new reference points to replace the ones he is about to leave, but that peace does not come. And yet he has really jumped into the void. What more can be done? Only this: to understand that the leap never ends and that no progress eliminates it. Although one is filled with the hope of surpassing it, one does not succeed because it always remains to be done again. One can abandon it, interrupt it, but if one decides to persevere, it will be necessary to maintain it... and even to renew it.

But suddenly we have all the time in the world to examine it. And then we understand that it is the very condition of the openness required by the spiritual adventure - better still, that it is this openness in itself, and that is why it cannot be surpassed. When the seeker becomes aware of this, the leap is transformed into an active letting go, and the anxiety associated with it begins to dissipate. He then discovers that he already knew it in attenuated forms, in areas other than those labeled "spirituality. In a particular situation, it was an action that should have been taken, a word that should have been spoken, a risk that should have been taken, a small step that should have been taken...and was not taken.

It is not easy to rigorously explain why we do not do these things, nor to specify the nature of the obstacle. It is fear, of course, but also laziness, inertia... We come up against a resistant and hard je-ne-sais-quoi, difficult to describe but very stubborn. We had to dive, as they say, instead of staying on the shore. This is what the Zen master demands of his disciple when he asks him a puzzling question - and even if the disciple's natural tendency is to feel inadequate and to look outside himself for reassurance and guarantees, the leap requires him to improvise.

Zen is certainly known for its unsettling aspect, but it may come as a surprise that everyday actions or small acts of daring can also be small spiritual events in their own way. Does this mean that spirituality is a broader domain than what we usually understand by the word? The answer is yes. As the researcher progresses along his path, he comes to understand, as we shall see, that it is not a "domain" in the strict sense of the word, but a way of approaching all things, and that for this reason it cannot be studied like a Ph.D. student preparing his dissertation."
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond Wisdom, How to Live, 2023)

E1.6.B.2.7.c. ALL SEARCH GOES IN THE OPPOSITE DIRECTION. THE MORE YOU SEARCH, THE FURTHER ASTRAY YOU ARE: THAT'S WHAT I CALL A SECRET.
(Linji)
Shifting one's inner position, thus adopting a dynamic outside of the will, involves replacing the goal with the consequence. This means forgoing the establishment of a target and the development of a strategy to reach it. This concept is exemplified by the Zen adage, "he who achieves his goal misses all the rest," with spirituality found within this "rest."

E1.6.B.2.7.c_REF1_PH "THE LIMITS OF THE VOLUNTARY ACT: LINJI'S SECRET

[...] The difficulty that the seeker encounters "after" the leap seems so radical that it resembles a knot that cannot be untied. When he began the practice, it was obviously because he wanted to bring about an inner change. Now he realizes that he can't rely on that will because, as Trungpa writes, "the process that leads us to want, to desire, is itself a blockage. If the seeker treats spiritual development as a life program comparable to others - physical maintenance, exercise, or personal development - and sets goals and tries to achieve them through an effort of willpower... he only blocks his progress. This paradox is astonishing, but it's actually well known, and the great Zen master Linji (Lin-Tsi), famous for his provocative formulas, had already pointed it out in the 9th century: "All searching," he said, "goes in the opposite direction. The more you search, the further you go: that's what I call a secret. It's a strange formula - why a "secret"? Since I don't know Chinese, I don't know the original term Linji used and have to rely on existing translations, but I assume that this word must be understood in the sense that it designates a craftsman's personal know-how, the particular technique he insists on keeping to himself or passing on only to selected disciples... In any case, we find this paradox so often and in so many activities that we could speak of an inner theorem, a fundamental principle that governs our psychology. [...]

The answer is simple. If voluntary action is ineffective in these areas, it is because the will imposes a framework, because it defines a goal. But invention and grace are born outside of frameworks. [...]

So let's try to put it more prosaically. To place oneself in a dynamic other than that of the will, by changing, if I may say so, one's inner position, is to replace the goal with the consequence, it is to give up setting a goal and implementing a strategy to achieve it, because "the one who achieves his goal lacks all the rest," as a Zen proverb says, and it is precisely in this "rest" that spirituality is to be found. This replacement of the goal by the consequence is a change in the logical universe that leads to a psychological change, or, to use Fabrice Midal's word, a "revolution" within the psyche."
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond Wisdom, How to Live, 2023)

E1.6.B.2.7.d. THE ROLE OF THE FRAMEWORK IN SPIRITUAL EXERCICES
The framework acts as an authority, providing reference points and organizing my experience into coherent, oriented, and meaningful acts. By superimposing on my actions, it allows me to classify my activity into one of the available categories. Thus, the framework partly influences what I feel, and more importantly, what I allow into my being.

E1.6.B.2.7.d_REF1_PH ACCORDING TO GOFFMAN'S ANALYSIS, THE FRAME IS A STRUCTURE THAT GOVERNS SOCIAL SITUATIONS, GIVING MEANING TO OUR ACTIONS AND DETERMINING WHAT IS POSSIBLE AND PERMISSIBLE. Extending this notion to the interior, the frame helps to categorise our activities (work, hobbies, play, learning) and influences our feelings. The frame, an effect of the self, is crucial to the coherence and orientation of our experiences. The question is how we can remove or replace this frame in a spiritual quest through psychic surgery.
What is going on inside me?

WHAT IS A FRAME?
[...]

Play is [a frame], as is work, which is another. A ritual, a conference or a game of bridge are other examples. Frames can be more or less small, more or less global: they fit together. [...]

If you violate a framework, you sometimes risk losing face or damaging your reputation. You may be excluded from a group or judged unfit for the job you are doing [...].


WHAT HAPPENS?

[From all of Goffman's analyses] one definition emerges - the setting is the instance that makes it possible to answer the question: what's going on here?

Imagine that an anthropologist arrives among an unknown people and observes men and women in brightly coloured clothes making regular and bizarre movements; he thinks it's a ritual, but not being sure, he asks his informant, who replies: No, it's not a ritual, it's a game. Or vice versa. This example clearly shows how a framework governs a situation: it is to life in general what a genre is to literature or film. It defines what is possible and what isn't, what is allowed and what isn't, and is an essential element of social life: it gives it its framework, and nothing that constitutes it escapes it - it's everywhere.

However, if we extend Goffman's analysis by transposing the implicit question to which the frame responds into the register of interiority, it becomes: "What is happening inside me? What am I doing? Possible answers: 'I'm learning the piano', 'I'm doing judo', or 'I'm trying to educate my son'. The framework then appears as an authority that gives me points of reference, transforming my experience into a series of organized actions to which it gives coherence, direction, and meaning. By superimposing itself on what I am doing, it allows me to classify my activity in one of the categories available to me: work, hobby, play, learning, and so on. This categorization is not only the basis of any description and analysis, but it also largely determines how I experience a given moment, what I feel in a given situation. Because the same activity, framed differently, can lead to pleasure or suffering, interest or boredom, as we see with certain arduous tasks, which become difficult when they are a punishment, but become exciting when they are the object of games, competitions, challenges or bets. [...]

The framework, therefore, partly determines how I feel; but even more profoundly, it determines what I accept to welcome within me, what I give a kind of inner official status, a right of citizenship in the citadel of my psyche. So what is the authority that classifies, accepts or rejects? It is the self, which Trungpa and Midal rightly compare to a bureaucracy. The framework, then, is an effect of the self; it comes under the jurisdiction of the authority that Lacan showed to be constituted at the level of the imaginary, and that it is at this level, that is, in a mirror, that the sense of one's own unity is forged for each individual. From then on, our question about the inner change that spiritual research induces becomes clearer: if it is a matter of breaking out of the framework, replacing it, or making it disappear, by what psychic operation can this be achieved?"
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond Wisdom, How to Live, 2023)

E1.6.B.2.8. FOCUS ON RESULTS OR ON THE PROCESS?
The way we currently define productivity is flawed. It equates the process with the product. Instead of focusing solely on producing, our purpose should be to understand, and let the "product" be the byproduct of that understanding.

E1.6.B.2.8_REF1_PH THE TRUE PURPOSE IS UNDERSTANDING AND EXPERIENCING LIFE, WITH ANY TANGIBLE OUTPUT BEING MERELY A BYPRODUCT OF THAT DEEPER PROCESS - contrary to the traditional notion of productivity.
"Alexandra Horowitz: [I have also] spent time in a job where you then wonder, a year later, what happened to that year. And if I had bothered to sit on the subway, commuting to my office, looking — looking — I think that those moments would have been memorialized, and I would know what happened to that year… [...]
Maria Popova: I think productivity, as we define it, is flawed to begin with, because it equates a process with a product. So, our purpose is to produce — as opposed to, our purpose is to understand and have the byproduct of that understanding be the “product.” For me, I read, and I hunger to know… I record, around that, my experience of understanding the world and understanding what it means to live a good life, to live a full life. Anything that I write is a byproduct of that — but that’s not the objective. So, even if it may have the appearance of “producing” something on a regular basis, it’s really about taking in, and what I put out is just … the byproduct."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings, in conversation with Alexandra Horowitz to discuss On Looking: Eleven Walks with Expert Eyes)

E1.6.B.2.8_REF2_PH PEOPLE STOP IMPROVING AT MOST SKILLS WHEN THEY REACH AN "OK PLATEAU" WHERE PERFORMANCE BECOMES AUTOMATIC, a barrier that experts overcome by using "deliberate practice" to remain consciously engaged, push beyond their comfort zones, and systematically learn from their mistakes.
“When people first learn to use a keyboard, they improve very quickly from sloppy single-finger pecking to careful two-handed typing, until eventually the fingers move so effortlessly across the keys that the whole process becomes unconscious and the fingers seem to take on a mind of their own. At this point, most people’s typing skills stop progressing. They reach a plateau. If you think about it, it’s a strange phenomenon. After all, we’ve always been told that practice makes perfect, and many people sit behind a keyboard for at least several hours a day in essence practicing their typing. Why don’t they just keep getting better and better?
In the 1960s, the psychologists Paul Fitts and Michael Posner attempted to answer this question by describing the three stages that anyone goes through when acquiring a new skill. During the first phase, known as the
“cognitive stage,” you’re intellectualizing the task and discovering new strategies to accomplish it more proficiently. During the second
“associative stage,” you’re concentrating less, making fewer major errors, and generally becoming more efficient. Finally you reach what Fitts called the “autonomous stage,” when you figure that you’ve gotten as good as you need to get at the task and you’re basically running on autopilot. During that autonomous stage, you lose conscious control over what you’re doing. Most of the time that’s a good thing. Your mind has one less thing to worry about. In fact, the autonomous stage seems to be one of those handy features that evolution worked out for our benefit. The less you have to focus on the repetitive tasks of everyday life, the more you can concentrate on the stuff that really matters, the stuff that you haven’t seen before. And so, once we’re just good enough at typing, we move it to the back of our mind’s filing cabinet and stop paying it any attention. You can actually see this shift take place in fMRI scans of people learning new skills. As a task becomes automated, the parts of the brain involved in conscious reasoning become less active and other parts of the brain take over. You could call it the “OK plateau,” the point at which you decide you’re OK with how good you are at something, turn on autopilot, and stop improving.
We all reach OK plateaus in most things we do. We learn how to drive when we’re in our teens and then once we’re good enough to avoid tickets and major accidents, we get only incrementally better. My father has been playing golf for forty years, and he’s still—though it will hurt him to read this—a duffer. In four decades his handicap hasn’t fallen even a point. How come? He reached an OK plateau.
Psychologists used to think that OK plateaus marked the upper bounds of innate ability. In his 1869 book Hereditary Genius, Sir Francis Galton argued that a person could only improve at physical and mental activities up until he reached a certain wall, which “he cannot by any education or exertion overpass.” According to this view, the best we can do is simply the best we can do.
But Ericsson and his fellow expert performance psychologists have found over and over again that with the right kind of concerted effort, that’s rarely the case. They believe that Galton’s wall often has much less to do with our innate limits than simply with what we consider an acceptable level of performance.
What separates experts from the rest of us is that they tend to engage in a very directed, highly focused routine, which Ericsson has labeled
“deliberate practice.” Having studied the best of the best in many different fields, he has found that top achievers tend to follow the same general pattern of development. They develop strategies for consciously keeping out of the autonomous stage while they practice by doing three things: focusing on their technique, staying goal-oriented, and getting constant and immediate feedback on their performance. In other words, they force themselves to stay in the “cognitive phase.”
Amateur musicians, for example, are more likely to spend their practice time playing music, whereas pros are more likely to work through tedious exercises or focus on specific, difficult parts of pieces. The best ice skaters spend more of their practice time trying jumps that they land less often, while lesser skaters work more on jumps they’ve already mastered. Deliberate practice, by its nature, must be hard.
When you want to get good at something, how you spend your time practicing is far more important than the amount of time you spend. In fact, in every domain of expertise that’s been rigorously examined, from chess to violin to basketball, studies have found that the number of years one has been doing something correlates only weakly with level of performance. My dad may consider putting into a tin cup in his basement a good form of practice, but unless he’s consciously challenging himself and monitoring his performance—reviewing, responding, rethinking, rejiggering—it’s never going to make him appreciably better. Regular practice simply isn’t enough. To improve, we must watch ourselves fail, and learn from our mistakes.
The best way to get out of the autonomous stage and off the OK plateau, Ericsson has found, is to actually practice failing. One way to do that is to put yourself in the mind of someone far more competent at the task you’re trying to master, and try to figure out how that person works through problems. Benjamin Franklin was apparently an early practitioner of this technique. In his autobiography, he describes how he used to read essays by the great thinkers and try to reconstruct the author’s arguments according to Franklin’s own logic. He’d then open up the essay and compare his reconstruction to the original words to see how his own chain of thinking stacked up against the master’s. The best chess players follow a similar strategy. They will often spend several hours a day replaying the games of grand masters one move at a time, trying to understand the expert’s thinking at each step. Indeed, the single best predictor of an individual’s chess skill is not the amount of chess he’s played against opponents, but rather the amount of time he’s spent sitting alone working through old games.
The secret to improving at a skill is to retain some degree of conscious control over it while practicing—to force oneself to stay out of autopilot.
With typing, it’s relatively easy to get past the OK plateau. Psychologists have discovered that the most efficient method is to force yourself to type faster than feels comfortable, and to allow yourself to make mistakes. In one noted experiment, typists were repeatedly flashed words 10 to 15 percent faster than their fingers were able to translate them onto the keyboard. At first they weren’t able to keep up, but over a period of days they figured out the obstacles that were slowing them down, and overcame them, and then continued to type at the faster speed. By bringing typing out of the autonomous stage and back under their conscious control, they had conquered the OK plateau.
Ericsson suggested I try the same thing with cards. He told me to find a metronome and to try to memorize a card every time it clicked. Once I figured out my limits, he instructed me to set the metronome 10 to 20 percent faster than that and keep trying at the quicker pace until I stopped making mistakes. Whenever I came across a card that was particularly troublesome, I was supposed to make a note of it, and see if I could figure out why it was giving me problems. It worked, and within a couple days I was off the OK plateau and my card times began falling again at a steady clip.
If they’re not practicing deliberately, even experts can see their skills backslide. […]
People have been swimming for as long as people have been getting neck-deep in water. You’d think that as a species, we’d have maxed out how fast we could swim long ago. And yet new swimming records are set every year. Humans keep getting faster and faster. “Olympic swimmers from early this century would not even qualify for swim teams at competitive high schools,” notes Ericsson. Likewise, “the gold medal performance at the original Olympic marathon is regularly attained by amateurs just to qualify as a participant in the Boston Marathon.” And the same is true not just of athletic pursuits, but in virtually every field. The thirteenth-century philosopher Roger Bacon claimed that “nobody can obtain to proficiency in the science of mathematics by the method hitherto known unless he devotes to its study thirty or forty years.” Today, the entire body of mathematics known to Bacon is now acquired by your average high school junior.
There’s no reason to think that the most talented athletes alive today possess that much more innate talent than the most talented athletes of the past. And there’s also no reason to believe that improvements in running shoes or swimwear—while certainly of some significance—could be responsible for the totality of these dramatic improvements. What’s changed is the amount and quality of training that athletes must endure to achieve world-class status. The same is true not just of running and swimming, but of javelin throwing, ice skating, and every other athletic pursuit. There is not a single sport in which records don’t regularly fall. If there are plateaus out there, collectively we have not reached them yet.
How is it that we continue to surpass ourselves? Part of Ericsson’s answer is that the barriers we collectively set are as much psychological as innate. Once a benchmark is deemed breakable, it usually doesn’t take long before someone breaks it. For a long time, people thought that no one would ever run a mile in under four minutes. It was considered an immovable barrier, like the speed of light. When Roger Bannister, a twenty-year-old British medical student, finally broke the four-minute mile in 1954, his accomplishment was splashed across the front pages of newspapers around the world and hailed as one of the greatest athletic achievements of all time. But the barrier turned out to be more like a floodgate. It took only six weeks before an Australian named John Landy ran the mile a second and a half faster than Bannister, and within a few years four-minute miles were commonplace. Today, all professional middle-distance runners are expected to clock four-minute miles and the world record has fallen to 3 minutes and 43.13 seconds. At the World Memory Championship, at least half the existing world records fall each year.”
(Joshua Foer, Moonwalking with Einstein, 2011)

E1.6.B.2.9. ARE THERE EXCESSIVE PRACTICES THAT DISTRACT US FROM LIFE?
Is an absolute recluse missing out on life?

E1.6.B.2.9_REF1_CUR "ONE YEAR PERFORMANCE 1978-1979 (CAGE PIECE)
In his earliest performance starting in 1978, Hsieh spent one year locked inside a cage constructed in his studio in New York City. During that period the artist did not speak, read, nor interact with the world in any way, while a friend assisted with food, clothes, and refuse. Every three weeks, his apartment was open to the public to see the evolving work. On the day in which he locked himself, a lawyer was present to put a piece of paper onto each lock and seal it with his name. One year later, on 30th of September 1979, he came back and signed a con- tract saying that Hsieh had stayed in the cell for exactly one year."
(Curatorship: Neue Galerie, Berlin)

E1.6.B.2.9_REF2_CUR  "ONE YEAR PERFORMANCE 1980-1981 (TIME CLOCK PIECE)
The second "One Year Performance" took place only one year after the first, from 1980 and 1981. For one year, every hour and on the hour, the artist punched a time clock. Simultaneously, he used a 16mm movie camera to shoot one frame on the hour, continued for a year, resulting into 8,760 photos that became a 6-minute time-lapse film. It grasps the unimaginable duration of a year through the visible growth of his hair and thus reveals the relationship between the culturally constructed clock and the duration of a lived experience."
(Curatorship: Neue Galerie, Berlin)

E1.6.B.2.9_REF3_CUR "ONE YEAR PERFORMANCE 1981-1982 (OUTDOOR PIECE)
In his third "One Year Performance" from 1981 to 1982, Hsieh did not allow himself to go inside, with the consequence of living outdoors in New York City for one year. I shall not go into a building, subway, train, car, airplane, ship, cave, tent.' Hsieh pledged to exist and survive without shelter, with only a sleeping bag and a backpack containing supplies like clothes, maps, a camera, a radio, and a flashlight. The work exists today as daily map documentation that Hsieh produced each day to detail his movements around the city, as well as two arrest records. Hsieh's status at that time was an illegal immigrant in the United States."
(Curatorship: Neue Galerie, Berlin)

E1.6.B.3. HOW TO DISCOVER YOUR TRUE CALLING ?
"There are so many people who don’t know what they want. And I think that, in this world, that’s the only thing you have to know — exactly what you want. … Doing what you were born to do … That’s the way to be happy."
(Agnes Martin — legendary abstract painter, revered minimalist, celebrated reconstructionist — in a short 1997 interview by Chuck Smith and Sono Kuwayama, by Maria Popova, Brain Pickings)

E1.6.B.3.1. FIND SOMETHING MORE IMPORTANT THAN YOU ARE AND DEDICATE YOUR LIFE TO IT.
"“Find something more important than you are,” philosopher Dan Dennett once said in discussing the secret of happiness, “and dedicate your life to it.” But how, exactly, do we find that? Surely, it isn’t by luck. I myself am a firm believer in the power of curiosity and choice as the engine of fulfillment, but precisely how you arrive at your true calling is an intricate and highly individual dance of discovery. 

E1.6.B.3.1_REF1_PH "“FIND SOMETHING MORE IMPORTANT THAN YOU ARE,” philosopher Dan Dennett once said in discussing the secret of happiness, “and dedicate your life to it.” But how, exactly, do we find that? Surely, it isn’t by luck. I myself am a firm believer in the power of curiosity and choice as the engine of fulfillment, but precisely how you arrive at your true calling is an intricate and highly individual dance of discovery. Still, there are certain factors — certain choices — that make it easier. Gathered here are insights from [...] thinkers who have contemplated the art-science of making your life’s calling a living."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings)

E1.6.B.3.1_REF1.1_PH 1. PAUL GRAHAM ON HOW TO DO WHAT YOU LOVE
"What you should not do, I think, is worry about the opinion of anyone beyond your friends. You shouldn’t worry about prestige. Prestige is the opinion of the rest of the world. […]
Prestige is like a powerful magnet that warps even your beliefs about what you enjoy. It causes you to work not on what you like, but what you’d like to like. […]
Prestige is just fossilized inspiration. If you do anything well enough, you’ll make it prestigious. Plenty of things we now consider prestigious were anything but at first. Jazz comes to mind—though almost any established art form would do. So just do what you like, and let prestige take care of itself.
Prestige is especially dangerous to the ambitious. If you want to make ambitious people waste their time on errands, the way to do it is to bait the hook with prestige. That’s the recipe for getting people to give talks, write forewords, serve on committees, be department heads, and so on. It might be a good rule simply to avoid any prestigious task. If it didn’t suck, they wouldn’t have had to make it prestigious."
(Paul Graham, How to Do What You Love, 2006)

E1.6.B.3.1_REF1.2_PH 2. ALAIN DE BOTTON ON SUCCESS
"One of the interesting things about success is that we think we know what it means. A lot of the time our ideas about what it would mean to live successfully are not our own. They’re sucked in from other people. And we also suck in messages from everything from the television to advertising to marketing, etcetera. These are hugely powerful forces that define what we want and how we view ourselves. What I want to argue for is not that we should give up on our ideas of success, but that we should make sure that they are our own. We should focus in on our ideas and make sure that we own them, that we’re truly the authors of our own ambitions. Because it’s bad enough not getting what you want, but it’s even worse to have an idea of what it is you want and find out at the end of the journey that it isn’t, in fact, what you wanted all along."
(Alain de Botton, The Pleasures and Sorrows of Work)

E1.6.B.3.1_REF1.2.1_PH WHAT IS SUCCESS FOR ARUNDHATI ROY?
“To love. To be loved. To never forget your own insignificance. To never get used to the unspeakable violence and the vulgar disparity of life around you. To seek joy in the saddest places. To pursue beauty to its lair. To never simplify what is complicated or complicate what is simple. To respect strength, never power. Above all to watch. To try and understand. To never look away. And never, never to forget. “
(Arundhati Roy, The cost of living, 1999)

E1.6.B.3.1_REF1.3_PH 3. HUGH MACLEOD ON SETTING BOUNDARIES
"The most important thing a creative person can learn professionally is where to draw the red line that separates what you are willing to do, and what you are not.
Art suffers the moment other people start paying for it. The more you need the money, the more people will tell you what to do. The less control you will have. The more bullshit you will have to swallow. The less joy it will bring. Know this and plan accordingly."
(Hugh MacLeod, Ignore Everybody: and 39 Other Keys to Creativity)

E1.6.B.3.2. WHERE IS YOUR SELF TO BE FOUND ? Always in the deepest enchantment that you have experienced.
(Hugo von Hofmannsthal)

E1.6.B.3.2.a. WHAT HAVE YOU TRULY LOVED THUS FAR? WHAT HAS EVER UPLIFTED YOUR SOUL, WHAT HAS DOMINATED AND DELIGHTED IT AT THE SAME TIME?

E1.6.B.3.2.a_REF1_PH NIETZSCHE EXPLORES THE COMPLEXITY AND DIFFICULTY OF SELF-KNOWLEDGE, SUGGESTING THAT TRUE SELF-UNDERSTANDING IS NOT FOUND BY INTROSPECTION ALONE BUT THROUGH EXAMINING WHAT ONE HAS LOVED AND VALUED. He proposes that these cherished objects reveal a fundamental law of one's being, showing that the true self is not buried within but rises above common perceptions of identity.
"Any human being who does not wish to be part of the masses need only stop making things easy for himself. Let him follow his conscience, which calls out to him: “Be yourself! All that you are now doing, thinking, desiring, all that is not you.”
Every young soul hears this call by day and by night and shudders with excitement at the premonition of that degree of happiness which eternities have prepared for those who will give thought to their true liberation. There is no way to help any soul attain this happiness, however, so long as it remains shackled with the chains of opinion and fear. And how hopeless and meaningless life can become without such a liberation! There is no drearier, sorrier creature in nature than the man who has evaded his own genius and who squints now towards the right, now towards the left, now backwards, now in any direction whatever. [...]
How can man know himself? It is a dark, mysterious business: if a hare has seven skins, a man may skin himself seventy times seven times without being able to say, “Now that is truly you; that is no longer your outside.” It is also an agonizing, hazardous undertaking thus to dig into oneself, to climb down toughly and directly into the tunnels of one’s being. How easy it is thereby to give oneself such injuries as no doctor can heal. Moreover, why should it even be necessary given that everything bears witness to our being — our friendships and animosities, our glances and handshakes, our memories and all that we forget, our books as well as our pens. For the most important inquiry, however, there is a method. Let the young soul survey its own life with a view of the following question: “What have you truly loved thus far? What has ever uplifted your soul, what has dominated and delighted it at the same time?” Assemble these revered objects in a row before you and perhaps they will reveal a law by their nature and their order: the fundamental law of your very self. Compare these objects, see how they complement, enlarge, outdo, transfigure one another; how they form a ladder on whose steps you have been climbing up to yourself so far; for your true self does not lie buried deep within you, but rather rises immeasurably high above you, or at least above what you commonly take to be your I."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Untimely Meditations, Schopenhauer as Educator)

E1.6.B.3.2.a_REF1.1_PH TRUE EDUCATION AND CULTIVATION REVEAL THE ESSENCE OF ONE'S BEING, WHICH CANNOT BE FULLY SHAPED BY OTHERS BUT CAN BE LIBERATED BY EDUCATORS. "Your true educators and cultivators will reveal to you the original sense and basic stuff of your being, something that is not ultimately amenable to education or cultivation by anyone else, but that is always difficult to access, something bound and immobilized; your educators cannot go beyond being your liberators. And that is the secret of all true culture: she does not present us with artificial limbs, wax-noses, bespectacled eyes — for such gifts leave us merely with a sham image of education. She is liberation instead, pulling weeds, removing rubble, chasing away the pests that would gnaw at the tender roots and shoots of the plant; she is an effusion of light and warmth, a tender trickle of nightly rain… [...]
There may be other methods for finding oneself, for waking up to oneself out of the anesthesia in which we are commonly enshrouded as if in a gloomy cloud — but I know of none better than that of reflecting upon one’s educators and cultivators."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Untimely Meditations, Schopenhauer as Educator)

E1.6.B.3.2.a_REF2_PO “NO ONE CAN BUILD YOU THE BRIDGE ON WHICH YOU, AND ONLY YOU, MUST CROSS THE RIVER OF LIFE” (FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE)
“No one can acquire for another — not one,
Not one can grow for another — not one.
The song is to the singer, and comes back most to him,
The teaching is to the teacher, and comes back most to him,
The murder is to the murderer, and comes back most to him,
The theft is to the thief, and comes back most to him,
The love is to the lover, and comes back most to him,
The gift is to the giver, and comes back most to him — it cannot fail. […]
Underneath the lessons of things, spirits, Nature, governments,
ownerships, I swear I perceive other lessons,
Underneath all to me is myself, to you yourself. […]
…the part that still looks back on the actor or actress,
The same old role, the role that is what we make it, as great as we like,
Or as small as we like, or both great and small.”
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of Grass)

E1.6.B.3.2.b THE REALITY IS ALWAYS THERE, AND IT IS PRECEDED BY VISION. AND IF ONE KEEPS LOOKING STEADILY THE VISION CRYSTALLIZES INTO FACT OR DEED
"I see that my steadfast desire was alone responsible for whatever progress or mastery I have made. The reality is always there, and it is preceded by vision. And if one keeps looking steadily the vision crystallizes into fact or deed. There is no escaping it. It doesn’t matter what route one travels — every route brings you eventually to the goal… If one accepted that fully, one would get there so much more quickly. One should not be worrying about the degree of “success” obtained by each and every effort, but only concentrate on maintaining the vision, keeping it pure and steady. The rest is sleight-of-hand work in the dark, a genuine automatic process, no less somnambulistic because accompanied by pains and aches."
(Henry Miller, The Waters Reglitterized, 1950)

E1.6.B.3.2.c. BUT BEWARE OF FALSE ENCHANTMENTS
When we are truly enchanted we desire nothing for ourselves, only that the enchanting object or person shall continue to exist. When we are falsely enchanted, we desire either to possess the enchanting being or be possessed by it.

E1.6.B.3.2.c_REF1_LIT "THE STATE OF ENCHANTMENT IS ONE OF CERTAINTY. When enchanted, we neither believe nor doubt nor deny: we know, even if, as in the case of a false enchantment, our knowledge is self-deception.
All folk tales recognize that there are false enchantments as well as true ones. When we are truly enchanted we desire nothing for ourselves, only that the enchanting object or person shall continue to exist. When we are falsely enchanted, we desire either to possess the enchanting being or be possessed by it.
We are not free to choose by what we shall be enchanted, truly or falsely. In the case of a false enchantment, all we can do is take immediate flight before the spell really takes hold.
Recognizing idols for what they are does not break their enchantment.
All true enchantments fade in time. Sooner or later we must walk alone in faith. When this happens, we are tempted, either to deny our vision, to say that it must have been an illusion and, in consequence, grow hardhearted and cynical, or to make futile attempts to recover our vision by force, i.e., by alcohol or drugs.
A false enchantment can all too easily last a lifetime."
(W.H. Auden, A Certain World: A Commonplace Book, 1970)

E1.6.B.3.2.d. STEVE JOBS ON NOT SETTLING
"Your work is going to fill a large part of your life, and the only way to be truly satisfied is to do what you believe is great work. And the only way to do great work is to love what you do. If you haven’t found it yet, keep looking. Don’t settle. As with all matters of the heart, you’ll know when you find it. And, like any great relationship, it just gets better and better as the years roll on. So keep looking until you find it. Don’t settle."
(Steve Jobs, 2005 Stanford commencement address)

E1.6.B.3.2.e. "THE JOURNEY

One day you finally knew
what you had to do, and began,
though the voices around you
kept shouting 
their bad advice - 
though the whole house 
began to tremble 
and you felt the old tug 
at your ankles. 
"Mend my life!" 
each voice cried. 
But you didn't stop. 
You knew what you had to do, 
though the wind pried 
with its stiff fingers 
at the very foundations - 
though their melancholy 
was terrible. 
It was already late 
enough, and a wild night, 
and the road full of fallen 
branches and stones. 
But little by little, 
as you left their voices behind, 
the stars began to burn 
through the sheets of clouds, 
and there was a new voice, 
which you slowly 
recognized as your own,
that kept you company 
as you strode deeper and deeper 
into the world, 
determined to do 
the only thing you could do - 
determined to save 
the only life you could save."
(Mary Oliver, Dream work, 1986)

E1.6.B.3.2.f. CAL NEWPORT REFUTES THE "PASSION HYPOTHESIS," ARGUING THAT SINCE CAREER-RELEVANT PASSIONS ARE RARE, TRUE JOB SATISFACTION IS NOT THE RESULT OF MATCHING YOUR WORK TO A PRE-EXISTING INTEREST, BUT IS INSTEAD A SIDE EFFECT THAT DEVELOPS OVER TIME AS YOU ACHIEVE MASTERY AND FULFILL THE CORE PSYCHOLOGICAL NEEDS OF AUTONOMY AND COMPETENCE.
“The Science of Passion
Why do some people enjoy their work while so many other people don’t? Here’s the CliffsNotes summary of the social science research in this area: There are many complex reasons for workplace satisfaction, but the reductive notion of matching your job to a pre-existing passion is not among them.
To give you a better sense of the realities uncovered by this research, here are three of the more interesting conclusions I’ve encountered: 

Conclusion #1: Career Passions Are Rare
In 2002, a research team led by the Canadian psychologist Robert J. Vallerand administered an extensive questionnaire to a group of 539 Canadian university students6. The questionnaire’s prompts were designed to answer two important questions: Do these students have passions? And if so, what are they?
At the core of the passion hypothesis is the assumption that we all have pre-existing passions waiting to be discovered. This experiment puts that assumption to he test. Here’s what it found: 84 percent of the students surveyed were identified as having a passion. This sounds like good news for supporters of the passion hypothesis—that is, until you dive deeper into the details of these pursuits. Here are the top five identified passions: dance, hockey (these were Canadian students, mind you), skiing, reading, and swimming. Though dear to the hearts of the students, these passions don’t have much to offer when it comes to choosing a job. In fact, less than 4 percent of the total identified passions had any relation to work or education, with the remaining 96 percent describing hobby-style interests such as sports and art.
Take a moment to absorb this result, as it deals a strong blow to the passion hypothesis. How can we follow our passions if we don’t have any relevant passions to follow? At least for these Canadian college students, the vast majority will need a different strategy for choosing their career.
Conclusion #2: Passion Takes Time
Amy Wrzesniewski, a professor of organizational behavior at Yale University, has made a career studying how people think about their work. Her breakthrough paper, published in the Journal of Research in Personality while she was still a graduate student, explores the distinction between a job, a career, and a calling. A job, in Wrzesniewski’s formulation, is a way to pay the bills, a career is a path toward increasingly better work, and a calling is work that’s an important part of your life and a vital part of your identity.
Wrzesniewski surveyed employees from a variety of occupations, from doctors to computer programmers to clerical workers, and found that most people strongly identify their work with one of these three categories. A possible explanation for these different classifications is that some occupations are better than others. The passion hypothesis, for example, predicts that occupations that match common passions, such as being a doctor or a teacher, should have a high proportion of people who experience the work as a true calling, while less flashy occupations—the type that no one daydreams about—should have almost no one experiencing the work as a calling. To test this explanation, Wrzesniewski looked at a group of employees who all had the same position and nearly identical work responsibilities: college administrative assistants. She found, to her admitted surprise, that these employees were roughly evenly split between seeing their position as a job, a career, or a calling. In other words, it seems that the type of work alone does not necessarily predict how much people enjoy it.
Supporters of the passion hypothesis, however, might reply that a position like a college administrative assistant will attract a wide variety of employees. Some might arrive at the position because they have a passion for higher education and will therefore love the work, while others might stumble into the job for other reasons, perhaps because it’s stable and has good benefits, and therefore will have a less exalted experience.
But Wrzesniewski wasn’t done. She surveyed the assistants to figure out why they saw their work so differently, and discovered that the strongest predictor of an assistant seeing her work as a calling was the number of years spent on the job. In other words, the more experience an assistant had, the more likely she was to love her work.
This result deals another blow to the passion hypothesis. In Wrzesniewski’s research, the happiest, most passionate employees are not those who followed their passion into a position, but instead those who have been around long enough to become good at what they do. On reflection, this makes sense. If you have many years’ experience, then you’ve had time to get better at what you do and develop a feeling of efficacy. It also gives you time to develop strong relationships with your coworkers and to see many examples of your work benefiting others. What’s important here, however, is that this explanation though reasonable, contradicts the passion hypothesis, which instead emphasizes the immediate happiness that comes from matching your job to a true passion.
Conclusion #3: Passion Is a Side Effect of Mastery
Not long into his popular TED talk, titled “On the Surprising Science of Motivation,” author Daniel Pink, discussing his book Drive, tells the audience that he spent the last couple of years studying the science of human motivation. “I’m telling you, it’s not even close,” he says. “If you look at the science, there is a mismatch between what science knows and what business does.” When Pink talks about “what science knows,” he’s referring, for the most part, to a forty-year-old theoretical framework known as Self-Determination Theory (SDT), which is arguably the best understanding science currently has for why some pursuits get our engines running while others leave us cold.
SDT tells us that motivation, in the workplace or elsewhere, requires that you fulfill three basic psychological needs—factors described as the “nutriments” required to feel intrinsically motivated for your work:
- Autonomy: the feeling that you have control over your day, and that your actions are important
- Competence: the feeling that you are good at what you do 
- Relatedness: the feeling of connection to other people
The last need is the least surprising: If you feel close to people at work, you’re going to enjoy work more. It’s the first two needs that prove more interesting. It’s clear, for example, that autonomy and competence are related. In most jobs, as you become better at what you do, not only do you get the sense of accomplishment that comes from being good, but you’re typically also rewarded with more control over your responsibilities. These results help explain Amy Wrzesniewski’s findings: Perhaps one reason that more experienced assistants enjoyed their work was because it takes time to build the competence and autonomy that generates this enjoyment.
Of equal interest is what this list of basic psychological needs does not include. Notice, scientists did not find “matching work to pre-existing passions” as being important for motivation. The traits they did find, by contrast, are more general and are agnostic to the specific type of work in question. Competence and autonomy, for example, are achievable by most people in a wide variety of jobs—assuming they’re willing to put in the hard work required for mastery. This message is not as inspiring as “follow your passion and you’ll immediately be happy,” but it certainly has a ring of truth. In other words, working right trumps finding the right work.”
(Cal Newport, So good they can't ignore you, 2012)

E1.6.B.3.2.f_REF1_LIT CAL NEWPORT ARGUES THAT THE "PASSION HYPOTHESIS"—THE POPULAR ADVICE TO "FOLLOW YOUR PASSION"—IS A DANGEROUS AND FLAWED MODERN MYTH THAT HAS PARADOXICALLY LED TO INCREASED JOB DISSATISFACTION AND CAREER ANGST BY CREATING THE FALSE EXPECTATION OF FINDING A PERFECT, PRE-EXISTING DREAM JOB. 
“The Birth of the Passion Hypothesis
It’s difficult to pinpoint the exact moment when our society began emphasizing the importance of following your passion, but a good approximation is the 1970 publication of What Color Is Your Parachute? The author, Richard Bolles, was working at the time for the Episcopal Church advising campus ministers, many of whom were in danger of losing their jobs. He published the first edition of Parachute as a straightforward collection of tips for those facing career change. The original print run was one hundred copies.
The premise of Bolles’s guide sounds self-evident to the modern ear: “[Figure] out what you like to do… and then find a place that needs people like you.” But in 1970, this was a radical notion. “[At the time,] the idea of doing a lot of pen-and-paper exercises in order to take control of your own career was regarded as a dilettante’s exercise,” Bolles recalls: The optimism of this message, however, caught on: You can control what you do with your life, so why not pursue what you love? There are now more than six million copies of Bolles’s book in print.
The decades since the publication of Bolles’s book can be understood as a period of increasing dedication to the passion hypothesis. You can visualize this shift by using Google’s Ngram Viewer. This tool allows you to search Google’s vast corpus of digitized books to see how often selected phrases turn up in published writing over time. If you enter “follow your passion,” you see a spike in usage right at 1970 (the year when Bolles’s book was published), followed by a relatively steady high usage until 1990, at which point the graph curve swings upward. By 2000, the phrase
“follow your passion” was showing up in print three times more often than in the seventies and eighties.
Parachute, in other words, helped introduce the baby boom generation to this passion-centric take on career, a lesson they have now passed down to their children, the echo boom generation, which has since raised the bar on passion obsession. This young generation has “high expectations for work,” explains psychologist Jeffrey Arnett, an expert on the mindset of the modern postgrad. “They expect work to be not just a job but an adventure[,]… a venue for self-development and self-expression[,]… and something that provides a satisfying fit with their assessment of their talents.”
Even if you accept my argument that the passion hypothesis is flawed, it’s at this point that you might respond, “Who cares!” If the passion hypothesis can encourage even a small number of people to leave a bad job or to experiment with their career, you might argue, then it has provided a service. The fact that this occupational fairy tale has spread so far should not cause concern.
I disagree. The more I studied the issue, the more I noticed that the passion hypothesis convinces people that somewhere there’s a magic “right” job waiting for them, and that if they find it, they’ll immediately recognize that this is the work they were meant to do. The problem, of course, is when they fail to find this certainty, bad things follow, such as chronic job- hopping and crippling self-doubt.
We can see this effect in the statistics. As I just established, the last several decades are marked by an increasing commitment to Bolles’s contagious idea. And yet, for all of this increased focus on following our passion and holding out for work we love, we aren’t getting any happier. The 2010 Conference Board survey of U.S. job satisfaction found that only 45 percent of Americans describe themselves as satisfied with their jobs. This number has been steadily decreasing from the mark of 61 percent recorded in 1987, the first year of the survey. As Lynn Franco, the director of the Board’s Consumer Research Center notes, this is not just about a bad business cycle: “Through both economic boom and bust during the past two decades, our job satisfaction numbers have shown a consistent downward trend.” Among young people, the group perhaps most concerned with the role of work in their lives, 64 percent now say that they’re actively unhappy in their jobs. This is the highest level of dissatisfaction ever measured for any age group over the full two-decade history of the survey. In other words, our generation-spanning experiment with passion-centric career planning can be deemed a failure: The more we focused on loving what we do, the less we ended up loving it.
These statistics, of course, are not clear-cut, as other factors play a role in declining workplace happiness. To develop a more visceral understanding of this unease, we can turn to anecdotal sources. Consider Alexandra Robbins and Abby Wilner’s 2001 ode to youth disaffection, Quarterlife Crisis: The Unique Challenges of Life in Your Twenties. This book chronicles the personal testimony of dozens of unhappy twentysomethings who feel adrift in the world of work. Take, for example, the tale of Scott, a twenty-seven-year-old from Washington, D.C.
“My professional situation now couldn’t be more perfect,” Scott reports. “I chose to pursue the career I knew in my heart I was passionate about: politics…. I love my office, my friends… even my boss.” The glamorous promises of the passion hypothesis, however, led Scott to question whether his perfect job was perfect enough.
“It’s not fulfilling,” he worries when reflecting on the fact that his job, like all jobs, includes difficult responsibilities. He has since restarted his search for his life’s work. “I’ve committed myself to exploring other options that interest me,” Scott says. “But I’m having a hard time actually thinking of a career that sounds appealing.”
“I graduated college wanting nothing more than the ultimate job or me,” says Jill, another young person profiled in Quarterlife Crisis. Not surprisingly, everything Jill tried failed to meet this high mark.
“I’m so lost about what I want to do,” despairs twenty-five-year-old Elaine, “that I don’t even realize what I’m sacrificing.”
And so on. These stories, which are increasingly common at all ages, from college students to the middle-aged, all point toward the same conclusion: The passion hypothesis is not just wrong, it’s also dangerous. Telling someone o “follow their passion” is not just an act of innocent optimism, but potentially the foundation for a career riddled with confusion and angst.”
(Cal Newport, So good they can't ignore you, 2012)

E1.6.B.3.2.f_REF2_LIT ACCORDING TO CAL NEWPORT, THE "CRAFTSMAN MINDSET," AN OUTPUT-CENTRIC APPROACH TO WORK EXEMPLIFIED BY STEVE MARTIN'S ADVICE TO "BE SO GOOD THEY CAN'T IGNORE YOU," IS A FAR MORE EFFECTIVE AND LIBERATING FOUNDATION FOR A FULFILLING CAREER THAN THE SELF-CENTERED AND CONFUSING "PASSION MINDSET."
“The Craftsman Mindset
Let me be clear about something: I really don’t care if Jordan Tice loves what he does. I also don’t care why he decided to become a musician or whether he sees guitar playing as his “passion.” Musicians’ career paths are idiosyncratic, often relying on unusual circumstances and lucky breaks early in life. (The fact that Jordan’s parents are both bluegrass musicians, for example, obviously played a big role in his early dedication to guitar.) Because of this, I’ve never found the origin stories of performers’ careers to be all that relevant to the rest of us. Here’s what does interest me about Jordan: how he approaches his work on a daily basis. Lurking here, I discovered, is an insight of great value to my quest for work I love.
The path that led me to Jordan and the insight he represents began with a 2007 episode of the Charlie Rose show. Rose was interviewing the actor and comedian Steve Martin about his memoir Born Standing Up2. They talked about the realities of Martin’s rise. “I read autobiographies in general,” Martin said. “[And I often get frustrated]… and say, ‘You left out that one part here, how did you get that audition for that one thing where suddenly you’re working at the Copa? How did that happen?’ ” Martin wrote his book to answer the “how” question, at least with respect to his own success in stand-up. It was in this explanation of “how” that Martin introduced a simple idea that floored me when I first heard it. The quote comes in the last five minutes of the interview, when Rose asks Martin his advice for aspiring performers.
“Nobody ever takes note of [my advice], because it’s not the answer they wanted to hear,” Martin said. “What they want to hear is ‘Here’s how you get an agent, here’s how you write a script,’… but I always say, ‘Be so good they can’t ignore you.’ ”
In response to Rose’s trademark ambiguous grunt, Martin defended his advice: “If somebody’s thinking, ‘How can I be really good?’ people are going to come to you.”
This is exactly the philosophy that catapulted Martin into stardom. He was only twenty years old when” he decided to innovate his act into something too good to be ignored. “Comedy at the time was all setup and punch line… the clichéd nightclub comedian, rat-a-tat-tat,” Martin explained to Rose. He thought it could be something more sophisticated. Here’s how Martin explained his evolution in an article he published around the time of his Charlie Rose interview: “What if there were no punch lines? What if there were no indicators? What if I created tension and never released it? What if I headed for a climax, but all I delivered was an anticlimax?” In one famous bit, Martin tells the audience that it’s time for his famous nose-on-the-microphone routine. He then leans in and puts his nose on the microphone for several seconds, steps back, takes a long bow, and with gravitas thanks the crowd.
“The laugh came not then,” he explains, “but only after they realized I had already moved on to the next bit.”
It took Martin, by his own estimation, ten years for his new act to cohere, but when it did, he became a monster success. It’s clear in his telling that there was no real shortcut to his eventual fame.
“[Eventually] you are so experienced [that] there’s a confidence that comes out,” Martin explained. “I think it’s something the audience smells.”
Be so good they can’t ignore you. When I first heard this advice, I was watching the Martin interview online. It was the winter of 2008 and I was approaching my final year as a graduate student. At the time, I had recently started a blog called Study Hacks, which was inspired by the pair of student- advice guides I had published, and focused mainly on tips for undergraduates. Soon after hearing Martin’s axiom, however, I dashed off a blog post that introduced his idea to my readers. “Sure, it’s scary,” I concluded. “But, even more, I find it liberating.”
As my graduate student career had been winding down, I had become obsessed with my research strategy—an obsession that was manifested in the chronic working and reworking of the description of my work on my website. This was a frustrating process: I felt like I was stretching to convince the world that my work was interesting, yet no one cared. Martin’s axiom gave me a reprieve from this self-promotion. “Stop focusing on these little details,” it told me. “Focus instead on becoming better.” Inspired, I turned my attention from my website to a habit that continues to this day: I track the hours spent each month dedicated to thinking hard about research problems (in the month in which I first wrote this chapter, for example, I dedicated forty-two hours to these core tasks).
This hour-tracking strategy helped turn my attention back above all else to the quality of what I produce. At the same time, however, it also felt incremental, as if I hadn’t yet grasped the full implications of Martin’s radical idea. When I later launched my quest to uncover how people end up loving their work, it didn’t take long for me to return to Martin’s advice. Intuitively I grasped that it played an important role in constructing a remarkable career. This is what led me to Jordan Tice: If I really wanted to understand this axiom, I figured, I needed to understand the people who live their lives by it.
Listening to Tice talk about his routine, I was struck by his Martin-esque focus on what he produces. As you’ll recall, he’s happy to spend hours every day, week after week, in a barely furnished monastic room, exhausting himself in pursuit of a new flat-picking technique, all because he thinks it will add something important to the tune he’s writing. This dedication to output, I realized, also explains his painful modesty. To Jordan, arrogance doesn’t make sense.
“Here’s what I respect: creating something meaningful and then presenting it to the world,” he explained.
Inspired by meeting Jordan, I got in touch with Mark Casstevens to gain a cynical veteran’s perspective on the performer’s mindset. Mark is a studio musician from Nashville who has certainly earned his stripes: He’s played on ninety-nine number one hit singles on the Billboard charts. When I told Mark about Jordan, he agreed that an obsessive focus on the quality of what you produce is the rule in professional music. “It trumps your appearance, your equipment, your personality, and your connections,” he explained. “Studio musicians have this adage: ‘The tape doesn’t lie.’ Immediately after the recording comes the playback; your ability has no hiding place.”
I liked that phrase—the tape doesn’t lie—as it sums up nicely what motivates performers such as Jordan, Mark, and Steve Martin. If you’re not focusing on becoming so good they can’t ignore you, you’re going to be left behind. This clarity was refreshing. 
To simplify things going forward, I’ll call this output-centric approach to work the craftsman mindset. My goal […] is to convince you of an idea that became clearer to me the more time I spent studying performers such as Tice: Irrespective of what type of work you do, the craftsman mindset is crucial for building a career you love. Before we get ahead of ourselves, however, I want to take a moment to contrast this mindset with the way most of us are used to thinking about our livelihood.
The Passion Mindset
“[People] thrive by focusing on the question of who they really are—and connecting that to work that they truly love.”6 Po Bronson wrote this in a 2002 manifesto published in Fast Company. This should sound familiar, as it’s exactly the type of advice you would give if you subscribed to the passion hypothesis, which I debunked [before]. With this in mind, let’s call the approach to work endorsed by Bronson the passion mindset. Whereas the craftsman mindset focuses on what you can offer the world, the passion mindset focuses instead on what the world can offer you. This mindset is how most people approach their working lives.
There are two reasons why I dislike the passion mindset (that is, two reasons beyond the fact that, as I argued [before], it’s based on a false premise). First, when you focus only on what your work offers you, it makes you hyperaware of what you don’t like about it, leading to chronic unhappiness. This is especially true or entry-level positions, which, by definition, are not going to be filled with challenging projects and autonomy—these come later. When you enter the working world with the passion mindset, the annoying tasks you’re assigned or the frustrations of corporate bureaucracy can become too much to handle.
Second, and more serious, the deep questions driving the passion mindset—“Who am I?” and “What do I truly love?”—are essentially impossible to confirm. “Is this who I really am?” and “Do I love this?” arely reduce to clear yes-or-no responses. In other words, the passion mindset is almost guaranteed to keep you perpetually unhappy and confused, which probably explains why Bronson admits, not long into his career-seeker epic What Should I Do With My Life? that “the one feeling everyone in this book has experienced is of missing out on life.”
Adopting the Craftsman Mindset
To summarize, I’ve presented two different ways people think about their working life. The first is the craftsman mindset, which focuses on what you can offer the world. The second is the passion mindset, which instead focuses on what the world can offer you. The craftsman mindset offers clarity, while the passion mindset offers a swamp of ambiguous and unanswerable questions. As I concluded after meeting Jordan Tice, there’s something liberating about the craftsman mindset: It asks you to leave behind self-centered concerns about whether your job is “just right,” and instead put your head down and plug away at getting really damn good. No one owes you a great career, it argues; you need to earn it—and the process won’t be easy.
With this in mind, it’s only natural to envy the clarity of performers like Jordan Tice. But here’s the core argument […]: You shouldn’t just envy the craftsman mindset, you should emulate it. In other words, I am suggesting that you put aside the question of whether your job is your true passion, and instead turn your focus toward becoming so good they can’t ignore you. That is, regardless of what you do for a living, approach your work like a true performer.
This shift in mindset proved an exciting development in my own quest. But as I discovered, it comes more easily for some than for others. When I began exploring the craftsman mindset on my blog, some of my readers became uneasy. I noticed them starting to home in on a common counterargument, which I should address before we continue. Here’s how one reader put it:
Tice is willing to grind out long hours with little recognition, but that’s because it’s in service to something he’s obviously passionate about and has been for a long time. He’s found that one job that’s right for him.
I’ve heard this reaction enough times to give it a name: “the argument from pre-existing passion.” At its core is the idea that the craftsman mindset is only viable for those who already feel passionate about their work, and therefore it cannot be presented as an alternative to the passion mindset.
I don’t buy it.
First, let’s dispense with the notion that performers like Jordan Tice or Steve Martin are perfectly secure in their knowledge that they’ve found their true calling. If you spend any time with professional entertainers, especially those who are just starting out, one of the first things you notice is their insecurity concerning their livelihood. Jordan had a name for the worries about what his friends are doing with their lives and whether his accomplishments compare favorably: “the cloud of external distractions.”
Fighting this cloud is an ongoing battle. Along these lines, Steve Martin was so unsure during his decade-long dedication to improving his routine that he regularly suffered crippling anxiety attacks. The source of these performers’ craftsman mindset is not some unquestionable inner passion, but instead something more pragmatic: It’s what works in the entertainment business. As Mark Casstevens put it, “the tape doesn’t lie”: If you’re a guitar player or a comedian, what you produce is basically all that matters. If you spend too much time focusing on whether or not you’ve found your true calling, the question will be rendered moot when you find yourself out of work.
Second, and more fundamental, I don’t really care why performers adopt the craftsman mindset. As I mentioned earlier, their world is idiosyncratic, and most of what makes them tick doesn’t generalize. The reason I focused on Jordan’s story is that I wanted you to see what the craftsman mindset looked like in action. In other words, forget why Jordan adopted this mindset and notice instead how he deploys it. In the next chapter, I will argue that regardless of how you feel about your job right now, adopting the craftsman mindset will be the foundation on which you’ll build a compelling career. This is why I reject the “argument from pre-existing passion,” because it gets things backward. In reality, as I’ll demonstrate, you adopt the craftsman mindset first and then the passion follows. [...]
THREE DISQUALIFIERS FOR APPLYING THE CRAFTSMAN MINDSET
1. The job presents few opportunities to distinguish yourself by developing relevant skills that are rare and valuable.
2. The job focuses on something you think is useless or perhaps even actively bad for the world.
3. The job forces you to work with people you really dislike.
A job with any combination of these disqualifying traits can thwart your attempts to build and invest career capital. If it satisfies the first trait, skill growth isn’t possible. If it satisfies the second two traits, then even though you could build up reserves of career capital, you’ll have a hard time sticking around long enough to accomplish this goal. ”
(Cal Newport, So good they can't ignore you, 2012)

E1.6.B.3.3. THE "TASK WE CAME HERE FOR" IS NOT TO BE CONTEMPLATED AS A PROBLEM TO BE SOLVED but as a question to be asked; we discover it not as something to be managed but something to be savored.

E1.6.B.3.3_REF1_PH OUR UNEASY RELATIONSHIP WITH TIME STEMS FROM MAKING CHOICES TO AVOID ANXIETY RATHER THAN SEEKING SIGNIFICANCE, LEADING US TO MANAGE LIFE RATHER THAN SAVOR IT. Embracing our limitations can lead to true productivity and fulfillment, allowing us to accomplish meaningful tasks and enrich life for others.
"The root of our uneasy relationship with time — is that, in the course of our ordinary days, we instinctively make choices not through the lens of significance but through the lens of anxiety-avoidance, which increasingly renders life something to be managed rather than savored, a problem to be solved rather than a question to be asked, which we must each answer with the singular song of our lives, melodic with meaning."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)
"If you can step more fully into the condition of being a limited human — you will reach the greatest heights of productivity, accomplishment, service, and fulfillment that were ever in the cards for you to begin with. And the life you will see incrementally taking shape, in the rearview mirror, will be one that meets the only definitive measure of what it means to have used your weeks well: not how many people you helped, or how much you got done; but that working within the limits of your moment in history, and your finite time and talents, you actually got around to doing — and made life more luminous for the rest of us by doing — whatever magnificent task or weird little thing it was that you came here for."
(Oliver Burkeman, Four Thousand Weeks: Time Management for Mortals, 2021)

E1.6.B.3.3_REF2_LIT “LOITERING”

“I’m sitting at a café in Detroit where in the door window is the sign with the commands

        NO SOLICITING
        NO LOITERING

stacked like an anvil. I have a fiscal relationship with this establishment, which I developed by buying a coffee, and which makes me a patron. And so even though I subtly dozed in the late afternoon sun pouring under the awning, the two bucks spent protects me, at least temporarily, from the designation of loiterer, though the dozing, if done long enough, or ostentatiously enough, or with enough delight, might transgress me over.

“Loitering, as you know, means fucking off, or doing jack shit, or jacking off, and given that two of those three terms have sexual connotations, it’s no great imaginative leap to know that it is a repressed and repressive (sexual and otherwise) culture, at least, that invented and criminalized the concept. Someone reading this might very well keel over considering loitering a concept and not a fact. Such are the gales of delight.

“The Webster’s definition of loiter reads thus: ‘to stand or wait around idly without apparent purpose,’ and ‘to travel indolently with frequent pauses.’

“Among the synonyms for this behavior are linger, loaf, laze, lounge, lollygag, dawdle, amble, saunter, meander, putter, dillydally, and mosey. Any one of these words, in the wrong frame of mind, might be considered a critique or, when nouned, an epithet (‘Lollygagger!’ or ‘Loafer!’).”

Is “lollygag” a Minnesota thing? Because my mom says that all the time.

“Indeed, lollygag was one of the words my mom would use to cajole us while jingling her keys when she was waiting on us, which, judging from the visceral response I had while writing that memory, must’ve been not quite infrequent. All of these words to me imply having a nice day. They imply having the best day. They also imply being unproductive. Which leads to being, even if only temporarily, nonconsumptive, and this is a crime in America, and more explicitly criminal depending upon any number of quickly apprehended visual cues.”

“For instance, the darker your skin, the more likely you are to be ‘loitering.’ Though a Patagonia jacket could do some work to disrupt that perception.

“A Patagonia jacket, colorful pants, Tretorn sneakers with short socks, an Ivy League ball cap, and a thick book not the Bible and you’re almost golden. Almost. (There is a Venn diagram someone might design, several of them, that will make visual our constant internal negotiation toward safety, and like the best comedy it will make us laugh hard before saying Lord.)

“It occurs to me that laughter and loitering are kissing cousins, as both bespeak an interruption of production and consumption. And it’s probably for this reason that I have been among groups of nonwhite people laughing hard who have been shushed — in a Qdoba in Bloomington, in a bar in Fishtown, in the Harvard Club at Harvard. The shushing, perhaps, reminds how threatening to the order are our bodies in nonproductive, nonconsumptive delight. The moment of laughter not only makes consumption impossible (you might choke)…

“…but if the laugh is hard enough, if the talk is just right, food or drink might fly from your mouth, if not, and this hurts, your nose. And if your body is supposed to be one of the consumables, if it has been, if it is, one of the consumables around which so many ideas of production and consumption have been structured in this country, well, there you go.

“There is a Carrie Mae Weems photograph of a woman in what looks to be some kind of textile factory, with an angel embroidered to the left breast of her shirt, where her heart resides. The woman, like the angel, has her arms splayed wide almost in ecstasy, as though to embrace everything, so in the midst of her glee is she. Every time I see that photo, after I smile and have a genuine bodily opening on account of witnessing this delight, which is a moment of black delight, I look behind her for the boss. Uh-oh, I think. You’re in a moment of nonproductive delight. Heads up!

“Which points to another of the synonyms for loitering, which I almost wrote as delight: taking one’s time. For while the previous list of synonyms allude to time, taking one’s time makes it kind of plain, for the crime of loitering, the idea of it, is about ownership of one’s own time, which must be, sometimes, wrested from the assumed owners of it, who are not you, back to the rightful, who is. And while having interpolated the policing of delight such that I am on the lookout for the overseer even in photos I have studied hundreds of times, on the lookout always for the policer of delight, my work is studying this kind of glee, being on the lookout for it, and aspiring to it, floating away from the factory, as she seems to be.”
(Ross Gay, The book of delights, 2020)

E1.6.B.3.3_REF3_PH “EVERYONE SEARCHES FOR OPPORTUNITIES WHILE RUNNING FROM PROBLEMS, missing that they're the same thing.
Problems aren't obstacles to opportunity, they ARE the opportunity.”
(Shane Parrish, FS Farnam Street, october 26, 2025)

E1.6.B.3.4. LONGING HAS ITS OWN SECRET, FUTURE DESTINATION, AND ITS OWN SEASONAL EMERGENCE FROM WITHIN, A RIPENING FROM THE CORE
It is a seed growing in our own bodies; it is as if we are put into a relationship with an enormous distance inside us, leading back to some unknown origin with its own secret timing, indifferent to our wills, and gifted at the same time with an intimate sense of proximity, to a lover, to a future, to a transformation, to a life we want for ourselves, and to the beauty of the sky and the ground that surrounds us.

E1.6.B.3.4_REF1_PH "LONGING

[...] Longing calls for a beautiful, grounded humiliation, the abasement of what we thought we were, and strangely the giving up of central control while being granted a new, watchful, scintillating, peripheral discrimination. The static, wilful central identity is pierced and wounded, violated and orphaned into its own future, as if set adrift on a tide: like Moses in his floating cradle, bumping along the reeds of the Nile; like a child lost in a panicked, moving crowd; and, at times, like a creature stunned, gripped and lifted by a passing hawk.

Longing has its own secret, future destination, and its own seasonal emergence from within, a ripening from the core, a seed growing in our own bodies; it is as if we are put into a relationship with an enormous distance inside us, leading back to some unknown origin with its own secret timing, indifferent to our wills, and gifted at the same time with an intimate sense of proximity, to a lover, to a future, to a transformation, to a life we want for ourselves, and to the beauty of the sky and the ground that surrounds us.

Longing is nothing without its dangerous edge, which cuts and wounds us while setting us free, and beckons us exactly because of the human need to invite the right kind of peril. The foundational instinct that we are here essentially to risk ourselves in the world, that we are a form of invitation to others and to otherness, that we are meant to hazard ourselves for the right thing, for the right woman or the right man, for a son or a daughter, for the right work, or for a gift given against all the odds. In longing we move, and are moving, from a known but abstracted elsewhere to a beautiful, about-to-be-reached someone, something, or somewhere we want to call our own."
(David Whyte, Consolations, The Solace, Nourishment and Underlying Meaning of Everyday Words, 2015)

E1.6.B.3.4_REF2_PH ADVANCE CONFIDENTLY IN THE DIRECTION OF YOUR DREAMS "I learned this, at least, by my experiment: that if one advances confidently in the direction of his dreams, and endeavors to live the life which he has imagined, he will meet with a success unexpected in common hours. He will put some things behind, will pass an invisible boundary; new, universal, and more liberal laws will begin to establish themselves around and within him; or the old laws be expanded, and interpreted in his favor in a more liberal sense, and he will live with the license of a higher order of beings. In proportion as he simplifies his life, the laws of the universe will appear less complex, and solitude will not be solitude, nor poverty poverty, nor weakness weakness. If you have built castles in the air, your work need not be lost; that is where they should be. Now put the foundations under them."
(Henry David Thoreau, Walden, 1854)

E1.6.B.3.4_REF3_PO "GROWTH OF MAN - LIKE GROWTH OF NATURE -
GRAVITATES WITHIN -
Atmosphere, and Sun endorse it -
But it stir - alone -

Each - it’s difficult Ideal 
Must achieve - Itself -
Through the solitary prowess 
Of a Silent Life -

Effort - is the sole condition -
Patience of Itself -
Patience of opposing forces -
And intact Belief -

Looking on - is the Department 
Of it’s Audience -
But Transaction - is assisted 
By no Countenance -"
(Emily Dickinson, 1863)

E1.6.B.3.4_REF3_LIT “TRUST YOUR OBSESSIONS. This is one I learned more or less accidentally. People sometimes ask whether the research or the idea for the story comes first for me. And I tell them, normally the first thing that turns up is the obsession: for example, all of a sudden I notice that I’m reading nothing but English 17th century metaphysical verse. And I know it’ll show up somewhere—whether I’ll name a character after one of those poets, or use that time period, or use the poetry, I have no idea. But I know one day it’ll be there waiting for me. You don’t always use your obsessions. Sometimes you stick them onto the compost heap in the back of your head, where the rot down, and attach to other things, and get half-forgotten, and will, one day, turn into something completely usable. Go where your obsessions take you. ... Your obsessions may not always take you to commercial places, or apparently commercial places. But trust them.”
(Neil Gaiman)

E1.6.B.3.5. YOU MIGHT PREPARE FOR YOUR CENTRAL MISSION IN LIFE BY DOING OTHER THINGS THAT MAY SEEM ENTIRELY UNRELATED
"We each of us have to invent our own destiny out of the confusion and pell-mell around us, and it is because we are so long in deciding what destiny to invent that so many completely meaningless, insignificant, irrelevant episodes follow one another in our life, unconnected with any general “stream of tendency”, springing from nothing, returning to nothing."

E1.6.B.3.5_REF1_LIT SEEMINGLY CHAOTIC AND MEANINGLESS EVENTS IN LIFE OFTEN FEEL UNCONNECTED TO ONE'S MAIN PURPOSE. This randomness affects everyone, even those who have found a purpose, causing frustration and introspection about past meaningless occurrences. 
"How many forms of stress, of strain, of tension there are in life that have no relation at all to a person’s main life-purpose! It sometimes seems as if we all move for years— sometimes for half a lifetime—through a perfectly meaningless chaos of irrelevant events, events that gather themselves together like bubbles on a stream—[...]—and then vanish into absolute nothingness! Man seems more subject to this tossing welter of irrelevance than anything else in Nature. What could be more beautifully fatal in the movement of its significant destiny than the life of a cow or the life of a tree? The truth is we each of us have to invent our own destiny out of the confusion and pell-mell around us, and it is because we are so long in deciding what destiny to invent that so many completely meaningless, insignificant, irrelevant episodes follow one another in our life, unconnected with any general “stream of tendency”, springing from nothing, returning to nothing. Chance, not destiny, rules us, swirling the litter and the debris into endless insignificant patterns that form and re-form, only to dissolve even as we gaze at them. 
But it is not merely the person who has been lucky enough to find some main purpose for his earthly days that these silly, little, empty occurrences jolt, shake, prod and infuriate. They hurt us and tease us with their meaninglessness, long ere we have found any sort of raison d’être for our days equal to what chewing the cud is for a cow or being rained upon for a tree. Who in looking back over their early life can escape being put to shame and utterly confounded by the things that occurred, things for which you feel later nothing but a slowly fading disgust accompanied by a sort of gaping curiosity and base inquisitiveness, and a low, morbid, egotistical interest, a staring bestial interest that it was to you yourself and not another that they happened, an interest comparable to that with which infants contemplate their own excrement."
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber, p. 45-47)

E1.6.B.3.5_REF2_LIT "YOU MIGHT PREPARE FOR YOUR CENTRAL MISSION IN LIFE BY DOING OTHER THINGS THAT MAY SEEM ENTIRELY UNRELATED… Orwell seemed to have an instinct for this other work and a talent for giving it what it required. In the last phase of his life, he was both intent upon writing Nineteen Eighty-Four and devoting huge amounts of his time, energy, imagination, and resources to building up a garden verging on a farm, with livestock, crops, fruit trees, a tractor — and a lot of flowers — on the remote tip of a Scottish island. What is it that makes it possible to do the work that is of highest value to others and one’s central purpose in life? It may appear — to others, sometimes even to oneself — trivial, irrelevant, indulgent, pointless, distracted, or any of those other pejoratives with which the quantifiable beats down the unquantifiable."
Solnit finds a parallel mooring-post in one of the most famous slogans of the suffrage movement: “Bread for All, and Roses Too” [... in] 1910. Solnit reflects:
"It was a pretty slogan but a fierce argument that more than survival and bodily well-being were needed and were being demanded as a right. It was equally an argument against the idea that everything that human beings need can be reduced to quantifiable, tangible goods and conditions. Roses in these declarations stood for the way that human beings are complex, desires are irreducible, that what sustains us is often subtle and elusive."
(Maria Popova´s review of Rebecca Solnit's Orwell’s Roses, 2021)

E1.6.B.3.5_REF3_LIT AN INVENTED WORD TO DESCRIBE A MOMENT THAT SEEMED INNOCUOUS AT THE TIME BUT ENDED UP MARKING A DIVERSION INTO A STRANGE NEW ERA OF YOUR LIFE
“keyframe n. a moment that seemed innocuous at the time but ended up marking a diversion into a strange new era of your life—set in motion not by a series of jolting epiphanies but by tiny imperceptible differences between one ordinary day and the next, until entire years of your memory can be compressed into a handful of indelible images—which prevents you from rewinding the past, but allows you to move forward without endless buffering.”
(John Koenig, The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021)

E1.6.B.3.5_REF4_LIT AN INVENTED WORD TO ENCAPSULATE THE REALIZATION THAT THE PLOT OF YOUR LIFE DOESN'T MAKE SENSE TO YOU ANYMORE
“nodus tollens  n. the realization that the plot of your life doesn't make sense to you anymore— that although you thought you were following the arc of the story, you keep  finding yourself immersed in passages you don't understand, that don't even  seem to belong in the same genre—which requires you to go back and reread  the chapters you had originally skimmed to get to the good parts, only to learn  that all along you were supposed to choose your own adventure.”
(John Koenig, The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021)

E1.6.B.3.6. TO EARN MONEY BUT RISK LOSING ONE'S LIFE, OR TO SEEK THE REAL LIFE BUT RISK LIVING IN RELATIVE POVERTY - this philosophical dilemma confronts everyone who approaches the threshold of genuine living.

E1.6.B.3.6_REF1_PH "TO MAKE MONEY AND RISK LOSING ONE'S LIFE, or to seek true life and risk living in relative poverty, is the highly philosophical dilemma that confronts all those who stand on the threshold of true life. This is what Spinoza himself tells us in a short treatise that he would write later, around 1660, after the leap had been made: Tractatus de intellectus emendatione, Treatise on the Reformation (almost the Restoration) of the Intellect, or the Faculty of Discernment. The first lines beautifully present the alternative we have just mentioned: "I decided to search for something that was a true good, capable of being communicated, that the soul, rejecting everything else, could be influenced by it alone; something whose discovery and acquisition would give me the enjoyment of supreme and continuous joy for all eternity (in aeternum fruerer laetitia). I say, "At last I made up my mind": at first sight, it did indeed seem unreasonable to give up something certain for something uncertain. I saw the advantages that honors and riches bring us; but I also saw that I had to give up the pursuit of them if I was to devote myself seriously to this other and new quest. Now I could see that if supreme happiness were contained in honors and riches, I would have to be deprived of them; but if, on the other hand, it were not contained in them, and I pursued them exclusively, I would deprive myself of supreme happiness forever. Spinoza would not have become himself if he had chosen business and abandoned philosophy, but neither would he have acted in accordance with himself if he had chosen otherwise. Thus we become only in order to understand what we have always been, and that true freedom does not lie in the offer of choices but, on the contrary, in obedience to the inner determination that commands us to become what we are: "That is said to be free which exists by the mere necessity of its nature and determines itself alone to act" (Eth. I, def. 7). Then, having forgotten the violence of the commitment, we lie to ourselves by telling ourselves that we deliberated freely and finally chose the choice that seemed most reasonable to us. But in truth there is no such thing: we chose because we felt intimately the imperative that commanded us to do so, which, according to Spinoza, is really the voice of God or of nature. And if we had to do it again, we would take the same path. There is nothing more necessary than the choices of freedom."
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the fullness of this world, 2- The critique of superstitions, 2017)

E1.6.B.3.6_REF2_TH WE MUST UNDERSTAND OUR TRUE FEELINGS AND DESIRES, RECOGNIZING AND RESOLVING INTERNAL CONFLICTS. Making decisions requires the willingness to assume responsibility and accept potential consequences without blaming others.
“We must be aware of what our wishes are, or even more, of what our feelings are. [And yet] we do not know what we really feel or want. […]

Even if we recognize a conflict as such, we must be willing and able to renounce one of the two contradictory issues. But the capacity for clear and conscious renunciation is rare, because our feelings and beliefs are muddled, and perhaps because in the last analysis most people are not secure and happy enough to renounce anything. [...]

To make a decision presupposes the willingness and capacity to assume responsibility for it. This would include the risk of making a wrong decision and the willingness to bear the consequences without blaming others for them.”
(Karen Horney, Our Inner Conflicts: A Constructive Theory of Neurosis, 1943)

E1.6.B.3.6_REF3_LIT “THE HIGHEST FORM OF WEALTH IS THE ABILITY TO WAKE UP EVERY MORNING AND SAY, “I CAN DO WHATEVER I WANT TODAY.”
People want to become wealthier to make them happier. Happiness is a complicated subject because everyone’s diﬀerent. But if there’s a common denominator in happiness—a universal fuel of joy—it’s that people want to control their lives.
The ability to do what you want, when you want, with who you want, for as long as you want, is priceless. It is the highest dividend money pays.
Angus Campbell was a psychologist at the University of Michigan. Born in 1910, his research took place during an age when psychology was overwhelmingly focused on disorders that brought people down—things like depression, anxiety, schizophrenia.
Campbell wanted to know what made people happy. His 1981 book, The Sense of Wellbeing in America, starts by pointing out that people are generally happier than many psychologists assumed. But some were clearly doing better than others. And you couldn’t necessarily group them by income, or geography, or education, because so many in each of those categories end up chronically unhappy.
The most powerful common denominator of happiness was simple. Campbell summed it up:

Having a strong sense of controlling one’s life is a more dependable predictor of positive feelings of wellbeing than any of the objective conditions of life we have considered.
More than your salary. More than the size of your house. More than the prestige of your job. Control over doing what you want, when you want to, with the people you want to, is the broadest lifestyle variable that makes people happy.
Money’s greatest intrinsic value—and this can’t be overstated—is its ability to give you control over your time. To obtain, bit by bit, a level of independence and autonomy that comes from unspent assets that give you greater control over what you can do and when you can do it.”
(Morgan Housel, The Psychology of Money, 2020)

E1.6.B.3.7. WHEN WE CHANGE OUR MIND ABOUT WHAT WE WANT

E1.6.B.3.7_REF1_TH CHANGING ONESELF IS ESSENTIAL FOR GROWTH AND LIVING FULLY, DESPITE THE DIFFICULTY DUE TO OUR NEED FOR PSYCHOLOGICAL CONTINUITY AND SOCIETAL PRESSURES FOR CONSISTENCY. Giving up and enduring the uncertainty is a courageous act that paves the way for a different future and a more authentic life.
"“A self that goes on changing is a self that goes on living,” Virginia Woolf wrote. Nothing is more vital to the capacity for change than the uncomfortable luxury of changing your mind — that stubborn refusal to ossify, the courageous willingness to outgrow your views, anneal your values, and keep clarifying your priorities. It is incredibly difficult to achieve because the very notion of the self hinges on our sense psychological continuity and internal consistency; because we live in a culture whose myths of heroism and martyrdom valorize completion at any cost, a culture that contractually binds the present self to the future self in mortgages and marital vows, presuming unchanging desires, forgetting that who we are is shaped by what we want and what we want goes on changing as we go on growing.

Changing — your mind, your life — is also painfully difficult because it is a form of renunciation, a special case of those necessary losses that sculpt our lives; it requires giving something up — a way of seeing, a way of being — in order for something new to come abloom along the vector of the “endless unfolding” that is a life fully lived, something that leaves your new emerging self more fully met.

The psychoanalyst Adam Phillips offers a salve for that perennial difficulty in On Giving Up (public library) — an exploration and celebration of giving up as “a prelude, a precondition for something else to happen, a form of anticipation, a kind of courage,” “an attempt to make a different future” that “get us the life we want, or don’t know that we want.” [...]

It is our ego-ideals — the stories we tell ourselves and the world about who we are and who we ought to be, fantasies of coherence and continuity mooring us to a static idealized self — that feed what Phillips calls the “tyranny of completion.” But human beings are rough drafts that continually mistake themselves for the final story, then gasp as the plot changes on the page of living. We do this largely because we are captives of comfort in our habits of thought and feeling, victims of certainty — that supreme narrowing of the mind — when it comes to our own desires. That we don’t fully know what we want because we are half-opaque to ourselves, that something we didn’t think we wanted may end up enlarging our lives in unimaginable ways, is a kind of uncertainty that unravels us. But if we can bear the frustration of the figuring, we may live into a larger and more authentic life."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.6.B.3.7_REF1.1_TH ADAM PHILLIPS EXPLORES THE CONCEPT OF GIVING UP, CHALLENGING THE COMMON PERCEPTION THAT IT SIGNIFIES FAILURE. He argues that giving up reveals our true desires and involves a complex calculation of future benefits. Phillips suggests that the inability to give up reflects an inability to accept loss and change.
"We tend to value, and even idealize, the idea of seeing things through, of finishing things rather than abandoning them. Giving up has to be justified in a way that completion does not; giving up doesn’t usually make us proud of ourselves; it is a falling short of our preferred selves… Giving up, in other words, is usually thought of as a failure rather than a way of succeeding at something else. It is worth wondering to whom we believe we have to justify ourselves when we are giving up, or when we are determinedly not giving up. [...]
The whole notion of sacrifice depends upon our knowing what we want… Giving up, or giving up on, anything or anyone always exposes what it is we take it we want… To give something up is to seek one’s own assumed advantage, one’s apparently preferred pleasure, but in an economy that we mostly can’t comprehend, or, like all economies, predict… We calculate, in so far as we can, the effect of our sacrifice, the future we want from it… to get through to ourselves: to get through to the life we want. [...]
Not being able to give up is not to be able to allow for loss, for vulnerability; not to be able to allow for the passing of time, and the revisions it brings. [...]
The question is always: what are we going to have to sacrifice in order to develop, in order to get to the next stage of our lives?"
(Adam Phillips, On Giving Up, 2024)

E1.6.B.3.7_REF1.1.a_TH "OUR FRUSTRATION IS THE KEY TO OUR DESIRE; to want something or someone is to feel their absence; so to register or recognize a lack would seem to be the precondition for any kind of pleasure or satisfaction. Indeed, in this account, frustration, a sense of lack, is the necessary precondition for any kind of satisfaction. […]

The traditional story about lack and desire describes a closed system; in this story I can never be surprised by what I want, because somewhere in myself I already know what is missing; my frustration is the form my recognition takes, it is a form of remembering.

Wanting is recovery, not discovery… There is a part of oneself that needs to know what it is doing, and a part of oneself that needs not to… a part of oneself that needs to know what one wants and a part of oneself that needs not to."
(Adam Phillips, On Giving Up, 2024)

E1.6.B.3.7_REF2_PH "EXCESS AS A REMEDY.—We can make our own talent once more acceptable to ourselves by honouring and enjoying the opposite talent for some time to excess.—Using excess as a remedy is one of the more refined devices in the art of life."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human All Too Human II, Aphorism 365, 1878)


E1.6.B.3.7_REF3_PH “DEBASEMENT OF JOY.—To call a thing good not a day longer than it appears to us good, and above all not a day earlier—that is the only way to keep joy pure. Otherwise, joy all too easily becomes insipid and rotten to the taste, and counts, for whole strata of the people, among the adulterated foodstuffs.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 327, 1878)

E1.6.B.3.7_REF4_PH SØREN KIERKEGAARD FEELS LIKE "HERCULES—NOT AT A CROSSROADS—NO, BUT AT A MULTITUDE OF ROADS, AND THEREFORE IT IS ALL THE HARDER TO CHOOSE THE RIGHT ONE."

“You know how inspiring I once found it to listen to you and how enthusiastic I was about your description of your stay in Brazil, although not so much on account of the mass of de-tailed observations with which you have enriched yourself and your scholarly field as on account of the impression your first journey into that wondrous nature made upon you: your paradisical happiness and joy. Something like this is bound to find a sympathetic response in any person who has the least feeling and warmth, even though he seeks his satisfaction, his occupation, in an entirely different sphere, but especially so in a young person who as yet only dreams of his destiny. Our early youth is like a flower at dawn with a lovely dewdrop in its cup, harmoniously and pensively reflecting everything that sur-rounds it. But soon the sun rises over the horizon, and the dewdrop evaporates; with it vanish the fantasies of life, and now it becomes a question (to use a flower metaphor once more) whether or not man is able to produce by his own efforts as does the nereum-a drop that may represent the fruit of his life. This requires, above all, that one be allowed to grow in the soil where one really belongs, but that is not always so easy to find. In this respect there exist fortunate creatures who have such a decided inclination in a particular direction that they faithfully follow the path once it is laid out for them with-out ever falling prey to the thought that perhaps they ought to have followed an entirely different path. There are others who let themselves be influenced so completely by their surroundings that it never becomes clear to them in what direction they are really striving. Just as the former group has its own implicit categorical imperative, so the latter recognizes an explicit categorical imperative. But how few there are in the former group, and to the latter I do not wish to belong. Those who get to experience the real meaning of Hegelian dialectics in their lives are greater in number. Incidentally, it is altogether natural for wine to ferment before it becomes clear; never the less this process is often disagreeable in its several stages, although regarded in its totality it is of course agreeable, pro-vided it does in the end yield its relative results in the context of the usual doubt. This is of major significance for anybody who has come to terms with his destiny by means of it, not only because of the calm that follows in contrast to the preceding storm, but because one then has life in a quite different sense than before. For many, it is this Faustian element that makes itself more or less applicable to every intellectual development, which is why it has always seemed to me that we should concede cosmic significance to the Faust concept. Just as our ancestors worshipped a goddess of yearning, so I think that Faust represents doubt personified. He need be no more than that, and Goethe probably sins against the concept when he permits Faust to convert, as does Mérimée when he permits Don Juan to convert. One cannot use the argument against me that Faust is taking a positive step at the instant he applies to the Devil, for right here, it seems to me, is one of the most significant elements in the Faust legend. He surrendered himself to the Devil for the express purpose of attaining enlightenment, and it follows that he was not in possession of it prior to this; and precisely because he surrendered himself to the Devil, his doubt increased (just as a sick person who falls into the hands of a medical quack usually gets sicker). For although Mephistopheles permitted him to look through his spectacles into man and into the secret hiding places of the earth, Faust must forever doubt him because of his inability to provide enlightenment about the most profound intellectual matters. In accordance with his own idea he could never turn to God because in the very instant he did so he would have to admit to himself that here in truth lay enlightenment; but in that same instant he would, in fact, have denied his character as one who doubts.

But such a doubt can also manifest itself in other spheres.

Even though a man may have come to terms with a few of these main issues, life offers other significant questions. Naturally every man desires to work according to his abilities in this world, but it follows from this that he wishes to develop his abilities in a particular direction, namely, in that which is best suited to him as an individual. But which is that? Here I am confronted with a big question mark. Here I stand like Hercules-not at a crossroads-no, but at a multitude of roads, and therefore it is all the harder to choose the right one. Perhaps it is my misfortune in life that I am interested in far too many things rather than definitely in any one thing. My interests are not all subordinated to one but are all coordinate.”
(Søren Kierkegaard , selected entries from kierkegaard's journals and papers pertaining to either/or, part 1, Copenhagen, June 1, 1835)

E1.6.B.4. HOW TO WORK "LEISURELY"?
Leisure is a state of mind, not a state of non-activity. It shouldn't be mistaken for laziness, which views work merely as a means to an end. Once the goal is achieved, the lazy person ceases to work. In contrast, a leisurely worker sees work as an end in itself. They don't believe in the absolute concept of perfection, even though it guides their work. They see it as a direction without a definitive end. Therefore, a leisurely worker never ceases to strive for self-improvement.

E1.6.B.4.1. LEISURE IS A FORM OF CELEBRATION OR A JOYFUL, LOVING CONNECTION WITH THE WORLD
Leisure is often misunderstood in modern society as a luxury or idleness, despite being the source of many significant human achievements like art, philosophy, and technological breakthroughs. It isn't just the absence of work or external activities but a state of mind characterized by calm, stillness, and contemplation. Leisure is a necessary preparation for accepting reality, acting as a form of celebration or a joyful, loving connection with the world. Contrary to the idea of work as activity, effort, or social function, leisure is a condition of perceptive understanding and immersion in the world. It's different from rest or a simple "break" from work, as it involves a deep inner agreement with one's existence and the world.

E1.6.B.4.1.a. TODAY, IN OUR CULTURE OF PRODUCTIVITY-FETISHISM, WE HAVE SUCCUMBED TO THE TYRANNICAL NOTION OF “WORK/LIFE BALANCE” and have come to see the very notion of “leisure” not as essential to the human spirit but as self-indulgent luxury reserved for the privileged or deplorable idleness reserved for the lazy

E1.6.B.4.1.b. LEISURE IS A STATE OF MIND, NOT MERELY THE ABSENCE OF WORK OR EXTERNAL ACTIVITIES, AND IS CHARACTERIZED BY CALM, STILLNESS, AND CONTEMPLATION
It is a necessary preparation for accepting reality and can be seen as a form of celebration or a joyful, loving connection with the world. Leisure is contrary to the notion of work as activity, effort, or social function. Instead, it refers to a state of perceptual understanding and immersion in the world. It is not equivalent to rest or a simple "break" from work, but rather involves a profound inner acceptance of one's existence and the world.

E1.6.B.4.1.b_REF1_PH TRUE LEISURE IS A STATE OF THE SOUL CHARACTERIZED BY INNER STILLNESS AND A CONTEMPLATIVE ATTITUDE, DISTINCT FROM MERE BREAKS FROM WORK. Leisure involves a deep, joyful engagement with existence and reality, allowing individuals to transcend the confines of work and reconnect with the world and themselves. It is essential for maintaining humanity and accessing life-giving forces.
"The code of life in the High Middle Ages [held] that it was precisely lack of leisure, an inability to be at leisure, that went together with idleness; that the restlessness of work-for-work’s-sake arose from nothing other than idleness. There is a curious connection in the fact that the restlessness of a self-destructive work-fanaticism should take its rise from the absence of a will to accomplish something. […]
Idleness, for the older code of behavior, meant especially this: that the human being had given up on the very responsibility that comes with his dignity… The metaphysical-theological concept of idleness means, then, that man finally does not agree with his own existence; that behind all his energetic activity, he is not at one with himself; that, as the Middle Ages expressed it, sadness has seized him in the face of the divine Goodness that lives within him. [...]
The opposite of acedia [ loosely translated as “despair of listlessness”] is not the industrious spirit of the daily effort to make a living, but rather the cheerful affirmation by man of his own existence, of the world as a whole, and of God — of Love, that is, from which arises that special freshness of action, which would never be confused by anyone [who has] any experience with the narrow activity of the “workaholic.” […]
Leisure, then, is a condition of the soul — (and we must firmly keep this assumption, since leisure is not necessarily present in all the external things like “breaks,” “time off,” “weekend,” “vacation,” and so on — it is a condition of the soul) — leisure is precisely the counterpoise to the image for the “worker. [...]
Against the exclusiveness of the paradigm of work as activity … there is leisure as “non-activity” — an inner absence of preoccupation, a calm, an ability to let things go, to be quiet. [...]
Leisure is a form of that stillness that is necessary preparation for accepting reality; only the person who is still can hear, and whoever is not still, cannot hear. Such stillness is not mere soundlessness or a dead muteness; it means, rather, that the soul’s power, as real, of responding to the real — a co-respondence, eternally established in nature — has not yet descended into words. Leisure is the disposition of perceptive understanding, of contemplative beholding, and immersion — in the real. ...]
In leisure, there is … something of the serenity of “not-being-able-to-grasp,” of the recognition of the mysterious character of the world, and the confidence of blind faith, which can let things go as they will. […]
Leisure is not the attitude of the one who intervenes but of the one who opens himself; not of someone who seizes but of one who lets go, who lets himself go, and “go under,” almost as someone who falls asleep must let himself go… The surge of new life that flows out to us when we give ourselves to the contemplation of a blossoming rose, a sleeping child, or of a divine mystery — is this not like the surge of life that comes from deep, dreamless sleep? [...]
Against the exclusiveness of the paradigm of work as effort, leisure is the condition of considering things in a celebrating spirit. The inner joyfulness of the person who is celebrating belongs to the very core of what we mean by leisure… Leisure is only possible in the assumption that man is not only in harmony with himself … but also he is in agreement with the world and its meaning. Leisure lives on affirmation. It is not the same as the absence of activity; it is not the same thing as quiet, or even as an inner quiet. It is rather like the stillness in the conversation of lovers, which is fed by their oneness. [...]
Leisure stands opposed to the exclusiveness of the paradigm of work as social function.
The simple “break” from work — the kind that lasts an hour, or the kind that lasts a week or longer — is part and parcel of daily working life. It is something that has been built into the whole working process, a part of the schedule. The “break” is there for the sake of work. It is supposed to provide “new strength” for “new work,” as the word “refreshment” indicates: one is refreshed for work through being refreshed from work.
Leisure stands in a perpendicular position with respect to the working process… Leisure is not there for the sake of work, no matter how much new strength the one who resumes working may gain from it; leisure in our sense is not justified by providing bodily renewal or even mental refreshment to lend new vigor to further work… Nobody who wants leisure merely for the sake of “refreshment” will experience its authentic fruit, the deep refreshment that comes from a deep sleep. [...]
Leisure is not justified in making the functionary as “trouble-free” in operation as possible, with minimum “downtime,” but rather in keeping the functionary human … and this means that the human being does not disappear into the parceled-out world of his limited work-a-day function, but instead remains capable of taking in the world as a whole, and thereby to realize himself as a being who is oriented toward the whole of existence.
This is why the ability to be “at leisure” is one of the basic powers of the human soul. Like the gift of contemplative self-immersion in Being, and the ability to uplift one’s spirits in festivity, the power to be at leisure is the power to step beyond the working world and win contact with those superhuman, life-giving forces that can send us, renewed and alive again, into the busy world of work…
In leisure … the truly human is rescued and preserved precisely because the area of the “just human” is left behind… [But] the condition of utmost exertion is more easily to be realized than the condition of relaxation and detachment, even though the latter is effortless: this is the paradox that reigns over the attainment of leisure, which is at once a human and super-human condition.”
(Josef Pieper, Leisure, the Basis of Culture, 1948)

E1.6.B.4.1.b_REF1.1_PH BREAKS FROM WORK, WHETHER SHORT OR LONG, ARE INTEGRAL TO THE WORKING PROCESS. "The simple “break” from work — the kind that lasts an hour, or the kind that lasts a week or longer — is part and parcel of daily working life. It is something that has been built into the whole working process, a part of the schedule. The “break” is there for the sake of work. It is supposed to provide “new strength” for “new work,” as the word “refreshment” indicates: one is refreshed for work through being refreshed from work."

E1.6.B.4.1.c. MODERN SOCIETY IS OFTEN CHARACTERIZED AS A SOCIETY OF WORKERS AND CONSUMERS, WHERE ALL HUMAN ACTIVITIES ARE SEEN AS MEANS OF PROVIDING LIFE NECESSITIES AND PRODUCING ABUNDANCE
According to this perspective, work is defined as the opposite of play, and any activity not related to work is considered a hobby. Hannah Arendt and Zadie Smith suggest that while this emancipation of work may have been a step forward in terms of non-violence, hasn't necessarily promoted freedom. It has led to a near unquestioned dominance of work over other life activities.

E1.6.B.4.1.c_REF1_PH "A CONSUMERS' SOCIETY.
It is frequently said that we live in a consumers' society, and since, as we saw, labor and consumption are but two stages of the same process, imposed upon man by the necessity of life, this is only another way of saying that we live in a society of laborers. This society did not come about through the emancipation of the laboring
classes but by the emancipation of the laboring activity itself, which preceded by centuries the political emancipation of laborers. The point is not that for the first time in history laborers were admitted and given equal rights in the public realm, but that we have almost succeeded in leveling all human activities to the common
denominator of securing the necessities of life and providing for their abundance. Whatever we do, we are supposed to do for the sake of "making a living"; such is the verdict of society, and the number of people, especially in the professions who might challenge it, has decreased rapidly. The only exception society is willing to grant is the artist, who, strictly speaking, is the only "worker" left in a laboring society. The same trend to level down all serious activities to the status of making a living is manifest in present-day labor theories, which almost unanimously define labor as the opposite of play. As a result, all serious activities, irrespective of their fruits, are called labor, and every activity which is not necessary either for the life of the individual or for the life process of society is subsumed under playfulness 75. In these theories, which by echoing the current estimate of a laboring society on the theoretical level sharpen it and drive it into its inherent extreme, not even the "work" of the artist is left; it is dissolved into play and has lost its worldly meaning. The playfulness of the artist is felt to fulfil the same function in the laboring life process of society as the playing of tennis or the pursuit of a hobby fulfils in the life of the individual. The emancipation of labor has not resulted in an equality of this activity with the other activities of the vita activa, but in its almost undisputed predominance. From the standpoint of "making a living," every activity unconnected with labor becomes a "hobby. 76" [...]

The emancipation of labor and the concomitant emancipation of the laboring classes from oppression and exploitation certainly meant progress in the direction of non-violence. It is much less certain that it was also progress in the direction of freedom. No manexerted violence, except the violence used in torture, can match
the natural force with which necessity itself compels. It is for this reason that the Greeks derived their word for torture from necessity, calling it anagkai, and not from bia, used for violence as exerted by man over man, just as this is the reason for the historical fact that throughout occidental antiquity torture, the "necessity no
man can withstand," could be applied only to slaves, who were subject to necessity anyhow.78 It was the arts of violence, the arts of war, piracy, and ultimately absolute rule, which brought the defeated into the services of the victors and thereby held necessity in abeyance for the longer period of recorded history.79 The modern age, much more markedly than Christianity, has brought about — together with its glorification of labor—a tremendous degradation in the estimation of these arts and a less great but not less important actual decrease in the use of the instruments of violence in human affairs generally.80 The elevation of labor and the necessity inherent in the laboring metabolism with nature appear to be intimately connected with the downgrading of all activities which either spring directly from violence, as the use of force in human
relations, or harbor an element of violence within themselves, which, as we shall see, is the case for all workmanship. It is as though the growing elimination of violence throughout the modern age almost automatically opened the doors for the re-entry of necessity on its most elementary level. What already happened once in our history, in the centuries of the declining Roman Empire, may be happening again. Even then, labor became an occupation of the free classes, "only to bring to them the obligations of the servile classes."81"

Notes:

75. Although this labor-play category appears at first glance to be so general as to be meaningless, it is characteristic in another respect: the real opposite underlying it is the opposition of necessity and freedom, and it is indeed remarkable to see how plausible it is for modern thinking to consider playfulness to be the source of freedom. Aside from this generalization, the modern idealizations of labor may be said to fall roughly into the following categories: (1) Labor is a means to attain a higher end. This is generally the Catholic position, which has the great merit of not being able to escape from reality altogether, so that the intimate connections between labor and life and between labor and pain are usually at least mentioned. One outstanding representative is Jacques Leclercq of Louvain, especially his discussion of labor and property in Lemons de droit naturel (1946), Vol. IV, Part 2. (2) Labor is an act of shaping in which "a given structure is transformed into another, higher structure." This is the central thesis of the famous work by Otto Lipmann, Grundriss der Arbeitswissensckaft (1926). (3) Labor in a laboring society is pure pleasure or "can be made fully as satisfying as leisure-time activities" (see Glen W. Cleeton, Making Work Human [1949]). This position is taken today by Corrado Gini in his Ecconomica Lavorista
(1954), who considers the United States to be a "laboring society" (societh lavorista) where "labor is a pleasure and where all men want to labor." (For a summary of his position in German see Zeitschrift fur die gesamte Staatswissensckaft, CIX [1953] and CX [1954].) This theory, incidentally, is less new than it seems. It was first formulated by F. Nitti ("Le travail humain et ses lois," Revue Internationale de sociologie [1895]), who even then maintained that the "idea that labor is painful is a psychological rather than a physiological fact," so that pain will disappear in a society where everybody works. (4) Labor, finally, is man's confirmation of himself against nature, which is brought under his domination through labor. This is the assumption which underlies—explicitly or implicitly—the new, especially French trend of a humanism of labor. Its best-known representative is Georges Friedmann. After all these theories and academic discussions, it is rather refreshing to learn that a large majority of workers, if asked "why does man work?" answer simply "in order to be able to live" or "to make money" (see Helmut Schelsky, Arbeiterjugend Gestern und Heute [1955], whose publications are remarkably free of prejudices and idealizations).

76. The role of the hobby in modern labor society is quite striking and may be the root of experience in the labor-play theories. What is especially noteworthy in this context is that Marx, who had no inkling of this development, expected that in his Utopian, laborless society all activities would be performed in a manner which very closely resembles the manner of hobby activities.

78. The current modern explanation of this custom which was characteristic of the whole of Greek and Latin antiquity—that its origin is to be found in "the belief that the slave is unable to tell the truth except on the rack" (Barrow, op. dt., p. 31)—is quite erroneous. The belief, on the contrary, is that nobody can invent a lie under torture: "On croyait recueillir la voix meme de la nature dans les cris de la douleur. Plus la douleur penetrait avant, plus intime et plus vrai sembla etre ce temoignage de la chair et du sang" (Wallon, op. cit., I, 325). Ancient psychology was much more aware than we are of the element of freedom, of free invention, in telling lies. The "necessities" of torture were supposed to destroy this freedom and therefore could not be applied to free citizens.

79. The older of the Greek words for slaves, douloi and dittoes, still signify the defeated enemy. About wars and the sale of prisoners of war as the chief source of slavery in antiquity, see W. L. Westermann, "Sklaverei," in Pauly- Wissowa.

80. Today, because of the new developments of instruments of war and destruction, we are likely to overlook this rather important trend in the modern age. As a matter of fact, the nineteenth century was one of the most peaceful centuries in history.

81. Wallon, op. cit., Ill, 265. Wallon shows brilliantly how the late Stoic generalization that all men are slaves rested on the development of the Roman Empire, where the old freedom was gradually abolished by the imperial government, so that eventually nobody was free and everybody had his master. The turning point is when first Caligula and then Trajan consented to being called dominus, a word formerly used only for the master of the household. The socalled slave morality of late antiquity and its assumption that no real difference existed between the life of a slave and that of a free man had a very realistic background. Now the slave could indeed tell his master: Nobody is free, everybody has a master. In the words of Wallon: "Les condamnes aux mines ont pour confreres, a un moindre degre de peine, les condamnes aux moulins, aux boulangeries, aux relais publics, a tout autre travail faisant l'objet d'une corporation particuliere" (p. 216). "C'est Ie droit de l'esclavage qui gouverne maintenant le
citoyen; et nous avons retrouve toute la legislation propre aux esclaves dans les reglements qui concernent sa personne, sa famille ou ses biens" (pp. 219-20)."
(Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition, 1954)

E1.6.B.4.1.c_REF1_LIT "WHY DID YOU BAKE THAT BANANA BREAD? IT WAS SOMETHING TO DO… Out of an expanse of time, you carve a little area — that nobody asked you to carve — and you do “something.” But perhaps the difference between the kind of something that I’m used to, and this new culture of doing something, is the moral anxiety that surrounds it. The something that artists have always done is more usually cordoned off from the rest of society, and by mutual agreement this space is considered a sort of charming but basically useless playpen, in which adults get to behave like children — making up stories and drawing pictures and so on — though at least they provide some form of pleasure to serious people, doing actual jobs… As a consequence, art stands in a dubious relation to necessity — and to time itself. It is something to do, yes, but when it is done, and whether it is done at all, is generally considered a question for artists alone. An attempt to connect the artist’s labor with the work of truly laboring people is frequently made but always strikes me as tenuous, with the fundamental dividing line being this question of the clock. Labor is work done by the clock (and paid by it, too). Art takes time and divides it up as art sees fit. It is something to do. [...]
At the end of April, in a powerful essay (by another writer, Ottessa Moshfegh, I read this line about love: “Without it, life is just ‘doing time.’” I don’t think she intended by this only romantic love, or parental love, or familial love or really any kind of love in particular. At least, I read it in the Platonic sense: Love with a capital L, an ideal form and essential part of the universe — like “Beauty” or the color red — from which all particular examples on earth take their nature. Without this element present, in some form, somewhere in our lives, there really is only time, and there will always be too much of it. Busyness will not disguise its lack. [...]
I write because… well, the best I can say for it is it’s a psychological quirk of mine developed in response to whatever personal failings I have. But it can’t ever meaningfully fill the time. There is no great difference between novels and banana bread. They are both just something to do. They are no substitute for love. The difficulties and complications of love — as they exist on the other side of this wall, away from my laptop — is the task that is before me, although task is a poor word for it, for unlike writing, its terms cannot be scheduled, preplanned or determined by me. Love is not something to do, but something to be experienced, and something to go through — that must be why it frightens so many of us and why we so often approach it indirectly. Here is this novel, made with love. Here is this banana bread, made with love. If it weren’t for this habit of indirection, of course, there would be no culture in this world, and very little meaningful pleasure for any of us. Although the most powerful art, it sometimes seems to me, is an experience and a going-through; it is love comprehended by, expressed and enacted through the artwork itself, and for this reason has perhaps been more frequently created by people who feel themselves to be completely alone in this world — and therefore wholly focused on the task at hand — than by those surrounded by “loved ones.” Such art is rare: we can’t all sit cross-legged like Buddhists day and night meditating on ultimate matters. Or I can’t. But I also don’t want to just do time anymore, the way I used to. And yet, in my case, I can’t let it go: old habits die hard. I can’t rid myself of the need to do “something,” to make “something,” to feel that this new expanse of time hasn’t been “wasted.” Still, it’s nice to have company. Watching this manic desire to make or grow or do “something,” that now seems to be consuming everybody, I do feel comforted to discover I’m not the only person on this earth who has no idea what life is for, nor what is to be done with all this time aside from filling it."
(Zadie Smith, Intimations, 2020)

E1.6.B.4.1.d. THE CHALLENGE OF PROVIDING SUFFICIENT LEISURE OPPORTUNITIES
Hannah Arendt investigates the possible consequences of modern labor emancipation, analyzing Marx's concept of liberating humanity from the need for work. Instead of endorsing the myth of a freed workforce, Arendt contends that automation could result in an escalated cycle of consumption. This presents a societal challenge in providing ample leisure opportunities.

E1.6.B.4.1.d_REF1_PH HANNAH ARENDT EXPLORES THE IDEA THAT THE EMANCIPATION OF LABOR, THOUGH UTOPIAN ACCORDING TO MARX, COULD BECOME A REALITY WITH AUTOMATION. However, this emancipation could intensify the biological cycle of consumption and create social problems related to leisure. 
"The danger that the modern age's emancipation of labor will not only fail to usher in an age of freedom for all but will result, on the contrary, in forcing all mankind for the first time under the yoke of necessity, was already clearly perceived by Marx when he insisted that the aim of a revolution could not possibly be the already-
accomplished emancipation of the laboring classes, but must consist in the emancipation of man from labor. At first glance, this aim seems Utopian, and the only strictly Utopian element in Marx's teachings.82 Emancipation from labor, in Marx's own terms, is emancipation from necessity, and this would ultimately mean emancipation from consumption as well, that is, from the metabolism with nature which is the very condition of human life.83 Yet the developments of the last decade, and especially the possibilities opened up through the further development of automation, give us reason to wonder whether the Utopia of yesterday will not turn into the reality of tomorrow, so that eventually only the effort of consumption will be left of "the toil and trouble" inherent in the biological cycle to whose motor human life is bound.

However, not even this Utopia could change the essential worldly futility of the life process. The two stages through which the ever-recurrent cycle of biological life must pass, the stages of labor and consumption, may change their proportion even to the point where nearly all human "labor power" is spent in consuming, with the concomitant serious social problem of leisure, that is, essentially the problem of how to provide enough opportunity for daily exhaustion to keep the capacity for consumption intact.84

Painless and effortless consumption would not change but would only increase the devouring character of biological life until a mankind altogether "liberated" from the shackles of pain and effort would be free to "consume" the whole world and to reproduce daily all things it wished to consume. How many things would appear and disappear daily and hourly in the life process of such a society would at best be immaterial for the world, if the world and its thing-character could withstand the reckless dynamism of a wholly motorized life process at all. The danger of future automation is less the much deplored mechanization and artificialization of natural life than that, its artificiality notwithstanding, all human productivity would be sucked into an enormously intensified life process and would follow automatically, without pain or effort, its ever-recurrent natural cycle. The rhythm of machines would magnify and intensify the natural rhythm of life enormously, but it would not change, only make more deadly, life's chief character with respect to the world, which is to wear down durability.

It is a long way from the gradual decrease of working hours, which has progressed steadily for nearly a century, to this Utopia. The progress, moreover, has been rather overrated, because it was measured against the quite exceptionally inhuman conditions of exploitation prevailing during the early stages of capitalism. If we think in somewhat longer periods, the total yearly amount of individual free time enjoyed at present appears less an achievement of modernity than a belated approximation to normality.85 [...]

Notes:

82. The classless and stateless society of Marx is not Utopian. Quite apart from the fact that modern developments have an unmistakable tendency to do away with class distinctions in society and to replace government by that "administration of things" which according to Engels was to be the hallmark of socialist society, these ideals in Marx himself were obviously conceived in accordance with Athenian democracy, except that in communist society the privileges of the free citizens were to be extended to all.

83. It is perhaps no exaggeration to say that Simone Weil's La condition ouvriere (1951) is the only book in the huge literature on the labor question which deals with the problem without prejudice and sentimentality. She chose as the motto for her diary, relating from day to day her experiences in a factory, the line from Homer: poll' aekadzomene, kratere d'epikeisef anagke ("much against your own will, since necessity lies more mightily upon you"), and concludes that the hope for an eventual liberation from labor and necessity is the only Utopian element of Marxism and at the same time the actual motor of all Marxinspired revolutionary labor movements. It is the "opium of the people" which Marx had believed religion to be.

84. This leisure, needless to say, is not at all the same, as current opinion has it, as the skhole of antiquity, which was not a phenomenon of consumption, "conspicuous" or not, and did not come about through the emergence of "spare time" saved from laboring, but was on the contrary a conscious "abstention from" all activities connected with mere being alive, the consuming activity no less than the laboring. The touchstone of this skhole, as distinguished from the modern ideal of leisure, is the well-known and frequently described frugality of Greek life in the classical period. Thus, it is characteristic that the maritime trade, which more than anything else was responsible for wealth in Athens, was felt to be suspect, so that Plato, following Hesiod, recommended the foundation of new city-states far away from the sea.

85. During the Middle Ages, it is estimated that one hardly worked more than half of the days of the year. Official holidays numbered 141 days (see Levasseur, op. cit., p. 329; see also Liesse, Le Travail [1899], p. 253, for the number of working days in France before the Revolution). The monstrous extension of the working day is characteristic of the beginning of the industrial revolution, when the laborers had to compete with newly introduced machines. Before that, the length of the working day amounted to eleven or twelve hours in fifteenth-century England and to ten hours in the seventeenth (see H. Herkner, "Arbeitszeit," in Handworterbuch fiir die Staatswissenschaft [1923], I, 889 ff.). In brief, "les travailleurs ont connu, pendant la premiere moitie du 19e siecle, des conditions d'existences pires que celles subies auparavant par les plus infortunes" (fidouard Dolleans, Histoke du travail en France [1953]). The extent of progress achieved in our time is generally overrated, since we measure it against a very "dark age" indeed. It may, for instance, be that the life expectancy of the most highly civilized countries today corresponds only to the life expectancy in certain centuries of antiquity. We do not know, of course, but a reflection upon the age of death in the biographies of famous people invites this suspicion."
(Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition, 1954)

E1.6.B.4.1.e. THE UNIVERSAL PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS HAS LED TO THE FUTILITY OF A LIFE THAT "NEITHER SETTLES NOR REALIZES ITSELF IN A PERMANENT SUBJECT THAT LASTS AFTER ITS TOIL IS OVER"
The modern economy has become wasteful, continually producing and discarding items to sustain consumption. This has detrimental effects on the planet's sustainability and humanity's relationship with the world.

E1.6.B.4.1.e_REF1_PH HANNAH ARENDT CRITICIZES THE MARXIST-INSPIRED ILLUSION OF PRODUCTIVE LEISURE, POINTING OUT THAT MODERN SOCIETY DEVOTES ITS LEISURE TIME TO INSATIABLE CONSUMPTION. She warns of a wasteful economy in which objects are quickly consumed or discarded, threatening the sustainability of the human world. Arendt argues that the true human condition is based on the sustainable use of objects, not their unbridled consumption, and warns that consumer society is in danger of losing sight of the futility of its existence.
"The hope that inspired Marx and the best men of the various workers' movements—that free time eventually will emancipate men from necessity and make the animal laborans productive—rests on the illusion of a mechanistic philosophy which assumes that labor power, like any other energy, can never be lost, so that if it is not spent and exhausted in the drudgery of life it will automatically nourish other, "higher," activities. The guiding model of this hope in Marx was doubtless the Athens of Pericles which, in the future, with the help of the vastly increased productivity of human labor, would need no slaves to sustain itself but would become a reality for all. A hundred years after Marx we know the fallacy of this reasoning; the spare time of the animal laborans is never spent in anything but consumption, and the more time left to him, the greedier and more craving his appetites. That these appetites become more sophisticated, so that consumption is no longer restricted to the necessities but, on the contrary, mainly concentrates on the superfluities of life, does not change the character of this society, but harbors the grave danger that eventually no object of the world will be safe from consumption and annihilation through consumption.

The rather uncomfortable truth of the matter is that the triumph the modern world has achieved over necessity is due to the emancipation of labor, that is, to the fact that the animal laborans was permitted to occupy the public realm; and yet, as long as the animal laborans remains in possession of it, there can be no true public realm, but only private activities displayed in the open. The outcome is what is euphemistically called mass culture, and its deeprooted trouble is a universal unhappiness, due on one side to the troubled balance between laboring and consumption and, on the other, to the persistent demands of the animal laborans to obtain a happiness which can be achieved only where life's processes of exhaustion and regeneration, of pain and release from pain, strike a perfect balance. The universal demand for happiness and the widespread unhappiness in our society (and these are but two sides of the same coin) are among the most persuasive signs that we have begun to live in a labor society which lacks enough laboring to keep it contented. For only the animal laborans, and neither the craftsman nor the man of action, has ever demanded to be "happy" or thought that mortal men could be happy.

One of the obvious danger signs that we may be on our way to bring into existence the ideal of the animal laborans is the extent to which our whole economy has become a waste economy, in which things must be almost as quickly devoured and discarded as they have appeared in the world, if the process itself is not to come to a sudden catastrophic end. But if the ideal were already in existence and we were truly nothing but members of a consumers' society, we would no longer live in a world at all but simply be driven by a process in whose ever-recurring cycles things appear and disappear, manifest themselves and vanish, never to last long enough to surround the life process in their midst.

The world, the man-made home erected on earth and made of the material which earthly nature delivers into human hands, consists not of things that are consumed but of things that are used. If nature and the earth generally constitute the condition of human life, then the world and the things of the world constitute the condition under which this specifically human life can be at home on earth. Nature seen through the eyes of the animal laborans is the great provider of all "good things," which belong equally to all her children, who "take [them] out of [her] hands" and "mix with" them in labor and consumption. The same nature seen through the eyes ofhomo faber, the builder of the world, "furnishes only the almost worthless materials as in themselves," whose whole value lies in the work performed upon them. Without taking things out
of nature's hands and consuming them, and without defending himself against the natural processes of growth and decay, the animal laborans could never survive. But without being at home in the midst of things whose durability makes them fit for use and for erecting a world whose very permanence stands in direct contrast to life, this life would never be human.

The easier that life has become in a consumers' or laborers' society, the more difficult it will be to remain aware of the urges of necessity by which it is driven, even when pain and effort, the outward manifestations of necessity, are hardly noticeable at all. The danger is that such a society, dazzled by the abundance of its growing fertility and caught in the smooth functioning of a neverending process, would no longer be able to recognize its own futility—the futility of a life which "does not fix or realize itself in any permanent subject which endures after [its] labour is past."
(Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition, 1954)

E1.6.B.4.2. ARE WORK AND LEISURE REALLY THE TWO POLES OF ACTIVITY? IF SO, HOW CAN WE DISCUSS THE CONCEPT OF LEISURELY WORK?
Leisure is not the privilege of those who can afford to take time; it is the virtue of those who give to everything they do the time it deserves to take. What then is the opposite of work? It is play. To recover a healthy understanding of leisure is to come a long way toward understanding contemplation. Are the two poles of activity really work and leisure? If this were so, how could we speak of leisurely work? It would be a blatant contradiction. We know, however, that working leisurely is no contradiction at all. In fact, work ought to be done with leisure, if it is to be done well.
Work and leisure are complementary parts of the same living process and cannot be separated without destroying the joy of work and the bliss of leisure.

E1.6.B.4.2_REF1_PH "LEISURE … IS NOT THE PRIVILEGE OF THOSE WHO CAN AFFORD TO TAKE TIME; IT IS THE VIRTUE OF THOSE WHO GIVE TO EVERYTHING THEY DO THE TIME IT DESERVES TO TAKE. [...]
To recover a healthy understanding of leisure is to come a long way toward understanding contemplation. But few words we use are as misunderstood as the word “leisure.” This shows itself right away when we speak of work and leisure as a pair of opposites. Are the two poles of activity really work and leisure? If this were so, how could we speak of leisurely work? It would be a blatant contradiction. We know, however, that working leisurely is no contradiction at all. In fact, work ought to be done with leisure, if it is to be done well.
What then is the opposite of work? It is play. These are the two poles of activity: work and play. [...]
Whenever you work, you work for some purpose. If it weren’t for that purpose, you’d have better things to do than work. Work and purpose are so closely connected that your work comes to an end, once your purpose is achieved. Or how are you going to continue fixing your car once it is fixed?…
In play, all the emphasis falls on the meaning of your activity… Play needs no purpose. That is why play can go on and on as long as players find it meaningful. After all, we do not dance in order to get somewhere. We dance around and around. A piece of music doesn’t come to an end when its purpose is accomplished. It has no purpose, strictly speaking. It is the playful unfolding of meaning that is there in each of its movements, in every theme, every passage: a celebration of meaning. Pachelbel’s Canon is one of the magnificent superfluities of life. Every time I listen to it, I realize anew that some of the most superfluous things are the most important for us because they give meaning to our human lives. [...]
When our purposeful work also is meaningful, we will have a good time in the midst of it. Then we will not be so eager to get it over with. If you spend only minutes a day getting this or that over with, you may be squandering days, weeks, years in the course of a lifetime. Meaningless work is a form of killing time. But leisure makes time come alive. The Chinese character for being busy is also made up of two elements: heart and killing. A timely warning. Our very heartbeat is healthy only when it is leisurely.
The heart is a leisurely muscle. It differs from all other muscles. How many push-ups can you make before the muscles in your arms and stomach get so tired that you have to stop? But your heart muscle goes on working for as long as you live. It does not get tired, because there is a phase of rest built into every single heartbeat. Our physical heart works leisurely. And when we speak of the heart in a wider sense, the idea that life-giving leisure lies at the very center is implied. Never to lose sight of that central place of leisure in our life would keep us youthful."
(David Steindl-Rast, Essential Writings)

E1.6.B.4.2_REF1.1_PH PURSUITS LIKE PHILOSOPHY AND ART, WHILE NOT ESSENTIAL FOR SURVIVAL, ADD VALUE TO LIFE, SUGGESTING THAT LEISURE IS NOT A LUXURY BUT A VITAL COMPONENT OF A FULFILLING EXISTENCE.
"C.S. Lewis echoed this beautifully in his memorable meditation on friendship, where he argued that things “like philosophy, like art, like the universe itself” have no survival value but are among “those things which give value to survival.” Reframed in this way, leisure reveals itself as precisely one of those things — not a luxury of life, but an essential vitalizer of it."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings in her rteview of David Steindl-Rast's Essential Writings)

E1.6.B.4.2_REF1.2_MU LISTEN TO JOHAN PACHELBEL - CANON IN D on Soundcloud:
https://soundcloud.com/tharth0ur/pachelbel-canon-in-d-piano

E1.6.B.4.2_REF2_PH "ZEN ART

In the practice of Zen art, the environment is treated with respect. It is loved, studied, embellished... But the one in which we accept to place ourselves is not "wanting to change," "practicing spirituality," or even "practicing Zen" - it is, paradoxically, a completely different setting, one that we are tempted to say is any setting, whose essential quality will be precisely that it is not any of these. [...]

Herrigel did not tell it in detail, but he described the process and the stages in a remarkably simple and profound book, Zen in the Art of Archery. The most surprising thing for our Western mind is that the learning process he deals with is really that of archery, and that there is no explicit mention of Zen, except at the beginning and the end. The point is to aim well, to shoot well, to hit the target, and to do this the student must learn to detach from all intention, from the perception of others and of himself. The self must be erased, and "something" must aim or shoot in its place, accomplishing the act of archery by becoming its impersonal author. When, after much doubt and discouragement, the perfect movement is finally achieved, the student understands that there is nothing more to be achieved or expected, for this perfection is Zen in itself. Learning archery will not have been a simple preliminary phase, nor a preparation for another psychological state; even less an esoteric initiation or a revelation of knowledge - it will have been... a meticulous apprenticeship in archery. This activity has not disappeared, it has not been replaced, it has not given way to something else, no, it is becoming, it is, it was... the end of the road. "As a motionless movement, a dance without dance, archery merges with Zen".

The Framework then disappears, through fusion; it disappears in the face of the inner event that maintains it, it is there and then it is no longer there. There you have it.

The reader may think that other practices could have led to the same result, and he would be right. As we saw in the previous chapter, everything has potential spiritual value. Through examples such as these, taken from different fields of observation, or through the diversity of his personal practices, the researcher gradually understands that what he is trying to achieve is not, as has been said, a domain, but, like poetry, a particular way of approaching them all - and the suffix of the word spirituality indicates this well, since it denotes a quality that can be detected here or there... in this case, everywhere. [...]

In my opinion, there is no hierarchy to be established among them. Let each one go to what calls to him! The important thing is to keep in mind that the spiritual learning of a practice, whatever it may be, must be a true learning of that practice; for it is to the extent that the framework is respected in itself, and not considered as a means, a process, or a tool, to the extent that it is installed and, if I may say so, pushed to the limit, that the spiritual space can come into being. These "Zen arts" have no other specificity than to make this transformation possible - and in fact they do not fall into any of our various categories. The distinction that underlies our social life and divides our time between work and leisure, tasks and entertainment, serious activities and games, is not relevant to them. Archery or flower arranging, experienced from a spiritual perspective, do not belong to any of these categories, or they belong to all of them at once. Like hobbies, they seem gratuitous, but then one would have to imagine a hobby shifted toward the essential, a hobby taken to extremes that would acquire the virtue of a poem in action. Pierre Oster a magnifiquement défini le poème comme « une machine à indiquer l'univers » : un art zen serait une machine à indiquer la voie, à la capter comme une lumière, ou plutôt à la devenir... par fusion."
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond Wisdom, How to Live, 2023)

E1.6.B.4.2_REF2.1_PH WORK CAN BE EXPERIENCED AS A FORM OF SPIRITUAL DISCIPLINE, SIMILAR TO A ZEN ART. Although constraining, it can be approached as an opportunity for spirituality, provided it is fully embraced and a personal connection is made with one's professional activity. This approach makes it possible to transform work into a field of observation and self-practice that can be applied to various activities.
"But a Zen art is also very close to a job because of the discipline it imposes. Certainly a job imposes a constraint that can be overwhelming, and the worries it causes often prevent any perspective; but when this is not the case, it can be approached not as an ordeal, but as an experience. The constraint it entails then changes its value - it can become a spiritual discipline, and work can become an opportunity for spirituality, provided the researcher chooses to see it as such, even if this choice seems incongruous. Work, transformed into Zen art, then changes its face and becomes a world in itself, which can be fascinating. It is a permanent field of observation, and the self-practice that it then constitutes, although arduous, is one of the richest there is. Still, it is necessary to accept to connect with it. What does "connect" mean here?

More than simply accepting it, or even assuming it: the researcher must welcome his or her work into his or her innermost being, establish his or her own relationship with his or her professional activity, and for this to happen he or she must first give himself or herself the right to make personal use of it, which goes beyond its social justification. And strangely enough, this turns out to be more difficult than one might think. Because one can do one's job perfectly, be very successful in one's professional life, and be a success in the eyes of society, without ever establishing this connection, which is of a different order. [...]

The work in which he is immersed gradually becomes a field of research that he conducts.

He then realizes that what he has understood about himself can be extended to a large number of activities, restrictive or not; and that his experience now enables him to approach multiple tasks, even the most menial, as spiritual exercises".
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond Wisdom, How to Live, 2023)

E1.6.B.4.2_REF3_PH THE BUDDHIST PERSPECTIVE ON WORK EMPHASIZES ITS ROLE IN DEVELOPING HUMAN FACULTIES, FOSTERING COOPERATION, AND PRODUCING NECESSARY GOODS AND SERVICES. Work should not be organized in a way that makes it meaningless or stressful, as this shows a lack of compassion and attachment to materialism. 
"The Buddhist point of view takes the function of work to be at least threefold: to give a man a chance to utilize and develop his faculties; to enable him to overcome his ego-centeredness by joining with other people in a common task; and to bring forth the goods and services needed for a becoming existence. Again, the consequences that flow from this view are endless. To organize work in such a manner that it becomes meaningless, boring, stultifying, or nerve-racking for the worker would be little short of criminal; it would indicate a greater concern with goods than with people, an evil lack of compassion and a soul-destroying degree of attachment to the most primitive side of this worldly existence. Equally, to strive for leisure as an alternative to work would be considered a complete misunderstanding of one of the basic truths of human existence, namely that work and leisure are complementary parts of the same living process and cannot be separated without destroying the joy of work and the bliss of leisure.
From the Buddhist point of view, there are therefore two types of mechanization which must be clearly distinguished: one that enhances a man’s skill and power and one that turns the work of man over to a mechanical slave, leaving man in a position of having to serve the slave."
(E. F. Schumacher, Buddhist Economics,  Small Is Beautiful: Economics as if People Mattered, 1973)

E1.6.B.4.2_REF4_PH JOHNSON COULD NOT RECONCILE WORK AND LEISURE AS COMPLEMENTARY PARTS OF THE SAME LIVING PROCESS
"Talking of trade, he observed, ‘ It is a mistaken notion that a vast deal of money is brought into a nation by trade. It is not so. Commodities come from commodities ; but trade produces no capital accession of wealth. However, though there should be little profit in money, there is a considerable profit in pleasure, as it gives to one nation the productions of another ; as we have wines and fruits, and many other foreign articles, brought to us.’ BOSWELL. ‘ Yes, Sir, and there is a profit in pleasure, by its furnishing occupation to such numbers of mankind.’ JOHNSON. ‘ Why, Sir, you cannot call that pleasure to which all are averse, and which none begin but with the hope of leaving off ; a thing which men dislike before they have tried it, and when they have tried it.’ BOSWELL. ‘ But, Sir, the mind must be employed, and we grow weary when idle.’ JOHNSON. ‘ That is, Sir, because others being busy, we want company ; but if we were all idle, there would be no growing weary ; we should all entertain one another. There is, indeed, this in trade :— it gives men an opportunity of improving their situation. If there were no trade, many who are poor would always remain poor. But no man loves labour for itself.’ BOSWELL. ‘ Yes, Sir, I know a person who does. He is a very laborious Judge, and he loves the labour.’ JOHNSON. ‘ Sir, that is because he loves respect and distinction. Could he have them without labour, he would like it less.’ BOSWELL. ‘ He tells me he likes it for itself.’ JOHNSON —’ Why, Sir, he fancies so, because he is not accustomed to abstract.’ "
(Boswell’s Life of Johnson, revised third edition 1799, first published in 1791)

E1.6.B.4.2_REF5_LIT “WHICHEVER ROUTE YOU TAKE, EXPECT A STRUGGLE. Finding work you love is very difficult. Most people fail. Even if you succeed, it's rare to be free to work on what you want till your thirties or forties. But if you have the destination in sight you'll be more likely to arrive at it. If you know you can love work, you're in the home stretch, and if you know what work you love, you're practically there.”
(Paul Graham)

E1.6.B.4.3. FEELING BESIEGED CAN ALSO SERVE AS A SOURCE OF PRIVILEGE AND CONNECTION TO OTHERS, RATHER THAN A BURDEN
Most people feel besieged by the demands of life, whether by external events or their own choices. To combat this feeling, it is helpful to create a sense of freedom, a sense of recollection out of the tumult. This allows one to see oneself and the world in a renewed way. Feeling besieged can also be a source of privilege and connection to others, rather than a burden.

E1.6.B.4.3_REF1_PH "BESIEGED
is how most people feel most of the time: by events, by people, by all the necessities of providing, parenting or participating, by creative possibilities they have set in motion themselves; and strangely, most strongly besieged by a success they have achieved through long years of endeavour.
To feel crowded, set upon, blocked by circumstances, in defeat or victory, is not only the daily experience of most human beings in most contemporary societies, it has been an abiding dynamic of individual life since the dawn of human consciousness. In a human life there is no escape from commitment: retreat to a desert island and the lonely islander will draw up a Robinson Crusoe list to make the place habitable or begin building a raft to escape; tell everyone to go away and they hang around wanting to know why. Earn a great Ideal of money to gain individual freedom and a whole world moves in for a share of the harvest."
(David Whyte, Consolations, The Solace, Nourishment and Underlying Meaning of Everyday Words, 2015)

E1.6.B.4.3_REF1.1_PH "IF THE WORLD WILL NOT GO AWAY, THEN THE GREAT DISCIPLINE SEEMS TO BE THE ABILITY TO MAKE AN IDENTITY THAT CAN LIVE IN THE MIDST OF EVERYTHING WITHOUT FEELING BESET. Being besieged asks us to begin the day not with a to do list but a not to do list, a moment outside of the time-bound world in which it can be reordered and reprioritised. In this space of undoing and silence we create a foundation from which to re-imagine our day and ourselves. Beginning the daily conversation from a point of view of freedom and being untethered allows us to re-see ourselves, to re-enter the world as if for the first time. We give ourselves and our accomplishments, our ambitions and our over-described hopes away, in order to see in what form they return to us. [...]
Creating a state of aloneness in the besieged everyday may be one of the bravest things individual men and women can do for themselves. Nel mezzo, in the midst of everything, as Dante said, to be besieged but beautifully, because we have made a place to stand in the people and the places and the perplexities we have grown to love, seeing them not now as enemies or forces laying siege but, as if for the first time, as participants in the drama, both familiar and strangely surprising. We find that having people knock on our door is as much a privilege as it is a burden; that being seen, being recognised and being wanted by the world, and having a place in which to receive everyone and everything, is infinitely preferable to its opposite."
(David Whyte, Consolations, The Solace, Nourishment and Underlying Meaning of Everyday Words, 2015)

E1.6.B.4.4. WHEN WORK BECOMES A REFUGE OR ILLUSION
"Sometimes, for violent minds, the time that we tear off for work, that is torn away from time, is the best. An unfortunate passion."

E1.6.B.4.4_REF1_PH "SOMETIMES, FOR VIOLENT MINDS, the time that we tear off for work, that is torn away from time, is the best. An unfortunate passion."
(Albert Camus, 1956,  Notebooks)

E1.6.B.4.4_REF2_PH "THOUGHT
Of persons arrived at high positions, ceremonies, wealth, scholarships, and the like;
(To me all that those persons have arrived at sinks away from them, except as it results to their bodies and souls,
So that often to me they appear gaunt and naked,
And often to me each one mocks the others, and mocks himself or herself,
And of each one the core of life, namely happiness, is full of the rotten excrement of maggots,
And often to me those men and women pass unwittingly the true realities of life, and go toward false realities,
And often to me they are alive after what custom has served them, but nothing more,
And often to me they are sad, hasty, unwaked sonnambules walking the dusk.)"
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.6.B.4.4_REF3_PH THIS VISION OF ALAIN'S SEEMS MORE DISCOURAGING THAN INSPIRING.
"Usually we turn around without moving forward. That is why the great Jean-Jacques wrote: 'The man who meditates is a depraved animal.
Necessity gets us out of it, almost always. Almost all of us have a job to do, and that's very good. What we lack are small jobs that give us a break from the other. I have often envied women who knit or embroider. In their eyes there is something real to follow, so that images of the past and the future appear only in flashes. But in these meetings, where time is used up, the men have nothing to do and buzz around like flies in a bottle.
The hours of insomnia, when one is not ill, are only dreaded, I think, because then the imagination is too free and has no real objects to consider. A man goes to bed at ten o'clock, and until midnight he jumps about like a carp, invoking the god of sleep. The same man, at the same time, if he were in the theater, would completely forget his own existence.
These reflections help to understand the various occupations that fill the lives of the rich. They give themselves a thousand duties and a thousand tasks and run after them as if they were on fire. They pay ten visits a day and go from the concert to the theater. Those with a more lively disposition throw themselves into hunting, war, or perilous journeys. Others drive cars and wait impatiently for the opportunity to break their bones in an airplane. They need new actions and new perceptions. They want to live in the world, not in themselves. Like the great mastodons that once grazed the forests, they graze the world through their eyes. The simplest among them play at punching themselves in the nose and stomach; this brings them back to the present, and they are very happy. Wars are perhaps primarily a remedy for boredom; this would explain why those who are most willing to accept, if not want, war are often those who have the most to lose. The fear of dying is a thought for the idle, which is instantly extinguished by urgent action, however dangerous. A battle is undoubtedly one of the circumstances in which one thinks least of death. Hence this paradox: the better one fills one's life, the less one fears losing it.
(Alain, On Happiness, January 29, 1909)

E1.6.C. BEAUTY AND ART
Insofar as they draw us out of ourselves into the world, pushing back the limits of our subjectivity to include new perspectives and a broader view, natural beauty and art are promises of happiness.

E1.6.C.1. NATURAL BEAUTY: A PARABLE OF JOY

E1.6.C.1.1. WONDER IN FRONT OF A WORLD BEYOND OURSELVES
What we feel towards a world that is beyond us: joy. 
The strength of nature is that it is pure presence. In order to see beauty, one must take a certain distance, be in the world as a spectator, not taking any interest in it. The aesthetic emotion is the criterion of humanity (both reasonable and sensitive); it makes us participate in the community of men.

E1.6.C.1.1.a. THE HEALING POWER OF NATURE
The natural world can evoke deeply-rooted feelings of joy inherited from our ancestors who thrived as hunter-gatherers and farmers. It opens us up, making us feel part of something larger and connecting us to the world and other creatures. Experiencing nature alleviates loneliness and helps us become more attuned to our inner selves. This connection increases our responsiveness to other life forms and fosters a sense of peace.

E1.6.C.1.1.a_REF1_PH THE NATURAL WORLD OFFERS PROFOUND JOY, A DEEP-SEATED EMOTION ROOTED IN OUR EVOLUTIONARY HISTORY "The natural world can offer us more than the means to survive, on the one hand, or mortal risks to be avoided, on the other: it can offer us joy.[…]
There can be occasions when we suddenly and involuntarily find ourselves loving the natural world with a startling intensity, in a burst of emotion which we may not fully understand, and the only word that seems to me to be appropriate for this feeling is joy. [...]
They are surely very old, these feelings. They are lodged deep in our tissues and emerge to surprise us. For we forget our origins; in our towns and cities, staring into our screens, we need constantly reminding that we have been operators of computers for a single generation and workers in neon-lit offices for three or four, but we were farmers for five hundred generations, and before that hunter-gatherers for perhaps fifty thousand or more, living with the natural world as part of it as we evolved, and the legacy cannot be done away with."
(Michael McCarthy, The Moth Snowstorm: Nature and Joy)

E1.6.C.1.1.a_REF2_LIT “WHAT HAS TRULY ENTERED OUR SOUL AND BECOME PSYCHICAL IS OUR ENVIRONMENT— that wild nature in which and to which we were born at an inconceivably remote period, and which made us what we are. It is true that we are eminently adaptive, that we have created, and exist in some sort of harmony with new conditions, widely different from those to which we were originally adapted; but the old harmony was infinitely more perfect than the new, and if there be such a thing as historical memory in us, it is not strange that the sweetest moment in any life, pleasant or dreary, should be when Nature draws near to it, and, taking up her neglected instrument, plays a fragment of some ancient melody, long unheard on the earth… Nature has at times this peculiar effect on us, restoring instantaneously the old vanished harmony between organism and environment.”
(William Henry Hudson, Idle Days in Patagonia, 1893)

E1.6.C.1.1.a_REF3_LIT THE TRANSFORMATIVE EXPERIENCE OF CONNECTING WITH NATURE FREES INDIVIDUALS FROM THE OBSESSION WITH REASON AND HIGHLIGHTS THE INTERCONNECTEDNESS OF ALL LIFE.
"We had with us no rite of passage. We had gone through no initiation, as we went into childhood and into adolescence with no warning. This is why we come to the mountain. We have no other elevation.
We slept under trees but in fact within the mountain’s vast sadness and we awoke very new.
The night freed us from our obsession with reason. It told us that we were a bundle of electric wires plugged into everything that came along. It was enough to be alive and around. The same was true of everything else."
(Etel Adnan, Journey to Mount Tamalpais)

E1.6.C.1.1.a_REF3.1_CUR “IHRMAN'S ALGAE INSTALLATION A GREAT SEAWEED DAY TELLS A STORY OF THE LIQUID ORIGINS OF HUMAN BODIES AND THE EXISTING CONNECTIONS BETWEEN DIVERSE LIFE FORMS. Silent, large-scale objects propose the exhibition visitors to partake in a bodily experience. By allying with more-than-human beings and worlds commonly considered "others", it is possible to transgress limiting concepts and to reconsider notions of loneliness, belonging and coexistence.”
(Curatorship: Venice Bienal)

E1.6.C.1.1.a_REF4_PO TREES ARE OFTEN USED AS AN IMAGE OF HUMAN JOY in poetry because they represent resilience, persistence, and the beauty of nature. They are described as giving off hints of gladness, providing a sense of hope, and reminding the speaker to take things slowly and appreciate the present moment. They also symbolize the idea of finding light in difficult situations and the ability to adapt and grow. Additionally, trees are often associated with the idea of age and timelessness, which can evoke feelings of peace and contentment.

E1.6.C.1.1.a_REF4.1_PO "WHEN I AM AMONG THE TREES
When I am among the trees,
especially the willows and the honey locust,
equally the beech, the oaks and the pines,
they give off such hints of gladness.
I would almost say that they save me, and daily.

I am so distant from the hope of myself,
in which I have goodness, and discernment,
and never hurry through the world
    but walk slowly, and bow often.

Around me the trees stir in their leaves
and call out, “Stay awhile.”
The light flows from their branches.

And they call again, “It’s simple,” they say,
“and you too have come
into the world to do this, to go easy, to be filled
with light, and to shine.”
(Mary Oliver, Thirst, 2006)

E1.6.C.1.1.a_REF4.2_PO "OPTIMISM
More and more I have come to admire resilience.
Not the simple resistance of a pillow, whose foam
returns over and over to the same shape, but the sinuous
tenacity of a tree: finding the light newly blocked on one side,
it turns in another. A blind intelligence, true.
But out of such persistence arose turtles, rivers,
mitochondria, figs — all this resinous, unretractable earth."
(Jane Hirshfield, Each happiness ringed by lions)

E1.6.C.1.1.a_REF4.3_PO “FOR A FOREST TO BE MAGNIFICENT
It needs age and infinity.
Don't die too quickly, friends
Of lunch under the hail.
Fir trees that lie in our beds,
Make our footsteps on the grass eternal.”
(René Char, Far from our ashes)

"POUR QU'UNE FORÊT SOIT SUPERBE
Il lui faut l'âge et l'infini.
Ne mourez pas trop vite, amis
Du casse-croûte sous la grêle.
Sapins qui couchez dans nos lits,
Éternisez nos pas sur l'herbe."
(René Char, Loin de nos cendres)

E1.6.C.1.1.a_REF4.4_PO “EVEN TREES AWAKE TO A
BREAKFAST OF LIGHT
Even trees awake to a breakfast of light.
In hungry excitement they elevate their leaves,
Great green choirs with ten thousand open mouths,
Hosanna-ing the sun from silent boughs.
Trees know glory with neither sound nor sight,
Yet spread their limbs with phototropic ease.
No one knows the inwardness of trees;
Imagination, though, rapport allows:
Nor sickness, fire, drought, nor age, nor blight
Erodes their silent worship of delight.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

“ALL CREATURES LIVE
THEIR LIVES IN ECSTASY
All creatures live their lives in ecstasy,
Nor is one moment less than any other.
Gigantic redwoods tremble in their pleasure,
Each root agog in search of buried treasure,
Light the music singing through their sea,
A wound of joy from which none can recover.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E1.6.C.1.1.a_REF5_LIT “IF WONDER SPRINGS FROM THE QUALITY OF ATTENTION WE PAY TO THINGS AND JOY SPRINGS FROM OUR CAPACITY FOR PRESENCE WITH WONDER", then the quality of our attention shapes the quality of our lives. It is a dangerous falsehood that to find wonder in reality is to relinquish our realism — rather, this attentive gladness, this fluency in the native poetry of the universe, may be the truest realism we have.
That is what Robert Louis Stevenson (November 13, 1850–December 3, 1894) explores in some breathtaking passages from his long essay “The Lantern-Bearers,” found in his 1892 collection of personal writings Across the Plains"
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.6.C.1.1.a_REF5.1_LIT "THERE IS ONE FABLE THAT TOUCHES VERY NEAR THE QUICK OF LIFE, — the fable of the monk who passed into the woods, heard a bird break into song, hearkened for a trill or two, and found himself at his return a stranger at his convent gates; for he had been absent fifty years, and of all his comrades there survived but one to recognize him. It is not only in the woods that this enchanter carols, though perhaps he is native there. He sings in the most doleful places. The miser hears him and chuckles, and his days are moments. With no more apparatus than an evil-smelling lantern, I have evoked him on the naked links. All life that is not merely mechanical is spun out of two strands, — seeking for that bird and hearing him. And it is just this that makes life so hard to value, and the delight of each so incommunicable. And it is just a knowledge of this, and a remembrance of those fortunate hours in which the bird has sung to us, that fills us with such wonder when we turn to the pages of the realist. There, to be sure, we find a picture of life in so far as it consists of mud and of old iron, cheap desires and cheap fears, that which we are ashamed to remember and that which we are careless whether we forget; but of the note of that time-devouring nightingale we hear no news."
(Robert Louis Stevenson, The Lantern-Bearers,  Across the Plains, 1892)

E1.6.C.1.1.a_REF5.1.a_LIT "THE GROUND OF A MAN’S JOY IS OFTEN HARD TO HIT. It may hinge at times upon a mere accessory, like the lantern; it may reside… in the mysterious inwards of psychology… It has so little bond with externals… that it may even touch them not, and the man’s true life, for which he consents to live, lie together in the field of fancy…. In such a case the poetry runs underground. The observer (poor soul, with his documents!) is all abroad. For to look at the man is but to court deception. We shall see the trunk from which he draws his nourishment; but he himself is above and abroad in the green dome of foliage, hummed through by winds and nested in by nightingales. And the true realism were that of the poets, to climb after him like a squirrel, and catch some glimpse of the heaven in which he lives. And the true realism, always and everywhere, is that of the poets: to find out where joy resides, and give it a voice far beyond singing.

For to miss the joy is to miss all. In the joy of the actors lies the sense of any action. That is the explanation, that the excuse… for no man lives in the external truth among salts and acids, but in the warm, phantasmagoric chamber of his brain, with the painted windows and the storied wall."
(Robert Louis Stevenson, The Lantern-Bearers,  Across the Plains, 1892)

E1.6.C.1.1.a_REF6_LIT "“PLACE AND A MIND MAY INTERPENETRATE TILL THE NATURE OF BOTH IS ALTERED,” the great Scottish mountaineer and poet Nan Shepherd wrote as she reflected on the relationship between nature and human nature. But what we call place — that unalloyed presence with a here and now, with the unfolding of time in a locus of space — penetrates more than the mind: it permeates body and spirit and the entire constellation of being. There is a reason why the original Latin use of the word genius was in the phrase genius loci — the spirit of a place. We become who we are in the crucible of where we are.
Our minds, however, are born wanderers — perpetual refugees from presence, perpetually paying for their flight with loneliness. We go on forgetting that we are not only embodied creatures, but embodied in the body of the world; we go on forgetting that the here and now — that locus of intimacy with everything and everyone else inhabiting this island of spacetime, intimacy with the pulsating totality of our own being — is our only refuge from the existential loneliness that is the price of being alive."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.6.C.1.1.a_REF6.1_LIT BARRY LOPEZ ARGUES AGAINST THE STEREOTYPE THAT INDIGENOUS PEOPLE'S CONNECTION TO PLACE IS PRIMITIVE, EMPHASIZING THE PROFOUND VALUE OF PHYSICAL INTIMACY WITH THE NATURAL WORLD. He suggests that modern civilization's existential loneliness and sense of meaninglessness stem from neglecting the therapeutic relationship with nature. Lopez believes that knowing a place deeply fosters a sense of belonging and reciprocity, which reinforces one's significance in the world. 
[Drawing on his longtime immersion in indigenous cultures and his lifelong travel with native companions, Lopez counters the hollow stereotype that indigenous people’s connection to place is a sort of “primitive” sensitivity to be contrasted with “advanced” civilization (Maria Popova, The Marginalian)]
"Such a dismissive view, as I have come to understand it, ignores the great intangible value that achieving physical intimacy with a place might provide. I’m inclined to point out to someone who condescends to such a desire for intimacy, although it might seem rude, that it is not possible for human beings to outgrow loneliness. Nor can someone from a culture that condescends to nature easily escape the haunting thought that one’s life is meaningless.

Existential loneliness and a sense that one’s life is inconsequential, both of which are hallmarks of modern civilizations, seem to me to derive in part from our abandoning a belief in the therapeutic dimensions of a relationship with place. A continually refreshed sense of the unplumbable complexity of patterns in the natural world, patterns that are ever present and discernible, and which incorporate the observer, undermine the feeling that one is alone in the world, or meaningless in it. The effort to know a place deeply is, ultimately, an expression of the human desire to belong, to fit somewhere. [...] 

The determination to know a particular place, in my experience, is consistently rewarded. And every natural place, to my mind, is open to being known. And somewhere in this process a person begins to sense that they themselves are becoming known, so that when they are absent from that place they know that place misses them. And this reciprocity, to know and be known, reinforces a sense that one is necessary in the world. [...]

Intimacy with the physical Earth apparently awakens in us, at some wordless level, a primal knowledge of the nature of our emotional as well as our biological attachments to physical landscapes. Based on my own inquiries, my impression is that we experience this primal connection regularly as a diffuse, ineffable pleasure, experience it as the easing of a particular kind of longing. [...]

Perhaps the first rule of everything we endeavor to do is to pay attention. Perhaps the second is to be patient. And perhaps a third is to be attentive to what the body knows."
(Barry Lopez,  Embrace Fearlessly the Burning World, 2022)

E1.6.C.1.1.a_REF6.2_PH “FINDING OUR “DOUBLE” IN NATURE.—In some country places we rediscover ourselves, with a delightful shudder: it is the pleasantest way of finding our “double.”—How happy must he be who has that feeling just here, in this perpetually sunny October air, in this happy elfin play of the wind from morn till eve, in this clearest of atmospheres and mildest of temperatures, in all the serious yet cheerful landscape of hill, lake, and forest on this plateau, which has encamped fearlessly next to the terrors of eternal snow: here, where Italy and Finland have joined hands, and where the home of all the silver colour-tones of Nature seems to be established. How happy must he be who can say, “True, there are many grander and finer pieces of scenery, but this is so familiar and intimate to me, related by blood, nay even more to me!”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human III, Aphorism 338, 1878)

E1.6.C.1.1.a_REF7_PO THE SPLENDID NATURE BRIGHTENS HIS DAYS
"Outlook
The open day is bright with images for people,
when the green shows itself from a distance,
even before the evening light begins to twilight,
and shimmers gently soften the sound of the day.
Often the inner world of the world seems clouded, closed,
man's mind full of doubts, sullen,
the splendid nature brightens his days
and the dark question of doubt is far away."
(Friedrich Hölderin, 1671)

E1.6.C.1.1.a_REF8_PH TRUE APPRECIATION OF NATURE REQUIRES RETAINING A CHILDLIKE SPIRIT. "To speak truly, few adult persons can see nature. Most persons do not see the sun. At least they have a very superficial seeing. The sun illuminates only the eye of the man, but shines into the eye and the heart of the child. The lover of nature is he whose inward and outward senses are still truly adjusted to each other; who has retained the spirit of infancy even into the era of man- hood. His intercourse with heaven and earth becomes part of his daily food. In the presence of nature a wild delight runs through the man, in spite of real sorrows. Nature says he is my creature, and maugre all his impertinent griefs, he shall be glad with me. Not the sun or the summer alone, but every hour and season yields its tribute of delight; for every hour and change corre- sponds to and authorizes a different state of the mind, from breathless noon to grimmest midnight. Nature is a setting that fits equally well a comic or a mourning piece. In good health, the air is a cordial of incredible virtue. Crossing a bare common, in snow puddles, at twilight, under a clouded sky, without having in my thoughts any occurrence of special good fortune, I have en- joyed a perfect exhilaration. I am glad to the brink of fear. In the woods, too, a man casts off his years, as the snake his slough, and at what period soever of life is always a child. In the woods is perpetual youth. Within these plantations of God, a decorum and sanctity reign, a perennial festival is dressed, and the guest sees not how he should tire of them in a thousand years. In the woods, we return to reason and faith. There I feel that nothing can be- fall me in life-no disgrace, no calamity (leaving me my eyes), which nature cannot repair. Standing on the bare ground-my bead bathed by the blithe air and uplifted into infinite space-all mean egotism vanishes. I become a transparent eyeball; I am nothing; I see all; the currents of the Universal Being circulate through me; I am part or parcel of God. The name of the nearest friend sounds then foreign and accidental: to be brothers, to be acquaintances, master or servant, is then a trifle and a disturb- ance. I am the lover of uncontained and immortal beauty. In the wilderness I find something more dear and connate than in streets or villages. In the tranquil landscape, and especially in the distant line of the horizon, man beholds somewhat as beautiful as his own nature.

The greatest delight which the fields and woods minister is the suggestion of an occult relation between man and the vegetable. I am not alone and unacknowledged. They nod to me, and I to them. The waving of the boughs in the storm is new to me and old. It takes me by surprise, and yet is not unknown. Its effect is like that of a higher thought or a better emotion coming over me, when I deemed I was thinking justly or doing right.
Yet it is certain that the power to produce this delight does not reside in nature, but in man, or in a harmony of both. It is necessary to use these pleasures with great temperance. For nature is not always tricked in holiday attire, but the same scene which yesterday breathed perfume and glittered as for the frolic of the nymphs is overspread with melancholy to-day. Nature always wears the colors of the spirit. To a man laboring under calamity, the heat of his own fire hath sadness in it. Then there is a kind of contempt of the landscape felt by him who has just lost by death a dear friend. The sky is less grand as it shuts down over less worth in the population.
(Ralph Waldo Emerson, Nature, 1836)

E1.6.C.1.1.a_REF8.1_PH "BEAUTY

A NOBLER want of man is served by nature, namely, the love of Beauty.

The ancient Greeks called the world κόσμος, beauty. Such is the constitution of all things, or such the plastic power of the human eye, that the primary forms, as the sky, the mountain, the tree, the animal, give us a delight in and for themselves; a pleasure arising from outline, color, motion, and grouping. This seems partly owing to the eye itself. The eye is the best of artists. By the mutual action of its structure and of the laws of light, perspective is produced, which integrates every mass of objects, of what character soever, into a well colored and shaded globe, so that where the particular objects are mean and unaffecting, the landscape which they compose is round and symmetrical. And as the eye is the best composer, so light is the first of painters. There is no object so foul that intense light will not make beautiful. And the stimulus it affords to the sense, and a sort of infinitude which it hath, like space and time, make all matter gay. Even the corpse has its own beauty. But besides this general grace diffused over nature, almost all the individual forms are agreeable to the eye, as is proved by our endless imitations of some of them [...]"
(Ralph Waldo Emerson, Nature, 1836)

E1.6.C.1.1.a_REF9_PO "I WALKED IN THE ORCHARD WHERE THE RASPBERRIES SING IN THE SUN 
SING UNDER THE AZURE SKY BECAUSE OF THE HONEY FLIES.
I speak to you from a very young age.
I was born near the mountains, near the mountains.
And now I can feel that in my soul
there is snow, streams the color of frost
and great broken peaks where birds of prey
float in an intoxicating air,
in a wind that whips the snow and the water.

Yes, I feel that I am like the mountains.
My sadness has the color of the gentians that grow there.
In my family I must have had naive herbalists
with green insect-colored boxes,
who, on afternoons of terrible heat,
into the icy shadows of the woods,
in search of precious samples
which they would not exchange for the ancient
treasures of the magicians of the wonderful Baghdads
where the fountains have a sleep-inducing freshness.
My love has the softness of a rainbow
after an April rain, where the sun sings.
Why do I have the existence that I have? ... Was I not created
to live on the peaks, in the scattering
of the snow of the herds, with a high stick,
in the hour when one is made taller by the peace of the falling day?
(Francis Jammes, 1897)

E1.6.C.1.1.a_REF10_PSI "AS A WRITER, I FIND GARDENS ESSENTIAL TO THE CREATIVE PROCESS; as a physician, I take my patients to gardens whenever possible. All of us have had the experience of wandering through a lush garden or a timeless desert, walking by a river or an ocean, or climbing a mountain and finding ourselves simultaneously calmed and reinvigorated, engaged in mind, refreshed in body and spirit. The importance of these physiological states on individual and community health is fundamental and wide-ranging. In forty years of medical practice, I have found only two types of non-pharmaceutical “therapy” to be vitally important for patients with chronic neurological diseases: music and gardens. [...] 
I cannot say exactly how nature exerts its calming and organizing effects on our brains, but I have seen in my patients the restorative and healing powers of nature and gardens, even for those who are deeply disabled neurologically. In many cases, gardens and nature are more powerful than any medication. [...]
Clearly, nature calls to something very deep in us. Biophilia, the love of nature and living things, is an essential part of the human condition. Hortophilia, the desire to interact with, manage, and tend nature, is also deeply instilled in us. The role that nature plays in health and healing becomes even more critical for people working long days in windowless offices, for those living in city neighborhoods without access to green spaces, for children in city schools, or for those in institutional settings such as nursing homes. The effects of nature’s qualities on health are not only spiritual and emotional but physical and neurological. I have no doubt that they reflect deep changes in the brain’s physiology, and perhaps even its structure."
(Oliver Sacks, “Why We Need Gardens,” found in Everything in Its Place: First Loves and Last Tales, 2019)

E1.6.C.1.1.a_REF11_LIT “I THINK OF BEAUTY AS AN ABSOLUTE NECESSITY. I don’t think it’s a privilege or an indulgence, it’s not even a quest. I think it’s almost like knowledge, which is to say, it’s what we were born for. I think finding, incorporating and then representing beauty is what humans do. With or without authorities telling us what it is, I think it would exist in any case.

The startle and the wonder of being in this place. This overwhelming beauty—some of it is natural, some of it is man-made, some of it is casual, some of it is a mere glance—is an absolute necessity. I don’t think we can do without it any more than we can do without dreams or oxygen."
(Toni Morisson)

E1.6.C.1.1.a_REF12_PO “TO BE CONSUMED BY SOMETHING
MORE THAN BEAUTY
To be consumed by something more than beauty,
Holding in one's hand the sense of all,
Innocent of self, of interest pure,
Reaching for a grace that will endure,
The fragments of a light beyond the wall
Yielding truth with neither rage nor pity;
Seized by inner craftsmen, skilled and sure,
In reverent abandon, ruthless awe,
X-ing out the fruits of one's own fancy . . .”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E1.6.C.1.1.b. EMBRACE THE OPENNESS OF NATURE
Rilke urges us to stop perceiving nature as an external, opaque entity and instead immerse ourselves in its internal, shared, and unbounded space. He proposes that all living beings dwell contemporarily in the same eternity, at the core of existence, infinity, and mystery. While animals experience this state unknowingly, most humans are aware of it but either don't embrace it or quickly forget it. Rilke refers to this realization as "openness," which is akin to awareness, being present in space and time, perceived as coexistence rather than a sequence of moments.

E1.6.C.1.1.b_REF1_PH "OPEN
[...] For Rilke, [the Open] is rather the "indescribable opening" of nature, when we stop making it an object, necessarily external and opaque, to inhabit its internal space both common and unbounded: « Through all beings passes the one space, the internal space of the world. Silently the birds fly through us. [...] All eyes, of all that lives, look towards the Open. » This is another word for the present, but thought of as space rather than duration (« the pure and simple space in which flowers continue to flourish »), as coexistence rather than as succession. So we are, men and beasts, open in the Open, passers-by in the passage, fleeting contemporaries in the same eternity : at the heart of being, of infinity, of mystery. Animals live it without knowing it; most humans, Rilke tells us, know it without experiencing it or hasten to forget about it."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.6.C.1.1.b_REF1.1_PH RILKE CALLS "THE OPEN" AN "INDESCRIBABLY OPEN FREEDOM"—A STATE OF NON-DUALISTIC UNITY WITH THE WORLD, FREE FROM THE SEPARATION CREATED BY SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS.

“What Rilke designates by this term is not in any way defined by openness in the sense of the unconcealedness of beings that lets beings as such be present. If we attempted to interpret what Rilke has in mind as the Open in the sense of unconcealedness and what is unconcealed, we would have to say: what Rilke experiences as the Open is precisely what is closed up, unlightened, which draws on in boundlessness, so that it is incapable of encountering anything unusual, or indeed anything at all. Where something is encountered, a barrier comes into being. Where there is confinement, whatever is so barred is forced back upon itself and thus bent in upon itself. The barring twists and blocks off the relation to the Open, and makes of the relation itself a twisted one. The confinement within the boundless is established by man's representation.

The oppositeness confronting him does not allow man to be directly within the Open. In a certain manner, it excludes man from the world and places him before the world—"world" meaning here all beings as a whole. In contrast, what has the character of world is the Open itself, the whole of all that is not objective.

But the name "the Open," too, like the word "venture," is, as a metaphysical term, ambiguous. It signifies the whole of the unbounded drawings of the whole draft, as well as openness in the sense of a universally prevailing release from all bounds.

The Open admits. To admit does not, however, mean to grant entry and access to what is closed off, as though what is concealed had to reveal itself in order to appear as unconcealed. To admit means to draw in and to fit into the unlightened whole of the drawings of the pure draft. Admittance, as the way the Open is, has the character of an including attraction, in the manner of the gravity of the pure forces. The less ventured beings are debarred from admittance into the pure draft, the more they belong within the great whole of the Open. Rilke, accordingly, calls those beings that have been ventured directly into this great whole and there rest in the balance, the "great-accustomed things" {Spate Gettichtey p. 22). Man is not among them. The song that sings of this different relation of living beings and of man to the Open is the eighth of the Duino Elegies. The differences lie in the different degrees of consciousness. Ever since Leibniz, the distinction among beings in this respect has been current in modern metaphysics.

What Rilke thinks when he thinks the word "the Open" can be documented by a letter which he addressed in the last year of his life (February 25, 1926) to a Russian reader who had questioned him about the eighth elegy. Rilke writes:

You must understand the concept of the "Open,"

which have tried to propose in the elegy, in such a way that the

animal's degree of consciousness sets it into the world without

the animal's placing the world over against itself at every

moment (as we do); the animal is *in* the world; we stand

before it by virtue of what peculiar turn and intensification

which our consciousness has taken. [Rilke goes on,] By the

"Open," therefore, I do not mean sky, air, and space; they,

too, are "object" and thus "opaque" and closed to the man

who observes and judges. The animal, the flower, presumably

is all that, without accounting to itself, and therefore

has before itself and above itself that indescribably open

freedom which perhaps has its (extremely fleeting) equivalents

among us only in those first moments of love when

one human being sees his own vastness in another, his

beloved, and in man's elevation toward God.

Plant and animal are admitted into the Open. They are "in the world." The "in" means: they are included and drawn, unlightened, into the drawing of the pure draft. The relation to the Open—if indeed we may still speak here of a "too"—is the unconscious one of a merely striving-drawing ramification into the whole of what is. With the heightening of consciousness, the nature of which, for modern metaphysics, is representation, the standing and the counterstanding of objects are also heightened.

The higher its consciousness, the more the conscious being is excluded from the world. This is why man, in the words of Rilke's letter, is "before the world." He is not admitted into the Open. Man stands over against the world. He does not live immediately in the drift and wind of the whole draft. The passage from the letter helps us to understand the Open better, especially because Rilke here denies expressly that one may think of the Open in the sense of the openness of sky and space. Still further removed from Rilke's poetry, which remains in the shadow of a tempered Nietzschean metaphysics, is the thought of the Open.”
(Martin Heidegger, Poetry, Language, Thought, 1971)

E1.6.C.1.1.b_REF1.2_PH RILKE’S JOURNEY IS A "DESCENT" FROM THE "TIP OF A PYRAMID" (CUSTOMARY CONSCIOUSNESS) INTO THE VAST "DEPTH DIMENSIONS OF OUR INNER BEING."
“The widest orbit of beings becomes present in the heart's inner space. The whole of the world achieves here an equally essential presence in all its drawings. Rilke, in the language of metaphysics, here speaks of "existence." The world's whole presence is in the widest sense "worldly existence." That is another name for the Open, other because of the different manner of naming, which now thinks the Open, insofar as the representing-producing parting against the Open has now reversed itself, from the immanence of calculating consciousness toward the inner space of the heart. The heart's inner space for worldly existence is therefore also called the "world's inner realm." "Worldly" means the whole of all beings.

In a letter from Muzot dated August 11,1924, Rilke writes:

However vast the "outer space" may be, yet with all its sidereal

distances it hardly bears comparison with the dimensions,

*with the depth dimensions of our inner being,* which

does not even need the spaciousness of the universe to be

within itself almost unfathomable. Thus, if the dead, if those

who are to come, need an abode, *what* refuge could be

more agreeable and appointed for them than this imaginary

space? To me it seems more and more as though our customary

consciousness lives on the tip of a pyramid whose

base within us (and in a certain way beneath us) widens out

so fully that the farther we find ourselves able to descend

into it, the more generally we appear to be merged into

those things that, independent of time and space, are given

in our earthly, in the widest sense worldly, existence.

By contrast, the objectness of the world remains reckoned in that manner of representation which deals with time and space as *quanta* of calculation, and which can know no more of the nature of time than of the nature of space. Rilke, too, gives no further thought to the spatiality of the world's inner space; even less does he ask whether the world's inner space, giving its abode to worldly presence, is by this presence grounded in a temporality whose essential time, together with essential space, forms the original unity of that time-space by which even Being itself presences.”
(Martin Heidegger, Poetry, Language, Thought, 1971)

E1.6.C.1.1.b_REF2_PH THE LANDSCAPE BECAME A PARABLE OF JOY
"Without meaning to, we had felt the warmth, the happiness and the splendor that can radiate from a meadow, a stream, a hill covered with flowers and fruit-bearing trees, so that when we painted the Madonnas, they were surrounded by this wealth as if by a cloak, crowned by it as if by a crown... no more resounding celebration could be prepared for them, no gift could be recognized as equal to this one: to present them with all the beauties that had just been discovered and to merge them with them. The landscape had become a parable of joy..."
(R. M. Rilke, On the Landscape, Works, I, Prose)

E1.6.C.1.1.b_REF2.1_PO "BEING HERE MEANS SO MUCH" 
[...] 
But from the steep slopes of the mountain, the traveler brings back not only a handful of soil unknown to all in the valley, but also a resounding word, the yellow and white gentian. 
Perhaps we are here to say: home, fountain... 
Here is the time for what can be said, 
here is his home. Speak and recognize. 
[...] 
Show him how happy, how innocent a thing can be,
and how much a part of us;
[...] things are waiting 
for us to change them in our invisible heart 
- infinitely - in ourselves! 
(R. M. Rilke, Duino Elegies, Ninth Elegy, Works)

E1.6.C.1.1.b_REF3_PO "LET MY LANDSCAPES COME TO ME
Now all dreams have fled, stripped bare
My heart becomes secret like an altar

Let my landscapes come to me
To build a silence
Where the voices that wounded me are silenced
I remember a vast sky in my eyes
I remember stars on my forehead
Warm as abandoned hands
I remember love flowing across my face
And a blue path that leads to the heart
Oh, to believe that one too is something without despair

Let my landscapes come to me".
(Anne Perrier)

E1.6.C.1.1.b_REF4_PH ACCORDING TO GASTON BACHELARD, NARCISSUS EXPERIENCES AN EPIPHANY ABOUT HIS IDENTITY AND DUALITY WHILE GAZING AT HIS REFLECTION IN THE FOUNTAIN WATER. He cultivates an idealized form of narcissism that is reflected with the entire forest and sky mirrored in his image. Bachelard refers to this as "cosmic narcissism", a natural progression from egoistic narcissism. Narcissus sees himself as beautiful because he sees nature as beautiful, and vice versa.

E1.6.C.1.1.b_REF4.1_PH "IN FRONT OF THE WATERS, NARCISSUS HAS THE REVELATION OF HIS IDENTITY AND HIS DUALITY, the revelation of his double masculine and feminine powers, the revelation especially of his reality and his ideality.
Near the fountain takes thus birth an idealizing narcissism [...]. The sublimation is not always the negation of a desire; it is not always presented as a sublimation against instincts. It can be a sublimation of an ideal. Then Narcissus does not say any more: « I like myself such as I am », he says: « I am such as I like myself ». I am with effervescence because I love myself with fervor. I want to appear, so I must increase my adornment. Thus life illustrates itself, life covers itself with images. Life grows; it transforms the being; life takes on whiteness; life blossoms; the imagination opens to the most distant metaphors; it participates in the life of all flowers. With this floral dynamic, real life takes on a new blassoming. Real life is better if given its fair leeway of unreality. [...]
  The least sigh 
  That I would exhale 
  Would come to confiscate 
  What I adored 
  On the blue and blond water 
  And skies and forests 
  And rose of the stream. 
   (« Narcissus », Paul Valéry, Combinations) 
[...] Narcissus at the fountain is not only deep into the contemplation of himself. His own image is the center of a world. With Narcissus, for Narcissus, it is all the forest which is reflected, all the sky which comes to take conscience of its grandiose image. [...] A cosmic narcissism [...] thus gives continuum quite naturally to the egoistic one. « I am handsome because nature is beautiful, nature is beautiful because I am handsome». Such is the endless dialogue of creative imagination and its natural models."
(Gaston Bachelard, Water and Dreams, 1942)

E1.6.C.1.1.b_REF5_PO "SWAN

Did you too see it, drifting, all night on the black river?
Did you see it in the morning, rising into the silvery air, 
an armful of white blossoms,
a perfect commotion of silk and linen as it leaned 
into the bondage of its wings: a snowbank, a bank of lilies, 
biting the air with its black beak?
Did you hear it, fluting and whistling 
a shrill dark music, like the rain pelting the trees, 
    like a waterfall
knifing down the black ledges?
And did you see it, finally, just under the clouds - 
a white cross streaming across the sky, its feet 
like black leaves, its wings like the stretching light
    of the river?
And did you feel it, in your heart, how it pertained to everything? 
And have you too finally figured out what beauty is for?
And have you changed your life?"
(Mary Oliver, A Thousand Mornings, 2012)

E1.6.C.1.1.b_REF6_PH C.S. LEWIS DISCUSSES THE PROFOUND AND SERIOUS SENTIMENT OF THE LOVE OF NATURE, PARTICULARLY AMONG ENGLISHMEN AND RUSSIANS. This love is not merely an appreciation for beauty but a deeper connection to the moods and spirit of nature. 
"For some people, perhaps especially for Englishmen and Russians, what we call "the love of nature" is a permanent and serious sentiment. I mean here that love of nature which cannot be adequately classified simply as an instance of our love for beauty. Of course many natural objects-trees, flowers and animals are beautiful. But the nature-lovers whom I have in mind are not very much concerned with individual beautiful objects of that sort. The man who is distracts them. An enthusiastic botanist is for them a dreadful companion on a ramble. He is always stopping to draw their attention to particulars. Nor are they looking for "views" or landscapes. Wordsworth, their spokesman, strongly deprecates this. It leads to "a comparison of scene with scene," makes you "pamper" yourself with "meagre novelties of colour and proportion." While you are busying yourself with this critical and discriminating activity you lose what really matters the "moods of time and season," the "spirit" of the place. And of course Wordsworth is right. That is why, if you love nature in his fashion, a landscape painter is (out of doors) an even worse companion than a botanist.

It is the "moods" or the "spirit" that matter. Nature-lovers want to receive as fully as possible whatever nature, at each particular time and place, is, so to speak, saying. The obvious richness, grace, and harmony of some scenes are no more precious to For some people, perhaps especially for English- men and Russians, what we call "the love of nature" is a permanent and serious sentiment. I mean here that love of nature which cannot be adequately classified simply as an instance of our love for beauty. Of course many natural objects-trees, flowers and animals are beautiful. But the nature-lovers whom I have in mind are not very much concerned with individual beautiful objects of that sort. The man who is distracts them. An enthusiastic botanist is for them a dreadful companion on a ramble. He is always stopping to draw their attention to particulars. Nor are they looking for "views" or landscapes. Wordsworth, their spokesman, strongly deprecates this. It leads to "a comparison of scene with scene," makes you "pamper" yourself with "meagre novelties of colour and proportion." While you are busying yourself with this critical and discriminating activity you lose what really matters the "moods of time and season," the "spirit" of the place. And of course Wordsworth is right. That is why, if you love nature in his fashion, a landscape painter is (out of doors) an even worse companion than a botanist.

It is the "moods" or the "spirit" that matter. Nature-lovers want to receive as fully as possible what- ever nature, at each particular time and place, is, so to speak, saying. The obvious richness, grace, and harmony of some scenes are no more precious to"
(C.S. Lewis, The four loves, 1960)

E1.6.C.1.1.b_REF7_CUR "LANDSCAPE PLAYED AN IMPORTANT PART IN RENOIR'S EARLIEST PAINTINGS, but in the 1860s his work became increasingly dominated by the human figure. Unpeopled landscape is rare in his work; this landscape is widely considered to be among his finest of its kind.
The view may represent a stretch of countryside near Saint-Cloud, to the west of Paris: it was probably painted around 1872. Evidently, Renoir was less concerned with reproducing topographical accuracy, than conveying the sensual pleasures of the outdoors: light, warmth, and the most un-paintable of natural elements, air."
(Curatorship : Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge)

E1.6.C.1.1.b_REF8_CUR "IN "THE LAKE" (1928), Tarsila do Amaral abandons the desire to guarantee the precedence of the eye, the ability to look, to understand things objectively. Before being a descriptive painting of this or that place, this or that landscape, it is an image aimed at inner meditation."

E1.6.C.1.1.b_REF8.1_CUR THE PAINTING INVITES VIEWERS TO A PSYCHIC STATE OF SUBMERSION "Despite its size, O lago preserves something of the scale of a fresco or wallpaper. It portrays neither a single scene nor primary or secondary characters. The painting has distinct planes, even while elements that emerge from the background contour images at the fore, entwining themselves round them (for example, the rosy fohage at the right that comes from behind a plant to embrace it, or in the upper left, the stalk that emerges from behind the farthest hUl, passing in front of it and advancing even further in front of a palm tree atop another mountain, in an impossible perspectival logic). Ultimately, the colors refuse to respect the atmospheric effect of fading as they recede into the distance, maintaining the same intensity whether in the first plane or the last plane of the composition. Moreover, the figuration all acquires a sense of unity, whereas the painted elements. in addition to the localizable lake, become aquatic. each in their own way—from the refracted displacement of the brightest glimmers on the pink-colored fruits of the foliage to the right, to the upside-down flowers, as if recently laid down or decanted in the foreground, to the form of the light ‘ue bubble of the mountains in the background. It is as if the imagination of the lake itself is rendering the entire landscape aquatic, without thereby having to explore the effects of light on vet objects as a theme—one that was dear to the impressionists, in the elaboration of the behavior of vision, a type of limit of distancing of the subject with relation to their objects that Tarsila appears to completely ehde. There is no priority prescribed for the viewer’s gaze, nor any direction given toward an objective vision of things in this painting. Noteworthy are the simple titles of many of Tarsila’s paintings from the late 1920s. As with O lago, many of the titles are composed of a noun  preceded by an article, designating landscapes in which places, sensations, and objects come together non-hierarchically. This tendency offers the clear impression that Tarsila was beginning to produce work in which the generalization of symbolic images, charged with a certain descriptive pretension of the totality of visual experience with Brazilian nature (a pretension that previously prescribed sunny views of cities, walls. suburbs, and train stations), gave way to a more intimate style of painting, marked by cooler shades and turning back toward interior meditation. One can argue that Tarsila began to deliberately flirt with a decorative disengagement in her work. But this disengagement in no way signifies that she was less intrepid or more naive with regard to the power of her painting; on the contrary, it is in this very moment that she foresaw a renewed possibility for treating the monumentality of her subjects. For I country that, with great effort, was modernizing, landscape became a significant matter. And thus Tarsila began to work with a decidedly unpretentious formahsm that gave her paintings a character resolutely in opposition to the reverence she had been seeking, either in the modernizing promises that she had learned by paying her dues in the cubist style or in the nationalist enthusiasm that had inspired production of art that was truly Brazilian. O lago is a painting that meditates on a deep sense of landscape, in which the artist could offer a sense of rest or, perhaps, an invitation to a psychic state of submersion in the centerlesjess dilation of the painting’s surface. Tarsila herself had been searching for a definitive style of painting nee the beginning of her career, filling the center of objects with white and dragging or dissolving her colors to the edges of the forms; here that technique becomes an act of painting freed from the precedence of meaning over motif."
(MASP curator’s review, 2019)

E1.6.C.1.1.c. THE AESTHETIC SOCIETY
According to Kant, the aesthetic society is rooted in the collective experience of beauty and the emotional aesthetic response. In his "Critique of the Power of Judgment," Kant posits that the aesthetic emotion becomes a standard for humanity and community among individuals. He outlines three types of societies: the society of saints, the society of intelligence (scientists), and the aesthetic community. The aesthetic community involves the entirety of a person, underpinned by the common sentiment of beauty. In contrast to other societies, aesthetic appreciation is a disinterested and freely shared satisfaction, grounded in an individual's emotional response to beauty. Kant defines this emotion as embodying universal satisfaction without the requirement for concepts.

E1.6.C.1.1.c_REF1_PH "THE POWER OF NATURE IS THAT IT IS PURE PRESENCE. To see beauty appear, you have to stand back, to be in the world as a spectator, to take no interest in it. [...]
Aesthetic emotion is the criterion of humanity (both reasonable and sensitive), of the community of men".

E1.6.C.1.1.c_REF2_PH KANT, CAN WE ARGUE ABOUT TASTES AND COLORS?
The Critique of the Faculty of Judgement defines a space for the perception of beauty that had never been thought of before and that would become the aesthetic norm until the rupture of contemporary art, which Jacques Darriulat locates around 1970.
"The first commonplace of taste is contained in the assertion by which every person without taste thinks he can protect himself from all reproach: everyone has his own taste. The second commonplace of taste is this: taste cannot be discussed, because discussing and discussing are different things. When one argues, one prefers to produce this agreement according to fixed concepts, intervening as demonstrative reason and consequently admitting objective concepts as the basis of judgment. Between these two commonplaces there is a proposition that belongs to common sense, namely, that of taste, which one can discuss even though one cannot dispute it", Emmanuel Kant, Critique of Judgment, 1870.
Aesthetic emotion is the criterion of humanity (both rational and sensitive), of the human community. Kant speaks of an original contract: people ask themselves what they have in common, and it is the common feeling of beauty that establishes a society - based on the need to be together in an aesthetic society.
For Kant, there are three kinds of society:
The society of the saints, which is more than human; the society of intelligence, that of the scientists, a logical society that does not include sensibility; in the aesthetic community, the whole human being is involved.
It is difficult to share one's aesthetic knowledge because it is always knowledge of the singular - it is what connects aesthetic feeling and love, which is also knowledge of the singular (people who love humanity in general often cannot stand their neighbor - knowing how to maintain a friendly or loving relationship with someone is a rare thing). Every aesthetic experience is based on an encounter, a singular gaze - otherwise there is no knowledge of the singular, since every concept is general. In this sense, we can discuss taste and not argue about it: to show the way to the gaze that provokes emotion, to direct it towards this recognition, but I cannot convince it because there is no concept.
"The pleasant, the beautiful, the good, designate three different relations of representation to the feeling of pleasure and pain. Pleasant means to each man what gives him pleasure. The beautiful is that which he simply finds pleasing. The good is that which he appreciates, that which he approves, that is, that to which he assigns an objective value. It can be said that, of these three kinds of satisfaction, only that which the sense of beauty gives is a disinterested and free satisfaction, because no interest, neither that of the senses nor that of reason, compels one to give one's assent. Hence this definition: Beauty is that which is represented without concept as the object of universal satisfaction", Immanuel Kant, Critique of the Power of Judgment, chapters 5 & 6, 1870.
We are in a thought that is exploring its own limits; we are at the limit of all possible knowledge, where Aristotelian categories do not work very well - nevertheless, we can only speak of this non-conceptualizable object by applying to it the four categories of quality, quantity, modality, and relation - for example, the universality of beauty (in the category of quantity) is a universality without concept - whereas only concept should open knowledge to the general. What is the universality of a sensory experience rooted in the singular? We use the table of categories by default to talk about beauty because our intelligence has no other conceptual forms. For Kant, the aesthetic object is reflective, it makes us see something of ourselves-something in us that is universal-and yet the most intimate part of ourselves: it is the force or vital impulse. It is the movement of life in us that we reflect on the aesthetic object - the aesthetic object is only a subjective mirage. When we recognize beauty, we feel alive. Beauty is a lure that triggers the creative faculties of the imagination. The judgment of knowledge set forth in the Critique of Pure Reason is a decisive judgment, it is a judgment that constructs its object: I place the object in the world in order to place myself as a non-world, for I am a living being with a will, I am not a thing. In aesthetic feeling, I do not construct an object because the vital energy is in me. The vital force lives in us when, on the one hand, the imagination makes representations and, on the other hand, the understanding makes them vary. In the judgment of knowledge, the imagination is bound, enslaved by the understanding that draws the law through its categories - the role of the imagination is to represent the knowledge that the understanding has arrived at. In the aesthetic judgment, the imagination is free, while the understanding seeks the rule and lags behind. It varies the forms elaborated by the imagination.
For Kant, nature is always more beautiful than art. When you look at a work of art, you can always ask yourself what the artist wanted to say. Beauty means nothing. The power of nature is that it is pure presence. To see beauty, you have to take a certain step back, be in the world as a spectator, not interested in it. Beauty is an event, like Baudelaire's passerby. See how Baudelaire echoes Kant (whom he did not read) in the painter of modern life in 1863.
Before Kant, classical beauty was eternal, known by concept, defined by the academies. After Kant, when beauty is no longer a concept, it can no longer be taught, there is no more harmony. 
Hannah Arendt saw a political dimension in the human community founded on aesthetics. However, Jacques Darriulat does not agree with this interpretation. In his interpretation, the only possible political city for Kant is that of law, which is the foundation of the republic. A law that has the character of a lex talionis, offering violence against violence, because men are hostile to each other out of vanity. This enmity must therefore be remedied by law. The aesthetic community has nothing to do with the political community; the former is a community of friendly and creative interference.
(Jacques Darriulat in conversation with Adèle Van Reeth on the program Les Chemins De La Philosophie on 04/02/2019 on France Culture)

Listen to the podcast in French:
https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/kant-peut-on-discuter-des-gouts-et-des-couleurs-4112994

E1.6.C.1.1.d. REFLEXIVE JOY
For Spinoza, happiness and joy represent a cosmic and reflexive love of God, who is synonymous with unified Nature. This human love for God is a component of the love through which God (encompassing Nature and humanity) loves itself. It is a joy that underscores the interconnectedness of all things in the universe as a whole.

E1.6.C.1.1.d_REF1_PH For Spinoza, BLISS IS IN FACT A METAPHOR FOR PERFECT LOVE "We know that, for Spinoza, bliss, like joy, is an 'intellectual love of God,' God being nature itself as a unified totality. And man's love for "God" is a part of the love with which "God" (that is, nature and man) loves itself (Spinoza, Ethics, V, 36). It is a cosmic and reflexive joy. It is really a metaphor for perfect love.
(Robert Misrahi, Les actes de la joie, 1987)

E1.6.C.1.1.d_REF2_PH "SPINOZA SOMETIMES SOUNDS LIKE THE STOICS, BUT IF THE TWO SYSTEMS OF THOUGHT COINCIDE LOCALLY, THE FOUNDATIONS ARE VERY DIFFERENT. In both cases we find the idea of accepting the world as it is, but for Spinoza this is achieved through the love of knowledge of the world: We love not the fate that crushes us, but the understanding of the circumstances, so that there is no resignation.
On the contrary, for the Stoics, acceptance comes through love of the world itself. This difference is based on the fact that the Stoics believe in a purpose. Surprisingly, as much as the Stoics criticize illusions, they also save destiny, providence, which is understood as a form of love for a living whole. Wisdom, therefore, consists in participating in the life of the world. For Spinoza, on the other hand, there is no moral imperative to bring us into harmony with providence.
(Pierre Schindler)

E1.6.C.1.1.e. BEAUTY AS A LADDER LEADING TO JOY
Plato perceived beauty as a ladder that guides us towards a joyful life.

E1.6.C.1.1.e_REF1_PH SOCRATES, THROUGH THE TEACHINGS OF THE PRIESTESS DIOTINA, DESCRIBES EROS AS A CONNECTING FORCE BETWEEN THE MORTAL AND IMMORTAL THAT INSPIRES HUMANS TO ASCEND THE LADDER OF LOVE. This ascent involves moving from physical attraction to understanding the ideal form of beauty, which is essential for achieving happiness through creative activity. 
"Plato's Symposium
Desires play a key role for Plato's in shaping a good character and contribute to leading a good life and developing the right virtues.
Socrates says that although he knows about nothing, he knows about love what he learned from the priestess Diotina. A female character with a religious function to give credibility to the religious dimension that Socrates gives to Eros.: Eros is a demon that connects the mortal and the immortal. In itself it is neither good or bad, beautiful or ugly - it is just a connecting force that inspires humans to ascend the ladder of love. The fact she is a female is relevant in that she claims that all humans are born "pregnant" with the potential of intellectual creation of art, science and philosophy - we need the inspiration of erotic love and a guide (like the role an older male would endorse towards a younger lover in Athens at the time) in order to make our potential flourish.
About the ladder of love: all desire occurs for the sake of some end, which is happiness. We need creative activity to reach happiness which is not our natural state since we are not Gods. The ascend of the ladder of love is this activity: reflecting on what is valuable to us, we start from a realization of physical attraction to one specific beautiful body, then realize what is beautiful across all beautiful bodies, then realize the unifying feature among beautiful souls and finally come to perceive the "wide sea of beauty" and understand the form or ideal of beauty itself.
Since forms are the true objects of knowledge, Eros is what enable us to access that realm through reciprocal relationships  with particulars.
Alcibiades comes in completely drunk and gives us an account of how difficult it is to be caught into erotic love for one individual (in his case his love for Socrates) maybe as a warning of how difficult it will be to climb the ladder of love and move away from humans incarnation."
(In our time, Plato´s symposium, BBC Radio 4 on Thu 2 Jan 2014)

Listen to the episode:
https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b03mhyzk

E1.6.C.1.1.e_REF2_CUR IN JONATHAN GLAZER'S "UNDER THE SKIN" (2013), THE EXTRATERRESTRIAL REALIZES HER OWN ATTRACTIVENESS AND CRAVES FOR THE JOY THAT BEAUTY APPEARS TO BRING.

Watch the trailer on IMDb: https://www.imdb.com/video/vi2666834713/?playlistId=tt1441395&ref_=tt_ov_vi

E1.6.C.1.1.e_REF3_PO "SOCRATES AND ALCIBIADES
Why, holy Socrates, do you court
  This youth all the time? Don't you know of anything greater?
    Why do your eyes gaze on him with love,
      as if you were looking at the gods?"
 
He who has pondered the most profound thoughts, loves what is most alive;
  He who has seen the world understands lofty virtue.
    And in the end, the wise will often
      Bend toward that which is beautiful."
(Friedrich Hölderlin)

E1.6.C.1.1.f. SCHILLER ARGUES THAT WHILE THE AESTHETIC STATE YIELDS NO SINGLE, PRACTICAL RESULT FOR KNOWLEDGE OR MORALITY, ITS PROFOUND VALUE LIES IN FREEING HUMANITY FROM THE SPECIFIC LIMITATIONS OF BOTH REASON AND FEELING, THEREBY RESTORING US TO A STATE OF UNLIMITED POTENTIAL AND COMPLETE HUMAN FREEDOM.

E1.6.C.1.1.f_REF1_PH SCHILLER ARGUES THAT WHILE THE AESTHETIC STATE YIELDS NO SINGLE, PRACTICAL RESULT FOR KNOWLEDGE OR MORALITY, ITS PROFOUND VALUE LIES IN FREEING HUMANITY FROM THE SPECIFIC LIMITATIONS OF BOTH REASON AND FEELING, THEREBY RESTORING US TO A STATE OF UNLIMITED POTENTIAL AND COMPLETE HUMAN FREEDOM.
“The mind is determined, inasmuch as it is only limited; but it is also determined because it limits itself of its own absolute capacity. It is situated in the former position when it feels, in the second when it thinks. Accordingly the aesthetic constitution is in relation to determinableness what thought is in relation to determination. The latter is a negative from internal and infinite completeness, the former a limitation from internal infinite power. Feeling and thought come into contact in one single point, the mind is determined in both conditions, the man becomes something and exists—either as individual or person—by exclusion; in other cases these two faculties stand infinitely apart. Just in the same manner the aesthetic determinableness comes in contact with the mere want of determination in a single point, by both excluding every distinct determined existence, by thus being in all other points nothing and all, and hence by being infinitely different. Therefore if the latter, in the absence of determination from deficiency, is represented as an empty infiniteness, the aesthetic freedom of determination, which forms the proper counterpart to the former, can be considered as a completed infiniteness; a representation which exactly agrees with the teachings of the previous investigations.

Man is therefore nothing in the aesthetic state, if attention is given to the single result, and not to the whole faculty, and if we regard only the absence or want of every special determination. We must therefore do justice to those who pronounce the beautiful, and the disposition in which it places the mind, as entirely indifferent and unprofitable, in relation to knowledge and feeling. They are perfectly right; for it is certain that beauty gives no separate, single result, either for the understanding or for the will; it does not carry out a single intellectual or moral object; it discovers no truth, does not help us to fulfil a single duty, and, in one word, is equally unfit to found the character or to clear the head. Accordingly, the personal worth of a man, or his dignity, as far as this can only depend on himself, remains entirely undetermined by aesthetic culture, and nothing further is attained than that, on the part of nature, it is made profitable for him to make of himself what he will; that the freedom to be what he ought to be is restored perfectly to him.

But by this something infinite is attained. But as soon as we remember that freedom is taken from man by the one-sided compulsion of nature in feeling, and by the exclusive legislation of the reason in thinking, we must consider the capacity restored to him by the aesthetical disposition, as the highest of all gifts, as the gift of humanity. I admit that he possesses this capacity for humanity, before every definite determination in which he may be placed. But, as a matter of fact, he loses it with every determined condition into which he may come; and if he is to pass over to an opposite condition, humanity must be in every case restored to him by the aesthetic life.

It is therefore not only a poetical license, but also philosophically correct, when beauty is named our second creator. Nor is this inconsistent with the fact that she only makes it possible for us to attain and realize humanity, leaving this to our free will. For in this she acts in common with our original creator, nature, which has imparted to us nothing further than this capacity for humanity, but leaves the use of it to our own determination of will.

LETTER XXII.
Accordingly, if the aesthetic disposition of the mind must be looked upon in one respect as nothing—that is, when we confine our view to separate and determined operations—it must be looked upon in another respect as a state of the highest reality, in as far as we attend to the absence of all limits and the sum of powers which are commonly active in it. Accordingly we cannot pronounce them, again, to be wrong who describe the aesthetic state to be the most productive in relation to knowledge and morality. They are perfectly right, for a state of mind which comprises the whole of humanity in itself must of necessity include in itself also —necessarily and potentially—every separate expression of it. Again, a disposition of mind that removes all limitation from the totality of human nature must also remove it from every special expression of the same. Exactly because its "aesthetic disposition" does not exclusively shelter any separate function of humanity, it is favorable to all without distinction; nor does it favor any particular functions, precisely because it is the foundation of the possibility of all. All other exercises give to the mind some special aptitude, but for that very reason give it some definite limits; only the aesthetical leads him to the unlimited. Every other condition in which we can live refers us to a previous condition, and requires for its solution a following condition; only the aesthetic is a complete whole in itself, for it unites in itself all conditions of its source and of its duration. Here alone we feel ourselves swept out of time, and our humanity expresses itself with purity and integrity as if it had not yet received any impression or interruption from the operation of external powers.”
(Friedrich Schiller, The Aesthetical Essays, 1875)

E1.6.C.1.1.f_REF2_PH SCHILLER ASSERTS THAT THE AESTHETIC STATE IS THE CRUCIAL AND MOST DIFFICULT TRANSITION FOR HUMANITY, BECAUSE ONLY BY FIRST SUBMITTING OUR SENSUOUS NATURE TO THE LAWS OF BEAUTY CAN WE DEVELOP THE INNER FREEDOM THAT IS THE NECESSARY FOUNDATION FOR A MORAL AND RATIONAL LIFE.
“The transition from the passivity of sensuousness to the activity of thought and of will can be effected only by the intermediary state of aesthetic liberty; and though in itself this state decides nothing respecting our opinions and our sentiments, and therefore it leaves our intellectual and moral value entirely problematical, it is, however, the necessary condition without which we should never attain to an opinion or a sentiment. In a word, there is no other way to make a reasonable being out of a sensuous man than by making him first aesthetic.

But, you might object: Is this mediation absolutely indispensable? Could not truth and duty, one or the other, in themselves and by themselves, find access to the sensuous man? To this I reply: Not only is it possible but it is absolutely necessary that they owe solely to themselves their determining force, and nothing would be more contradictory to our preceding affirmations than to appear to defend the contrary opinion. It has been expressly proved that the beautiful furnishes no result, either for the comprehension or for the will; that it mingles with no operations, either of thought or of resolution; and that it confers this double power without determining anything with regard to the real exercise of this power. Here all foreign help disappears, and the pure logical form, the idea, would speak immediately to the intelligence, as the pure moral form, the law, immediately to the will.

But that the pure form should be capable of it, and that there is in general a pure form for sensuous man, is that, I maintain, which should be rendered possible by the aesthetic disposition of the soul. Truth is not a thing which can be received from without like reality or the visible existence of objects. It is the thinking force, in his own liberty and activity, which produces it, and it is just this liberty proper to it, this liberty which we seek in vain in sensuous man. The sensuous man is already determined physically, and thenceforth he has no longer his free determinability; he must necessarily first enter into possession of this lost determinability before he can exchange the passive against an active determination. Therefore, in order to recover it, he must either lose the passive determination that he had, or he should enclose already in himself the active determination to which he should pass. If he confined himself to lose passive determination, he would at the same time lose with it the possibility of an active determination, because thought needs a body, and form can only be realized through matter. He must therefore contain already in himself the active determination, that he may be at once both actively and passively determined, that is to say, he becomes necessarily aesthetic.

Consequently, by the aesthetic disposition of the soul the proper activity of reason is already revealed in the sphere of sensuousness, the power of sense is already broken within its own boundaries, and the ennobling of physical man carried far enough, for spiritual man has only to develop himself according to the laws of liberty. The transition from an aesthetic state to a logical and moral state (from the beautiful to truth and duty) is then infinitely more easy than the transition from the physical state to the aesthetic state (from life pure and blind to form). This transition man can effectuate alone by his liberty, whilst he has only to enter into possession of himself not to give it himself; but to separate the elements of his nature, and not to enlarge it. Having attained to the aesthetic disposition, man will give to his judgments and to his actions a universal value as soon as he desires it. This passage from brute nature to beauty, in which an entirely new faculty would awaken in him, nature would render easier, and his will has no power over a disposition which, we know, itself gives birth to the will. To bring the aesthetic man to profound views, to elevated sentiments, he requires nothing more than important occasions: to obtain the same thing from the sensuous man, his nature must at first be changed. To make of the former a hero, a sage, it is often only necessary to meet with a sublime situation, which exercises upon the faculty of the will the more immediate action; for the second, it must first be transplanted under another sky.

One of the most important tasks of culture, then, is to submit man to form, even in a purely physical life, and to render it aesthetic as far as the domain of the beautiful can be extended, for it is alone in the aesthetic state, and not in the physical state, that the moral state can be developed. If in each particular case man ought to possess the power to make his judgment and his will the judgment of the entire species; if he ought to find in each limited existence the transition to an infinite existence; if, lastly, he ought from every dependent situation to take his flight to rise to autonomy and to liberty, it must be observed that at no moment he is only individual and solely obeys the laws of nature. To be apt and ready to raise himself from the narrow circle of the ends of nature, to rational ends, in the sphere of the former he must already have exercised himself in the second; he must already have realized his physical destiny with a certain liberty that belongs only to spiritual nature, that is to say according to the laws of the beautiful.

And that he can effect without thwarting in the least degree his physical aim. The exigencies of nature with regard to him turn only upon what he does—upon the substance of his acts; but the ends of nature in no degree determine the way in which he acts, the form of his actions. On the contrary, the exigencies of reason have rigorously the form of his activity for its object. Thus, so much as it is necessary for the moral destination of man, that he be purely moral, that he shows an absolute personal activity, so much is he indifferent that his physical destination be entirely physical, that he acts in a manner entirely passive. Henceforth with regard to this last destination, it entirely depends on him to fulfil it solely as a sensuous being and natural force (as a force which acts only as it diminishes) or, at the same time, as absolute force, as a rational being. To which of these does his dignity best respond? Of this there can be no question. It is as disgraceful and contemptible for him to do under sensuous impulsion that which he ought to have determined merely by the motive of duty, as it is noble and honorable for him to incline towards conformity with laws, harmony, independence; there even where the vulgar man only satisfies a legitimate want. In a word, in the domain of truth and morality, sensuousness must have nothing to determine; but in the sphere of happiness, form may find a place, and the instinct of play prevail.

Thus then, in the indifferent sphere of physical life, man ought to already commence his moral life; his own proper activity ought already to make way in passivity, and his rational liberty beyond the limits of sense; he ought already to impose the law of his will upon his inclinations; he ought—if you will permit me the expression—to carry into the domain of matter the war against matter, in order to be dispensed from combating this redoubtable enemy upon the sacred field of liberty; he ought to learn to have nobler desires, not to be forced to have sublime volitions. This is the fruit of aesthetic culture, which submits to the laws of the beautiful, in which neither the laws of nature nor those of reason suffer, which does not force the will of man, and which by the form it gives to exterior life already opens internal life.”
(Friedrich Schiller, The Aesthetical Essays, 1875)

E1.6.C.1.1.f_REF3_PH SCHILLER POSITS THAT THE CRUCIAL TRANSITION FROM A PURELY SENSUOUS EXISTENCE TO SELF-CONSCIOUS HUMANITY OCCURS IN THE AESTHETIC STATE, WHERE REFLECTIVE CONTEMPLATION CREATES A VITAL DISTANCE BETWEEN THE SELF AND THE WORLD, THUS GIVING RISE TO BOTH A DISTINCT PERSONALITY AND AN OBJECTIVE REALITY.
“LETTER XXV.
Whilst man, in his first physical condition, is only passively affected by the world of sense, he is still entirely identified with it; and for this reason the external world, as yet, has no objective existence for him. When he begins in his aesthetic state of mind to regard the world objectively, then only is his personality severed from it, and the world appears to him an objective reality, for the simple reason that he has ceased to form an identical portion of it.

That which first connects man with the surrounding universe is the power of reflective contemplation. Whereas desire seizes at once its object, reflection removes it to a distance and renders it inalienably her own by saving it from the greed of passion. The necessity of sense which he obeyed during the period of mere sensations, lessens during the period of reflection; the senses are for the time in abeyance; even ever-fleeting time stands still whilst the scattered rays of consciousness are gathering and shape themselves; an image of the infinite is reflected upon the perishable ground. As soon as light dawns in man, there is no, longer night outside of him; as soon as there is peace within him the storm lulls throughout the universe, and the contending forces of nature find rest within prescribed limits. Hence we cannot wonder if ancient traditions allude to these great changes in the inner man as to a revolution in surrounding nature, and symbolize thought triumphing over the laws of time, by the figure of Zeus, which terminates the reign of Saturn.

As long as man derives sensations from a contact with nature, he is her slave; but as soon as he begins to reflect upon her objects and laws he becomes her lawgiver. Nature, which previously ruled him as a power, now expands before him as an object. What is objective to him can have no power over him, for in order to become objective it has to experience his own power. As far and as long as he impresses a form upon matter, he cannot be injured by its effect; for a spirit can only be injured by that which deprives it of its freedom. Whereas he proves his own freedom by giving a form to the formless; where the mass rules heavily and without shape, and its undefined outlines are for ever fluctuating between uncertain boundaries, fear takes up its abode; but man rises above any natural terror as soon as he knows how to mould it, and transform it into an object of his art. As soon as he upholds his independence towards phenomenal natures he maintains his dignity toward her as a thing of power, and with a noble freedom he rises against his gods. They throw aside the mask with which they had kept him in awe during his infancy, and to his surprise his mind perceives the reflection of his own image. The divine monster of the Oriental, which roams about changing the world with the blind force of a beast of prey, dwindles to the charming outline of humanity in Greek fable; the empire of the Titans is crushed, and boundless force is tamed by infinite form.

But whilst I have been merely searching for an issue from the material world, and a passage into the world of mind, the bold flight of my imagination has already taken me into the very midst of the latter world. The beauty of which we are in search we have left behind by passing from the life of mere sensations to the pure form and to the pure object. Such a leap exceeds the condition of human nature; in order to keep pace with the latter we must return to the world of sense.

Beauty is indeed the sphere of unfettered contemplation and reflection; beauty conducts us into the world of ideas, without however taking us from the world of sense, as occurs when a truth is perceived and acknowledged. This is the pure product of a process of abstraction from everything material and accidental, a pure object free from every subjective barrier, a pure state of self-activity without any admixture of passive sensations. There is indeed a way back to sensation from the highest abstraction; for thought teaches the inner sensation, and the idea of logical or moral unity passes into a sensation of sensual accord. But if we delight in knowledge we separate very accurately our own conceptions from our sensations; we look upon the latter as something accidental, which might have been omitted without the knowledge being impaired thereby, without truth being less true. It would, however, be a vain attempt to suppress this connection of the faculty of feeling with the idea of beauty, consequently, we shall not succeed in representing to ourselves one as the effect of the other, but we must look upon them both together and reciprocally as cause and effect. In the pleasure which we derive from knowledge we readily distinguish the passage from the active to the passive state, and we clearly perceive that the first ends when the second begins. On the contrary, from the pleasure which we take in beauty, this transition from the active to the passive is not perceivable, and reflection is so intimately blended with feeling that we believe we feel the form immediately. Beauty is then an object to us, it is true, because reflection is the condition of the feeling which we have of it; but it is also a state of our personality (our Ego) because the feeling is the condition of the idea we conceive of it: beauty is therefore doubtless form, because we contemplate it, but it is equally life because we feel it. In a word, it is at once our state and our act. And precisely because it is at the same time both a state and an act, it triumphantly proves to us that the passive does not exclude the active, neither matter nor form, neither the finite nor the infinite; and that consequently the physical dependence to which man is necessarily devoted does not in any way destroy his moral liberty. This is the proof of beauty, and I ought to add that this alone can prove it. In fact, as in the possession of truth or of logical unity, feeling is not necessarily one with the thought, but follows it accidentally; it is a fact which only proves that a sensitive nature can succeed a rational nature, and vice versa; not that they co-exist, that they exercise a reciprocal action one over the other; and, lastly, that they ought to be united in an absolute and necessary manner. From this exclusion of feeling as long as there is thought, and of thought so long as there is feeling, we should on the contrary conclude that the two natures are incompatible, so that in order to demonstrate that pure reason is to be realized in humanity, the best proof given by the analysis is that this realization is demanded. But, as in the realization of beauty or of aesthetic unity, there is a real union, mutual substitution of matter and of form, of passive and of active, by this alone is proved the compatibility of the two natures, the possible realization of the infinite in the finite, and consequently also the possibility of the most sublime humanity.

Henceforth we need no longer be embarrassed to find a transition from dependent feeling to moral liberty, because beauty reveals to us the fact that they can perfectly coexist, and that to show himself a spirit, man need not escape from matter. But if on one side he is free, even in his relation with a visible world, as the fact of beauty teaches, and if on the other side freedom is something absolute and supersensuous, as its idea necessarily implies, the question is no longer how man succeeds in raising himself from the finite to the absolute, and opposing himself in his thought and will to sensuality, as this has already been produced in the fact of beauty. In a word, we have no longer to ask how he passes from virtue to truth which is already included in the former, but how he opens a way for himself from vulgar reality to aesthetic reality, and from the ordinary feelings of life to the perception of the beautiful.”
(Friedrich Schiller, The Aesthetical Essays, 1875)

E1.6.C.1.2. A THING OF BEAUTY IS A JOY FOREVER
A thing of beauty is a joy for ever because it is the harvest of presence. It occurs in the meeting of time with the timeless.

E1.6.C.1.2.a. THE TIMELESSNESS OF BEAUTY
François Cheng posits that beauty is a timeless and intimate experience. It transcends the constraints of time and space, providing a lasting gift. Beauty only gains significance when it is captured by a gaze: the act of perceiving beauty can evoke memories and incite future experiences. Beauty bridges the gap between the external world and the internal self, eliminating feelings of separation and fear.

E1.6.C.1.2.a.i. FOR FRANÇOIS CHENG, BEAUTY IS AN INTIMATE EXPERIENCE THAT TRANSCENDS TIME AND SPACE. Each encounter with beauty evokes past experiences and anticipates future ones. Beauty can be a lasting gift, connected to the primal longing for beauty that either guided the universe's creation (for believers) or emerged from chaos (for non-believers).

E1.6.C.1.2.a.i_REF1_PH FRANÇOIS CHENG EXPLORES HOW MEMORY AND CONSCIOUSNESS TRANSCEND TEMPORAL DIVISIONS, creating a continuity in which each experience of beauty evokes memories of past beauties and anticipates future beauties.
"If, outside us, everyone is subject to the tyranny of the passage of time, in their inner consciousness, thanks to memory, the experiences, the imaginary, but also the elements that form part of their knowledge, constitute an organic duration that transcends, so to speak, the breaks, the gaps, the separations in time and space. The components of this duration remain in a "contemporaneity", playing with chronology and always approaching the present. [...] Returning to the theme of beauty, we can say that in the duration that inhabits a consciousness, beauty attracts beauty, in the sense that an experience of beauty recalls other previously experienced experiences of beauty and at the same time calls for other future experiences of beauty. The more intense the experience of beauty, the more the poignancy of its dual nature generates the desire to repeat the experience, necessarily in a different form, since each experience is unique. In other words, in the consciousness in question, nostalgia and hope combined, each experience of beauty recalls a lost paradise and calls for a promised paradise.

This is probably how we should interpret the lines of the poet John Keats: “A thing of beauty is a joy forever”. [...]. For we become aware that beauty can be a lasting gift, if we remember that it is a promise kept from the beginning. This is why the desire for beauty is no longer limited to an object of beauty; the desire aspires to join the original desire for beauty that presided over the advent of the universe, over the adventure of life. Each experience of life, so brief in time yet transcending time, each time restores to us the freshness of the world's morning.”
(François Cheng, Five meditations on beauty, 2006)

E1.6.C.1.2.a.i_REF1.1_PO “NAMING EVERYTHING SEPARATELY
IS THE BEGINNING OF EVERYTHING
But to say what arises from them
always new
and unexpected
Is
every time
to start the world over

Between tree and cloud
May a wounded bird or a delighted wind pass
May the furtive radiance inscribe itself
between the eyes
between the lips
To real life


endlessly
we are reborn”
(François Cheng, The book of the median void, 2004)

E1.6.C.1.2.a.i_REF1.2_PO “WHEN THE ANGEL SIGNALS
We know that what is born of us
will never cease to happen
Before us, without our knowing
it suddenly overtakes us, saves us”
(François Cheng, The book of the median void, 2004)

E1.6.C.1.2.a.ii. BEAUTY ONLY HOLDS SIGNIFICANCE IF IT IS CAPTURED BY AN OBSERVER. The observer's perception of beauty prompts a mental journey to past experiences, thus linking the present moment to all previous instances of perceived beauty. This connection also extends to the perspectives of other observers. Hence, Beauty attracts Beauty, enhancing and elevating it.

E1.6.C.1.2.a.ii_REF1_PH FRANÇOIS CHENG EXPLORES THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN BEAUTY, THE GAZE, AND MEMORY, AFFIRMING THAT BEAUTY TAKES ON MEANING WHEN IT IS PERCEIVED. "On a higher level, another encounter occurs when this scene is captured by a gaze. If it is not captured by a gaze, beauty is not known; it is a "waste," it does not take on its full meaning. "Taking on meaning" here means that whenever the universe tends toward the state of beauty, it offers a chance - or revives a promise - of enjoyment. This gaze of a subject that captures the scene of beauty in the moment leads to a new encounter that is located on another level, that of memory.
In memory, or more precisely in its duration, each present gaze of a subject joins all the past gazes when the subject has encountered beauty; it also joins the gazes of other creators whose works the subject has admired. This is in accordance with the truth I mentioned earlier, that beauty attracts beauty, that it increases and elevates it. From there, from gaze to gaze, the subject, if inspired, can aspire to a supreme encounter that would connect it to the original gaze of the universe. Without the need for belief, it may instinctively feel that this universe, which was capable of creating beings endowed with a gaze, must itself have possessed a gaze. If the universe created itself, it must have 'seen' itself being created, and in the end it 'said' to itself, 'This is beautiful,' or more simply, 'This is right. If it hadn't said, "It's beautiful," would man ever have been able to say, "It's beautiful?

In the light of these few reflections, we understand that the act of looking is almost always linked to time, in the sense that this act, carried out by a subject, is immediately accompanied by another effort, that of recognition, which is linked to memory. In other words, what is looked at refers, in the subject, to all that he has looked at in the past or in the imagination, and, more deeply, to the intimate experience he has of a revelation of the self that is spread out over time.

In this regard, I would like to recall a remark by Henri Makliney that the noun regard and the verb regarder are two words that many languages can envy French. For the combination of re and garder is rich in connotations. More than the act of surreptitiously catching a glimpse or an image, it evokes the resumption or renewal of something that has been preserved and that, with each new opportunity, demands to be developed as a future. Let us add that contemplation also carries the idea of reflection; it always encourages the viewer to a deeper engagement.

Is there a source of the gaze that would be the gaze itself? Even a people as supposedly nonreligious as the Chinese, as we have said, instinctively feel that this universe that was capable of creating living beings with eyes must itself have been driven by the need to see and the ability to see. Moreover, in Chinese, the character that denotes the gaze holds the key to the sacred, to the divine. Moreover, an almost banal expression has taken root in the popular imagination: lao-tian-you-yan, "Heaven has its eyes. We have just seen that the entire poetic and artistic tradition in China was driven by this fundamental conviction. Later, Buddhism introduced the notion of the "eye of wisdom" or the "third eye. The view produced by this eye is a product of the universal consciousness that inhabits it, rather than the wisdom of the subject, and can only be acquired after the experience of emptiness. [...] 

I will content myself with quoting a phrase of Meister Eckhart's, which later interested Hegel very much: "The eye with which I see God is the eye with which God sees me." [...]

Ibn 'Arabî, one of the greatest Sufi poets of the 13th century, expressed in his own way the relationship between the gaze of the Creator and that of the creature. From a rather long poem, let us listen to the following four verses, which bring out a subtle dialectic of gaze. Here, too, it is the Creator who speaks:

I have created in you your perception so that you may be the object of my perception.
It is through my gaze that you see me and I see you.
On the other hand, when you perceive me, you perceive yourself.

[...] The second verse clarifies further: it is through the gaze of the Creator that the creature sees Him. The creature meets the gaze of the Creator and sees Him. And suddenly the Creator, meeting the gaze of the creature that sees Him, sees the creature.
The third verse confirms that the creature cannot see the Creator through itself. With the fourth verse, we understand that when the creature sees the Creator, it can truly see itself. What this verse says can also be reversed by suggesting that likewise, if the Creator sees the creature, it can truly see itself. In this long poem, if the Creator teaches the Creature the secret of the gaze, it is because He wants to enter into a relationship of love with the Creature. He asks the Creature not to be content with looking inward; he literally begs it to meet its gaze with that of the Creator.

[...] In love, as in beauty, every gaze is a mutual gaze. This is why Merleau-Ponty defines perception through the concept of the chiasm, this interpenetration, precisely, between what looks and what is looked at. An isolated gaze can hardly achieve beauty. Only crossed gazes can provoke the spark that illuminates, and in the extreme case of Creator and creature, only they allow the divine light to reveal itself. But in an authentic experience of love and beauty, if not every creature is raised to the dignity of the Creator, it is true that the glances exchanged give birth to each other and make them be.

[...] At a higher level, the gaze goes beyond the fascination of the figure and reaches the light of the soul, which is true presence. This light, received from the outside, penetrates within and becomes an inner light that allows us to see the soul of the other and our own soul in a vision made up of coming and going, like a fountain with intersecting jets. In this moment, one closes one's eyes as if in prayer or ecstasy.

I am thinking of the Khmer heads in the Guimet Museum. You can no longer see the eyes, but curiously, you can see the gaze turned toward the infinite space within. On the subject of this infinite space within, let us add a clarification. If we stick to the physical body, it is a terribly limited space. If we recognize and accept the spiritual body, that is, the body animated by the breath of spirit, the infinite is practically there, but the spiritual body must awaken and come into exchange, into resonance with the breath that animates the living universe, for the infinite is that which never ceases to spring forth into open life. But the space within is inevitable. You have to go through it, and from there everything can radiate again.

The dimension in question is truly that of the soul. It is in the depths of the inner space that we can hear the voice of the soul, that we can perceive the vision of the soul. When we look at a Khmer head in contemplation, we see before us a face completely absorbed by the gaze, a face that becomes pure gaze and pure smile, the face of vision, where the visible and the invisible nourish each other, where the source of beauty and the effective beauty become one. Turned inward and then outward, this face can then radiate another kind of light, that of transfiguration.
(François Cheng, Five Meditations on Beauty - Fourth Meditation, 2006)

E1.6.C.1.2.b. THE REVELATIONS OF EPIPHANIES
Epiphanies can be significant moments in our lives, revealing how to appreciate life's essence, even in moments of discomfort. As time passes, our recollections of these events can take on a special significance. Reflecting on these moments is more impactful than casually recalling them, as in Marcel Proust's remembrance of the madeleine dipped in his tea.

E1.6.C.1.2.b_REF1_LIT JOHN COWPER POWYS REFLECTS ON A TRANSFORMATIVE MOMENT IN HIS LIFE, TRIGGERED BY A WORN-OUT BOOK DURING SCHOOL DAYS. THIS SEEMINGLY INSIGNIFICANT EVENT REVEALED THE PROFOUND ABILITY TO FIND DEEP PLEASURE AND MEANING IN SMALL, EVERYDAY EXPERIENCES, akin to Proust's "Madeleine." The author argues that such moments, filled with sensory richness, can be consciously recalled and appreciated over time, offering lasting joy and insight.
“Tuesday and Thursday; it was Sherborne and not any ancient god that made you holy to me for ever! Yes, it was Sherborne and Mr. Whitehead’s lessons. For even as I said to myself: “It is Thursday,” and took up my little, worn-to-pieces, plum-coloured edition of Euclid, such a great wave of ecstasy rushed over me that I can recall its subtlest essence even unto this hour. This little, ragged, plum-coloured Euclid—Ailinon! Ailinon! That I should have ever lost that book!—became at that moment, if I may say so without irreverence, a sort of consecrated wafer, into which every lovely sensation I had ever had, had miraculously gathered itself. It is really possible that that moment was the most important of my whole life! We have to live a long time to know what are the important moments. We think, at the time, they are the days when we change continents, or hemispheres, or nationalities, or religions, or infatuations, but they do not as a rule turn out to be these great lumbering events. They turn out to be some little, tiny, infinitesimal sensation —like Proust’s “Madeleine” dipped in camomile tea—that reveals to us the clue to our life. And what actually did that Euclid, picked up there in that leather-stinking, rotten-apple-reeking lobby, where stood our lockers and play-boxes, reveal to me? It revealed to me something much more precious that that Eternal Being of Proust’s, reaching him purely by chance and doing him, when it did reach him, no particular good. This tattered Euclid revealed to me that it is possible, even when the bulk of your days and the larger number of your hours are full of discomfort, to embrace a thousand essences of life. The limbs of the loveliest of women, the flanks of the noblest of hills, the mosses upon the most marbly rocks, the clearest Waterfalls, the freshest of ploughed-up fields, the blackest of rooks feeding in the furrows, the whitest dust rising up from the most ancient of classic roads, the gleam of glittering sea-pebbles, the faint music of the dying away of the burdens of old ballads, the taste of newly baked bread, the feel of the mystery of things as you muse over your tea—to enjoy such presences and such essences of life, and to do so in the scope of some negligible fragment of matter, this and nothing less is what I found I could compass under the spell of this little plum-coloured Euclid! Yes, I learnt from this moment in that littered lobby, smelling of acrid leather, sour sweat, and rotten apples, that our deepest pleasure strew behind them—even when at the time they are not consciously enjoyed—leaves of delight that become enchanted with the passing of time, like petals gathered in an ancient pot pourri. 
And if they are always there in that storehouse, why cannot they be summoned up at will? And they can! Proust, with his impersonal Eternal Being, stops short at this point, leaving it all to the accidents of our way. But when I think now of that Euclid something comes back! Not in any thrilling tush does it comes. It comes quietly and prepense. But something does actually comes from where that book lies in my mind. “
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber, p.128-130)

E1.6.C.1.2.b_REF1.1_LIT JOHN COWPER POWYS DESCRIBES A PROFOUND AND INDESCRIBABLE SENSATION HE EXPERIENCED WHILE OBSERVING PATCHES OF GRASS, MOSS, AND STONE-CROP ON AN ANCIENT WALL “Not far from Trumpington Mill—somewhere in the umbrageous purlieus to the rear of the Fitzwilliam Museum—there stands an ancient wall; and as I drifted along to visit my lively satirist, I observed, growing upon this wall, certain patches of grass and green moss and yellow stone-crop. Something about the look of these small growths, secluded there in a place seldom passed, and more seldom noticed, seized upon me and caught me up into a sort of Seventh Heaven.
A few seconds ago, before touching my pen to tell you what kind of Seventh Heaven it was into which, leaning upon the handle of “Sacred,” I was transported, I felt all that I have ever felt, of the burden of this extraordinary moment. It certainly penetrated every recess of my being. I would call it a beyond sensation, and it lies in my consciousness now, like a sunken ship, full of fathom-deep treasure. But the touch of my pen—and I suppose it will always be so—breaks the spell I can tell you nothing! It has, however, whatever its fluctuating mystery may be, a power upon me that is like the power of a hidden Mass, celebrated by no human hands. It is impossible for me to describe it! And yet I never see the least patch of lichen, or moss, or grass, in the veinings of an ancient rock but something of the same feeling returns. Not, however, quite the same; for that impression, that vision of “Living Bread,” that mysterious meeting-point of animate with inanimate, had to do with some secret underlying world of rich magic and strange romance. In fact I actually regarded it as a prophetic idea of the sort of stories that I myself might come to write; stories that should have as their background the indescribable peace and gentleness of the substance we name grass in contact with the substance we name stone.“
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber, p. 199-200)

E1.6.C.1.2.b_REF2_PO "SNOW GEESE

Oh, to love what is lovely, and will not last!
    What a task 
        to ask

of anything, or anyone,

yet it is ours,  
    and not by the century or the year, but by the hours.

One fall day I heard 
    above me, and above the sting of the wind, a sound 
I did not know, and my look shot upward; it was

a flock of snow geese, winging it 
    faster than the ones we usually see, 
and, being the color of snow, catching the sun

so they were, in part at least, golden. I

held my breath
as we do 
sometimes 
to stop time 
when something wonderful 
has touched us

as with a match 
which is lit, and bright, 
but does not hurt 
in the common way,

but delightfully, 
as if delight 
were the most serious thing 
you ever felt.

The geese 
flew on. 
I have never 
seen them again.

Maybe I will, someday, somewhere.
Maybe I won't. 
It doesn't matter. 
What matters 
is that, when I saw them, 
I saw them 
as through the veil, secretly, joyfully, clearly."
(Mary Oliver, Why I wake early, 2004)

E1.6.C.1.2.b_REF3_PO "THE PLACE I WANT TO GET BACK TO
is where
in the pinewoods
in the moments between
the darkness
and first light
two deer
came walking down the hill
and when they saw me
they said to each other, okay,
this one is okay,
let’s see who she is
and why she is sitting
on the ground like that,
so quiet, as if
asleep, or in a dream,
but, anyway, harmless;
and so they came
on their slender legs
and gazed upon me
not unlike the way
I go out to the dunes and look
and look and look
into the faces of the flowers;
and then one of them leaned forward
and nuzzled my hand, and what can my life
bring to me that could exceed
that brief moment?
For twenty years
I have gone every day to the same woods,
not waiting, exactly, just lingering.
Such gifts, bestowed,
can’t be repeated.
If you want to talk about this
come to visit. I live in the house
near the corner, which I have named
Gratitude."
(Mary Oliver)

E1.6.C.1.2.c. BEAUTY IS THE HARVEST OF PRESENCE
Beauty is the harvest of presence, the moment we perceive something that resides deep within us. It represents a dialogue between the external world and our inner self, eliminating our sense of separation, distance, and fear of the unknown. It emerges when the temporal intersects with the timeless.

E1.6.C.1.2.c.i. "BEAUTY

is the harvest of presence, the evanescent moment of seeing or hearing on the outside what already lives far inside us; the eyes, the ears or the imagination suddenly become a bridge between the here and the there, between then and now, between the inside and the outside; beauty is the conversation between what we think is happening outside in the world and what is just about to occur far inside us.

Beauty is an achieved state of both deep attention and self-forgetting: the self-forgetting of seeing, hearing, smelling or touching that erases our separation, our distance, our fear of the other. Beauty invites us, through entrancement, to that fearful frontier between what we think makes us; and what we think makes the world. Beauty is almost always found in symmetries and intriguing asymmetries: the symmetries and asymmetries seen out in creation, the wings of the moth, the airy sky and the solid earth, the restful, focused eyes of a loving face in which we see our own self reflected: the symmetry also, therefore, of bringing together inner and outer recognitions, the far horizon of otherness seen in that face joined to the deep inner horizon of our own being. Beauty is an inner and an outer complexion living in one face.

Beauty especially occurs in the meeting of time with the timeless; the passing moment framed by what has happened and what is about to occur: the scattering of the first spring apple blossom, the turning, spiralling flight of a curled leaf in the falling light; the smoothing of white sun-filled sheets by careful hands setting them to air on a line, the broad expanse of cotton filled by the breeze only for a moment, the sheets sailing on into dryness, billowing toward a future that is always beckoning, always just beyond us. Beauty is the harvest of presence."
(David Whyte, Consolations, The Solace, Nourishment and Underlying Meaning of Everyday Words, 2015)

E1.6.C.1.2.c.ii. RICHARD JEFFERIES BELIEVED THAT COMMUNION WITH THE NATURAL WORLD IS A PORTAL TO THE HIGHEST REACHES OF OUR OWN HUMANITY
“To be beautiful and to be calm without mental fear is the ideal of Nature,” he wrote, insisting again and again that we can attain this ideal by relinquishing our sense of separateness from the rest of nature and unselfing into the elemental totality of life.

E1.6.C.1.2.c.ii_REF1_LIT COMMUNION WITH NATURE ALLOWS US TO REACH THE HIGHEST LEVELS OF OUR HUMANITY BY DISSOLVING THE BOUNDARIES OF THE SELF. "There are moments in life when something breaks open, something breaks free, something dissolves and resurfaces as large as the universe. Moments when we access what G.K. Chesterton called “the submerged sunrise of wonder.” Moments when we part what Virginia Woolf called “the cotton wool” gauzing our view of raw reality. Moments when the boundaries of the self fall away and we find ourselves in oneness with what Margaret Fuller called “the All.”

These are moments marked by William James’s four characteristics of transcendent consciousness, most acutely by their ineffability. But once or twice a century, if we are lucky, a person emerges to articulate the inner pulse-beat of such an experience and, in articulating it, broadens the portal of possibility for the rest of us.

No one has captured the ineffable transcendence of such a moment more vividly and passionately than the great British nature writer Richard Jefferies (November 6, 1848–August 14, 1887) — a man of uncommon sensitivity to beauty, who died at the age I am now, having lived a life electric with wonder.

Like his American contemporary John Burroughs, who wrote so movingly about the spirituality of nature, Jefferies believed that communion with the natural world is a portal to the highest reaches of our own humanity. “To be beautiful and to be calm without mental fear is the ideal of Nature,” he wrote, insisting again and again that we can attain this ideal by relinquishing our sense of separateness from the rest of nature and unselfing into the elemental totality of life."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.6.C.1.2.c.ii_REF1.1_LIT RICHARD JEFFERIES DESCRIBES A PROFOUND SPIRITUAL EXPERIENCE IN NATURE, WHERE HE FEELS A DEEP CONNECTION WITH THE EARTH, SUN, AIR, AND SEA. "I was utterly alone with the sun and the earth. Lying down on the grass, I spoke in my soul to the earth, the sun, the air, and the distant sea far beyond sight. I thought of the earth’s firmness — I felt it bear me up: through the grassy couch there came an influence as if I could feel the great earth speaking to me. I thought of the wandering air — its pureness, which is its beauty; the air touched me and gave me something of itself. I spoke to the sea: though so far, in my mind I saw it, green at the rim of the earth and blue in deeper ocean; I desired to have its strength, its mystery and glory. Then I addressed the sun, desiring the soul equivalent of his light and brilliance, his endurance and unwearied race. I turned to the blue heaven over, gazing into its depth, inhaling its exquisite colour and sweetness. The rich blue of the unattainable flower of the sky drew my soul towards it, and there it rested, for pure colour is rest of heart. By all these I prayed; I felt an emotion of the soul beyond all definition; prayer is a puny thing to it, and the word is a rude sign to the feeling, but I know no other. […]

I prayed by the sweet thyme, whose little flowers I touched with my hand; by the slender grass; by the crumble of dry chalky earth I took up and let fall through my fingers. Touching the crumble of earth, the blade of grass, the thyme flower, breathing the earth-encircling air, thinking of the sea and the sky, holding out my hand for the sunbeams to touch it, prone on the sward in token of deep reverence, thus I prayed that I might touch to the unutterable existence infinitely higher than deity. […]

With the earth, the sun and sky, the stars hidden by the light, with the ocean — in no manner can the thrilling depth of these feelings be written — with these I prayed, as if they were the keys of an instrument, of an organ, with which I swelled forth the note of my soul, redoubling my own voice by their power. [...]

I returned to myself and thought, reclining in rapt thought, full of aspiration, steeped to the lips of my soul in desire. I did not then define, or analyse, or understand this. I see now that what I laboured for was soul-life, more soul-nature, to be exalted, to be full of soul-learning. […]

Having drunk deeply of the heaven above and felt the most glorious beauty of the day, and remembering the old, old, sea, which (as it seemed to me) was but just yonder at the edge, I now became lost, and absorbed into the being or existence of the universe… and losing thus my separateness of being came to seem like a part of the whole. [...]

I was breathing full of existence; I was aware of the grass blades, the flowers, the leaves on hawthorn and tree. I seemed to live more largely through them, as if each were a pore through which I drank. The grasshoppers called and leaped, the greenfinches sang, the blackbirds happily fluted, all the air hummed with life. I was plunged deep in existence, and with all that existence, I prayed… I prayed that I might have a soul more than equal to, far beyond my conception of, these things of the past, the present, and the fullness of all life. Not only equal to these, but beyond, higher, and more powerful than I could imagine. That I might take from all their energy, grandeur, and beauty, and gather it into me. That my soul might be more than the cosmos of life."
(Richard Jefferies, The Story of My Heart, 1883)

E1.6.C.1.2.c.ii_REF1.1.a_LIT WILLIAM JAMES CAUTIONS AGAINST DEVALUING SUCH SEEMINGLY IMPRACTICAL EXPERIENCES AS TRANSCENDENT MOMENTS, urging us instead to recognize them as vital revelations of what makes life worth living 
"William James himself was deeply moved by Jefferies’s account of this transcendent hour. In his talks to teachers and students, a century before our golden age of compulsive productivity at the expense of presence, he cautions against devaluing such seemingly impractical experiences, urging us instead to recognize them as vital revelations of what makes life worth living"
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.6.C.1.2.c.ii_REF1.1.b_LIT PRACTICAL INTERESTS OFTEN BLIND US TO DEEPER MEANINGS, WHICH ARE MORE ACCESSIBLE TO MYSTICS, DREAMERS, OR THOSE UNCONCERNED WITH WORLDLY SUCCESS. "Surely, a worthless hour of life, when measured by the usual standards of commercial value. Yet in what other kind of value can the preciousness of any hour, made precious by any standard, consist, if it consist not in feelings of excited significance like these, engendered in some one, by what the hour contains?

Yet so blind and dead does the clamor of our own practical interests make us to all other things, that it seems almost as if it were necessary to become worthless as a practical being, if one is to hope to attain to any breadth of insight into the impersonal world of worths as such, to have any perception of life’s meaning on a large objective scale. Only your mystic, your dreamer, or your insolvent tramp or loafer, can afford so sympathetic an occupation, an occupation which will change the usual standards of human value in the twinkling of an eye, giving to foolishness a place ahead of power, and laying low in a minute the distinctions which it takes a hard-working conventional man a lifetime to build up. You may be a prophet, at this rate; but you cannot be a worldly success. […]

Life is always worth living, if one have such responsive sensibilities. But we of the highly educated classes (so called) have most of us got far, far away from Nature. We are trained to seek the choice, the rare, the exquisite exclusively, and to overlook the common. We are stuffed with abstract conceptions, and glib with verbalities and verbosities; and in the culture of these higher functions the peculiar sources of joy connected with our simpler functions often dry up, and we grow stone-blind and insensible to life’s more elementary and general goods and joys."
(William James, Talks to Teachers on Psychology: And to Students on Some of Life’s Ideals, 1911)

E1.6.C.1.2.c.iii. WHEN WE ARE UNABLE TO BE PRESENT...
"Sunny cosmic afternoon
Sun color of the human eye
A carefree sunbeam detaches itself
then comes to linger
On the leprous wall of a house
on the tawny curtain
Behind, in the shade
A drab life of regrets
Gathers in the hollow of a dingy armchair
Ignoring all that shimmering
of earthly dust
Enchanted for a moment
by this miraculous encounter".
(François Cheng, Transcending the Void, 2004)

E1.6.C.1.2.d. THE VARIABLE AND INVARIANT COMPONENTS OF BEAUTY
Baudelaire holds a rational and historical theory of beauty that opposes the notion of beauty being unique and absolute. He perceives beauty as a blend of two elements: an eternal, unchanging component, and a relative, circumstantial component that fluctuates with time, fashion, morality, and passions.

E1.6.C.1.2.d_REF1_PH "BEAUTY, FASHION AND HAPPINESS [...]

The past is interesting not only by reason of the beauty which could be distilled from it by those artists for whom it was the present, but also precisely because it is the past, for its historical value. It is the same with the present. The pleasure which we derive from the representation of the present is due not only to the beauty with which it can be invested, but also to its essential quality of being present. [...]

This in fact an excellent opportunity to establish a rationl and historical theory of beauty, in contrast to the academic theory of an unique and absolute beauty; to show that beauty is always and inevitably of a double composition, although the impression that it produces is single-for the fact that it is difficult to discern the variable elements of beauty within the unity of the impression invalidates in no way the necessity of variety in its composition. Beauty is made up of an eternal, invariable element, whose quantity it is excessivly diffiult to determine, and of a relative circumstantial element, which will be, if you like, whether severally or all at once, the age, its fashions, its morals, its emotions. Without this second element, which might be described as the amusing, enticing, appetizing icing on the divine cake, the first 
element would be beyond out powers of digestion or appreciation, neither adapted nor suitable to human nature: I defy anyone to point to a single scrap of beauty which does not contain these two elements. [...]

The duality of art is a fatal consequence of the duality of man. Consider, if you will, the eternally subsisting portion as the soul of art, and the variable element as its body. That is why Stendhal-an impertinent, teasing, even a disagreeable critic, but one whose impertinences are often a useful spur to reflection-approached the truth more closely than many another when he said that 'Beauty is nothing else but a promise of happiness'. This definition doubtless overshoots the mark; it makes Beauty far too
subject to the infinitely variable ideal of Happiness; it strips Beauty too neatly of its aristocratic quality: but it has the great merit of making a decided break with the academic error. [...]"
(Charles Baudelaire, The Painter of Modern Life, 1863)

E1.6.C.1.3. A CONSOLATION FOR THE SERIOUS
For the more solemn characters, or those facing significant difficulties, beauty provides at least consolation, if not joy.

E1.6.C.1.3.a. CONSOLATION BY BECOMING AN OBSERVER RATHER THAN A PARTICIPANT IN ONE'S DESIRE
Even Schopenhauer, the renowned pessimist, acknowledges that beauty can provide comfort. He suggests that aesthetic experiences, particularly music, allow one to alleviate suffering by becoming an observer rather than a participant in one's desires.

E1.6.C.1.3.a_REF1_PH THAT THE DEEPEST THOUGHT IS ATTRACTED BY THE LIVELIEST LIFE, AND THAT THE WISE OFTEN END UP CLINGING TO BEAUTY. "This mischievous wisdom is that of the dancing Socrates who appears in Xenophon's Symposium, it is that of the joking and ironic Socrates who appears in Plato's dialogues, it is that of the philosopher in love with life of whom Hölderlin speaks in his poem Socrates and Alcibiades:

"Why, divine Socrates, do you pay such homage to this young man? 
"Do you know nothing greater? 
"Why do you look at him with love, as one looks at the gods? 
"The deepest thought loves the most vivid life. 
"It is only after one has pierced the world with one's gaze that one can understand noble youth. 
And the wise, very often, end up becoming attached to beauty."
(Pierre Hadot, In Praise of Socrates, 1974)

E1.6.C.1.3.a_REF1.1_PH WE EMPHASIZE THE HUMANITY AND NATURALNESS OF THE WISE, WHO, DESPITE THEIR PROFOUND THOUGHTS, APPRECIATE THE BEAUTY OF LIFE. "In Schopenhauer as an educator, this figure of Socrates in love with the most alive will come to cover that of Schopenhauer. Speaking of the joy of the wise man, he turns to Hölderlin's verses to describe it in these extraordinary lines: "Nothing more joyful or better can be granted to man than to approach one of those victors who, having devoted themselves to the deepest thoughts, love the most vivid reality all the more, and who, toward the end of their lives, are wise enough to be interested above all in beauty....
They truly live and move...which is why in their company we finally rediscover a sense of humanity and naturalness, and we want to exclaim with Goethe: How beautiful and delightful a living being is! How well adapted to its condition, how true, how existent!'" 
(Pierre Hadot, In Praise of Socrates, 1974)

E1.6.C.1.3.a_REF2_PH FOR SCHOPENHAUER, AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE AND MUSIC ALLEVIATE SUFFERING BY TRANSFORMING DESIRE INTO CONTEMPLATION.
For Schopenhauer, aesthetic experience allows me to stop being the actor of desire and to become the spectator of desire, and thus to stop suffering through contemplation. For Schopenhauer, aesthetic experience and music are relieving. For Rosset, joy is not a consolation. Music does not console, it allows joy to blossom without cause.
(Clément Rosset program:  : "It's very easy to live when you have no education at all" broadcast on France Culture on 05/31/2018)

Listen to the Podcast in French:
https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/a-voix-nue/clement-rosset-c-est-tres-simple-de-vivre-quand-on-n-est-pas-instruit-du-tout-4834987

E1.6.C.1.3.b. EXTRACTING BEAUTY FROM EVIL
For Baudelaire, beauty is the ultimate remedy for the evil of the fall. His aim is to "extract beauty from evil". Even in the aftermath of the fall, it's beauty that rescues humanity.

E1.6.C.1.3.b_REF1_PH BAUDELAIRE'S AIM IS TO EXTRACT BEAUTY FROM EVIL. "Baudelaire imagines a modern beauty which is no longer dependent on the absolute or on an ideal. There is no idea of ​​a beauty accessible to man as with the classics - this absolute beauty is that of God - it is a beauty to which Baudelaire is not insensitive, yet one can only long for with nostalgia for man is fallen and the beauty which one has access to is a corrupt beauty - an idea corroborated in the title of « The Flowers of Evil »: it is beauty that saves the fallen human.
There is no concept of the beautiful and therefore there is no connection between beauty, goodness and truth as with the classics. Beauty is the only way to heal the evil of the fall; Baudelaire´s project is « to extract beauty out of evil », as he writes in the preface to The Flowers of Evil.
In line with his position of the independence of beauty, art cannot be taught. « The beautiful is always bizarre, [...] it is its registration mark, its characteristic », because it is « stamped » by the fall - wounded, properly human, it can go as far as being monstrous and ugly - and also free of any rule, moving away from cultural lines.
Classic beauty, which is inaccessible to us, is that which is « anywhere out of this world », the one Baudelaire evokes when he praises the beauty of the clouds or of the sea which are portals to something else."
(André Guyaux in the program Les chemins de la philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 04/03/2019)

E1.6.C.1.3.b_REF1.1_PH “BEAUTY IS MADE UP OF AN ETERNAL, INVARIABLE ELEMENT, WHOSE QUANTITY IT IS EXCESSIVLY DIFFIULT TO DETERMINE, AND OF A RELATIVE CIRCUMSTANTIAL ELEMENT, which will be, if you like, whether severally or all at once, the age, its fashions, its morals, its emotions. Without this second element, which might be described as the amusing, enticing, appetizing icing on the divine cake, the first 
element would be beyond out powers of digestion or appreciation, neither adapted nor suitable to human nature: I defy anyone to point to a single scrap of beauty which does not contain these two elements.”
(Charles Baudelaire, The painter of modern life, 1863)

E1.6.C.1.3.b_REF2_PO "ABOVE THE LAKES, ABOVE THE VALES,
The mountains and the woods, the clouds, the seas,
Beyond the sun, beyond the ether,
Beyond the confines of the starry spheres,
My soul, you move with ease,
And like a strong swimmer in rapture in the wave
You wing your way blithely through boundless space
With virile joy unspeakable.
Fly far, far away from this baneful miasma
And purify yourself in the celestial air,
Drink the ethereal fire of those limpid regions
As you would the purest of heavenly nectars.
Beyond the vast sorrows and all the vexations
That weigh upon our lives and obscure our vision,
Happy is he who can with his vigorous wing
Soar up towards those fields luminous and serene,
He whose thoughts, like skylarks,
Toward the morning sky take flight
— Who hovers over life and understands with ease
The language of flowers and silent things!"
(Charles Baudelaire, The flowers of evil, Elévation, 1857)

E1.6.C.1.3.c. ACCORDING TO FREUD, BEAUTY OFFERS LITTLE PROTECTION
Freud believed that adopting an aesthetic approach to life provides minimal protection against potential suffering. However, it can still compensate for many things.

E1.6.C.1.3.c_REF1_TH FREUD EXPLORES HOW THE PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS THROUGH BEAUTY, WHETHER IN NATURE OR IN THE ARTS, OFFERS A SPECIAL KIND OF SATISFACTION BUT LITTLE PROTECTION FROM SUFFERING. "We may go on from here to consider the interesting case in which happiness in life is predominantly sought in the enjoyment of beauty, wherever beauty presents itself to our senses and our judgement—the beauty of human forms and gestures, of natural objects and landscapes and of artistic and even scientific
creations. This aesthetic attitude to the goal of life offers little protection against the threat of suffering, but it can compensate for a great deal. The enjoyment of
beauty has a peculiar, mildly intoxicating quality of feeling. Beauty has no obvious use; nor is there any clear cultural necessity for it. Yet civilization could not do without it. The science of aesthetics investigates the conditions under which things are felt as beautiful, but it has been unable to give any explanation of the nature and origin of beauty, and, as usually happens, lack of success is concealed beneath a flood of resounding and empty words. Psychoanalysis, unfortunately, has scarcely anything to say about beauty either."
(Sigmund Freud, Civilization and its Discontents, 1930)

E1.6.C.1.3.c_REF2_PO WRITING A POEM CAN BE A WAY OF FIXING WHAT GOES WRONG OR IS NOT WORKING IN LIFE"Original interview proposed by Catherine Fromilhague for the annual review Place de la Sorbonne, the 5th edition of which will be published in March 2015. Revised in June 2019.
Catherine Fromilhague proposed to Valérie Rouzeau a series of words that appear in her work and invited her to react to these words and comment on their use. Valérie Rouzeau played along. The result was the following text of a very special "interview" [...] POEM "Chain poems I'm making good progress I might forget everything in the end / If I better separate my syllables from my feeling in the void, if I keep up the hellish rhythm" Va οὐ 19 Writing a poem can be a way for me to repair (the "mechanic" can attest to this!) what goes wrong or doesn't work in life, or even to take revenge for the nastiness and other unpleasantness of existence. André Breton writes at the beginning of the first Surrealist manifesto that "poetry (...) contains the perfect compensation for the misery we endure". The poem you quote is about composing tirelessly in order to forget what weighs us down. It is both illusory and helpful... as is reading others, ancient and modern, as long as they sing to me.
(Valérie Rouzeau, Éphéméride, 2015)

E1.6.C.1.3.d. BEAUTY GIVES MEANING TO LIFE
For Viktor Frankl, meaning in life is not only derived from our actions but also from our ability to love and appreciate beauty, greatness, and goodness. Experiences with nature or human interactions can foster a similar effect. Our approaches to handling difficulties, how they influence our actions and capacity to love, and our acceptance of suffering under such constraints, reveal our character and how we can continue to uphold human values.

E1.6.C.1.3.d_REF1_PH VIKTOR FRANKL ARGUES THAT LIFE’S MEANING CAN BE FOUND NOT ONLY THROUGH ACTIONS BUT ALSO THROUGH LOVING DEDICATION TO BEAUTY, GREATNESS, AND GOODNESS. This sense of meaning can also arise from experiencing nature or connecting deeply with another person. Frankl concludes that how individuals handle limitations and suffering reveals their true character and capacity to fulfill human values.
"It is not only through our actions that we can give life meaning — insofar as we can answer life’s specific questions responsibly — we can fulfill the demands of existence not only as active agents but also as loving human beings: in our loving dedication to the beautiful, the great, the good. Should I perhaps try to explain for you with some hackneyed phrase how and why experiencing beauty can make life meaningful? I prefer to confine myself to the following thought experiment: imagine that you are sitting in a concert hall and listening to your favorite symphony, and your favorite bars of the symphony resound in your ears, and you are so moved by the music that it sends shivers down your spine; and now imagine that it would be possible (something that is psychologically so impossible) for someone to ask you in this moment whether your life has meaning. I believe you would agree with me if I declared that in this case you would only be able to give one answer, and it would go something like: “It would have been worth it to have lived for this moment alone!"
Those who experience, not the arts, but nature, may have a similar response, and also those who experience another human being. Do we not know the feeling that overtakes us when we are in the presence of a particular person and, roughly translates as, "The fact that this person exists in the world at all, this alone makes this world, and a life in it, meaningful." [...]
How human beings deal with the limitation of their possibilities regarding how it affects their actions and their ability to love, how they behave under these restrictions — the way in which they accept their suffering under such restrictions — in all of this they still remain capable of fulfilling human values.
So, how we deal with difficulties truly shows who we are."
(Viktor Frankl, Yes to Life: In Spite of Everything, 1946)

E1.6.C.1.3.e. BEAUTY HELPS US FACE THE GRUBBINESS OF SUFFERING
For Anne Lamott, beauty is meaning that helps us face the grubbiness of suffering, in order to come out  changed on the other side. The way to heal is to stand in the middle of the horror and wait out in contemplation. No matter what happens in life, it is still a gift to be human and to have a human life, be it wild, hard and sweet, or wild, hard and cruel.

E1.6.C.1.3.e_REF1_LIT TRUE HEALING COMES FROM STANDING WITH OTHERS IN THEIR PAIN AND RECOGNIZING THE INHERENT VALUE OF LIFE DESPITE ITS HARDSHIPS. Hope, beauty, and genuine friendships are central to navigating life's challenges and discovering a sense of "home" within ourselves.
"What I resist is not the truth but when people put a pretty bow on scary things instead of saying, “This is a nightmare. I hate everything. I’m going to go hide in the garage.” […]

My understanding of incarnation is that we are not served by getting away from the grubbiness of suffering. Sometimes we feel that we are barely pulling ourselves forward through a tight tunnel on badly scraped-up elbows. But we do come out the other side, exhausted and changed. […]

To heal, it seems we have to stand in the middle of the horror, at the foot of the cross, and wait out another’s suffering where that person can see us. [...]

No matter what happens to us — to our children, to our town, to our world — we feel it is still a gift to be human and to have a human life, as long as we ignore the commercials and advertisements and the static that the world beams at us, and understand that we and our children are going to get knocked around, sometimes so cruelly that it will take our breath away. Life can be wild, hard and sweet, but it can also be wild, hard and cruel.

The bad news is that after the suffering, we wait at the empty tomb for a while, the body of our beloved gone, grieving an unsurvivable loss.

It’s a terrible system. But the good news is that then there is new life. Wildflowers bloom again… They’re both such surprises. Wildflowers stop you in your hiking tracks. You want to savor the colors and scents, let them breathe you in, let yourself be amazed. And bulbs that grow in the cold rocky dirt remind us that no one is lost. [...]

A great truth, attributed to Emily Dickinson, is that “hope inspires the good to reveal itself.” This is almost all I ever need to remember. Gravity and sadness yank us down, and hope gives us a nudge to help one another get back up or to sit with the fallen on the ground, in the abyss, in solidarity. [...]

When you love something like reading — or drawing or music or nature — it surrounds you with a sense of connection to something great. If you are lucky enough to know this, then your search for meaning involves whatever that Something is. It’s an alchemical blend of affinity and focus that takes us to a place within that feels as close as we ever get to “home.” It’s like pulling into our own train station after a long trip — joy, relief, a pleasant exhaustion.

If a writer or artist creates from a place of truth and spirit and generosity, then I may be able to enter and ride this person’s train back to my own station. It’s the same with beautiful music and art.

Beauty is meaning. [...]

What saved me was that I found gentle, loyal and hilarious companions, which is at the heart of meaning: maybe we don’t find a lot of answers to life’s tougher questions, but if we find a few true friends, that’s even better. They help you see who you truly are, which is not always the loveliest possible version of yourself, but then comes the greatest miracle of all — they still love you."
(Anne Lamott, Stitches: A Handbook on Meaning, Hope and Repair)

E1.6.C.1.3.e_REF2_PO "THE PEACE OF WILD THINGS

When despair for the world grows in me
and I wake in the night at the least sound
in fear of what my life and my children’s lives may be,
I go and lie down where the wood drake
rests in his beauty on the water, and the great heron feeds.
I come into the peace of wild things
who do not tax their lives with forethought
of grief. I come into the presence of still water.
And I feel above me the day-blind stars
waiting with their light. For a time
I rest in the grace of the world, and am free."
(Wendell Berry)

E1.6.C.1.3.e_REF3_PO "MORNING POEM

Every morning 
the world 
is created. 
Under the orange

sticks of the sun 
the heaped 
ashes of the night 
turn into leaves again

and fasten themselves to the high branches 
and the ponds appear 
like black cloth 
on which are painted islands

of summer lilies. 
If it is your nature 
to be happy 
you will swim away along the soft trails

for hours, your imagination 
alighting everywhere. 
And if your spirit 
carries within it

the thorn 
that is heavier than lead - 
if it's all you can do 
to keep on trudging -

there is still 
somewhere deep within you 
a beast shouting that the earth 
is exactly what it wanted -

each pond with its blazing lilies 
is a prayer heard and answered 
lavishly, 
every morning,

whether or not 
you have ever dared to be happy, 
whether or not 
you have ever dared to pray."
(Mary Oliver, Dream work, 1986)

E1.6.C.1.3.e_REF4_PO "THE POET WITH HIS FACE IN HIS HANDS

You want to cry aloud for your 
mistakes. But to tell the truth the world 
doesn't need any more of that sound.

So if you're going to do it and can't 
stop yourself, if your pretty mouth can't 
hold it in, at least go by yourself across

the forty fields and the forty dark inclines 
of rocks and water to the place where
 the falls are flinging out their white sheets

like crazy, and there is a cave behind all that 
jubilation and water-fun and you can 
stand there, under it, and roar all you

want and nothing will be disturbed; you can 
drip with despair all afternoon and still, 
on a green branch, its wings just lightly touched

by the passing foil of the water, the thrush, 
puffing out its spotted breast, will sing 
of the perfect, stone-hard beauty of everything."
(Mary Oliver, New and selected poems: Volume two, 2005)

E1.6.C.1.3.e_REF5_PO 'THAT TIME
I THOUGHT I COULD NOT
go any closer to grief
without dying

I went closer,
and I did not die.
Surely God
had his hand in this,

as well as friends.


Still, I was bent,
and my laughter,
as the poet said,

was nowhere to be found.
Then said my friend Daniel,
(brave even among lions),
“It’s not the weight you carry

but how you carry it–
books, bricks, grief–
it’s all in the way
you embrace it, balance it, carry it

when you cannot, and would not,
put it down.”


So I went practicing.
Have you noticed?

Have you heard
the laughter
that comes, now and again,
out of my startled mouth?

How I linger
to admire, admire, admire
the things of this world
that are kind, and maybe

also troubled –
roses in the wind,
the sea geese on the steep waves,
a love
to which there is no reply?'
(Mary Oliver)

E1.6.C.1.4. RESTORING HUMANS TO THEIR RIGHTFUL PLACE WITHIN “NATURE”
"The real disconnect is not between our human nature and all the other beings; it is between our image of our nature and our real nature"

E1.6.C.1.4_REF1_PH RECOGNIZING ORGANISMS AS SENTIENT SYSTEMS IS CRUCIAL FOR UNDERSTANDING LIFE'S MYSTERIES. "Organisms are not clocks assembled from discrete, mechanical pieces; rather, they are unities held together by a mighty force: feeling what is good or bad for them. Biology… is discovering how the individual experiencing self is connected with all life and how this meaningful self must be seen as the basic principle of organic existence… Feeling and experience are not human add-ons to an otherwise meaningless biosphere. Rather, selves, meaning and imagination are the guiding principles of ecological functioning. The biosphere is made up of subjects with their idiosyncratic points of view and emotions. Scientists have started to recognize that only when they understand organisms as feeling, emotional, sentient systems that interpret their environments — and not as automatons slavishly obeying stimuli — can they ever expect answers to the great enigmas of life."
(Andreas Weber, The Biology of Wonder: Aliveness, Feeling and the Metamorphosis of Science, 2016)

E1.6.C.1.4_REF1.1_PH POETIC ECOLOGY REPOSITIONS HUMANS WITHIN NATURE, EMPHASIZING THE LEGITIMACY OF OUR DEEP CONNECTION AND WONDER TOWARDS IT. It highlights that our emotions and mental concepts are deeply rooted in nature. "Poetic ecology restores the human to its rightful place within “nature” — without sacrificing the otherness, the strangeness and the nobility of other beings. It can be read as a scientific argument that explains why the deep wonder, the romantic connection and the feeling of being at home in nature are legitimate — and how these experiences help us to develop a new view of life as a creative reality that is based on our profound, first-person observations of ecological relations. Poetic ecology allows us to find our place in the grand whole again. [...]

This understanding provides us with a home in the wilderness again, in the creative natura naturans, that so many people are longing for in their private lives, that they create in their gardens, that they visit during hikes in the wilderness and that they seek to protect. [...]

Nature… is the living medium of our emotions and our mental concepts. […]

All our qualities — and particularly the most human ones like our need to be in connection, to be perceived as an individual, to be welcomed by other life and give life, in short, our need to love — spring forth from an organic “soil.” We are part of a web of meaningful inter-penetrations of being that are corporeal and psychologically real at the same time. Humans can only fully comprehend their own inwardness if they understand their existence as cultural beings who are existentially tied to the symbolic processes active inside nature. [...]

The conceptual framework that we have invented to understand organisms is the deeper reason for our environmental catastrophe. We are extinguishing life because we have blinded ourselves to its actual character… The real disconnect is not between our human nature and all the other beings; it is between our image of our nature and our real nature."
(Andreas Weber, The Biology of Wonder: Aliveness, Feeling and the Metamorphosis of Science, 2016)

E1.6.C.1.4_REF1.1.a_PH NATURE'S RESILIENCE AND ABILITY TO REGENERATE AFTER CATASTROPHES SYMBOLIZE HOPE AND RENEWAL FOR HUMANITY. "Perhaps the most important psychological role that other beings play is to help us reconcile ourselves with our pain, our inevitable separation as individuals from the remainder of the web of life and our ephemeral existences. The primal feature of nature is that it always rises again, bringing forth new life. Even the most devastating catastrophe gives way over time to green shoots of rebirth and productivity and therefore to hope for ourselves."
(Andreas Weber, The Biology of Wonder: Aliveness, Feeling and the Metamorphosis of Science, 2016)

E1.6.C.1.4_REF2_LIT OUR MOMENT OF AWE AND REALIZATION UNDERSCORE THE DEEP INTERCONNECTION OF ALL LIFE ACROSS TIME. "The time has to be right; one has to be, by chance or intention, upon the border of two worlds. And sometimes these two borders may shift or interpenetrate and one sees the miraculous. [...]

It was a late hour on a cold, wind-bitten autumn day when I climbed a great hill spined like a dinosaur’s back and tried to take my bearings. The tumbled waste fell away in waves in all directions. Blue air was darkening into purple along the bases of the hills. I shifted my knapsack, heavy with the petrified bones of long-vanished creatures, and studied my compass. I wanted to be out of there by nightfall, and already the sun was going sullenly down in the west.

It was then that I saw the flight coming on. It was moving like a little close-knit body of black specks that danced and darted and closed again. It was pouring from the north and heading toward me with the undeviating relentlessness of a compass needle. It streamed through the shadows rising out of monstrous gorges. It rushed over towering pinnacles in the red light of the sun or momentarily sank from sight within their shade. Across that desert of eroding clay and wind-worn stone they came with a faint wild twittering that filled all the air about me as those tiny living bullets hurtled past into the night. [...]

It may not strike you as a marvel. It would not, perhaps, unless you stood in the middle of a dead world at sunset, but that was where I stood. Fifty million years lay under my feet, fifty million years of bellowing monsters moving in a green world now gone so utterly that its very light was traveling on the farther edge of space. The chemicals of all that vanished age lay about me in the ground. Around me still lay the shearing molars of dead titanotheres, the delicate sabers of soft-stepping cats, the hollow sockets that had held the eyes of many a strange, outmoded beast. Those eyes had looked out upon a world as real as ours; dark, savage brains had roamed and roared their challenges into the steaming night.

Now they were still here, or, put it as you will, the chemicals that made them were here about me in the ground. The carbon that had driven them ran blackly in the eroding stone. The stain of iron was in the clays. The iron did not remember the blood it had once moved within, the phosphorus had forgot the savage brain. The little individual moment had ebbed from all those strange combinations of chemicals as it would ebb from our living bodies into the sinks and runnels of oncoming time. [...]

I had lifted up a fistful of that ground. I held it while that wild flight of south-bound warblers hurtled over me into the oncoming dark. There went phosphorus, there went iron, there went carbon, there beat the calcium in those hurrying wings. Alone on a dead planet I watched that incredible miracle speeding past. It ran by some true compass over field and waste land. It cried its individual ecstasies into the air until the gullies rang. It swerved like a single body, it knew itself, and, lonely, it bunched close in the racing darkness, its individual entities feeling about them the rising night. And so, crying to each other their identity, they passed away out of my view.

I dropped my fistful of earth. I heard it roll inanimate back into the gully at the base of the hill: iron, carbon, the chemicals of life. Like men from those wild tribes who had haunted these hills before me seeking visions, I made my sign to the great darkness. It was not a mocking sign, and I was not mocked. As I walked into my camp late that night, one man, rousing from his blankets beside the fire, asked sleepily, “What did you see?”

“I think, a miracle,” I said softly, but I said it to myself. Behind me that vast waste began to glow under the rising moon."
(Loren Eiseley, The Judgment of the Birds published in The Star Thrower, 1957)

E1.6.C.1.5. HOW TO ENTERTAIN WONDER IN AN URBAN ENVIRONMENT?
It is not at all easy to see how this contact with natural beauty can be preserved in our large urban areas. We forget that nature itself is a vast miracle transcending the reality of night and nothingness. We forget that each of us, in our personal lives, repeats this miracle. The contemporary values that have taken over devalue  wonder. 

E1.6.C.1.5.a. HOW TO NURTURE WONDER IN AN URBAN ENVIRONMENT THAT DISCONNECTS US FROM THE WORLD OF PLANTS AND ANIMALS?
Preserving contact with natural beauty in our vast urban areas, especially as we increasingly forget our part of the animal world, is challenging. We often overlook that nature itself is a vast wonder, transcending the reality of night and nothingness. We forget that each one of us, in our personal lives, repeats this miracle.

E1.6.C.1.5.a_REF1_PH "WHAT IS SACRED FOR US (NATURE, ART, MUSIC) IS WHAT GIVES ITS PRESENCE AND ITS DENSITY TO OUR LIFE. The sacred is indeed in the daily reality of our lives, but outside of ourselves where we often close ourselves in. To be able to connect the sacred outside of ourselves is to give back its presence to the moment.
“We forget that nature itself is one vast miracle transcending the reality of night and nothingness. We forget that each one of us in his personal life repeats that miracle.”
(Loren Eiseley)

E1.6.C.1.5.a_REF2_PH "WHAT MAKES NERVOUS FATIGUE SO DANGEROUS IS THAT IT ACTS AS A KIND OF SCREEN BETWEEN MAN AND THE OUTSIDE WORLD. [...] All of this is basically a punishment for having lost this contact with the Earth [...]. But it is not at all easy to see how this contact can be preserved in our large urban agglomerations. "
(Bertrand Russell, The conquest of happiness, 1962)

E1.6.C.1.5.a_REF2.1_PO "I FELT MY LUNGS INFLATE WITH THE ONRUSH OF SCENERY — AIR, MOUNTAINS, TREES, PEOPLE. I THOUGHT, "THIS IS WHAT IT IS TO BE HAPPY.”
(Sylvia Plath)

E1.6.C.1.5.a_REF2.2_PH "FEELING IN THE COUNTRY. If one does not have stable, calm lines on the horizon of his life, like lines of mountaintops or trees, then man’s innermost will itself becomes restless, distracted, and covetous, like the city dweller’s character: he knows no happiness, and gives none."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, all too human, Aphorism 290, 1878)

E1.6.C.1.5.a_REF2.3_CUR "EDWARD HOPPER, PAINTING TIME GOING BY - NOSTALGIA FOR NATURE Hopper is an heir to Ralph Waldo Emerson and Thoreau in terms of resisting the consumerism that distances us from nature, but also in terms of valorizing everyday American life and its landscapes. A nostalgia for nature is evident in most of his work:
Blackwell's Island, 1928 &amp; Apartment Houses, East River, c. 1930 (the factories and buildings that form a barrier on the horizon) Room in Brooklyn, 1932 (the bouquet of flowers as a souvenir of a view of nature) People in the Sun, 1963 (admiring the horizon from a concrete platform) Sometimes he goes as far as a pure celebration of nature without nostalgia - but only in marine visions, as if the ocean were the last frontier.
(Didier Ottinger on the program Les chemins de la philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 20/12/2018)

Listen to the Podcast in French:
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/lattente-44-edward-hopper-peindre-le-temps-qui-setire

E1.6.C.1.5.a_REF3_PH "“YOU ONLY HAVE TO LET THE SOFT ANIMAL OF YOUR BODY LOVE WHAT IT LOVES,” Mary Oliver wrote in one of her finest poems. And yet in an age when we have come to see ourselves as disembodied intellects channeled by machines, we seem to have forgotten that there is a soft animal of the body, that it purrs with agency in every aspect of our lived experience, from hunger to love; we seem to have forgotten that our intelligence is not the crowning curio of nature but just one particular accoutrement of one particular animal, while all about us are creatures “aflame with shades of brilliance we cannot fathom… far more vibrant, far more holy, than we could ever imagine.”

In How to Be Animal: A New History of What It Means to Be Human (public library), poet turned environmental historian and philosopher of science Melanie Challenger traces our slow self-alienation from our own nature and invites an urgent recalibration of the organizing principles by which we perceive, respond to, and reverence the world."
(Maria Popova's review of Melanie Challenger's How to Be Animal: A New History of What It Means to Be Human, 2021 - in The Marginalian)

E1.6.C.1.5.a_REF3.1_PH HUMANS, DESPITE THEIR SELF-PERCEIVED UNIQUENESS, ARE FUNDAMENTALLY ANIMALS GOVERNED BY THE SAME NATURAL LAWS AS OTHER ORGANISMS. Historical and scientific revelations have led to a continuous search for ways to maintain a sense of human distinction.
"We live behind a hidden membrane through which — at any moment — one of us may tumble to find ourselves on the other side. Opening our eyes, we face the truth of what we are, a thinking and feeling colony of energy and matter wrapped in precious flesh that prickles when it’s cold or in love. We are a creature of organic substance and electricity that can be eaten, injured and dissipated back into the enigmatic physics of the universe. The truth is that being human is being animal. This is a difficult thing to admit if we are raised on a belief in our distinction. [...]
History shows us that knowledge doesn’t necessarily lead to enlightenment but only to the search for a different source of light. Each scientific or intellectual threat to our singular status has been followed by a fracturing of existing beliefs and renewed efforts to ground the basis of our separation from the rest of life. One solution was to redirect the emphasis on to becoming human. Solace could be found in the possibility that, as Thomas Huxley put it, we may be “from them” but we are not “of them.” This has been repeated in different forms ever since. It’s common to hear that while science tells us that we are animals subject to the same laws as other organisms, humans are “uniquely unique.” In this way, scientists swallow Darwinism but remain immune to its effects."
(Melanie Challenger, How to Be Animal: A New History of What It Means to Be Human, 2021)

E1.6.C.1.5.a_REF3.1.a_PH HUMAN CONSCIOUSNESS AND SENSE OF SELF ARE DEEPLY ROOTED IN OUR PHYSICAL BODIES AND OUR DENIAL OF BEING ANIMALS LEADS TO PSYCHOLOGICAL AND EXISTENTIAL CONFLICTS. This myth of superiority fosters a disconnection from nature, resulting in a misguided sense of freedom and a reliance on falsehoods.
"If we no longer see into the lives of other animals, it’s not because they don’t have minds or we can’t. It’s because we don’t want to. Yet now we’re told that everything should make way for humankind’s greatest invention: artificial intelligence. This is a far more dangerous delusion than anything dreamed up in a church. In this cult of freedom, nothing much is said of the consequences for the eight million or so species that live alongside us. Little is said for the passing of all the intelligence found in flesh and bone, feather and fang. [...]
It’s only when we forget that our conscious experience is a feature of our bodies that we stumble when we see it at work… That our subjective consciousness is a physical phenomenon that can be interrupted by everything from diet and disease to depression only reaffirms that we are an animal… Our sense of self is a purposeful extension of the needs of our bodies… Consciousness is just a convenient word that stands for a global function that emerges from but extends beyond our immediate anatomy. The person we build our lives around is a consequence of the body, a detonation of senses and interpretations, the meaningful content of the central nervous system. [...]
As we became self-conscious, our personal view floodlit what can be a danger to our bodies and laid bare the inescapable danger of death. We’ve become the conundrum of an animal that doesn’t want an animal’s body. What was survival has re-emerged, by a long, curious path, as psychological imperative. Other animals don’t have to justify themselves to themselves. But humans seek what might give their lives a meaning that no other animal possesses. If we don’t belong to the rest of nature, its dangers can’t reach us.

But rather than reassure us, this strategy has left us reliant on a falsehood. The myth of human exceptionalism is as unsettling as it is irrational. The idea of our superiority runs with mercenary and sometimes aggressive features of our psychology. Being animal is a kind of syndrome for us, a peculiar combination of symptoms, emotions and opinions. It’s something we deny, manipulate as a weapon and seek to escape. At other times, being animal is given as a reason for our actions and, as often, the excuse for them. And so our lives are spent quietly haunted by the truth of a connection to nature we can barely admit."
(Melanie Challenger, How to Be Animal: A New History of What It Means to Be Human, 2021)

E1.6.C.1.5.a_REF3.2_PH "WILD GEESE

You do not have to be good.
You do not have to walk on your knees
For a hundred miles through the desert, repenting.
You only have to let the soft animal of your body
love what it loves.
Tell me about despair, yours, and I will tell you mine.
Meanwhile the world goes on.
Meanwhile the sun and the clear pebbles of the rain
are moving across the landscapes,
over the prairies and the deep trees,
the mountains and the rivers.
Meanwhile the wild geese, high in the clean blue air,
are heading home again.
Whoever you are, no matter how lonely,
the world offers itself to your imagination,
calls to you like the wild geese, harsh and exciting —
over and over announcing your place
in the family of things."
(Mary Oliver, Dream work, 1986)

E1.6.C.1.5.a_REF4_PH COUNTRY LIFE OFFERS A POWERFUL MIND ADVANTAGES OVER CITY LIFE, AS NATURE'S INFLUENCE NOURISHES AND SHAPES ONE'S SENSES AND THOUGHTS. "These facts may suggest the advantage which the country-life possesses, for a powerful mind, over the artificial and curtailed life of cities. We know more from nature than we can at will communicate. Its light flows into the mind evermore, and we forget its presence. The poet, the orator, bred in the woods, whose senses have been nourished by their fair and appeasing changes, year after year, without design and without heed-shall not lose their lesson altogether, in the roar of cities or the broil of politics. Long hereafter, amidst agitation and terror in national councils -in the hour of revolution-these solemn images shall reappear in their morning lustre, as fit symbols and words of the thoughts which the passing events shall awaken. At the call of a noble sentiment, again the woods wave, the pines murmur, the river rolls and shines, and the cattle low upon the mountains, as he saw and heard them in his infancy. And with these forms, the spells of persuasion, the keys of power are put into his hands."
(Ralph Waldo emerson, Nature, 1836)

E1.6.C.1.5.a_REF5_PH “THE RAIN I AM IN IS NOT LIKE THE RAIN OF CITIES. It fills the wood with an immense and confused sound. It covers the flat roof of the cabin and its porch with insistent and controlled rhythms. And I listen, because it reminds me again and again that the whole world runs by rhythms I have not yet learned to recognize, rhythms that are not those of the engineer.

I came up here from the monastery last night, sloshing through the cornfield, said Vespers, and put some oatmeal on the Coleman stove for supper. It boiled over while I was listening to the rain and toasting a piece of bread at the log fire. The night became very dark. The rain surrounded the whole cabin with its enormous virginal myth, a whole world of meaning, of secrecy, of silence, of rumor. Think of it: all that speech pouring down, selling nothing, judging nobody, drenching the thick mulch of dead leaves, soaking the trees, filling the gullies and crannies of the wood with water, washing out the places where men have stripped the hillside! What a thing it is to sit absolutely alone, in the forest, at night, cherished by this wonderful, unintelligible, perfectly innocent speech, the most comforting speech in the world, the talk that rain makes by itself all over the ridges, and the talk of the watercourses everywhere in the hollows!

Nobody started it, nobody is going to stop it. It will talk as long as it wants, this rain. As long as it talks I am going to listen.”
(Thomas Merton)

E1.6.C.1.5.a_REF6_PO “FROM MY VILLAGE I SEE AS MUCH OF THE UNIVERSE AS CAN BE SEEN 
     from the earth,
And so my village is as large as any town,
For I am the size of what I see
And not the size of my height...
In the cities life is smaller
Than here in my house on top of this hill.
The big buildings of cities lock up the view,
They hide the horizon, pulling our gaze far away from the 
     open sky.
They make us small, for they take away all the vastness our 
     eyes can see,
And they make us poor, for our only wealth is seeing.”
(Fernando Pessoa, A Little Larger Than the Entire Universe Selected Poems)

E1.6.C.1.5.a_REF7_LIT RICHARD JEFFERIES RECOUNTS A LIFELONG SPIRITUAL PRACTICE IN WHICH HE SEEKS OUT SOLITARY MOMENTS IN NATURE, WHERE THE INTENSE, SENSUOUS ENJOYMENT OF BEAUTY CONSISTENTLY AWAKENS IN HIM THE SAME PROFOUND PRAYER TO INTERNALIZE ITS ESSENCE AND ACHIEVE A GREATER PERFECTION OF HIS OWN SOUL AND BODY.
“I looked at the hills, at the dewy grass, and then up through the elm
branches to the sky. In a moment all that was behind me, the house, the
people, the sounds, seemed to disappear, and to leave me alone.
Involuntarily I drew a long breath, then I breathed slowly. My thought,
or inner consciousness, went up through the illumined sky, and I was
lost in a moment of exaltation. This only lasted a very short time,
perhaps only part of a second, and while it lasted there was no
formulated wish. I was absorbed; I drank the beauty of the morning; I
was exalted. When it ceased I did wish for some increase or enlargement
of my existence to correspond with the largeness of feeling I had
momentarily enjoyed. Sometimes the wind came through the tops of the
elms, and the slender boughs bent, and gazing up through them, and
beyond the fleecy clouds, I felt lifted up. The light coming across the
grass and leaving itself on the dew-drops, the sound of the wind, and
the sense of mounting to the lofty heaven, filled me with a deep sigh,
a wish to draw something out of the beauty of it, some part of that
which caused my admiration, the subtle inner essence.

Sometimes the green tips of the highest boughs seemed gilded, the light
laid a gold on the green. Or the trees bowed to a stormy wind roaring
through them, the grass threw itself down, and in the east broad
curtains of a rosy tint stretched along. The light was turned to
redness in the vapour, and rain hid the summit of the hill. In the rush
and roar of the stormy wind the same exaltation, the same desire,
lifted me for a moment. I went there every morning, I could not exactly
define why; it was like going to a rose bush to taste the scent of the
flower and feel the dew from its petals on the lips. But I desired the
beauty—the inner subtle meaning—to be in me, that I might have it, and
with it an existence of a higher kind.

Later on I began to have daily pilgrimages to think these things. There
was a feeling that I must go somewhere, and be alone. It was a
necessity to have a few minutes of this separate life every day; my
mind required to live its own life apart from other things. A great oak
at a short distance was one resort, and sitting on the grass at the
roots, or leaning against the trunk and looking over the quiet meadows
towards the bright southern sky, I could live my own life a little
while. Behind the trunk I was alone; I liked to lean against it; to
touch the lichen on the rough bark. High in the wood of branches the
birds were not alarmed; they sang, or called, and passed to and fro
happily. The wind moved the leaves, and they replied to it softly; and
now at this distance of time I can see the fragments of sky up through
the boughs. Bees were always humming in the green field; ring-doves
went over swiftly, flying for the woods.

Of the sun I was conscious; I could not look at it, but the boughs held
back the beams so that I could feel the sun’s presence pleasantly. They
shaded the sun, yet let me know that it was there. There came to me a
delicate, but at the same time a deep, strong, and sensuous enjoyment
of the beautiful green earth, the beautiful sky and sun; I felt them,
they gave me inexpressible delight, as if they embraced and poured out
their love upon me. It was I who loved them, for my heart was broader
than the earth; it is broader now than even then, more thirsty and
desirous. After the sensuous enjoyment always came the thought, the
desire: That I might be like this; that I might have the inner meaning
of the sun, the light, the earth, the trees and grass, translated into
some growth of excellence in myself, both of body and of mind; greater
perfection of physique, greater perfection of mind and soul; that I
might be higher in myself. To this oak I came daily for a long time;
sometimes only for a minute, for just to view the spot was enough. In
the bitter cold of spring, when the north wind blackened everything, I
used to come now and then at night to look from under the bare branches
at the splendour of the southern sky. The stars burned with brilliance,
broad Orion and flashing Sirius—there are more or brighter
constellations visible then than all the year: and the clearness of the
air and the blackness of the sky—black, not clouded—let them gleam in
their fulness. They lifted me—they gave me fresh vigour of soul. Not
all that the stars could have given, had they been destinies, could
have satiated me. This, all this, and more, I wanted in myself.

There was a place a mile or so along the road where the hills could be
seen much better; I went there frequently to think the same thought.
Another spot was by an elm, a very short walk, where openings in the
trees, and the slope of the ground, brought the hills well into view.
This too, was a favourite thinking-place. Another was a wood, half an
hour’s walk distant, through part of which a rude track went, so that
it was not altogether inclosed. The ash-saplings, and the trees, the
firs, the hazel bushes—to be among these enabled me to be myself. From
the buds of spring to the berries of autumn, I always liked to be
there. Sometimes in spring there was a sheen of blue-bells covering
acres; the doves cooed; the blackbirds whistled sweetly; there was a
taste of green things in the air. But it was the tall firs that pleased
me most; the glance rose up the flame-shaped fir-tree, tapering to its
green tip, and above was the azure sky. By aid of the tree I felt the
sky more. By aid of everything beautiful I felt myself, and in that
intense sense of consciousness prayed for greater perfection of soul
and body. […]
A time came when, having to live in a town, these pilgrimages had to be
suspended. The wearisome work on which I was engaged would not permit
of them. But I used to look now and then, from a window, in the evening
at a birch-tree at some distance; its graceful boughs drooped across
the glow of the sunset. The thought was not suspended; it lived in me
always. A bitterer time still came when it was necessary to be
separated from those I loved. There is little indeed in the more
immediate suburbs of London to gratify the sense of the beautiful. Yet
there was a cedar by which I used to walk up and down, and think the
same thoughts as under the great oak in the solitude of the sunlit
meadows. In the course of slow time happier circumstances brought us
together again, and, though near London, at a spot where there was easy
access to meadows and woods. Hills that purify those who walk on them
there were not. Still I thought my old thoughts.”
(Richard Jefferies, The Story of My Heart - An Autobiography, 1883)

E1.6.C.1.5.b. EMBRACING BEAUTY AND WONDER IN THE MODERN AGE
Contemporary values often undermine the importance of wonder. It's incorrect to believe that our emotions are less significant than our rational awareness. Allowing beauty to deeply impact us enables us to experience the joy of being alive. It encourages us to embrace the vibrancy of life and celebrate it.

THIS LIFE I HAVE MADE IS TOO SMALL
“I realise I am groping […] towards something I do not yet know, but which I know I need. It is a little like an unused instinct, the call of the wild felt in a domesticated animal like me. Perhaps I am struggling to assimilate all the changes that have patterned this earth over the last decade, but it strikes me forcibly that I am living in only one dimension. It’s not just a matter of being confined to home. It’s more than that, a whole existence that’s constrained and over-reasoned, full of fear. This life I have made is too small. It doesn’t allow enough in: enough ideas, enough beliefs, enough encounters with the exuberant magic of existence. I have been so keen to deny it, to veer deliberately towards the rational, to cling solely to the experiences that are directly observable by others. Only now, when everything is taken away, can I see what a folly this is.
I don’t want that life anymore. I want what Julian Jaynes’s ancients had: to be able to talk to god. Not in a personal sense, to a distant figure who is unfathomably wise, but to have a direct encounter with the flow of things, a communication without words. I want to let something break in me, some dam that has been shoring up this shamefully atavistic sense of the magic behind all things, the tingle of intelligence that was always waiting for me when I came to tap in. I want to feel that raw, elemental awe that my ancestors felt, rather than my tame, explained modern version. I want to prise open the confines of my skull and let in a flood of light and air and mystery. I want this time of change to change me. I want to absorb its might, its giant waves travelling around the planet. I want to retain what the quiet reveals, the small voices whose whispers can be heard only when everything falls silent.
We are a forgetful species, obsessed with the endless succession of tasks that hover over our days, and negligent of the grand celestial drama unfolding around us. And here I am, remembering.”
(Katherine May, Enchantment, 2023)

E1.6.C.1.5.b.i. PROVIDE ACCESS TO BEAUTY!
Society should strive to offer better access to beauty for individuals dprived of it due to the hardships of their lives. They often yearn for beauty and, in their desperation, make naive and hasty attempts to beautify their lives. The kitsch of a garden gnome, for instance, represents a step toward beauty and gentleness.

E1.6.C.1.5.b.i_REF1_PH ALAIN DE BOTTON EXPLORES THE IMPORTANCE OF BEAUTY IN ARCHITECTURE, ARGUING THAT BEAUTIFUL BUILDINGS REFLECT VALUES WE CHERISH IN LIFE AND CAN INSPIRE US MORALLY. He also addresses the societal divide over aestheticism, noting that while excessive love of beauty can be problematic, access to beauty should be improved for those deprived of it.
"How important is beauty in architecture? Is a concern with beauty mere aestheticism? Alain de Botton, author of The Architecture of Happiness discusses these and related questions.
When we find a building beautiful we tend to associate to it qualities we find are good in other parts of life. Can good art make us into good people? Works of art have a moral in the sense they bring suggestion about how we should behave. Modernist architects such as Le Corbusier argued that the form should follow the function - but the function of a building, although it encompasses sheltering, also includes "speaking" (from Ruskin) to us and reminding us of the values that are important to us - inspiring us. We do not entertain this expectation about completely functional objects. Alain de Botton thinks Le Corbusier thought machins were beautiful and inspiring but it did not fit the agenda of the epoch to recognize this; so he appealed to science as the most prestigious force in society to justify his work. You find the same emphasis in today's ecological architecture. Recognizing that the key feature in architecture is beauty it invites aesthesism as a principle for living where many of us think aesthesism isn't the right way to live, foregrounding beauty before ethical issues. This debate fuelled the divide between catholics and protestants who worshiped God in a bear room. In a wealthy civilisation we can have both aspects of life.
Of course when the love of beauty gets out of hand things go wrong, as Oscar Wilde showed us and in contrast as Nietzsche perhaps failed to recognize. Society should care to give better access to beauty to people who are deprived of it because of the hardship of there lives. These people are often desperate for beauty and encounter often naive and impatient steps to try to aesthecize their lives: the kitsch of the garden gnome is a step towards beauty and sweetness.
The role of the critics is to legitimize certain sensibilities (such as authorizing the quest for beauty)."
(Alain de Botton on The Aesthetics of Architecture in Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: http://philosophybites.com/2007/06/alain-de-botton.html

E1.6.C.1.5.b.i_REF2_CUR "PAVILION is inspired by Monika Sosnowska's research into a 1960's housing estate in Lublin, Poland, which included residential buildings, gardens, retail spaces and a cultural centre.
Sosnowska's sculpture echoes the metal latticework of the original shopping pavilion, but it is distorted and collapsed into a functionless architectural fragment. The estate was designed by Oskar and Zofia Hansen according to 'Open Form' theory, which aimed to encourage individuals to participate actively in creating their own environment. Pavilion reflects both the failure of these ideals, and the destruction of post-communist Poland's unwanted modernist  buildings."
(Curatorship: Tate Modern, London)

E1.6.C.1.5.b.i_REF3_CUR THIS CITY IS A CORE THAT SEEMS TO FLOAT, ISOLATED FROM THE REST OF THE WORLD - a man-made island in which we are cut off from nature?

E1.6.C.1.5.b.i_REF4_CUR WILL THE LANDSCAPES THAT WE ARE GIVEN TO LOOK AT SOON BE NOTHING MORE THAN URBAN LANDSCAPES?

E1.6.C.1.5.b.ii. EVERYONE ON EARTH HAS EXPERIENCED A SENSE OF COMMUNION WITH NATURE.
"But why for heaven's sake do we revere everything except this feeling? Why do we give high importance to politics, religion, philosophy, ambition, business, pleasure, and give this magical feeling no importance at all?"

E1.6.C.1.5.b.ii_REF1_LIT JOHN COWPER POWYS, THINKING ABOUT HOW TO CAPTURE AND EXPRESS THE SUBTLE AND EPHEMERIC FEELINGS HE EXPERIENCES IN CONNECTION WITH DAILY AND COMMON EXPERIENCES, criticizes society for giving more importance to areas such as politics and religion than to these magical feelings.
« How can I catch that stir, that rustle, that indrawn sigh, that indescribable silence which emanates from the passing of my voyaging soul over all these little, casual chance-groupings of the Inanimate? How can I find the right expression for the feelings that came to me in those days when the wind blew in a certain way as I followed
some muddy grass-track along the edge of the Ely Road or the London Road? How can I describe the feeling I got, as if all the scarce-noticed sensations that had come lightly and incidentally to long generations of my ancestors, when they met the rain, or felt the sun, or heard the calling of rooks or the twittering of sparrows, or saw the smoke rising from human hearths, were rushing over me, in a hardly bearable flood of ecstatic happiness, simply because, on that undistinguished road to the railway station, I heard some patient shop assistant mowing his scrap of grass behind a privet-hedge?

I know perfectly well that everybody born into the world has the feelings I am describing, is visited by these indescribable and apparently causeless transports. I am not in the least suggesting that I am peculiar in this. But why, in the Devil’s name, then, do we go on making a cult of everything else except these? Why must politics, religion, philosophy, ambition, revolution, reaction, business, pleasure—all be considered intensely important, and these rare magical feelings not to be considered at all? »
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934)

E1.6.C.1.5.b.ii_REF2_PH “WHERE INDIFFERENCE IS NECESSARY. […] We must once more become good friends of the “everyday matters,” and not, as hitherto, despise them and look beyond them at clouds and monsters of the night. In forests and caverns, in marshy tracts and under dull skies, on the lowest rungs of the ladder of culture, man has lived for æons, and lived in poverty. There he has learnt to despise the present, his neighbours, his life, and himself, and we, the inhabitants of the brighter fields of Nature and mind, still inherit in our blood some taint of this contempt for everyday matters.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human III, Aphorism 16, 1878)

E1.6.C.1.5.b.ii_REF3_CUR "ROBERT GOBER'S WORK OFTEN DEALS WITH THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN INSIDE AND OUTSIDE, the hidden and the revealed. Mostly male bodies are presented as mutants, as hybrids. Waterfall combines two ordinary elements, a dark suit inside which a waterfall flows, transposing the individual with the environment. The gaze is thus reversed. A powerful symbol of our urban modernity, the black suit seems to be inhabited by something more muted and wild. While the title and device of the work is reminiscent of the ghost of Marcel Duchamp's final installation, Étant donnés: 1° la chute d'eau 2° le gaz d'éclairage..., which integrates the viewer's gaze within itself, Waterfall continues Robert Gober's exploration of queer identity, envisaged as a world made of porous borders and paradoxes."
(Curatorship: Bourse de Commerce - Pinault Collection, Paris)

E1.6.C.1.5.b.iii. FOR HENRI MATISSE” COLOR STIRS THE SENSUAL DEPTHS OF MAN”.
While color is often regarded as an accessory, it holds the power to impact a dimension of our existence that we often overlook, and it can fill us with joy by setting us in motion.

E1.6.C.1.5.b.iii_REF1_PH "HENRI MATISSE: "COLOR STIRS THE SENSUAL BOTTOM OF MAN" To fully appreciate this sentence, I would like to invite you to carry out an experiment. Look around you and try to pay attention to the colors you perceive. Usually we don't pay attention, we look at things and identify them, we see a green tree, but not just green. Now look at the green alone, its very special quality, let it be there in all its intensity. Allow it to stir the sensual depths of your being, it is no longer separate from you, your whole being is being worked by this vibration. This experience has much more meaning than it may seem at first.
Most of the time, being touched is an experience that remains somewhat superficial: I am touched by the sunset, by this gift I have just received; it remains fleeting and sometimes even imperceptible. Matisse invites us to an exploration that can truly transform us because, without us even realizing it, he undermines the entire philosophical structure in which we have been living for centuries and which leads us astray without us even being aware of it. In fact, we have been led to believe that color is random and incidental; it doesn't matter if the pot is blue or green, what matters is that it is a pot. Whatever our emotions, it is our rational awareness that counts. This concept prevents us from rejoicing in this dimension that is within our grasp.
It is a very unique experience because it is neither purely physical and sensory, nor cerebral and intellectual; it touches another dimension of our being that we neglect. I can now tell you the great secret of Matisse's phrase: by letting color move us and touch the depths of our soul, it moves us, it sets us in motion and thus brings us into the purest joy. To let color come into us is to let ourselves be filled with life. You have discovered the most direct way to rediscover the joy of being. Matisse's words also shed light on the profound meaning of this other wisdom that I want to defend here: a wisdom in which we do not protect ourselves from the intensity of life, but celebrate it.
(Fabrice Midal, 3 minutes de philosophie pour redevenir humain, broadcast on France Culture on 07/17/2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/3-minutes-de-philosophie-pour-redevenir-humain/henri-matisse-la-couleur-remue-le-fond-sensuel-de-lhomme

E1.6.C.1.5.b.iv. WHY DO SO MANY OF US NEED TO BE IN NATURE?
”When I observe Nicolas Poussin's L'Empire de Flore, 1631, the flowers are more than mere vegetation. They symbolize beauty and the renewal of life, demanding my attention. This perspective surprises us, as in our society, the world is often viewed as a collection of goods and resources that should be maximized.”

E1.6.C.1.5.b.iv_REF1_CUR IN THIS PAINTING, MYTHOLOGICAL BEINGS ARE TRANSFORMED INTO FLOWERS, SYMBOLIZING BEAUTY, THE RENEWAL OF LIFE AND OUR DEEP CONNECTION WITH NATURE, in contrast to the modern view of nature as a mere resource.
"In 1631, Poussin painted The Empire of Flora, inspired by another of Ovid's works, the Fasti. We see Flora, a magnificent young goddess, accompanied by all the beings who, according to mythology, became flowers. On the left is Ajax, who committed suicide; a carnation is born from his spilled blood. Behind Narcissus, Cliticus holds a basket of sunflowers in his right hand and turns towards the solar chariot of his lover Apollo, covering his eyes with his hand so as not to be dazzled. In the foreground on the right, Crocus and Ajax are entwined like bindweed. Why did Nicolas Poussin paint this? My hypothesis is that the painter chose this subject because the transformation of mythological beings into plants has a profound meaning for him, which sheds light on our stay on earth. It is a narrative that teaches us that to live is to find a place in a world that speaks to us. I see these flowers, they are not just a piece of vegetation, but in some way they speak to me of beauty, they speak to me of the renewal of life, of the attention I must pay to them. We are surprised because in our society the world is a collection of goods, of resources that must be maximized. For Nicolas Poussin, the world is a poem. Why do so many of us need to be in nature? It's because we feel that we are part of this whole; we are not in front of nature - in a state of distant contemplation - we are really in nature, we become part of it".
(Fabrice Midal)

E1.6.C.1.5.b.iv_REF2_PH HOW TO HAVE ENOUGH: WENDELL BERRY ON CREATIVITY AND LOVE
“Enough is so vast a sweetness, I suppose it never occurs, only pathetic counterfeits,” Emily Dickinson sighed in one of her love letters to Susan an epoch before Kurt Vonnegut, in a short and lovely poem, distilled happiness to the knowledge that you have enough. It is not an easy knowledge to live with amid the commodified counterfeits of happiness that light up these sunset days of Western civilization, with its mesmerism of maximums and its cult of more, materially and spiritually — capitalism goads us to do more in order to own more while the secular church of self-improvement goads us to be more in order to do more.
Against this backdrop, to take a sabbath is a radical act, an act of countercultural act of courage and resistance, none more radical than a sabbath taken in nature — that eternal pasture of enoughness, which knew from the outset to create just enough more matter than antimatter for the first small seed of something to bloom into everything; which knows daily to make everything, from the electron to the elephant, take up just as much space and energy as it needs to be exactly what it is; which made every life finite and set a limit even to the speed of light.
To be in nature, without doing, is to be reminded that we are nature, too; that we cannot force the creative force that made us; that we need not keep breaking our own hearts on expectation’s cold hard edge of not-enough.”
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

Read it on The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2024/12/14/wendell-berry-sabbath/?mc_cid=493e432d3c&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E1.6.C.1.5.b.iv_REF3_PH “FORGETTING NATURE.—We speak of Nature, and, in doing so, forget ourselves: we ourselves are Nature, quand même.—Consequently, Nature is something quite different from what we feel on hearing her name pronounced.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human III, Aphorism 327, 1878)

E1.6.C.1.5.c. THE ENDLESS REVERBERATIONS OF SENSATIONS IN THE AESTHETIC REALM
Unlike the finite nature of the practical order, in the aesthetic realm, sensations reverberate endlessly.

E1.6.C.1.5.c.i. THE AESTHETIC ORDER IS CHARACTERIZED BY AN "INFINITELY REVERBERATING" EFFECT OF THE SENSES, where "satisfaction gives birth to a need, response regenerates demand, presence engenders absence, and possession engenders desire". In this order, sensation and its expectation are reciprocal and sought indefinitely. This contrasts with the practical order, where achieving a goal causes the act's sensible conditions to subside. Furthermore, "change is desirable in itself, as variety is needed to complement the duration of our sensation.".

E1.6.C.1.5.c.i_REF1_PH PAUL VALÉRY EXPLORES THE IDEA OF THE AESTHETIC INFINITE, WHERE SENSATIONS AND THEIR EXPECTATIONS SEEK EACH OTHER OUT INDEFINITELY, CREATING A PERPETUAL CYCLE OF DESIRE AND SATISFACTION. Unlike the practical order, where the attainment of the goal puts an end to the perceptible conditions of the act, the aesthetic order maintains a perpetual oscillation between sensation and desire.
“Sight, touch, smell, hearing, movement and speech induce us from time to time to linger in the impressions they cause us, to preserve them or to renew them. All of these infinitely variable effects that I have just isolated could constitute the order of aesthetic things. To justify this word 'infinity' and give it a precise meaning, it is enough to recall that, in this order, satisfaction gives rise to need, response regenerates demand, presence engenders absence, and possession desire. [...]

While in the practical order I have mentioned, the attainment of the goal causes all the sensitive conditions of the act to fade away (the duration of which is itself absorbed, or leaves little more than an abstract and powerless memory), in the aesthetic order the opposite is true. In this "universe of sensitivity", sensation and its expectation are in some way reciprocal, seeking each other indefinitely, as in the "universe of colors", where complementary colors follow each other and exchange one for the other, based on a strong impression on the retina. This kind of oscillation does not cease of itself; it is not exhausted or interrupted except by some extraneous circumstance, such as fatigue, which extinguishes it, abolishes it, or postpones its resumption. [...] 

Change becomes desirable in itself: variety is demanded as a complement to the duration of our sensations and as a remedy for a satiation resulting from the exhaustion of the finite resources of our organism, demanded by an infinite, local, particular tendency; we would thus be a system of overlapping functions - a system whose condition would be the interruption of each partial activity. To be able to desire again, one must desire something else; and the need for change is introduced as an indication of the desire to desire, or the desire for everything that can be desired."
(Paul Valéry, The infinite aesthetic in ART, AESTHETICS, POETRY - 9 Conferences, Discourses and Comments 1923-1939)

E1.6.C.1.5.c.ii. FROM THIS WE CAN DERIVE ONE OF THE COMPONENTS OF THE DEFINITION OF AESTHETIC ART: it is characterized by the fact that no idea or action can quell the desire it incites, and that the appreciation of art continually renews the need for it.

E1.6.C.1.5.c.ii_REF1_PH PAUL VALÉRY EXPLAINS THAT UNLIKE HUNGER, WHICH DISAPPEARS ONCE IT IS SATISFIED, DESIRE IN THE FIELD OF ARTISTIC SENSIBILITY IS REGENERATED BY SATISFACTION. The artist seeks to produce a work that creates a system of sensations that perpetuates this desire without ever reaching a definitive end.
"The sensation of hunger ceases in the satiated man, and the images that illustrated this need disappear. It is quite different in the exclusive realm of sensibility with which we are concerned: satisfaction generates desire; response regenerates demand; possession generates a growing appetite for what is possessed: in a word, sensibility increases expectation and reproduces it, without any clear end, any definite limit, any resolutive action capable of directly abolishing this effect of reciprocal excitation. The organization of a system of sensitive things possessing this property is the crux of the problem of art; a necessary condition, but by no means sufficient. [...] Here we can detect the very seed of the production of the work of art. We know that it has the property that no "idea" it can awaken in us, no act it can suggest to us, can complete or exhaust it: No matter how much we inhale the scent of a flower that appeals to our sense of smell, we cannot get rid of that perfume, the enjoyment of which revives the need; and no memory, thought, or action can cancel its effect and free us from its power. This is what those who want to create a work of art strive for".
(Paul Valéry, General notions about art in ART, AESTHETICS, POETRY - 9 Conferences, Discourses and Comments 1923-1939)

E1.6.C.1.5.c.iii. JOHN COWPER POWYS ARGUES THAT AMERICAN MEN ARE TRAGIC DUE TO THE NARROWNESS AND EMPTINESS OF THEIR SENSUAL AND SPIRITUAL EXPERIENCES. 
He asserts that society, despite being reorganized to provide sustenance and entertainment, is missing elements of mysticism and sensuality, which make life worth living.
Powys characterizes the American attitude towards Old World values as restless. He believes that Americans are on a blind quest for satisfaction, a sense of fulfillment that their lifestyle denies them. Furthermore, he contends that Americans idolize an abstract notion of power, rather than tangible power, and struggle to understand that all human action merely serves as a pathway to contemplation.

E1.6.C.1.5.c.iii_REF1_LIT JOHN COWPER POWYS CRITIQUES AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR ITS LACK OF DEEP SENSUAL AND MYSTICAL EXPERIENCES, attributing this to unbounded capitalism and "rugged individualism." He argues that while societal reorganization and provision of basic needs are important, they leave a void that can only be filled by a return to imaginative and poetic life. 
"American men are tragic without knowing that they are tragic. They are tragic, by reason of the desolate thinness and forlorn narrowness of their sensual and mystical contacts. Mysticism and sensuality are the things that most of all redeem life. Let the workers march to triumph, singing the International. But when you have marched, when you have reorganized society when you have given the people bread and the circus, the question comes, what next? It is then that we want to worship the elements; it is then that we want to return to the imaginative and poetic life that Science has for so long been destroying. [...]
This impersonalization, this thinning down of the life-pulses, the life-nerves, the life-senses, the life-imagination of human beings has been achieved in America without the least restriction upon unbounded capitalism. The phrase “rugged individualism” has grown to be the catch phrase to describe the life-destroying condition of this old state of affairs. Individuals became “rugged”—though such “ruggedness” looked repulsively sleek to the naked eye—by hardening their hearts against all the things in life that can be described as “poetical or philosophical“. Our unfortunate human nature has never been subjected to conditions quite so anti-pathetic to all the most interesting stimuli to poetic human feeling since the beginning of the world, as it has been subjected to in America. One can only hope now that the great Mr. Roosevelt, by some inspired conjuring-trick, may be able to change the actual tempo of human psychology in this amazing country in at least some important ways. "
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber, p. 492-497)

E1.6.C.1.5.c.iii_REF1.1_LIT JOHN COWPER POWYS DESCRIBES THE AMERICAN'S RESTLESS PURSUIT OF SATISFACTION THROUGH CONSTANT ACTIVITY AND INDUSTRIAL EXPLOITATION, DRIVEN BY A PIONEER SPIRIT THAT FINDS SOLACE IN PHYSICAL LABOR AND MACHINERY. He contrasts this with a lack of aesthetic and spiritual contemplation, portraying Americans as industrious yet spiritually unfulfilled.
"Vaguely conscious of the psychic and sensual sterility of his native air the American’s attitude to Old World values is shown in his troubled, half humorous, half bewildered restlessness. Seeking he knows not what, he rushes about in ever-improving automobiles, drugging himself, distracting himself, exhausting himself, in a blind sub-conscious struggle to find that psychic-sensuous Absolute of human satisfaction which the basic conditions of his life deny him. As long as he can be a pioneer, all is well! Any primeval wrestling with Nature solaces him while it numbs and atrophies him. But the tragedy of an American begins when his pioneer-psychology has no further outlet. Desperately then does he hunt the wind, recklessly then does he rake the dust! To say he worships the dollar is a preposterous lie. It is we who worship me money, as Sexton Truggins puts it in Theodore’s book. What the American worships is not even power. It is some will-o-the-wisp idea of power, bringing with it the prestige, the reputation, the glow, the glory of being the one who has ”huffed” the other, in the great cosmic game. What the American cannot grasp, and what gives him a vertiginous and ghastly sense of a yawning gulf, is the planetary law of Nature that all human action is only a means to contemplation. [...]

If I have learnt anything from my life in America it is a certain lonely and perhaps rather desperate stoicism, a certain stark endurance of one’s fate in the presence of air and water and fire and the basic rock-structures of this earth. You must remember that every American man is a Jack of all Trades. In the midst of his towering cities, in the forlorn and woefully standardized “residential-sections” he has built for himself, you find this cheerful, nervous, restless, humble-minded person, without mental recreations, without aesthetic interests,  without spiritual or sensuous contemplation, hammering, sawing, chopping, brushing, cleaning, polishing, improving, pulling down, building up, like a competent, shrewd, cynical, kindly, but quite mad, super-artisan. He may be a manipulator of half the railroads of the country, or he may be a furnace-Stoker in a flimsy apartment-house, put him on his back underneath a broken motor-car, and you will see a man who can be happy—and perhaps only entirely happy—when he is tinkering at the bolts and screws and pistons that he, or others like him, have caused to take shape from the bowels of a gouged-out planet! It is this competent grasp of the essentials of machinery, of tools and engines, of inventions and the art of running inventions, this restless concentration on the industrial exploitation of Nature, combined with an absence of all aristocratic airs, that creates the yearning and wistful admiration with which our Russian friends—since their upheaval—tend to regard Americans. 

It is hard to worship Demeter in America. I cannot conceive of any expression less appropriate in this country than the expression “our Mother, the Earth.” The Earth is not a mother to an American. She is a tool-shed, a smithy, a tank, a malevolent but sublime volcano, out of which so much horse-power calculated in terms of so many dynamos or kilowatts is forced to erupt.”
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber, p. 492-497)

E1.6.C.1.5.c.iv. MARX SUGGESTS THAT BEAUTY IS A FORM OF POWER CURRENCY, leading us to question who sets the standards of beauty. There are no endless reverberations here!

E1.6.C.1.5.d. RECONNECTING WITH NATURE THROUGH NATURAL PARKS?
Can natural parks help us rediscover the joy nature provides? Preserved nature elicits deep emotions and connects us to a world beyond our own. It serves as a reminder of our humility and our capacity to remain open and curious in an often daunting world. Islands, for example, can liberate us from choice anxiety, rekindle our childhood memories, and remind us that life can be more fulfilling when it is limited yet enriched with a higher quality of presence.

E1.6.C.1.5.d_REF1_LIT NATIONAL PARKS OCCUPY A ROLE AS SPACES OF REVERENCE AND WONDER THAT TRANSCEND HUMAN CLEVERNESS AND FEAR. They have a profound emotional and spiritual impact on us.
"Perhaps it is not so much what we learn that matters in these moments of awe and wonder, but what we feel in relationship to a world beyond ourselves, even beyond our own species.
[...] I see our national parks as our ongoing struggle as a diverse people to create circles of reverence in a time of collective cynicism where we are wary of being moved by anything but our own clever perspective… The nature of our national parks is bound to the nature of our own humility, our capacity to stay open and curious in a world that instead beckons closure through fear.
[…] Our national parks are blood. They are more than scenery, they are portals and thresholds of wonder, an open door that swings back and forth from our past to our future.
[...] No matter how much we try to manage and manipulate, orchestrate, or regulate our national parks, they will remain as the edge-scapes they are, existing on the boundaries between culture and wildness — improvisational spaces immune to the scripts of anyone. Wildlife in wildlands appear without notice. Awakened is what we become in their presence. Curiosity leads us forward on an unknown path, even if it is a path of well-placed steps made out of pink granite here in Acadia. For a precious moment we touch and taste life uninterrupted. Awe sneaks up on us like love. We surrender to the ecstatic outpouring of life before us."
(Terry Tempest Williams, The Hour of Land: A Personal Topography of America’s National Parks)

E1.6.C.1.5.d_REF1_PH "WHY, THEN, ARE WE SO OVERWHELMED BY A FEELING OF WELL-BEING AS SOON AS WE SET FOOT ON AN ISLAND and stay there, even if only for a few hours? Ossip Mandelstam, in The Egyptian Seal, says it is because there are only short and limited paths that no longer offer 'the infinity of their negative freedom'! It is true that we are no longer constantly plagued by the anxiety of choice, as we are at the various crossroads of the wide world! 
It seems, in fact, that this microcosmic exaltation seizes us from the moment we set foot in these "corners of the world", withdrawn in themselves, these geographical monads... We rediscover, forgotten since childhood, the multiple and rich resources of the immediate, the treasures formerly buried within ourselves, dimensions to our measurements. In short, we reconnect with the obvious fact that life very often benefits from being limited!"
(Denis Grozdanovitch, A short treatise on casualness, 2002)

E1.6.C.1.6. THE TRANSIENCE OF BEAUTY: A REFLECTION ON MORTALITY
Could it be the fleeting nature of many beautiful things that lends them a hint of impending disappearance as soon as they appear? Our comfort with the concept of death might then reflect our ability to find joy in beauty, or even our ability to recognize it. Immersion in nature can evoke a sense of freedom and a heightened awareness of being alive, while simultaneously reminding us of our finitude. Ultimately, it's a complex yet genuine joy.

E1.6.C.1.6_REF1_PO  "IN PASSING

How swiftly the strained honey
of afternoon light
flows into darkness

and the closed bud shrugs off
its special mystery
in order to break into blossom:

as if what exists, exists
so that it can be lost
and become precious."
(Lisel Mueller)

E1.6.C.1.6_REF2_PH KATHERINE MAY REFLECTS ON THE PROFOUND CONNECTION FELT WHILE EXPERIENCING THE TIDES IN A CANOE, emphasizing the global and cosmic interconnectedness of tidal movements.
"There is the tide you can feel in a canoe more than in any other larger kind of boat equipped with sails or motor. 
"There are two giant waves travelling endlessly around the earth, and twice a day we see their full volume. We barely sense the scale of what is really happening, because we only ever witness it locally. We rarely stop to think that they join us to the entire planet, and to the space beyond it. […]

When I feel the pull of the tides, I am also feeling the pull of the whole world, of the moon and the sun; that I am part of a chain of interconnection that crosses galaxies."
(Katherine May, Enchantment: Awakening Wonder in an Anxious Age, 2023)

E1.6.C.1.6_REF2.1_CUR ON THE SIGNIFICANCE OF ROWING, ASSOCIATED WITH FREEDOM AND AN AWARENESS OF MORTALITY. "Laurie Anderson´s golden canoe is a reminder of other worlds, probably a reference to the Egyptian Sun barge that every night travels to the underworld. The god Ra, makes his daily journey until he gets to the other side and resurrects, bringing light to the world every morning. It is, in the same way, connected to the funerary ritual of the pharaoh as he travels on the Nile river to his final resting place, recreating his path to the afterlife. The image reminds me of Peter Doig’s eerie canoes depictions with their uncomfortable feeling of detachment and strangeness and of Yamandu Canosa's A la deriva. In A la deriva the reference seems rather to be Charon enabling the dead to cross the Styx, although I love the way it looks like the rower is carrying his own body in his canoe - rather than using a third party like Charon - who you have to pay to cross the river; And also that Canosas' canoe seems to be going towards the light rather than towards darkness.
Is it why I love rowing so much in boats? Because these simple and light rafts enable you to to cross the alien element that is water, over huge distances without worrying about the scarry depths (such as depicted in Munch's painting)? Thus the feeling of freedom when rowing, the feeling of being so much alive while conscious of our finitude."
(Pierre Schindler)

E1.6.C.1.6_REF2.2_CUR HUMANS HAVE A COMPLEX RELATIONSHIP WITH BOUNDARIES, SIMULTANEOUSLY SEEKING AND AVOIDING THEM. WE'RE DRAWN TO EDGES LIKE COASTLINES AND CLIFFS, COMPELLED BY THEIR POTENTIAL FOR BOTH SAFETY AND RISK. BOUNDARIES DEFINE OUR COMFORT ZONES, YET ALSO CHALLENGE US TO GROW BEYOND THEM. Edges represent life's core dilemma: balancing safety with growth. Limits test our courage and expand our abilities, with each conquered boundary revealing new horizons. In essence, edges are where we discover ourselves.
“As humans, we have a confused relationship with edges, boundaries and limitations, which can be seen as one and the same thing, unified paradoxically by their dividing potential… We seek them even when, as a psychological or relational construct, we recoil from their necessity, and will often find ourselves drawn to and entranced by the water’s edge: the shifting line between sand and sea, the horror of the cliff’s edge. Our pull towards edges is magnetic, our playfulness around them notable. We are compelled to edges, boundaries and limits, like an intrusive thought that we don’t want but can’t resist going towards… Edges are, in some ways, an embodiment of the core dilemma about how to live, and how to live under the spectre of death. Boundaries say *here is OK, but beyond is the insistent abyss, and I am curious about that*. Limits give us a place to challenge ourselves and triumph over. They provide an opportunity for growth, where going beyond a limit can test our courage, expand our hitherto unknown ability, and consolidate our resilience for yet another new horizon that appears as we pass through what’s now behind us. In short, edges are frontiers where we find ourselves. […]

In the overlap between people’s boundaries there is potential for interesting meetings and the potential for collapses. […]

Being alive in any meaningful sense is a balance of feeling and staying safe, and taking and overcoming risks. In safety, we have a vital place to rest, be comfortable and build the foundations of a life, and through risk we are expanded and grown… It is through taking risks that we expand our safety – widening the boundaries and limitations of our existence into ever-broadening and rich terrains… In therapy… pushing our psychological and emotional limits in creative ways. Real and effective trauma work is about carefully restoring the inner grounds of self-trust and trust-in-world, increasing our capacity for risk, not striving to make the world safe. […]

Reaching our boundaries is not the same as limiting our growth. Sometimes we find our edges and an amazing thing happens; capacity is rebuilt, old wounds are healed and we grow further and more beautifully than before. The process is analogous to mineral growth in rock. Without a surface and a set of containing edges, minerals that we prize for their beauty, function and even healing properties do not have the right conditions to develop. Crystals do not grow in the open, where space is boundless. Where crystals become their most vivid and multi-faceted is where there is containment that gives shape and definition to what is alchemically coming together on the inside.

We all need a container to hold and ferment the rich potential of our energy and talents — this is the crucible of newness from which all creativity and life flows.”
(Ruth Allen, Weathering, 2024)

E1.6.C.1.6_REF3_PH THE FOREST IS A COMPLEX, EVER-CHANGING ENVIRONMENT THAT OFFERS DEEP, SENSORY EXPERIENCES AND SYMBOLIC MEANINGS. Engaging with it exposes the ephemerality of human existence compared to the enduring natural elements.
"The forest… is a deep terrain, a place of unending variance and subtle meaning. It is a complete sensory environment… It is different each time you meet it, changing with the seasons, the weather, the life cycles of its inhabitants… Dig beneath its soil, and you will uncover layers of life: the frail networks of mycelia, the burrows of animals, the roots of trees.

Bring questions into this space and you will receive a reply, though not an answer. Deep terrain offers up multiplicity, forked paths, symbolic meaning. It schools you in compromise, in shifting interpretation. It will mute your rationality and make you believe in magic. It removes time from the clock face and reveals the greater truth of its operation, its circularity and its vastness. It will show you rocks of unfathomable age and bursts of life so ephemeral that they are barely there. It will show you the crawl of geological ages, the gradual change of the seasons, and the countless micro-seasons that happen across the year. It will demand your knowledge: the kind of knowledge that’s experiential, the kind of knowledge that comes with study. Know it — name it — and it will reward you only with more layers of detail, more frustrating revelations of your own ignorance. A deep terrain is a life’s work. It will beguile, nourish, and sustain you through decades, only to finally prove that you, too, are ephemeral compared to the rocks and the trees."
(Katherine May, Enchantment: Awakening Wonder in an Anxious Age, 2023)

E1.6.C.1.6_REF4_LIT MARIA POPOVA REFLECTS ON THE PROFOUND CONNECTION BETWEEN PLACE AND HUMAN NATURE, EMPHASIZING THAT OUR ENVIRONMENT SHAPES OUR ENTIRE BEING, NOT JUST OUR MINDS. She highlights the concept of "genius loci" — the spirit of a place — and suggests that true intimacy and refuge from existential loneliness are found in being fully present in the here and now.
"“Place and a mind may interpenetrate till the nature of both is altered,” the great Scottish mountaineer and poet Nan Shepherd wrote as she reflected on the relationship between nature and human nature. But what we call place — that unalloyed presence with a here and now, with the unfolding of time in a locus of space — penetrates more than the mind: it permeates body and spirit and the entire constellation of being. There is a reason why the original Latin use of the word genius was in the phrase genius loci — the spirit of a place. We become who we are in the crucible of where we are.
Our minds, however, are born wanderers — perpetual refugees from presence, perpetually paying for their flight with loneliness. We go on forgetting that we are not only embodied creatures, but embodied in the body of the world; we go on forgetting that the here and now — that locus of intimacy with everything and everyone else inhabiting this island of spacetime, intimacy with the pulsating totality of our own being — is our only refuge from the existential loneliness that is the price of being alive."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.6.C.1.6_REF4.1_LIT BARRY LOPEZ ARGUES AGAINST THE STEREOTYPE THAT INDIGENOUS PEOPLE'S CONNECTION TO PLACE IS PRIMITIVE, EMPHASIZING THE PROFOUND VALUE OF PHYSICAL INTIMACY WITH THE NATURAL WORLD. He suggests that modern civilization's existential loneliness and sense of meaninglessness stem from neglecting the therapeutic relationship with nature. Lopez believes that knowing a place deeply fosters a sense of belonging and reciprocity, which reinforces one's significance in the world. 
"[Drawing on his longtime immersion in indigenous cultures and his lifelong travel with native companions, Lopez counters the hollow stereotype that indigenous people’s connection to place is a sort of “primitive” sensitivity to be contrasted with “advanced” civilization (Maria Popova, The Marginalian)]

"Such a dismissive view, as I have come to understand it, ignores the great intangible value that achieving physical intimacy with a place might provide. I’m inclined to point out to someone who condescends to such a desire for intimacy, although it might seem rude, that it is not possible for human beings to outgrow loneliness. Nor can someone from a culture that condescends to nature easily escape the haunting thought that one’s life is meaningless.

Existential loneliness and a sense that one’s life is inconsequential, both of which are hallmarks of modern civilizations, seem to me to derive in part from our abandoning a belief in the therapeutic dimensions of a relationship with place. A continually refreshed sense of the unplumbable complexity of patterns in the natural world, patterns that are ever present and discernible, and which incorporate the observer, undermine the feeling that one is alone in the world, or meaningless in it. The effort to know a place deeply is, ultimately, an expression of the human desire to belong, to fit somewhere. [...] 

The determination to know a particular place, in my experience, is consistently rewarded. And every natural place, to my mind, is open to being known. And somewhere in this process a person begins to sense that they themselves are becoming known, so that when they are absent from that place they know that place misses them. And this reciprocity, to know and be known, reinforces a sense that one is necessary in the world. [...]

Intimacy with the physical Earth apparently awakens in us, at some wordless level, a primal knowledge of the nature of our emotional as well as our biological attachments to physical landscapes. Based on my own inquiries, my impression is that we experience this primal connection regularly as a diffuse, ineffable pleasure, experience it as the easing of a particular kind of longing. [...]

Perhaps the first rule of everything we endeavor to do is to pay attention. Perhaps the second is to be patient. And perhaps a third is to be attentive to what the body knows."
(Barry Lopez,  Embrace Fearlessly the Burning World, 2022)

E1.6.C.1.6_REF5_PO "LIFE STORY

When I lived under the black oaks
I felt I was made of leaves. 
When I lived by Little Sister Pond, 
I dreamed I was the feather of the blue heron
 left on the shore; 
I was the pond lily, my root delicate as an artery, 
my face like a star, 
my happiness brimming. 
Later I was the footsteps that follow the sea. 
I knew the tides, I knew the ingredients of the wrack. 
I knew the eider, the red-throated loon 
with his uplifted beak and his smart eye. 
I felt I was the tip of the wave, 
the pearl of water on the eider's glossy back. 
No, there's no escaping, nor would I want to escape 
this outgo, this foot-loosening, this solution 
to gravity and a single shape.
Now I am here, later I will be there. 
I will be that small cloud, staring down at the water, 
the one that stalls, that lifts its white legs, that 
looks like a lamb."
(Mary Oliver, A Thousand Mornings, 2012)

E1.6.C.1.6_REF5.1_PO "IT WAS EARLY

It was early, 
    which has always been my hour 
        to begin looking 
            at the world

and of course, 
    even in the darkness, 
        to begin 
            listening into it,

especially 
    under the pines 
        where the owl lives 
            and sometimes calls out

as I walk by, 
    as he did 
        on this morning. 
            So many gifts!

What do they mean? 
    In the marshes 
        where the pink light 
            was just arriving

the mink
    with his bristle tail 
        was stalking 
            the soft-eared mice,

and in the pines
    the cones were heavy, 
        each one 
            ordained to open.

Sometimes 
    I need only to stand 
        wherever I am 
            to be blessed.

Little mink, let me watch you. 
    Little mice, run and run. 
        Dear pine cone, let me hold you 
            as you open."
(Mary Oliver, Evidence, 2009)

E1.6.C.1.6_REF5.2_PO "PEONIES

This morning the green fists of the peonies are getting ready 
    to break my heart 
        as the sun rises, 
            as the sun strokes them with his old, buttery fingers

and they open -
    pools of lace,
        white and pink - 
            and all day the black ants climb over them,

boring their deep and mysterious holes 
    into the curls, 
        craving the sweet sap, 
            taking it away

to their dark, underground cities-
    and all day
        under the shifty wind, 
            as in a dance to the great wedding,

the flowers bend their bright bodies, 
    and tip their fragrance to the air, 
        and rise, 
            their red stems holding

all that dampness and recklessness 
    gladly and lightly,
        and there it is again -
            beauty the brave, the exemplary,

blazing open.
    Do you love this world?
        Do you cherish your humble and silky life?
            Do you adore the green grass, with its terror beneath?

Do you also hurry, half-dressed and barefoot, into the garden,
    and softly,
        and exclaiming of their dearness,
            fill your arms with the white and pink flowers,

with their honeyed heaviness, their lush trembling, 
    their eagerness
        to be wild and perfect for a moment, before they are 
            nothing, forever?"
(Mary Oliver, New and selected poems: Volume one, 1992)

E1.6.C.1.6_REF6_CUR IS OUR CAPACITY TO SEE BEAUTY IN LIFE LINKED TO OUR RELATIVE COMFORT WITH THE PERSPECTIVE OF OUR OWN DEATH?
"I was talking with Albano Afono yesterday night at the Triangulo Gallery and asked him if he believed our capacity to see beauty in life was linked to our relative comfort with the perspective of our own death. He agreed and said he did not see his work as radiating sadness but rather fighting it, being able - trough the sculpting of light in the dark hours - to find wonder rather than plunge into the awe of our moments of epiphany, of contact with the sublime of reality. Maybe people who can only see the darkness in his work are uneasy with death?"
(Pierre Schindler, February 2024)

E1.6.C.1.6_REF7_CUR 夢幻空華 . むげんくうげ
Mugenkūge, 2019
The illusory levitation of flowers
[夢幻] mugen: dream, illusion
[空華] kuge: flowers in the sky

E1.6.C.1.6_REF8_PO "BETWEEN SUN AND MOON, between the fever of living and that of dying, the moutain keeps the balance"
(Etel Adnan)

E1.6.C.1.6_REF9_PO "DID LIFE’S PENURIOUS LENGTH 
ITALICIZE IT’S SWEETNESS,
The men that daily live 
Would stand so deep in joy 
That it would clog the cogs 
Of that revolving reason 
Whose esoteric belt 
Protects our sanity."
(Emily Dickinson, undated)

E1.6.C.1.7. BECOMING THE "RAVINE OF THE WORLD"

E1.6.C.1.7.a. CONTEMPLATING BEAUTY IN THE WAY OF ZEN: BECOMING THE RAVINE OF THE WORLD
The practitioner of Chan (Zen) contemplates beauty and embraces the world's pain, opening up to universal resonance. Their capacity for receptivity and acceptance deepens, transforming them into the "ravine of the world". They allow themselves to be burned by intense light. This path validates our existence in the present moment, emphasizing the importance of a lucid vision. Simultaneously, it requires the individual to constantly renew their commitment to decisive detachment.

E1.6.C.1.7.a_REF1_PH "TO PAINT IS TO LOVE AGAIN. It’s only when we look with eyes of love that we see as the painter sees. His is a love, moreover, which is free of possessiveness. What the painter sees he is duty-bound to share. Usually he makes us see and feel what ordinarily we ignore or are immune to. His manner of approaching the world tells us, in effect, that nothing is vile or hideous, nothing is stale, flat and unpalatable unless it be our own power of vision. To see is not merely to look. One must look-see. See into and around. [...]
The practice of any art demands more than mere savoir faire. One must not only be in love with what one does, one must also know how to make love. In love self is obliterated. Only the beloved counts. Whether the beloved be a bowl of fruit, a pastoral scene, or the interior of a bawdy house makes no difference. One must be in it and of it wholly. Before a subject can be transmuted aesthetically it must be devoured and absorbed. If it is a painting it must perspire with ecstasy."
(Henry Miller, To paint is to love again, 1963)

E1.6.C.1.7.a_REF2_PH "THIS BEAUTY, AS AN ABSOLUTE VALUE [...] INVOLVES TAKING ON THE WORLD'S SORROW, the extreme demand for dignity, compassion and a sense of justice, as well as total openness to universal resonance. This demand and this openness imply, on the part of the person who wants to deepen his capacity for receptivity and acceptance to the point of becoming the "canyon of the world," that he allows himself to be burned by an intense light. A light capable of removing the tinsel that clutters his body and mind, a necessary condition for the emergence of authentic openness.
The approach I have just described is, in fact, none other than the path of Chan (Zen) itself. This path affirms the value of our existence here and now, and therefore the value of a lucid gaze, and at the same time it demands of the subject the constant renewal of a resolute dismantling, to the point of a state of non-seeing, even of non-being. It requires facing the objective world, not its appearance, but as if at its root, so that the object is truly born and grows in the subject's innermost being, and so that the subject's self participates, through a reversal, in universal becoming. We find the three stages of the Song master Qingdeng: seeing the mountain, no longer seeing the mountain, seeing the mountain again. Or the four stages of Tang Master Linji: seeing the object, no longer seeing the object, self-forgetfulness, co-creating object and self.
This idea of co-birth - which Claudel formulated in her own way - corresponds to the experience of a Western thinker, Henri Maldiney: "Sometimes, when I wake up in the indecisive clarity of a space where all signs of recognition disappear, I perceive neither things nor images. I am not the subject of pure impressions, nor the indifferent spectator of the objects in front of me. I'm co-born with the world, which rises within itself and comes to light in my own day, which rises only with it" (L'Avènement de I'œuvre).
This path of awakening, which has inspired the most beautiful poems of China, is a fundamental disposition to face the challenge of beauty as we understand it, and the elements that make up this path are: gift, welcome, going beyond appearance by inhabiting the full presence of the other, opening to universal resonance. 
(François Cheng, Five meditations on beauty - Fourth meditation, 2006)

E1.6.C.1.7.a_REF3_PO "LOCATIONS AND TIMES
Locations and times — what is it in me that meets them all, whenever and wherever, and makes me at home?
Forms, colors, densities, odors — what is it in me that corresponds with them?"
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.6.C.1.7.b. "UNSELFING"
Iris Murdoch contends that beauty in nature and art can lead us to "unselfing." This is a process of stepping outside oneself and fostering a humble, nonjudgmental curiosity towards others. Murdoch cautions that this unselfing should not be forced. Instead, it should arise from a relaxation of the spirit into the shared rhythm of existence.

E1.6.C.1.7.b_REF1_LIT "AN OCCASION FOR UNSELFING: IRIS MURDOCH ON IMPERFECTION AS INTEGRAL TO GOODNESS AND HOW THE BEAUTY OF NATURE AND ART LEAVENS OUR MOST UNSELFISH IMPULSES.

To recognize that there are infinitely many kinds of beautiful lives is to step outside the self, beyond its particular conceptions of beauty — which includes, of course, moral beauty — and walking beside it with humble, nonjudgmental curiosity about the myriad other selves afoot on their own paths, propelled by their own ideals of the Good.

Such recognition requires what the great moral philosopher and novelist Iris Murdoch (July 15, 1919–February 8, 1999) termed unselfing — a difficult, triumphant act for which, Murdoch argues in her 1970 masterpiece The Sovereignty of Good (public library), nature and art uniquely train us.

Murdoch defines what we commonly call beauty as “an occasion for ‘unselfing’” — an occasion most readily experienced in our communion with nature and our contemplation of art. She writes:

"Beauty is the convenient and traditional name of something which art and nature share, and which gives a fairly clear sense to the idea of quality of experience and change of consciousness. I am looking out of my window in an anxious and resentful state of mind, oblivious of my surroundings, brooding perhaps on some damage done to my prestige. Then suddenly I observe a hovering kestrel. In a moment everything is altered. The brooding self with its hurt vanity has disappeared. There is nothing now but kestrel. And when I return to thinking of the other matter it seems less important. And of course this is something which we may also do deliberately: give attention to nature in order to clear our minds of selfish care."

Oliver Sacks would come to echo the sentiment decades later in his observation that meeting nature on its own terms and timescales broadens our perspective by effecting “a detachment from the timescale, the urgencies, of daily life.” But this unselfing, Murdoch cautions, cannot come by through a straining of the will, for the will is a clenching of the very self which true beauty decondition; rather, it comes as a gladsome relaxing of the spirit, of our essential nature, into the shared pulse of existence:

"A self-directed enjoyment of nature seems to me to be something forced. More naturally, as well as more properly, we take a self-forgetful pleasure in the sheer alien pointless independent existence of animals, birds, stones and trees."

This “self-forgetful pleasure” calls to mind Jeanette Winterson’s wonderfully paradoxical notion of active surrender as the crucible of our joy in art and the fulcrum for art’s transforms power over the self. But while there is a distinct difference between how nature and art each effect unselfing, Murdoch argues that what separates great art from the bad and the mediocre is precisely this capacity for stripping down the self rather than inflating the ego — a notion evocative of Tolstoy’s insistence that “a real work of art destroys, in the consciousness of the receiver, the separation between himself and the artist.” Murdoch writes of this dissolution of the self in the presence of great art:

"The experience of art is more easily degraded than the experience of nature. A great deal of art, perhaps most art, actually is self-consoling fantasy, and even great art cannot guarantee the quality of its consumer’s consciousness. However, great art exists and is sometimes properly experienced and even a shallow experience of what is great can have its effect. Art, and by “art” from now on I mean good art, not fantasy art, affords us a pure delight in the independent existence of what is excellent. Both in its genesis and its enjoyment it is a thing totally opposed to selfish obsession. It invigorates our best faculties and, to use Platonic language, inspires love in the highest part of the soul. It is able to do this partly by virtue of something which it shares with nature: a perfection of form which invites unpossessive contemplation and resists absorption into the selfish dream life of the consciousness."

And yet, Murdoch argues, any real understanding of goodness is necessarily an embrace of imperfection — something philosopher Martha Nussbaum, in many ways Murdoch’s only worthy intellectual heir, would argue brilliantly a generation later in her incisive case for the intelligence of emotions. Murdoch writes:

"The concept of Good… is a concept which is not easy to understand partly because it has so many false doubles, jumped-up intermediaries invented by human selfishness to make the difficult task of virtue look easier and more attractive: History, God, Lucifer, Ideas of power, freedom, purpose, reward, even judgment are irrelevant. Mystics of all kinds have usually known this and have attempted by extremities of language to portray the nakedness and aloneness of Good, its absolute for-nothingness. One might say that true morality is a sort of unesoteric mysticism, having its source in an austere and unconsoled love of the Good. When Plato wants to explain Good he uses the image of the sun. The moral pilgrim emerges from the cave and begins to see the real world in the light of the sun, and last of all is able to look at the sun itself. […]

We may also speak seriously of ordinary things, people, works of art, as being good, although we are also well aware of their imperfections. Good lives as it were on both sides of the barrier and we can combine the aspiration to complete goodness with a realistic sense of achievement within our limitations." [...]

"The self, the place where we live, is a place of illusion. Goodness is connected with the attempt to see the unself, to see and to respond to the real world in the light of a virtuous consciousness. This is the non-metaphysical meaning of the idea of transcendence to which philosophers have so constantly resorted in their explanations of goodness. “Good is a transcendent reality” means that virtue is the attempt to pierce the veil of selfish consciousness and join the world as it really is. It is an empirical fact about human nature that this attempt cannot be entirely successful."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings, review on Iris Murdoch's Sovereignty of good, 1970)

E1.6.C.1.7.b_REF2_LIT “IN MY DARKEST HOURS, WHAT HAS SAVED ME AGAIN AND AGAIN IS SOME ACTION OF UNSELFING  — some instinctive wakefulness to an aspect of the world other than myself: a helping hand extended to someone else’s struggle, the dazzling galaxy just discovered millions of lightyears away, the cardinal trembling in the tree outside my window. We know this by its mirror-image — to contact happiness of any kind is “to be dissolved into something complete and great,” something beyond the bruising boundaries of the ego. The attainment of happiness is then less a matter of pursuit than of surrender — to the world’s wonder, ready as it comes.”
(Maria Popova, The marginalian)

E1.6.C.1.7.b_REF3_PO ”WINDS OF THE OPEN SEA
brush the earth and make it shine! 
and may it blaze anew 
in the tired hearts of men!

winds of the open sea, widen! free! spread! 
until the edges disappear!"
(Patrice Repusseau, Ébleui- Ablaze, pages of Houat in mid summer, 2013)

E1.6.C.1.7.b_REF4_PO “ABLAZE

spreading under the blue of the sky 
all ablaze in this summer's midday

eyes full of the big blue 
and the body too, down to the very last cell

spreading out under the azure 
ablaze to the point of not knowing no longer knowing oneself!”
(Patrice Repusseau, Ébleui - Ablaze, pages of Houat in mid summer, 2013)

E1.6.C.1.7.b_REF5_PO “AT THE EDGE OF THE DUNE

at the very end of the beach

we take a slower pace
the sand is coarser

a mortar of crushed 
wrecked shells

and a few sea holly 
flowers among the marram grass

in summer 
women sunbathe there

their breasts their bellies their pubis 
undulate at the bottom of the dune 
in a single gentle movement

a faceless wave"
(Patrice Repusseau, Ébleui - Ablaze, pages of Houat in mid summer, 2013)

E1.6.C.1.7.b_REF6_CUR PRUNE NOURRY INVITES US TO REFLECT ON OUR FUTURE AND OUR COMMON ORIGINS.
“Subtly interweaving existential questions with scientific debate, and blending the sacred with contemporary social issues, Prune Nourry's humanistic approach, invites us to reflect on our future and our common origins.

In 2010, she invited an 8-month-pregnant woman to pose in her studio in an inflatable pool filled with milk, where the liquid created a horizon out of which only certain parts of the body protruded. She photographed the model, made a life-sized mould out of clay, then cast the sculpture in concrete. She soon felt compelled to produce it on a much larger scale, which led to Mater Earth: a permanent clay sculpture created for Château La Coste in 2023.

In keeping with this project, she presents a new work for Le Voyage à Nantes entitled Mothership. Nearly 17 metres (56 ft.) long, the sculpture takes the form of upturned boat hulls, echoing the city's history as one of France's oldest ports. Made of metallic structures, the frameworks of these hulls trace skeletal lines that appear simultaneously human, animal, and naval, in keeping with her interest in hybridizing living forms.

As in all of her work, Nourry blends different sources of inspiration in Mater Earth and Mothership: from temazcales (pre-Columbian sweat lodges in Central and North America) to the Lascaux cave paintings, to iconic works from the 1960s by Niki de Saint-Phalle or Jean Dubuffet.”
(Curatorship: Le Voyage à Nantes, 20225)

E1.6.C.1.7.c. I AM SURPRISED THAT THE WORLD EXISTS
Wittgenstein recognizes the "unspeakable" or the "mystical" as an emotion that cannot be expressed. This feeling sits within the existential, ethical, or aesthetic realm. The most fitting description for this emotion is a sense of astonishment at the world's existence. In this sense, the mystical experience closely resembles the aesthetic experience. Could the aesthetic perspective of the world essentially consist of contemplating the world through a joyful gaze?

E1.6.C.1.7.c_REF1_PH "WHEN WITTGENSTEIN IDENTIFIES THE « UNSPEAKABLE » TO THE « MYSTIC », it is not a question of negative theology or ecstasy, but of « feeling », and I think that what characterizes for him the « mystic » is precisely that there is a feeling, an emotion, an affective experience [...] that cannot be expressed, because it is about something foreign to the scientific description of facts, something which is in the sphere of the existential, ethical or aesthetic order. One might think, moreover, that when Wittgenstein speaks of mysticism, he is thinking of his own experience. Thus he writes in the proposition (6.44) of the Tractatus: « The mystic is not the how (wie) of the world, but the fact of the existence (dass) of the world »; it is clarified by his confidence in the Conference on Ethics in which, without using the word « mystical », he speaks of what he calls his experience per excellence: « I believe that the best way to describe it is to say that when I have this experience, I am amazed by the sheer existence of the world ». In the same lecture, he talks about an experience of « seeing the world as a miracle ». We can also see on this subject that, for Wittgenstein, the mystical experience is quite analogous to the aesthetic experience, since we read in the Notebooks [...]: « The miracle, aesthetically speaking, is that there is a world »”.
(Pierre Hadot, Wittgenstein and the limits of language, 2004, excerpt from the forward in the 2014 edition)

E1.6.C.1.7.c_REF2_PH FOR WITTGENSTEIN, THE DISINTERESTED CONTEMPLATION OF THE WORLD TRANSCENDS INDIVIDUALITY AND IS PLACED IN THE PERSPECTIVE OF ETERNITY.
"Wittgenstein's account of the mystical, as well as that of the aesthetic and, in a sense, the ethical, is situated in Schopenhauer's problematic. What Wittgenstein says about the mystic corresponds, in fact, to what Schopenhauer says about knowledge that frees itself from the service of will (1) and individuality. Wittgenstein is certainly thinking about this issue when he writes in Proposition 6.45: "The intuition of the world sub specie aeterni is the intuition of the world as totality - but limited totality. The feeling of the world as limited totality constitutes mystical feeling.
Let us note in parentheses the rapid shift that takes place here from the notion of intuition to that of feeling. First of all, the use of the term "limited totality" is reminiscent of the author of The World as Will and Representation, who writes that the subject and the object, like two halves, constitute the totality of the world, but are mutually limited. The world appears as a limited totality when it is considered from the point of view of a transcendental subject, which, according to Wittgenstein, is neither man, nor the human body, nor the human soul, but the metaphysical subject, which is the limit of the world and not a part of it, an object that would be in the world (5.632, 5. 633 and 5.641, Notebooks, August 7, 1916). This situation is realized precisely in the disinterested intuition of the world, freed from the principle of sufficient reason, of which Schopenhauer speaks (2). We no longer consider, says Schopenhauer, "neither the place, nor the time, nor the why, nor the what-good of things, but purely and simply their nature"; we are no longer ourselves, but a "pure subject" (is this not the metaphysical subject of which Wittgenstein speaks? ), ruined and lost in the object. On this point, Schopenhauer quotes Spinoza: "The mind is eternal insofar as it conceives things in the perspective of eternity (sub specie aeternitatis)," which for Schopenhauer means that whoever sees things in this perspective transcends his individuality and identifies with the eternal subject of knowledge. Wittgenstein's Notebooks (October 7, 1916) shed some light on what this formula of Schopenhauer and Spinoza means to him. First of all, it corresponds to an aesthetic and ethical view of the world:

The work of art is the object seen sub specie aeternitatis, and the good life is the world seen sub specie aeternitatis. This is the connection between art and ethics. In the ordinary way of seeing, one looks at objects, as it were, by placing oneself among them; in the way of seeing sub specie aeternitatis, one looks at them from the outside. So that they have the whole world as a background. 
Does the aesthetic view of the world consist essentially in looking at the world with a happy gaze? (October 20, 1916).

One could say that to see from the perspective of eternity, that is, "from the outside," is in a sense to see from above, with a total disinterest in practical utility, or even to see from the perspective of an eternal present. For, as Wittgenstein (6.4311) tells us, following Schopenhauer, eternity should not be understood as an infinite period of time, but as timelessness: "He lives eternally who lives in the present". Thus, for Wittgenstein, as for Schopenhauer, the disinterested contemplation of the world that brings salvation has a dual ethical and aesthetic dimension.
From this perspective, we can better understand the profound intentions of the Tractatus, as we are invited to do by a note in the Notebooks dated May 25, 1915: "The tendency to the mystical comes from the fact that science leaves our desires unsatisfied. We feel that even if all scientific questions were solved, our problem would still not be addressed." 

Notes: 
1 Schopenhauer, The World as Will and Representation
2 idem"
(Pierre Hadot, Wittgenstein and the Limits of Language, 2004, extract from the preface of 2014)

E1.6.C.1.7.c_REF2.1_PH WITTGENSTEIN COMBINES THE ASTONISHMENT AT THE EXISTENCE OF THE WORLD WITH A FEELING OF ABSOLUTE SECURITY, BOTH INEXPRESSIBLE BY LANGUAGE. Hadot doubts the feasibility of this ideal of silent wisdom and suggests that philosophy is a never-ending quest motivated by this ideal, combining critical discourse and personal transformation.
"It is also interesting to note that, in the Conference on Ethics, in addition to the feeling of astonishment at the existence of the world, which he says is his experience par excellence, he alludes to another experience that is also familiar to him, the feeling of absolute security, which can be expressed as follows (although he notes that this expression is logically nonsense): "I have a clear conscience, nothing can happen to me, no matter what", a phrase with a stoic tone, because the person who admits that there is no evil other than moral evil also knows that, if he wants, nothing bad can happen to him. These two feelings, these two experiences of astonishment and security, which cannot be adequately expressed because they are affective experiences, are deeply related in that they both imply a disposition of disinterest and indifference toward the determined objects of the world. If Wittgenstein insists so much on the limits of language, it is because he ultimately wants to offer a glimpse of a state of silent wisdom that would be attained by those who have gone beyond the propositions of the Tractatus. All the discourse of the book will have been rejected like a ladder that has become useless, destroying itself after having fulfilled its therapeutic function (like the philosophical discourse of the skeptics of antiquity, which they considered to be a simple purgative to be eliminated with bad moods), to give way to the silence of a life of wisdom, in which the problem of life will be solved by its own disappearance. "He must overcome these suggestions," says Wittgenstein (6.54), "then he sees the world correctly" (wouldn't this be a recollection of the contemplation of the world, freed from the principle of sufficient reason, that Schopenhauer spoke of?)
Personally, I doubt that this ideal of a life of quiet wisdom is attainable. Wittgenstein's own life shows that he was unable to adhere to it. I would be more inclined to think, as I have said elsewhere, that one should not oppose a philosophy conceived as pure discourse to a wisdom that would be a silent way of life. For wisdom is not a state that would put an end to philosophy, but an unattainable ideal that motivates the philosopher's endless search. Philosophy, therefore, since it is an aspiration to wisdom, must be at once and indissolubly a critical discourse and an exercise in self-transformation".
(Pierre Hadot, Wittgenstein and the Limits of Language, 2004, extract from the preface of 2014)

E1.6.C.1.7.d. QUESTIONS THAT CAN MAKE OR UNMAKE A LIFE
Once we become the "ravine of the world", we come upon
"questions
that can make
or unmake
a life,
questions
that have patiently
waited for you,
questions
that have no right
to go away"

E1.6.C.1.7.d_REF1_PO "SOMETIMES
Sometimes
if you move carefully
through the forest,
breathing
like the ones
in the old stories,
who could cross
a shimmering bed of leaves
without a sound,
you come to a place
whose only task
is to trouble you
with tiny
but frightening requests,
conceived out of nowhere
but in this place
beginning to lead everywhere.
Requests to stop what
you are doing right now,
and
to stop what you
are becoming
while you do it,
questions
that can make
or unmake
a life,
questions
that have patiently
waited for you,
questions
that have no right
to go away."
(David Whyte, Everything Is Waiting for You)

E1.6.C.2. THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ART AND HAPPINESS IS PROFOUND AND MULTIFACETED, offering numerous pathways to joy and fulfillment. Art serves as a powerful medium that enriches our lives by helping us be more present in the world, deepening our understanding of reality, and providing tools to navigate life's challenges.
Through its transformative power, art elevates the human spirit and opens new dimensions of perception and understanding. It acts as a bridge between our inner world and the external reality, offering not just aesthetic pleasure but also spiritual and emotional enrichment. Whether through music's ability to distill and intensify our emotions, or visual art's power to crystallize moments in time, art provides us with unique tools to experience life more fully and find meaning in our existence.
This exploration delves into thirteen distinct ways that art intersects with happiness. Each pathway offers unique insights into how artistic expression and appreciation can contribute to a more fulfilling and joyful life.

1. BEING PRESENT
2. DEVELOPING TACIT UNDERSTANDING WITH REALITY
3. OVERCOMING SUFFERING
4. GIVING US THE COURAGE TO FIGHT
5. REMINDING US OF BALANCE AND GOODNESS
6. FOSTERING SELF-UNDERSTANDING
7. EXPANDING THE BOUNDARIES OF WHO WE ARE BY INVITING THE UNKNOWN
8. MAKING LIFE LIGHTER
9. PRESERVING WHAT TRULY MATTERS
10. RECONCILING US WITH THE WORLD
11. ORGANIZING THE CHAOS
12. EXPLORING MORALITY
13. PUTING US ON A SPIRITUAL PATH
14. VARIATION ON ALL THAT IS REGULAR AND SYMMETRICAL IN LINES, POINTS, AND RHYTHMS – AND THEIR VIOLATION
15. THE PRIMARY EVOLUTIONARY FUNCTION OF ART IS TO SERVE AS A FITNESS DISPLAY

"TO THE GREAT IN ART.—That enthusiasm for some object which you, O great man, introduce into this world causes the intelligence of the many to be stunted. The knowledge of this fact spells humiliation. But the enthusiast wears his hump with pride and pleasure, and you have the consolation of feeling that you have increased the world's happiness."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 132, 1878)


E1.6.C.2.1. BEING PRESENT
Art leads us to be more present to the world, more intensely alive. Art and music possess profound transformative powers in human experience. Music has the unique ability to distill and intensify our emotions, while art elevates the human spirit to new heights of perception and understanding. As François Cheng and Jacques Darriulat explain, authentic art crystallizes moments in time, challenges our routine existence, and transforms the ordinary into the extraordinary through the creative mind, ultimately serving as a powerful medium for human expression and transcendence.

E1.6.C.2.1.a. MUSIC GENERATES PENETRATING, INTENSE AND TRANSFORMATIVE EMOTIONS
It is the very nature of music to distill our feelings and to offer us the essence of a penetrating and intense experience, expressed in such a way that we can contemplate it at the very moment it carries us away.

E1.6.C.2.1.a_REF1_MU AARON COPLAND DISCUSSES THE UNIQUE AND EPHEMERAL NATURE OF MUSICAL EXPERIENCE, EMPHASIZING THAT MUSIC IS IN A CONSTANT STATE OF BECOMING AND REQUIRES IMAGINATIVE ENGAGEMENT. Listening, an innate talent to some degree, can be developed and refined.
"At no point can you seize the musical experience and hold it. Unlike that moment in a film when a still shot suddenly immobilizes a complete scene, a single musical moment immobilized makes audible only one chord, which in itself is comparatively meaningless. This never-ending flow of music forces us to use our imaginations, for music is in a continual state of becoming. [...]
Listening is a talent, and like any other talent or gift, we possess it in varying degrees… There are two principal requirements for talented listening: first, the ability to open oneself up to musical experience; and secondly, the ability to evaluate critically that experience. Neither of these is possible without a certain native gift. Listening implies an inborn talent of some degree, which, again, like any other talent, can be trained and developed. This talent has a certain « purity » about it. We exercise it, so to speak, for ourselves alone; there is nothing to be gained from it in a material sense. Listening is its own reward; there are no prizes to be won, no contests of creative listening. But I hold that person fortunate who has the gift, for there are few pleasures in art greater than the secure sense that one can recognize beauty when one comes upon it… Recognizing the beautiful in an abstract art like music partakes somewhat of a minor miracle. [...]
There is something about music that keeps its distance even at the moment that it engulfs us. It is at the same time outside and away from us and inside and part of us. In one sense it dwarfs us, and in another we master it. We are led on and on, and yet in some strange way we never lose control. It is the very nature of music to give us the distillation of sentiments, the essence of experience transfused and heightened and expressed in such fashion that we may contemplate it at the same instant that we are swayed by it."
(Aaron Copland, Music and Imagination, 1952)

E1.6.C.2.1.b. ART ELEVATES, TRANSFORMS AND CHALLENGES US
"Authentic art is in itself a conquest of the spirit. It elevates humanity to the level of the Creator, carving out a spark of emotion and memorable enjoyment from destiny's darkness. It also provides a glimmer of passion and compassion that can be shared. Through its ever-evolving forms, it promotes the idea of an "open life" by breaking down the barriers of routine and introducing a new way of perceiving and living.
Art is always a crystallization of a "here and now" moment, marking the emergence of a presence within time. It revives the grand rhythm [of the cosmos] through its refined forms, making it a supreme tool for humans to defy destiny and death."

E1.6.C.2.1.b_REF1_PH "AUTHENTIC ART IS IN ITSELF A CONQUEST OF THE SPIRIT. It elevates humanity to the level of the Creator, carving out a spark of emotion and memorable enjoyment from destiny's darkness. It also provides a glimmer of passion and compassion that can be shared. Through its ever-evolving forms, it promotes the idea of an "open life" by breaking down the barriers of routine and introducing a new way of perceiving and living.
[...] Art is always a crystallization of a "here and now" moment, marking the emergence of a presence within time. It revives the grand rhythm [of the cosmos] through its refined forms, making it a supreme tool for humans to defy destiny and death. This does not diminish the value of other types of activities and commitments. Rather, art justifies its existence through its own being, or "the thing in itself". It provides humans with a reason for their earthly existence."
(François Cheng, Five Meditations on Beauty, 2006)

E1.6.C.2.1.b_REF2_PO IT’S A REPEATED CRY BY A THOUSAND SENTINELS 
"These curses, these blashphemies, these complaints,
These ecstasies, these cries, these tears, these Te Deum,
Are an echo reiterated by a thousand labyrinthes;
It’s for the mortal hearts a divine opium!

It’s a repeated cry by a thousand sentinels,
An order returned by a thousand megaphones,
It’s a lighthouse illuminating a thousand citadels,
A call to hunters lost in the large wood!

Because it’s truly, Lord, the best testimony
That we could give our dignity
That this ardent sob that rolls from age to age
And comes to die at the edge of your eternity!"
(Charles Baudelaire, The Lighthouses, The flowers of evil, 1857)

E1.6.C.2.1.b_REF3_PO JUST AS BAUDELAIRE SUCCESSFULLY CONVEYED THE WILD AND SENSUAL FORCE OF HIS EXPERIENCE WITH HIS COMPANION'S HAIR, art provides us with examples of presence in the world. These examples can inspire us to enhance our ability to capture the moment.

E1.6.C.2.1.b_REF3.1_PO "LA CHEVELURE


   O fleece, that foams down unto the shoulders bare!
   O curls, O scents which lovely languidness exhale!
   Delight! to fill this alcove's sombre atmosphere
   With memories, sleeping deep within this tress of hair,
   I'll wave it in the evening breezes like a veil!

   The shores of Africa, and Asia's burning skies,
   A world forgotten, distant, nearly dead and spent,
   Within thy depths, O aromatic forest! lies.
   And like to spirits floating unto melodies,
   Mine own, Belovèd! glides within thy sacred scent.

   There I will hasten, where the trees and humankind
   With languor lull beside the hot and silent sea;
   Strong tresses bear me, be to me the waves and wind!
   Within thy fragrance lies a dazzling dream confined
   Of sails and masts and flames--O lake of ebony!

   A loudly echoing harbour, where my soul may hold
   To quaff, the silver cup of colours, scents and sounds,
   Wherein the vessels glide upon a sea of gold,
   And stretch their mighty arms, the glory to enfold
   Of virgin skies, where never-ending heat abounds.

   I'll plunge my brow, enamoured with voluptuousness
   Within this darkling ocean of infinitude,
   Until my subtle spirit, which thy waves caress,
   Shall find you once again, O fertile weariness;
   Unending lullabye of perfumed lassitude!

   Ye tresses blue--recess of strange and sombre shades,
   Ye make the azure of the starry Realm immense;
   Upon the downy beeches, by your curls' cascades,
   Among your mingling fragrances, my spirit wades
   To cull the musk and cocoa-nut and lotus scents.

   Long--foraye--my hand, within thy heavy mane,
   Shall scatter rubies, pearls, sapphires eternally,
   And thus my soul's desire for thee shall never wane;
   For art not thou the oasis where I dream and drain
   With draughts profound, the golden wine of memory?"
(Charles Baudelaire, The flowers of evil, 1857)

E1.6.C.2.1.c. THE ARTIST GIVES SHAPE TO THE WORLD AND REVEALS THE FULLNESS OF THE MOMENT
The artist gives shape to the world, bringing the phenomenon to a kind of incandescence that reveals the fullness of the moment: "In its energies the objects of the world are made new, alchemized by their passage through the imaginal, musical, world-foraging and word-forging mind."

E1.6.C.2.1.c_REF1_PH "ART IS THE REVEALER OF ETERNITY, AND THE ARTIST MAKES US INTERESTED IN LIFE (the phenomenon recreated by art functions as a lure for desire, and the "veil of Maya" is the adornment of a seductress) through the invention of new values, which transfigure life in our eyes. 
This thesis, of the transfiguration of the world by art, of its re-creation through the invention of new "values", turns the classical maxim on its head: it is not art that imitates nature, it is conversely nature that imitates art. [...] Without art, we would miss the beauty of this world, and life would perish with boredom. In this way, the artist is the true meta-physician, since it is his task to raise the stage of this world to the glory of eternity, to reunite heaven and earth, to rediscover the earthly paradise.
This is the foundation of a theory of style, and even of what Nietzsche calls "the great style", which is that higher activity of the will to power, which brings form out of chaos, which brings value out of the undifferentiated. Art shapes and recreates the world. Style understood in this way is not the expression of subjectivity, the projection of psychology: on the contrary, it is objective rather than subjective, sculpting the shape of the world, making phenomena appear in the scintillation of their presence, in the eternity of the present. The " great style " affirms the value of the fleeting and the contingent transfigured into the eternal (Baudelaire), the rare brilliance of form, and "against the value of that which remains eternally identical (the naiveté of Spinoza, Descartes too), the value of that which is most brief, most perishable, the seductive glitter of gold on the belly of the serpent vita" (posthumous fragment, autumn 1887, OC: XIII, p. 26). In another posthumous fragment, from spring 1888: 14 [61] (OC, XIV, p. 48), entitled "Music and the Great Style", Nietzsche wrote: "The greatness of an artist is not measured by the beautiful feelings he arouses; that is what good women believe [alluding to Wagnerian women, always hysterical according to Nietzsche]. But to the extent that it approaches great style, to the extent that it is capable of great style [...] To master the chaos that one is: to force one's chaos to become form; to become necessity in form: to become logical, simple, unequivocal, mathematical; to become law - that is the great ambition." Great style gives form to the world, and the artist brings the phenomenon to a kind of incandescence that reveals the fullness of the present. Through this formalism, this cult of form that turned him away from Wagner and towards Bizet's Carmen, Nietzsche considerably apollinated the Dionysus of The Birth of Tragedy, and drew closer to certain aesthetic currents of his time, which he was nevertheless unaware of. [...] Art thus plays an active part in the progress of visibility: it discovers new possibilities for us, enriching our vision by bringing to light nuances, contrasts and iridescence that we had previously failed to see. It makes us see. Without the aesthetic stimuli with which painting has enriched our visual field, we might still see the world in black and white: "The rest of us are stuck in the perceptions that our eyes offer us, and our power of visual representation soon reaches its limit, an impenetrable darkness paralyzes us. The artist, on the other hand, finds within himself the means to express and grasp with increasing precision those vague, indeterminate processes by which we perceive a visible world as a whole" (Fiedler, On the Origin of Artistic Activity, ed. Kohn, p. 87). There's nothing unconscious about this work on the visible. On the contrary, according to Fiedler, the artist is in a sense hyperconscious: he elevates sensation to the awareness of his own activity, he perceives actively and no longer passively: "If, for others, the artist seems to carry out his activity in a kind of dream, for him, this activity is a real awakening" (ibid. p. 90). We perceive the visible in a kind of twilight state; the artist calls us to a higher lucidity. [...]"
(Jacques Darriulat, "Become what you are", 2007-08

E1.6.C.2.1.c_REF2_LIT "THE DAILY ROUTINE OF MOST ADULTS IS SO HEAVY AND ARTIFICIAL THAT WE ARE CLOSED OFF TO MUCH OF THE WORLD. We have to do this in order to get our work done. I think one purpose of art is to get us out of those routines. When we hear music or poetry or stories, the world opens up again. We’re drawn in — or out — and the windows of our perception are cleansed, as William Blake said. The same thing can happen when we’re around young children or adults who have unlearned those habits of shutting the world out."
(Jonathan Whyte, Interview with Ursula K. Le Guin, Talking on the Water: Conversations about Nature and Creativity, 2016)

E1.6.C.2.1.c_REF3_PO "GOOD ART IS A TRUING OF VISION, IN THE WAY A SAW IS TRUED IN THE SAW SHOP, TO CUT MORE CLEANLY. It is also a changing of vision. Entering a good poem, a person feels, tastes, hears, thinks, and sees in altered ways. Why ask art into a life at all, if not to be transformed and enlarged by its presence and mysterious means? … And by changing selves, one by one, art changes also the outer world that selves create and share…. Inside the intricate clockworks of language and music, event and life, what allows and invites us to feel and know as we do, and then increase our feeling and knowing? Such a question cannot be answered. “We” are different, from one another and, moment by moment, from even ourselves. “Art,” too, is a word deceptively single of surface. Still, following this question for thirty years has given me pleasure, and some sense of approaching more nearly a destination whose center cannot ever be mapped or reached. [...]

A mysterious quickening inhabits the depths of any good poem—protean, elusive, alive in its own right…. We feel something stir, shiver, swim its way into the world when a good poem opens its eyes. Poetry’s work is not simply the recording of inner or outer perception; it makes by words and music new possibilities of perceiving…. The eyes and ears must learn to abandon the habits of useful serving and take up instead a participatory delight in their own ends. A work of art is not a piece of fruit lifted from a tree branch: it is a ripening collaboration of artist, receiver, and world. […]

All writers recognize this surge of striking; in its energies the objects of the world are made new, alchemized by their passage through the imaginal, musical, world-foraging and word-forging mind.

This altered vision is the secret happiness of poems, of poets. It is as if the poem encounters the world and finds in it a hidden language, a Braille unreadable except when raised by the awakened imaginative mind. [...]


Poetry itself, when allowed to, becomes within us a playable organ of perception, sounding out its own forms of knowledge and forms of discovery. Poems do not simply express. They make, they find, they sound (in both meanings of that word) things undiscoverable by other means. […]

A poem is not the outer event or phenomenon it ostensibly describes, nor is it the feeling or insight it may seem to reveal or evoke. A poem may involve both, but is, more complexly, a living fabrication of new comprehension — “fabrication” meaning, not accidentally, both “lie,” “falsehood,” and, more simply and fundamentally, anything created and made: the bringing of something freshly into being. Fabric, whether of material or mind, is an interwoven invention: some substance — silk or cotton, wool or image — made stronger, larger than itself, by the dual-natured meeting of warp thread and weft thread. A work of art holds our lives as they are known when fully engaged with the multiple, crossing experience-strands of self, language, culture, emotion, senses, and mind. [...]

The desire of monks and mystics is not unlike that of artists: to perceive the extraordinary within the ordinary by changing not the world but the eyes that look… To form the intention of new awareness is already to transform and be transformed. [...]

A poem plucks the interconnection of the experiencing self and all being. In poetry’s words, life calls to life with the same inevitability and gladness that bird calls to bird, whale to whale, frog to frog. Listening across the night or ocean or pond, they recognize one another and are warmed by that knowledge."
(Jane Hirshfield,  Ten Windows: How Great Poems Transform the World, 2015)

E1.6.C.2.1.c_REF4_PO "GARDEN

If the gardener abandoned his task in the middle of it 
and sat down tired in a chair
and spent the whole afternoon
under fat roses that are only roses
that blind us with joy
while the garden
in himself
contorts itself 
sourcing out of himself
the intricate sex of the camellias 
and the death and madness of the lilies 
and the suburban boredom of guavas 
subject to archaical commotions 
he might feel like a poet 
looking at the poem 
that doesn't know how to end."
(Ana Martins Marques, Paper boats, Life under water, 2009

E1.6.C.2.1.c_REF5_CUR TO BREATHE THE SHADE IS TO REVEAL
“Men and trees do not breathe to the same rhythm. On entering Giuseppe Penone's installation, the scent given off by walls covered in bay leaves reminds us of that unconscious bodily necessity. The vegetal enters our lungs, the work literally invading us as we advance towards an illuminated form in which one recognizes, precisely, the human respiratory system. Outside his drawings, the figurative is very rare in Penone's work. Yet the imitation here is in keeping with its context, for it was produced by arranging bay leaves and casting them in bronze. To breathe the shade is to reveal.”
(Curatorship: Centre Pompidou, Paris)

E1.6.C.2.2. DEVELOPING TACIT UNDERSTANDING WITH REALITY
Art at its peak implies a profound connection between humanity and the world, often referred to in Chinese as a "tacit understanding." It goes beyond mere rational knowledge to establish an intimate perception that connects us spiritually with the world. Through the metaphor of landscape, a place can transcend its physical existence to create a resonant connection with the observer. This concept is particularly significant as it offers a counterpoint to the Enlightenment's rational approach, which, while advancing scientific understanding, led to a disconnect from nature and diminished appreciation of emotional and aesthetic experiences.

E1.6.C.2.2.a. TACIT UNDERSTANDING WITH REALITY
François Cheng introduces us to three core concepts of Chinese aesthetics that are used to evaluate works of art. The highest quality a piece must possess is divine resonance. This is a presence that aligns with the divine spirit and enlightenment. The pinnacle of art suggests a deep, soul-to-soul connection between humans and the divine, or the world for those who are non-believers. This concept is referred to as "tacit understanding" in the Chinese language.

E1.6.C.2.2.a_REF1_PH FRANÇOIS CHENG EXPLORES THREE FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS OF CHINESE AESTHETICS: YIN-YUN (UNIFYING INTERACTION), QI-YUN (RHYTHMIC BREATH), AND SHEN-YUN (DIVINE RESONANCE). These concepts serve as criteria for evaluating works of art, ranging from the unification of elements to the divine presence felt in the work. He also emphasizes the notion of yi-jing (soul dimension), which evokes a connivance between the human and the divine, and the importance of emptiness in Chinese art as a symbol of expectation and potential.
"For my part, I will retain three notions of Chinese aesthetics that seem fundamental to me. All three relate primarily to visual art, but are also valid for other art forms. They form a three-tiered "system" that can be used as a criterion for evaluating and judging works of art. I will present them in the following organic order: yin-yun, qi-yun and shen-yun.

1. As a basic level, yin-yun, "unifying interaction. [...] Thus, in the brush stroke that realizes yin-yun, the carnal relationship is forged between the feeling body of the artist and the feeling body of the landscape. All in all, yin-yun is indeed this intrinsic quality of a work: a unifying order that emerges from a multi-level interaction between the various elements that make up a material, between matter and spirit, and ultimately between the human subject and the living universe, which is itself a subject.

2. As an intermediate level, qi-yun, "rhythmic breathing. [A rhythm does not unfold in time and space, it is the generator of its space-time. The emergence of a rhythmic space is one with the constitutive transformation of all the elements of a work of art into a moment of form, into a moment of rhythm. This rhythm is not before us; it is not something that can be possessed. We are in the rhythm. Present to it, we discover ourselves present to ourselves. We exist in this opening of being. Rhythm is a form of surprised existence... Rare are the works in which we have reason to be present.

3. Finally, at the highest level, shen-yun, "divine resonance. This term refers to the supreme quality a work must possess: to be of the highest order. It is difficult to grasp because it seems to suggest something abstract and vague. The Chinese are careful not to freeze it in an overly rigid definition, considering the quality it evokes as a state that can be experienced without being able to explain it. [...] The appearance of a presence - not in the figurative or anthropological sense of the word, which can be felt or sensed, but the very presence of the divine spirit. In all its invisible aspects, this presence corresponds to what Chinese theorists call xiang-wai-zhi-xiang, "the image beyond images. It is also close to what Chan spirituality experiences as enlightenment. When we stand in front of a natural scene, a tree in bloom, a bird flying away with a cry, a ray of sunlight or moonlight illuminating a moment of silence, we suddenly go to the other side of the scene, we find ourselves beyond the screen of phenomena, and we experience the impression of a presence that is self-evident, It comes to us, whole, undivided, inexplicable and yet undeniable, like a generous gift that makes everything wonderfully present, spreading a light of original color, whispering a song that is native from heart to heart, from soul to soul.

I have just said the word "soul"; it brings to mind the notion of yi-jing, "soul dimension," which we encountered in the second meditation on the rose, and which in Chinese aesthetic thought is somewhat equivalent to shen-yun, "divine resonance. Like shen, yi, "disposition of the heart, of the soul," is what both human beings and the living universe are endowed with. The yi-jing thus suggests a soul to soul understanding between man and the divine, which the Chinese language refers to as mo-qi, "tacit understanding.
An understanding that is never complete: there will always be a hiatus, a suspension, a gap to be filled. The sought-after infinity is in fact an un-infinity. The void that stretches across a scroll of Chinese painting is there to signify this. This breathless emptiness conceals an expectation, a listening, ready to welcome a new arrival, to herald a new understanding. For his part, the artist is always ready to endure pain and suffering, hardship and ruin, to the point of being consumed by the fire of his act, of being drawn into the space of the work. He knows that beauty, more than a given, is the supreme gift of what has been offered. And that for man, more than an achievement, it will always be a challenge, a gamble".
(François Cheng, Five meditations on beauty – Fifth meditation, 2006)

E1.6.C.2.2.b. TACIT UNDERSTANDING BRINGS THE WORLD OUT OF ITS INDIFFERENCE AND CONNECTS IT TO MY VITALITY
"Knowledge is rooted in objectification and abstraction, while connivance stems from  a tacit understanding of the world. Connivance allows us to perceive the world in a more intimate way, uncovering a spiritual dimension and establishing a connection between us and the world. It's a shift from reason, not denying conscious reason, but harmonizing with the resonance and fluctuations of nature.
“In essence, this transformation occurs when a country becomes a landscape. What I grasp in it is no longer alien to me, but communicates, 'speaks to me', 'touches me'. It is not a self-projecting subject that casts itself into the landscape, making it the confidant of its emotion (the common stance of cheap romanticism), but rather the landscape, by standing out, pulls me into its field of tension, resonating with its variation. As Stendhal remarked, the landscape is like a bow "that played on my soul". From beneath the mind asserting itself autonomously (the island subject knowing and wanting), it revives my more original affiliation to the world, a world that has risen from its indifference and into which my vitality plugs in.”

E1.6.C.2.2.b_REF1_PH FRANÇOIS JULLIEN EXPLORES THE TRANSFORMATION OF "LAND" INTO "LANDSCAPE" AS A SHIFT FROM OBJECTIVE KNOWLEDGE TO AFFECTIVE AND PERCEPTIVE CONNIVANCE. He emphasizes that this relationship is not a subjective projection, but a resonance with the landscape, which becomes a partner and a vital link, without falling into irrationalism or mysticism. The landscape, by distinguishing itself, reveals our original belonging to the world.
"There is a 'landscape' when my cognitive capacity switches and is reversed into collusion; when the relationship of objectification, and above all of observation, that I maintain with the world is transformed into tacit understanding and communication: from knowing that I was vis-à-vis the 'country' (the knowledge of geography), I become collusive again in a landscape. Not, strictly speaking, that I "personify" elements of the landscape, or that I "project" myself into them, or that I lend my subjectivity to things, or that I animate the inanimate, as has been said and rehashed, as if to compensate for the rationalism of knowledge, the ordinary romanticism, the chatty romanticism, in Europe - all operations in which the subject still wants to be the master and which are only devices. But this transformation does take place: when the land becomes landscape, what I perceive in it is no longer foreign to me, but beckons to me, "speaks to me," "touches me," as we say colloquially (but can we ever escape this colloquialism?). That is to say, as the Chinese literary painters have expressed it so beautifully, that the perceptive becomes affective at the same time, or that I then perceive from the inside as from the outside of myself; by which a dimension of infinity or of spirit then emanates from the physicality of things and is released from it, with which my mind "understands" (softly, as the Chinese strategically put it). The country becomes the landscape - do we know, or rather "do we really know", but the Chinese language of thought has proved particularly gifted in expressing this implicitness, when this "corner of the country" thus establishes itself as a partner, the tension that promotes it integrates me and is shared: there is a "landscape", in other words, when a relationship is established (re-established) with this "country" that makes me go back upstream - finds its source on this side of that which is established by knowing reason; when the place suddenly becomes a "link"; and when this "corner of the country" then "becomes the world": when I connect with it as with that which makes the world. [...] 
At the same time, there is no fusional shift, no compensatory slide into the ecstatic or the mystical, as so much bad lyricism in Europe has advocated, I do not then lapse into any irrationalism (this is an upstream of reason and not its polemical refusal), on which the famous "communion" or symbiosis with nature, coming as reparation for knowing reason, at least leaves ambiguity hanging in the air. [...]
Let it not, then, be a subject-self that projects itself into the landscape, making it the confidant of its emotion (which I have just stigmatized as the banal attitude of bad romanticism), but let it be the landscape that, by setting itself apart, draws me into its field of tension, resonates with its variation (the landscape is like a bow "that has played on my soul," said Stendhal), brings back - from beneath the mind that asserts itself as autonomous (the insular subject that knows and wants) - my more original belonging to the world: a world that has emerged from its indifference and to which my vitality is bound."
(François Jullien, Chinese thought vis-à-vis philosophy, 2015)

E1.6.C.2.2.b_REF2_PH FRANÇOIS JULLIEN EXPLORES THE ALTERNATION BETWEEN TWO REGIMES OF THINKING "To tell the truth, we live in the alternation between these two registers, or rather these two regimes [...] I press more on one key or the other of my inner keyboard; I constantly move the cursor between one pole and the other. For we live by moving discreetly from one to the other, and in this agility, by advancing (asserting) the knowing, or by retreating, conniving, regressing from our autarkic self. Now, the ideal for the knowing subject is modeling. But how can we go one step further and name the other side of this, the side that has remained in the shadows, which means that the capacity is acquired and grows, but silently, without even paying attention to this continuous process, until we finally see the result?
(François Jullien, Chinese thought vis-à-vis philosophy, 2015)

E1.6.C.2.2.b_REF3_TH IN [GREAT WORKS OF ART] A FRAGMENT OF THE UNITARY REALITY IS APPREHENDED — A DEEPER, MORE PRIMORDIAL, AND AT THE SAME TIME MORE COMPLETE REALITY that we are fundamentally unable to grasp with our differentiated conscious functions, because their development is oriented toward a sharper perception of sections of polarized reality.

“Although the creative process, in all its gripping possession, feels so profoundly personal, in its highest form it is inseparable from the universal, from the immensity of the one reality we share, the one experience we share — the fundamental unity which sparked quantum pioneer Erwin Schrödinger’s koan-like pronouncement that “the over-all number of minds is just one.” We habitually lose sight of that oneness as the mind splits into consciousness and the unconscious. Creativity is what we call the process of integrating the two so that we may feel more fully and see more deeply into the nature of reality.”

(Maria Popova review´s of Erich Neumann’s Art and the Creative Unconscious, 1960 - in The Marginalian)

“When we consider the totality of the human psyche, in which consciousness and the unconscious are interdependent both in their development and in their functions, we see that consciousness can develop only where it preserves a living bond with the creative powers of the unconscious… It must not be forgotten that the outside world that we apprehend with our differentiated consciousness is only a segment of reality, and that our consciousness has developed and differentiated itself as a specialized organ for apprehending this particular segment of reality… We pay a heavy price for the sharpness of our conscious knowledge, which is based on the separation of the psychic systems and which breaks down the one world into the polarity of psyche and world. This price is a drastic curtailment of the reality that we experience. […]

In [great works of art] a fragment of the unitary reality is apprehended — a deeper, more primordial, and at the same time more complete reality that we are fundamentally unable to grasp with our differentiated conscious functions, because their development is oriented toward a sharper perception of sections of polarized reality. In the differentiation of consciousness we seem to be doing the same thing as when we close our eyes in order to enhance our hearing, in order that we may be “all ears.” Unquestionably this exclusion sharpens and intensifies our hearing. But in thus excluding the other senses we perceive only a segment of the total sensory reality, which we experience more adequately and fully if we not only hear it but also see, smell, taste, and touch it. […]

In the rapture and beauty of the creative moment… consciousness and the unconscious momentarily become a creative unity and a third term, a part of the one reality. […]

Always and everywhere [the creative person] is driven to rediscover, to reawaken, to give form to this world. But he does not find this world as though seeking something outside him; rather, he knows that this encounter with full reality, the one world, in which everything is still “whole,” is bound up with his own transformation toward wholeness. For this reason he must, in every situation, in every constellation, refresh the openness into which alone the open world can enter.”
(Erich Neumann,  Art and the Creative Unconscious, 1960)

Read it in The Marginalian: 
https://www.themarginalian.org/2025/05/02/erich-neumann-art-unconscious/?mc_cid=d302573a35&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E1.6.C.2.2.b_REF4_CUR ILLUSTRATION OF THE EVER-CHANGING NATURE OF REALITY
“Early in his career, Arp criticized classical art, writing, "The illusionist sculptures of the Greeks ... led man to overestimate his nature, to separation and discord." Nonetheless, he was also fascinated by other aspects of antiquity, such as the writings of the pre-Socratic philosopher Heraclitus, who insisted on the ever-changing nature of reality. In the 1950s, Arp's trips to Greece and the eastern Mediterranean further stimulated his interest. One of his most elegant and popular-late works, Classical Sculpture appears misleadingly conventional. Assuming the form of a standing, probably female, figure, it is irresolvably ambiguous in execution: moving slowly around the sculpture reveals shifting contours that make it difficult to ascertain the front and profile aspects of the figure.”
(Curatorship: Peggy Guggenheim Collection, Venice)

E1.6.C.2.2.b_REF5_CUR NEW PERCEPTUAL APPROACHES TO REALITY.
“The New Realists have become aware of their collective uniqueness. New realism = new perceptual approaches to reality.”
“Les Nouveaus réalistes ont rpis cnscience de leur singularité collective. Nouveau réalisme = nouvelles approches perceptives du réel.”

E1.6.C.2.2.c. EITHER JOY IS REASONABLE - BUT IT'S NOT JOY - OR IT ISN'T, AND IS THEREFORE PARADOXICAL, BUT TRUE. 
"If I have reasons to be happy and I don't want to see the tragedy of existence, my joy is illusory, based as it is on an incomplete representation of a world reduced to its good moments. It's a fleeting joy that lacks substance and depth."
(Clément Rosset in the program À Voie Nue broadcast on France Culture on June, 1st 2018)

E1.6.C.2.2.c_REF1_PH CLÉMENT ROSSET EXPLORES THE JOYFUL NATURE OF MUSIC, DEFINING IT AS A REVELATION OF REALITY WITHOUT WORDS AND UNCONDITIONAL JOY. Unlike illusory joy, which is based on an incomplete vision of reality, true joy is paradoxical and profound. Music replaces traditional philosophical foundations as the primary revelation of the meaning and cause of existence.
"Clément Rosset - Music and Joy Music, expressing only itself, reveals the wondrous fact of existence - and is therefore jubilant. It is reality without words, joy without cause, reality revealed. 
If I have reason to be happy and do not want to see the tragedy of existence, my joy is illusory because it is based on the incomplete representation of a world reduced to its good moments. It is a fleeting joy that lacks substance and depth. Either joy is reasonable - but it is not joy - or it is not reasonable and therefore paradoxical, but true. True joy is a mad joy...in spite of everything. There is a tradition of Christian mysticism that is consistent with this vision.
Joy is amazement (not acceptance, not affirmation, if by that we mean a justified or intellectualistic affirmation) at the fullness of reality - the rejection of the double. The fabrication of the double has two main motivations: the refusal of reality (anything but this!) or the expression of a lack - the inability to feel the fullness of reality.
For Schopenhauer, aesthetic experience and music are comforting. For Rosset, joy is no consolation. Music does not console, it allows the causeless blossoming of joy. If, for Nietzsche, "life without music would be a mistake," it is because he believes that the conditions for the absolute affirmation of the Spinozist type are fulfilled by the immediate and absolute experience that music provides.
In the drunken song in the penultimate chapter of Zarathustra, Nietzsche also tells us: "I have discovered the truth of truths: joy is deeper than sorrow. It is the virtuous circle of joy that can change from passive to active in Spinoza.
In La force majeure, Clément Rosset writes: "Music is what occupies all the nerve centers of the 'philosophy of Nietzsche,' for whom it replaces exactly everything that, in this or that system, is called upon to act as a principle or a foundation: it is what answers all questions and thus takes the place of theology, metaphysics, and physics. It is the primary revelation that provides once and for all sufficient information about the meaning, cause and purpose of all existence."
(Clément Rosset on the program À Voie Nue broadcast on France Culture on June 1, 2018)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/a-voix-nue/clement-rosset-autant-etre-heureux-et-ne-pas-se-tourmenter-puisque-le-pire-est-certain-9752496

E1.6.C.2.2.d. THE CONCEPT OF OURSELVES AS A BRIDGE TO NATURE HAS BEEN FORGOTTEN IN RECENT TIMES
The Enlightenment era introduced a fresh, rational perspective in comprehending the world, but it also led to a growing disconnect from nature and diminished the importance of emotions and beauty. Schelling's philosophy of unity brought together what the scientific revolution had separated: nature and humankind. His philosophy became the driving force of Romanticism. Art was perceived as the manifestation of the bond between the individual and nature and was deemed essential for understanding the world. Nevertheless, the concept of ourselves as a bridge to nature has been forgotten in recent times.

E1.6.C.2.2.d_REF1_PH THE ENLIGHTENMENT DISTANCED HUMANITY FROM NATURE BY FOCUSING ON RATIONALITY AND OBJECTIVITY, BUT SCHELLING'S PHILOSOPHY REUNITED NATURE AND HUMANKIND, emphasizing the emotional and visceral connection to nature. His ideas became central to Romanticism, asserting that art, as a union of the self and nature, is essential for understanding the world.
"The Enlightenment had truly enlightened. But this new rational approach had also created a certain distancing from nature and excluded the roles of feeling and beauty. Nature had become something that was investigated from a so-called objective perspective. Light, for example, was no longer appreciated for its kaleidoscopic play of iridescent colours, Novalis said, but for its refraction and “mathematical obedience”: hence its elevation to the term “Enlightenment” itself. This was why Schelling’s students fell for their young professor. He reunited what the scientific revolution had separated: nature and humankind. No matter how much scientists observed, calculated and experimented, there was something emotional, something visceral and perhaps inexplicable about humanity’s connection to nature. However we feel it, nature can soothe, heal or simply fill us with joy. Schelling gave us the philosophical explanation.
And by doing so, his philosophy of oneness became the heartbeat of Romanticism.  [...]

An artwork — a painting, a sculpture, a poem — was therefore the expression of the union between the self and nature. Whatever an artist produced was created by nature through him or her. Nature — the unconscious product of the self — and the conscious self came together in the artistic creation. Art was therefore essential in order to make sense of the world, Schelling declared. Neither rational thought nor the most accurate scientific instruments held the key to understanding the world. Art was the finite or concrete representation of the infinite. Art opened “the holiest of holies,” Schelling wrote. It was the revelation of the universe through the creative production of an artist."
(Andrea Wulf, Magnificent Rebels: The First Romantics and the Invention of the Self, 2022)

E1.6.C.2.2.d_REF1.1_PH MARIA POPOVA DISCUSSES HOW THE ORIGINAL PHILOSOPHY OF ROMANTICISM, INTENDED TO CONNECT INDIVIDUALS TO EACH OTHER AND NATURE, HAS MUTATED INTO A SELF-CENTERED IDEOLOGY. She argues that reclaiming the original intent can transform the self into a source of creativity and connection.
"But all great ideas, if followed not critically but cultishly, run the risk of metastasizing into dogmas. Today, we are living with one such metastasis of Romanticism in our staggering epidemic of selfing — rather than connecting us to each other and the living world as kindred elements in a system, the inflamed I has folded us unto ourselves: living proteins of ego. It is by returning to the original philosophy, before its mutation, that we stand a chance of reclaiming the self as a crucible of creativity and a portal of connection to nature."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian, Review on Andrea Wulf's Magnificent Rebels: The First Romantics and the Invention of the Self, 2022)

E1.6.C.2.2.d_REF1.2_PO “ONE MORE CONTRADICTION
Did I fulfill what I had to, here, on earth?
I was a guest in a house under white clouds
Where rivers flow and grasses renew themselves.
So what if I were called, if I was hardly aware.
The next time early I would search for wisdom.
I would not pretend I could be just like the others:
Only evil and suffering come from that.
Renouncing, I would choose the fate of obedience.
I would suppress my wolf's eye and greedy throat.
A resident of some cloister floating in the air
With a view on the cities glowing below,
Or onto a stream, a bridge and old cedars,
I would give myself to one task only.
Which then, however, could not be accomplished”
(Czeslaw Milosz)

E1.7.A.3.1.wE1.6.C.2.2. POETRY: AN ART THAT CONVEYS A SENSE OF THE UNIVERSE.
Paul Valéry characterizes poetry and poetic emotion as an emerging perception of a world or comprehensive system of relationships. In this system, beings, things, events, and actions are indistinctly but accurately linked to the modes and laws of our general sensibility. To preserve this emotion, humans have devised methods to capture and replicate it through various arts, including music, painting, and architecture.

E1.6.C.2.3. OVERCOMING SUFFERING
Art helps the artist sublimate his pain; by hi sexample, he helps us to remember the rightful place of suffering in a good life. It is not that artists suffer more than others, or that one must suffer to be an artist, but the artist has a way of sublimating pain that others do not.

E1.6.C.2.3.a. ONE OF THE UNEXPECTEDLY IMPORTANT THINGS THAT ART CAN DO FOR US IS TEACH US HOW TO SUFFER MORE SUCCESSFULLY.
We can see a great deal of artistic achievement as “sublimated" sorrow on the part of the artist, and in turn, in its reception, on the part of the audience. 

E1.6.C.2.3.a_REF1_PH ART HELPS US BECOME MORE WHOLE BY EXPANDING OUR CAPACITY FOR POSITIVE EMOTIONS AND HELPING US PROCESS NEGATIVE ONES WITH DIGNITY. "Since we’re creatures of infinite inner contradiction, art can help us be more whole not only by expanding our capacity for positive emotions but also by helping us to fully inhabit and metabolize the negative — and by doing so with dignity and by reminding us « of the legitimate place of sorrow in a good life » :
« One of the unexpectedly important things that art can do for us is teach us how to suffer more successfully. … We can see a great deal of artistic achievement as “sublimated" sorrow on the part of the artist, and in turn, in its reception, on the part of the audience. The term sublimation derives from chemistry. It names the process by which a solid substance is directly transformed into a gas, without first becoming liquid. In art, sublimation refers to the psychological processes of transformation, in which base and unimpressive experiences are converted into something noble and fine — exactly what may happen when sorrow meets art [...]
Art can offer a grand and serious vantage point from which to survey the travails of our condition. »"
(Maria Popova´s review of Alain de Botton & John Armstrong's Art as Therapy)

E1.6.C.2.3.a_REF2_LIT “THE STUBBORN ART OF TURNING SUFFERING INTO STRENGTH: VÁCLAV HAVEL’S EXTRAORDINARY LETTERS FROM PRISON
I have got to make everything that has happened to me good for me,” Oscar Wilde wrote from prison. “There is not a single degradation of the body which I must not try and make into a spiritualising of the soul.”  

The cruel kindness of life is that our sturdiest fulcrum of transformation is the devastation of our hopes and wishes — the losses, the heartbreaks, the diagnoses that shatter the template of the self, leaving us to reconstitute a new way of being from the rubble. In those moments, brutal and inevitable, we come to realize that no prayer or protest will bend reality to our will, that we are being bent to it instead and we have two options only: bow or break. Suffering, surrender, transformation — this may be the simplest formulation of the life process. It is the evolutionary mechanism of adaptation by which every creature on Earth became what it is. It is existential mechanism by which we become who we are. In a universe where free will may well be an illusion, what we make of our suffering may be the measure and meaning of our freedom. “Everything can be taken from a man,” Viktor Frankl wrote in his epochal memoir of surviving the unsurvivable, “but one thing: the last of the human freedoms — to choose one’s attitude in any given set of circumstances, to choose one’s own way.”  

Just before dawn on May 29, 1979, the Czechoslovakian State Security Police barged into the home of the playwright, essayist, and poet Václav Havel (October 5, 1936–December 18, 2011), dragged him out of bed, and threw him in a municipal jail along with ten other members of the Committee to Defend the Unjustly Prosecuted — a human rights movement formed to bring to light cases of people harassed and imprisoned for speaking up against the dictatorship.  

Havel was not surprised. A decade earlier, he had discovered a listening device in the ceiling of his Prague apartment. He had been trailed by the secret police ever since. He had watched his books removed from schools and public libraries, his plays banned from the stage.  

“It’s Tuesday evening and I’ve just returned from court a sentenced man,” he wrote to his wife Olga when he was found guilty on charges of “subversion” a month after his forty-third birthday. “I’m taking my sentence, as they say, philosophically.” The philosophy he drew from the experience would lead him to write the finest thing I have ever read about the meaning of hope.

Havel was sent to a prison ruled by a sadistic admirer of Hitler who in his heyday had presided over a Stalinist prison camp. Now, all the more embittered by the knowledge that he was nearing the end of his career, the warden spent his days tormenting his captives in body and in mind. The prisoners, whose days were filled with hard labor, were allowed to write to just one person, a single four-page letter a week. Havel chose Olga — “a working-class girl, very much her own person, sober, unsentimental,” who had always been the first reader of all his work and his “main authority when it comes to judging it.” Looking back on his life, he would recall: “I needed an energetic woman beside me to turn to for advice and yet still be someone I could be in awe of.” 

The letters had to be legible, with nothing corrected or crossed out. Quotation marks, foreign expressions, underlining, and humor were forbidden. Those deemed to contain too many “thoughts” were confiscated. Once, Havel was thrown into solitary confinement after it was discovered that he had been writing on behalf of an illiterate Roma man, just as Whitman had done for illiterate Civil War soldiers an epoch ago and a world away.  

Still, as if to remind us that constraint is a catalyst of creativity, Havel managed to contraband a wealth of “thoughts” in these spare dispatches to his wife. They survive as Letters to Olga — the extraordinary record of the philosophy he drew from his plight, out of which arises a lucid and luminous field guide to suffering as an instrument of self-refinement, an ode to the refusal of having one’s spirit broken by any depredation of the body or the mind, and a stubborn insistence on kindness as the only lifeline amid cruelty.

Days after his sentence, with an eye to the five years ahead — an unimaginable time horizon of freedom — Havel outlines his spiritual strategy for survival:  

I find myself in a radically new existential situation, and the first thing I have to do is learn to live with it, which means finding a completely new structure of values and a new perspective on everything — other hopes, other aims, other interests, other joys. I have to create a new concept of time for myself and ultimately a new concept of life.  

But, in consonance with the visionary Elizabeth Peabody’s admonition that the greatest danger to the gifted is middle age, “when a false wisdom tempts them to doubt the divine origin of the dreams of their youth,” Havel realizes that this new concept is in fact a return to a prior purity occluded by the self we ossify into when we begin believing our own myth, which may be the greatest danger to the artist. (The recovery of that deeper purity is what Hermann Hesse meant when he contemplated discovering the soul beneath the self.) Suddenly horrified by the way we have of caving in on ourselves by becoming our own favorite subject, Havel tells Olga:  

Learning to live with this new situation and one of the tasks I’ve set myself during this long stay in prison will be a kind of “self-consolidation.” When I began to write plays, I wasn’t as inwardly burdened as I have been in recent years; I had… far more equanimity; I saw most things in proportion; I had a balanced outlook and a sense of humor, without a trace of uptightness, hysteria, bitterness. The positions I took were not absolute; I wasn’t constantly brooding over myself, absorbed in my own feelings, etc. — and at the same time I possessed a kind of harmonious inner certitude. Obsessive critical introspection is the other side of “pigheadedness.”  

With an eye to the fault lines that often become frontiers of growth, he adds:  

Jail, of all places, may seem to you a strange instrument of this self-reconstitution, but I truly feel that when I’m cut off from all my former commitments for so long, I might somehow achieve inner freedom and a new mastery over myself. I don’t intend to revise my view of the world, of course, but rather to find a better way of fulfilling the demands that the world — as I see it — places on me. I don’t want to change myself, but to be myself in a better way… It also seems to me that the only way for someone like me to survive here is to breathe his own meaning into the experience.  

Prison calibrated his metric for what constitutes a good or bad day. A hot bath, a healthy meal, and “a marvelous session of yoga” left him gladdened to the bone. Of the bad days he could say little — no record survives of the abuses he endured — other than reporting on the “sheer agony” of his hemorrhoids. (“It’s worse here than it would be outside… You’re alone with your pain and you have to go through with it.”) He decided that, “theoretically,” nothing could stop him from writing a new play while in prison. (He did.) He decided that, practically, he could use the time to improve his English and learn German. In one of his provision lists to Olga, in between a hard case for his glasses, a pocket calendar, warm socks, and “a lot of vitamins,” he requested the German-Czech dictionary from their home and a language textbook. And then he itemized his resolutions for serving his sentence:  

to remain at least as healthy as I am now (and perhaps cure my hemorrhoids); 
generally reconstitute myself psychologically; 
write at least two play; 
improve my English; 
learn German at least as well as I know English; 
study the entire Bible thoroughly. 

Three years into his imprisonment, the state police visited Havel and told him he could be home within the week if only he would write a single sentence renouncing his views and asking for pardon. Unlike Galileo, he refused. Four months later, Havel fell ill with a fever so high that he feared he would not live. So did the wardens, who threw him in the back of a police van and drove him fifty miles to a prison hospital in Prague as he shivered with the delirium of death handcuffed in his pajamas.  

When he slowly returned to the land of the living, Havel gambled that the hospital censors might be less severe than the prison’s and composed the first detailed letter to Olga describing his struggle. It made it. An epoch before social media, she immediately reached out to his friends aboard. Petitions on his behalf began pouring in from all over the world through this borderless network of solidarity.  

One evening after he was sent back to prison, as he was about to go to sleep, several guards suddenly barged into his cell, along with a doctor and “a woman official of some kind.” They informed Havel that his sentence was terminated. He was so astonished that, in a literal embodiment of Dorris Lessing’s metaphor of the prisons we choose to live inside, he asked to spend one more night in his cell. They refused — he was now a civilian. He was taken out in his pajamas.

When Havel reentered the real world, he devoted himself to eradicating the tyrannical impulse that makes dictatorships and their systemic attack on the dignity of human beings possible. Six years after his release from prison, he was unanimously elected president of Czechoslovakia by the Federal Assembly. The following year, when the country held its first free election in nearly half a century, the was re-elected by the people. As tensions between Czechs and Slovaks rose in the 1990s, he governed a divided nation by the personal credo he had articulated in one of his prison letters to Olga — a sentiment as true of physical imprisonment as of the prisons of the mind we enter whenever we succumb to divisive ideologies or take a victim stance toward our suffering:  

I’ve discovered that in lengthy prison terms, sensitive people are in danger of becoming embittered, developing grudges against the world, growing dull, indifferent and selfish. One of my main aims is not to yield an inch to such threats, regardless of how long I’m here. I want to remain open to the world, not to shut myself up against it; I want to retain my interest in other people and my love for them. I have different opinions of different people, but I cannot say that I hate anyone in the world. I have no intention of changing in that regard. If I did, it would mean I had lost.”
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

Read it in the Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2025/02/06/vaclav-havel-letters-to-olga/?mc_cid=2afb17e3f9&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E1.6.C.2.3.b. SCHOPENHAUER BELIEVED THAT ART ALLOWS US TO TRANSCEND THE SUFFERING OF LIFE AND DEATH BY CONTEMPLATING IT AS A SPECTACLE.
Without the intensity of love and the preoccupation with death, would we truly comprehend what it means to be alive? Without these emotions, wouldn't we be stuck in the monotony of daily routine? As discussed in the reflections on beauty, isn't our capacity to find joy in beauty, or even our ability to recognize it, partly influenced by our level of comfort with death?

E1.6.C.2.3.b_REF1_PH JACQUES DARRIULAT DISCUSSES HOW PLATO AND SCHOPENHAUER DEAL WITH THE FUNDAMENTAL EXPERIENCES OF LOVE AND DEATH. The idea of death, Darriulat argues, is essential to understanding life as an incomprehensible miracle and to living fully as a human being.
"Timothée Coyras]: For Plato, there are two fundamental experiences, love and death, which are perhaps experiences of an aesthetic nature...
[Jacques Darriulat]: The violence of love and the anxiety of death are the two demons that pull us by the hair and tear us out of the hypnosis of the cave. Without this double call, without this double sign that reminds them of the mystery, men would live without thinking about what it means to live and what it means to be a man.
[Jacques Darriulat]: Exactly, for Schopenhauer, the will as representation is relieved of the weight of death. The will begins to move toward its extinction, it calms down, because in contemplation it becomes disinterested. Death, or more precisely the suffering of the living, the agony of torment, becomes a spectacle in the work. The violin cries in my place, the symphony dies in my place, and like a spectator-god I contemplate this extinction. It is not I who die, it is the musical phrase that dissolves into silence; it is not I who love, it is the fortissimo that expresses the fury of passion. I linger in contemplation, I transport myself beyond love and life. [...]

To return to Plato, I think only when violence is done to me and I am confronted with the unthinkable. The unthinkable is the infinity of desire and the infinity of silence, the mystery of death. The thought of death must remain in this questioning. There is no proof of immortality in the Phaedo; to assume the immortality of the soul is a "beautiful risk," a gamble, and the prize is never certain. Death is the riddle that calls us to think; without the thought of death, we would go round in circles in the cage of routine, and life would never appear to us for what it is: an incomprehensible miracle. There is this horizon of silence, like the empty sea in front of the beach, and we must be careful not to forget it if we want to live like men and not like animals. The prisoner, overwhelmed by the flood of sensations, falls into the hypnosis of presence; the thinker contemplates absence, he remembers those who are absent".
(Jacques Darriulat, Interview with Nicolas Rousseau and Timothée Coyras, part two, 2010)

E1.6.C.2.3.b_REF1.1_CUR "CANOVA CREATED A MASTERPIECE OF NEOCLASIC SCULPTURE IN CARRARA MARBLE FOR HIS MAUSOLEUM, which is unique in this church. The monument is almost five meters high, but it's embedded in the southern wall of the nave, so you don't notice it when you enter. The perfect, pure lines of the pyramid are as striking as the bottomless central opening that leads to the world of the dead. The life-size funeral procession, which unfolds on an extraordinary marble carpet, offers the spectator a scene that is both tragic and serene. Each of the five figures, except the old man, supported by an allegory of charity, has his head bowed. A dynamic present in the movement of their draped garments, the positions of their bodies and the garlands of flowers makes them a homogeneous and fluid group. Virtue, accompanied by two girls, carries an urn. This is symbolic because this monument is a cenotaph. Marie-Christine was buried, like the entire imperial family, in the Capuchin crypt, which I recommend you visit. The only element that recalls the archduchess is the bas-relief medallion with her portrait at the top of the pyramid, supported by a magnificent duo in high relief. Opposite the procession are a genius and a lion, both mourning the death of Marie-Christine. The movement of this group, marked in the marble by the shield and the inclination of the genius's limbs, contrasts with that of the procession. Together they reinforce the lines of the pyramid and draw our attention to the inscription in golden letters on the door: Uxori optimae Albertus (To the Best Wife, Albert). It was indeed Albert who commissioned Canova to create this sublime monument. A simple and affectionate message.
The sculptor went to Vienna in 1805 to assemble the various sculptural elements produced in his workshop. Interestingly, he used a very similar design for his own tomb, which can be admired in the church of Santa Maria Gloria dei Frari in Venice."

E1.6.C.1.6.wE1.6.C.2.3.b. THE TRANSIENCE OF BEAUTY: A REFLECTION ON MORTALITY
Could it be the fleeting nature of many beautiful things that lends them a hint of impending disappearance as soon as they appear? Our comfort with the concept of death might then reflect our ability to find joy in beauty, or even our ability to recognize it. Immersion in nature can evoke a sense of freedom and a heightened awareness of being alive, while simultaneously reminding us of our finitude. Ultimately, it's a complex yet genuine joy.

E1.6.C.2.3.c. IS PAIN A NECESSARY ELEMENT FOR CREATIVITY?
Many great artists have a conflicted sense of self and strive for uniqueness, even against societal norms. They use art as a medium to connect with others and validate their distinctiveness. So, is pain a prerequisite for creativity? What's certain is that the creative process can be tormenting. As a songwriter, Cave's perceive his role as helping people overcome their grief through music. He posits that songwriting involves remaining conscious of one's own wounds without indulging them, pursuing joy, venturing past convention, and accepting that our most cherished beliefs lie beyond our existing knowledge.

E1.6.C.2.3.c_REF1_PH "DO YOU NEED TO BE HURT OR MENTALLY ILL TO BE A GREAT ARTIST?
LATABAN, ENSENADA, MEXICO

What makes a great song?
MILA, AMSTERDAM, HOLLAND

Dear Lataban and Mila,

It seems to me that many of the great artists, especially in music, appear to possess a wildly conflicted sense of themselves, yet persistently pursue their own uniqueness, even when it runs at odds with the orthodoxies of the day. They tend to be outliers, abyss-gazers and misfits, whose sense of isolation is further amplified by their notoriety, and who use their art as a way of connecting to people and legitimising their own strangeness. They understand, on some level, that it is the nature of their vocation to steal across the borders of convention, collect up ideas and bring them back to the world. This requires a certain reckless spirit and it may be that some spend too long on the other side and that it becomes difficult for them to return. However, whether any of this is actual mental illness, I don’t know. This term feels too elastic, too nebulous to comment.

Whether being hurt is a necessary requirement to creativity is only true in so much as to live is partly to suffer. You cannot create without suffering, because you cannot live without suffering. One of the jobs of a songwriter, as I see it, is to develop strategies to help people transcend their sorrows. This is the unique duality of a great song – that it can reflect back at the listener the extent of their own hurt, yet lift them beyond it at the same time. How often have we wept ourselves to transcendence through music?

Part of the process for the songwriter is to stay alert to the nature of their own wounds without indulging them, to gravitate towards happiness when possible, to venture beyond convention and acceptability without losing oneself, to understand that our most treasured beliefs exist on the far side of what we think we know, and to go there cautiously, yet fearlessly and, perhaps most importantly of all, to remember to return.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #81 / JANUARY 2020)

E1.6.C.2.3.c_REF2_PH NICK CAVE EMPHASIZES THAT AUTHENTIC CREATIVE STRUGGLE AND THE REDEMPTIVE ARTISTIC ACT, WHICH RESONATE DEEPLY WITH HUMAN VULNERABILITY AND SUFFERING, are unique to human experience and cannot be genuinely replicated by AI.
"[An] authentic creative struggle that precedes the invention of a unique lyric of actual value; it is the breathless confrontation with one’s vulnerability, one’s perilousness, one’s smallness, pitted against a sense of sudden shocking discovery; it is the redemptive artistic act that stirs the heart of the listener, where the listener recognizes in the inner workings of the song their own blood, their own struggle, their own suffering. This is what we humble humans can offer, that AI can only mimic, the transcendent journey of the artist that forever grapples with his or her own shortcomings. This is where human genius resides, deeply embedded within, yet reaching beyond, those limitations."
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #218 / JANUARY 2023)

E1.6.C.2.3.c_REF3_LIT "YOU MUST NOT FEAR, HOLD BACK, COUNT OR BE A MISER WITH YOUR THOUGHTS AND FEELINGS. It is also true that creation comes from an overflow, so you have to learn to intake, to imbibe, to nourish yourself and not be afraid of fullness. The fullness is like a tidal wave which then carries you, sweeps you into experience and into writing. Permit yourself to flow and overflow, allow for the rise in temperature, all the expansions and intensifications. Something is always born of excess: great art was born of great terrors, great loneliness, great inhibitions, instabilities, and it always balances them."
(Anais Nin, The Diary of Anais Nin, Vol. 4, 1944-47)

E1.6.C.2.3.c_REF4_PH "IN CONTRAST WITH THE LINE OF THE ROMANTICS WHO SAW THE ARTIST CONDEMNED TO ANXIETY AND SENTIMENTALITY BECAUSE OF THE FALL, an the paradise lost, an alternative view of artistic creation is based on a need for internal balance and music in the soul: Sophocles, Aristotle, Da Vinci, Bach, Jane Austin."
(In our Times, BBC4)

Listen to the program: https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p005489g

E1.6.B.1.7.wE1.6.C.2.3.c. WHAT ABOUT THE MYTH OF THE UNHAPPY CREATOR?
While artists like Marina Abramovic claim their best work came from unhappiness, research suggests that creative success comes despite mental struggles, not because of them. The connection between creativity and mental health is more nuanced, with evidence of genetic and familial links. Artists like Nick Cave reject the notion that suffering or addiction is necessary for creativity, instead emphasizing that sobriety and mental wellness can lead to profound artistic expression. While artists may have heightened sensitivity to both joy and pain, suffering itself is not a prerequisite for artistic creation, and the idea of suffering as essential to art is particularly tied to modern Western and Christian sensibilities.

E1.6.C.2.3.d. FOR FREUD, SUBLIMATION INVOLVES ENHANCING THE PLEASURE OBTAINED FROM PSYCHIC AND INTELLECTUAL ACTIVITIES. This is done to protect oneself from suffering by shifting the focus of inner pulsions, making one unaffected by the external world's rejection.
However, this method can't entirely shield one from suffering and isn't universally applicable. It presupposes specific gifts and dispositions, which are not common.
Art, conversely, involves gaining satisfaction from illusions acknowledged as such. These illusions exist in areas of imaginary life, serving as a source of pleasure and comfort.

E1.6.C.2.3.d_REF1_TH SIGMUND FREUD EXPLAINS THAT ART AND ILLUSION OFFER A TEMPORARY ESCAPE, BUT ARE NOT SUFFICIENT TO FORGET REAL SUFFERING. The sublimation of drives and the search for psychic and intellectual satisfactions can alleviate suffering, but these methods are not universally accessible and do not completely protect against pain.
"Another technique for fending off suffering is the employment of the displacements of libido which our mental apparatus permits of and through which its function gains so much in flexibility. The task here is that of shifting the instinctual aims in such a way that they cannot come up against frustration from the external world. In this, sublimation of the instincts lends its assistance. One gains the most if one can sufficiently heighten the yield of pleasure from the sources of psychical and intellectual work. When that is so, fate can do little against one. A satisfaction of this kind, such as an artist's joy in creating, in giving his phantasies body, or a scientist's in solving problems or discovering truths, has a special quality which we shall certainly one day be able to characterize in metapsychological terms. At present we can only say figuratively that such satisfactions seem ‘finer and higher’. But their intensity is mild as compared with that derived from the sating of crude and primary instinctual impulses; it does not convulse our physical being. And the weak point of this method is that it is not applicable generally: it is accessible to only a few people. It presupposes the possession of special dispositions and gifts which are far from being common to any practical degree. And even to the few who do possess them, this method cannot give complete protection from suffering. It creates no impenetrable armour against the arrows of fortune, and it habitually fails when the source of suffering is a person's own body.

While this procedure already clearly shows an intention of making oneself independent of the external world by seeking satisfaction in internal, psychical processes, the next procedure brings out those features yet more strongly. In it, the connection with reality is still further loosened; satisfaction is obtained from illusions, which are recognized as such without the discrepancy between them and reality being allowed to interfere with enjoyment. The region from which these illusions arise is the life of the imagination; at the time when the development of the sense of reality took place, this region was expressly exempted from the demands of reality-testing and was set apart for the purpose of fulfilling wishes which were difficult to carry out. At the head of these satisfactions through phantasy stands the enjoyment of works of art—an
enjoyment which, by the agency of the artist, is made accessible even to those who are not themselves creative. People who are receptive to the influence of art cannot set too high a value on it as a source of pleasure and consolation in life. Nevertheless the mild narcosis induced in us by art can do no more than bring about a transient
withdrawal from the pressure of vital needs, and it is not strong enough to make us forget real misery."
(Sigmund Freud, Civilization and its Discontents, 1930)

E1.6.C.2.3.d_REF2_PH "ALL THOSE WHO CREATE A MATERIAL OR ARTISTIC WORK, PUNCTUAL OR SYNTHETIC, KNOW IT: whatever the difficulties, the anxieties or the struggles, the movement of the subject and the awareness that she has of herself in her deepest interiority are a a kind of contentment, a form of joy."
(Robert Misrahi, Acts of joy, 1987)

E1.6.C.2.3.d_REF2.1_PH MARY OLIVER REFLECTS ON THE PERSISTENT CHALLENGES OF SHAME AND GRIEF, LIKENING THEM TO A BURDEN ONE CARRIES. Despite these difficulties, she emphasizes the importance of engaging with the world's admirable energies and finding solace in meaningful work. Through meticulous effort, one can transform chaotic thoughts into something beautiful and enduring, creating a fulfilling life through work and love.
"I don’t mean it’s easy or assured; there are the stubborn stumps of shame, grief that remains unsolvable after all the years, a bag of stones that goes with one wherever one goes and however the hour may call for dancing and for light feet. But there is, also, the summoning world, the admirable energies of the world, better than anger, better than bitterness and, because more interesting, more alleviating. And there is the thing that one does, the needle one plies, the work, and within that work a chance to take thoughts that are hot and formless and to place them slowly and with meticulous effort into some shapely heat-retaining form, even as the gods, or nature, or the soundless wheels of time have made forms all across the soft, curved universe — that is to say, having chosen to claim my life, I have made for myself, out of work and love, a handsome life."
(Mary Oliver, "Staying alive" in Upstream)

E1.6.C.2.3.d_REF2.1.a_PH MARY OLIVER REFLECTS ON THE PASSAGE OF TIME, THE LOSS OF LOVED ONES, AND THE TRANSIENT NATURE OF POSSESSIONS. Despite these changes, she emphasizes the importance of steadfastness in her passions and the autonomy over her own life, ultimately accepting the impermanence of existence with grace.
"And now my old dog is dead, and another I had after him, and my parents are dead, and that first world, that old house, is sold and lost, and the books I gathered there lost, or sold — but more books bought, and in another place, board by board and stone by stone, like a house, a true life built, and all because I was steadfast about one or two things: loving foxes, and poems, the blank piece of paper, and my own energy — and mostly the shimmering shoulders of the world that shrug carelessly over the fate of any individual that they may, the better, keep the Niles and the Amazons flowing. And that I did not give to anyone the responsibility for my life. It is mine. I made it. And can do what I want to with it. Live it. Give it back, someday, without bitterness, to the wild and weedy dunes."
(Mary Oliver, "Staying alive" in Upstream)

E1.6.C.2.3.d_REF3_PH "IT'S A TOUGH ASSIGNMENT!", says Woody Allen.
Woody Allen on The Meaninglessness of Life & The Role of The Artist

Watch the interview on Yotube: https://youtu.be/2MsuqvLIttk

E1.6.C.2.4. GIVING US THE COURAGE TO FIGHT
Artistic beauty instills in us the courage to face reality. The hope it nourishes is not a method to ignore real-life challenges, but a source of strength to surmount them.

E1.6.C.2.4.a. ART CAN ENCOURAGE US TO CHERISH AND CELEBRATE HOPE
Beauty in art could be dismissed as feeding sentimentality and ignoring significant issues, numbing us and leaving us insufficiently critical. However, these concerns are misguided, for optimism and hope are critical skills that are essential for a good life. Art encourages us to cherish and celebrate hope, and to appreciate an ideal image without considering it a false depiction of reality. A beautiful but partial vision can be all the more precious to us because we understand how rarely life meets our desires.

E1.6.C.2.4.a_REF1_PH THE COMMON DISDAIN FOR PRETTINESS IN ART, OFTEN SEEN AS PROMOTING SENTIMENTALITY AND IGNORING COMPLEX ISSUES, IS MISGUIDED. Optimism and hope are crucial cognitive and emotional skills for living well. Cheerfulness and hope are achievements that can influence success more than talent alone.
"The love of prettiness is often deemed a low, even a “bad” response, but because it is so dominant and widespread it deserves attention, and may hold important clues about a key function of art. … The worries about prettiness are twofold. Firstly, pretty pictures are alleged to feed sentimentality. Sentimentality is a symptom of insufficient engagement with complexity, by which one really means problems. The pretty picture seems to suggest that in order to make life nice, one merely has to brighten up the apartment with a depiction of some flowers. If we were to ask the picture what is wrong with the world, it might be taken as saying ‘you don’t have enough Japanese water gardens’ — a response that appears to ignore all the more urgent problems that confront humanity. . . . . The very innocence and simplicity of the picture seems to militate against any attempt to improve life as a whole. Secondly, there is the related fear that prettiness will numb us and leave us insufficiently critical and alert to the injustices surrounding us"
But these worries, they argue, are misguided. Optimism, rather than a failure of intelligence, is a critical cognitive and psychoemotional skill in our quest to live well — something even neuroscience has indicated — and hope, its chariot, is something to cherish, not condemn:
"Cheerfulness is an achievement, and hope is something to celebrate. If optimism is important, it’s because many outcomes are determined by how much of it we bring to the task. It is an important ingredient of success. This flies in the face of the elite view that talent is the primary requirement of a good life, but in many cases the difference between success and failure is determined by nothing more than our sense of what is possible and the energy we can muster to convince others of our due. We might be doomed not by a lack of skill, but by an absence of hope. [...]
The dancers in Matisse’s painting are not in denial of the troubles of this planet, but from the standpoint of our imperfect and conflicted — but ordinary — relationship with reality, we can look to their attitude for encouragement. They put us in touch with a blithe, carefree part of ourselves that can help us cope with inevitable rejections and humiliations. The picture does not suggest that all is well, any more than it suggests that women always delight in each other’s existence and bond together in mutually supportive networks [...]
We should be able to enjoy an ideal image without regarding it as a false picture of how things usually are. A beautiful, though partial, vision can be all the more precious to us because we are so aware of how rarely life satisfies our desires."
(Alain de Botton, Art as Therapy)

E1.6.C.2.4.a_REF1.1_CUR WHAT HOPE MIGHT LOOK LIKE
The dancers in Matisse’s painting are not in denial of the troubles of this planet, but from the standpoint of our imperfect and conflicted — but ordinary — relationship with reality, we can look to their attitude for encouragement. They put us in touch with a blithe, carefree part of ourselves that can help us cope with inevitable rejections and humiliations. The picture does not suggest that all is well, any more than it suggests that women always delight in each other’s existence and bond together in mutually supportive networks [...]
We should be able to enjoy an ideal image without regarding it as a false picture of how things usually are. A beautiful, though partial, vision can be all the more precious to us because we are so aware of how rarely life satisfies our desires."
(Alain de Botton, Art as Therapy)

E1.6.C.2.4.a_REF1.2_CUR "LILAK IS ONE OF A SERIES OF ABSTRACT ELEGIAC PAINTINGS that the artist began painting in 1992. They were monumental diptychs, depicting nature and the physical realization of psychic states: “landscapes are a type of ardent desire, the aspiration to a meaningful but simple life”. The artist has used various tools (paint brushes, scrapers and various brushes) to ensure that each climatic zone shows the effects of the matter. The blue in the corners of the painting is a naturalistic reference to the sky. Through a geometric scaffolding of lines, columns, brushstrokes and tubes, the composition creates the illusion of depth. The gestural craftsmanship associated with clear colors -  green, yellow and blue -  generates energy and profusion."
(Fondation Louis Vuitton, Paris, France´s curator´s review)

E1.6.C.2.4.a_REF1.3_PH “LIFE BEATS DOWN AND CRUSHES THE SOUL AND ART REMINDS YOU THAT YOU HAVE ONE”.
(Stella Adler quoted by arthunter.me)

E1.6.C.2.4.a_REF2_PH NICK CAVE ADDRESSES ARTISTS STRUGGLING WITH MOTIVATION, EMPHASIZING THAT CREATING ART IS A DUTY, NOT RELIANT ON INSPIRATION. He argues that art is essential, especially in a world filled with war and cruelty, and that artists must overcome excuses and work diligently.
"My muses have left me and I have lost all motivation to create as a film and music maker. Have you ever felt alien to yourself and your identity as an artist?
TAM, CAPE TOWN, SOUTH AFRICA

Every time I set foot in my studio, intentions blazing, I crumble with pathetic and flaccid paralysis. Do it, paint. No. Fuck. Why not? I can’t get my brain right in that space anymore, and I thought my whole life was going to be devoted to my art. I don’t know how to reconnect or reconcile making art in a world made of war and cruelty, how would painting a fucking picture ever help. How do you create in this environment?
DAN, SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA
Dear Tam and Dan,

What makes our particular job so exceptional that it requires inspiration or a muse to do it? We are artists and we labour in the service of others. It is not something we do only if and when we feel motivated – we create because it is our responsibility to do so. In this respect our occupation is no different than that of most people. Does an ordinary adult go to work only if they feel in the mood? Do doctors? Do labourers? Do teachers? Do taxi drivers? We are duty-bound to do our job, like everyone else, because the space we occupy depends upon our participation and breaks down if we don’t. A committed artist cannot afford the luxury of revelation. Inspiration is the indolent indulgence of the dabbler. Muses, Tam, are for losers!

The idea that you can’t paint because the world is 'made of war and cruelty' has to be the lamest and most faint-hearted excuse not to work I have ever heard, Dan. How will painting a fucking picture help? — it will help because art is the noble and necessary rejoinder to the sins of the world. When the world rushes toward us with all its streaming wounds – wanting, needing – do we cover our eyes and shrink away, do we sit and wring our hands in despair, do we run and hide, or do we hasten toward it, like we hasten toward an injured child, with our arms outstretched?

If we are to call ourselves artists then we must avoid the myriad excuses that present themselves and do our job. Yes, the world is sick, and yes it can be cruel, but it would be a whole lot sicker and a whole lot crueler if it were not for painters and filmmakers and songwriters – the beauty-makers – wading through the blood and muck of things, whilst reaching skyward to draw down the very heavens themselves.

These are perilous and urgent times. This is not the hour to sit around moaning about the condition of the world — leave that to the posturing inhabitants of that most morbidly neurotic of spaces, social media — and nor is it the moment to fruitlessly wait for inspiration to find us. It’s time to get to work, to reach up and tear the divine idea from its heavenly cradle and proffer it to the world. Create, Tam! Create, Dan! Create like your life depends on it, because, of course, of course, it does!

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #274 / FEBRUARY 2024)

E1.6.C.2.4.b. EXPLORING BOTH HEAVEN AND HELL
Before the 20th century, art primarily celebrated beauty. However, this perspective has evolved with the progression of humanity. Today, art is tasked with expressing both the violence and suffering of life, as well as unveiling the beauty of the universe. Thus, artists are charged with the mission of exploring both heaven and hell.

E1.6.C.2.4.b_REF1_PH DANTE SUGGESTED THAT ARTISTS SHOULD EXPLORE BOTH THE SUBLIME AND THE GROTESQUE. Artistic creation has historically aimed to celebrate beauty, but this changed in the late 19th and 20th centuries due to factors like industrialization, modernity, and global tragedies. Art now also expresses life's violence and suffering while revealing hidden beauty. 
"Until the beginning of the 20th century, artistic creation was placed under the sign of beauty. The canons of beauty could be modified according to the period, but the purpose of art remained the same: to celebrate beauty, to reveal it, to create the beautiful. Towards the end of the 19th century already, and throughout the 20th century, several factors combined to change this status-quo: ugliness of the big cities which resulted from forced industrialization, conscience of a « modernity » based on the idea of « the death of God », collapse of humanism caused by the successive tragedies at the planetary level. All these elements have upset the traditional concept of art, which is no longer limited to the exaltation of a beauty recognized as such. [...] 
An artistic creation worthy of this name, defying reality, must maintain two aims: it must certainly express the violent, suffering part of life, as well as all the forms of perversion that life generates, but it also has the task of continuing to reveal what the living universe conceals of virtual beauty. Every artist, in short, should accomplish the mission assigned by Dante: to explore both heaven and hell."
(François Cheng, Five Meditations on Beauty, 2006)

E1.6.C.2.4.c. THE ARTIST SEES THINGS WE DON'T WANT TO
"In this country … if you’re an artist, you’re guilty of a crime: not that you’re aware, which is bad enough, but that you see things other people don’t admit are there."
(James Baldwin in the May 24 issue of LIFE magazine)

E1.6.C.2.4.c_REF1_PSI "Ferreira Gullar, a Brazilian poet, essayist, and art critic, had a very particular view on art. For him, art was a form of expression deeply connected to life and social reality. Gullar believed that art should not be something distant or isolated, but a tool to transform and question the world. In his famous essay "Theory of the Non-Object," he discusses the need to overcome merely contemplative art to reach a more engaged art that acts as a mediator between the aesthetic object and everyday life.
He also stated that art is a way to bring to light the contradictions of human existence and society. For Gullar, art should be capable of impacting and provoking reflection, being a space where the tensions of reality can be questioned and, in a way, reorganized. "Art exists because life is not enough".
(Patricia Huber, https://www.instagram.com/pdh_psicanalise/)

E1.6.C.2.5. REMINDING US OF BALANCE AND GOODNESS
"The task for artists is to find new ways of prying open our eyes to tiresomely familiar, but critically important, ideas about how to lead a balanced and good life. Art can save us time — and save our lives — through opportune and visceral reminders of balance and goodness that we should never presume we know enough about already."
(Alain de Botton & John Armstrong, Art as Therapy)

E1.6.C.2.5.a. ART IS ONE RESOURCE THAT CAN LEAD US BACK TO A MORE ACCURATE ASSESSMENT OF WHAT IS VALUABLE by working against habit and inviting us to recalibrate what we admire or love.

E1.6.C.2.5.a_REF1_PH HABITS SIMPLIFY OUR LIVES BY REDUCING THE MENTAL EFFORT REQUIRED FOR NEW TASKS BUT CAN ALSO MAKE US LESS PRESENT AND AWARE. Activities like travel, art, nature, work, and certain drugs can help us break this cycle by immersing us in the present moment, fostering a sense of wonder.
"Habits are undeniably useful tools, relieving us of the need to run a complex mental operation every time we’re confronted with a new task or situation. Yet they also relieve us of the need to stay awake to the world: to attend, feel, think, and then act in a deliberate manner. (That is, from freedom rather than compulsion.) […]

The efficiencies of the adult mind, useful as they are, blind us to the present moment. We’re constantly jumping ahead to the next thing. We approach experience much as an artificial intelligence (AI) program does, with our brains continually translating the data of the present into the terms of the past, reaching back in time for the relevant experience, and then using that to make its best guess as to how to predict and navigate the future.

One of the things that commends travel, art, nature, work, and certain drugs to us is the way these experiences, at their best, block every mental path forward and back, immersing us in the flow of a present that is literally wonderful — wonder being the by-product of precisely the kind of unencumbered first sight, or virginal noticing, to which the adult brain has closed itself. (It’s so inefficient!) Alas, most of the time I inhabit a near-future tense, my psychic thermostat set to a low simmer of anticipation and, too often, worry. The good thing is I’m seldom surprised. The bad thing is I’m seldom surprised."
(Michael Pollan How to Change Your Mind: What the New Science of Psychedelics Teaches Us About Consciousness, Dying, Addiction, Depression, and Transcendence)

E1.6.C.2.5.a_REF2_CUR DELPHINE COINDET REINVENES OUR PERSPECTIVE AND QUESTIONS THE STATUS OF SCULPTURE TODAY "Delphine Coindet occupies a special place on the French contemporary sculpture scene: between minimal and transvestite, abstract and virtual, sophisticated and handcrafted, in short, in the words of the art critic Vincent Pécoil, an 'anti-academic' sculpture. From preparatory and autonomous drawings, she has developed a creative process that conditions her three-dimensional creations. She produces computer-generated drawings that are intended to be produced in different scales to animate the space, in materials and colors that give them a meaning other than that of the objects represented or attached. These drawings are entrusted to other craftsmen who execute them. A diversion, then, but also a metamorphosis, the first of which is that of realization. The idea - that of an object, a plant, a hybrid or a pure form - then becomes reality: "My work sometimes boils down to the question: what makes two completely different things come together? From this point of view, the way my works work seems to me to be related to that of the psyche: there is the inside/outside, order/disorder, etc.".
In her choice of materials, Delphine Coindet likes to combine antinomic or anti-real, organic and synthetic, living and inert materials: wood, plastic, mirrors, fur, feathers, cardboard, metal, etc. This improbable combination of colors, ideas, shapes and materials and their staging offer a new hypothesis of reality, which then presents itself as a setting, a "theatricality".
Such is the Beautiful Hypothesis (2004), a new way of imagining the representation of nature: the pond becomes an azure airbed, a flower resting on the water a metal motif, a pontoon a geometric shape in plywood. The artificiality of this vision of nature is further exaggerated by the staging of this image, which is illuminated by a projector with changing, acidic colors. How can we not see in these luminous and colorful impressions an unprecedented form of iconic reference and homage to Claude Monet's Water Lilies and Op Art, but also, in the hieratic plywood pontoon, an echo of Pop Art and the tradition of the Readymade? Their poetic and everyday objects are like holes in reality, new propositions where the drops on the terraces of Bethlehem become tears (Gouttes, 2000), where threads unravel from balls of wool in the aisles of a supermarket (Pelotes, 1999), where boas become real snakes...
By focusing on the representation of the idea of things, as in Cézanne, Delphine Coindet reinvents our gaze and questions the status of sculpture today, between the handmade object and the three-dimensional collage, between sophisticated staging and design, between decoration and representation, weaving an unprecedented link between reality and fiction".
(Alexia Fabre, Wha is sculpture today?, 2008)

E1.6.C.2.5.a_REF3_CUR "PAINTING « NATURE » IN AN ORIGINAL WAY IS A CHALLENGE IN POST-MODERN TIMES. The main quality of D'Hollander's work is the honesty of execution [...] bold flat planes of colour and net contour lines infuse the work with spiritual poetry."
(Mineta House)

"One of our major flaws, and causes of unhappiness, is that we find it hard to take note of what is always around us. We suffer because we lose sight of the value of what is before us and yearn, often unfairly, for the imagined attraction elsewhere. [...]
Art is one resource that can lead us back to a more accurate assessment of what is valuable by working against habit and inviting us to recalibrate what we admire or love"
(Alain de Botton & John Armstrong, Art as Therapy )

E1.6.C.2.5.a_REF4_PH APPRECIATION
Our attention, as we know, is « an intentional, unapologetic discriminator » that blinds us to so much of what is around us and to the magic in our familiar surroundings. Art, de Botton and Armstrong argue, can lift these blinders so we can truly absorb not only just what we’re expecting to see, but also what we aren’t:
« One of our major flaws, and causes of unhappiness, is that we find it hard to take note of what is always around us. We suffer because we lose sight of the value of what is before us and yearn, often unfairly, for the imagined attraction elsewhere. [...] Art is one resource that can lead us back to a more accurate assessment of what is valuable by working against habit and inviting us to recalibrate what we admire or love. »"
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings - Review of Alain de Botton & John Armstrong's Art as Therapy)

E1.6.C.2.5.a_REF5_PH NIETZSCHE LAMENTS THE SHIFT IN THE ROLE OF THE ARTIST FROM A GUIDING, SHAPING FORCE TO ONE THAT PRIMARILY LIBERATES AND OFTEN DESCENDS INTO THE REALM OF UNTAMED PASSIONS. He idealizes a past where artists possessed a certain discipline and aimed to elevate and instruct, imparting wisdom and moral guidance.
"THE POET NO LONGER A TEACHER.—Strange as it may sound to our time, there were once poets and artists whose soul was above the passions with their delights and convulsions, and who therefore took their pleasure in purer materials, worthier men, more delicate complications and dénouements. If the artists of our day for the most part unfetter the will, and so are under certain circumstances for that very reason emancipators of life, those were tamers of the will, enchanters of animals, creators of men. In fact, they moulded, re-moulded, and new-moulded life, whereas the fame of poets of our day lies in unharnessing, unchaining, and shattering.—The ancient Greeks demanded of the poet that he should be the teacher of grown men. How ashamed the poet would be now if this demand were made of him! He is not even a good student of himself, and so never himself becomes a good poem or a fine picture. Under the most favourable circumstances he remains the shy, attractive ruin of a temple, but at the same time a cavern of cravings, overgrown like a ruin with flowers, nettles, and poisonous weeds, inhabited and haunted by snakes, worms, spiders, and birds; an object for sad reflection as to why the noblest and most precious must grow up at once like a ruin, without the past and future of perfection." 
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 172, 1878)

E1.6.C.2.5.b. ART CAN HELP RESTORE A MEASURE OF EQUILIBRIUM TO OUR EMOTIONS by putting us in touch with concentrated doses of our missing dispositions: Are we drawn to artworks that compensate for our inner weaknesses and help us return to a viable balance? Can art act as a calibration mechanism for our moral virtues?
The most valuable type of cautionary art is that which discusses morality without being moralistic, understanding how easy it is to be drawn to the wrong things.

E1.6.C.2.5.b_REF1_PH ART PROVIDES THE VIRTUES WE LACK, MAKING IT BEAUTIFUL TO US, WHILE ALSO SERVING AS A MECHANISM FOR MORAL TUNING. Art encourages us to be our better selves through subtle exhortations, helping us overcome weaknesses of will and reminding us of important virtues.
"Few of us are entirely well balanced. Our psychological histories, relationships and working routines mean that our emotions can incline grievously in one direction or another. We may, for example, have a tendency to be too complacent, or too insecure; too trusting, or too suspicious; too serious, or too light-hearted. Art can put us in touch with concentrated doses of our missing dispositions, and thereby restore a measure of equilibrium to our listing inner selves."
This function of art also helps explain the vast diversity of our aesthetic preferences — because our individual imbalances differ, so do the artworks we seek out to soothe them:
"Why are some people drawn to minimalist architecture and others to Baroque? Why are some people excited by bare concrete walls and others by William Morris’s floral patterns? Our tastes will depend on what spectrum of our emotional make-up lies in shadow and is hence in need of stimulation and emphasis. Every work of art is imbued with a particular psychological and moral atmosphere: a painting may be either serene or restless, courageous or careful, modest or confident, masculine or feminine, bourgeois or aristocratic, and our preferences for one kind over another reflect our varied psychological gaps. We hunger for artworks that will compensate for our inner fragilities and help return us to a viable mean. We call a work beautiful when it supplies the virtues we are missing, and we dismiss as ugly one that forces on us moods or motifs that we feel either threatened or already overwhelmed by. Art holds out the promise of inner wholeness."
Viewing art from this perspective, de Botton and Armstrong argue, also affords us the necessary self-awareness to understand why we might respond negatively to a piece of art — an insight that might prevent us from reactive disparagement. Being able to recognize what someone lacks in order to find an artwork beautiful allows us to embody that essential practice of prioritizing understanding over self-righteousness. In this respect, art is also a tuning — and atoning — mechanism for our moral virtues. In fact, some of history’s most celebrated art is anchored on moralistic missions — what de Botton and Armstrong call “an attempt to encourage our better selves through coded messages of exhortation and admonition” — to which we often respond with resistance and indignation. But such reactions miss the bigger point:
"We might think of works of art that exhort as both bossy and unnecessary, but this would assume an encouragement of virtue would always be contrary to our own desires. However, in reality, when we are calm and not under fire, most of us long to be good and wouldn’t mind the odd reminder to be so; we simply can’t find the motivation day to day. In relation to our aspirations to goodness, we suffer from what Aristotle called akrasia, or weakness of will. We want to behave well in our relationships, but slip up under pressure. We want to make more of ourselves, but lose motivation at a critical juncture. In these circumstances, we can derive enormous benefit from works of art that encourage us to be the best versions of ourselves, something that we would only resent if we had a manic fear of outside intervention, or thought of ourselves as perfect already.
The best kind of cautionary art — art that is moral without being “moralistic” — understands how easy it is to be attracted to the wrong things. […]
The task for artists, therefore, is to find new ways of prying open our eyes to tiresomely familiar, but critically important, ideas about how to lead a balanced and good life. [...] Art can save us time — and save our lives — through opportune and visceral reminders of balance and goodness that we should never presume we know enough about already."
(Alain de Botton & John Armstrong, Art as Therapy)

E1.6.C.2.5.b_REF2_CUR "MADE OF CUT AND GLUED PAPER, Blue nude with green stockings is characterized by the dynamism of the figure and the sense of weightlessness that radiates from it. These qualities owe as much to the drawing as to the use of a bright palette, which enlivened the blue Matisse liked to paint with at the time. With its chromatic and formal correspondences, the plant motif on the right suggests an equivalence between the human and the plant and gives poise to the figure in space."
(Fondation Louis Vuitton, Paris, France´s curator´s review)

E1.6.C.2.5.c. TO PAINT IS TO LOVE AGAIN
Henry Miller posits that that “to paint is to love again”. He believes that a painter's true gift is the love for their craft, regardless of its reception. He suggests that only when we perceive with affection can we see as a painter does, reminding us of the importance of love in our lives.

E1.6.C.2.5.c_REF1_PH  "TO PAINT IS TO LOVE AGAIN. It’s only when we look with eyes of love that we see as the painter sees. His is a love, moreover, which is free of possessiveness. What the painter sees he is duty-bound to share. Usually he makes us see and feel what ordinarily we ignore or are immune to. His manner of approaching the world tells us, in effect, that nothing is vile or hideous, nothing is stale, flat and unpalatable unless it be our own power of vision. To see is not merely to look. One must look-see. See into and around. [...]
The practice of any art demands more than mere savoir faire. One must not only be in love with what one does, one must also know how to make love. In love self is obliterated. Only the beloved counts. Whether the beloved be a bowl of fruit, a pastoral scene, or the interior of a bawdy house makes no difference. One must be in it and of it wholly. Before a subject can be transmuted aesthetically it must be devoured and absorbed. If it is a painting it must I believe that a true artist always prefers to give his work away rather than sell it. A good artist must also have a streak of insanity in him, if by insanity is meant an exaggerated inability to adapt. The individual who can adapt to this mad world of to-day is either a nobody or a sage. In the one case he is immune to art and in the other he is beyond it. [...]
Usually the artist has two life-long companions, neither of his own choosing… — poverty and loneliness. To have a friend who understands and appreciates your work, one who never lets you down but who becomes more devoted, more reverent, as the years go by, that is a rare experience. It takes only one friend, if he is a man of faith, to work miracles. [...]
To win through by sheer force of genius is one thing; to survive and continue to create when every last door is slammed in one’s face is another. Nobody acquires genius — it is God-given. But one can acquire patience, fortitude, wisdom, understanding. Perhaps the greatest gift [is] to love what one does whether it causes a stir or not."perspire with ecstasy. [...]"
(Henry Miller, To paint is to love again, 1963)

E1.6.C.2.5.d. TRANSFORMING THE FUTURE INTO A SPACE OF INFINITE POSSIBILITIES FOR ELEVATION
The artist's desire to transform the future into a space of infinite possibilities for elevation reminds us of the virtue of exercise systems that makes us surpass ourselves whatever the field of human activity.

E1.6.C.2.5.d_REF1_PH "THE ARTIST´S METAPHYSICS
[...] "... there are always fewer who climb with me on ever higher mountains: I am raising a chain of ever holier mountains". [...] Only the building of new steeper walls can compensate for the flattening of the mountain due to the habit of living on it.
It is important to understand how much Nietzsche addresses himself here as an artist to other artists: the desire to raise improbability to the level of a mountain made of mountains expresses the most extreme point that an artistic confession can reach. Only the artistic will to transform the future into a space of infinite possibilities for the elevation of art makes the final sentence of the rule of reproduction we quoted understandable: "You must create a creator [...] a first movement, a wheel that rolls of its own accord". This rule contains nothing less than Nietzsche's theology after the death of God: there will continue to be God and gods, but they will only be immanent to man, and only insofar as there are creators who relate to what has been achieved and  go higher, faster and further. [...]
Only a man of this type would no longer take himself as the yardstick for the future of the next generation and a fortiori of his ancestors. Only he could [...] approve of the idea that the cultural mountain of the improbable will have to rise by one more level in each generation. He would not make his own imperfection a duty for his descendants. He would rather die for good than return unchanged. That, according to the law of the normalisation of the improbable, the previous peaks appear in the perception of his descendants as landscapes of hills or plains is for him as understandable as it is welcome. [...] What has existed  before is the base camp for the next departure. From this point on, only the acrobatic path remains.
(Peter Sloterdijk, You must change your life, 2009)

E1.6.C.2.5.d_REF2_PO "POETS TO COME

Poets to come! orators, singers, musicians to come! 
Not to-day is to justify me and answer what I am for, 
But you, a new brood, native, athletic, continental, greater than before known,
Arouse! for you must justify me.

I myself but write one or two indicative words for the future, 
I but advance a moment only to wheel and hurry back in the darkness.

I am a man who, sauntering along without fully stopping, turns a casual look upon you and then averts his face, Leaving it to you to prove and define it,
Expecting the main things from you."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.6.C.2.5.d_REF2.1_PO "I AM THE TEACHER OF ATHLETES,
He that by me spreads a wider breast than my own proves the width of my own,
He most honors my style who learns under it to destroy the teacher.

The boy I love, the same becomes a man not through derived power, but in his own right,

[...]

I teach straying from me, yet who can stray from me?
I follow you whoever you are from the present hour,
My words itch at your ears till you understand them"
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.6.C.2.5.d_REF3_LIT AGAINST THE CARTESIAN MYTH OF WORK/LIFE BALANCE: “YOU CHOSE WORK. I HAVE CHOSEN THE LIFE. THE WORK AND THE LIFE”.
“Half a millennium into our recovery from the civilizational wound Descartes inflicted by severing the body and the mind, we are bleeding with a Cartesian cleft of our own making — the damaging divide between life and work. The notion of a “workaholic,” often worn as a badge on the lapel of the modern ego, presupposes someone who makes work the central axis of life at the expense of living. The very question of “work/life balance,” inherited from the industrial model of labor, asks us to live in parts — a portion of the person doing the working, another doing the living. But culture is not made the way cars are made. We create — anything that is not mechanical, that is not a commodity, that touches anyone else in a meaningful way — with everything we are: every experience we have ever had, every book we have ever read and every place we have ever walked, every elation and every shattering. The simplest poem pouring from the poet’s pen, the smallest wooden spoon taking shape in the carpenter’s hand, is the work of a lifetime.”
(Maria Popova’s review of André Gregory’s letter to Richard Avedon)

”Let’s face it — artists are always working, though they may not seem as if they are. They are like plants growing in winter. You can’t see the fruit, but it is taking root below the earth. […]

You owned that exquisite house in Montauk, one of the loveliest I have seen anywhere, on the cliffs overlooking the ocean. You designed it yourself. But you almost never went there. Did you yearn for another kind of life? Yes, you had friends—almost all driven and workaholic artists—but never a community. You saw each of us alone. In those lovely rooms of yours, over superb dinners, the talk would always be of work, work, and work.

Each time you stopped, you would descend into a depression, believing that you had hit a wall and lost the ability to work, that you would never work again. […]

You chose work. I have chosen the *life*. The work *and* the life.

At least I have done so in the last 30 years. Doesn’t the work on the self inform the *Work*? When we inch closer to ourselves, to who we originally were, who we’re meant to be, doesn’t that serve the work, doesn’t it connect us more deeply to others? Isn’t there value in spreading laughter, love, and compassion to the people around us? … The work changes the life, and the life changes the work.”
(André Gregory’s letter to Richard Avedon)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2025/11/10/andre-gregory-richard-avedon-letter/?mc_cid=8ce3cad4ce&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E1.6.B.2.wE1.6.C.2.5.c "EXERCISE SYSTEMS"
Joy can be derived from creating an "exercise system". This process allows an individual to enhance their skills through repeated tasks, acting as immune device and coping mechanism for life's lack of inherent meaning. In essence, it's through these exercise systems that one shapes their life.

E1.6.C.2.6. FOSTERING SELF-UNDERSTANDING
"A fugitive and elusive part of our own thinking, our own experience, is taken up, edited, and returned to us better than it was before, so that we feel, at last, that we know ourselves more clearly."
(Maria Popova´s review of Alain de Botton & John Armstrong's Art as Therapy)

E1.6.C.2.6.a. WORKS OF ART CAN HELP US RECOGNIZE SOMETHING WE HAVE FELT BUT NEVER FULLY UNDERSTOOD BEFORE. 
Art can aid in self-understanding by offering a means to express thoughts and feelings that are difficult to articulate. It provides a language to convey our inner selves to others in a way that words cannot fully encapsulate.

E1.6.C.2.6.a_REF1_PH "SELF-UNDERSTANDING
« We are not transparent to ourselves. We have intuitions, suspicions, hunches, vague musings, and strangely mixed emotions, all of which resist simple definition. We have moods, but we don’t really know them. Then, from time to time, we encounter works of art that seem to latch on to something we have felt but never recognized clearly before. Alexander Pope identified a central function of poetry as taking thoughts we experience half-formed and giving them clear expression: “what was often thought, but ne’er so well expressed.” In other words, a fugitive and elusive part of our own thinking, our own experience, is taken up, edited, and returned to us better than it was before, so that we feel, at last, that we know ourselves more clearly. »
More than that, [Alain de Botton & John Armstrong] argue, the self-knowledge art bequeaths gives us a language for communicating that to others — something that explains why we are so particular about the kinds of art with which we surround ourselves publicly, a sort of self-packaging we all practice as much on the walls of our homes as we do on our Facebook walls [...]. While the cynic might interpret this as mere showing off, however, de Botton and Armstrong peel away this superficial interpretation to reveal the deeper psychological motive — our desire to communicate to others the subtleties of who we are and what we believe in a way that words might never fully capture."
(Maria Popova´s review of Alain de Botton & John Armstrong's Art as Therapy)

E1.6.C.2.6.a_REF2_LIT "AN ARTIST IS A SORT OF EMOTIONAL OR SPIRITUAL HISTORIAN. His role is to make you realize the doom and glory of knowing who you are and what you are. He has to tell, because nobody else in the world can tell, what it is like to be alive. All I’ve ever wanted to do is tell that, I’m not trying to solve anybody’s problems, not even my own. I’m just trying to outline what the problems are.
I want to be stretched, shook up, to overreach myself, and to make you feel that way too."
(James Baldwin in the May 24 issue of LIFE magazine)

E1.6.C.2.6.a_REF3_LIT "ONE OF THE FUNCTIONS OF ART IS TO GIVE PEOPLE THE WORDS TO KNOW THEIR OWN EXPERIENCE. There are always areas of vast silence in any culture, and part of an artist’s job is to go into those areas and come back from the silence with something to say. It’s one reason why we read poetry, because poets can give us the words we need. When we read good poetry, we often say, ‘Yeah, that’s it. That’s how I feel.’ [...]
Storytelling is a tool for knowing who we are and what we want, too. If we never find our experience described in poetry or stories, we assume that our experience is insignificant."
(Jonathan Whyte, Interview with Ursula K. Le Guin, Talking on the Water: Conversations about Nature and Creativity, 2016)

E1.6.C.2.6.a_REF4_LIT TRUE HEALING COMES FROM STANDING WITH OTHERS IN THEIR PAIN AND RECOGNIZING THE INHERENT VALUE OF LIFE DESPITE ITS HARDSHIPS. Hope, beauty, and genuine friendships are central to navigating life's challenges and discovering a sense of "home" within ourselves.
"When you love something like reading — or drawing or music or nature — it surrounds you with a sense of connection to something great. If you are lucky enough to know this, then your search for meaning involves whatever that Something is. It’s an alchemical blend of affinity and focus that takes us to a place within that feels as close as we ever get to “home.” It’s like pulling into our own train station after a long trip — joy, relief, a pleasant exhaustion.
If a writer or artist creates from a place of truth and spirit and generosity, then I may be able to enter and ride this person’s train back to my own station. It’s the same with beautiful music and art.
Beauty is meaning."
(Anne Lamott, Stitches: A Handbook on Meaning, Hope and Repair)

E1.6.C.2.6.a_REF5_PO "A PLACE TO THINK [...]

One thing I've never understood is why 
it is generally believed that the poem 
is not a place to think."
(Ana Martins Marques, Paper boats, Life under water, 20096

E1.6.C.2.6.a_REF6_PH "THE PICTURE OF LIFE.—The task of painting the picture of life, often as it has been attempted by poets and philosophers, is nevertheless irrational. Even in the hands of the greatest artist-thinkers, pictures and miniatures of one life only—their own—have come into being, and indeed no other result is possible. While in the process of developing, a thing that develops, cannot mirror itself as fixed and permanent, as a definite object."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 19, 1878)

E1.6.C.2.6.a_REF7_PH "LOOKING FORWARD AND BACKWARD.—An art like that which streams out of Homer, Sophocles, Theocritus, Calderon, Racine, Goethe, as the superabundance of a wise and harmonious conduct of life—that is the true art, at which we grasp when we have ourselves become wiser and more harmonious. It is not that barbaric, if ever so delightful, outpouring of hot and highly coloured things from an undisciplined, chaotic soul, which is what we understood by “art” in our youth. It is obvious from the nature of the case that for certain periods of life an art of overstrain, excitement, antipathy to the orderly, monotonous, simple, logical, is an inevitable need, to which artists must respond, lest the soul of such periods should unburden itself in other ways, through all kinds of disorder and impropriety. Hence youths as they generally are, full, fermenting, tortured above all things by boredom, and women who lack work that fully occupies their soul, require that art of delightful disorder. All the more violently on that account are they inflamed with a desire for satisfaction without change, happiness without stupor and intoxication."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 173, 1878)

E1.6.C.2.6.a_REF8_PH "THE MOUTHPIECE OF THE GODS.—The poet expresses the universal higher opinions of the nation, he is its mouthpiece and flute; but by virtue of metre and all other artistic means he so expresses them that the nation regards them as something quite new and wonderful, and believes in all seriousness that he is the mouthpiece of the Gods. Yes, under the clouds of creation the poet himself forgets whence he derives all his intellectual wisdom—from father and mother, from teachers and books of all kinds, from the street and particularly from the priest. He is deceived by his own art, and really believes, in a naïve period, that a God is speaking through him, that he is creating in a [pg 094]state of religious inspiration. As a matter of fact, he is only saying what he has learnt, a medley of popular wisdom and popular foolishness. Hence, so far as a poet is really vox populi he is held to be vox dei."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 176, 1878)

E1.6.C.2.6.a_REF9_TH “WHENEVER THE COLLECTIVE UNCONSCIOUS BECOMES A LIVING EXPERIENCE AND IS BROUGHT TO BEAR UPON THE CONSCIOUS OUTLOOK OF AN AGE, THIS EVENT IS A CREATIVE ACT WHICH IS OF IMPORTANCE TO EVERYONE LIVING IN THAT AGE. […] Art is a kind of innate drive that seizes a human being and makes him its instrument. The artist is not a person endowed with free will who seeks his own ends, but one who allows art to realize its purpose through him.”

“The question of what it takes to create — to make something of beauty and substance that touches other lives across space and time — is one of the deepest, oldest questions, perhaps because the answer to it is so unbearably simple: everything. We bring everything we are and everything we have lived to every smallest creative act — every experience, every dream, every memory, every unremembered impression, every unconsciously absorbed influence. The great bewilderment is that we can only access a fraction of our own everythingness — most of it dwells in the recesses of the mind and the psyche, below the level of our surface awareness. Creativity is the periscope through which the unconscious looks out onto the world and renders what it sees. The rendering is what we call art, and it is as much a picture of the seer as of the seen.”
(Maria Popova’s review of Carl G. Jung’s Modern man in search of a soul in The Marginalian)

“The creative imagination is the only primordial phenomenon accessible to us, the real Ground of the psyche, the only immediate reality… All other realities are derived from and indirectly revealed by it, actually with the artificial aid named science. […]
The creative aspect of life, which finds its clearest expression in art, baffles all attempts at rational formation. Any reaction to stimulus may be causally explained; but the creative act, which is the absolute antithesis of mere reaction, will forever elude the human understanding. It can only be described in its manifestations; it can be obscurely sensed, but never wholly grasped. […]

The psychological mode deals with materials drawn from the realm of human consciousness — for instance, with the lessons of life, with emotional shocks, the experience of passion and the crises of human destiny in general — all of which go to make up the conscious life of man, and his feeling life in particular. This material is psychically assimilated by the poet, raised from the commonplace to the level of poetic experience, and given an expression which forces the reader to greater clarity and depth of human insight by bringing fully into his consciousness what he ordinarily evades and overlooks or senses only with a feeling of dull discomfort. The poet’s work is an interpretation and illumination of the contents of consciousness, of the ineluctable experiences of human life with its eternally recurrent sorrow and joy. He leaves nothing over for the psychologist… Such themes go to make up the lot of humankind; they repeat themselves millions of times… No obscurity whatever surrounds them, for they fully explain themselves. […]
[By contrast, in the visionary mode] the experience that furnishes the material for artistic expression is no longer familiar. It is a strange something that derives its existence from the hinterland of man’s mind — that suggests the abyss of time separating us from pre-human ages, or evokes a super-human world of contrasting light and darkness. It is a primordial experience which surpasses man’s understanding, and to which he is therefore in danger of succumbing. The value and the force of the experience are given by its enormity. It arises from timeless depths… that in every way exceed the grasp of human feeling and comprehension [which] makes quite other demands upon the powers of the artist than do the experiences of the foreground of life. These never rend the curtain that veils the cosmos; they never transcend the bounds of the humanly possible, and for this reason are readily shaped to the demands of art, no matter how great a shock to the individual they may be. But the primordial experiences rend from top to bottom the curtain upon which is painted the picture of an ordered world, and allow a glimpse into the unfathomed abyss of what has not yet become. […]

In dealing with the psychological mode of artistic creation, we never need ask ourselves what the material consists of or what it means. But this question forces itself upon us as soon as we come to the visionary mode of creation. We are astonished, taken aback, confused, put on our guard or even disgusted — and we demand commentaries and explanations. We are reminded in nothing of everyday, human life, but rather of dreams, nighttime fears and dark recesses of the mind that we sometimes sense with misgiving. […]

A great work of art is like a dream; for all its apparent obviousness it does not explain itself and is never unequivocal. A dream never says: “You ought,” or: “This is the truth.” It presents an image in much the same way as nature allows a plant to grow, and we must draw our own conclusions. […]

Human passion falls within the sphere of conscious experience, while the subject of the vision lies beyond it. Through our feelings we experience the known, but our intuitions point to things that are unknown and hidden — that by their very nature are secret. If ever they become conscious, they are intentionally kept back and concealed, for which reason they have been regarded from earlier times as mysterious, uncanny, and deceptive. […]

In our midst, the poet now and then catches sight of the figures that people the night-world — the spirits, demons and gods. He knows that a purposiveness out-reaching human ends is the life-giving secret for man; he has a presentiment of incomprehensible happenings in the pleroma. […]

Great poetry draws its strength from the life of mankind, and we completely miss its meaning if we try to derive it from personal factors. Whenever the collective unconscious becomes a living experience and is brought to bear upon the conscious outlook of an age, this event is a creative act which is of importance to everyone living in that age. A work of art is produced that contains what may truthfully be called a message to generations… Every period has its bias, its particular prejudice and its psychic ailment. An epoch is like an individual; it has its own limitations of conscious outlook, and therefore requires a compensatory adjustment. This is effected by the collective unconscious in that a poet, a seer or a leader allows himself to be guided by the unexpressed desire of his times and shows the way, by word or deed, to the attainment of that which everyone blindly craves and expects — whether this attainment results in good or evil, the healing of an epoch or its destruction. […]

Every creative person is a duality or a synthesis of contradictory aptitudes. On the one side he is a human being with a personal life, while on the other side he is an impersonal, creative process… Art is a kind of innate drive that seizes a human being and makes him its instrument. The artist is not a person endowed with free will who seeks his own ends, but one who allows art to realize its purpose through him. As a human being he may have moods and a will and personal aims, but as an artist he is “man” in a higher sense — he is “collective man” — one who carries and shapes the unconscious, psychic life of mankind. […]

The artist’s life cannot be otherwise than full of conflicts, for two forces are at war within him — on the one hand the common human longing for happiness, satisfaction and security in life, and on the other a ruthless passion for creation which may go so far as to override every personal desire…. A person must pay dearly for the divine gift of creative fire [because] each of us [is] endowed at birth with a certain capital of energy [and] a special ability means a heavy expenditure of energy in a particular direction, with a consequent drain from some other side of life. […]

Whenever the creative force predominates, human life is ruled and moulded by the unconscious as against the active will, and the conscious ego is swept along on a subterranean current, behind nothing more than a helpless observer. […]

The secret of artistic creation and of the effectiveness of art is to be found in a return to… that level of experience at which it is man who lives, and not the individual, and at which the weal or woe of a single human being does not count, but only human existence. This is why every great work of art is objective and impersonal, but none the less profoundly moves us each and all. And this is also why the personal life of the poet cannot be held essential to but at most a his art — but at most a help or a hindrance to his creative task.”
(Carl G. Jung, Modern man in search of a soul, 1939)

Read it in the Marginalian: 
https://www.themarginalian.org/2025/04/09/carl-jung-creativity/?mc_cid=7afbd5c24d&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E1.6.C.2.6.a_REF10_CUR THE RENDERING OF AN INNER MOOD.

Watch this video from the free educational series Khan Academy that offers a short and insightful exploration of the painting’s symbolism: https://youtu.be/Nk4DmlnoLxw

E1.6.C.2.6.b. ART INVITES US TO THINK "WITH" RATHER THAN "AGAINST".
The love of art is intelligent in the sense that it can teach us to astonish ourselves by learning to love intelligently. In this sense, the beauty in an aesthetic work serves as an invitation to knowledge and is a positive force.

E1.6.C.2.6.b_REF1_PH JACQUES DARRIULAT DISCUSSES THE IMPORTANCE OF MAINTAINING A CRITICAL DISTANCE FROM WORKS OF ART IN ORDER TO BETTER APPRECIATE AND UNDERSTAND THEM. He emphasizes that love for a work of art must be intelligent and thoughtful, not idolatrous.
"Nicolas Rousseau]: One learns to keep a certain distance from the work, to reflect on it without idolizing it.
[Jacques Darriulat]: Yes, and that's how you love it more and more. You have to think to love more, and it's better to love what you want to think about. There are sad scholars who devote their existence to studying only the problems that inspire them with the deepest boredom. So they are very boring themselves. I taught only what I loved, I wrote only to defend what I thought was true, I didn't waste time railing against what I didn't like. I believe we must think with, not against. And the very idea of dialectical negativity requires that you experience, in its most intimate sense, the thought you are trying to overcome, which, as everyone knows, is as much a denial as a preservation. [I have never written except to share my joy. This is not idolatry; love is intelligent, no one is forced to love stupidly. And if it is not intelligent, it can at least strive to become so, learning to be surprised by itself... Dare to know. Sapere aude. Beauty is an invitation to knowledge, to joyful knowledge. I do not encounter the aesthetic phenomenon pathologically, I make it my own, I use the energy it gives me. Beauty that seeks to dazzle us is always a poor beauty, and the shock of the aesthetic encounter is not measured by the intensity of the sensation alone. It was this criticism that Kant addressed to Edmund Burke, that he was only able to conceive a "physiology" of the beautiful instead of thinking about the dynamics of aesthetic judgment. It is very striking that in the Third Critique, the first part of which, as you know, is devoted to aesthetic judgment, there is practically no mention of sensibility itself, but always of the creative interplay of imagination and understanding. But everyone knows that the word "aesthetic" is derived from a Greek word meaning "sensation. Sensory perception is only the beginning, the "motive," the impulse that sets the movement in motion. But all the work is done by the dynamic and creative faculties that produce images and concepts. Aesthetic imagination is not the hypnotized imagination of dreams, and, as Bachelard said, "it does not fix images; on the contrary, it varies and destroys them forever in order to create new ones".
(Jacques Darriulat, Interview with Nicolas Rousseau and Timothée Coyras, part two, 2010)

E1.6.C.2.6.b_REF2_PH NIETZSCHE LAMENTS THAT HIS CONTEMPORARIES SEE ART ONLY AS ENTERTAINMENT.
CONTINUED EXISTENCE OF ART.—Why, really, does a creative art nowadays continue to exist? Because the majority who have hours of leisure (and such an art is for them only) think that they cannot fill up their time without music, theatres and picture-galleries, novels and poetry. Granted that one could keep them from this indulgence, either they would strive less eagerly for leisure, and the invidious sight of the rich would be less common (a great gain for the stability of society), or they would have leisure, but would learn to reflect on what can be learnt and unlearnt: on their work, for instance, their associations, the pleasure they could bestow. All the world, with the exception of the artist, would in both cases reap the advantage.—Certainly, there are many vigorous, sensible readers who could take objection to this. Still, it must be said on behalf of the coarse and malignant that the author himself is concerned with this protest, and that there is in his book much to be read that is not actually written down therein.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 175, 1878)

E1.6.C.2.7. EXPANDING THE BOUNDARIES OF WHO WE ARE  BY INVITING THE UNKNOWN
"Art also allows us to expand the boundaries of who we are by helping us overcome our chronic fear of the unfamiliar and living more richly by inviting the unknown"
(Maria Popova´s review of Alain de Botton & John Armstrong's Art as Therapy)

Through art, we can overcome our defensive reactions to strange or alien experiences. As Mary Oliver describes, literature offers the "sustenance of empathy" and allows us to stand in the perspective of others - whether people, trees, or clouds. This transformative power of art is supported by concepts like Keats's "negative capability" - the ability to remain in uncertainty without seeking immediate rational explanations, and what Sloterdijk calls the "surrealist mental module" that allows us to suspend disbelief and enter realms of impossible reality.

E1.6.C.2.7_REF1_PH "GROWTH
Besides inviting deeper knowledge of our own selves, art also allows us to expand the boundaries of who we are by helping us overcome our chronic fear of the unfamiliar and living more richly by inviting the unknown:
"Engagement with art is useful because it presents us with powerful examples of the kind of alien material that provokes defensive boredom and fear, and allows us time and privacy to learn to deal more strategically with it. An important first step in overcoming defensiveness around art is to become more open about the strangeness that we feel in certain contexts."
De Botton and Armstrong propose three critical steps to overcoming our defensiveness around art: First, acknowledging the strangeness we feel and being gentle on ourselves for feeling it, recognizing that it’s completely natural — after all, so much art comes from people with worldviews radically different from, and often contradictory to, our own; second, making ourselves familiar and thus more at home with the very minds who created that alien art; finally, looking for points of connection with the artist, “however fragile and initially tenuous,” so we can relate to the work that sprang from the context of their life with the personal reality of our own context."
(Maria Popova´s review of Alain de Botton & John Armstrong's Art as Therapy)

E1.6.C.2.7_REF2_LIT MARY OLIVER DESCRIBES HER EXPERIENCE OF HOW THE WORLD OF LITERATURE OFFERED HER SUSTENANCE OF EMPATHY and how she found comfort in standing in the characters of everything, whether it be people, trees, or clouds. She saw literature as a way to notice, contemplate, praise and come into power. She also talks about the idea of "negative capability" described by Keats, which is the ability to be in uncertainty, doubts and mysteries without being irritated by the need for fact and reason. Oliver sees language not as a means of self-description but as a door, a thousand opening doors, past herself.

“Art is sort of an experimental station in which one tries out living”
(John Cage)

E1.6.C.2.7_REF1.1_LIT "THE SECOND WORLD — THE WORLD OF LITERATURE — OFFERED ME, BESIDES THE PLEASURES OF FORM, THE SUSTENTATION OF EMPATHY (the first step of what Keats called negative capability) and I ran for it. I relaxed in it. I stood willingly and gladly in the characters of everything — other people, trees, clouds. And this is what I learned: that the world’s otherness is antidote to confusion, that standing within this otherness — the beauty and the mystery of the world, out in the fields or deep inside books — can re-dignify the worst-stung heart [...]
I did not think of language as the means to self-description. I thought of it as the door — a thousand opening doors! — past myself. I thought of it as the means to notice, to contemplate, to praise, and, thus, to come into power."
(Mary Oliver, "Staying alive" in Upstream)

E1.6.C.2.7_REF3_PH JOHN KEATS DESCRIBES "NEGATIVE CAPABILITY" AS THE QUALITY THAT ALLOWS A PERSON, PARTICULARLY A GREAT POET LIKE SHAKESPEARE, TO REMAIN IN UNCERTAINTIES AND MYSTERIES without seeking concrete facts and reasons, emphasizing that the sense of beauty surpasses all other considerations.
"Several things dovetailed in my mind, & at once it struck me, what quality went to form a Man of Achievement especially in Literature & which Shakespeare possessed so enormously — I mean Negative Capability, that is when man is capable of being in uncertainties, Mysteries, doubts, without any irritable reaching after fact & reason — Coleridge, for instance, would let go by a fine isolated verisimilitude caught from the Penetralium of mystery, from being incapable of remaining content with half knowledge. This pursued through Volumes would perhaps take us no further than this, that with a great poet the sense of Beauty overcomes every other consideration, or rather obliterates all consideration."
(John Keats, Selected letters)

E1.6.C.2.7_REF4_PH A "SURREALIST MENTAL MODULE"  IN RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS INVOLVES A SUSPENSION OF DISBELIEF, ALLOWING BELIEVERS TO ENTER A REALM OF IMPOSSIBLE REALITY, SIMILAR TO THE ARTISTIC HANDLING OF THE UNBELIEVABLE.
"A mental module that is rarely missing in the composition of religious systems [...] gathers the internal operations that represent the impossible as being accomplished - better, that affirm its accomplishment. Whenever these operations are implemented, the boundary between the possible and the impossible falls. Thanks to this [...] element, we practice a hybrid conclusion in which the fact that X is impossible proves its possibility. [...] Needless to say, this is the real surrealist module of religion. Its implementation involves an internal operation that Coleridge - in the aesthetic context - had described as the willing suspension of disbelief. With it, the believer abruptly breaks down the system of empirical plausibility and enters the sphere of impossible reality. When one conducts intensive training in that field, one achieves the mobility characteristic of artists in the handling of the unbelievable."
(Peter Sloterdijk, You must change your life, 2009)

E1.6.C.2.7_REF5_PH "LIKE OTHER TOOLS, ART HAS THE POWER TO EXTEND OUR CAPACITIES BEYOND THOSE THAT NATURE HAS ORIGINALLY ENDOWED US WITH. Art compensates us for certain inborn weaknesses, in this case of the mind rather than the body, weaknesses that we can refer to as psychological frailties."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings - Review of Alain de Botton & John Armstrong´s Art as Therapy)

E1.6.C.2.7_REF6_PH IF THE WORK NO LONGER INTRODUCES TENSION, IF IT ONLY CONFIRMS MY IDENTITY AS A VIEWER, IS IT STILL A CULTURAL WORK?
"The Frankfurt School: Adorno and Benjamin at War with the Kulturindustrie
The Legacy of Critical Theory today asks whether the integration of cultural creation into a capitalist production process aimed at profit transforms cultural production. There has certainly been a democratization of access to culture, but this is linked to a specific economic system with its own agenda.
One test would be to see if a work of culture no longer disturbs us, if it creates distance between itself and the viewer. Do we see what we already saw? Do we think about it as we already thought? If a work no longer introduces tension and merely confirms the viewer's identity, is it still a cultural work?
The following is an excerpt from Theodore Adorno's talk on September 28, 1963, on France Culture, regarding "intellectual accomplices":
"Among intellectuals who seek to reconcile their reservations about the culture industry with respect for its power, a tone of ironic indulgence has taken hold. We know what all this is about, they say: serial novels, formulaic films, and anti-family television shows diluted into series; variety shows; horoscope and advice columns. But all this is harmless and democratic because it caters to a prefabricated demand. Moreover, all this produces all kinds of benefits, for example, through the dissemination of information and advice. However, this information is undoubtedly poor or insignificant, as proven by all sociological studies on basic things like the level of political knowledge. The advice that emerges from the culture industry is mere triviality or worse."
According to Adorno, the role of the intellectual is not to agree with those in power. This does not mean rejecting "the powerful" (he is not a thinker of domination). What is powerful is the dominant opinion that goes unquestioned and unchallenged.
 
His theoretical demand is almost aesthetic because he is a trained composer and believes that any quotable statement becomes a commodity in a market of knowledge and good philosophical dictions. This justifies his complicated style against "bourgeois rationality".
(Julia Christ on the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on November 19, 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/adorno-et-benjamin-en-guerre-contre-la-kulturindustrie-9053846

E1.6.C.2.7_REF7_LIT LITERATURE IS BUILT ON TENDERNESS TOWARD ANY BEING OTHER THAN OURSELVES. TENDERNESS IS THE ART OF PERSONIFYING, OF SHARING FEELINGS, AND THUS ENDLESSLY DISCOVERING SIMILARITIES.
"We live in a reality of polyphonic first-person narratives, and we are met from all sides with polyphonic noise. What I mean by first-person is the kind of tale that narrowly orbits the self of a teller who more or less directly just writes about herself and through herself. We have determined that this type of individualized point of view, this voice from the self, is the most natural, human and honest, even if it does abstain from a broader perspective. Narrating in the first person, so conceived, is weaving an absolutely unique pattern, the only one of its kind; it is having a sense of autonomy as an individual, being aware of yourself and your fate. Yet it also means building an opposition between the self and the world, and that opposition can be alienating at times. [...]

We are all — people, plants, animals, and objects — immersed in a single space, which is ruled by the laws of physics. This common space has its shape, and within it the laws of physics sculpt an infinite number of forms that are incessantly linked to one another. Our cardiovascular system is like the system of a river basin, the structure of a leaf is like a human transport system, the motion of the galaxies is like the whirl of water flowing down our washbasins. Societies develop in a similar way to colonies of bacteria. The micro and macro scale show an endless system of similarities.

Our speech, thinking and creativity are not something abstract, removed from the world, but a continuation on another level of its endless processes of transformation. [...]

Literature is one of the few spheres that try to keep us close to the hard facts of the world, because by its very nature it is always psychological, because it focuses on the internal reasoning and motives of the characters, reveals their otherwise inaccessible experience to another person, or simply provokes the reader into a psychological interpretation of their conduct. Only literature is capable of letting us go deep into the life of another being, understand their reasons, share their emotions and experience their fate. [...]

Tenderness is the art of personifying, of sharing feelings, and thus endlessly discovering similarities. Creating stories means constantly bringing things to life, giving an existence to all the tiny pieces of the world that are represented by human experiences, the situations people have endured and their memories. Tenderness personalizes everything to which it relates, making it possible to give it a voice, to give it the space and the time to come into existence, and to be expressed. [...]

Tenderness is the most modest form of love. It is the kind of love that does not appear in the scriptures or the gospels, no one swears by it, no one cites it. It has no special emblems or symbols, nor does it lead to crime, or prompt envy.

It appears wherever we take a close and careful look at another being, at something that is not our “self.”

Tenderness is spontaneous and disinterested; it goes far beyond empathetic fellow feeling. Instead it is the conscious, though perhaps slightly melancholy, common sharing of fate. Tenderness is deep emotional concern about another being, its fragility, its unique nature, and its lack of immunity to suffering and the effects of time. Tenderness perceives the bonds that connect us, the similarities and sameness between us. It is a way of looking that shows the world as being alive, living, interconnected, cooperating with, and codependent on itself.

Literature is built on tenderness toward any being other than ourselves."
(Olga Tokarczuk, Nobel Prize in literature acceptance speech, 2018)

Read the full transcript of Olga Tokarczuk's speech: 
https://culture.pl/en/article/olga-tokarczuks-nobel-lecture-the-tender-narrator?mc_cid=2cf496f0e3&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E1.6.C.2.8. MAKING LIFE LIGHTER
"Anyone who wants to idealize his life should not want to look at it too precisely and should always move his eye back a certain distance."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, all too Human, Aphorism 279, 1878)

John Cowper Powys argues that art and literature offer valuable moments of escape from life's burdens, Camus discusses how humans seek unity through artistic creation, and Darriulat emphasizes that art should inspire creativity rather than mere fascination. While art may not directly solve life's practical challenges, it provides essential moments of reflection, unity, and creative inspiration that help us navigate our existence.

E1.6.C.2.8.a. "ALLIVIATING THE BURDENS OF LIFE. - A major way to alliviate the burdens of life is to idealize events; but you have to get a clear idea of what idealizing means from paintings. The painter wants the spectator's gaze not to be too exact, too sharp, he forces him to consider his work from a certain distance; that is, he has to assume that the spectator is looking at the painting from a specific distance; better still, he must admit  that the spectator's degree of acuity of the eye is identical to his own; on these aspects he cannot be undecided. Anyone, therefore, who wishes to idealize his life should not want to look at it too precisely and must always move his eye back a certain distance."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, all too Human, Aphorism 279, 1878)

E1.6.C.2.8.a_REF1_PH SCHILLER ARGUES THAT WHILE THE IDEAL PURPOSE OF ART IS A HIGHER RECREATION THAT HARMONIZES ALL OF A PERSON'S FACULTIES, MOST PEOPLE, EXHAUSTED BY MODERN LIFE, DEMAND A LOWER FORM OF AMUSEMENT THAT MERELY SUSPENDS THOUGHT AND PROVIDES SENSUOUS REST. DOES THIS APPLY TODAY?
“Two maxims are prevalent in relation to poetry, both of them quite correct in themselves, but mutually destructive in the way in which they are generally conceived. The first is, that "poetry serves as a means of amusement and recreation," and we have previously observed that this maxim is highly favorable to aridity and platitudes in poetical actions. The other maxim, that "poetry is conducive to the moral progress of humanity," takes under its shelter theories and views of the most wild and extravagant character. It may be profitable to examine more attentively these two maxims, of which so much is heard, and which are so often imperfectly understood and falsely applied.

We say that a thing amuses us when it makes us pass from a forced state to the state that is natural to us. The whole question here is to know in what our natural state ought to consist, and what a forced state means. If our natural state is made to consist merely in the free development of all our physical powers, in emancipation from all constraint, it follows that every act of reason by resisting what is sensuous, is a violence we undergo, and rest of mind combined with physical movement will be a recreation par excellence. But if we make our natural state consist in a limitless power of human expression and of freely disposing of all our strength, all that divides these forces will be a forced state, and recreation will be what brings all our nature to harmony. Thus, the first of these ideal recreations is simply determined by the wants of our sensuous nature; the second, by the autonomous activity of human nature. Which of these two kinds of recreation can be demanded of the poet? Theoretically, the question is inadmissible, as no one would put the human ideal beneath the brutal. But in practice the requirements of a poet have been especially directed to the sensuous ideal, and for the most part favor, though not the esteem, for these sorts of works is regulated thereby. Men's minds are mostly engaged in a labor that exhausts them, or an enjoyment that sets them asleep. Now labor makes rest a sensible want, much more imperious than that of the moral nature; for physical nature must be satisfied before the mind can show its requirements. On the other hand, enjoyment paralyzes the moral instinct. Hence these two dispositions common in men are very injurious to the feeling for true beauty, and thus very few even of the best judge soundly in aesthetics. Beauty results from the harmony between spirit and sense; it addresses all the faculties of man, and can only be appreciated if a man employs fully all his strength. He must bring to it an open sense, a broad heart, a spirit full of freshness. All a man's nature must be on the alert, and this is not the case with those divided by abstraction, narrowed by formulas, enervated by application. They demand, no doubt, a material for the senses; but not to quicken, only to suspend, thought. They ask to be freed from what? From a load that oppressed their indolence, and not a rein that curbed their activity.

After this can one wonder at the success of mediocre talents in aesthetics? or at the bitter anger of small minds against true energetic beauty? They reckon on finding therein a congenial recreation, and regret to discover that a display of strength is required to which they are unequal. With mediocrity they are always welcome; however little mind they bring, they want still less to exhaust the author's inspiration. They are relieved of the load of thought; and their nature can lull itself in beatific nothings on the soft pillow of platitude. In the temple of Thalia and Melpomene—at least, so it is with us—the stupid savant and the exhausted man of business are received on the broad bosom of the goddess, where their intelligence is wrapped in a magnetic sleep, while their sluggish senses are warmed, and their imagination with gentle motions rocked.

Vulgar people may be excused what happens to the best capacities. Those moments of repose demanded by nature after lengthy labor are not favorable to aesthetic judgment, and hence in the busy classes few can pronounce safely on matters of taste. Nothing is more common than for scholars to make a ridiculous figure, in regard to a question of beauty, besides cultured men of the world; and technical critics are especially the laughing-stock of connoisseurs. Their opinion, from exaggeration, crudeness, or carelessness guides them generally quite awry, and they can only devise a technical judgment, and not an aesthetical one, embracing the whole work, in which feeling should decide. If they would kindly keep to technicalities they might still be useful, for the poet in moments of inspiration and readers under his spell are little inclined to consider details. But the spectacle which they afford us is only the more ridiculous inasmuch as we see these crude natures—with whom all labor and trouble only develop at the most a particular aptitude,—when we see them set up their paltry individualities as the representation of universal and complete feeling, and in the sweat of their brow pronounce judgment on beauty.

We have just seen that the kind of recreation poetry ought to afford is generally conceived in too restricted a manner, and only referred to a simple sensuous want. Too much scope, however, is also given to the other idea, the moral ennobling the poet should have in view, inasmuch as too purely an ideal aim is assigned.

In fact, according to the pure ideal, the ennobling goes on to infinity, because reason is not restricted to any sensuous limits, and only finds rest in absolute perfection. Nothing can satisfy whilst a superior thing can be conceived; it judges strictly and admits no excuses of infirmity and finite nature. It only admits for limits those of thought, which transcends time and space. Hence the poet could no more propose to himself such an ideal of ennobling (traced for him by pure (didactic) reason) any more than the coarse ideal of recreation of sensuous nature. The aim is to free human nature from accidental hinderances, without destroying the essential ideal of our humanity, or displacing its limits. All beyond this is exaggeration, and a quicksand in which the poet too easily suffers shipwreck if he mistakes the idea of nobleness. But, unfortunately, he cannot rise to the true ideal of ennobled human nature without going some steps beyond it. To rise so high he must abandon the world of reality, for, like every ideal, it is only to be drawn from its inner moral source. He does not find it in the turmoil of worldly life, but only in his heart, and that only in calm meditation. But in this separation from real life he is likely to lose sight of all the limits of human nature, and seeking pure form he may easily lose himself in arbitrary and baseless conceptions. Reason will abstract itself too much from experience, and the practical man will not be able to carry out, in the crush of real life, what the contemplative mind has discovered on the peaceful path of thought. Thus, what makes a dreamy man is the very thing that alone could have made him a sage; and the advantage for the latter is not that he has never been a dreamer, but rather that he has not remained one.

We must not, then, allow the workers to determine recreation according to their wants, nor thinkers that of nobleness according to their speculations, for fear of either a too low physical poetry, or a poetry too given to hyperphysical exaggeration. And as these two ideas direct most men's judgments on poetry, we must seek a class of mind at once active, but not slavishly so, and idealizing, but not dreamy; uniting the reality of life within as few limits as possible, obeying the current of human affairs, but not enslaved by them. Such a class of men can alone preserve the beautiful unity of human nature, that harmony which all work for a moment disturbs, and a life of work destroys; such alone can, in all that is purely human, give by its feelings universal rules of judgment. Whether such a class exists, or whether the class now existing in like conditions answers to this ideal conception, I am not concerned to inquire. If it does not respond to the ideal it has only itself to blame. In such a class—here regarded as a mere ideal—the simple and sentimental would keep each other from extremes of extravagance and relaxation. For the idea of a beautiful humanity is not exhausted by either, but can only be presented in the union of both.”
(Friedrich Schiller, The Aesthetical Essays, 1875)

E1.6.C.2.8.b. MOMENTS OF FREEDOM FROM THE WEIGHT OF THE WORLD
The creations of geniuses are not designed to assist us in the harsh struggle of life, but to offer us precious moments of escape and dialogue with the great shadows. The works of literature and thought do not deeply integrate into the daily necessities of our lives, but they provide us with moments of freedom from the world's weight..

E1.6.C.2.8.b_REF1_LIT JOHN COWPER POWYS ARGUES THAT THE TRUE VALUE OF GENIUS LIES IN ENRICHING THE IMAGINATIVE ASPECTS OF OUR LIVES, DESPITE THE HARSH REALITIES WE FACE DAILY. While philosophers and artists may not directly aid in our struggles, their creations offer moments of profound personal reflection and escape from the burdens of reality.
"The real value of the creations of men of genius is to make richer and more complicated what might be called the imaginative margin of our normal life.

We all, as Goethe says, have to bear the burden of humanity - we have to plunge into the bitter waters of reality, so full of sharp rocks and blinding spray. We have to fight for our own hand. We have to forget that we so much as possess a soul as we tug and strain at the resistant elements out of which we live and help others to live.

It is nonsense to pretend that the insight of philosophers and the energy of artists help us very greatly in this bleak wrestling. They are there, these men of genius, securely lodged in the Elysian fields of large and free thoughts - and we are here, sweating and toiling in the dust of brutal facts.

The hollow idealism that pretends that the achievements of literature and thought enter profoundly into the diurnal necessity which prods us forward is a plausible and specious lie. We do not learn how to deal craftily and prosperously with the world from the Machiavels and Talleyrands. We do not learn how to love the world and savour it with exquisite joy from the Whitmans and Emersons. What we do is to struggle on, as best we may; living by custom, by prejudice, by hope, by fear, by envy and jealousy, by ambition, by vanity, by love.

[Yet] there are those invaluable, unutterable moments, which we have to ourselves, free of the weight of the world. There are the moments the door of our bedroom, of our attic, of our ship's cabin, of our monastic cell, of our tenement-flat, shut against the intruder - when we can enter the company of the great shadows and largely and freely converse with them to the forgetting of all vexation."
(John Cowper Powys, Suspended Judgments, 1916)

E1.6.C.2.8.c. UNITY IN ART EMERGES FROM THE ARTIST'S TRANSFORMATION OF REALITY
Humans aspire for a better, unified world. This quest for unity in life may explain both religion and artistic creation. Novels, for example, represent a revision of reality where all life assumes the guise of fate. Unity in art arises from the artist's transformation of reality. This adjustment, known as style, lends the reimagined universe its unity and boundaries. Poets, unrecognized as lawmakers, impose their law on the world.

E1.6.C.2.8.c_REF1_PH ALBERT CAMUS ARGUES THAT HUMANS INHERENTLY SEEK UNITY IN THEIR EXISTENCE, DRIVEN BY A DESIRE TO GIVE LIFE A COHERENT SHAPE. This pursuit manifests in various forms, notably, the creation of novels. Novels serve as a means to impose form and destiny on life, reflecting humanity's deep desire for a unified world. This artistic correction aims to impose order and laws on the world, with poets being the unacknowledged legislators of this transformed reality.
"There is no one at last who, from an elementary level of consciousness, does not exhaust himself in seeking the formulas or the attitudes that would give his existence the unity it lacks. [...] It is not enough to live, one needs a destiny before death comes. It is thus right to say that man has the idea of a better world than this one. But better does not mean different, better means unified. This fever that lifts the spirits above a scattered world, from which it cannot escape however, is the fever of unity. It does not lead to a mediocre escape, but to the most obstinate claim. Be it religion or crime, every human effort obeys in the end this unreasonable desire to give to life a shape it does not have. The same movement, which can lead to the adoration of heaven or to the destruction of man, also results in the writing of novels.
What is the novel, indeed, if not a universe where action finds its form, where words of the end are pronounced, characters fall at the mercy of others, where all life takes the face of destiny. The novelistic world is only the correction of this world, according to the deep desire of man. [...]
The realist artist and the formal artist look for unity where it is not, in reality in its raw state, or in the imaginary creation which believes to expel all reality. On the contrary, unity in art arises at the end of the transformation that the artist imposes on reality. It cannot do without either one or the other. This correction, that the artist operates by his language and by a redistribution of elements drawn from reality, is called style and gives to the recomposed universe its unity and its limits. It aims in all revolted beings, and succeeds in some geniuses, at giving its laws to the world. « Poets, says Shelley, are the unacknowledged legislators of the world. »"
(Albert Camus, The rebel, The historical revolt, Revolt and Art, 1951)

E1.6.C.2.8.d. ART IS NOT MEANT TO MESMERIZE, BUT RATHER TO AWAKEN IN US THE DESIRE TO CREATE AND MAKE THE WORLD A BETTER PLACE.
Jacques Darriulat believes that when viewing a work of art, we should not worship it, but think and seek by ourself its path of creation. Aesthetic judgment isn't about being mesmerized, as it continuously generates meaning and enriches our sensory experiences. Aesthetic knowledge is "reflective" because it accurately captures the reflections that the artwork projects around it. However, be cautious as "form itself can be a temptation, making the work of art into a small myth which is a self-contained and self-satisfied construction".

E1.6.C.2.8.d_REF1_PH JACQUES DARRIULAT ARGUES THAT ART SHOULD INSPIRE THE DESIRE TO CREATE RATHER THAN FASCINATE. He contrasts the artist with the charlatan, emphasizing that aesthetic judgment should lead to deeper understanding and creation, not idolatry.
"Nicolas Rousseau]: You can also be fascinated by a work of art, stunned. Aren't we moving from hypnosis to fascination?
[Jacques Darriulat]: Art is not meant to fascinate, but rather to awaken in us the desire to create. It is the charlatan who fascinates, not the artist. And the best way not to be fascinated by the beauty of a work of art is to make it the object of an aesthetic judgment. When confronted with a work of art, one must think, one must find one's own way of creating it, and above all, one must not idolize it. Proust understood that idolaters are always the bachelors of art, their enthusiasm remains sterile, their fanaticism is purely formal. But before him, Kant had clearly stated that beauty is not the model of our admiration, but the motive of our creation, in the sense that it has the power to motivate the creative faculties that are in us, which are imagination and understanding, the former guiding the latter. It is certainly not a question of solving the unknown of beauty, but of weaving new networks of forms and meanings around this focus. Fascination is only a failure of intelligence, a breakdown of invention. Aesthetic judgment is not fascinated; it never ceases to produce meaning, to deepen the quality of the sensory encounter, because here it is not quantity but quality, in its extreme singularity, that is essential.
You know that one of the characteristics of the analysis of beauty is that Kant gives pride of place to the moment of quality, while for the decisive judgment, whether speculative or moral, quantity comes first. Some superstitious minds imagine that if you analyze a poem too much, you risk destroying its charm. On the contrary, the more you study a work, the more you enjoy it. Taste is educated, and even more so the eye and the ear. Gradually, one learns to recognize the infinite interplay of echoes, the overtones that resonate with the work. Beauty only makes sense in the network of "correspondences," as Baudelaire said, of which it is the source. Aesthetic knowledge is not rigorous or demonstrative, it is "reflective", it identifies precisely the reflections that the work makes shine around it."
(Jacques Darriulat, Interview with Nicolas Rousseau and Timothée Coyras, part two, 2010)

E1.6.C.2.8.d_REF1_LIT "FORM ITSELF CAN BE A TEMPTATION, MAKING THE WORK OF ART INTO A SMALL MYTH which is a self-contained and indeed self-satisfied construction… Real people are destructive of myth, contingency is destructive of fantasy and opens the way for imagination… Too much contingency of course may turn art into journalism. But since reality is incomplete, art must not be too much afraid of incompleteness. Literature must always represent a battle between real people and images; and what it requires now is a much stronger and more complex conception of the former.

In morals and politics we have stripped ourselves of concepts. Literature, in curing its own ills, can give us a new vocabulary of experience, and a truer picture of freedom. With this, renewing our sense of distance, we may remind ourselves that art too lives in a region where all human endeavour is failure. Perhaps only Shakespeare manages to create at the highest level both images and people; and even Hamlet looks second-rate compared with Lear. Only the very greatest art invigorates without consoling, and defeats our attempts, in W. H. Auden’s words, to use it as magic."
(Iris Murdoch,  Existentialists and Mystics: Writings on Philosophy and Literature, 1997)

Watch a video from Daniel Arsham's Eroding and Reforming Digital Sculpture Series on YouTube: https://youtu.be/bv-IxUN3ciQ?feature=shared

E1.6.C.2.8.e. ”ART IN AN AGE OF WORK.—We have the conscience of an industrious epoch. This debars us from devoting our best hours and the best part of our days to art, even though that art be the greatest and worthiest. Art is for us a matter of leisure, of recreation, and we consecrate to it the residue of our time and strength. This is the cardinal fact that has altered the relation of art to life. When art makes its great demands of time and strength upon its recipients, it has to battle against the conscience of the industrious and efficient, it is relegated to the idle and conscienceless, who, by their very nature, are not exactly suited to great art, and consider its claims arrogant. It might, therefore, be all over with art, since it lacks air and the power to breathe. But perhaps the great art attempts, by a sort of coarsening and disguising, to make itself at home in that other atmosphere, or at least to put up with it—an atmosphere which is really a natural element only for petty art, the art of recreation, of pleasant distraction. This happens nowadays almost everywhere. Even the exponents of great art promise recreation and distraction; even they address themselves to the exhausted; even they demand from him the evening hours of his working-day—just like the artists of the entertaining school, who are content to smooth the furrowed brow and brighten the lack-lustre eye. What, then, are the devices of their mightier brethren? These have in their medicine-chests the most powerful excitants, which might give a shock even to a man half-dead: they can deafen you, intoxicate you, make you shudder, or bring tears to your eyes. By this means they overpower the exhausted man and stimulate him for one night to an over-lively condition, to an ecstasy of terror and delight. This great art, as it now lives in opera, tragedy, and music—have we a right to be angry with it, because of its perilous fascination, as we should be angry with a cunning courtesan? Certainly not. It would far rather live in the pure element of morning calm, and would far rather make its appeal to the fresh, expectant, vigorous morning-soul of the beholder or listener. Let us be thankful that it prefers living thus to vanishing altogether. But let us also confess that an era that once more introduces free and complete high-days and holidays into life will have no use for our great art.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human III, Aphorism 170, 1878)

E1.6.C.2.9. PRESERVING WHAT TRULY MATTERS
"Art is a way of preserving experiences, of which there are many transient and beautiful examples, and that we need help containing"
(Alain de Botton & John Armstrong, Art as Therapy)

E1.6.C.2.9_REF1_PH GOOD ART CAPTURES THE ESSENCE OF WHAT TRULY MATTERS, PRESERVING SIGNIFICANT EXPERIENCES
"What we’re worried about forgetting … tends to be quite particular. It isn’t just anything about a person or scene that’s at stake; we want to remember what really matters, and the people we call good artists are, in part, the ones who appear to have made the right choices about what to communicate and what to leave out. … We might say that good artwork pins down the core of significance, while its bad counterpart, although undeniably reminding us of something, lets an essence slip away. It is an empty souvenir. [...]
Art is a way of preserving experiences, of which there are many transient and beautiful examples, and that we need help containing."
(Alain de Botton & John Armstrong, Art as Therapy)

E1.6.C.2.10. RECONCILING US WITH THE WORLD
"Art can act as a point of salvation, because it has the potential to put beauty back into the world. And that in itself is a way of making amends, of reconciling us with the world and with other people. "
(Maria Popova's review of Nick Cave's Faith, Hope and Carnage)

E1.6.C.2.10.a. SALVATION THROUGHT ART AND FORGIVENESS
 "In my own experience, nothing seeds cynicism more readily than the withholding of forgiveness — forgiveness of others, of the world, of Father Chance and Mother Circumstance; above all, of oneself. Self-forgiveness is indeed the most potent antidote to cynicism I know. Cave shines a sidewise gleam on the same intimation. [...]

      We all have regrets and most of us know that those regrets, as excruciating as they can be, are the things that help us lead improved lives. Or, rather, there are certain regrets that, as they emerge, can accompany us on the incremental bettering of our lives. Regrets are forever floating to the surface… They require our attention. You have to do something with them. One way is to seek forgiveness by making what might be called living amends, by using whatever gifts you may have in order to help rehabilitate the world. [...]

Art does have the ability to save us, in so many different ways. It can act as a point of salvation, because it has the potential to put beauty back into the world. And that in itself is a way of making amends, of reconciling us with the world. Art has the power to redress the balance of things, of our wrongs, of our sins… By “sins,” I mean those acts that are an offence to God or, if you would prefer, the “good in us” — that live within us, and that if we pay them no heed, harden and become part of our character. They are forms of suffering that can weigh us down terribly and separate us from the world. I have found that the goodness of the work can go some way towards mitigating them."
(Maria Popova's review of Nick Cave's Faith, Hope and Carnage)

E1.6.C.2.10.a_REF1_PH THE FUNDAMENTAL PURPOSE OF ART IS TO "EMBELLISH LIFE." THIS ISN'T JUST ABOUT SUPERFICIAL DECORATION; it's about making our existence more bearable and fostering positive social interactions.
"Against the Art of Works of Art.—Art is above all and first of all meant to embellish life, to make us ourselves endurable and if possible agreeable in the eyes of others. With this task in view, art moderates us and holds us in restraint, creates forms of intercourse, binds over the uneducated to laws of decency, cleanliness, politeness, well-timed speech and silence. Hence art must conceal or transfigure everything that is ugly—the painful, terrible, and disgusting elements which in spite of every effort will always break out afresh in accordance with the very origin of human nature. Art has to perform this duty especially in regard to the passions and spiritual agonies and anxieties, and to cause the significant factor to shine through unavoidable or unconquerable ugliness. To this great, super-great task the so-called art proper, that of works of art, is a mere accessary. A man who feels within himself a surplus of such powers of embellishment, concealment, and transfiguration will finally seek to unburden himself of this surplus in works of art. The same holds good, under special circumstances, of a whole nation.—But as a rule we nowadays begin art at the end, hang on to its tail, and think that works of art constitute art proper, and that life should be improved and transformed by this means—fools that we are! If we begin a dinner with dessert, and try sweet after sweet, small wonder that we ruin our digestions and even our appetites for the good, hearty, nourishing meal to which art invites us!" 
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 174, 1878)

E1.6.C.2.10.b. AT THE ROOT OF CONTEMPLATIVE REDEMPTION LIES A FORCE THAT ENABLES US TO ACCEPT LIFE, IN A SINGLE ACT, WITH ALL ITS INTIMATE CONTRADICTIONS

E1.6.C.2.10.b_REF1_PH ART, AS DESCRIBED BY GASTON BACHELARD, IS A FORM OF SOLITUDE THAT ALLOWS US TO RECONNECT WITH OUR INNER VOICE AND THE PRIMORDIAL ESSENCE OF OUR BEING. It transcends individual discontinuities, harmonizing us with the universe and revealing its beauty and meaning. This contemplative redemption helps us accept life with all its contradictions.
"If Art, like Reason, is solitude, then Solitude is Art itself. After suffering, we are returned « to the haughty solitude of our heart... then, our soul which broke its infamous chains, returns in its buried temple » and Mr. Roupnel continues: « Art is the listening of this interior voice. It brings us the buried murmur. It is the voice of supernatural conscience which sits inside us on the inalienable and perpetual bottom. It brings us back to the primordial site of our Being and to the immense Place where we are in the whole Universe. Our miserable parcel takes its proportional rank in the universe which authority is revealed to us. Triumphing over all the discontinuous themes that separate our Being and compose the Individual, Art is the sense of Harmony that brings us back to the sweet rhythm of the World, and returns us to the call of the Infinite. [...]
"When the Universe reveals its beauty, it acquires meaning; and the outdated image that we had of it gives way to the absolute face that emerges from the mystery." 
There is, we believe, at the root of this contemplative redemption, a force that enables us to accept life in a single act, with all its intimate contradictions."
(Gaston Bachelard, The Intuition of the Moment, 1931)

E1.6.C.2.10.b_REF2_LIT “ONLY THE VERY GREATEST ART INVIGORATES WITHOUT CONSOLING.”
(Iris Murdoch)

E1.6.C.2.10.c. “MUSIC HAS A UNIFYING EFFECT ON THE PEOPLES OF THE WORLD, because they all understand and love it… And when they find themselves enjoying and loving the same music, they find themselves loving one another.”
(Julia Perry)

E1.6.C.2.10.c_REF1_MU LISTENING TO MUSIC ACTIVATES THE BRAIN'S DOPAMINERGIC CIRCUITRY, FOSTERING A SENSE OF WONDER AND EXPLORATION. This experience can evoke physical reactions like tears and chills, symbolizing a merging with others to confront mysteries. Music unites individuals by synchronizing bodily rhythms, creating a sense of community and connection to something larger or sacred.
"When we listen to music that moves us, the dopaminergic circuitry of the brain is activated, which opens the mind to wonder and exploration. In this bodily state of musical awe, we often tear up and get the chills, those embodied signs of merging with others to face mysteries and the unknown… Music breaks down the boundaries between self and other and can unite us in feelings of awe… When we listen to music with others, the great rhythms of our bodies — heartbeat, breathing, hormonal fluctuations, sexual cycles, bodily motion — once separate, merge into a synchronized pattern. We sense that we are part of something larger, a community, a pattern of energy, an idea of the times — or what we might call the sacred."
(Dacher Keltner, Awe: The New Science of Everyday Wonder and How It Can Transform Your Life, 2023)

Watch Angelica Mesiti commenting Citizens Band on YouTube: https://youtu.be/oZCESnLdr1c?feature=shared

E1.6.C.2.10.d. GIVING LIFE MEANING
Life can gain meaning through our experiences of beauty, experienced through art, nature, or the contact with other human beings. When something profoundly touches us, it validates our existence.

E1.6.C.2.10.d_REF1_PH VIKTOR FRANKL ARGUES THAT LIFE’S MEANING CAN BE FOUND NOT ONLY THROUGH ACTIONS BUT ALSO THROUGH LOVING DEDICATION TO BEAUTY, GREATNESS, AND GOODNESS. This sense of meaning can also arise from experiencing nature or connecting deeply with another person. Frankl concludes that how individuals handle limitations and suffering reveals their true character and capacity to fulfill human values.
"It is not only through our actions that we can give life meaning — insofar as we can answer life’s specific questions responsibly — we can fulfill the demands of existence not only as active agents but also as loving human beings: in our loving dedication to the beautiful, the great, the good. Should I perhaps try to explain for you with some hackneyed phrase how and why experiencing beauty can make life meaningful? I prefer to confine myself to the following thought experiment: imagine that you are sitting in a concert hall and listening to your favorite symphony, and your favorite bars of the symphony resound in your ears, and you are so moved by the music that it sends shivers down your spine; and now imagine that it would be possible (something that is psychologically so impossible) for someone to ask you in this moment whether your life has meaning. I believe you would agree with me if I declared that in this case you would only be able to give one answer, and it would go something like: “It would have been worth it to have lived for this moment alone!"
Those who experience, not the arts, but nature, may have a similar response, and also those who experience another human being. Do we not know the feeling that overtakes us when we are in the presence of a particular person and, roughly translates as, "The fact that this person exists in the world at all, this alone makes this world, and a life in it, meaningful." [...]
How human beings deal with the limitation of their possibilities regarding how it affects their actions and their ability to love, how they behave under these restrictions — the way in which they accept their suffering under such restrictions — in all of this they still remain capable of fulfilling human values.
So, how we deal with difficulties truly shows who we are."
(Viktor Frankl, Yes to Life: In Spite of Everything)

E1.6.C.2.10.d_REF2_PH “SEEING OUR LIGHT SHINING.—In the darkest hour of depression, sickness, and guilt, we are still glad to see others taking a light from us and making use of us as of the disk of the moon. By this roundabout route we derive some light from our own illuminating faculty.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 61, 1878)

E1.6.C.2.10.d_REF3_PH ART IS THE ULTIMATE THERAPY FOR INTENSIFYING THE MEANING OF EXISTENCE. 
"When the tragic knot is untangled, it explodes in an extraordinary way—it's the birth of something new." The Greeks went to the theater to watch tragedies so they could experience the extremes of everything they feared in their everyday lives and free themselves from the minor annoyances that surrounded them. One thing that can't be negotiated is your relationship with yourself. This singularity is not the individuality of a person in the city who says, ‘I have the right to vote differently from you,’ because individuality is still in the realm of transaction. Antigone makes her existence the means of absolute and unsurpassable singularity. In theater, by proxy, we experience this intensity, and we are delivered from the pettiness of everyday life. Art is the ultimate therapy for intensifying the meaning of existence. The Athenians had to pay a fine if they did not attend the tragedies, which were meant to show them that human truth is a catastrophe we repress, and which we can confront vicariously in theater. We can draw courage from this confrontation when our tragic hour comes. Today, we live in a transactional society where all opposition is subject to negotiation. The goal is to find common ground for reconciliation by extracting the extreme violence lurking in opposition through a transaction. This is the opposite of Athenian tragedy, which aims to exacerbate tension to bring it to a head. Antigone is completely apolitical. It is a therapy for human misery.”
(Heinz Wismann in the program Les chemins de la philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 04/28/2021)

E1.6.C.2.11. ORGANIZING THE CHAOS
How does Apollo's art conceal the chaos of Dionysus, according to Friedrich Nietzsche?

E1.3.D.9.wE1.6.C.2.11. DIONYSUS VS. APOLLO
In his first work, "The Birth of Tragedy," Nietzsche examines the mechanism of constructing a system of appearances that attempts to make a chaotic world livable. He calls this the Apollonian approach, which he deems inherently flawed as it tries to mask aspects of reality we refuse to confront. Nietzsche contrasts this with the Dionysian strategy—a complete acceptance of reality. However, when taken to the extreme, this approach risks losing itself in the undifferentiated identity within the universal whole. The question remains: is there a possible reconciliation between these two approaches?

E1.6.C.2.11_REF1_SCI IN THE BIOLOGY OF ART, DESMOND MORRIS STUDYING THE DRAWING OF APES developed the hypotheses that the apes' scribbles seemed to picture the bedding of branches the apes arrange for themselves before going to sleep. Morris suggested that making a bed is a way for the animal to suspend the chaos of the world in the place he has chosen to sleep, and that apes chose to represent their bed in drawing suggests that one of the virtues of art could be the suspension of chaos - calming ourselves in a world of insecurity. 

E1.6.C.2.11_REF2_LIT KATHERINE ANNE PORTER ASSERTS THAT ARTISTS HAVE A DUTY TO CONFRONT CHAOS AND GIVE IT SHAPE AND MEANING, HELPING US UNDERSTAND EVENTS AND THEIR LESSONS OVER TIME.
"In the face of such shape and weight of present misfortune, the voice of the individual artist may seem perhaps of no more consequence than the whirring of a cricket in the grass, but the arts do live continuously, and they live literally by faith; their names and their shapes and their uses and their basic meanings survive unchanged in all that matters through times of interruption, diminishment, neglect; they outlive governments and creeds and the societies, even the very civilization that produced them. They cannot be destroyed altogether because they represent the substance of faith and the only reality. They are what we find again when the ruins are cleared away. [...]

Nothing is pointless, and nothing is meaningless if the artist will face it. And it’s his business to face it. He hasn’t got the right to sidestep it like that. Human life itself may be almost pure chaos, but the work of the artist — the only thing he’s good for — is to take these handfuls of confusion and disparate things, things that seem to be irreconcilable, and put them together in a frame to give them some kind of shape and meaning… We understand very little of what is happening to us at any given moment. But by remembering, comparing, waiting to know the consequences, we can sometimes see what an event really meant, what it was trying to teach us."
(Katherine Anne Porter, introduction to the 1940 Modern Library edition of Flowering Judas, 1935)

E1.6.C.2.11_REF3_CUR MATISSE IS THE LINE, PICASSO IS THE FORM

E1.6.C.2.11_REF4_LIT ART : A LIGHTHOUSE FOR DARK TIMES
”Every age, every culture, every custom and tradition has its own character, its own weakness and its own strength, its beauties and ugliness; accepts certain sufferings as matters of course, puts up patiently with certain evils. Human life is reduced to real suffering, to hell, only when two ages, two cultures and religions overlap. A man of the Classical Age who had to live in medieval times would suffocate miserably just as a savage does in the midst of our civilisation. Now there are times when a whole generation is caught in this way between two ages, two modes of life, with the consequence that it loses all power to understand itself and has no standard, no security, no simple acquiescence. […]

You will, instead, embark on the longer and wearier and harder road of life. You will have to multiply many times your two-fold being and complicate your complexities still further. Instead of narrowing your world and simplifying your soul, you will have to absorb more and more of the world and at last take all of it up in your painfully expanded soul, if you are ever to find peace. […]

A work of art… is the only material object in the universe which may possess internal harmony. All the others have been pressed into shape from outside, and when their mould is removed they collapse. The work of art stands up by itself, and nothing else does. It achieves something which has often been promised by society, but always delusively. Ancient Athens made a mess — but the Antigone stands up. Renaissance Rome made a mess — but the ceiling of the Sistine got painted. James I made a mess — but there was *Macbeth*. Louis XIV — but there was Phèdre. Art… is the one orderly product which our muddling race has produced. It is the cry of a thousand sentinels, the echo from a thousand labyrinths; it is the lighthouse which cannot be hidden. […]

If our present society should disintegrate — and who dare prophesy that it won’t? — [the figure of the artist] will become clearer: the Bohemian, the outsider, the parasite, the rat — one of those figures which have at present no function either in a warring or a peaceful world. It may not be dignified to be a rat, but many of the ships are sinking, which is not dignified either — the officials did not build them properly. Myself, I would sooner be a swimming rat than a sinking ship — at all events I can look around me for a little longer — and I remember how one of us, a rat with particularly bright eyes called Shelley, squeaked out, “Poets are the unacknowledged legislators of the world,” before he vanished into the waters of the Mediterranean… The legislation of the artist is never formulated at the time, though it is sometimes discerned by future generations. […]

Society can only represent a fragment of the human spirit, and that another fragment can only get expressed through art… Looking back into the past, it seems to me that that is all there has ever been: vantage-grounds for discussion and creation, little vantage-grounds in the changing chaos, where bubbles have been blown and webs spun, and the desire to create order has found temporary gratification, and the sentinels have managed to utter their challenges, and the huntsmen, though lost individually, have heard each other’s calls through the impenetrable wood, and the lighthouses have never ceased sweeping the thankless seas.”
(Hermann Hesse, Steppenwolf, 1927)

E1.6.C.2.12. EXPLORING MORALITY
Susan Sontag and Iris Murdoch argue that art is connected to morality and can yield moral pleasure. Art has a moral duty, which is to enliven our sensibility and consciousness. The qualities intrinsic to the aesthetic experience and aesthetic objects are fundamental constituents of a moral response to life.
Maya Angelou, on the other hand, believes that every artist has a responsibility to honor their talent, independently of moral constructs.
Wittgenstein asserts that a work of art is an object viewed from the outside, just as a good life is the world viewed from the outside. Both, thus, have the entire world as their backdrop. This establishes the connection between art and ethics.

E1.6.C.2.12.a. THE QUALITIES INTRINSIC TO THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE ARE ALSO FUNDAMENTAL CONSTITUENTS OF A MORAL RESPONSE TO LIFE
Susan Sontag argues that art is connected to morality and that art can yield moral pleasure. Morality is a code of behavior, emotions, and actions that guide how we should interact with others, driven by love. The aesthetic experience enhances our ability to make moral choices and encourages our willingness to take action, assuming we do make a choice, which is a prerequisite for considering an action moral. Art fulfills this "moral" role because the qualities inherent in the aesthetic experience are also essential elements of a moral response to life.

E1.6.C.2.12.a_REF1_PH SUSAN SONTAG ARGUES THAT ART IS CONNECTED TO MORALITY THROUGH THE INTELLIGENT GRATIFICATION OF CONSCIOUSNESS, RATHER THAN THROUGH APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL OF SPECIFIC ACTS. Art's moral task is to awaken sensibility and prompt moral choice through its intrinsic qualities such as disinterestedness, contemplativeness, and expressiveness.
"Art is connected with morality, I should argue. One way that it is so connected is that art may yield moral pleasure; but the moral pleasure peculiar to art is not the pleasure of approving of acts or disapproving of them. The moral pleasure in art, as well as the moral service that art performs, consists in the intelligent gratification of consciousness.

What "morality" means is a habitual or chronic type of behavior (including feelings and acts). Morality is a code of acts, and of judgments and sentiments by which we reinforce our habits of acting in a certain way, which prescribe a standard for behaving or trying to behave toward other human beings generally (that is, to all who are acknowledged to be human) as if we were inspired by love. Needless to say, love is something we feel in truth for just a few individual human beings, among those who are known to us in reality and in our imagination.... Morality is a form of acting and not a particular repertoire of choices.

If morality is so understood - as one of the achievements of human will, dictating to itself a mode of acting and being in the world - it becomes clear that no generic antagonism exists between the form of consciousness, aimed at action, which is morality, and the nourishment of consciousness, which is aesthetic experience. Only when works of art are reduced to statements which propose a specific content, and when morality is identified with a particular morality (and any particular morality has its dross, those elements which are no more than a defense of limited social interests and class values) - only then can a work of art be thought to undermine morality. Indeed, only then can the full distinction between the aesthetic and the ethical be made.

But if we understand morality in the singular, as a generic decision on the part of consciousness, then it appears that our response to art is "moral" insofar as it is, precisely, the enlivening of our sensibility and consciousness. For it is sensibility that nourishes our capacity for moral choice, and prompts our readiness to act, assuming that we do choose, which is a prerequisite for calling an act moral, and are not just blindly and unreflectively obeying. Art performs this "moral" task because the qualities which are intrinsic to the aesthetic experience (disinterestedness, contemplativeness, attentiveness, the awakening of the feelings) and to the aesthetic object (grace, intelligence, expressiveness, energy, sensuousness) are also fundamental constituents of a moral response to life."
(Susan Sontag, Against Interpretation, 1965)

E1.6.C.2.12.a_REF2_PH SCHILLER ASSERTS THAT AN ARTIST REPRESENTS HUMANITY'S HIGHER, MORAL FREEDOM NOT BY SUPERNATURAL MEANS, BUT BY DEPICTING PHYSICAL ACTIONS IN WHICH THE FORCE OF THE WILL VISIBLY MASTERS OR RESISTS THE OTHERWISE AUTOMATIC REACTIONS OF OUR ANIMAL INSTINCT.
“And how does one succeed in representing something that is above nature without having recourse to supernatural means? What can this phenomenon be which is accomplished by natural forces—otherwise it would not be a phenomenon—and yet which cannot be derived from physical causes without a contradiction? This is the problem; how can the artist solve it?

It must be remembered that the phenomena observable in a man in a state of passion are of two kinds. They are either phenomena connected simply with animal nature, and which, therefore, only obey the physical law, without the will being able to master them, or the independent force in him being able to exercise an immediate influence over them. It is the instinct which immediately produces these phenomena, and they obey blindly the laws of instinct. To this kind belong, for example, the organs of the circulation of the blood, of respiration, and all the surface of the skin. But, moreover, the other organs, and those subject to the will, do not always await the decision of the will; and often instinct itself sets them immediately in play, especially when the physical state is threatened with pain or with danger. Thus, the movements of my arm depend, it is true, on my will; but if I place my hand, without knowing it, on a burning body, the movement by which I draw it back is certainly not a voluntary act, but a purely instinctive phenomenon. Nay more, speech is assuredly subject to the empire of the will, and yet instinct can also dispose of this organ according to its whim, and even of this and of the mind, without consulting beforehand the will, directly a sharp pain, or even an energetic affection, takes us by surprise. Take the most impassible stoic and make him see suddenly something very wonderful, or a terrible and unexpected object. Fancy him, for example, present when a man slips and falls to the bottom of an abyss. A shout, a resounding cry, and not only inarticulate, but a distinct word will escape his lips, and nature will have acted in him before the will: a certain proof that there are in man phenomena which cannot be referred to his person as an intelligence, but only to his instinct as a natural force.

But there is also in man a second order of phenomena, which are subject to the influence and empire of the will, or which may be considered at all events as being of such a kind that will might always have prevented them, consequently phenomena for which the person and not instinct is responsible. It is the office of instinct to watch with a blind zeal over the interests of the senses; but it is the office of the person to hold instinct in proper bounds, out of respect for the moral law. Instinct in itself does not hold account of any law; but the person ought to watch that instinct may not infringe in any way on the decrees of reason. It is therefore evident that it is not for instinct alone to determine unconditionally all the phenomena that take place in man in the state of affection, and that on the contrary the will of man can place limits to instinct. When instinct only determines all phenomena in man, there is nothing more that can recall the person; there is only a physical creature before you, and consequently an animal; for every physical creature subject to the sway of instinct is nothing else. Therefore, if you wish to represent the person itself, you must propose to yourself in man certain phenomena that have been determined in opposition to instinct, or at least that have not been determined by instinct. That they have not been determined by instinct is sufficient to refer them to a higher source, the moment we see that instinct would no doubt have determined them in another way if its force had not been broken by some obstacle.”
(Friedrich Schiller, The Aesthetical Essays, 1875)

E1.6.C.2.12.a_REF3_PH SCHILLER ARGUES THAT POETRY'S PURPOSE IS NOT DIRECT MORAL INSTRUCTION BUT THE INDIRECT SHAPING OF OUR WHOLE CHARACTER, AS THE AESTHETIC JUDGMENT IT APPEALS TO IS INTERESTED NOT IN THE MORAL CORRECTNESS OF AN ACTION BUT IN THE SHEER FORCE AND FREEDOM OF WILL IT DEMONSTRATES, EVEN IF THAT WILL IS WICKED.
“Poetry ought not to take its course through the frigid region of memory; it ought never to convert learning into its interpreter, nor private interest its advocate with the popular mind. It ought to go straight to the heart, because it has come from the heart; and aim at the man in the citizen, not the citizen in the man.

Happily, true genius does not make much account of all these counsels that people are so anxious to give her with better intentions than competence. Otherwise, Sulzer and his school might have made German poetry adopt a very equivocal style. It is no doubt a very honorable aim in a poet to moralize the man, and excite the patriotism of the citizen, and the Muses know better than any one how well the arts of the sublime and of the beautiful are adapted to exercise this influence. But that which poetry obtains excellently by indirect means it would accomplish very badly as an immediate end. Poetry is not made to serve in man for the accomplishment of a particular matter, nor could any instrument be selected less fitted to cause a particular object to succeed, or to carry out special projects and details. Poetry acts on the whole of human nature, and it is only by its general influence on the character of a man that it can influence particular acts. Poetry can be for man what love is for the hero. It can neither counsel him, nor strike for him, nor do anything for him in short; but it can form a hero in him, call him to great deeds, and arm him with a strength to be all that he ought to be.

Thus the degree of aesthetical energy with which sublime feelings and sublime acts take possession of our souls, does not rest at all on the interest of reason, which requires every action to be really conformable with the idea of good. But it rests on the interest of the imagination, which requires conformity with good should be possible, or, in other terms, that no feeling, however strong, should oppress the freedom of the soul. Now this possibility is found in every act that testifies with energy to liberty, and to the force of the will; and if the poet meets with an action of this kind, it matters little where, he has a subject suitable for his art. To him, and to the interest we have in him, it is quite the same, to take his hero in one class of characters or in another, among the good or the wicked, as it often requires as much strength of character to do evil conscientiously and persistently as to do good. If a proof be required that in our aesthetic judgments we attend more to the force than to its direction, to its freedom than to its lawfulness, this is sufficient for our evidence. We prefer to see force and freedom manifest themselves at the cost of moral regularity, rather than regularity at the cost of freedom and strength. For directly one of those cases offers itself, in which the general law agrees with the instincts which by their strength threaten to carry away the will, the aesthetic value of the character is increased, if he be capable of resisting these instincts. A vicious person begins to interest us as soon as he must risk his happiness and life to carry out his perverse designs; on the contrary, a virtuous person loses in proportion as he finds it useful to be virtuous. Vengeance, for instance, is certainly an ignoble and a vile affection, but this does not prevent it from becoming aesthetical, if to satisfy it we must endure painful sacrifice. Medea slaying her children aims at the heart of Jason, but at the same time she strikes a heavy blow at her own heart, and her vengeance aesthetically becomes sublime directly we see in her a tender mother.

In this sense the aesthetic judgment has more of truth than is ordinarily believed. The vices which show a great force of will evidently announce a greater aptitude for real moral liberty than do virtues which borrow support from inclination; seeing that it only requires of the man who persistently does evil to gain a single victory over himself, one simple upset of his maxims, to gain ever after to the service of virtue his whole plan of life, and all the force of will which he lavished on evil. And why is it we receive with dislike medium characters, whilst we at times follow with trembling admiration one which is altogether wicked? It is evident, that with regard to the former, we renounce all hope, we cannot even conceive the possibility of finding absolute liberty of the will; whilst with the other, on the contrary, each time he displays his faculties, we feel that one single act of the will would suffice to raise him up to the fullest height of human dignity.

Thus, in the aesthetic judgment, that which excites our interest is not morality itself, but liberty alone; and moral purity can only please our imagination when it places in relief the forces of the will. It is then manifestly to confound two very distinct orders of ideas, to require in aesthetic things so exact a morality, and, in order to stretch the domain of reason, to exclude the imagination from its own legitimate sphere.

Either it would be necessary to subject it entirely, then there would be an end to all aesthetic effect; or it would share the realm of reason, then morality would not gain much. For if we pretend to pursue at the same time two different ends, there would be risk of missing both one and the other. The liberty of the imagination would be fettered by too great respect for the moral law; and violence would be done to the character of necessity which is in the reason, in missing the liberty which belongs to the imagination.”
(Friedrich Schiller, The Aesthetical Essays, 1875)

E1.6.C.2.12.b. THROUGH ART, WE CAN RE-DISCOVER THE DENSITY OF OUR LIVES
According to Iris Murdoch, society has lost the moral and political concepts and vocabulary. Instead of viewing individuals against a backdrop of transcendent values and realities, we see them in an easily comprehensible empirical world. Our current understanding of freedom leans more towards a dream-like ease, neglecting the complexity and difficulty of moral life. However, through literature, we can regain a sense of the density of our lives. It also allows us to acquire a new vocabulary of experience and a more accurate understanding of freedom.

E1.6.C.2.12.b_REF1_LIT IRIS MURDOCH ARGUES THAT MODERN SOCIETY HAS LOST A RICH MORAL AND POLITICAL VOCABULARY, REPLACING IT WITH A SIMPLISTIC IDEA OF SINCERITY OVER TRUTH. She calls for a return to a complex moral life and a renewed sense of the opacity of persons. Murdoch believes literature can help rediscover the density of life, combat the ailments of Romanticism, and provide a new vocabulary of experience.
"We have suffered a general loss of concepts, the loss of a moral and political vocabulary. We no longer use a spread-out substantial picture of the manifold virtues of man and society. We no longer see man against a background of values, of realities, which transcend him. We picture man as a brave naked will surrounded by an easily comprehended empirical world. For the hard idea of truth we have substituted a facile idea of sincerity. What we have never had, of course, is a satisfactory Liberal theory of personality, a theory of man as free and separate and related to a rich and complicated world from which, as a moral being, he has much to learn. We have bought the Liberal theory as it stands, because we have wished to encourage people to think of themselves as free, at the cost of surrendering the background.

We have never solved the problems about human personality posed by the Enlightenment. Between the various concepts available to us the real question has escaped: and now, in a curious way, our present situation is analogous to an eighteenth-century one. We retain a rationalistic optimism about the beneficent results of education, or rather, technology. We combine this with a romantic conception of “the human condition,” a picture of the individual as stripped and solitary: a conception which has, since Hitler, gained a peculiar intensity. [...]

The temptation of art, a temptation to which every work of art yields except the greatest ones, is to console. The modern writer, frightened of technology and (in England) abandoned by philosophy and (in France) presented with simplified dramatic theories, attempts to console us by myths or by stories. [...]

A simple-minded faith in science, together with the assumption that we are all rational and totally free, engenders a dangerous lack of curiosity about the real world, a failure to appreciate the difficulties of knowing it. We need to return from the self-centred concept of sincerity to the other-centred concept of truth. We are not isolated free choosers, monarchs of all we survey, but benighted creatures sunk in a reality whose nature we are constantly and overwhelmingly tempted to deform by fantasy. Our current picture of freedom encourages a dream-like facility; whereas what we require is a renewed sense of the difficulty and complexity of the moral life and the opacity of persons. We need more concepts in terms of which to picture the substance of our being; it is through an enriching and deepening of concepts that moral progress takes place. Simone Weil said that morality was a matter of attention, not of will. We need a new vocabulary of attention. [...]

Through literature we can re-discover a sense of the density of our lives. Literature can arm us against consolation and fantasy and can help us to recover from the ailments of Romanticism. If it can be said to have a task, that surely is its task. But if it is to perform it, prose must recover its former glory, eloquence and discourse must return. [...]

I would connect eloquence with the attempt to speak the truth. […]

Form itself can be a temptation, making the work of art into a small myth which is a self-contained and indeed self-satisfied individual… Real people are destructive of myth, contingency is destructive of fantasy and opens the way for imagination… Too much contingency of course may turn art into journalism. But since reality is incomplete, art must not be too much afraid of incompleteness. Literature must always represent a battle between real people and images; and what it requires now is a much stronger and more complex conception of the former.

In morals and politics we have stripped ourselves of concepts. Literature, in curing its own ills, can give us a new vocabulary of experience, and a truer picture of freedom. With this, renewing our sense of distance, we may remind ourselves that art too lives in a region where all human endeavour is failure. Perhaps only Shakespeare manages to create at the highest level both images and people; and even Hamlet looks second-rate compared with Lear. Only the very greatest art invigorates without consoling, and defeats our attempts, in W. H. Auden’s words, to use it as magic."
(Iris Murdoch,  Existentialists and Mystics: Writings on Philosophy and Literature, 1997)

E1.6.C.2.12.c. TALENT COMES WITH A RESPONSIBILITY TO LIVE UP TO AND LIVE INTO OUR CREATIVE POTENTIAL AS HUMAN BEINGS
“Be a good steward of your gifts,” the poet Jane Kenyon urged in what remains some of the finest advice on writing and life ever committed to words. Our gifts come unbidden — that is what makes them gifts — but with them also comes a certain responsibility, a duty to live up to and live into our creative potential as human beings. “Talent is insignificant. I know a lot of talented ruins,” James Baldwin admonished in his advice on writing. “Beyond talent lie all the usual words: discipline, love, luck, but most of all, endurance.” That durational willingness to work at our gifts, to steward them with disciplined devotion, is our fundamental responsibility to them — our fundamental responsibility to ourselves."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.6.C.2.12.c_REF1_LIT “I TRY TO LIVE WHAT I CONSIDER A “POETIC EXISTENCE.” That means I take responsibility for the air I breathe and the space I take up. I try to be immediate, to be totally present for all my work. […]

My responsibility as a writer is to be as good as I can be at my craft. So I study my craft… Learning the craft, understanding what language can do, gaining control of the language, enables one to make people weep, make them laugh, even make them go to war. You can do this by learning how to harness the power of the word. So studying my craft is one of my responsibilities. The other is to be as good a human being as I possibly can be so that once I have achieved control of the language, I don’t force my weaknesses on a public who might then pick them up and abuse themselves. [...]

I believe talent is like electricity. We don’t understand electricity. We use it. Electricity makes no judgment. You can plug into it and light up a lamp, keep a heart pump going, light a cathedral, or you can electrocute a person with it. Electricity will do all that. It makes no judgment. I think talent is like that. I believe every person is born with talent. [...]

Writing is a part of my life; cooking is a part of my life. Making love is a part of my life; walking down the street is a part of it. Writing demands more time, but it takes from all of these other activities. They all feed into the writing. I think it’s dangerous to concern oneself too damned much with “being an artist.” It’s more important to get the work done. You don’t have to concern yourself with it, just get it done. The pondering pose — the back of the hand glued against the forehead — is baloney. People spend more time posing than getting the work done. The work is all there is. And when it’s done, then you can laugh, have a pot of beans, stroke some child’s head, or skip down the street."
(Maya Angelou, in a 1983 interview included in Black Women Writers at Work)

E1.6.C.2.12.d. THE CONNECTION BETWEEN ART AND ETHICS
"Art is the perception of objects under the guise of eternity, just as a good life is the perception of the world in the same manner. This establishes the link between art and ethics. Typically, we view objects by placing ourselves among them. However, from the perspective of 'sub specie aeternitatis' [under the guise of eternity], we view them externally, setting the whole world as their backdrop.
So, does the aesthetic viewpoint essentially involve viewing the world through through joyful eyes?"

E1.6.C.2.12.d_REF1_PH FOR WITTGENSTEIN, THE DISINTERESTED CONTEMPLATION OF THE WORLD TRANSCENDS INDIVIDUALITY AND IS PLACED IN THE PERSPECTIVE OF ETERNITY.
"The work of art is the object seen sub specie aeternitatis, and the good life is the world seen sub specie aeternitatis. This is the connection between art and ethics. In the ordinary way of seeing, one looks at objects, as it were, by placing oneself among them; in the way of seeing sub specie aeternitatis, one looks at them from the outside. So that they have the whole world as a background. 
Does the aesthetic view of the world consist essentially in looking at the world with a happy gaze? (October 20, 1916).

One could say that to see from the perspective of eternity, that is, "from the outside," is in a sense to see from above, in a total disinterest in practical utility, or even to see from the perspective of an eternal present. For, as Wittgenstein (6.4311) tells us, following Schopenhauer, eternity should not be understood as an infinite period of time, but as timelessness: "He lives eternally who lives in the present". Thus, for Wittgenstein, as for Schopenhauer, the disinterested contemplation of the world that brings salvation has a dual ethical and aesthetic dimension."
(Pierre Hadot, Wittgenstein and the Limits of Language, 2004, extract from the 2014 forward

E1.6.C.2.12.e. ART CAN HELP RESTORE A MEASURE OF EQUILIBRIUM TO OUR EMOTIONS by connecting us with concentrated doses of our missing dispositions. Do we seek artworks that will compensate for our inner weaknesses and help us return to a viable mean? Can art act as a tuning and atoning mechanism for our moral virtues?
The most effective cautionary art would be that which is moral without being moralistic, understanding how easy it is for us to be attracted to the wrong things.

E1.6.C.2.12.e_REF1_PH ART PROVIDES THE VIRTUES WE LACK, MAKING IT BEAUTIFUL TO US, WHILE ALSO SERVING AS A MECHANISM FOR MORAL TUNING. Art encourages us to be our better selves through subtle exhortations, helping us overcome weaknesses of will and reminding us of important virtues.
"Few of us are entirely well balanced. Our psychological histories, relationships and working routines mean that our emotions can incline grievously in one direction or another. We may, for example, have a tendency to be too complacent, or too insecure; too trusting, or too suspicious; too serious, or too light-hearted. Art can put us in touch with concentrated doses of our missing dispositions, and thereby restore a measure of equilibrium to our listing inner selves."
This function of art also helps explain the vast diversity of our aesthetic preferences — because our individual imbalances differ, so do the artworks we seek out to soothe them:
"Why are some people drawn to minimalist architecture and others to Baroque? Why are some people excited by bare concrete walls and others by William Morris’s floral patterns? Our tastes will depend on what spectrum of our emotional make-up lies in shadow and is hence in need of stimulation and emphasis. Every work of art is imbued with a particular psychological and moral atmosphere: a painting may be either serene or restless, courageous or careful, modest or confident, masculine or feminine, bourgeois or aristocratic, and our preferences for one kind over another reflect our varied psychological gaps. We hunger for artworks that will compensate for our inner fragilities and help return us to a viable mean. We call a work beautiful when it supplies the virtues we are missing, and we dismiss as ugly one that forces on us moods or motifs that we feel either threatened or already overwhelmed by. Art holds out the promise of inner wholeness."
Viewing art from this perspective, de Botton and Armstrong argue, also affords us the necessary self-awareness to understand why we might respond negatively to a piece of art — an insight that might prevent us from reactive disparagement. Being able to recognize what someone lacks in order to find an artwork beautiful allows us to embody that essential practice of prioritizing understanding over self-righteousness. In this respect, art is also a tuning — and atoning — mechanism for our moral virtues. In fact, some of history’s most celebrated art is anchored on moralistic missions — what de Botton and Armstrong call “an attempt to encourage our better selves through coded messages of exhortation and admonition” — to which we often respond with resistance and indignation. But such reactions miss the bigger point:
"We might think of works of art that exhort as both bossy and unnecessary, but this would assume an encouragement of virtue would always be contrary to our own desires. However, in reality, when we are calm and not under fire, most of us long to be good and wouldn’t mind the odd reminder to be so; we simply can’t find the motivation day to day. In relation to our aspirations to goodness, we suffer from what Aristotle called akrasia, or weakness of will. We want to behave well in our relationships, but slip up under pressure. We want to make more of ourselves, but lose motivation at a critical juncture. In these circumstances, we can derive enormous benefit from works of art that encourage us to be the best versions of ourselves, something that we would only resent if we had a manic fear of outside intervention, or thought of ourselves as perfect already.
The best kind of cautionary art — art that is moral without being “moralistic” — understands how easy it is to be attracted to the wrong things. […]
The task for artists, therefore, is to find new ways of prying open our eyes to tiresomely familiar, but critically important, ideas about how to lead a balanced and good life. [...] Art can save us time — and save our lives — through opportune and visceral reminders of balance and goodness that we should never presume we know enough about already."
(Alain de Botton & John Armstrong, Art as Therapy)

E1.6.C.2.12.e_REF2_CUR "MADE OF CUT AND GLUED PAPER, Blue nude with green stockings is characterized by the dynamism of the figure and the sense of weightlessness that radiates from it. These qualities owe as much to the drawing as to the use of a bright palette, which enlivened the blue Matisse liked to paint with at the time. With its chromatic and formal correspondences, the plant motif on the right suggests an equivalence between the human and the plant and gives poise to the figure in space."
(Fondation Louis Vuitton, Paris, France´s curator´s review)

E1.6.C.2.12.f. WHEN WE DISAPPROVE OF AN ARTIST'S MORALITY, CAN WE ENJOY THEIR ART?
“THEY SAY YOU SHOULD SEPARATE THE ART FROM THE ARTIST. I CAN’T DO THAT. My childhood heroes have become monsters. Now I read that the song “I Am A God” by Kanye West should be played at your funeral. How the hell can you listen to the song without seeing the scum of a human being that Kanye has become? 
JÖRG, BAD, GERMANY

Dear Jörg,
Numerous letters have come in expressing, in no uncertain terms, disapproval of my fondness for Kanye West’s music. A lot of time and energy has been spent explaining the evil of Nazism, the harm of antisemitism, why it is wrong to sell t-shirts emblazoned with swastikas and why it is unacceptable to coerce one’s girlfriend into standing naked on the red carpet at the Grammys. On that matter, it seems, we can all find some common ground. I agree.   

However, I want to challenge the notion that we can separate art from the artist.  I’ve written on this subject before (#149), but I thought it might be worth revisiting. From reading your recent letters, it appears that some of you assume I hold this belief. To be clear, I do not. The idea of an artist being divorced from their art is absurd. An artist and their art are fundamentally intertwined because art is the essence of the artist made manifest. The artist’s work proclaims, "This is me. I am here. This is what I am.” However, the great gift of art is the potential for the artist to excavate their interior chaos and transform it into something sublime. This is what Kanye does. This is what I strive to do, and this is the enterprise undertaken by all genuine artists. The remarkable utility of art lies in its audacity to transfigure our corrupted state and create something beautiful. 

When I make a song, I do not draw from a pocket of purity isolated from the rest of me; a song is torn from all of me, the mess of me, becoming the best of me on its alchemical journey to its realisation. This is the very definition of hope - that we are not prisoners of our flawed nature but can transcend it. We look to artists and their art to convey this exact thing. In his brokenness, Kanye is an exemplar par excellence of this notion, the braided dance between sin, transcendence and genius.

We are all broken, flawed, and suffering human beings, each a disaster in our own right, each with the capacity to cause great harm, each brimming with misguided notions, perhaps the most deluded of which is the belief that we are somehow exclusively and morally superior to everyone else. Many of you might be thinking, "Well, speak for yourself! I’m not like Kanye! I could never behave like that!" Yet, given the circumstances, we humans are capable of anything. To be human is to be flawed, yet it is also to possess the potential to achieve staggering things - beautiful, brilliant, inspiring, wild and audacious things; things to be cherished, despite our complex and compromised natures.    

As odious and disappointing as many of Kanye’s views are, and as sickening as antisemitism is - in its sadly always-present, ever-morphing forms - I endeavour to seek beauty wherever it presents itself. In doing so, I am reluctant to invalidate the best of us in an attempt to punish the worst. I don’t think we can afford that luxury.  

Love, Nick”
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files ISSUE #313 / February 2025)

Read it in The Red Hand Files: https://www.theredhandfiles.com/kanye-art-artist/

E1.6.C.2.12.f_REF1_PH “AN EXCUSE FOR MANY A TRANSGRESSION.—The ceaseless desire to create, the eternal looking outward of the artist, hinders him from becoming better and more beautiful as a personality: unless his craving for glory be great enough to compel him to exhibit in his relations with other men a growth corresponding to the growing beauty and greatness of his works. In any case he has but a limited measure of strength, and how could the proportion of strength that he spends on himself be of any benefit to his work—or vice versa?”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 102, 1878)

E1.6.C.2.13. PUTING US ON A SPIRITUAL PATH

E1.6.C.2.13.a. TRUE ART HUMBLES US, OFFERING A GLIMPSE OF THE SACRED

E1.6.C.2.13.a_REF1_PH "I AM CURRENTLY WITNESSING THE AWE INSPIRING BEAUTY OF A FIERCE THUNDERSTORM. Earlier today, I had a meeting with a very well connected artist. We discussed my work. He said something to me that I’ve heard before from others: that my work has to participate in the socio-political discourse. The work needs to call into question immediate and “relevant” topics. In my work I strive for something ineffable and timeless. Why do I have to put words to something where language can’t begin to scratch the surface of the ultimate beauty that permeates it. Like this thunderstorm.
ISABELLA, PARIS, FRANCE

Dear Isabella,

I’m sorry that this man offered you such tiresome advice. Perhaps he thinks that producing art that presents a particular world view is the only way for you to climb the ladder. Unfortunately, these days, this may be true. I find your own words about your work encouraging though, and I can imagine that concepts such as the ‘ineffable ’and ‘timelessness ’will be absolutely foreign to this person’s outlook, which seems concerned only with the topical and the uncomplicated. Perhaps your friend is keen for you to conform to a particular view that he himself holds. If so, sadly, he is providing counsel from the shallowest possible place imaginable, his own ideological bathwater.

Be wary of anyone who denies art its true complex and eternal nature, repurposing it for their own political contrivances. Art should not lecture or talk down to us or reprimand us. There is little left of the sacred in the modern world, but great art still offers us an opportunity to experience the hallowed, the mysterious and the reverential. For me, art of true significance chaffs against the prescribed modes of the day on its way to the transcendental. We are humbled by its power, as it reflects back to us something about the enigma of our own nature. We stand before it, quieted and awed, touched by the eternal.

So here’s to art, Isabella! Here’s to freedom! Send your well connected artist packing and continue to listen to your own thundering heart. That awesome sound you hear is the trembling of true art as it rumbles and calls to your very soul.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #247 / JULY 2023)

E1.6.C.2.13.a_REF2_LIT "OUR CULTURE DOESN’T THINK STORYTELLING IS SACRED; we don’t set aside a time of year for it. We don’t hold anything sacred except what organized religion declares to be so. Artists pursue a sacred call, although some would buck and rear at having their work labeled like this. Artists are lucky to have a form in which to express themselves; there is a sacredness about that, and a terrific sense of responsibility. We’ve got to do it right. Why do we have to do it right? Because that’s the whole point: either it’s right or it’s all wrong."
(Jonathan Whyte, Interview with Ursula K. Le Guin, Talking on the Water: Conversations about Nature and Creativity, 2016)

E1.6.C.2.13.a_REF3_PO "ARCHAIC TORSO OF APOLLO

We cannot know his legendary head
with eyes like ripening fruit. And yet his torso
is still suffused with brilliance from inside,
like a lamp, in which his gaze, now turned to low,

gleams in all its power. Otherwise
the curved breast could not dazzle you so, nor could
a smile run through the placid hips and thighs
to that dark center where procreation flared.

Otherwise this stone would seem defaced
beneath the translucent cascade of the shoulders
and would not glisten like a wild beast's fur:

would not, from all the borders of itself,
burst like a star: for here there is no place
that does not see you. You must change your life!"
(Rainer Maria Rilke)

E1.6.C.2.13.b. ART CAN CONVEY THE SACRED WHERE WORDS ARE ILL-EQUIPED TO DO SO

E1.6.C.2.13.b_REF1_SCI LISTENING TO MUSIC ACTIVATES THE BRAIN'S DOPAMINERGIC CIRCUITRY, FOSTERING A SENSE OF WONDER AND EXPLORATION. This experience can evoke physical reactions like tears and chills, symbolizing a merging with others to confront mysteries. Music unites individuals by synchronizing bodily rhythms, creating a sense of community and connection to something larger or sacred.
"When we listen to music that moves us, the dopaminergic circuitry of the brain is activated, which opens the mind to wonder and exploration. In this bodily state of musical awe, we often tear up and get the chills, those embodied signs of merging with others to face mysteries and the unknown… Music breaks down the boundaries between self and other and can unite us in feelings of awe… When we listen to music with others, the great rhythms of our bodies — heartbeat, breathing, hormonal fluctuations, sexual cycles, bodily motion — once separate, merge into a synchronized pattern. We sense that we are part of something larger, a community, a pattern of energy, an idea of the times — or what we might call the sacred."
(Dacher Keltner, The New Science of Everyday Wonder and How It Can Transform Your Life, 2023)

E1.6.C.2.13.b_REF2_PO "DRIFTING

I was enjoying everything: the rain, the path 
    wherever it was taking me, the earth roots 
    beginning to stir.

[...]

It's wonderful to walk along like that, 
    thought not the usual intention to reach an answer 
    but merely drifting.

Like clouds that only seem weightless 
    but of course are not.
Are really important.
I mean, terribly important. 
Not decoration by any means. 
By next week the violets will be blooming. 
Anyway, this was my delicious walk in the rain. 
What was it actually about?

Think about what it is that music is trying to say. 
It was something like that."
(Mary Oliver, Blue horses, 2014)

E1.6.C.2.13.b_REF3_CUR "A RECURRING ELEMENT in Kounellis's work since the 1960s, the bedframe symbolises the measurements of the human body and how this shapes our living environment. A real bedframe, suspended from a meat hook, contrasts with the flat, yellow, painted square behind it. Its shape refers to one of the earliest works of geometric abstraction, Kasimir Malevich's Black Square 1915. Kounellis often connected the colour yellow to the sunflowers and suns in Vincent Van Gogh's paintings, as well as to the gold background of religious icons. The work may be a dialogue between reality and abstraction, or between materiality and spirituality."
(Curatorship: Tate Modern, London)

"I have seen the sacred in the common object. I have believed in weight as the right measure... I want the return of poetry by all means available: through practice, observation, solitude: through language, image and insurrection."
(Jannis Kounellis, 1987)

E1.6.C.2.13.b_REF4_LIT "There must always be something about a poem, or any work of art, besides the evident intellect or plot of it, or what is on its surface, or what it tells. This something is the Invisible, the Undefined, almost Unexpressed, and is perhaps the best part of any work of art, as it is of a noble personality… As, in the superbest person, it is not merely what he or she says or knows or shows, or even how they behave, but in the silent qualities, like gravitation, that insensibly but resistlessly hold us; so in a good poem, or any other expression of art."
(John Burroughs, Birds and poets, 1877)

E1.6.C.2.13.c. ART MAKES THE ORDINARY SACRED, AS DOES SPIRITUALITY

E1.6.C.2.13.c_REF1_PH "BACK TO THE SACRED

The path, as we have said, turns emptiness into an active background: figures are silhouetted against a background, words stand out on a blank page, sounds emerge from silence, and actions emerge from inaction.

Awareness of this background is the signature of the path: it gives things a brilliance, a force, a resonance that they do not have in habitual usage or common perception. Think of what Mallarmé says about poetry, which, by removing words from the common usage where they have worn out, restores their force and beauty - the path acts in the same way, and that is why it borders on poetry.

To describe this new way of understanding the world, the term "sacred" often comes to mind-Jack Kerouac, Robert Musil, and Chögyam Trungpa, to name a few, have used it readily. Yet this choice may seem surprising: to understand why, we need to return briefly to Caillois and his analysis. We recall that the spheres of the sacred and the profane are defined in relation to each other: the sacred is that which is not profane, and the profane is that which is not sacred. The sacred is thus achieved through a rupture, a withdrawal, the delimitation of a space that is one's own. The Latin word templum (temple) comes from the same root as the Greek verb temnein, which means to cut off, to limit, to circumscribe, and originally referred to the territory that the augur circumscribed with his staff on the earth or in the sky, and which derives its specific value from this delimitation. Now, in spiritual practice, the path is at once the augur, the staff, and the sky - it sanctifies, it does so by itself, and the space it delimits is the totality, so that what remains of the sacred is... everywhere.

In this new configuration, the sacred transcends its opposition to the profane. There is no need to enter a particular place or follow a rite of passage. The Way transforms all things into the Way: through it, the sacred spreads and makes the profane world shine with its brilliance. The transformation it accomplishes is therefore the exact opposite of desecration - it desacralizes things. By revealing that what was thought to be profane was potentially sacred, it acts in the same way as art, according to Duchamp, which can include any object, including a bicycle wheel. Some might point out that by merging the two spheres in this way, the significance of their difference is nullified, and that to sacralize everything is to desacralize everything - so it seems fairer to say that the way does not abolish the distinction, but maintains it by emptying it of its content. The temple is still there, but it has expanded into the whole world. And this expansion is not self-evident: it must always be accomplished, installed, renewed-hence the need for spiritual practice and even technique. But if one commits oneself to it, one realizes that the path is always in action, and that the transformation it brings about is taking place: it is happening here and now, at every moment-the path never leaves its birth."
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond wisdom, How to live?, 2023)

E1.6.C.2.13.c_REF1.1_PH "GENERALIZATION OF AESTHETICS 

The vision of the world that the researcher then arrives at is, of course, aesthetic, an aesthetic that extends to everything and leaves nothing outside its field. Thank God, however, every other relationship to reality, of an ethical, emotional, affective or simply practical nature, does not disappear; but from now on the potential beauty of the world is within the reach of the observer, like a possible poetry. In his book Vide et plein (Empty and Full), François Cheng writes that Chinese painting, initially characterized by realism, has gradually evolved towards an "increasingly spiritual conception"; and he specifies that by this term he does not mean an art with a religious theme, but "a painting that itself tends to become spirituality". Well, the researcher discovers that the same path can be followed in reverse: spirituality can become painting, or in any case tend towards this art (as well as others), not through the acquisition of new qualities, but through the concretization of those that constitute it. For it opens a gaze and gives rise to a way of seeing, which is also witnessed in the works of certain artists, as if they were going further in the direction indicated by it, transforming their inner vision into a work of art. [...]

PAINTING AND SPIRITUALITY 

These analyses are very valuable for our researcher: he finds in them his experience of the Way. Not only does it accentuate the presence of things, but it also tends to unify the vision, transforming what we perceive into a "picture". By encompassing everything it passes through, it gives what we have before our eyes a view that is both global and detailed. It's strange. It's as if it connects the different elements that make up a perception and, as a result of this connection, gives the necessarily harmonious sensation of the whole they form. Not only do the elements find their place and their weight in the whole thus formed, but, more surprisingly, this whole is "beautiful" - even ugly, it is beautiful. I am not writing this for the pleasure of glowing with paradoxes, but because I cannot express otherwise what I am trying to say - as if the place of observation, where the path places us, were the one from which things reveal this potential quality".
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond wisdom, How to live?, 2023)

E1.6.C.2.13.c_REF2_LIT C.S. LEWIS DISCUSSES A DEEP, UNFULFILLED LONGING FOR AN IDEAL OR BEAUTY THAT WE CAN NEITHER FULLY EXPRESS NOR ATTAIN. "This desire for our own far off country [is] the secret which hurts so much that you take your revenge on it by calling it names like Nostalgia and Romanticism and Adolescence; the secret also which pierces with such sweetness that when, in very intimate conversation, the mention of it becomes imminent, we grow awkward and affect to laugh at ourselves; the secret we cannot hide and cannot tell, though we desire to do both. We cannot tell it because it is a desire for something that has never actually appeared in our experience. We cannot hide it because our experience is constantly suggesting it, and we betray ourselves like lovers at the mention of a name. Our commonest expedient is to call it beauty and behave as if that had settled the matter. Wordsworth’s expedient was to identify it with certain moments in his own past. But all this is a cheat. If Wordsworth had gone back to those moments in the past, he would not have found the thing itself, but only the reminder of it; what he remembered would turn out to be itself a remembering. [...]

The books or the music in which we thought the beauty was located will betray us if we trust to them; it was not in them, it only came through them, and what came through them was longing. These things — the beauty, the memory of our own past — are good images of what we really desire; but if they are mistaken for the thing itself they turn into dumb idols, breaking the hearts of their worshipers. For they are not the thing itself; they are only the scent of a flower we have not found, the echo of a tune we have not heard, news from a country we have never visited. [...]

Behind the cotton wool is hidden a pattern… the whole world is a work of art… there is no Shakespeare… no Beethoven… no God; we are the words; we are the music; we are the thing itself."
(C.S. Lewis, The Weight of Glory, sermon he delivered on June 8, 1941)

E1.6.C.2.14. VARIATION ON ALL THAT IS REGULAR AND SYMMETRICAL IN LINES, POINTS, AND RHYTHMS – AND THEIR VIOLATION

E1.6.C.2.14.a. "ORIGINS OF TASTE IN WORKS OF ART.—If we consider the primary germs of the artistic sense, and ask ourselves what are the various kinds of joy produced by the firstlings of art—as, for example, among savage tribes—we find first of all the joy of understanding what another means. Art in this case is a sort of conundrum, which causes its solver pleasure in his own quick and keen perceptions.—Then the roughest works of art remind us of the pleasant things we have actually experienced, and so give joy—as, for example, when the artist alludes to a chase, a victory, a wedding.—Again, the representation may cause us to feel excited, touched, inflamed, as for instance in the glorification of revenge and danger. Here the enjoyment lies in the excitement itself, in the victory over tedium.—The memory, too, of unpleasant things, so far as they have been overcome or make us appear interesting to the listener as subjects for art (as when the singer describes the mishaps of a daring seaman), can inspire great joy, the credit for which is given to art.—A more subtle variety is the joy that arises at the sight of all that is regular and symmetrical in lines, points, and rhythms. For by a certain analogy is awakened the feeling for all that is orderly and regular in life, which one has to thank alone for all well-being. So in the cult of symmetry we unconsciously do homage to rule and proportion as the source of our previous happiness, and the joy in this case is a kind of hymn of thanksgiving. Only when a certain satiety of the last-mentioned joy arises does a more subtle feeling step in, that enjoyment might even lie in a violation of the symmetrical and regular. This feeling, for example, impels us to seek reason in apparent unreason, and the sort of æsthetic riddle-guessing that results is in a way the higher species of the first-named artistic joy.—He who pursues this speculation still further will know what kind of hypotheses for the explanation of æsthetic phenomena are hereby fundamentally rejected."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 119, 1878)

E1.6.C.2.15 KEVIN SIMLER AND ROBIN HANSON ARGUE THAT ART'S PRIMARY EVOLUTIONARY FUNCTION IS TO SERVE AS A FITNESS DISPLAY FOR SEXUAL SELECTION, WHERE ITS VALUE LIES NOT IN ITS INTRINSIC BEAUTY BUT IN THE EXTRINSIC SKILL AND IMPRACTICALITY THAT SIGNAL THE ARTIST'S WORTH, while the act of discernment itself becomes a parallel display for the public.

“ART […]

Art poses a challenge for evolutionary thinkers. It’s a costly behavior, both in time and energy, but at the same time it’s impractical […] In his book The Mating Mind, the evolutionary psychologist Geoffrey Miller gives a promising answer. Miller argues that while ecological selection (the pressure to survive) abhors waste, sexual selection often favors it. The logic […] is that we prefer mates who can afford to waste time, energy, and other resources. What’s valuable isn’t the waste itself, but what the waste says about the survival surplus—health, wealth, energy levels, and so forth—of a potential mate.
To appreciate the power of this idea, let’s turn once again to the nonhuman world. […]

Importantly, human artists don’t need to be conscious of this motive. Humans, as we’ve seen many times throughout the book, are adept at acting on unconscious motives, especially when the motive in question (e.g., showing off) is antisocial and norm-violating. What’s important isn’t whether we’re aware that we’re using art as a fitness display, but rather the fact that art works as a fitness display. It serves a useful and important purpose, both to artists and consumers, so we shouldn’t be surprised to find ourselves endowed with instincts both to make and enjoy art. […]

There’s no doubt that observing art often induces strong feelings that we deeply crave, such as awe and an appreciation of beauty, and that creating art often gives us a strong sense of accomplishment and connection.
The argument we’re making in this chapter is simply that “showing off” is one of the important motives we have for making art, and that many details of our artistic instincts have been shaped substantially by this motive. Not only do artists want to show off, but consumers simultaneously use art as a means to judge the artist. That’s one of the big reasons people appreciate art, and we can’t understand the full range of phenomena unless we’re willing to look at art as a fitness display. […]

Now we’re ready to understand the most important difference between the conventional view of art (in any of its forms: beauty, communication, etc.) and the fitness-display theory. The difference is that the conventional view locates the vast majority of art’s value in its intrinsic properties, along with the experiences that result from perceiving and contemplating those properties. Beauty, for example, is typically understood as an experience that arises from the artwork itself. According to the conventional view, artists use their technical skills and expressive power to create the final physical product, which is then perceived and enjoyed by the consumer. The extrinsic properties, meanwhile, are mostly an aside or an afterthought; in the conventional view, they aren’t crucial to the transaction.
In contrast, in the fitness-display theory, extrinsic properties are crucial to our experience of art. As a fitness display, art is largely a statement about the artist, a proof of his or her virtuosity. And here it’s often the extrinsic properties that make the difference between art that’s impressive, and which therefore succeeds for both artist and consumer, and art that falls flat. If a work of art is physically (intrinsically) beautiful, but was made too easily (like if a painting was copied from a photograph), we’re likely to judge it as much less valuable than a similar work that required greater skill to produce. One study, for example, found that consumers appreciate the same artwork less when they’re told it was made by multiple artists instead of a single artist—because they’re assessing the work by how much effort went into it, rather than simply by the final result. […]

Consider our emphasis on originality in works of art. We prize originality and spurn works that are too derivative, however pleasing they might otherwise be to our senses or intellect. Here again, we betray our concern for using art to evaluate the artist. Insofar as art is a perceptual experience, it shouldn’t matter whether the artist copied another artist in producing the work, but it makes a world of difference in gauging the artist’s skill, effort, and creativity.
“We find attractive,” says Miller, “those things that could have been produced only by people with attractive, high-fitness qualities such as health, energy, endurance, hand–eye coordination, fine motor control, intelligence, creativity, access to rare materials, the ability to learn difficult skills, and lots of free time.”
Artists, in turn, often respond to this incentive by using techniques that are more difficult or demanding, but which don’t improve the intrinsic properties of the final product. “From an evolutionary point of view,” writes Miller, “the fundamental challenge facing artists is to demonstrate their fitness by making something that lower-fitness competitors could not make, thus proving themselves more socially and sexually attractive.” Artists routinely sacrifice expressive power and manufacturing precision in order to make something more “impressive” as a fitness display. […]
As both artists and consumers, we’re often eager to jump in and explore the expressive and aesthetic possibilities of each new medium and manufacturing technique. But just as often, we hold out. Whenever we prefer things made “the old-fashioned way”—handwritten instead of printed, homemade instead of store-bought, live instead of prerecorded—we’re choosing to celebrate the skill and effort of an artist over the intrinsically superior results of a more mechanical process. […]

WHY ART IS IMPRACTICAL […]

The waste is important. It’s only by doing something that serves no concrete survival function that artists are able to advertise their survival surplus. […]
Thus impracticality is a feature of all art forms. But we can see it with special clarity in those art forms that need to distinguish themselves from closely related practical endeavors. Consider the difference between clothing, which is a necessity, and fashion, which is a luxury. Fashion often distinguishes itself from mere clothing by being conspicuously impractical, non-functional, and sometimes even uncomfortable. “The history of European costume,” writes Alison Lurie, “is rich in styles in which it was literally impossible to perform any useful function: sleeves that trailed on the floor, . . . powdered wigs the size, color and texture of a large white poodle, . . . and corsets so tight that it was impossible to bend at the waist or take a normal breath.” Even today we encumber ourselves in the name of style. High heels, for example, are awkward for walking and brutal on the feet—which is precisely how they’re able to convey the message, “I care about fashion.” 

DISCERNMENT
The fitness-display theory also helps us understand why artistic discernment—the skill of the savvy consumer or critic—is an important adaptive skill.
Discernment helps us answer a question we’re often asking ourselves as we navigate the world: “Which way is high status?” […] Without the ability to distinguish “good” art from “bad” art, we run the risk of admiring less fit, lower-status artists. […] It’s only by shopping around and sampling a wide variety of art that we learn to appreciate which skills are common (banging two rocks together) and which are rare (elaborate rhythms). An unrefined palate won’t appreciate a Michelin-starred restaurant. An untrained ear can’t appreciate the genius of Bach. […]
We spend an incredible amount of our leisure time refining our critical faculties in this way. Rarely are we satisfied simply to sit back and passively enjoy art (or any other type of human achievement for that matter). Instead we lean forward and take an active role in our experiences. We’re eager to evaluate art, reflect on it, criticize it, calibrate our criticisms with others, and push ourselves to new frontiers of discernment. And we do this even in art forms we have no intention of practicing ourselves.
Thus discernment, artistic or otherwise, is a critical skill, and yet it can be something we take for granted, in part because we do it so effortlessly. Think about how rarely we’re impressed by truly unimpressive people. When it happens, we feel as though we’ve been taken in by a charlatan. It can even be embarrassing to demonstrate poor aesthetic judgment. We don’t want others to know that we’re inept at telling good art from bad, skilled artists from amateurs. This suggests that we evaluate each other not only for our first-order skills, but for our skills at evaluating the skills of others.”
(Kevin Simler and Robin Hanson, The Elephant in the Brain, 2017)

E1.6.C.2.CONCLUSION
Art emerges as a powerful force that enriches human experience in multiple dimensions. It serves as a bridge to deeper understanding, helping us be more present in the world and intensifying our lived experience⁠⁠. Through art, we develop a tacit understanding with reality that goes beyond rational knowledge, establishing an intimate spiritual connection with the world⁠⁠.

Art not only helps us transcend suffering and gives us courage to face life's challenges, but it also acts as a moral compass, helping restore balance to our emotions and reminding us of what truly matters⁠⁠. It expands our boundaries by inviting us to embrace the unknown⁠⁠, while simultaneously helping us organize chaos and make life lighter⁠⁠.

Perhaps most importantly, art serves as a point of salvation, with the potential to put beauty back into the world and reconcile us with both ourselves and others⁠⁠. Through artistic expression, we can explore morality⁠, preserve meaningful experiences⁠⁠, and ultimately find a path to spiritual understanding⁠⁠. In this way, art becomes not just a form of expression, but a fundamental tool for human growth, understanding, and connection.

E1.6.D. KNOWLEDGE
The pursuit of knowledge through intellectual activity and, over a longer period of time, the emergence of lucidity. Without lucidity, education does not necessarily make us happier.

E1.6.D.1. ACTION VS. CONTEMPLATION
According to Aristotle, the contemplative sage finds happiness in intellectual activity:
This sage seeks intellectual activity as an alternative to collective action. The wise individual in this state will find satisfaction in contemplation, a use of one’s time reserved for a select few. However, they do not live out this state as a human, but as the divine within them.

E1.6.D.1.1. TRUE WISDOM IS DISILLUSIONED AND LUCID
Contemplation refers to the conscious approach of considering things without any desire to possess, use, or judge them. It is a state of pure joy derived from knowledge. Wisdom is a lifestyle, a blend of theoretic and practical understanding. It is identifiable by a certain serenity, joy, freedom, and love. Wisdom is an approximate, unstable state that varies according to each individual's circumstances. True wisdom, disillusioned with itself, achieves maximum happiness through lucidity.

E1.6.D.1.1_REF1_PH "CONTEMPLATION 

The attentive and disinterested gaze. Metaphorically, it refers to the attitude of consciousness when it is content to contemplate what is, without wanting to possess, use, or judge it. It is the summit of the spiritual life: the pure joy of knowing (Aristotle's theoretical life, Spinoza's amor intellectualis) or the true love of the true. The self seems to dissolve in the contemplation of its object: there is no one left to save, and that is salvation itself. [...]

WISDOM [...] 
Wisdom, true wisdom, is not an insurance policy against all risks, nor a panacea, nor a work of art. It is a rest, but a joyful and free rest, in truth. Knowledge? This is indeed the meaning of the word, both for the Greeks (sophia) and for the Latins (sapientia). But it is a very special knowledge. "Wisdom can be neither a science nor a technique," said Aristotle; it is less about what is true or effective than about what is good, for oneself and for others. Knowledge? Perhaps. But it is a way of life. [...]

The Greeks distinguished between theoretical or contemplative wisdom (sophia) and practical wisdom (phronèsis). But one is hardly possible without the other, or rather, true wisdom would be the combination of the two. It can be recognized by a certain serenity, but even more by a certain joy, a certain freedom, a certain eternity (the wise man lives in the present: he feels and experiences, as Spinoza said, that he is eternal), a certain love... "Of all the goods that wisdom offers us for the happiness of life as a whole, friendship is by far the greatest", insisted Epicurus (Maxims, XXVII). Self-love, fear, lack or lies are no longer obstacles. There is only the joy of knowledge: there is only love and truth. Therefore, we all have our moments of wisdom, when love and truth are enough for us. And of madness, when they tear us apart or fail us. True wisdom must be disillusioned with itself, as we see in Ecclesiastes. It is no longer an ideal; it is a state, always approximate, always unstable (it is eternal, like love, only as long as it lasts), it is an experience, it is an act. It is not an absolute, despite the Stoics (we are more or less wise), but a maximum (as such relative): it is the maximum of happiness, in the maximum of lucidity. It depends on the situation of this or that person, on the capacities of this or that person (wisdom is not the same in Auschwitz or in Paris, for Etty Hillesum or for Cavaillès) - in short, on the state of the world and of oneself. It is not an absolute; it is the way, always relative, of inhabiting reality, which is the only absolute in truth. This wisdom is better than all the books ever written about it, which run the risk of separating us from it. It is up to each of us to invent our own. "Even if we could be learned in the knowledge of others," said Montaigne, "we can only be wise in our own wisdom" (Essays, 1.25)."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionnary, 2013)

E1.6.D.1.2. IMMANENCE THROUGH INTELLECTUAL EXCELLENCE
Engaging in intellectual activities brings us closer to divinity, even if our comprehension of the divine is imperfect. Aristotle proposed an ethic rooted in immanence, achieved not through the pursuit of spiritual realms, but by transcending oneself using the means at our disposal. He championed the joy derived from understanding the truth of a shared world, a stark contrast to the vision of a personal world embodied by Bernardo Soares in Fernando Pessoa's Book of Intranquility.

E1.6.D.1.2_REF1_PH "FOR ARISTOTLE, IT IS THE JOY OF KNOWING THE TRUTH OF A COMMON WORLD and not that of dreaming a world that is unique to us, like that of Bernardo Soares, a character in Fernando Pessoa's The Book of Intranquility. Aristotle is firmly anchored in reality while Bernardo Soares calls the reality of the world of men of action a fiction.
At first glance contradictory, the two positions perhaps deliver us two facets of reality that reconcile in Eastern philosophy: contemplation allows us to escape from our singularity to commune with the world; in doing so, it appears to us that the vision we had from the point of view of our singularity was an illusion of what reality really is."
(Pierre Schindler)

E1.6.D.1.2_REF2_LIT "THERE WAS A TIME WHEN I WAS ANNOYED BY THINGS THAT NOW MAKE ME SMILE. And one of them, which I'm reminded of almost every day, is the insistence with which everyday people who are active in life smile at poets and artists. They don't always do it, as newspaper thinkers believe, with an air of superiority. They often do it with affection. But it's always like cuddling a child, someone who doesn't know the certainty and precision of life. 

This used to irritate me because I assumed, like the naïve, and I was naïve, that this smile given to the worries of dreaming and saying was an effluvium of an intimate feeling of superiority. It's just a crackle of difference. And if in the past I considered that smile an insult because it implied superiority, today I consider it an unconscious doubt; just as adults often recognize in children a sharpness of mind superior to their own, so they recognize in us, those of us who dream and say things, something different that they suspect is strange. I want to believe that the most intelligent among them often glimpse our superiority and then smile broadly to hide the fact that they see it.

But our superiority is not what so many dreamers have thought their own superiority to be. The dreamer is not superior to the doer because the dream is superior to reality. The superiority of the dreamer is that dreaming is much more practical than living, and that the dreamer derives a much greater and more varied pleasure from life than the man of action. In better and more direct terms, the dreamer is the man of action.
Since life is essentially a state of mind, and whatever we do or think is valid to us to the extent that we think it's valid, it's up to us to make the best of it. The dreamer is an issuer of bills, and the bills he issues run through the city of his mind just as the bills of reality do. What do I care if the paper money of my soul is never convertible into gold, if there is never any gold in the actual alchemy of life? 

The flood comes after all of us, but it's only after all of us. Better and happier are those who, recognizing the fiction of everything, make the novel before it is made for them, and, like Machiavelli, put on their court robes to write well in secret".
(Fernando Pessoa, The book of disquiet, 1982)

E1.6.B.2.wE1.6.D.1.2 "EXERCISE SYSTEMS"
Joy can be derived from creating an "exercise system". This process allows an individual to enhance their skills through repeated tasks, acting as immune device and coping mechanism for life's lack of inherent meaning. In essence, it's through these exercise systems that one shapes their life.
”ANYTHING YOU POLISH WITH ATTENTION WILL BECOME A MIRROR. Anything to which you give yourself fully, vest all your strength and risk all your vulnerability, will return you to your life annealed, magnified, both unselved and more deeply yourself. It can be a garden, or a desert, or a hare. It can be, perhaps most readily, a place. “Place and a mind may interpenetrate till the nature of both is altered,” the Scottish mountaineer and poet Nan Shepherd wrote in her stunning love letter to a mountain long before neuroscience found the seat of personhood in the hippocampus — the brain’s compass for navigating space. Places can become part of us, can imprint themselves on the soul like people we have loved. Because every place is part of a larger landscape, a cell in the body of the world, to fall in love with any one place — to contact its beckoning beauty, its vulnerability, its variousness — is to come to love the world itself more deeply.”
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.6.D.1.3. THERE IS NO HIERARCHY BETWEEN THE CONTEMPLATIVE AND THE PRACTICAL LIFE
Aristotle's text presents a tension between the fulfilling practical life and the satisfying contemplative life. This tension remains unresolved in his work. A simplistic interpretation might suggest a hierarchy between the two. However, Aristotle appears to suggest that both types of life are entirely legitimate.

E1.6.D.1.3_REF1_CUR HOW DID THIS WARRIOR KING, considered the most powerful of the Khmer kings, reconcile his practical life as a monarch with his devotion to Buddhism? Ten centuries earlier, the Roman Emperor and Philosopher Marcus Aurelius testified in his writings to the difficulty of reconciling these two aspects of his life and it seems that he carried out his duty as a monarch often resigned and reluctantly.


E1.6.D.1.3_REF2_PH "A MULTI-MILLENNIAL EXPERIENCE seems to show that there is an intermediate level at which people like to situate themselves, because there they find more moral and intellectual comfort, there they feel better or less bad than elsewhere, without resorting to any considerations other than hedonistic ones: this is the level of scientific knowledge, intellectual activity and artistic creation."

E1.6.D.1.3_REF2.1_PH LÉVI-STRAUSS REFLECTS ON THE CONTRADICTION BETWEEN THE LIMITED CAPACITY OF HUMAN THINKING AND THE VASTNESS  OF THE UNIVERSE, and defends the importance of continuing to live, work and think, even without absolute certainty.
"Didier Eribon: "To end a series of books like Mythologies with the disillusioning realization that 'nothing' remains of man's undertakings is almost to proclaim a philosophical creed. They have already pretended to see in this 'nothing' the expression of their profound philosophy."

Claude Lévi-Strauss: "I never said that. I said that man should live, work, think, keep courage, knowing that he will not always be present on earth, that one day this earth will cease to exist, and that then nothing will remain of all the works of man. It's not exactly the same.
My "profound philosophy," as you call it, stumbles over this contradiction and bows before it. Everything that physicists and biologists teach me makes me fall in love; nothing stimulates my thinking more. At the same time, it seems to me that every problem that is solved, or that we believe to be solved, gives rise to new problems, and so on and so forth, endlessly, so that we become more and more convinced of the inadequate certainty that our ability to think is and will always remain real, that the profound nature of reality escapes any effort to represent it. It was Kant who first taught us this. But Kant, who molded himself to a power of knowledge that was hopelessly diseased by certain antinomies, hoped to find an absolute foundation in the moral life. Hyper-Kantian, if I may say so, I include the moral life in the problem of pure reason: it too has its antinomies, which are impossible to overcome. What's more, if scientific knowledge opens us up to the immensely great and the immensely small from perspectives far more dizzying than Pascal imagines, it shows us our insignificance. Whether humanity disappears or the earth disappears, nothing will change in the march of the cosmos. Hence a final paradox: we are not at all sure that this knowledge, which reveals our insignificance, has any validity. We know that we are nothing, or that we are not much, and knowing this, we don't even know if this knowledge is knowledge. Thinking of the universe as immeasurable through thought forces us to question thought itself. We can't get out of it.
So what about the radical skepticism you seem to be accusing me of? It doesn't exist. Because even if we dedicate ourselves to moving from appearance to appearance, it's not indifferent to know that it makes sense to stop somewhere, and where to stop. Between superficial appearances and the tiring search for a between superficial appearances and the tiring search for a meaning behind the meaning that is never the right one, a multi-millennial experience seems to show that there is an intermediate level at which people like to situate themselves, because there they find more moral and intellectual comfort, there they feel better or less bad than elsewhere, without resorting to any considerations other than hedonistic ones: this is the level of scientific knowledge, intellectual activity and artistic creation. Well, then, let's cling to it, and let's act resolutely as if, in order to believe it for all practical purposes, not without nodding from time to time with a sign of intelligence to a memento mori that encompasses our universe and, with it, ourselves".
(From near and far, Conversation between Didier Eribon and Claude Lévi-Strauss, 1988)

E1.6.D.1.4. THE JOY OF KNOWING
Contemplative activity, or the "joy of knowing," is considered "the perfect happiness of man" (Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, X, 7). This maxim would resonate equally with Descartes or Nietzsche.

E1.D.1.4.a. CONTENTMENT WITH OURSELVES
For Descartes, the optimal use of our freedom—achieving knowledge through reason—brings self-contentment. This reflects the conviction that we have acted in our best interests, a concept Spinoza refers to as "acquiescence with ourselves." Descartes' moral philosophy emphasizes the cultivation of reason and the discovery of new truths. Provisional morality guides us to safeguard ourselves from the world, while philosophical morality encourages us to take control of our lives. The highest form of morality, informed by knowledge from various sciences, leads to the wisdom of beatitude, which is inner contentment. A generous Cartesian identifies more with himself than with others, seeing the exploration of the infinite within himself as a source of deep joy and personal balance.

E1.6.D.1.4.a.i. I SPEND MY WHOLE LIFE CULTIVATING MY REASON
"I considered reviewing the various occupations that people have in life, in order to choose the best one. But without commenting on others' choices, I concluded that I couldn't do better than to continue with my current path. That is, to devote my entire life to cultivating my reason."

E1.6.D.1.4.a.i_REF1_PH ACCORDING TO RENÉ DESCARTES, THE BEST USE OF LIFE IS TO CULTIVATE YOUR REASON AND SEEK THE TRUTH. He asserts that judging well leads to acting well and acquiring all possible virtues and goods, thus ensuring contentment.
"PART THREE [...]
Finally, to conclude this code of morals, I took it upon myself to review the various occupations that men have in this life, in order to try to choose the best one, and, not wanting to say anything about the occupations of others, I thought I could not do better than to continue in that very one in which I found myself, that is to say, spending my whole life cultivating my reason and advancing, as far as I could, in the knowledge of the truth, following the method I had prescribed to myself. I had met with such extreme contentment since the time I had begun to make use of this method, that I did not believe one could obtain any sweeter or more innocent contentment in this life, and, discovering every day by its means some truths that to me seemed quite important and commonly ignored by other men, the satisfaction I had from them so filled my mind that nothing else was of any consequence to me. In addition, the three preceding maxims were founded solely on the plan I had of continuing to instruct
myself, for since God has given each of us some light to distinguish the true from the false, I would not have believed I ought to rest content for a single moment with the opinions of others, had I not proposed to use my own judgment to examine them when there would be time; and I would not have been able to free myself of scruples in following these opinions, had I not hoped that I would not, on that account, lose any opportunity of finding better ones, in case there were any. And finally, I could not have limited my desires or have been content, had I not followed a path by which, thinking I was assured of acquiring all the knowledge of which I was capable, I thought I was assured by the same means of the knowledge of all the true goods that would ever be in my power. For, given that our will tends not to pursue or flee anything unless our understanding represents it to the will as either good or bad, it suffices to judge well in order to do well, and to judge as best one can, in order also to do one's very best, that is to say, to acquire all the virtues and in general all the other goods that one could acquire, and, when one is certain that this is the case, one could not fail to be contented."
(René Descartes, Discourse on Method, 1637)

E1.6.B.2.wE1.6.D.1.4.a.i. "EXERCISE SYSTEMS"
Joy can be derived from creating an "exercise system". This process allows an individual to enhance their skills through repeated tasks, acting as immune device and coping mechanism for life's lack of inherent meaning. In essence, it's through these exercise systems that one shapes their life.

E1.6.D.1.4.a.ii. ENJOY THE FRUITS OF THE EARTH AND FEEL WONDERFULLY EXISTING IN THE FLESH
"Descartes does not hesitate to conjecture that the first passion experienced by the soul when it insinuated itself into the fetal body was that of joy: « From the first moment that our soul was joined to the body, it is likely that it felt joy, and incontinently afterwards love... » (to Chanut, 1-2-47). [...]
For this is how men live, not for the labors of understanding alone, but to enjoy the fruits of the earth and feel wonderfully existing in the flesh, which is the soul's true earthly residence, and from which it would be vain - Descartes is very close to Montaigne here - to try to escape, as some mystics illusorily attempt to. [...] « The mind must be entirely freed from all kinds of sad thoughts, and even from all kinds of serious meditations on the sciences, and occupied only with imitating those who, looking at the greenness of a wood, the colors of a flower, the flight of a bird, and such things that require no attention, persuade themselves that they are thinking of nothing. Which is not to waste time, but to use it well ».

E1.6.D.1.4.a.ii_REF1_PH DESCARTES ARGUES THAT THE SOUL'S UNION WITH THE BODY IS AN ENRICHMENT, NOT A FALL, OPPOSING THE IDEA OF ORIGINAL SIN. He believes the soul's first passion upon incarnation is joy, emphasizing that humans should enjoy earthly existence and not solely focus on speculative knowledge. Descartes advocates for balancing intellectual pursuits with sensory relaxation and appreciating the present moment.
"What does the soul has to gain by uniting with a body, in what sense is incarnation an enrichment rather than a fall? Indeed, the idea of ​​original sin is radically foreign to Cartesian thought, which is resolutely optimistic, and always betting that all that is, is good, and that we can know it as such, if at least we manage to analyze it by the only means of our clear and distinct ideas. There is therefore no question of saying that the fall of the soul into the body is the effect of a theological punishment whose reasons would be impenetrable to our created understanding. [...] Descartes does not hesitate to imagine that the first passion felt by the soul when it incorporates itself into the fetus is that of joy: « From the first moment that our soul was joined to the body, it is probable that it has felt joy, and immediately afterwards love ... »
For this is how men live, not for the works of the understanding alone, but to enjoy the fruits of the earth and to feel themselves wonderfully existing in their flesh which is the true earthly residence of the soul, and from which it would be vain - Descartes is very close to Montaigne here - to want to escape, as certain mystics illusorously attempt. This is why we should only devote littArt: Kate Sweeney, Fall?le time to the most speculative knowledge that leads us to believe that we are only pure spirits, and strive to enjoy our incarnation by relaxing, by tasting the pleasure of passing time, such as it is given to us in the perpetuated miracle of the present, that is to say by the divine activity of continuous creation: « I have employed very few hours per day in the thoughts which occupy the imagination, and very few hours per year for those which occupy the understanding alone, and I have given all the rest of my time to the relaxation of the senses and to the rest of the mind » [...]; « We must completely free the mind from all kinds of sad thoughts, and even also from all kinds of serious meditations touching the sciences, and only concern ourselves with imitating those who, looking at the greenness of a wood, the colors of a flower, the flight of a bird, and such things which require no attention, convince themselves that they are thinking of nothing. Which is not wasting time, but using it well »"
(René Descartes, Discourse on the Method, 1637).

E1.6.D.1.4.a.iii. THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN HAPPINESS AND BLISS
We can say that [Decartes] feels delightfully alive, and that this feeling inspires in him a real bliss, which is much more than mere happiness: « There's a distinction to be made between happiness and bliss. The former is dependent on external factors. It's often experienced by those who are considered more fortunate than wise, having encountered good fortune they did not seek. Bliss, on the other hand, seems to be rooted in a profound sense of inner contentment and satisfaction. » […]
Provisional morality guides us in protecting ourselves from the world’s hostility, while philosophical morality instructs us on claiming our personal power. [...]
It's possible to adopt another kind of morality, not that of a novice seeking protection from the world's dangers to complete their life's work. This morality is for the wise individual who possesses the secrets of wisdom and intends to relish in it during their lifetime. The most elevated and perfect form of morality requires a comprehensive understanding of other sciences. It reaches its peak in the wisdom of bliss, which is contentment with one's inner self. This wisdom mainly involves the correct and appropriate use of passions.

E1.6.D.1.4.a.iii_REF1_PH DESCARTES ASSERTS THAT THE SOUL MUST TURN AWAY FROM PURE SPECULATION IN ORDER TO ORIENT ITSELF TO THE WORLD AND THUS ENRICH ITS EXISTENCE THROUGH INTERACTION WITH OTHERS AND THE WORLD AROUND IT. 
"If, according to Descartes, one should not devote too much time to metaphysics, it is because the true destiny of the soul is not to examine itself or to always work toward the edification of a purely speculative science, but rather to turn away from itself, not for the sake of distraction, but through a clear understanding of the path to true fulfillment and enrichment, to turn toward the world. The body encourages the soul to reverse the direction of its gaze, which through metaphysical conversion had been directed solely toward speculative inwardness - the mental space of the cogito - in order to invite it to progress in the world, to find its good there, and to work there for its greatest happiness.  [...]
To walk with confidence in this life, as Descartes wrote, is therefore to set out with a firm and steady step to discover the world, for the enrichment of our soul and the fulfillment of our health. The methodical march in which the cogito gave us our first enlightenment goes far beyond mere speculation and moves towards the curious discovery of the earth. The metaphysical traveler who has chosen to always seek the truth, in science as in life, does not remain within the circle of the purely spiritual, but goes out to meet things and beings. [...] "To give oneself a morality that is not provisional, but that of a sage who knows himself through the accomplishment of metaphysical experience, is, therefore, to formulate rules of conduct that will allow me to live my passion happily, not to flee from it - for there is nothing wrong with the worldly intentionality by which the body diverts the soul from the sole consideration of itself, and inclines it to the world and to itself, without, however, renouncing the right that belongs to me, as to every thinking being capable of thinking for itself, to remain a free examiner of the value that must be given to the object that invites me to go out of myself and to enrich myself through interaction with others. Metaphysical knowledge has taught my mind to truly enjoy the power of my thoughts and the substantial union of my mind with my body, and has thus inspired in me a very considerable satisfaction that not only makes me know that I am, but also makes me enjoy this existence in every moment given to me by a God who is constantly creating. It can be said that in Descartes we have even encountered a "contented" metaphysician, that is, one who enjoys the content of existence, which he now knows to be irreducibly his own: Throughout the Discourse," writes Gouhier, "Descartes speaks of his satisfaction; Cartesianism is the philosophy of a satisfied man, and he is satisfied with his philosophy" (Descartes, Essays, p. 216). Descartes now fully enjoys the spiritual and carnal radiance of which he is the living source. It can be said that he feels himself to be a delightful being, and that this feeling inspires him with a true bliss that is much more than mere happiness: "There is a difference between happiness and bliss, in that happiness depends only on things that are outside us, which is why those who are esteemed happier than wise are those to whom some good has happened that they have not sought for themselves, whereas bliss, it seems to me, consists in perfect contentment of the spirit and inward satisfaction" (to Elizabeth, 4-8-45). [...]
And if we ask where this great joy comes from, this joy that endures and does not pass away, the philosopher will answer that it comes from contemplating the infinity of the will in us, which is in us as the image of God and promises us an increase of existence that will never end, opening for us the path of the method by which we will learn more and more to enjoy fully the existence that is given to us and to affirm ever more powerfully the radiance of being that we know how to spread in us from the first point of evidence that set us on the path: The punctual and first clarity of the cogito. [Provisional morality teaches us how to protect ourselves from the hostility of the world; philosophical morality teaches us how to take possession of the Kingdom. [...] A different morality is now possible, not that of the beginner who wants above all to protect himself from the dangers of the world in order to carry out his life's work, but that of the sage who holds the secret of wisdom and is determined to enjoy it as much as possible in this life. If the soul responds to the invitation of the body, which directs it to others and to the world, it can go out fearlessly to meet others and, among all the wonders that await it in this world, to meet the wonder of all wonders, my fellow human being, who also thinks as I do and is worthy of that infinity that shines in his soul as in mine, of the same respect and esteem as those whose thoughts I recognize in me as worthy, which is an effect of the creative activity that is in God. It is then no longer a question of provisional morality, but of "the highest and most perfect morality, which presupposes a complete knowledge of the other sciences, [and which] is the last degree of wisdom" (566), represented, in the letter that serves as a preface to the Groundwork of Philosophy, by the highest branch of the tree of philosophy, whose roots are metaphysics (the source of the development of mathematical knowledge), the trunk of which is physics, and the other two branches, lower than morality, are mechanics (which teaches me to become like the master and owner of the earth) and medicine (which teaches me to increase in myself the fire of health and to push back as far as possible the threat of death). And just as we know that it is the highest branch that bears the most fruit, we understand that Descartes' entire philosophy culminates in this wisdom of happiness, which is contentment with one's inner self, a wisdom that consists mainly in the good and right use of the passions. For Descartes, it is not a question of establishing rules that would muzzle and restrain passionate outbursts, but, on the contrary, of accepting them as an experience of joy and growth of the existence that is within us. [...]"
(Jacques Darriulat)

Read the full essay in French: https://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Descartes/DescartesDiscours/Disc.Introd.html

E1.6.D.1.4.a.iii_REF2_PH DESCARTES SEES THE PASSIONS AS AN OPENING TO THE WORLD AND TO OTHERS, AS AN EXPANSION OF THE SOUL THAT LEADS TO HAPPINESS. He asserts that all passions are inherently good, and that wisdom consists in mastering them in order to derive pleasure from them. A life without passions is, in his view, an empty and impoverished life, for passions enable one to fully enjoy the sweetness of human life. The best minds are often those with the most intense passions.
"Because of its union with the body, the soul is indeed exposed to the shock of passion. [For Descartes, far from being a disturbance that blinds the soul, the passions are, on the contrary, an opening to the world and to others that enlarges it and makes it more generous. In this sense, all passions are good in themselves, insofar as they contribute to this expansion of the soul, which is the source of all happiness, whereas the passion that exaggerates the soul, makes it forget its right to think for itself and retain its free judgment, diverts it from the radiant center that gives it joy, and leaves it unhappy, at the mercy of chance and fate. [...]
And now that we know all the passions," Descartes concludes in his treatise, "we have much less reason to fear them than we had before; for we see that they are all good by nature, and that we have nothing to avoid but their abuse or excess" (Art. 211, p. 793-94). And in a letter to the Marquis of Newcastle (March or April 1648), Descartes confessed: "The philosophy I cultivate is not so barbarous or so wild as to reject the use of the passions; on the contrary, in them alone I find all the sweetness and happiness of this life" (1298-99). [...]
And since passion determines the direction of our coming into the world-without this violence we might never have left the purely intellectual realm of metaphysical certainties-it is only through passion that we are given the opportunity to enjoy our purely human nature, that is, the union of our soul with our body, which is the true place where, as human beings, we must exercise the freedom of our will. A life without passions, Descartes teaches, is an empty and poor life, spent on earth without tasting its fruits: "The people who can move the passions the most are capable of tasting the greatest sweetness in this life [...] Wisdom is mainly useful for the sake of the soul.Wisdom is especially useful in this respect, because it teaches one to master them and to manage them with such skill that the evils they cause are quite bearable, and even that one derives pleasure from them all" (art. 212, the last of the Passions of the Soul); so much so that "it is usually the best minds whose passions are more violent and have a stronger effect on their bodies" (to Elizabeth, June 45, p. 1189)".
(Jacques Darriulat)

Read the full essay in French: https://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Descartes/DescartesDiscours/Disc.Introd.html

E1.6.D.1.4.a.iv. THE GENEROUS CARTESIAN DEFINES HIMSELF MORE IN RELATION TO HIMSELF THAN IN RELATION TO OTHERS:
A generous soul is lively and radiant, quietly driven by the profound joy of experiencing the infinite's unfolding within, originating from God the Creator. This strength provides balance to the soul, allowing it to remain composed in all situations. Therefore, a generous person is someone who understands the reason for self-esteem, the infinity of freedom, long before recognizing the need to esteem others.

E1.6.D.1.4.a.iv_REF1_PH ACCORDING TO DESCARTES, GENEROSITY BEGINS WITH ONESELF BEFORE EXTENDING TO OTHERS, AND ONLY THOSE WHO VALUE THEMSELVES CAN TRULY VALUE OTHERS. 
"However, among all the passions that produce each other according to our progress in the land of tenderness, that is, according to the depth of our passionate experience, following a scenario in which the first encounter marks the point of origin and whose path we will trace, there is one, more fundamental than the others, that gives passionate life the weight that restores it to its center, the gravity of a joy that cannot be dismissed by accidental circumstances. This passion is called generosity. It is, in fact, a strange passion, because it cannot be said to be truly passive, the consequence of a shock suffered after the encounter with an external body, with an incarnate soul that is not our own, but, on the contrary, the passion that the soul feels when it feels the activity that is proper to it and that is within it. In this sense, we can say that generosity is the affection of the soul impassioned by the effect of its own activity. Indeed, it is only by considering the infinity of the will that is in it, an infinity that is potentially in the creature and only actively in God, a potential infinity that opens before the soul a path of progress that nothing can legitimately limit, It is in the contemplation of the determination to want to be more and more (which is the essence of the will) that the soul experiences the fire of generosity within itself: "I believe, therefore, that true generosity, which makes a man value himself in the highest degree that he can legitimately value himself, consists, on the one hand, in his knowing that nothing really belongs to him but this free disposition of his will [...] and, on the other hand, in his feeling within himself a firm and constant determination to use it well, that is, never to lack the will to undertake and carry out all those things that he will judge to be best; that is, to follow virtue perfectly" (art. 153). [Virtue, which here must be understood in the sense of virtus, is the strength of the soul that is determined never to allow itself to be diverted from the path that leads to the permanent expansion of its being. Thus the generous Cartesian defines himself in relation to himself and not in relation to others: generous is the radiant and living soul, secretly animated by the grave and profound joy of feeling within itself the unfolding of the infinite, which has its source in God the Creator. Such strength gives the soul its balance and allows it to stand firm in all circumstances. Therefore, the generous person is the one who knows why he has the right to appreciate himself, namely the infinity of freedom, long before he knows why he must appreciate others. Because the foundation of virtue, which is generosity, begins, according to Descartes, with oneself and not with others, unlike those who ignore themselves and always want to intervene in strategies that they assume should make others happy, almost always making those they publicly claim to want to help unhappy. Descartes' moral philosophy is based entirely on this inversion, which holds that the best way to make others happy is to be happy oneself, and that only those who know the legitimate reason why they have the right to value themselves first, which is none other than the infinity of freedom that endlessly renews the dynamism of the will, know how to value others: "I can see only one thing in us that would justify us in being proud of ourselves, and that is the exercise of our free will and the power we have over our own actions" (Art. 152). [Always open to others, but never recognizing their right to interfere with his complete freedom, the generous man, driven by his strength to do great things, is welcoming and courteous to those who happen to cross his path: "Those who are generous in this way are naturally inclined to do great things, and yet to undertake nothing of which they do not feel capable; and since they value nothing more than doing good to others and despise their own interests [but here we are speaking only of material, not spiritual interests], in this respect they are always perfectly courteous, kind, and obliging to everyone" (Art. 156). This radiant man, whose gait is sure and whose gaze is clear, gives the soul the balance that allows it always to remain itself, while opening itself unreservedly to the passion of others. [...] Because I appreciate in myself what is truly valuable, I am able to appreciate others and to recognize in them, as in myself, the radiance of freedom. A strange inversion, peculiar to Cartesian morality: only he who first values himself knows why he must also value others, and he who despises himself cannot help despising others".
(Jacques Darriulat)

Read the full essay in French: https://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Descartes/DescartesDiscours/Disc.Introd.html

E1.6.D.1.4.b. THE SIMPLE, QUIET LIFE OF THE THINKER
According to Friedrich Nietzsche, the lifestyle of a thinker is the simplest and most serene. A thinker can find joy with ease and lead a tranquil, vibrant life. They require society only occasionally and find comfort in solitude and in the company of the dead. They can substitute their friends with the greatest individuals who have ever lived.
Those who are free-spirited and dedicated to knowledge are often satisfied with a modest job or fortune that merely meets their basic needs. They structure their lives in a way that ensures a significant change in public fortune does not simultaneously devastate their lives.

E1.6.D.1.4.b_REF1_PH "CAUTION OF FREE SPIRITS. — Free-spirited people, living for knowledge alone, will soon find they have achieved their external goal in life, their ultimate position vis à vis society and the state, and gladly be satisfied, for example, with a minor position or a fortune that just meets their needs; for they will
set themselves up to live in such a way that a great change in economic conditions, even a revolution in political structures, will not overturn their life with it. They expend as little energy as possible on all these things, so that they can plunge with all their assembled energy, as if taking a deep breath, into the element of knowledge. They can then hope to dive deep, and also get a look at the bottom.
Such a spirit will be happy to take only the corner of an experience; he does not love things in the whole breadth and prolixity of their folds; for he does not want to get wrapped up in them.
He, too, knows the week-days of bondage, dependence, and service. But from time to time he must get a Sunday of freedom, or else he will not endure life.
It is probable that even his love of men will be cautious and somewhat shortwinded, for he wants to engage himself with the world of inclination and blindness only as far as is necessary for the sake of knowledge. He must trust that the genius of justice will say something on behalf of its disciple and protégé, should accusatory voices call him poor in love.
In his way of living and thinking, there is a refined heroism; he scorns to offer himself to mass worship, as his cruder brother does, and is used to going quietly through the world and out of the world. Whatever labyrinths he may wander through, among whatever rocks his river may at times have forced its tortured course—once he gets to the light, he goes his way brightly, lightly, and almost soundlessly, and lets the sunshine play down to his depths."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human, Aphorism 291, 1878)

E1.6.D.1.4.b_REF2_PH "LIVE CHEAPLY. The cheapest and most carefree way of life is that of the thinker: for, at any crucial moment, he is the one who most needs the things that others despise and give up. - He enjoys the rest easily and does not know the costly access to pleasure; his work is not hard, but, in a way, meridional; his days and nights are not spoiled by remorse; he moves, eats, drinks and sleeps in the measure that suits his mind, so that it becomes more and more quiet, strong and clear; he rejoices in his body and has no reason to fear it; he does not need society, if not from time to time and then embraces his solitude with all the more tenderness; the dead compensate him for the living and he even finds a way to replace his friends, evoking among the dead the best who have ever lived. - Let us ask ourselves for once if it is not the contradicting desires and habits which make people´s lives expensive, and consequently painful and often unbearable. - In another sense, however, the thinker's life is the most expensive, - nothing is too good for him; and to be deprived of the best would be unbearable deprivation for the thinker."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, The Dawn of day, aphorism 566, 1881)

E1.6.D.1.5. INTELLIGENT DETACHMENT
For Lucretius, scientific knowledge is a mode of psychological grace. It is a way of learning to let go.

E1.6.D.1.5_REF1_PH "The aim of Lucretius was not independent scientific knowledge, but the reduction of emotional anxiety. Lucretius saw man as torn between the pleasure of sex and the pain of emotional loss, tormented by superstitions inspired by religion, haunted by the fear of bodily decay and death. He recommended scientific knowledge, which teaches intelligent detachment, equanimity. Scientific knowledge is, for Lucretius, a mode of psychological gracefulness. It is a way of learning to let go."
(Susan Sontag, The anthropologist as hero, 1963)

E1.6.D.1.5_REF2_LIT LEARN WHY THE WORLD WAGS AND WHAT WAGS IT "The best thing for being sad… is to learn something. That is the only thing that never fails. You may grow old and trembling in your anatomies, you may lie awake at night listening to the disorder of your veins, you may miss your only love, you may see the world about you devastated by evil lunatics, or know your honor trampled in the sewers of baser minds. There is only one thing for it then — to learn. Learn why the world wags and what wags it. That is the only thing which the mind can never exhaust, never alienate, never be tortured by, never fear or distrust, and never dream of regretting."
(T.H. White, The Once and Future King, 1958)

E1.6.D.1.5_REF3_LIT WHAT IT’S LIKE TO BE A FALCON: THE PEREGRINE AS A PORTAL TO A WAY OF SEEING AND A STATE OF BEING
"Standing in the fields near the north orchard, I shut my eyes and tried to crystallise my will into the light-drenched prism of the hawk’s mind. Warm and firm-footed in long grass smelling of the sun, I sank into the skin and blood and bones of the hawk. The ground became a branch to my feet, the sun on my eyelids was heavy and warm. Like the hawk, I heard and hated the sound of man, that faceless horror of the stony places. I stifled in the same filthy sack of fear. I shared the same hunter’s longing for the wild home none can know, alone with the sight and smell of the quarry, under the indifferent sky. I felt the pull of the north, the mystery and fascination of the migrating gulls. I shared the same strange yearning to be gone. I sank down and slept into the feather-light sleep of the hawk."
(J.A. Baker, The Peregrine, 1967)

E1.6.D.1.5_REF3.1_LIT J.A. BAKER’S WORK COMBINES METICULOUS OBSERVATION, POETIC LANGUAGE, AND A DEEP REVERENCE FOR NATURE, SERVING AS A TIMELESS ODE TO THE BEAUTY AND WONDER OF THE NATURAL WORLD. In the mid-1950s, he dedicated a decade to observing the peregrine falcon.
"In the mid-1950s, a near-sighted English office worker set out to do for the sky what Rachel Carson had done for the sea thirty years earlier — invite our human imagination, grounded yet boundless, into the world of another creature dwelling in another sphere. J.A. Baker (August 6, 1926–December 26, 1987) spent a decade following earth’s fastest flying bird on bicycle and on foot, possessed by its “restless brilliance.” When he unloosed The Peregrine (public library) into the atmosphere of culture in 1967 — an atmosphere shaped by the new ecological conscience awakened by Carson’s Silent Spring five years earlier — it was a clarion call and a consecration, entirely original, yet emanating Thoreau’s meticulous observation, Whitman’s ecstatic language, and Carson’s soulful reverence for the realities of nature in all their brutal beauty. An epoch later, it remains an ode to wonder, a field guide to observation as devotional practice, a passionate and poetic reminder that by attending closely and tenderly to any one thing, we recover our natural reverence for everything, our love of the world in all its strangeness and splendor."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.6.D.1.5_REF3.2_LIT "YOU CANNOT KNOW WHAT FREEDOM MEANS TILL YOU HAVE SEEN A PEREGRINE LOOSED INTO THE WARM SPRING SKY TO ROAM AT WILL THROUGH ALL THE FAR PROVINCES OF LIGHT. [...]

The eyes of a falcon peregrine weigh approximately one ounce each; they are larger and heavier than human eyes. If our eyes were in the same proportion to our bodies as the peregrine’s are to his, a twelve-stone man would have eyes three inches across, weighing four pounds. The whole retina of a hawk’s eye records a resolution of distant objects that is twice as acute as that of the human retina. Where the lateral and binocular visions focus, there are deep-pitted foveal areas; their numerous cells record a resolution eight times as great as ours. This means that a hawk, endlessly scanning the landscape with small abrupt turns of his head, will pick up any point of movement; by focusing upon it he can immediately make it flare up into larger, clearer view.

The peregrine’s view of the land is like the yachtsman’s view of the shore as he sails into the long estuaries. A wake of water recedes behind him, the wake of the pierced horizon glides back on either side. Like the seafarer, the peregrine lives in a pouring-away world of no attachment, a world of wakes and tilting, of sinking planes of land and water. We who are anchored and earthbound cannot envisage this freedom of the eye. The peregrine sees and remembers patterns we do not know exist: the neat squares of orchard and woodland, the endlessly varying quadrilateral shapes of fields. He finds his way across the land by a succession of remembered symmetries. [...]

Slowly he drifted above the orchard skyline and circled down wind, curving upward and round in long steep glides. He passed from the cold white sky of the south, up to the warm blue zenith, ascending the wind-bent thermal with wonderful ease and skill. His long-winged, blunt-headed shape contracted, dwindled, and darkened to the flinty point of a diamond as he circled high and far over; hanging and drifting above; indolent, watchful, supreme. Looking down, the hawk saw the big orchard beneath him shrink into dark twiggy lines and green strips; saw the dark woods closing together and reaching out across the hills; saw the green and white fields turning to brown; saw the silver line of the brook, and the coiled river slowly uncoiling; saw the whole valley flattening and widening; saw the horizon staining with distant towns; saw the estuary lifting up its blue and silver mouth, tongued with green islands. And beyond, beyond all, he saw the straight-ruled shine of the sea floating like a rim of mercury on the surface of the brown and white land. The sea, rising as he rose, lifted its blazing storm of light, and thundered to freedom to the land-locked hawk… I watched him with longing, as though he were reflecting down to me his brilliant unregarded vision of the land beyond the hill… He sank forward into the wind, and passed slowly down across the sun. I had to let him go. When I looked back, through green and violet nebulae of whirling light, I could just see a tiny speck of dusk falling to earth from the sun, flashing and turning and falling through an immense silence that crashed open in a tumult of shrilling, wing-beating birds."
(J.A. Baker, The Peregrine, 1967)

E1.6.D.1.6. THE EYE OF THE HEART: A PATH TO LIBERATION
The power of “the Eye of the Heart,” which produces insight, is vastly superior to the power of thought, which produces opinions. […]
This is the process of gaining adaequatio, of developing the instrument capable of seeing and thus understanding the truth that does not merely inform the mind but liberates the soul.

E1.6.D.1.6.a. ADEQUATIO
"The understanding of the knower must be adequate to the thing to be known [...] For every one of us only those facts and phenomena “exist” for which we posses adaequatio, and as we are not entitled to assume that we are necessarily adequate to everything, at all times, and in whatever condition we may find ourselves, so we are not entitled to insist that something inaccessible to us has no existence at all and is nothing but a phantom of other people’s imaginations. [...] People say: “Let the facts speak for themselves”; they forget that the speech of facts is real only if it is heard and understood. It is thought to be an easy matter to distinguish between fact and theory, between perception and interpretation. In truth, it is extremely difficult."

E1.6.D.1.6.a_REF1_PH OUR BODILY SENSES PROVIDE BASIC DATA ABOUT INANIMATE MATTER, BUT INTELLECTUAL SENSES ARE NECESSARY TO RECOGNIZE HIGHER-ORDER CONCEPTS LIKE FORM, PATTERN, AND MEANING. These intellectual senses are active qualities of the mind, essential for deeper understanding.
 "What enables man to know anything at all about the world around him? … Nothing can be known without there being an appropriate “instrument” in the makeup of the knower. This is the Great Truth of “adaequatio” (adequateness), which defines knowledge as adaequatio rei et intellectus — the understanding of the knower must be adequate to the thing to be known. [...]
Our five bodily senses make us adequate to the lowest Level of Being — inanimate matter. But they can supply nothing more than masses of sense data, to “make sense” of which we require abilities or capacities of a different order. We may call them “intellectual senses.” Without them we should be unable to recognize form, pattern, regularity, harmony, rhythm, and meaning, not to mention life, consciousness, and self-awareness. While the bodily senses may be described as relatively passive, mere receivers of whatever happens to come along and to a large extent controlled by the mind, the intellectual senses are mind-in-action, and their keenness and reach are qualities of the mind itself."
(E.F. Schumacher, A Guide for the Perplexed, 1977)

E1.6.D.1.6.a_REF2_PH DISTINGUISHING BETWEEN FACT AND THEORY IS CHALLENGING "For every one of us only those facts and phenomena “exist” for which we posses adaequatio, and as we are not entitled to assume that we are necessarily adequate to everything, at all times, and in whatever condition we may find ourselves, so we are not entitled to insist that something inaccessible to us has no existence at all and is nothing but a phantom of other people’s imaginations. [...]
People say: “Let the facts speak for themselves”; they forget that the speech of facts is real only if it is heard and understood. It is thought to be an easy matter to distinguish between fact and theory, between perception and interpretation. In truth, it is extremely difficult. [...]
When the level of the knower is not adequate to the level (or grade of significance) of the object of knowledge, the result is not factual error but something much more serious: an inadequate and impoverished view of reality. [...]
The level of significance to which an observer or investigator tries to attune himself is chosen, not by his intelligence, but by his faith. The facts themselves which he observes do not carry labels indicating the appropriate level at which they ought to be considered. Nor does the choice of an inadequate level lead the intelligence into factual error or logical contradiction. All levels of significance up to the adequate level — i.e., up to the level of meaning … — are equally factual, equally logical, equally objective, but not equally real.

It is by an act of faith that I choose the level of my investigation; hence the saying “Credo ut intelligam” — I have faith as to be able to understand. If I lack faith, and consequently choose an inadequate level of significance for my investigation, no degree of “objectivity” will save me from missing the point of the whole operation, and I rob myself of the very possibility of understanding."
(E.F. Schumacher, A Guide for the Perplexed, 1977)

E1.6.D.1.6.b. EVERYTHING CAN BE SEEN DIRECTLY EXCEPT THE EYE THROUGH WHICH WE SEE
"There is nothing more difficult than to become critically aware of the presuppositions of one’s thought. Everything can be seen directly except the eye through which we see. Every thought can be scrutinized directly except the thought by which we scrutinize. A special effort, an effort of self-awareness, is needed: that almost impossible feat of thought recoiling upon itself — almost impossible but not quite. In fact, that is the power that makes man human and also capable of transcending his humanity. [...]
Only through the “heart” can contact be made with the higher grades of significance and Levels of Being. "

E1.6.D.1.6.b_REF1_PH THE OBSERVER'S UNDERSTANDING IS INFLUENCED BY THEIR FUNDAMENTAL ASSUMPTIONS AND SOCIETAL CONTEXT, MAKING SELF-AWARENESS AND CRITICAL EXAMINATION OF THESE PRESUPPOSITIONS CHALLENGING.
 "The observer depends not only on the adequateness of his own higher qualities, perhaps “developed” through learning or training; he depends also on the adequateness of his “faith” or, to put it more conventionally, of his fundamental presuppositions and basic assumptions. In this respect he tends to be very much a child of his time and of the civilization in which he has spent his formative years; for the human mind, generally speaking, does not just think: it thinks with ideas, most of which it simply adopts and takes over from its surrounding society. [...]
There is nothing more difficult than to become critically aware of the presuppositions of one’s thought. Everything can be seen directly except the eye through which we see. Every thought can be scrutinized directly except the thought by which we scrutinize. A special effort, an effort of self-awareness, is needed: that almost impossible feat of thought recoiling upon itself — almost impossible but not quite. In fact, that is the power that makes man human and also capable of transcending his humanity. [...]
Only through the “heart” can contact be made with the higher grades of significance and Levels of Being. [...]
For anyone wedded to the materialistic Scientism of the modern age … higher levels of Reality simply do not exist, because his faith excludes the possibility of their existence. He is like a man who, although in possession of a radio receiver, refuses to use it because he has made up his mind that nothing can be obtained from it but atmospheric noises. [...]
Faith is not in conflict with reason, nor is it a substitute for reason. Faith chooses the grade of significance or Level of Being at which the search for knowledge and understanding is to aim. There is reasonable faith and there is unreasonable faith. To look for meaning and purpose at the level of inanimate matter would be as unreasonable an act of faith as an attempt to “explain” the masterpieces of human genius as nothing but the outcome of economic interests or sexual frustration."
(E.F. Schumacher, A Guide for the Perplexed, 1977)

E1.6.D.1.6.c. SOME HAVE MORE REACH
"As regards the bodily senses, all healthy people possess a very similar endowment, but no one could possibly overlook the fact that there are significant differences in the power and reach of people’s minds"

E1.6.D.1.6.c_REF1_PH "AS REGARDS THE BODILY SENSES, ALL HEALTHY PEOPLE POSSESS A VERY SIMILAR ENDOWMENT, but no one could possibly overlook the fact that there are significant differences in the power and reach of people’s minds… Beethoven’s musical abilities, even in deafness, were incomparably greater than mine, and the difference did not lie in the sense of hearing; it lay in the mind. Some people are incapable of grasping and appreciating a given piece of music, not because they are deaf but because of a lack of adaequatio in the mind. The music is grasped by intellectual powers which some people possess to such a degree that they can grasp, and retain in their memory, an entire symphony on one hearing or one reading of the score; while others are so weakly endowed that they cannot get it at all, no matter how often and how attentively they listen to it. For the former, the symphony is as real as it was for the composer; for the latter, there is no symphony: there is nothing but a succession of more or less agreeable but altogether meaningless noises. The former’s mind is adequate to the symphony; the latter’s mind is inadequate, and thus incapable of recognizing the existence of the symphony."
(E.F. Schumacher, A Guide for the Perplexed, 1977)

E1.6.D.1.6.d. INSIGHT IS VASTLY SUPERIOR TO OPINIONS
"The power of “the Eye of the Heart,” which produces insight, is vastly superior to the power of thought, which produces opinions. […]

This is the process of gaining adaequatio, of developing the instrument capable of seeing and thus understanding the truth that does not merely inform the mind but liberates the soul. […]

Ideas produce insight and understanding, and the world of ideas lies within us. The truth of ideas cannot be seen by the senses but only by that special instrument sometimes referred to as “the Eye of the Heart,” which, in a mysterious way, has the power of recognizing truth when confronted with it."
(E.F. Schumacher, A Guide for the Perplexed, 1977)

E1.6.D.1.6.d_REF1_PH EMERSON ARGUES THAT OUR SENSE OF BEING IS INTRINSICALLY CONNECTED TO THE UNIVERSE, SHARING THE SAME SOURCE AS EVERYTHING IN EXISTENCE.
"The magnetism which all original action exerts is explained when we inquire the reason of self-trust. Who is the Trustee? What is the aboriginal Self, on which a universal reliance may be grounded? What is the nature and power of that science- baffling star, without parallax, without calculable elements, which shoots a ray of beauty even into trivial and impure actions, if the least mark of independence appear? The inquiry leads us to that source, at once the essence of genius, of virtue, and of life, which we call Spontaneity or Instinct. We denote this primary wisdom as Intuition, whilst all later teachings are tuitions. In that deep force, the last fact behind which analysis cannot go, all things find their common origin. For the sense of being which in calm hours rises, we know not how, in the soul, is not diverse from things, from space, from light, from time, from man, but one with them and proceeds obviously from the same source whence their life and being also proceed. We first share the life by which things exist and afterwards see them as appearances in nature and forget that we have shared their cause."
(Ralph Waldo Emerson, Self-reliance, 1841)

E1.6.D.1.7. TO KNOW IS AN ACT OF JOY THAT POTENTIATES THE OTHERS
For Robert Misrahi, knowing is one of the acts of joy that does not exclude the others (founding, loving, dreaming, acting). It is a reflexive action on other activities that enhances the joy in each.

E1.6.D.1.7_REF1_PH KNOWLEDGE PRODUCES A SPECIFIC JOY, INTRINSIC AND NON-UTILITARIAN, INSEPARABLE FROM THE JOY OF LIVING. This joy is possible because knowledge is a founding act that validates what is founded, doubling the foundation by reflecting on oneself and one's actions.
The joy of founding has another dimension: "epistemological" and not just existential. The traveler of real life realizes this every time he engages in reflective thought or refers to theoretical texts. Knowledge that accounts for itself produces a specific joy, not to be confused with the satisfaction of being able to use the results of this knowledge at a later date; while all knowledge has an existential or practical purpose, being merely the means to a higher end, which is joy itself, it nevertheless has an intrinsic dimension of elation. And for some, the joy of understanding is not inferior to the joy of living, it is not even separable from it: the joy of founding is expressed here as the joy of knowing. 
Why is such joy possible, why is it almost universal, despite the complicit efforts of the will to ignorance? It is because knowledge (like reflective choice) is a founding act. But it does not found in the way one creates or establishes; it founds insofar as it affirms what is founded. Founding knowledge is necessarily super-reflexive: it redoubles the second foundation in which the subject considered itself and its action in order to validate it. [...]"
(Robert Misrahi, The acts of joy, 1987)

E1.6.D.2. BEWARE OF HOURS SPENT CUT OFF FROM LIFE
Gaston Bachelard cautions us about hours spent in isolation from life, similar to Alan Watts, who provides insight on identifying unhealthy intellectual activity.

E1.6.D.2.1. THE AFFECTIVE CHARACTER OF DURATION
Gaston Bachelard writes: “What makes the affective character of duration, the joy or the pain of being, is the proportion or the disproportion of hours of our life used as hours of sterile thought or as hours of sympathy. Matter neglects to exist, life neglects to live, the heart neglects to love.”

E1.6.D.2.1_REF1_PH "WHAT MAKES FOR THE AFFECTIVE CHARACTER OF DURATION, THE JOY OR THE PAIN OF BEING, is the proportion or the disproportion of our life used as hours of thought vs. hours of sympathy. Matter neglects to be, life neglects to live, the heart neglects to love. It is by sleeping that we lose Paradise. [...] Then we feel a dull pain when we go in search of lost moments. We remember those rich hours that are marked by the thousand sounds of the Easter bells, those bells of the resurrection whose blows cannot be counted because they all count, because they each have an echo in our awakened soul. And this memory of joy is already remorse when we compare to these hours of total life the intellectually slow hours because they are relatively poor, the dead hours because they are empty - empty of purpose, as Carlyle said from the depths of his sadness - the interminable hostile hours because they give nothing. 
And we dream of a divine hour that would give everything. Not the fully occupied hour, but the repleated one. The hour when all the moments of time would be used by matter, the hour when all the moments realized in matter would be used by life, the hour when all the living moments would be felt, loved, thought. The hour, therefore, when the relativity of consciousness would be erased because consciousness would be the exact measure of total time. 
In the end, objective time is our maximum time; it is the one that contains all the moments."
(Gaston Bachelard, Intuition of the Instant, 1931)

E1.6.D.2.1_REF2_LIT MARION MILNER DESCRIBES TWO WAYS OF PERCEIVING: a narrow focus, which is reason-driven and limits perception, and a wide focus, which involves the whole body and enhances perception, leading to greater happiness.
"As soon as I began to study my perception, to look at my own experience, I found that there were different ways of perceiving and that the different ways provided me with different facts. There was a narrow focus which meant seeing life as if from blinkers and with the centre of awareness in my head; and there was a wide focus which meant knowing with the whole of my body, a way of looking which quite altered my perception of whatever I saw. And I found that the narrow focus way was the way of reason. If one was in the habit of arguing about life it was very difficult not to approach sensation with the same concentrated attention and so shut out its width and depth and height. But it was the wide focus way that made me happy."
(Marion Milner,  A Life of One’s Own, 1934)

E1.6.D.2.2. MAGNIFY YOUR SPIRIT
"Seek out what magnifies your spirit. Patti Smith, in discussing William Blake and her creative influences, talks about writers and artists who magnified her spirit — it’s a beautiful phrase and a beautiful notion. Who are the people, ideas, and books that magnify your spirit? Find them, hold on to them, and visit them often. Use them not only as a remedy once spiritual malaise has already infected your vitality but as a vaccine administered while you are healthy to protect your radiance."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian°

E1.6.D.2.2_REF1_LIT "HE IS CAREFUL OF WHAT HE READS, FOR THAT IS WHAT HE WILL WRITE. He is careful of what he learns, for that is what he will know."
(Annie Dillard)

E1.6.D.2.3. DON'T PUSH YOUR BRAIN AROUND
Alan Watts suggests that when individuals try to think or concentrate, they act as though they are forcing their brains, which is unnecessary. He believes that self-consciousness is a disorder and is evident in the intense feeling of separation between "I" and one's experiences. The brain can function appropriately when consciousness is performing its intended role: not struggling to escape the present experience, but being effortlessly aware of it.

E1.6.D.2.3_REF1_PH "IV. THE WISDOM OF THE BODY
"[...] When the heart is out of order, we are clearly conscious of its beating; it becomes a distraction, pounding within the breast. It seems most probable that our preoccupation with thinking and planning, together with the sense of mental fatigue, is a sign of some disorder of the brain. The brain should, and in some cases does, calculate and reason with the unconscious ease of the other bodily organs. After all, the brain is not a muscle, and is thus not designed for effort and strain.
But when people try to think or concentrate, they behave as if they were trying to push their brains around. They screw up their faces, knit their brows, and approach mental problems as if they were something like heaving bricks. Yet you do not have to grind and strain to digest food, and still less to see, hear, and receive other neural impressions. [...]
Working rightly, the brain is the highest form of "instinctual wisdom." Thus it should work like the homing instinct of pigeons and the formation of the foetus in the womb-without verbalizing the process or knowing "how" it does it. The self-conscious brain, like the self-conscious heart, is a disorder, and manifests itself in the acute feeling of separation between "I" and my experience. The brain can only assume its proper behavior when consciousness is doing what it is designed for: not writhing and whirling to get out of present experience, but being effortlessly aware of it."
(Alan Watts, The wisdom of insecurity, 1951)

E1.6.D.2.4. DON'T LOSE TOUCH WITH BEAUTY
As Darwin aged, his capacity to appreciate the world's beauty began to diminish, bringing him considerable sadness. In his autobiography, he expressed regret over not dedicating time to enjoy poetry and music. He speculated that doing so might have prevented the weakening of the brain regions responsible for perceiving beauty.

E1.6.D.2.4_REF1_LIT DARWIN, AS HE AGED, LAMENTED THE LOSS OF HIS ABILITY TO FIND JOY IN POETRY, MUSIC, AND NATURE, ATTRIBUTING THIS TO HIS MIND BECOMING OVERLY ANALYTICAL. In his later years, Darwin reflected on the importance of maintaining a balance between intellectual pursuits and the appreciation of beauty, suggesting that neglecting the latter could diminish happiness and emotional well-being.
"This feeling-tone of the beautiful, this delight in the native poetry and musicality of aliveness, accompanied Darwin as he dove deeper and deeper into science to emerge with nothing less than a new world order of understanding the natural world and our place in it. In the last months of finalizing On the Origin of Species, the forty-nine-year-old Darwin wrote in an ecstatic letter to his wife and great love, Emma:

« I strolled a little beyond the glade for an hour and a half… the fresh yet dark green of the grand old Scotch firs, the brown of the catkins of the old birches, with their white stems, and a fringe of distant green from the larches, made an excessively pretty view… a chorus of birds singing around me, and squirrels running up the trees, and some woodpeckers laughing… it was as pleasant and rural a scene as ever I saw and did not care one penny how the beasts or birds had been formed. »

When the Beagle took him to Brazil in his mid-twenties, Darwin gasped in his journal as he beheld the grandeur of the rainforest:

« It is not possible to give an adequate idea of the higher feelings of wonder, admiration, and devotion, which fill and elevate the mind. »

These « higher feelings » shaped his notion of divinity — he observed that the devotional experience people cite as their proof of God is based on the same « sense of sublimity » that nature’s grandeur stirs in the spirit, the same « powerful though vague and similar feelings excited by music. » [...]

But then, as Darwin grew old, something happened — something he himself struggled to understand, something that caused him great sorrow: This radiant delight in aliveness through the transcendent experience of beauty — be it in spring’s symphony of songbirds or in a Bach sonata, in a Whitman poem or in the slant of sunlight on a centuries-old oak — grew dim, then was altogether extinguished. Darwin found himself mentally alert and active, but blind, deaf, dead to the life of feeling with which beauty inspirits us.
This gave him both his greatest regret and his greatest insight into the purpose of life. In his final years, Darwin set aside an hour each afternoon to reflect on his life and to impart the private cosmogony of meaning he had discovered in his seven decades. In a set of autobiographical sketches he wrote for his children, bearing the heading « Recollections of the Development of My Mind and Character », he considered what makes us human, what makes us happy, and what makes life worth living. After his death, finding in these notes immense insight and universal value, his children edited and published them as The Autobiography of Charles Darwin.
In one of these recollections, the elderly Darwin writes:

« My mind has changed during the last twenty or thirty years… Poetry of many kinds… gave me great pleasure… Pictures gave me considerable, and music very great delight… But now for many years I cannot endure to read a line of poetry…Music generally sets me thinking too energetically on what I have been at work on, instead of giving me pleasure. I retain some taste for fine scenery, but it does not cause me the exquisite delight which it formerly did. »

In a sentiment of extraordinary lucidity and humility, and of immense foresight given what we have since learned about the brain, Darwin bends his mind into examining its own inner workings, illuminating the most essential nature of the human animal — a beast of feeling, wired not for brutality but for beauty:

« My mind seems to have become a kind of machine for grinding general laws out of large collections of facts, but why this should have caused the atrophy of that part of the brain alone, on which the higher tastes depend, I cannot conceive. A man with a mind more highly organised or better constituted than mine, would not, I suppose, have thus suffered; and if I had to live my life again, I would have made a rule to read some poetry and listen to some music at least once every week; for perhaps the parts of my brain now atrophied would thus have been kept active through use. The loss of these tastes is a loss of happiness, and may possibly be injurious to the intellect, and more probably to the moral character, by enfeebling the emotional part of our nature. »"
(Maria Popova´s review of The Autobiography of Charles Darwin)

E1.6.D.2.4_REF2_LIT C.S. LEWIS DISCUSSES THE PROFOUND AND SERIOUS SENTIMENT OF THE LOVE OF NATURE, PARTICULARLY AMONG ENGLISHMEN AND RUSSIANS. 
"For some people, perhaps especially for Englishmen and Russians, what we call "the love of nature" is a permanent and serious sentiment. I mean here that love of nature which cannot be adequately classified simply as an instance of our love for beauty. Of course many natural objects-trees, flowers and animals are beautiful. But the nature-lovers whom I have in mind are not very much concerned with individual beautiful objects of that sort. The man who is distracts them. An enthusiastic botanist is for them a dreadful companion on a ramble. He is always stopping to draw their attention to particulars. Nor are they looking for "views" or landscapes. Wordsworth, their spokesman, strongly deprecates this. It leads to "a comparison of scene with scene," makes you "pamper" yourself with "meagre novelties of colour and proportion." While you are busying yourself with this critical and discriminating activity you lose what really matters the "moods of time and season," the "spirit" of the place. And of course Wordsworth is right. That is why, if you love nature in his fashion, a landscape painter is (out of doors) an even worse companion than a botanist.

It is the "moods" or the "spirit" that matter. Nature-lovers want to receive as fully as possible whatever nature, at each particular time and place, is, so to speak, saying. The obvious richness, grace, and harmony of some scenes are no more precious to For some people, perhaps especially for English- men and Russians, what we call "the love of nature" is a permanent and serious sentiment. I mean here that love of nature which cannot be adequately classified simply as an instance of our love for beauty. Of course many natural objects-trees, flowers and animals are beautiful. But the nature-lovers whom I have in mind are not very much concerned with individual beautiful objects of that sort. The man who is distracts them. An enthusiastic botanist is for them a dreadful companion on a ramble. He is always stopping to draw their attention to particulars. Nor are they looking for "views" or landscapes. Wordsworth, their spokesman, strongly deprecates this. It leads to "a comparison of scene with scene," makes you "pamper" yourself with "meagre novelties of colour and proportion." While you are busying yourself with this critical and discriminating activity you lose what really matters the "moods of time and season," the "spirit" of the place. And of course Wordsworth is right. That is why, if you love nature in his fashion, a landscape painter is (out of doors) an even worse companion than a botanist.

It is the "moods" or the "spirit" that matter. Nature-lovers want to receive as fully as possible what- ever nature, at each particular time and place, is, so to speak, saying. The obvious richness, grace, and harmony of some scenes are no more precious to"
(C.S. Lewis, The four loves, 1960)

E1.6.D.2.5. A CERTAIN QUEST FOR KNOWLEDGE LIMITS LIFE INSTEAD OF AFFIRMING IT
Nietzsche and Walt Whitman caution us against a knowledge pursuit that limits life instead of affirming it and against a rationality that ignores intuition.

E1.6.D.2.5.a. GREAT CULTURE: THE BALANCE BETWEEN KNOWLEDGE AND INTUITION
Nietzsche cautions us about knowledge that restricts life rather than affirming it, and about rationality that overlooks intuition. He believes that "a true sign of great culture is a person's ability to balance clear and rigorous knowledge while also yielding to the power and beauty of poetry, religion, metaphysics, and feeling."

E1.6.D.2.5.a_REF1_PH "ANALOGY OF THE DANCE. — Today we should consider it the decisive sign of great culture if someone possesses the strength and flexibility to pursue
knowledge purely and rigorously and, at other times, to give poetry, religion, and metaphysics a handicap, as it were, and appreciate their power and beauty. A position of this sort, between two such different claims, is very difficult, for science urges the absolute dominion of its method, and if this is not granted, there exists the other danger of a feeble vacillation between different impulses. Meanwhile (to open up a view to the solution of this difficulty by means of an analogy, at least) one might remember that dancing is not the same thing as staggering wearily back and forth between different impulses. High culture will resemble a daring dance, thus requiring, as we said, much strength and flexibility."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human, Aphorism 278, 1878)

E1.6.D.2.5.a_REF1.1_PH "AVENIR DE LA SCIENCE. —  To the man who works and searches in it, science gives much pleasure; to the man who learns its results, very little. But since all important scientific truths must eventually become everyday and commonplace, even this small amount of pleasure ceases; just as we have long ago ceased to enjoy learning the admirable multiplication tables. Now, if science produces ever less joy in itself and takes ever greater joy in casting suspicion on the comforts of metaphysics, religion, and art, then the greatest source of pleasure, to which mankind owes almost its whole humanity, is impoverished. Therefore a higher culture must give man a double brain, two brain chambers, as it were, one to experience science, and one to experience nonscience. Lying next to one another, without confusion, separable, self-contained: our health demands this. In the one domain lies the source of strength, in the other the regulator. Illusions, biases, passions must give heat; with the help of scientific knowledge, the pernicious and dangerous consequences of overheating must be prevented.
If this demand made by higher culture is not satisfied, we can almost certainly predict the further course of human development: interest in truth will cease, the less it gives pleasure; illusion, error, and fantasies, because they are linked with pleasure, will reconquer their former territory step by step; the ruin of the sciences and relapse into barbarism follow next.
Mankind will have to begin to weave its cloth from the beginning again, after having, like Penelope, destroyed it in the night. But who will guarantee that we will keep finding the strength to do so?"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain, Aphorisme 251, 1878)

E1.6.D.2.5.b. OPPOSING KNOWLEDGE TO LIFE IS A MISTAKE
Nietzsche criticizes the presumption of knowledge when it conflicts with life, when it assesses and judges life, or when it sees itself as the ultimate goal. He suggests that knowledge is merely a tool subordinated to life, but it often presents itself as a goal, a judge, or a supreme authority. This opposition between knowledge and life, he argues, is a symptom of a life that contradicts itself, a reactive life that uses knowledge as a means to persist and assert its dominance.

E1.6.D.2.5.b_REF1_PH GILLES DELEUZE PROPOSES THAT THE WILL TO TRUTH IS MOTIVATED NOT BY THE NATURE OF THE WORLD BUT BY A MORAL DESIRE NOT TO DECEIVE. This will pits knowledge against life, creating a moral distinction between a truthful world and the world of appearances.
"The concept of truth describes a "truthful" world. Even in science the truth of phenomena forms a "world" distinct from that of the phenomena themselves. But a truthful world presupposes a truthful man as its centre. - Who is this truthful man, what does he want?
First hypothesis: He wants not to be deceived, not to let himself be deceived, because it is "harmful, dangerous and inauspicious to be deceived". But this hypothesis presupposes the truthfulness of the world itself. For, in a radically false world it is the will to not let oneself be deceived that becomes inauspicious, dangerous and harmful. In fact, the will to truth had to be formed "in spite of the danger and the uselessness of the truth at any price". There remains another
hypothesis: I want the truth means I do not want to deceive, and "I do not want to be deceived comprises, as a special case, I do not want to deceive myself (GS 344). - If someone wills the truth it is not in the name of what the world is but in the name of what the world is not. It is understood that "life aims to mislead, to dupe, to dissimilate, to dazzle, to blind". But he who wills the truth always wants to depreciate this high power of the false: he makes life an "error" and this world an "appearance". He therefore opposes knowledge to life and to the world he opposes another world, a world-beyond, the truthful world.
The truthful world is inseparable from this will, the will to treat this world as appearance. Thus the opposition of knowledge and life, the distinction between worlds, reveals its true character: it is a distinction of moral origin, an opposition of moral origin. The man who does not want to deceive wants a better world and a better life; all his reasons for not deceiving are moral ones. And we always come up against the virtuism of the one who wills the truth: one of his favourite occupations is the distribution of wrongs, he renders responsible, he denies innocence, he accuses and judges life, he denounces appearance. "It has gradually become clear to me . . . that the moral (or immoral) intentions in every philosophy have every time constituted the real germ of life out of which the entire plant has grown . . . I accordingly do not believe a "drive to knowledge" to be the father of philosophy" (BGE 6 p. 19). - However, this moral opposition is itself only a symptom. The one who wants another world, another life, wants something more profound: "Life against life" (GM III 13 p. 120). He wants life to become virtuous, to correct itself and to correct appearance, for it to serve as the way to the other world. He wants life to repudiate itself and to turn against itself: "An attempt to use force to taint force" (GM HI 11). Thus behind the moral opposition there stands another kind of contradiction, the religious or ascetic contradiction."
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophy, 1962)

E1.6.D.2.5.b_REF2_PH NIETZSCHE CRITICIZES KNOWLEDGE FOR OPPOSING AND JUDGING LIFE, TRANSFORMING ITSELF INTO AN END RATHER THAN A MEANS. He argues that knowledge, shaped by a reactive life, limits and confines life within scientifically observable reactions. Reason often restricts actions by deeming them useless, wrong, or impossible.
"Nietzsche often blames knowledge for its claim to oppose life, to measure and judge life, to take itself for an end. [...] And Nietzsche will not cease to say: as a simple means subordinated to life, knowledge errected itself as an end, a judge, a supreme authority. [...] Knowledge is opposed to life, because it expresses a life that contradicts life, a reactive life that finds in knowledge itself a means to preserve itself and to make its type triumphant. (Thus knowledge gives to life laws that separate it from what it can, that prevent it from acting, forbid it to act, keeping it within the narrow framework of scientifically observable reactions: more or less like an animal in a zoological garden. This knowledge which measures, limits and models life, is modeled on a reactive life, within the limits of a reactive life). [...]
Reason sometimes dissuades us, and sometimes forbids us to cross certain limits: because it is useless (knowledge is there to foresee), because it would be wrong (life is there to be virtuous), because it is impossible (there is nothing to see, nor to think behind the truth). - But then, doesn't criticism, conceived as criticism of knowledge itself, express new forces capable of giving another meaning to thinking? [...] Thinking would mean this: to discover, to invent new possibilities for life. « There are lives where the difficulties come close to prodigy; they are the lives of thinkers. And we must listen to the stories about them, for we discover in them possibilities of life, the mere telling of which gives us joy and strength, and sheds light on the lives of their successors. There is as much invention, reflection, boldness, despair and hope in these stories as in the voyages of the great navigators; and, indeed, they are also voyages of exploration into the most remote and perilous areas of life. The surprising thing about these lives is that two inimical instincts, pulling in opposite directions, seem to be forced to walk under the same yoke: the instinct searching for knowledge is forced again and again to abandon the ground where man is accustomed to live and to launch itself into the uncertain, and the instinct loving life is forced to grope endlessly for a new place to settle. » In other words: life exceeds the limits set by life. Thought ceases to be a ratio, life ceases to be a reaction. The thinker thus expresses the beautiful affinity of thought and life: life make of thought something active, thought make os of life something affirmative. For Nietzsche, this affinity is not only the pre-Socratic secret par excellence, but also the essence of art."
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophy, 1962)

E1.6.D.2.5.b_REF3_PH “DISTURBANCES OF THE THINKER.—All that interrupts the thinker in his thoughts (disturbs him, as people say) must be regarded by him calmly, as a new model who comes in by the door to offer himself to the artist. Interruptions are the ravens which bring food to the recluse.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human III, Aphorism 342, 1878)

E1.6.D.2.5.b_REF4_PH JOHN GARDNER ARGUES THAT SELF-RENEWAL IS A LIFELONG PROCESS OF MATURE LEARNING, WHERE LASTING VITALITY COMES NOT FROM ACHIEVING A FINAL GOAL, BUT FROM STAYING ACTIVELY "INTERESTED" IN THE WORLD AND EMBRACING CONTINUOUS GROWTH THROUGH LIFE'S COMMITMENTS AND CHALLENGES.
“There’s a myth that learning is for young people. But as the proverb says, “It’s what you learn after you know it all that counts.” The middle years are great, great learning years. […]
We learn from our jobs, from our friends and families. We learn by accepting the commitments of life, by playing the roles that life hands us (not necessarily the roles we would have chosen). We learn by growing older, by suffering, by loving, by taking risks, by bearing with the things we can’t change. 
The things you learn in maturity aren’t simple things such as acquiring information and skills. You learn not to engage in self-destructive behavior. You learn not to burn up energy in anxiety. You discover how to manage your tensions. You learn that self-pity and resentment are among the most toxic of drugs. […]

Those are things that are hard to learn early in life. As a rule you have to have picked up some mileage and some dents in your fenders before you understand. As writer Norman Douglas said, “There are some things you can’t learn from others. You have to pass through the fire.” You come to terms with yourself. You finally grasp what playwright S.N. Behrman meant when he said, “At the end of every road you meet yourself.”
You learn the arts of mutual dependence, meeting the needs of loved ones and letting yourself need them. You can even be unaffected – a quality that often takes years to acquire. You can achieve the simplicity that lies beyond sophistication. […]
One of the enemies of sound, lifelong motivation is a rather childish conception we have of the kind of concrete, describable goal toward which all of our efforts drive us. We want to believe that there is a point at which we can feel we have arrived. We want a scoring system that tells us when we’ve piled up enough points to count ourselves successful. […]

The world is moved by highly motivated people, by enthusiasts, by men and women who want something very much or believe very much.
I’m not talking about anything as narrow as ambition. After all, ambition eventually wears out and probably should. But you can keep your zest until the day you die. If I may offer you a simple maxim, “Be interested.” Everyone wants to be interesting but the vitalizing thing is to be interested. Keep a sense of curiosity. Discover new things. Care. Risk failure. Reach out. […]
It may just mean doing a better job at whatever you’re doing. There are men and woman who make the world better just by being the kind of people they are. It matters very little whether they’re behind the wheel of a truck or running a country store or bringing up a family.”
(John Gardner, The Road to Self-Renewal, 1994)

E1.6.D.2.5.c. ARTICULATING THE SEARCH FOR TRUTH WITH LUCIDITY
The pursuit of truth can sometimes be detrimental to life and well-being. Pleasure and pain motives may also conflict with the quest for truth. Therefore, a robust temperament is needed to handle the implications of knowledge until it matures into clear lucidity.

E1.6.D.2.5.c_REF1_PH "SOME REASSURANCE. — But does not our philosophy then turn into tragedy? Does not truth become an enemy of life, an enemy of what is better? A
question seems to weigh down our tongues, and yet not want to be uttered: whether one is capable of consciously remaining in untruth, or, if one had to do so, whether death would not be preferable? For there is no “ought” anymore. Morality to the extent that it was an “ought” has been destroyed by our way of reflection, every bit as much as religion. Knowledge can allow only pleasure and unpleasure, benefit and harm, as motives. But how will these motives come to terms with the feeling for truth? These motives, too, have to do with errors (to the extent that inclination and disinclination, and their very unfair measurements, essentially determine, as we have said,
our pleasure and unpleasure). All human life is sunk deep in untruth; the individual cannot pull it out of this well without growing profoundly annoyed with his entire past, without finding his present motives (like honor) senseless, and without opposing scorn and disdain to the passions that urge one on to the future and to the happiness in it. If this is true, is there only one way of thought left, with despair as a personal end and a philosophy of destruction as a theoretical end?
I believe that a man’s temperament determines the aftereffect of knowledge; although the aftereffect described above is possible in some natures, I could just as well imagine a different one, which would give rise to a life much more simple, more free of affects than the present one. The old motives of intense desire would still be strong at first, due to old, inherited habit, but they would gradually grow weaker under the influence of cleansing knowledge. Finally one would live among men and with
oneself as in nature, without praise, reproaches, overzealousness, delighting in many things as in a spectacle that one formerly had only to fear. One would be free of appearance32 and would no longer feel the goading thought that one was not simply nature, or that one was more than nature. Of course, as I said, a good temperament would be necessary—a secure, mild, and basically cheerful soul; such a disposition would not need to be on guard for tricks and sudden explosions, and its expressions would have
neither a growling tone nor sullenness—those familiar bothersome traits of old dogs and men who have lain a long time chained up. Rather, a man from whom the ordinary chains of life have fallen in such measure that he continues to live on only to better his knowledge must be able to renounce without envy and chagrin much, indeed almost everything, that other men value. He must be content with that free, fearless hovering over men, customs, laws and the traditional evaluations of things, which is for him the most desirable of states. He is glad to communicate his joy in this state, and perhaps he has nothing else to communicate, which is, to be sure, one renunciation, one self-denial the more. But if one nevertheless wants more from him, with a benevolent shake of the head he will indicate his brother, the free man of action, and perhaps not conceal a little scorn: for that man’s “freedom” is another matter entirely."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human, Aphorism 34,1878)

E1.6.D.2.5.c_REF2_CUR EVEN WHEN ABSORBED IN A BOOK THAT CAPTIVATES HER, this reader is not freed from the aesthetic conventions of society. In order to be "beautiful," even in this moment of intimacy with herself, she continues to wear stiletto heels, which must be extremely uncomfortable (and which are of an exaggerated, even surreal length in this sculpture). Without clarity, education is no guarantee of liberation.

E1.6.D.2.5.c_REF3_LIT "HE IS CAREFUL OF WHAT HE READS, FOR THAT IS WHAT HE WILL WRITE. He is careful of what he learns, for that is what he will know."
(Annie Dillard)

E1.6.D.2.5.c_REF4_PH NIETZSCHE USES SCHOPENHAUER AS A MODEL TO ILLUSTRATE THE THREE GREAT DANGERS THREATENING EVERY PROFOUND INDIVIDUAL: THE OPPRESSIVE MELANCHOLY OF CREATIVE SOLITUDE, THE LOSS OF TRUTH AND HUMANITY IN PURE REASON, AND THE STERILE HARDENING THAT SEVERS ONE FROM THEIR OWN IDEAL.
“So the first danger in whose shadow Schopenhauer lived was--
isolation. The second is called--doubting of the truth. To this every
thinker is liable who sets out from the philosophy of Kant, provided
he be strong and sincere in his sorrows and his desires, and not a
mere tinkling thought-box or calculating machine. We all know the
shameful state of things implied by this last reservation, and I
believe it is only a very few men that Kant has so vitally affected
as to change the current of their blood. To judge from what one
reads, there must have been a revolution in every domain of thought
since the work of this unobtrusive professor: I cannot believe it
myself. For I see men, though darkly, as themselves needing to be
revolutionised, before any "domains of thought" can be so. In fact,
we find the first mark of any influence Kant may have had on the
popular mind, in a corrosive scepticism and relativity. But it is
only in noble and active spirits who could never rest in doubt that
the shattering despair of truth itself could take the place of doubt.
This was, for example, the effect of the Kantian philosophy on
Heinrich von Kleist. "It was only a short time ago," he writes in his
poignant way, "that I became acquainted with the Kantian philosophy;
and I will tell you my thought, though I cannot fear that it will
rack you to your inmost soul, as it did me.--We cannot decide,
whether what we call truth is really truth, or whether it only seems
so to us. If the latter, the truth that we amass here does not exist
after death, and all our struggle to gain a possession that may
follow us even to the grave is in vain. If the blade of this thought
do not cut your heart, yet laugh not at another who feels himself
wounded by it in his Holy of Holies. My one highest aim has vanished,
and I have no more." Yes, when will men feel again deeply as Kleist
did, and learn to measure a philosophy by what it means to the "Holy
of Holies"? And yet we must make this estimate of what Schopenhauer
can mean to us, after Kant, as the first pioneer to bring us from the
heights of sceptical disillusionment or "critical" renunciation, to
the greater height of tragic contemplation, the nocturnal heaven with
its endless crown of stars. His greatness is that he can stand
opposite the picture of life, and interpret it to us as a whole:
while all the clever people cannot escape the error of thinking one
comes nearer to the interpretation by a laborious analysis of the
colours and material of the picture; with the confession, probably,
that the texture of the canvas is very complicated, and the chemical
composition of the colours undiscoverable. Schopenhauer knew that one
must guess the painter in order to understand the picture. But now
the whole learned fraternity is engaged on understanding the colours
and canvas, and not the picture: and only he who has kept the
universal panorama of life and being firmly before his eyes, will use
the individual sciences without harm to himself; for, without this
general view as a norm, they are threads that lead nowhere and only
confuse still more the maze of our existence. Here we see, as I said,
the greatness of Schopenhauer, that he follows up every idea, as
Hamlet follows the Ghost, without allowing himself to turn aside for
a learned digression, or be drawn away by the scholastic abstractions
of a rabid dialectic. The study of the minute philosophers is only
interesting for the recognition that they have reached those stages
in the great edifice of philosophy where learned disquisitions for
and against, where hair-splitting objections and counter-objections
are the rule: and for that reason they evade the demand of every
great philosophy to speak *sub specie æternitatis*--"this is the
picture of the whole of life: learn thence the meaning of thine own
life." And the converse: "read thine own life, and understand thence
the hieroglyphs of the universal life." In this way must
Schopenhauer's philosophy always be interpreted; as an individualist
philosophy, starting from the single man, in his own nature, to gain
an insight into his personal miseries, and needs, and limitations,
and find out the remedies that will console them: namely, the
sacrifice of the ego, and its submission to the nobler ends,
especially those of justice and mercy. He teaches us to distinguish
between the true and the apparent furtherance of man's happiness: how
neither the attainment of riches, nor honour, nor learning, can raise
the individual from his deep despair at his unworthiness; and how the
quest for these good things can only have meaning through a universal
end that transcends and explains them;--the gaining of power to aid
our physical nature by them and, as far as may be, correct its folly
and awkwardness. For one's self only, in the first instance: and
finally, through one's self, for all. It is a task that leads to
scepticism: for there is so much to be made better yet, in one and
all!

Applying this to Schopenhauer himself, we come to the third and most
intimate danger in which he lived, and which lay deep in the marrow
of his being. Every one is apt to discover a limitation in himself,
in his gifts of intellect as well as his moral will, that fills him
with yearning and melancholy; and as he strives after holiness
through a consciousness of sin, so, as an intellectual being, he has
a deep longing after the "genius" in himself. This is the root of all
true culture; and if we say this means the aspiration of man to be
"born again" as saint and genius, I know that one need not be a
Buddhist to understand the myth. We feel a strong loathing when we
find talent without such aspiration, in the circle of the learned, or
among the so-called educated; for we see that such men, with all
their cleverness, are no aid but a hindrance to the beginnings of
culture, and the blossoming of genius, the aim of all culture. There
is a rigidity in them, parallel to the cold arrogance of conventional
virtue, which also remains at the opposite pole to true holiness.
Schopenhauer's nature contained an extraordinarily dangerous dualism.
Few thinkers have felt as he did the complete and unmistakable
certainty of genius within them; and his genius made him the highest
of all promises,--that there could be no deeper furrow than that
which he was ploughing in the ground of the modern world. He knew one
half of his being to be fulfilled according to its strength, with no
other need; and he followed with greatness and dignity his vocation
of consolidating his victory. In the other half there was a gnawing
aspiration, which we can understand, when we hear that he turned away
with a sad look from the picture of Rancé, the founder of the
Trappists, with the words: "That is a matter of grace." For genius
evermore yearns after holiness as it sees further and more clearly
from its watch-tower than other men, deep into the reconciliation of
Thought and Being, the kingdom of peace and the denial of the will,
and up to that other shore, of which the Indians speak. The wonder
is, that Schopenhauer's nature should have been so inconceivably
stable and unshakable that it could neither be destroyed nor
petrified by this yearning. Every one will understand this after the
measure of his own character and greatness: none of us will
understand it in the fulness of its meaning.

The more one considers these three dangers, the more extraordinary
will appear his vigour in opposing them and his safety after the
battle. True, he gained many scars and open wounds: and a cast of
mind that may seem somewhat too bitter and pugnacious. But his single
ideal transcends the highest humanity in him. Schopenhauer stands as
a pattern to men, in spite of all those scars and scratches. We may
even say, that what was imperfect and "all too human" in him, brings
us nearer to him as a man, for we see a sufferer and a kinsman to
suffering, not merely a dweller on the unattainable heights of
genius.

These three constitutional dangers that threatened Schopenhauer,
threaten us all. Each one of us bears a creative solitude within
himself and his consciousness of it forms an exotic aura of
strangeness round him. Most men cannot endure it, because they are
slothful, as I said, and because their solitude hangs round them a
chain of troubles and burdens. No doubt, for the man with this heavy
chain, life loses almost everything that one desires from it in
youth--joy, safety, honour: his fellow-men pay him his due
of--isolation! The wilderness and the cave are about him, wherever he
may live. He must look to it that he be not enslaved and oppressed,
and become melancholy thereby. And let him surround himself with the
pictures of good and brave fighters such as Schopenhauer.

The second danger, too, is not rare. Here and there we find one
dowered by nature with a keen vision; his thoughts dance gladly in
the witches' Sabbath of dialectic; and if he uncautiously give his
talent the rein, it is easy to lose all humanity and live a ghostly
life in the realm of "pure reason": or through the constant search
for the "pros and cons" of things, he may go astray from the truth
and live without courage or confidence, in doubt, denial and
discontent, and the slender hope that waits on disillusion: "No dog
could live long thus!"

The third danger is a moral or intellectual hardening: man breaks the
bond that united him to his ideal: he ceases to be fruitful and
reproduce himself in this or that province, and becomes an enemy or a
parasite of culture. The solitude of his being has become an
indivisible, unrelated atom, an icy stone. And one can perish of this
solitude as well as of the fear of it, of one's self as well as one's
self-sacrifice, of both aspiration and petrifaction: and to live is
ever to be in danger.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Thoughts out of Season, Part II, 1876)

E1.6.D.2.5.d. REASON, INTUITION AND STOICISM: IMPERFECT CHOICES
Friedrich Nietzsche posits that there are two types of people: the rational person who depends on foresight and prudence, and the intuitive individual who ignores needs and values illusion and beauty. The rational person might achieve success but never genuine happiness, while the intuitive person may endure more hardships but experiences enlightenment and redemption. As an example of extreme rationality, the stoic person, who governs himself by concepts, executes a masterpiece of deception in times of misfortune.

E1.6.D.2.5.d_REF1_PH FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE CONTRASTS THE RATIONAL MAN, WHO RELIES ON FORESIGHT AND PRUDENCE TO AVOID MISFORTUNE, WITH THE INTUITIVE MAN, WHO EMBRACES LIFE THROUGH ILLUSION AND BEAUTY BUT SUFFERS MORE INTENSELY AND FREQUENTLY. The rational man seeks truth and protection from deception, while the intuitive man finds joy and redemption in his intuition despite repeated failures. In misfortune, the rational man maintains composure and self-deception, whereas the intuitive man is overtaken by his emotions.
"There are ages in which the rational man and the intuitive man stand side by side, the one in fear of intuition, the other with scorn for abstraction. The latter is just as irrational as the former is inartistic. They both desire to rule over life: the former, by knowing how to meet his principle needs by means of foresight, prudence, and regularity; the latter, by disregarding these needs and, as an “overjoyed hero,” counting as real only that life which has been disguised as illusion and beauty… The man who is guided by concepts and abstractions only succeeds by such means in warding off misfortune, without ever gaining any happiness for himself from these abstractions. And while he aims for the greatest possible freedom from pain, the intuitive man, standing in the midst of a culture, already reaps from his intuition a harvest of continually inflowing illumination, cheer, and redemption — in addition to obtaining a defense against misfortune. To be sure, he suffers more intensely, when he suffers; he even suffers more frequently, since he does not understand how to learn from experience and keeps falling over and over again into the same ditch. He is then just as irrational in sorrow as he is in happiness: he cries aloud and will not be consoled. How differently the stoical man who learns from experience and governs himself by concepts is affected by the same misfortunes! This man, who at other times seeks nothing but sincerity, truth, freedom from deception, and protection against ensnaring surprise attacks, now executes a masterpiece of deception: he executes his masterpiece of deception in misfortune, as the other type of man executes his in times of happiness. He wears no quivering and changeable human face, but, as it were, a mask with dignified, symmetrical features. He does not cry; he does not even alter his voice. When a real storm cloud thunders above him, he wraps himself in his cloak, and with slow steps he walks from beneath it."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, On Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral Sense, 1873)

E1.6.D.2.5.e. WALT WHITMAN ALREADY SHARED THE SAME CONVICTION
20 years before Nietzsche, Walt Whitman already shared the same conviction.

E1.6.D.2.5.e_REF1_PO " SONG OF THE OPEN ROAD

[...] 6 [...]

Now I see the secret of the making of the best persons,
It is to grow in the open air and to eat and sleep with the earth.

Here a great personal deed has room,
(Such a deed seizes upon the hearts of the whole race of men,
Its effusion of strength and will overwhelms law and mocks all authority and all argument against it.)

Here is the test of wisdom,
Wisdom is not finally tested in schools,
Wisdom cannot be pass’d from one having it to another not having it,
Wisdom is of the soul, is not susceptible of proof, is its own proof,
Applies to all stages and objects and qualities and is content,
Is the certainty of the reality and immortality of things, and the excellence of things;
Something there is in the float of the sight of things that provokes it out of the soul.

Now I re-examine philosophies and religions,
They may prove well in lecture-rooms, yet not prove at all under the 
     spacious clouds and along the landscape and flowing currents.

Here is realization,
Here is a man tallied—he realizes here what he has in him,
The past, the future, majesty, love—if they are vacant of you, you are vacant of them.

Only the kernel of every object nourishes;
Where is he who tears off the husks for you and me?
Where is he that undoes stratagems and envelopes for you and me?

Here is adhesiveness, it is not previously fashion’d, it is apropos;
Do you know what it is as you pass to be loved by strangers?
Do you know the talk of those turning eye-balls?"
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.6.D.2.5.e_REF1.1_PO " SONG OF THE OPEN ROAD

[...] 15
Allons! the road is before us!
It is safe—I have tried it—my own feet have tried it well—be not detain’d!
Let the paper remain on the desk unwritten, and the book on the shelf unopen’d!
Let the tools remain in the workshop! let the money remain unearn’d!
Let the school stand! mind not the cry of the teacher!
Let the preacher preach in his pulpit! let the lawyer plead in the court, and the judge expound the law.
Camerado, I give you my hand!
I give you my love more precious than money,
I give you myself before preaching or law;
Will you give me yourself. will you come travel with me?
Shall we stick by each other as long as we live?"
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.6.D.2.5.e_REF2_PO "A SONG FOR OCCUPATIONS

[...] 6 [...]
When the script preaches instead of the preacher,
When the pulpit descends and goes instead of the carver that carved the supporting desk,
When I can touch the body of books by night or by day, and when they touch my body back again,
When a university course convinces like a slumbering woman and child convince,
When the minted gold in the vault smiles like the night-watchman’s daughter,
When warrantee deeds loafe in chairs opposite and are my friendly companions,
I intend to reach them my hand, and make as much of them as I do of men and women like you."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.6.D.2.5.e_REF3_PO " MYSELF AND MINE

[...] 

I give nothing as duties,
What others give as duties I give as living impulses,
(Shall I give the heart’s action as a duty?)
Let others dispose of questions, I dispose of nothing, I arouse unanswerable questions,
Who are they I see and touch, and what about them? [...]

I must follow up these continual lessons of the air, water, earth,
I perceive I have no time to lose."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.6.D.2.5.e_REF4_PO WHEN I HEARD THE LEARN’D ASTRONOMER
When I heard the learn’d astronomer,
When the proofs, the figures, were ranged in columns before me,
When I was shown the charts and diagrams, to add, divide, and measure them,
When I sitting heard the astronomer where he lectured with much applause in the lecture-room,
How soon unaccountable I became tired and sick,
Till rising and gliding out I wander’d off by myself,
In the mystical moist night-air, and from time to time,
Look’d up in perfect silence at the stars."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.6.D.2.6. THE MOTIVATIONS OF KNOWLEDGE THAT DO NOT LEAD TO JOY
Bertrand Russell criticizes the pursuit of knowledge driven by the desire for power. Regarding Hegel's thought, can we argue that it's disconnected from the world? Should we advocate for a right to ignorance? Or suggest that this is an inappropriate time for seeking knowledge?

E1.6.D.2.6.a. JOYFUL KNOWLEDGE IS NOT MOTIVATED BY POWER...
Bertrand Russell suggests that science's evolution has shifted from a love of knowledge to a quest for control over the natural world. The urge to pursue knowledge for understanding and contemplation differs from the desire for control and manipulation. The love of nature, poetry, and mysticism are also forms of seeking knowledge, but with a different goal. The danger lies not in knowledge, but in using power for its own sake. True satisfaction, he argues, comes from contemplating and loving the world, rather than attempting to control it.

E1.6.D.2.6.a_REF1_PH BERTRAND RUSSELL DISCUSSES THE EVOLUTION OF SCIENCE FROM A CONTEMPLATIVE PURSUIT DRIVEN BY LOVE OF KNOWLEDGE TO A MANIPULATIVE ENDEAVOR DRIVEN BY THE DESIRE FOR POWER. He emphasizes the importance of balancing scientific advancement with the values of love, joy, and emotional fulfillment. 
"Science in the course of the few centuries of its history has undergone an internal development which appears to be not yet completed. One may sum up this development as the passage from contemplation to manipulation. The love of knowledge to which the growth of science is due is itself the product of a twofold impulse. We may seek knowledge of an object because we love the object or because we wish to have power over it. The former impulse leads to the kind of knowledge that is contemplative, the latter to the kind that is practical. [...]
The mystic, the lover, and the poet are also seekers after knowledge… In all forms of love we wish to have knowledge of what is loved, not for purposes of power but for the ecstasy of contemplation… Wherever there is ecstasy or joy or delight derived from an object there is the desire to know that object — to know it not in the manipulative fashion that consists of turning it into something else, but to know it in the fashion of the beatific vision, because in itself and for itself it sheds happiness upon the lover. This may indeed be made the touchstone of any love that is valuable. [...]
Science in its beginnings was due to men who were in love with the world. They perceived the beauty of the stars and the sea, of the winds and the mountains. Because they loved them their thoughts dwelt upon them, and they wished to understand them more intimately than a mere outward contemplation made possible. “The world,” said Heraclitus, “is an ever living fire, with measures kindling and measures going out.” Heraclitus and the other Ionian philosophers, from whom came the first impulse to scientific knowledge, felt the strange beauty of the world almost like a madness in the blood. They were men of Titanic passionate intellect, and from the intensity of their intellectual passion the whole movement of the modern world has sprung. But step by step, as science has developed, the impulse of love which gave it birth has been increasingly thwarted, while the impulse of power, which was at first a mere camp-follower, has gradually usurped command in virtue of its unforeseen success. The lover of nature has been baffled, the tyrant over nature has been rewarded. [...]
It is not knowledge that is the source of these dangers. Knowledge is good and ignorance is evil: to this principle the lover of the world can admit no exception. Nor is it power in and for itself that is the source of danger. What is dangerous is power wielded for the sake of power, not power wielded for the sake of genuine good. [...]
The leaders of the modern world are drunk with power: the fact that they can do something that no one previously thought it possible to do is to them a sufficient reason for doing it. Power is not one of the ends of life, but merely a means to other ends, and until men remember the ends that power should subserve, science will not do what it might to minister to the good life. But what then are the ends of life, the reader will say. I do not think that one man has a right to legislate for another on this matter. For each individual the ends of life are those things which he deeply desires, and which if they existed would give him peace. [...]
In the conscious desires of the man who seeks power for its own sake there is something dusty: when he has it he wants only more power, and does not find rest in contemplation of what he has. The lover, the poet and the mystic find a fuller satisfaction than the seeker after power can ever know, since they can rest in the object of their love, whereas the seeker after power must be perpetually engaged in some fresh manipulation if he is not to suffer from a sense of emptiness. I think therefore that the satisfactions of the lover, using the word in its broadest sense, exceed the satisfactions of the tyrant, and deserve a higher place among the ends of life. [...]
When I come to die I shall not feel that I have lived in vain. I have seen the earth turn red at evening, the dew sparkling in the morning, and the snow shining under a frosty sun; I have smelt rain after drought, and have heard the stormy Atlantic beat upon the granite shores of Cornwall. Science may bestow these and other joys upon more people than could otherwise enjoy them. If so, its power will be wisely used. But when it takes out of life the moments to which life owes its value, science will not deserve admiration, however cleverly and however elaborately it may lead men among the road to despair. The sphere of values lies outside science, except in so far as science consists in the pursuit of knowledge. Science as the pursuit of power must not obtrude upon the sphere of values, and scientific technique, if it is to enrich human life, must not outweigh the ends which it should serve. [...]
The purpose of government is not merely to afford pleasure to those who govern, but to make life tolerable for those who are governed… It must become an essential part of man’s ethical outlook to realize that the will alone cannot make a good life. Knowing and feeling are equally essential ingredients both in the life of the individual and in that of the community. Knowledge, if it is wide and intimate, brings with it a realization of distant times and places, an awareness that the individual is not omnipotent or all-important… [...]
Even more important than knowledge is the life of the emotions. A world without delight and without affection is a world destitute of value. These things the scientific manipulator must remember, and if he does his manipulation may be wholly beneficial. All that is needed is that men should not be so intoxicated by new power as to forget the truths that were familiar to every previous generation. Not all wisdom is new, nor is all folly out of date."
(Bertrand Russell, The Scientific Outlook, 1931)

E1.6.D.2.6.a_REF2_PH KNOWLEDGE WITHOUT VIRTUE IS ONE OF THE SEVEN SOCIAL SINS for Mahatma Gandhi:
"Politics without principle
Wealth without toil
Pleasure without conscience
Knowledge without virtue
Commerce without morality
Science without humanity
Adoration without sacrifice"

E1.6.D.2.6.a_REF2.1_CUR "THE SCREEN-PRINTED TEXTS ON THE MIRROR are quotes from "Seven Social, Sins," a list Gandhi published in his weekly newspaper Young India in 1925 and which is carved on his tombstone. 

POLITICS WITHOUT PRINCIPLES

WEALTH WITHOUT TOIL

PLEASURE WITHOUT CONSCIENCE

KNOWLEDGE WITHOUT VIRTUE

COMMERCE WITHOUT MORALITY

SCIENCE WITHOUT HUMANITY

ADORATION WITHOUT SACRIFICE

Jaar is known for projects that address sociopolitical issues such as war, genocide, and the impact of globalization around the world. "I wanted to construct bridges to link the almost fictitious reality of the art world with the realities of the real world," he once said."
(Curatorship, MomA, NYC)

E1.6.D.2.6.b. JOYFUL KNOWLEDGE IS NOT ISOLATED FROM THE WORLD
We must avoid isolating ourselves in thoughts that are detached from the world: During a mountain trip, Hegel acknowledged the "pure existence" of the mountains, meaning their simple physical presence. For Hegel, this silent and "boring" existence is nonsensical, and it's up to the mind to overcome this by subjecting existence to the authority of concepts and reason. He posits that the philosopher must work diligently to subordinate existence to judgment and ideas, even if it means surrendering the "enchanted" view of childhood.

E1.6.D.2.6.b_REF1_PH FOR BOTH HEGEL AND ALAIN, THE TASK OF THOUGHT IS TO TURN AWAY FROM BEING IN ORDER TO BETTER UNDERSTAND IT THROUGH DEMONSTRATIVE DISCOURSE.
"[The philosopher] will never abandon the work of the concept, even at the cost of the enchanted gaze of childhood. The wild existence of pure Being must be subjected to the law of judgment, to the form of the idea, not succumbing to its hypnosis, but subjugating it through the accuracy of naming, through the precision of demonstration. Heidegger, on the other hand, denounces the forgetfulness that, in his opinion, hinders the questioning of thought. In Alain's Propos, there is one entitled "L'Existence". The professor of Henri IV opens with a little-known text by the young Hegel: Journal d'un voyage dans les Alpes bernoises. In 1796, Hegel, who was twenty-six at the time, went on a one-week hike in the Alps with two friends. Each evening, he wrote in his diary an account of his day. The route, which took him from Bern to Lucerne, passed several peaks that slowed their progress. This did not prevent the three robust young men from covering thirty kilometers a day, crossing the grandiose scenery of the high mountains. Since Horace Bénédict de Saussure's successful ascent of Mont Blanc, it had been customary to celebrate the grandeur of the mountains with emphasis, a symbolic image, as Kant had shown in the Critique of the Faculty of Judgement (1790), of the moral elevation of man and the high dignity of his goal. Hegel counters this emphasis with a strict observation of the facts: the rocky massif is nothing but a dead mass devoid of all meaning, an accumulation of existence that boils down to its pure being-there. The world presents itself to man as a vast nonsense, and it is up to the mind, and the mind alone, to triumph over this mute presence by subjecting it to the authority of the concept: "Neither the eye," wrote Hegel, "nor the imagination finds in these formless masses a point where the former could rest with pleasure, and where the latter could find an occupation or a game. Only the mineralogist will find material to venture incomplete hypotheses about the revolutions of these mountains. In considering the duration of these mountains, or the kind of grandeur attributed to them, reason will find nothing compelling to compel it to wonder or admire. The sight of these eternally dead masses awakens nothing in me except the uniform and, in the long run, boring idea: that's how it is. Hegel finds the Alps boring, and through the feeling of this boredom he becomes aware of the meaninglessness that the pure fact of existence seems to have in his eyes. That's the way it is. It exists. For the philosopher from Berlin, the simple proof of being is only given to us as a test that challenges us to exercise the intelligence of our mind (the "hypotheses" of the mineralogist) and thus, through the work of the concept, to make this colossal strangeness, this formidable enigma, our own. Alain begins his essay "Existence" with Hegel's words: "It is said that Hegel, faced with the mountains, would simply say, 'So it is.' I do not believe that he later recovered this harsh idea of existence, which at that moment appeared to him in its purity. This poet sought the spirit everywhere, trying, as he said, to realize a kind of immense theodicy. What this mighty genius took so far, we all try to do. We want to believe that existence can be justified. Heidegger sees himself as a thinker, but Hegel and Alain are philosophers. What the former fears is the forgetting of being; what the latter fears is the forgetting of thinking. The pure given of being is an opportunity for the intellect to test its skill, and for discourse to cast the net of meanings and qualifications over the incomprehensible. Alain goes on to evoke the whirlwind of elements carried away in the storm: "The elements are shaken; they rub and collide; whirlwind and storm here, clearing there. Do not look for meaning in these elemental movements; they dance as they dance; it is up to us to make the best of it; it is up to us to launch our plans and our boats on them. Better than the silent, absurd mass of the mountain, which gives us the illusion of permanence ("these stubborn masses have a kind of constancy"), when in fact all existence is prey to becoming, in constant transformation, as it appears to the mountains themselves when we look at them in the long term, it is the ever-moving mass of the sea, an image of living existence, of being worked by existence, that the thinker must contemplate: "If one wants to form an idea of pure existence, it is rather the sea that one must look at. Here one form erases the other. You want to talk to the wave, but it is no longer there. All this is in turmoil, aiming at nothing. Every drop is pushed here and there; and the drops are made of drops; do not look for a culprit. Here is the field of the irresponsible", this last word to be heard in extremis: the raw fact of existence does not respond to the call of the word that names it, existence is an enormous "monster", blind, deaf and dumb. Against this monumental inertia, man sets the genius of his intelligence and the audacity of his desire: citing an ode by Horace (I, 3), Alain asserts that the sea is only worth it to test us, so that we launch the boat on the waves, at our own risk and peril, and to our greatest joy: "The spectacle of the mountains gives an idea of the fait accompli, of the mass that must be circumnavigated. We go around the mountain, but, responding to the invitation of the wave, we cross the sea. Being, pure existence, is only a stupid animal to which we can dictate our laws: "The sea reveals to us another kind of law, an instrument and a means for the bold. From there we must return and judge, solid or not, this infinite expanse of existence, of existence that is neither perfect nor imperfect, that neither loves us nor hates us, that is only mechanical and therefore governable as far as we can grasp its blind play". For Hegel, as for Alain, "the task of thought is to turn away from being in order to better explain it through demonstrative discourse."
(Jacques Darriulat, To Be and To Exist, 3- To Experience Existence, 2020)

E1.6.D.2.6.b_REF2_CUR "HIDDEN", A FILM BY MICHAEL HANEKE (2005) can be frustrating, especially at the end. But it seems to have a profound message, which it illustrates in a masterful way. Why does Georges lead such a dull life, where nothing happens, as he admits to his mother? Is it not because he is the antithesis of what Albert Camus wanted to be from the beginning of his work in The Wrongs and the Rights: a man capable of the greatest joys while being aware of the suffering of others? Georges is closed to his own suffering, to that of his wife, and to that of all the others with whom he comes into contact. This lack of lucidity also closes the doors to joy.

Why does Haneke have to resort to the fantastic? Is it not because Georges' life is too sheltered, too hermetic to the suffering of others, and the fantastic is the only way to penetrate it? Without Haneke, the memory of his childhood would never have resurfaced, guaranteeing Georges the unshakable continuity of his dreary life. Faced with this ordeal, he will fail miserably. It could have been an opportunity for a new start in his life, for learning to be lucid and compassionate... He chose to function according to his old habits: racism, silence, solipsism, isolation in his own little world. And this despite the fact that he is a man of culture (he hosts a literary program on television).

Watch the trailer on YouTube: https://youtu.be/pvT_9TqIEtM?feature=shared

E1.6.D.2.6.b_REF3_PH I WISH TO PERSUADE THE READER THAT, WHATEVER THE ARGUMENTS MAY BE, REASON LAYS NO EMBARGO UPON HAPPINESS
"It is common in our day, as it has been in many other periods of the world’s history, to suppose that those among us who are wise have seen through all the enthusiasms of earlier times and have become aware that there is nothing left to live for. The men who hold this view are genuinely unhappy, but they are proud of their unhappiness,
which they attribute to the nature of the universe and consider to be the only rational attitude for an enlightened man. Their pride in their unhappiness makes less sophisticated people suspicious of its genuineness; they think that the man who enjoys being miserable is not miserable.

This view is too simple; undoubtedly there is some slight compensation in the feeling of superiority and insight which these sufferers have, but it is not sufficient to make up for the loss of simpler pleasures. I do not myself think that there is any superior rationality in being unhappy. The wise man will be as happy as circumstances permit and if he finds the contemplation of the universe painful beyond a point, he will contemplate something else instead. This is what I wish to prove in the present
chapter. I wish to persuade the reader that, whatever the arguments may be, reason lays no embargo upon happiness; nay, more, I am persuaded that those who quite sincerely attribute their sorrows to their views about the universe are putting the cart before the horse: the truth is that they are unhappy for some reason of which they are not aware, and this unhappiness leads them to dwell upon the less agreeable characteristics of the world in which they live.

It is fortunate for literary men that people no longer read anything written long ago, for if they did they would come to the conclusion that, whatever may be said about pools of water, the making of new books is certainly vanity. If we can show that the doctrine of Ecclesiastes is not the only one open to a wise man, we need not trouble ourselves much with the later expressions of the same mood.

In an argument of this sort we must distinguish between a mood and its intellectual expression. There is no arguing with a mood; it can be changed by some fortunate event, or by a change in our bodily condition, but it cannot be changed by argument. I have frequently experienced myself the mood in which I felt that all is vanity; I have emerged from it not by means of any philosophy, but owing to some imperative necessity of action."
(Bertrand Russell, The Conquest of Happiness, 1930)

E1.6.D.2.6.c. CAN ONE ARGUE FOR A RIGHT TO IGNORANCE?
Is life too short to acquire all the knowledge we desire?
How can we determine the optimal amount of knowledge?
Is it through 1) a balance considering other joyful activities or 2) expanding my subjectivity to the world and others, so that my life and what I know about it increasingly contributes to what makes sense.
Aren't there other forms of wisdom beyond knowledge, such as Eastern wisdoms, which have been overlooked by the Western pursuit of knowledge for centuries?

E1.6.D.2.6.c_REF1_LIT NOT KNOWING ISN’T IGNORANCE "But not knowing, waiting and finding — though they may happen accidentally, aren’t accidents. They involve work and research. Not knowing isn’t ignorance. (Fear springs from ignorance.) Not knowing is a permissive and rigorous willingness to trust, leaving knowing in suspension, trusting in possibility without result, regarding as possible all manner of response. The responsibility of the artist … is the practice of recognizing."
(Ann Hamilton, “Making Not Knowing,” adapted from her 2005 commencement address at The School of the Art Institute of Chicago.)

E1.7.C.4.3_REF1_PO.wE1.6.D.2.6.c

E1.6.D.2.6.c_REF3_ANTH "MAN REALLY CREATES GREAT THINGS ONLY IN THE BEGINNING; in every field, only the first step is fully valid. [...] I pay tribute to the decisive reflection that a thinker or the society that created his legend did twenty-five centuries ago, and to which my civilization could only contribute by confirming it. What else have I learned from the masters I have listened to, the philosophers I have read, the societies I have visited, and from this very science of which the West is so proud, if not scraps of lessons which, put together, reconstruct the meditation of the sage at the foot of the tree? Every effort to understand destroys the object to which we have become attached in favor of an effort that abolishes it in favor of a third, and so on, until we reach the only permanent presence, the one in which the distinction between meaning and meaninglessness disappears: the same one from which we had departed. It is two thousand five hundred years since humans discovered and formulated these truths. Since then, we have found nothing but - by trying every exit door after another - so many additional demonstrations of the conclusion from which we would have liked to "escape".
(Claude Lévi-Strauss, Tristes Tropiques, 1955)

E1.6.D.2.6.c_REF3.1_ANTH BUDDHISM REDUCES THE METAPHYSICAL PROBLEM TO THAT OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR. "This great religion of non-knowledge [Buddhism] is not based on our inability to understand. It testifies to our capacity and elevates us to the point of discovering truth in the form of a mutual exclusion of being and knowing. With additional audacity, it has - alone with Marxism - reduced the metaphysical problem to that of human behavior."
(Claude Lévi-Strauss, Tristes Tropiques, 1955)

E1.6.D.2.6.d. IS IT ALWAYS TIME FOR PURSUING KNOWLEDGE?

E1.6.D.2.6.d.i. HUMANS PRIORITIZE KNOWLEDGE AND BEAUTY EVEN IN DIFFICULT TIMES
C.S. Lewis suggests that human culture has always existed in the shadow of something more significant and urgent. If humans had waited for a secure time to pursue knowledge and beauty, the pursuit would never have begun.

E1.6.D.2.6.d.i-REF1_LIT ADDRESSING AN AUDIENCE OF FRIGHTENED YOUNG SCHOLARS, UNSURE OF WHAT USE THEIR INTELLECTUAL PASSION AND CREATIVE LABOR HAVE IN A WAR-TORN WORLD, LEWIS OFFERS AN ELIXIR OF PERSPECTIVE (Maria Popova, The Marginalina):

     "The war creates no absolutely new situation; it simply aggravates the permanent human situation so that we can no longer ignore it. Human life has always been lived on the edge of a precipice. Human culture has always had to exist under the shadow of something infinitely more important than itself. If men had postponed the search for knowledge and beauty until they were secure, the search would never have begun. We are mistaken when we compare war with “normal life.” Life has never been normal. Even those periods which we think most tranquil, like the nineteenth century, turn out, on closer inspection, to be full of crises, alarms, difficulties, emergencies. Plausible reasons have never been lacking for putting off all merely cultural activities until some imminent danger has been averted or some crying injustice put right. But humanity long ago chose to neglect those plausible reasons. They wanted knowledge and beauty now, and would not wait for the suitable moment that never comes. [...]

The insects have chosen a different line: they have sought first the material welfare and security of the hive, and presumably they have their reward. Men* are different. They propound mathematical theorems in beleaguered cities, conduct metaphysical arguments in condemned cells, make jokes on scaffolds, discuss the last new poem while advancing to the walls of Quebec, and comb their hair at Thermopylae. This is not panache; it is our nature. [...]

The war has not really raised up a new enemy but only aggravated an old one. There are always plenty of rivals to our work. We are always falling in love or quarrelling, looking for jobs or fearing to lose them, getting ill and recovering, following public affairs. If we let ourselves, we shall always be waiting for some distraction or other to end before we can really get down to our work. The only people who achieve much are those who want knowledge so badly that they seek it while the conditions are still unfavourable. Favourable conditions never come. [...]

Never, in peace or war, commit your virtue or your happiness to the future. Happy work is best done by the man who takes his long-term plans somewhat lightly and works from moment to moment… The present is the only time in which any duty can be done or any grace received."
(C.S. Lewis, The Weight of Glory, 1949)

E1.6.D.2.6.d.ii. NIETZSCHE ENCOURAGES FREE MINDS TO LIVE FOR KNOWLEDGE. He urges them to leverage all aspects of their lives, including mistakes, illusions, and suffering, to achieve their goal of influencing 

E1.6.D.2.6.d.ii_REF1_PH "ONWARDS. — [...]
You have it in your power to merge everything you have lived through—attempts, false starts, errors, delusions, passions, your love and your hope—into your goal, with nothing left over: you are to become an inevitable chain of culture-rings, and on the basis of this inevitability, to deduce the inevitable course of culture in general. When your sight has become good enough to see the bottom in the dark well of your being and knowing, you may also see in its mirror the distant constellations of future cultures. Do you think this kind of life with this kind of goal is too arduous, too bereft of all comforts? Then you have not yet learned that no honey is sweeter than that of knowledge, and that the hanging clouds of sadness must serve you as an udder, from which you will squeeze the milk to refresh yourself. Only when you are older will you
perceive properly how you listened to the voice of nature, that nature which rules the whole world through pleasure. The same life that comes to a peak in old age also comes to a peak in wisdom, in that gentle sunshine of continual spiritual joyfulness; you encounter both old age and wisdom on one ridge of life—that is how nature wanted it. Then it is time, and no cause for anger that the fog of death is approaching. Towards the light—your last movement; a joyful shout of knowledge—your last sound."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain, Aphorisme 292, 1878)

E1.6.D.2.7. THE QUESTION REMAINS: WHAT IS CULTURE IN THE AGE OF THE CULTURAL INDUSTRY?
The Frankfurt School, including Adorno and Benjamin, opposed the Kulturindustrie, or the incorporation of culture into a profit-driven capitalist production process. They contended that this adversely affects the quality of the produced culture.

E1.6.D.2.7_REF1_PH ADORNO CRITICIZES THE CULTURE INDUSTRY FOR ITS ABILITY TO BORROW AND ADAPT CULTURE, MAKING IT INOFFENSIVE AND DEMOCRATIC BUT DEVOID OF TENSION AND CRITICAL REFLECTION. 
"The Frankfurt School: Adorno and Benjamin at War with the Kulturindustrie The Legacy of Critical Theory Today: It is still entirely legitimate to ask whether the integration of cultural creation into a capitalist production process aimed at profit is transforming cultural production. Certainly, there has been a democratization of access to culture, but it is linked to a specific economic system that has its own agenda.
A test that is applied is whether a cultural work is no longer disturbing, whether it does not create a distance with the spectator - do we see in it what we have already seen? Do we think about it as we have already thought about it? If the work no longer creates tension, if it only confirms my identity as a spectator, is it still a cultural work?
Excerpt from Théodore Adorno's lecture on "Complicit Intellectuals" for France Culture, September 28, 1963:
"Among intellectuals who try to reconcile their reservations about the culture industry with respect for its power, a tone of ironic indulgence has set in. We know, they say, what it's all about: serial novels, ready-made movies, television shows that are anti-family and watered down to make resignation series, and what it's all about with variety shows, horoscope columns and letters to the editor. But all this is harmless and, moreover, democratic, because it is true to say that it obeys a prefabricated demand. Moreover, all this produces all sorts of benefits, for example, through the dissemination of information and advice. But this information is undoubtedly poor or insignificant, as all the sociological studies on something as basic as the level of political information prove, and the advice that emerges from the manifestations of the cultural industry is simple triviality, or even worse".
For Adorno, the role of the intellectual is to disagree with the powerful. This does not mean rejecting "the" powerful (he is not a thinker of domination). What is powerful would be the dominant opinion that passes without causing harm, without being questioned, without managing conflict. 
His theoretical demand is almost aesthetic (he is a trained composer), because he thinks that any form of statement that is "quotable" already becomes a commodity or something that can be exchanged on a market of knowledge of good philosophical sayings (hence the justification of his complicated style against "bourgeois rationality")".
(Julia Christ in the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on November 19, 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French:
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/lecole-de-francfort-24-adorno-et-benjamin-en-guerre-contre-la-kulturindustrie

E1.6.D.2.7_REF1.1_PH "THE FRANKFURT SCHOOL: HABERMAS CONQUERS (PUBLIC) SPACE For Habermas, emancipation exists when no area or subject is excluded from the discussion. Except that the mass media promote and emphasize certain topics. It would be possible for everything to be discussed, but in reality it is the mass media that lead the discussion.
(Estelle Ferrarese on the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on November 20, 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French:
 https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/lecole-de-francfort-34-habermas-a-la-conquete-de-lespace-public

E1.6.D.2.7_REF2_SOC THE SCHOOL OF LIFE : THEODOR ADORNO

Watch it on YouTube :
https://youtu.be/4YGnPgtWhsw

E1.6.D.3. DOES EDUCATION GIVE US ACCESS TO "HIGHER" PLEASURES?

E1.6.D.3.1. CYNICISM IS THE ENEMY OF THE LOVE OF LEARNING
Leonard Bernstein argues that while everyone is born with a love for learning, as we age, cynicism often stifles this innate curiosity. Instead of experiencing the joy of learning, we turn to instant gratification. Bernstein believes this cynicism results in guilt, fear, and anxiety. It's a destructive cycle that diminishes our appreciation for beauty and love.

E1.6.D.3.1_REF1_PH LEONARD BERNSTEIN ARGUES THAT EVERY PERSON IS BORN WITH AN INHERENT LOVE OF LEARNING, WHICH IS GRADUALLY STIFLED BY CYNICISM AND THE PURSUIT OF INSTANT GRATIFICATION.
"Though I can’t prove it, deep in my heart I know that every person is born with the love of learning. Without exception. Every infant studies its toes and fingers, and a child’s discovery of his or her voice must be one of the most extraordinary of life’s moments… Imagine an infant lying in its cradle, discovering its voice, purring and murmuring MMM to itself."
As we grow up and learn to be cynical, Bernstein argues, we gradually stifle this inherent love of learning, turn off our curiosity, and become calcified. Out of that cynicism springs the impulse for instant gratification — the very opposite of the pleasurably protracted challenge of learning. [...]
"And you wake up so cynical… And guilt breeds fear and anxiety, and anxiety breeds fear, and it goes around — it’s that old vicious circle where one thing reinforces the other, which drives you day and night to instant gratification. Anything of a serious nature isn’t « instant » — [...] who has time to listen to a Mahler symphony, for God’s sake? […] You can’t « do » the Sistine Chapel instantly — you have to lie on your back and look up at that ceiling and contemplate. And we’ve already lost a whole generation of kids who are blind to anything constructive or beautiful, who are blind to love, love, LOVE — that battered, old, dirty four-letter word that few people understand anymore. [...]
We destroy our children’s songs of existence by giving them inhibitions, teaching them to be cynical, manipulative, and all the rest of it… You become hardened, but you can find that playfulness again. We’ve got to find a way to get music and kids together, as well as to teach teachers how to discover their own love of learning. Then the infectious process begins."
(Leonard Bernstein, Last long interview with Jonathan Cott)

E1.6.D.3.1_REF2_PH "THOUGH I CAN’T PROVE IT, DEEP IN MY HEART I KNOW THAT EVERY PERSON IS BORN WITH THE LOVE OF LEARNING. Without exception. Every infant studies its toes and fingers, and a child’s discovery of his or her voice must be one of the most extraordinary of life’s moments… Imagine an infant lying in its cradle, discovering its voice, purring and murmuring MMM to itself."
As we grow up and learn to be cynical, Bernstein argues, we gradually stifle this inherent love of learning, turn off our curiosity, and become calcified. Out of that cynicism springs the impulse for instant gratification — the very opposite of the pleasurably protracted challenge of learning. [...]
"And you wake up so cynical… And guilt breeds fear and anxiety, and anxiety breeds fear, and it goes around — it’s that old vicious circle where one thing reinforces the other, which drives you day and night to instant gratification. Anything of a serious nature isn’t “instant” — [...] who has time to listen to a Mahler symphony, for God’s sake? […] You can’t “do” the Sistine Chapel instantly — you have to lie on your back and look up at that ceiling and contemplate. And we’ve already lost a whole generation of kids who are blind to anything constructive or beautiful, who are blind to love, love, LOVE — that battered, old, dirty four-letter word that few people understand anymore. [...]
We destroy our children’s songs of existence by giving them inhibitions, teaching them to be cynical, manipulative, and all the rest of it… You become hardened, but you can find that playfulness again. We’ve got to find a way to get music and kids together, as well as to teach teachers how to discover their own love of learning. Then the infectious process begins."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings' review on Leonard Bernstein's last long interview with Jonathan Cott)

E1.6.D.3.2. THE HAPPINESS WE CREATE FOR OURSELVES IS THROUGH LEARNING
"Pleasures are indicators of power. While it's often said that happiness eludes us, this applies only to given happiness, as there's no such thing as given happiness. However, the happiness we create fro ourselves doesn't disappoint. It comes from learning, and one always learns continuously. The more knowledge one has, the greater the capacity for learning.”

E1.6.D.3.2_REF1_PH "IT IS SAID THAT HAPPINESS ALWAYS ELUDES US. THIS IS TRUE OF HAPPINESS RECEIVED, for there is no such thing as happiness received. But the happiness we create for ourselves is not deceptive. It is learning, and we are always learning. The more we know, the more we can learn. Hence the joy of being a Latinist, which has no end, but increases with progress. The joy of being a musician is the same. And Aristotle says this amazing thing, that the true musician is one who enjoys music, and the true politician is one who enjoys politics. "Pleasures," he says, "are the signs of powers." These words resonate with the perfection of concepts that take us beyond doctrine; and if we want to understand this astonishing genius, so often and so vainly denied, this is where we must look. The sign of true progress in any work is the pleasure one takes in it. From this we see that work is the only thing that is pleasurable and sufficient. I mean free work, both the effect of power and the source of power. Once again, not to suffer, but to act.
(Alain, On Happiness, Septembre 15, 1924)

E1.6.D.3.2_REF2_PH YOU DO HAVE TO BE DELIBERATE.
“The best are always learning.

Read like crazy.
Think alone.
Keep a journal.
Write stuff down the moment you see it.
Review regularly.
Memorize the big ideas to fluency.
Attack your best ideas.
And never get high on your own supply.

You don't have to be gifted. You do have to be deliberate.”
(Shane Parrish, FS - Brain Food, November 23, 2025)

E1.6.B.2.wE1.6.D.3.2. "EXERCISE SYSTEMS"
Joy can be derived from creating an "exercise system". This process allows an individual to enhance their skills through repeated tasks, acting as immune device and coping mechanism for life's lack of inherent meaning. In essence, it's through these exercise systems that one shapes their life.

E1.6.D.3.3. A SMALL AND A LARGE GLASS MAY BE EQUALLY FULL ; BUT THE LARGE ONE HOLDS MORE THAN THE SMALL
"I mentioned Hume’s notion, that all who are happy are equally happy ; a little miss with a new gown at a dancing school ball, a general at the head of a victorious army, and an orator, after having made an eloquent speech in a great assembly. JOHNSON [replied:] ‘ Sir, that all who are happy, are equally happy, is not true. A peasant and a philosopher may be equally satisfied, but not equally happy. Happiness consists in the multiplicity of agreeable consciousness. A peasant has not capacity for having equal happiness with a philosopher.’ I remember this very question very happily illustrated in opposition to Hume, by the Reverend Mr. Robert Brown, at Utrecht. ‘ A small drinking-glass and a large one, (said he,) may be equally full ; but the large one holds more than the small.’"
(James Boswell, Boswell’s Life of Johnson, 1791)

E1.6.D.3.4. ARE ALL KINDS OF PLEASURES EQUAL?
Happiness
Bentham equates pleasure and happiness. He sees no difference between different kinds of pleasure and happiness - for him, "if the quantity of pleasure be the same, push-pin is as good as poetry". Mill after him makes a Platonic move making a distinction between different kinds of pleasures. He ranks pleasures from the arts and reason above physical pleasures, but can we justify this? Can people who say they enjoy "higher pleasures" share their experience with people who have not had the education to enjoy these?
(Happiness, In our Times, broadcasted on BBC4 on Thu 24 Jan 2002)

Listen to the episode: https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p005489g

E1.6.D.3.5. HOW DO THE PLEASURES OF THE EDUCATED AND THE UNEDUCATED DIFFER?
The uneducated audience primarily seeks emotional engagement from tragedy, whereas the artist seeks technical and creative fulfillment. The average person falls between these two, with their enjoyment less clearly defined.d

E1.6.D.3.5_REF1_PH "THE PUBLIC. — The people actually desire nothing more from tragedy than to be moved, to be able to cry their hearts out; an artist who sees a new
tragedy, however, has his joy in its ingenious technical inventions and devices, in its manipulation and apportionment of the material, in its new use of old motifs, old thoughts. His is the aesthetic attitude towards a work of art, that of the creator; the attitude described first, which considers only content, is that of the people. There is nothing to be said about the man in the middle: he is neither “people” nor artist, and does not know what he wants. Thus his pleasure, too, is vague and slight."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human, Aphorism 166, 1878)

E1.6.D.3.5_REF2_PH "THE POSSESSION OF JOY ABOUNDING.—He that has joy abounding must be a good man, but perhaps he is not the cleverest of men, although he has reached the very goal towards which the cleverest man is striving with all his cleverness."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 48, 1878)

E1.6.D.3.6. CAN EDUCATION HAVE ADVERSE EFFECTS ON OUR FREEDOM TO PURSUE HAPPINESS?
One limitation to our freedom in pursuing happiness is the conditioning of our educational model. It sometimes confines us to limited thought patterns, hindering personal growth.

E1.6.D.3.6_REF1_LIT "OUR UNIVERSITIES FAIL TO GUIDE US DOWN THE EASIEST PATHS TO WISDOM… Rather than teaching a sense of awe, they teach the very opposite: counting and measuring over delight, sobriety over enchantment, a rigid hold on scattered individual parts over an affinity for the unified and whole. These are not schools of wisdom, after all, but schools of knowledge, though they take for granted that which they cannot teach — the capacity for experience, the capacity for being moved, the Goethean sense of wonderment."
(Hermann Hesse, Butterflies: Reflections, Tales, and Verse)

E1.6.D.3.6_REF1.1_LIT "WONDER IS WHERE IT STARTS, AND THOUGH WONDER IS ALSO WHERE IT ENDS, THIS IS NO FUTILE PATH. Whether admiring a patch of moss, a crystal, flower, or golden beetle, a sky full of clouds, a sea with the serene, vast sigh of its swells, or a butterfly wing with its arrangement of crystalline ribs, contours, and the vibrant bezel of its edges, the diverse scripts and ornamentations of its markings, and the infinite, sweet, delightfully inspired transitions and shadings of its colors — whenever I experience part of nature, whether with my eyes or another of the five senses, whenever I feel drawn in, enchanted, opening myself momentarily to its existence and epiphanies, that very moment allows me to forget the avaricious, blind world of human need, and rather than thinking or issuing orders, rather than acquiring or exploiting, fighting or organizing, all I do in that moment is “wonder,” like Goethe, and not only does this wonderment establish my brotherhood with him, other poets, and sages, it also makes me a brother to those wondrous things I behold and experience as the living world: butterflies and moths, beetles, clouds, rivers and mountains, because while wandering down the path of wonder, I briefly escape the world of separation and enter the world of unity."
(Hermann Hesse, Butterflies: Reflections, Tales, and Verse)

E1.6.D.3.6_REF2_CUR CARPE DIEM: CEASE THE DAY, MAKE YOUR LIVES EXTRAORDINARY
(Peter Weir, The dead poet society, 1989)

Watch the scene on YouTube:
https://youtu.be/vi0Lbjs5ECI

E1.6.D.3.6_REF3_CUR "FROM ALL THE JAILS THE BOYS AND GIRLS 
ECSTATICALLY LEAP -
Beloved only Afternoon 
That Prison does’nt keep -

They storm the Earth And stun the Air, 
A Mob of solid Bliss -
Alas - that Frowns should lie in wait 
For such a Foe as this -"
(Emily Dickinson, 1880)

E1.6.D.3.6_REF4_PH “THERE ARE NO TEACHERS.—As thinkers we ought only to speak of self-teaching. The instruction of the young by others is either an experiment performed upon something as yet unknown and unknowable, or else a thorough levelling process, in order to make the new member of society conform to the customs and manners that prevail for the time being. In both cases the result is accordingly unworthy of a thinker—the handiwork of parents and teachers, whom some valiantly honest person has called “nos ennemis naturels.” One day, when, as the world thinks, we have long since finished our education, we discover ourselves. Then begins the task of the thinker, and then is the time to summon him to our aid—not as a teacher, but as a self-taught man who has experience.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human III, Aphorism 267, 1878)

E1.6.D.3.6_REF5_LIT KEITH JOHNSTONE ARGUES THAT CONVENTIONAL "EDUCATION" OFTEN DESTROYS CREATIVITY AND EMOTIONAL RESPONSE BY PRIORITIZING A DULLING INTELLECT OVER "VISIONARY" PERCEPTION, a spell that, for him, was broken by a film that made him realize the man who dances might be superior to the "word-bound" intellectual.

“As I grew up, everything started getting grey and dull. I could still remember the amazing intensity of the world I’d lived in as a child, but I thought the dulling perception was an inevitable consequence of age—just as the lens of the eye is bound gradually to dim. I didn’t understand that clarity is in the mind.
I’ve since found tricks that can make the world blaze up again in about fifteen seconds, and the effects last for hours. For example, if I have a group of students who are feeling fairly safe and comfortable with each other, I get them to pace about the room shouting out the wrong name for everything that their eyes light on. Maybe there’s time to shout out ten wrong names before I stop them. Then I ask whether other people look larger or smaller—almost everyone sees people as different sizes, mostly as smaller. ‘Do the outlines look sharper or more blurred?’ I ask, and everyone agrees that the outlines are many times sharper. ‘What about the colours?’ Everyone agrees there’s far more colour, and that the colours are more intense. Often the size and shape of the room will seem to have changed, too. The students are amazed that such a strong transformation can be effected by such primitive means—and especially that the effects last so long. I tell them that they only have to think about the exercise for the effects to appear again.
My own rediscovery of the visionary world took longer. […]
I belatedly thought of attending to the reality around me. Then the deadness and greyness immediately sloughed off—yet I’d thought I’d never move through a visionary world again, that I’d lost it. In my case it was largely my interest in art that had destroyed any life in the world around me. I’d learned perspective, and about balance, and composition. It was as if I’d learned to redesign everything, to reshape it so that I saw what ought to be there, which of course is much inferior to what is there. The dullness was not an inevitable consequence of age, but of education. […]

‘Education’ as a Substance
People think of good and bad teachers as engaged in the same activity, as if education was a substance, and that bad teachers supply a little of the substance, and good teachers supply a lot. This makes it difficult to understand that education can be a destructive process, and that bad teachers are wrecking talent, and that good and bad teachers are engaged in opposite activities. […]

Emotion
One day, when I was eighteen, I was reading a book and I began to weep. I was astounded. I’d had no idea that literature could affect me in such a way. If I’d wept over a poem in class the teacher would have been appalled. I realised that my school had been teaching me not to respond.
(In some universities students unconsciously learn to copy the physical attitudes of their professors, leaning back away from the play or film they’re watching, and crossing their arms tightly, and tilting their heads back. Such postures help them to feel less ‘involved’, less ‘subjective’. The response of untutored people is infinitely superior.)
Intelligence
I tried to resist my schooling, but I accepted the idea that my intelligence was the most important part of me. I tried to be clever in everything I did. The damage was greatest in areas where my interests and the school’s seemed to coincide: in writing, for example (I wrote and rewrote, and lost all my fluency). I forgot that inspiration isn’t intellectual, that you don’t have to be perfect. In the end I was reluctant to attempt anything for fear of failure, and my first thoughts never seemed good enough. Everything had to be corrected and brought into line.
The spell broke when I was in my early twenties. I saw a performance of Dovzhenko’s Earth, a film which is a closed book for many people, but which threw me into a state of exaltation and confusion. There is a sequence in which the hero, Vassily, walks alone in the twilight. We know he’s in danger, and we have just seen him comforting his wife, who rolled her eyes like a frightened animal. There are shots of mist moving eerily on water, and silent horses stretching their necks, and corn-stooks against the dusky sky. Then, amazingly, peasants lying side by side, the men with their hands inside the women’s blouses and motionless, with idiotic smiles on their faces as they stare at the twilight. Vassily, dressed in black, walks through the Chagall village, and the dust curls up in little clouds around his feet and he is dark against the moonlit road, and he is filled with the same ecstasy as the peasants. He walks and walks and the film cuts and cuts until he walks out of frame. Then the camera moves back, and we see him stop. The fact that he walks for so long, and that the image is so beautiful, linked up with my own experience of being alone in the twilight—the gap between the worlds. Then Vassily walks again, but after a short time he begins to dance, and the dance is skilled, and like an act of thanksgiving. The dust swirls around his feet, so that he’s like an Indian god, like Siva—and with the man dancing alone in the clouds of dust something unlocked in me. In one moment I knew that the valuing of men by their intelligence is crazy, that the peasants watching the night sky might feel more than I feel, that the man who dances might be superior to myself—word-bound and unable to dance. From then on I noticed how warped many people of great intelligence are, and I began to value people for their actions, rather than their thoughts.”
(Keith Johstone, Impro: Improvisation and the theatre, 1979)

E1.6.D.3.6_REF6_PH THE LIBERATION DESCRIBED BY KRISHNAMURTI IS TWOFOLD, AND ONE FOLLOWS NECESSARILY FROM THE OTHER:
• INDIVIDUAL LIBERATION: A MIND THAT IS FREE FROM FEAR, ENVY, AND CONDITIONING.
• SOCIAL LIBERATION: THE CREATION OF A TRUE "SOCIETY OF EQUALS," WHICH ARISES NATURALLY FROM THE "TOTAL DEVELOPMENT OF EVERY INDIVIDUAL" AND IN WHICH THE "STING OF ENVY" CEASES.
“The fullest development of every individual creates a society of equals. The present social struggle to bring about equality on the economic or some spiritual level has no meaning at all. Social-reforms aimed at establishing equality, breed other forms of antisocial activity; but with right education, there is no need to seek equality through social and other reforms, because envy with its comparison of capacities ceases. 
We must differentiate here between function and status. Status, with all its emotional and hierarchical prestige, arises only through the comparison of functions as the high and the low. When each individual is flowering to his fullest capacity, there L.s then no comparison of functions; there is only the expression of capacity as a teacher, or a prime minister, or a gardener, and so status loses its sting of envy. 
Functional or technical capacity is now recognized through having a degree after one's name; but if we are truly concerned with the total development of the human being, our approach is entirely different. An individual who has the capacity may take a degree and add letters after his name, or he may not, as he pleases. But he will know for himself his own deep capabilities, which will not be framed by a degree, and their expression. will not bring about that self-centred confidence which mere technical capacity usually breeds. Such confidence is comparative and therefore antisocial. Comparison may exist for utilitarian purpose; but it is not for the educator to compare the capacities of his students and give greater or lesser evaluation. 
Since we are concerned with the total development of the individual, the student may not be allowed in the beginning to choose his own subjects, because his choice is likely to be based on passing moods and prejudices, or on finding the easiest thing to do; or he may choose according to the immediate demands of a particular need. But if he is helped to discover by himself and cultivate his innate capacities, then he will naturally choose, not the easiest subjects, but those through which he can express his capacities to the fullest and highest extent. If the student is helped from the very beginning to look at life as a whole, with all its psychological, intellectual and emotional problems, he will not be frightened by it.
It seems to me that a totally different kind of morality and conduct, and an action that springs from the understanding of the whole process of living, have become an urgent necessity, in our world of mounting crises and problems. We try to deal with these issues through political and organizational methods, through economic readjustment and various reforms; but none of these things will ever resolve the complex difficulties of human existence, though they may offer temporary relief. All reforms, however extensive and seemingly lasting, are in themselves merely productive of further confusion and further need of reformation. Without understanding the whole complex being of man, mere reformation will bring about only the confusing demand for further reforms. There is no end to reform; and there is no fundamental solution along these lines. 
Political, economic or social revolutions are not the answer either, for they have produced appalling tyrannies, or the mere transfer of power and authority into the hands of a different group. Such revolutions are not at any time the way out of our confusion and conflict. 
But there is a revolution which is entirely different and which must take place if we are to emerge from the endless series of anxieties, conflicts and frustrations in which we are caught. The revolution has to begin, not with theory and ideation, which eventually prove worthless, but with a radical transformation in the mind itself. Such a transformation can be brought about only through right education and the total development of the human being. It is a revolution that must take place in the whole of the mind and not merely in thought. Thought, after all, is only a result and not the source. There must be radical transformation in the source and not mere modification of the result. At present we are tinkering with results, with symptoms. We are not bringing about a vital change, uprooting the old ways of thought, freeing the mind from traditions and habits. It is with this vital change we are concerned and only right education can bring it into being. 
To inquire and to learn is the function of the mind. By learning I do not mean the mere cultivation of memory or the accumulation of knowledge, but the capacity to think clearly and sanely without illusion, to start from facts and not from beliefs and ideals. There is no learning if thought originates from conclusions. Merely to acquire information or knowledge, is not to learn. Learning implies the love of understanding and the love of doing a thing for itself. Learning is possible only when there is no coercion of any kind. And coercion takes many forms, does it not? There is coercion through influence, through attachment or threat, through persuasive encouragement or subtle forms of reward.
Most people think that learning is encouraged through comparison, whereas the contrary is the fact. Comparison brings about frustration and merely encourages envy, which is called competition. Like other forms of persuasion, comparison prevents learning and breeds fear. Ambition also breeds fear. Ambition, whether personal or identified with the collective, is always antisocial. So-called noble ambition in relationship is fundamentally destructive. 
It is necessary to encourage the development of a good mind - a mind which is capable of dealing with the many issues of life as a whole, and which does not try to escape from them and so become self-contradictory, frustrated, bitter or cynical. And it is essential for the mind to be aware of its own conditioning, its own motives and pursuits. 
Since the development of a good mind is one of our chief concerns, how one teaches becomes very important. There must be a cultivation of the totality of the mind, and not merely the giving of information. In the process of imparting knowledge, the educator has to invite discussion and encourage the students to inquire and to think independently. 
Authority, as `the one who knows,' has no place in learning. The educator and the student are both learning through their special relationship with each other; but this does not mean that the educator disregards the orderliness of thought. Orderliness of thought is not brought about by discipline in the form of assertive statements of knowledge; but it comes into being naturally when the educator understands that in cultivating intelligence there must be a sense of freedom. This does not mean freedom to do whatever one likes, or to think in the spirit of mere contradiction. It is the freedom in which the student is being helped to be aware of his own urges and motives, which are revealed to him through his daily thought and action. 
A disciplined mind is never a free mind, nor can a mind that has suppressed desire ever be free. It is only through understanding the whole process of desire that the mind can be free. Discipline always limits the mind to a movement within the framework of a particular system of thought or belief, does it not? And such a mind is never free to be intelligent. Discipline brings about submission to authority. It gives the capacity to function within the pattern of a society which demands functional ability, but it does not awaken the intelligence which has its own capacity. The mind that has cultivated nothing but capacity through memory is like the modem electronic computer which, though it functions with astonishing ability and accuracy, is still only a machine. Authority can persuade the mind to think in a particular direction. But being guided to think along certain lines, or in terms of a foregone conclusion is not to think at all; it is merely to function like a human machine, which breeds thoughtless discontent, bringing with it frustration and other miseries.
We are concerned with the total development of each human being, helping him to realize his own highest and fullest capacity - not some fictitious capacity which the educator has in view as a concept or an ideal. Any spirit of comparison prevents this full flowering of the individual, whether he is to be a scientist or a gardener. The fullest capacity of the gardener is the same as the fullest capacity of the scientist when there is no comparison; but when comparison comes in, then there is the disparagement and the envious reactions which create conflict between man and man. Like sorrow, love is not comparative; it cannot be compared with the greater or the lesser. Sorrow is sorrow, as love is love, whether it be in the rich or in the poor.”
(Krishnamurti, Life Ahead, 1963)

E1.6.D.3.6_REF6.1_PH THE LIBERATION DESCRIBED BY KRISHNAMURTI IS TWOFOLD, AND ONE FOLLOWS NECESSARILY FROM THE OTHER:
• INDIVIDUAL LIBERATION: A MIND THAT IS FREE FROM FEAR, ENVY, AND CONDITIONING.
• SOCIAL LIBERATION: THE CREATION OF A TRUE "SOCIETY OF EQUALS," WHICH ARISES NATURALLY FROM THE "TOTAL DEVELOPMENT OF EVERY INDIVIDUAL" AND IN WHICH THE "STING OF ENVY" CEASES. (Continued 1)
“Emotional openness and sensitivity can be cultivated only when the student feels secure in his relationship with his teachers. The feeling of being secure in relationship is a primary need of children. There is a vast difference between the feeling of being secure and the feeling of dependency. Consciously or unconsciously, most educators cultivate the feeling of dependency, and thereby subtly encourage fear - which the parents also do in their own affectionate or aggressive manner. Dependency in the child is brought about by authoritarian or dogmatic assertions on the part of parents and teachers as to what the child must be and do. With dependency there is always the shadow of fear, and this fear compels the child to obey, to conform, to accept without thought the edicts and sanctions of his elders. In this atmosphere of dependency, sensitivity is crushed; but when the child knows and feels that he is secure, his emotional flowering not thwarted by fear. 
This sense of security in the child is not the opposite of insecurity. It is the feeling of being at ease, whether in his own home or at school, the feeling that he can be what he is, without being compelled in any way; that he can climb a tree and not be scolded if he falls. He can have this sense of security only when the parents and the educators are deeply concerned with the total welfare of the child. 
It is important in a school that the child should feel at ease, completely secure from the very first day. This first impression is of the highest importance. But if the educator artificially tries by various means to gain the child's confidence and allows him to do what he likes, then the educator is cultivating dependency; he is not giving the child the feeling of being secure, the feeling that he is in a place where there are people who are deeply concerned with his total welfare. 
The very first impact of this new relationship based on confidence, which the child may never have had before, will help towards a natural communication, without the young regarding the elders as a threat to be feared. A child who feels secure has his own natural ways of expressing the respect which is essential for learning. This respect is denuded of all authority and fear. When he has a feeling of security, the child's conduct or behaviour is not something imposed by an elder, but becomes part of the process of learning. Because he feels secure in his relationship with the teacher, the child will naturally be considerate; and it is only in this atmosphere of security that emotional openness and sensitivity can flower. Being at ease, feeling secure, the child will do what he likes; but in doing what he likes, he will find out what is the right thing to do, and his conduct then will not be due to resistance, or obstinacy, or suppressed feelings, or the mere expression of a momentary urge. 
Sensitivity means being sensitive to everything around one - to the plants, the animals, the trees, the skies, the waters of the river, the bird on the wing; and also to the moods of the people around one, and to the stranger who passes by. This sensitivity brings about the quality of uncalculated, unselfish response, which is the morality and conduct. Being sensitive, the child in his conduct will be open and not secretive; therefore a mere suggestion on the part of the teacher will be accepted easily, without resistance or friction. 
As we are concerned with the total development of the human being, we must understand his emotional urges, which are very much stronger than intellectual reasoning; we must cultivate emotional capacity and not help to suppress it. When we understand and are therefore capable of dealing with emotional as well as intellectual issues, there will be no sense of fear in approaching them. 
For the total development of the human being, solitude as a means of cultivating sensitivity becomes a necessity. One has to know what it is to be alone, what it is to meditate, what it is to die; and the implications of solitude, of meditation, of death, can be known only by seeking them out. These implications cannot be taught, they must be learnt. One can indicate, but learning by what is indicated is not the experiencing of solitude or meditation. To experience what is solitude and what is meditation, one must be in a state of inquiry; only a mind that is in a state of inquiry is capable of learning. But when inquiry is suppressed by previous knowledge, or by the authority and experience of another, then learning becomes mere imitation, and imitation causes a human being to repeat what is learnt without experiencing it. 
Teaching is not the mere imparting of information but the cultivation of an inquiring mind. Such a mind will penetrate into the question of what is religion, and not merely accept the established religions with their temples and rituals. The search for God, or truth, or whatever one may like to name it - and not the mere acceptance of belief and dogma - is true religion. 
Just as the student cleans his teeth every day, bathes every day, learns new things every day, so also there must be the action of sitting quietly with others or by himself. This solitude cannot be brought about by instruction, or urged by the external authority of tradition, or induced by the influence of those who want to sit quietly but are incapable of being alone. Solitude helps the mind to see itself clearly as in a mirror, and to free itself from the vain endeavour of ambition with all its complexities, fears and frustrations, which are the outcome of self-centred activity. Solitude gives to the mind a stability, a constancy which is not to be measured in terms of time. Such clarity of mind is character. The lack of character is the state of self-contradiction. To be sensitive is to love. The word `love' is not love. And love is not to be divided as the love of God and the love of man, nor is it to be measured as the love of the one and of the many. Love gives itself abundantly as a flower gives its perfume; but we are always measuring love in our relationship and thereby destroying it.”
(Krishnamurti, Life Ahead, 1963)

E1.6.D.3.6_REF6.2_PH THE LIBERATION DESCRIBED BY KRISHNAMURTI IS TWOFOLD, AND ONE FOLLOWS NECESSARILY FROM THE OTHER:
• INDIVIDUAL LIBERATION: A MIND THAT IS FREE FROM FEAR, ENVY, AND CONDITIONING.
• SOCIAL LIBERATION: THE CREATION OF A TRUE "SOCIETY OF EQUALS," WHICH ARISES NATURALLY FROM THE "TOTAL DEVELOPMENT OF EVERY INDIVIDUAL" AND IN WHICH THE "STING OF ENVY" CEASES. (Continued 2)
“So attention is of primary importance, but it does not come through the effort of concentration. Attention is a state in which the mind is ever learning without a centre around which knowledge gathers as accumulated experience. A mind that is concentrated upon itself uses knowledge as a means of its own expansion; and such activity becomes self-contradictory and antisocial. 
Learning in the true sense of the word is possible only in that state of attention, in which there is no outer or inner compulsion. Right thinking can come about only when the mind is not enslaved by tradition and memory. It is attention that allows silence to come upon the mind, which is the opening of the door to creation. That is why attention is of the highest importance. 
Knowledge is necessary at the functional level as a means of cultivating the mind, and not as an end in itself. We are concerned, not with the development of just one capacity, such as that of a mathematician, or a scientist, or a musician, but with the total development of the student as a human being. 
How is the state of attention to be brought about? It cannot be cultivated through persuasion, comparison, reward or punishment, all of which are forms of coercion. The elimination of fear is the beginning of attention. Fear must exist as long as there is an urge to be or to become, which is the pursuit of success, with all its frustrations and tortuous contradictions. You can't teach concentration, but attention cannot be taught just as you cannot possibly teach freedom from fear; but we can begin to discover the causes that produce fear, and in understanding these causes there is the elimination of fear. So attention arises spontaneously when around the student there is an atmosphere of well-being, when he has the feeling of being secure, of being at ease, and is aware of the disinterested action that comes with love. Love does not compare, and so the envy and torture of `becoming' cease. 
The general discontent which all of us experience, whether young or old, soon finds a way to satisfaction, and thus our minds are put to sleep. Discontent is awakened from time to time through suffering, but the mind again seeks a gratifying solution. In this wheel of dissatisfaction and gratification the mind is caught, and the constant awakening through pain is part of our discontent. Discontent is the way of inquiry, but there can be no inquiry if the mind is tethered to tradition, to ideals. Inquiry is the flame of attention.
By discontent I mean that state in which the mind understands what is, the actual, and constantly inquires to discover further. Discontent is a movement to go beyond the limitations of what is; and if you find ways and means of smoothing or overcoming discontent, then you will accept the limitations of self-centred activity and of the society in which you find yourself. 
Discontent is the flame which burns away the dross of satisfaction, but most of us seek to dissipate it in various ways. Our discontent then becomes the pursuit of `the more', the desire for a bigger house, a better car, and so on, all of which is within the field of envy; and it is envy that sustains such discontent. But I am talking of a discontent in which there is no envy, no greed for `the more', a discontent that is not sustained by any desire for satisfaction, This discontent is an unpolluted state which exists in each one of us, if it is not deadened through wrong education, through gratifying solutions, through ambition, or through the pursuit of an ideal. When we understand the nature of real discontent, we shall see that attention is part of this burning flame which consumes the pettiness and leaves the mind free of the limitations of self-enclosing pursuits and gratifications. 
So attention comes into being only when there is inquiry not based on self-advancement or gratification. This attention must be cultivated in the child, right from the beginning. You will find that when there is love - which expresses itself through humility, courtesy, patience, gentleness - you are already free of the barriers which insensitivity builds; and so you are helping to bring about in the child this state of attention from a very tender age. 
Attention is not something to be~ learnt, but you can help to awaken it in the student by not creating around him that sense of compulsion which produces a self-contradictory existence. Then his attention can be focussed at any moment on any given subject, and it will not be the narrow concentration brought about through the compulsive urge of acquisition or achievement. 
A generation educated in this manner will be free of acquisitiveness and fear, the psychological inheritance of their parents and of the society in which they are born; and because they are so educated, they will not depend on the inheritance of property. This matter of inheritance destroys real independence and limits intelligence; for it breeds a false sense of security, giving a self-assurance which has no basis and creating a darkness of the mind in which nothing new can flourish. But a generation educated in this totally different manner which we have been considering will create a new society; for they will have the capacity born of that intelligence which is not hedged about by fear.”
(Krishnamurti, Life Ahead, 1963)

E1.7.C.3.5.b.wE1.6.D.3.6. EDUCATION MUST PREPARE FOR THE EXERCISE OF ATTENTION, SINCE ALL THE OTHER BENEFITS OF INSTRUCTION ARE IRRELEVANT. Study must be a gymnastic of the attention, the method consisting in looking at images, symbols, etc. until the light shines through, without trying to interpret them. This method must be applied to discriminate the real from the illusory. The condition is that attention is a gaze, not an attachment.

E1.6.D.3.7. THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN KNOWING AND UNDERSTANDING
The key is to understand, meaning to apply knowledge to transform one's life, rather than merely accumulating it.

E1.6.D.3.7.a. UNDERSTANDING INVOLVES RESTRUCTURING KNOWLEDGE

Understanding involves reshaping existing knowledge and expanding one's frame of reference, while knowledge is obtained by integrating new experiences into a concept system based on past experiences. Unlike knowledge, understanding cannot be passed on and naturally emerges when conditions are favorable.

Confusing conceptual knowledge with understanding is a frequent source of distress in human experience. Spiritual traditions and mystics have tried to express complete awareness in common sense principles, but these are often dismissed because they demand a restructuring and expansion of one's frames of reference.

E1.6.D.3.7.a.i. UNDERSTANDING REQUIRES RESTRUCTURING KNOWLEDGE
Understanding, whether it's another person's experience or a fundamental law of physics, involves reorganizing existing knowledge and expanding previous frames of reference. People often mistake their limited and incomplete knowledge for actual reality. Unlike knowledge, understanding is personal and subjective and cannot be easily transferred.
Aldous Huxley suggests that much of human suffering stems from confusing conceptual knowledge with understanding. However, this suffering can be lessened by replacing confusion with clarity — a complete awareness of reality achieved by surrendering the self and the narrative enterprise.
All spiritual traditions and mystics have tried to express this total awareness in practical principles. However, these principles are often rejected because understanding only comes through the previously mentioned restructuring and expansion of one's frames of reference.

E1.6.D.3.7.a.i_REF1_PH "TO UNDERSTAND ANYTHING — ANOTHER PERSON’S EXPERIENCE OF REALITY, ANOTHER FUNDAMENTAL LAW OF PHYSICS — IS TO RESTRUCTURE OUR EXISTING KNOWLEDGE, shifting and broadening our prior frames of reference to accommodate a new awareness. And yet we have a habit of confusing our knowledge — which is always limited and incomplete: a model of the cathedral of reality, built from primary-colored blocks of fact — with the actuality of things; we have a habit of mistaking the model for the thing itself, mistaking our partial awareness for a totality of understanding. Thoreau recognized this when he contemplated our blinding preconceptions and lamented that « we hear and apprehend only what we already half know. » [...]
Because the units of knowledge are concepts, and concepts can be conveyed and transmitted in words and symbols, knowledge itself can be passed between persons. Understanding, on the other hand, is intimate and subjective, not a conceptual container but an aura of immediacy cast upon an experience — which means it cannot be transmitted and transacted like knowledge. Our forebears devised ways of transmitting knowledge from one generation to the next — in words and symbols, in stories and equations — which ensured the survival of our species by preserving and passing down the results of experience. But knowing the results of an experience is not the same as understanding the experience itself. Complicating the matter is the added subtlety that we may understand the words and symbols by which we tell each other about our experience, but still miss the immediacy of the reality those concepts are intended to convey."
(Maria Popova's Review on Aldous Huxley's The Divine Within: Selected Writings on Enlightenment, 2013)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.i_REF2_PH MUCH HUMAN SUFFERING ARISES FROM MISTAKING CONCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE FOR TRUE UNDERSTANDING, LEADING TO CONFUSION AND DISTRESS. Achieving total awareness of reality, free from oversimplification and pseudoknowledge, can initially cause panic due to our inherent ignorance and helplessness. However, this awareness ultimately brings profound serenity and peace. 
"At the heart of Huxley’s essay is the observation that a great deal of human suffering stems from our tendency to mistake conceptual knowledge for understanding, « homemade concepts for given reality. » Such suffering can therefore be allayed by replacing the confusion with clarity — with a total awareness of reality, unfiltered by the « meaningless pseudoknowledge » that arises from our reflexive and all too human habits of « over-simplification, over-generalization, and over-abstraction. »
Such total awareness, Huxley observes, can produce an initial wave of panic at the two elemental facts it reveals: that we are « profoundly ignorant » — that is, forever lacking complete knowledge of reality; and that we are « impotent to the point of helplessness » — that is, what we are (which we call personality) and what we do (which we call choice) are merely the life of the universe living itself through us. (Anyone able to think calmly, deeply, and undefensively about free will will readily recognize this.)
And yet beyond the initial wave of panic lies a profound and fathomless sea of serenity — a buoyant peacefulness and gladsome accord with the universe, available upon surrender to this total awareness, upon the release of the narrative enterprise, the identity-intoxication, the conditioned reflex we call a self. [...]
Huxley notes that all of the world’s great spiritual traditions and all the celebrated mystics have attempted to articulate this total awareness, to transmit it to other consciousnesses in the vessel of concepts — concepts destined to enter other consciousnesses via the primary portal of common sense, and destined therefore to be reflexively rejected. In consonance with Carl Sagan’s admonition that common sense blinds us to the reality of the universe and Vladimir Nabokov’s admonition that it blunts our sense of wonder [...]
[...] A sentiment the great Zen Buddhist teacher Thich Nhat Hanh would come to echo half a century later in his life-broadening teaching that « understanding is love’s other name .»
(Maria Popova's Review on Aldous Huxley's The Divine Within: Selected Writings on Enlightenment, 2013)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.i_REF3_LIT “OUR INVESTMENT IN READING CHANGES THE BOOK BECAUSE THE BOOK HAS CHANGED US. ... If books are merely a means of transferring information, then perhaps, yes, a book is a waste of time. If a summary of its thesis and key points could be presented in a brief article or Substack post, why not just save the hours and read the Substack post? All the more if the information is outdated or questionable for one reason or another. But that mistakes what a book is for. A book is a tool. It’s a machine for thinking. And “all machines,” as Thoreau once said, “have their friction.” The time it takes to engage with ideas—whether factual or fictional, emotional or intellectual, accurate or inaccurate, efficient or inefficient—might strike some as a drag. But the time given to working through those ideas, adopting and adapting, developing or discarding, changes our minds, changes us. It’s not about the wisdom we glean. It’s about what wisdom we grow.”
(Joel Miller)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.i_REF3.1_LIT GEORGE ELIOT  DESCRIBES A "MOMENT OF VOCATION"—THE SUDDEN, SERENDIPITOUS DISCOVERY OF A LIFE'S PURPOSE. The young Tertius Lydgate, bored and aimless, stumbles upon a dusty encyclopedia and is struck by a "sudden light."
“He had been left an orphan when he was fresh from a public school. His
father, a military man, had made but little provision for three
children, and when the boy Tertius asked to have a medical education,
it seemed easier to his guardians to grant his request by apprenticing
him to a country practitioner than to make any objections on the score
of family dignity. He was one of the rarer lads who early get a decided
bent and make up their minds that there is something particular in life
which they would like to do for its own sake, and not because their
fathers did it. Most of us who turn to any subject with love remember
some morning or evening hour when we got on a high stool to reach down
an untried volume, or sat with parted lips listening to a new talker,
or for very lack of books began to listen to the voices within, as the
first traceable beginning of our love. Something of that sort happened
to Lydgate. He was a quick fellow, and when hot from play, would toss
himself in a corner, and in five minutes be deep in any sort of book
that he could lay his hands on: if it were Rasselas or Gulliver, so
much the better, but Bailey’s Dictionary would do, or the Bible with
the Apocrypha in it. Something he must read, when he was not riding the
pony, or running and hunting, or listening to the talk of men. All this
was true of him at ten years of age; he had then read through “Chrysal,
or the Adventures of a Guinea,” which was neither milk for babes, nor
any chalky mixture meant to pass for milk, and it had already occurred
to him that books were stuff, and that life was stupid. His school
studies had not much modified that opinion, for though he “did” his
classics and mathematics, he was not pre-eminent in them. It was said
of him, that Lydgate could do anything he liked, but he had certainly
not yet liked to do anything remarkable. He was a vigorous animal with
a ready understanding, but no spark had yet kindled in him an
intellectual passion; knowledge seemed to him a very superficial
affair, easily mastered: judging from the conversation of his elders,
he had apparently got already more than was necessary for mature life.

Probably this was not an exceptional result of expensive teaching at
that period of short-waisted coats, and other fashions which have not
yet recurred. But, one vacation, a wet day sent him to the small home
library to hunt once more for a book which might have some freshness
for him: in vain! unless, indeed, he took down a dusty row of volumes
with gray-paper backs and dingy labels—the volumes of an old
Cyclopaedia which he had never disturbed. It would at least be a
novelty to disturb them. They were on the highest shelf, and he stood
on a chair to get them down. But he opened the volume which he first
took from the shelf: somehow, one is apt to read in a makeshift
attitude, just where it might seem inconvenient to do so. The page he
opened on was under the head of Anatomy, and the first passage that
drew his eyes was on the valves of the heart. He was not much
acquainted with valves of any sort, but he knew that valvae were
folding-doors, and through this crevice came a sudden light startling
him with his first vivid notion of finely adjusted mechanism in the
human frame. A liberal education had of course left him free to read
the indecent passages in the school classics, but beyond a general
sense of secrecy and obscenity in connection with his internal
structure, had left his imagination quite unbiassed, so that for
anything he knew his brains lay in small bags at his temples, and he
had no more thought of representing to himself how his blood circulated
than how paper served instead of gold. But the moment of vocation had
come, and before he got down from his chair, the world was made new to
him by a presentiment of endless processes filling the vast spaces
planked out of his sight by that wordy ignorance which he had supposed
to be knowledge. From that hour Lydgate felt the growth of an
intellectual passion.”
(George Eliot, Middlemarch, 1871)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.i_REF4_SCI “IS INFORMATION A FUNDAMENTAL FORCE OF OUR UNIVERSE?
[…] A new proposal by an interdisciplinary team of researchers challenges that bleak conclusion. They have proposed nothing less than a new law of nature, according to which the complexity of entities in the universe increases over time with an inexorability comparable to the second law of thermodynamics — the law that dictates an inevitable rise in entropy, a measure of disorder. If they’re right, complex and intelligent life should be widespread.

In this new view, biological evolution appears not as a unique process that gave rise to a qualitatively distinct form of matter — living organisms. Instead, evolution is a special (and perhaps inevitable) case of a more general principle that governs the universe. According to this principle, entities are selected because they are richer in a kind of information that enables them to perform some kind of function. […] 

Wong said their work implies three main conclusions.

First, biology is just one example of evolution. “There is a more universal description that drives the evolution of complex systems.”

Second, he said, there might be “an arrow in time that describes this increasing complexity,” similar to the way the second law of thermodynamics, which describes the increase in entropy, is thought to create a preferred direction of time.

Finally, Wong said, “information itself might be a vital parameter of the cosmos, similar to mass, charge and energy.” […]

Whether or not functional information turns out to be the right tool for thinking about these questions, many researchers seem to be converging on similar questions about complexity, information, evolution (both biological and cosmic), function and purpose, and the directionality of time. It’s hard not to suspect that something big is afoot. There are echoes of the early days of thermodynamics, which began with humble questions about how machines work and ended up speaking to the arrow of time, the peculiarities of living matter, and the fate of the universe.”
(Philip Ball, Quanta Magazine, April 2, 2025)

Watch the video on Youtube: https://youtu.be/WqYRMmlZmhM?si=zoUGS6wst4SG3rLX

Read the article: https://www.quantamagazine.org/why-everything-in-the-universe-turns-more-complex-20250402/?mc_cid=5e37a88898&mc_eid=de38e9b771

E1.6.D.3.7.a.i_REF5_PH “ONLY THROUGH ORDERING WHAT YOU KNOW BY COMPARING EVERY TRUTH WITH EVERY OTHER TRUTH CAN YOU TAKE COMPLETE POSSESSION OF YOUR KNOWLEDGE AND GET IT INTO YOUR POWER.”
“You may accumulate a vast amount of knowledge but it will be of far less value to you than a much smaller amount if you have not thought it over for yourself; because only through ordering what you know by comparing every truth with every other truth can you take complete possession of your knowledge and get it into your power.”
(Arthur Schopenhauer)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.i_REF5.1_PH WE DON’T REMEMBER ISOLATED FACTS; WE REMEMBER THINGS IN CONTEXT.
“One of the reasons chess is such a satisfying game to play and to study is that your average chess buff can be utterly befuddled by a master’s move. Often the best move seems entirely counterintuitive. Realizing this De Groot pored through old games between chess masters and selected a handful of board positions where there was definitely one correct, but not obvious, move to be made. He then presented the boards to a group of international chess masters and top club players. He asked them to think aloud while they brooded over the proper move.
What De Groot uncovered was an even bigger surprise than what his Russian predecessors had found. For the most part, the chess experts didn’t look more moves ahead, at least not at first. They didn’t even consider more possible moves. Rather, they behaved in a manner surprisingly similar to the chicken sexers: They tended to see the right moves, and they tended to see them almost right away.
It was as if the chess experts weren’t thinking so much as reacting. When De Groot listened to their verbal reports, he noticed that they described their thoughts in different language than less experienced chess players. They talked about configurations of pieces like “pawn structures” and immediately noticed things that were out of sorts, like exposed rooks. They weren’t seeing the board as thirty-two pieces. They were seeing it as chunks of pieces, and systems of tension.
Grand masters literally see a different board. Studies of their eye movements have found that they look at the edges of squares more than inexperienced players, suggesting that they’re absorbing information from multiple squares at once. Their eyes also dart across greater distances, and linger for less time at any one place. They focus on fewer different spots on the board, and those spots are more likely to be relevant to figuring out the right move.
But the most striking finding of all from these early studies of chess experts was their astounding memories. The experts could memorize entire boards after just a brief glance. And they could reconstruct long ago games from memory. In fact, later studies confirmed that the ability to memorize board positions is one of the best overall indicators of how good a chess player somebody is. And these chess positions are not simply encoded in transient short-term memory. Chess experts can remember positions from games for hours, weeks, even years afterward. Indeed, at a certain point in every chess master’s development, keeping mental track of the pieces on the board becomes such a trivial skill that they can take on several opponents at once, entirely in their heads.
As impressive as the chess masters’ memories were for chess games, their memories for everything else were notably unimpressive. When the chess experts were shown random arrangements of chess pieces—ones that couldn’t possibly have been arrived at through an actual game—their memory for the board was only slightly better than chess novices’. They could rarely remember the positions of more than seven pieces. These were the same chess pieces, and the same chessboards. So why were they suddenly limited by the magical number seven?
The chess experiments reveal a telling fact about memory, and about expertise in general: We don’t remember isolated facts; we remember things in context. A board of randomly arranged chess pieces has no context—there are no similar boards to compare it to, no past games that it resembles, no ways to meaningfully chunk it. Even to the world’s best chess player it is, in essence, noise.”
(Joshua Foer, Moonwalking with Einstein, 2011)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.i_REF5.2_PH DON’T YOU NEED A MINIMUM OF MEMORIZATION TO BE ABLE TO DEVELOP UNDERSTANDING IN CONTEXT? FOER ARGUES THAT THE MODERN EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM'S REJECTION OF MEMORIZATION IS A PROFOUND MISTAKE, AS A WELL-TRAINED AND WELL-STOCKED MEMORY IS THE ESSENTIAL FOUNDATION FOR THE VERY HIGHER-LEVEL SKILLS, SUCH AS ANALYSIS AND CRITICAL THINKING, THAT IT SEEKS TO FOSTER.
“The last century has been an especially bad one for memory. A hundred years of progressive education reform have discredited memorization as oppressive and stultifying—not only a waste of time, but positively harmful to the developing brain. Schools have deemphasized raw knowledge (most of which gets forgotten anyway), and instead stressed their role in fostering reasoning ability, creativity, and independent thinking.
But is it possible we’ve been making a huge mistake? The influential critic E. D. Hirsch Jr. complained in 1987: “We cannot assume that young people today know things that were known in the past by almost every literate person in the culture.” Hirsch has argued that students are being sent out into the world without the basic level of cultural literacy that is necessary to be a good citizen (what does it say that two thirds of American seventeen-year-olds can’t even tell you within fifty years when the Civil War occurred?), and what’s needed is a kind of educational counterreformation that reemphasizes hard facts. Hirsch’s critics have pointed out that the curriculum he advocates is Dead White Males 101. But if anyone seems qualified to counter that argument it is Matthews, who maintains that for all the Eurocentrism of the curriculum, the fact is that facts still matter. If one of the goals of education is to create inquisitive, knowledgeable people, then you need to give students the most basic signposts that can guide them through a life of learning. And if, as the twelfth-century teacher Hugh of St. Victor put it, “the whole usefulness of education consists only in the memory of it,” then you might as well give them the best tools available to commit their education to memory.
“I don’t use the word ‘memory’ in my class because it’s a bad word in education,” says Matthews. “You make monkeys memorize, whereas education is the ability to retrieve information at will and analyze it. But you can’t have higher-level learning—you can’t analyze—without retrieving information.” And you can’t retrieve information without putting the information in there in the first place. The dichotomy between “learning” and “memorizing” is false, Matthews contends. You can’t learn without memorizing, and if done right, you can’t memorize without learning.
“Memory needs to be taught as a skill in exactly the same way that flexibility and strength and stamina are taught to build up a person’s physical health and well-being,” argues Buzan, who often sounds like an advocate of the old faculty psychology. “Students need to learn how to learn. First you teach them how to learn, then you teach them what to learn.
“The formal education system came out of the military, where the least educated and most educationally deprived people were sent into the army,” he says. “In order for them not to think, which is what you wanted them to do, they had to obey orders. Military training was extremely regimented and linear. You pounded the information into their brains and made them respond in a Pavlovian manner without thinking. Did it work? Yes. Did they enjoy the experience? No, they didn’t. When the industrial revolution came, soldiers were needed on the machines, and so the military approach to education was transferred into school. It worked. But it doesn’t work over the long term.”
Like many of Buzan’s pontifications, this one conceals a kernel of truth beneath an overlay of propaganda. Rote learning—the old “drill and kill” method that education reformers have spent the last century rebelling against—is surely as old as learning itself, but Buzan is right that the art of memory, once at the center of a classical education, had all but disappeared by the nineteenth century.
Buzan’s argument that schools have been teaching memory in entirely the wrong way deeply challenges reigning ideas in education, and is often couched in the language of revolution. In fact, though Buzan doesn’t seem to see it this way, his ideas are not revolutionary so much as deeply conservative. His goal is to turn the clock back to a time when a good memory still counted for something. […]
How we perceive the world and how we act in it are products of how and what we remember. We’re all just a bundle of habits shaped by our memories. And to the extent that we control our lives, we do so by gradually altering those habits, which is to say the networks of our memory. No lasting joke, invention, insight, or work of art was ever produced by an external memory. Not yet, at least. Our ability to find humor in the world, to make connections between previously unconnected notions, to create new ideas, to share in a common culture: All these essentially human acts depend on memory. Now more than ever, as the role of memory in our culture erodes at a faster pace than ever before, we need to cultivate our ability to remember. Our memories make us who we are. They are the seat of our values and source of our character. ”
(Joshua Foer, Moonwalking with Einstein, 2011)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.i_REF6_PH “WHEN YOU TRULY UNDERSTAND SOMETHING, YOU CAN EXPRESS IT AT ANY LEVEL OF DETAIL WHILE MAINTAINING COHERENCE.
The master can provide the one-sentence version, the paragraph version, and the chapter version, all of which tell the same story at different resolutions. The novice can only repeat what they've memorized at one resolution.”
(Shane Parrish, FS - Brain Food, September 7, 2025)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.ii. KNOWLEDGE IS ACQUIRED  BY INTEGRATING NEW EXPERIENCES INTO A FRAMEWORK OF CONCEPTS ROOTED IN PREVIOUS EXPERIENCES. IN CONTRAST, UNDERSTANDING IS AN IMMEDIATE EXPERIENCE THAT CAN'T BE TRANSFERRED.
Understanding isn't inherited or attained through effort, but instead arises naturally under favorable conditions. Common sense is based not on complete awareness and understanding, but on convention and limited personal experiences. Conversely, total awareness leads to understanding and insight into the nature of reality.

"To understand anything — another person’s experience of reality, another fundamental law of physics — is to restructure our existing knowledge, shifting and broadening our prior frames of reference to accommodate a new awareness. And yet we have a habit of confusing our knowledge — which is always limited and incomplete: a model of the cathedral of reality, built from primary-colored blocks of fact — with the actuality of things; we have a habit of mistaking the model for the thing itself, mistaking our partial awareness for a totality of understanding. Thoreau recognized this when he contemplated our blinding preconceptions and lamented that « we hear and apprehend only what we already half know. » [...]
Because the units of knowledge are concepts, and concepts can be conveyed and transmitted in words and symbols, knowledge itself can be passed between persons. Understanding, on the other hand, is intimate and subjective, not a conceptual container but an aura of immediacy cast upon an experience — which means it cannot be transmitted and transacted like knowledge. Our forebears devised ways of transmitting knowledge from one generation to the next — in words and symbols, in stories and equations — which ensured the survival of our species by preserving and passing down the results of experience. But knowing the results of an experience is not the same as understanding the experience itself. Complicating the matter is the added subtlety that we may understand the words and symbols by which we tell each other about our experience, but still miss the immediacy of the reality those concepts are intended to convey. [...]
At the heart of Huxley’s essay is the observation that a great deal of human suffering stems from our tendency to mistake conceptual knowledge for understanding, « homemade concepts for given reality. » Such suffering can therefore be allayed by replacing the confusion with clarity — with a total awareness of reality, unfiltered by the « meaningless pseudoknowledge » that arises from our reflexive and all too human habits of « over-simplification, over-generalization, and over-abstraction. »
Such total awareness, Huxley observes, can produce an initial wave of panic at the two elemental facts it reveals: that we are « profoundly ignorant » — that is, forever lacking complete knowledge of reality; and that we are « impotent to the point of helplessness » — that is, what we are (which we call personality) and what we do (which we call choice) are merely the life of the universe living itself through us. (Anyone able to think calmly, deeply, and undefensively about free will will readily recognize this.)
And yet beyond the initial wave of panic lies a profound and fathomless sea of serenity — a buoyant peacefulness and gladsome accord with the universe, available upon surrender to this total awareness, upon the release of the narrative enterprise, the identity-intoxication, the conditioned reflex we call a self. [...]
Huxley notes that all of the world’s great spiritual traditions and all the celebrated mystics have attempted to articulate this total awareness, to transmit it to other consciousnesses in the vessel of concepts — concepts destined to enter other consciousnesses via the primary portal of common sense, and destined therefore to be reflexively rejected. In consonance with Carl Sagan’s admonition that common sense blinds us to the reality of the universe and Vladimir Nabokov’s admonition that it blunts our sense of wonder [...]
[...] A sentiment the great Zen Buddhist teacher Thich Nhat Hanh would come to echo half a century later in his life-broadening teaching that « understanding is love’s other name .»
(Maria Popova's Review on Aldous Huxley's The Divine Within: Selected Writings on Enlightenment, 2013)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.ii_REF1_PH TRUE UNDERSTANDING IS AN IMMEDIATE, NON-CONCEPTUAL EXPERIENCE THAT CANNOT BE TRANSMITTED OR INHERITED. Understanding arises spontaneously under favorable conditions and is distinct from knowledge, which is based on past experiences and concepts. Achieving understanding requires us to connect with reality with total awareness, free from value judgments.
"Knowledge is acquired when we succeed in fitting a new experience into the system of concepts based upon our old experiences. Understanding comes when we liberate ourselves from the old and so make possible a direct, unmediated contact with the new, the mystery, moment by moment, of our existence. [...]
Understanding is not conceptual, and therefore cannot be passed on. It is an immediate experience, and immediate experience can only be talked about (very inadequately), never shared. Nobody can actually feel another’s pain or grief, another’s love or joy or hunger. And similarly nobody can experience another’s understanding of a given event or situation… We must always remember that knowledge of understanding is not the same thing as the understanding, which is the raw material of that knowledge. It is as different from understanding as the doctor’s prescription for penicillin is different from penicillin.
Understanding is not inherited, nor can it be laboriously acquired. It is something which, when circumstances are favorable, comes to us, so to say, of its own accord. All of us are knowers, all the time; it is only occasionally and in spite of ourselves that we understand the mystery of given reality. [...]
This discovery may seem at first rather humiliating and even depressing. But if I wholeheartedly accept them, the facts become a source of peace, a reason for serenity and cheerfulness. […]
In my ignorance I am sure that I am eternally I. This conviction is rooted in emotionally charged memory. Only when, in the words of St. John of the Cross, the memory has been emptied, can I escape from the sense of my watertight separateness and so prepare myself for the understanding, moment by moment, of reality on all its levels. But the memory cannot be emptied by an act of will, or by systematic discipline or by concentration — even by concentration on the idea of emptiness. It can be emptied only by total awareness. Thus, if I am aware of my distractions — which are mostly emotionally charged memories or fantasies based upon such memories — the mental whirligig will automatically come to a stop and the memory will be emptied, at least for a moment or two. Again, if I become totally aware of my envy, my resentment, my uncharitableness, these feelings will be replaced, during the time of my awareness, by a more realistic reaction to the events taking place around me. My awareness, of course, must be uncontaminated by approval or condemnation. Value judgments are conditioned, verbalized reactions to primary reactions. Total awareness is a primary, choiceless, impartial response to the present situation as a whole. [...]
Common sense is not based on total awareness; it is a product of convention, or organized memories of other people’s words, of personal experiences limited by passion and value judgments, of hallowed notions and naked self-interest. Total awareness opens the way to understanding, and when any given situation is understood, the nature of all reality is made manifest, and the nonsensical utterances of the mystics are seen to be true, or at least as nearly true as it is possible for a verbal expression of the ineffable to be. One in all and all in One; samsara and nirvana are the same; multiplicity is unity, and unity is not so much one as not-two; all things are void, and yet all things are the Dharma — Body of the Buddha — and so on. So far as conceptual knowledge is concerned, such phrases are completely meaningless. It is only when there is understanding that they make sense. For when there is understanding, there is an experienced fusion of the End with the Means, of the Wisdom, which is the timeless realization of Suchness, with the Compassion which is Wisdom in action. [...]
Of all the worn, smudged, dog-eared words in our vocabulary, “love” is surely the grubbiest, smelliest, slimiest. Bawled from a million pulpits, lasciviously crooned through hundreds of millions of loudspeakers, it has become an outrage to good taste and decent feeling, an obscenity which one hesitates to pronounce. And yet it has to be pronounced; for, after all, Love is the last word."
(Aldous Huxley, The Divine Within: Selected Writings on Enlightenment, 2013)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.ii_REF2_PH UNDERSTANDING THE OBVIOUS WITH TOTAL SELF-INVOLVEMENT "Attention and Will

We do not have to understand new things, but by dint of patience, effort and method to come to understand with our whole self the truths which are evident.

Stages of belief. The most commonplace truth when it floods the whole soul, is like a revelation."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.ii_REF2.1_PH A SPECIFIC APPLICATION TO THE OBJECT OF FULL ATTENTION "Attention and Will

[...] The authentic and pure values—truth, beauty and goodness— in the activity of a human being are the result of one and the same act, a certain application of the full attention to the object. Teaching should have no aim but to prepare, by training the attention, for the possibility of such an act.
All the other advantages of instruction are without interest.

Studies and faith. Prayer being only attention in its pure form and studies being a form of gymnastics of the attention, each school exercise should be a refraction of spiritual life. There must be method in it. A certain way of doing a Latin prose, a certain way of tackling a problem in geometry (and not just any way) make up a system of gymnastics of the attention calculated to give it a greater aptitude for prayer.

Method for understanding images, symbols, etc. Not to try to interpret them, but to look at them till the light suddenly dawns.
Generally speaking, a method for the exercise of the intelligence, which consists of looking.
Application of this rule for the discrimination between the real and the illusory. In our sense perceptions, if we are not sure of what we see we change our position while looking, and what is real becomes evident. In the inner life, time takes the place of space. With time we are altered, and, if as we change we keep our gaze directed towards the same thing, in the end illusions are scattered and the real becomes visible. This is on condition that the attention be a looking and not an attachment."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.ii_REF2.1.a_PH "INTELLIGENCE AND GRACE

[...] The desire to discover something new prevents people from allowing their thoughts to dwell on the transcendent, undemonstrable meaning of what has already been discovered. My total lack of talent which makes such a desire out of the question for me is a great favour I have received. The recognized and accepted lack of intellectual gifts compels the disinterested use of the intelligence."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.ii_REF3_PH SØREN KIERKEGAARD DISTINGUISHES BETWEEN AN ABSTRACT, "REMOTE" UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT IS RIGHT, AND A "NEAR AT HAND" UNDERSTANDING THAT IS INSEPARABLE FROM ACTION.
“It is one thing to let thought fight against thought; it is one thing to fight and conquer in a dispute; it is another thing to conquer one's self when one fights in the realities of life; for however closely one conflicting thought presses on the other in life, however closely one contender presses on the other in a dispute, all this conflict is still carried on at a distance, like a battle in the air. On the other hand, this is a measure of a man's disposition, of what he is; how far it is from what he understands to what he does; how great a distance there is be-tween his understanding and his actions. At bottom we all understand the highest things; a child, the simplest man, the wisest man, they all understand the highest things, and all understand the same things; for it is, if I dare say so, a lesson set for us all. But that which makes the difference is whether we understand it only remotely-so that we do not act accordingly; or near at hand-so that we do act accordingly, and "cannot do otherwise," cannot refrain from doing it, like Luther, who understood quite definitely what he had to do, when he said: "God help me, I cannot do otherwise. Amen."

At the distance of a quiet hour from all the turmoil of life and of the world, every man understands what the highest is; when he starts out, he has understood it. When life looks like fair weather to him, he still understands it: but when confusion begins, then the understanding flees, or it appears that this understanding was at a distance. To sit in a room where everything is so still that one can hear a grain of sand fall, and understand the highest, is something every man is able to do; but, speaking figuratively, for one to sit in a kettle while the coppersmith hammers upon it, and then to understand the same thing about the highest: to do this one must have his understanding in himself; other-wise it will appear that his understanding was at a distance-because he was absent-minded.

At the distance of a quiet hour from the turmoil of life, the child and the simplest man and the wisest man understand, and almost equally easily, what every man ought to do what every man should do; but in the midst of life's confusion, when the only question is about what he will do, then it perhaps appears that that understanding was at a distance from him was at the distance of humanity from him.

While a dispute is still remote from action, while the lofty resolutions are still awaiting action, while the solemn vows are unfulfilled and repentance still not proved, every man understands what the highest is. Within the habitual security of unchanged conditions, everyone can understand that a change is desirable, for this understanding is remote from the change. Is not the unchanged a tremendous distance from the change? Alas, in the world there is perpetually the pressing question about what one can do and what one cannot do: eternity which speaks of the highest, calmly assumes that every man can achieve it, and therefore asks only whether he did so. From the height of his superior condescension, the great man understands equality between man and man. From the height of their mysterious superiority the scholar and the educated man understand equality between man and man; granted a little ad-vantageous concession, the man whose difference consists in being like most other people, understands equality between men at a distance the neighbor is recognized by everyone: God alone knows how many really recognize him, that is, close by. And yet at a distance the neighbor is merely a figment of the imagination; he who is neighbor by virtue of being near by, is any man, unconditionally every man. At a distance the neighbor is a shadow who in imagination passes through every man's thought-but, alas, perhaps he did not discover that the man who at that very moment really did pass by him, was his neighbor. Everyone knows his neighbor at a distance, and yet it is impossible to see him at a distance; if you do not see him so close at hand that, before God, you see him unconditionally in every man, then you do not see him at all.”
(Søren Kierkegaard, Works Of Love, 1847)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.ii_REF4_PH LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN ARGUES THAT UNDERSTANDING IS NOT A HIDDEN MENTAL PROCESS THAT CAUSES OUR ACTIONS, BUT RATHER A DEMONSTRATED ABILITY TO CORRECTLY APPLY A RULE WITHIN A SPECIFIC SET OF CIRCUMSTANCES.

“146. Suppose I now ask: “Has he understood the system when he continues the series to the hundredth place?” Or—if I should not speak of ‘understanding’ in connection with our primitive language- game: Has he got the system, if he continues the series correctly so for?—Perhaps you will say here: to have got the system (or, again, to understand it) can’t consist in continuing the series up to this or that number: that is only applying one’s understanding. The understanding itself is a state which is the source of the correct use.

What is one really thinking of here? Isn’t one thinking of the derivation of a series from its algebraic formula? Or at least of some¬ thing analogous?—But this is where we were before. The point is, we can think of more than one application of an algebraic formula; and every type of application can in turn be formulated algebraically; but naturally this does not get us any further.—The application is still a criterion of understanding.

1. “But how can it be? When I say I understand the rule of a series, I am surely not saying so because I have found out that up to now I have applied the algebraic formula in such-and-such a way! In my own case at all events I surely know that I mean such-and-such a series; it doesn’t matter how far I have actually developed it.”—

Your idea, then, is that you know the application of the rule of the series quite apart from remembering actual applications to particular numbers. And you will perhaps say: “Of course 1 For the series is infinite and the bit of it that I can have developed finite.”

1. But what does this knowledge consist in? Let me ask: When do you know that application? Always? day and night? or only when you are actually thinking of the rule? do you know it, that is, in the same way as you know the alphabet and the multiplication table? Or is what you call “knowledge” a state of consciousness or a process— say a thought of something, or the like?
2. If one says that knowing the ABC is a state of the mind, one is thinking of a state of a mental apparatus (perhaps of the brain) by means of which we explain the manifestations of that knowledge. Such a state is called a disposition. But there are objections to speaking

of a state of the mind here, inasmuch as there ought to be two different criteria for such a state: a knowledge of the construction of the apparatus, quite apart from what it does. (Nothing would be more confusing here than to use the words “conscious” and “unconscious” for the contrast between states of consciousness and dispositions. For this pair of terms covers up a grammatical difference.)

1. The grammar of the word “knows” is evidently closely related to that of “can”, “is able to”. But also closely related to that of “understands”. (‘Mastery’ of a technique,)
2. But there is also this use of the word “to know”: we say “Now I know I”—and similarly “Now I can do it!” and “Now I understand!”

Let us imagine the following example: A writes series of numbers down; B watches him and tries to find a law for the sequence of

numbers. If he succeeds he exclaims: “Now I can go on!”-So this

capacity, this understanding, is something that makes its appearance in a moment. So let us try and see what it is that makes its appearance here.—A has written down the numbers 1, 5, 11, 19, 29; at this point B says he knows how to go on. What happened here? Various things may have happened; for example, while A was slowly putting one number after another, B was occupied with trying various algebraic formulae on the numbers which had been written down. After A had written the number 19 B tried the formula an = n2 +n - 1; and the next number confirmed his hypothesis.

Or again, B does not think of formulae. He watches A writing his numbers down with a certain feeling of tension, and all sorts of vague thoughts go through his head. Finally he asks himself: “What is the series of differences?” He finds the series 4, 6, 8, 10 and says: Now I can go on.

Or he watches and says “Yes, I know that series”—and continues it, just as he would have done if A had written down the series 1, 3,5, 7, 9. —Or he says nothing at all and simply continues the series. Perhaps he had what may be called the sensation “that’s easy!”. (Such a sensation is, for example, that of a light quick intake of breath, as when one is slightly startled.)

1. But are the processes which I have described here under¬ standing!

“B understands the principle of the series” surely doesn’t mean

simply: the formula “an =…” occurs to B. For it is perfectly

imaginable that the formula should occur to him and that he should nevertheless not understand. “He understands” must have more in it than: the formula occurs to him. And equally, more than any of those more or less characteristic accompaniments or manifestations of under¬ standing.

1. We are trying to get hold of the mental process of understanding which seems to be hidden behind those coarser and therefore more readily visible accompaniments. But we do not succeed; or, rather, it does not get as far as a real attempt. For even supposing I had found something that happened in all those cases of understanding,— why should it be the understanding? And how can the process of understanding have been hidden, when I said “Now I understand” because I understood?! And if I say it is hidden—then how do I know what I have to look for? I am in a muddle.
2. But wait—if “Now I understand the principle” does not mean the same as “The formula .... occurs to me” (or “I say the formula”, “I write it down”, etc.) —does it follow from this that I employ the sentence “Now I understand.” or “Now I can go on” as a description of a process occurring behind or side by side with that of saying the formula?

If there has to be anything ‘behind the utterance of the formula’ it is particular circumstances, which justify me in saying I can go on—when the formula occurs to me.

Try not to think of understanding as a ‘mental process’ at all.—

For that is the expression which confuses you. But ask yourself: in what sort of case, in what kind of circumstances, do we say, “Now I know how to go on,” when, that is, the formula has occurred to me?—

In the sense in which there are processes (including mental processes) j which are characteristic of understanding, understanding is not a j mental process.

(A pain’s growing more and less; the hearing of a tune or a sentence: these are mental processes.)

Thus what I wanted to say was: when he suddenly knew how to go on, when he understood the principle, then possibly he had a special experience—and if he is asked: “What was it? What took \ place when you suddenly grasped the principle?” perhaps he will describe it much as we described it above-but for us it is the circumstances under which he had such an experience that justify him in saying in such a case that he understands, that he knows how to go on.

1. This will become clearer if we interpolate the consideration of another word, namely “reading”. First I need to remark that I am not counting the understanding of what is read as part of ‘reading’ for purposes of this investigation: reading is here the activity of rendering out loud what is written or printed; and also of writing from dictation, writing out something printed, playing from a score, and so on.

The use of this word in the ordinary circumstances of our life is of course extremely familiar to us. But the part the word plays in our life, and therewith the language-game in which we employ it, would be difficult to describe even in rough outline. A person, let us say an Englishman, has received at school or at home one of the kinds of education usual among us, and in the course of it has learned to read his native language. Later he reads books, letters, newspapers, and other things.

Now what takes place when, say, he reads a newspaper?-His eye passes—as we say—along the printed words, he says them out loud—or only to himself; in particular he reads certain words by taking in their printed shapes as wholes; others when his eye has taken in the first syllables; others again he reads syllable by syllable, and an occasional one perhaps letter by letter,—We should also say that he had read a sentence if he spoke neither aloud nor to himself during the reading but was afterwards able to repeat the sentence word for word or nearly so.—He may attend to what he reads, or again—as we

might put it—function as a mere reading-machine: I mean, read aloud and correctly without attending to what he is reading; perhaps with his attention on something quite different (so that he is unable to say what he has been reading if he is asked about it immediately afterwards).

Now compare a beginner with this reader* The beginner reads the words by laboriously spelling them out.—Some however he guesses from the context, or perhaps he already partly knows the passage by heart. Then his teacher says that he is not really reading the words (and in certain cases that he is only pretending to read them).

If we think, of this sort of reading, the reading of a beginner, and ask ourselves what reading consists in, we shall be inclined to say: it is a special conscious activity of mind.

We also say of the pupil: “Of course he alone knows if he is really reading or merely saying the words off by heart”. (We have yet to discuss these propositions: “He alone knows_”.)

But I want to say: we have to admit that—as far as concerns uttering any one of the printed words—the same thing may take place in the consciousness of the pupil who is "pretending’ to read, as in that of the practised reader who is "reading’ it. The word ""to read” is applied differently when we are speaking of the beginner and of the practised reader.-Now we should of course like to say: What goes on in that practised reader and in the beginner when they utter the word can’t be the same. And if there is no difference in what they happen to be conscious of there must be one in the unconscious workings of their minds, or, again, in the brain.—So we should like to say: There are at all events two different mechanisms at work here. And what goes on in them must distinguish reading from not reading. —But these mechanisms are only hypotheses, models designed to explain, to sum up, what you observe.

Notes:

(a) “Understanding a word”: a state. But a mental state?—Depression, excitement, pain, are called mental states. Carry out a grammatical investigation as follows: we say

“He was depressed the whole day”.

“He was in great excitement the whole day”.

“He has been in continuous pain since yesterday”.—

We also say “Since yesterday I have understood this word”. “Continuously”, though?—To be sure, one can speak of an interruption of understanding. But in what cases? Compare: “When did your pains get less?” and “When did you stop understanding that word?”

(b) Suppose it were asked: “ When do you know how to play chess? All the time? or just while you are making a move? And the whole of chess during each move?—How queer that knowing how to play chess should take such a short time, and a game so much longer!”
(Ludwig Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations, 1953)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.ii_REF5_PH LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN  ARGUES THAT SINCE ANY RULE IS OPEN TO INFINITE INTERPRETATIONS, UNDERSTANDING IS NOT A MYSTERIOUS, PRIVATE MENTAL PROCESS THAT PREDETERMINES ALL ITS APPLICATIONS, BUT IS INSTEAD A PUBLIC PRACTICE GROUNDED IN THE SHARED CUSTOMS AND TRAINING OF A COMMUNITY.

“186. “What you are saying, then, comes to this: a new insight— intuition—is needed at every step to carry out the order ‘+n’ correctly.”—To carry it out correctly! How is it decided what is the right step to take at any particular stage?—“The right step is the one that accords with the order—as it was meant”—So when you gave the order +2 you meant that he was to write 1002 after 1000—and did you also mean that he should write 1868 after 1866, and 100036 after 100034, and so on—an infinite number of such propositions?— “No: what I meant was, that he should write the next but one number after every number that he wrote; and from this all those propositions follow in turn.”—But that is just what is in question: what, at any stage, does follow from that sentence. Or, again, what, at any stage we are to call “being in accord” with that sentence (and with the meaning you then put into the sentence—whatever that may have consisted in). It would almost be more correct to say, not that an intuition was needed at every stage, but that a new decision was needed at every stage.

1. “But I already knew, at the time when I gave the order, that he ought to write 1002 after 1000.”—Certainly; and you can also say you meant it then; only you should not let yourself be misled by the grammar of the words “know” and “mean”. For you don’t want to say that you thought of the step from 1000 to 1002 at that time— and even if you did think of this step, still you did not think of other ones. When you said “I already knew at the time.” that meant something like: “If I had then been asked what number should be written after 1000, I should have replied ‘1002’.” And that I don’t doubt. This assumption is rather of the same kind as: “If he had fallen into the water then, I should have jumped in after him”.—Now, what was wrong with your idea?
2. Here I should first of all like to say: your idea was that that act of meaning the order had in its own way already traversed all those steps: that when you meant it your mind as it were flew ahead and took all the steps before you physically arrived at this or that one.

Thus you were inclined to use such expressions as: “The steps are really already taken, even before I take them in writing or orally or in thought.” And it seemed as if they were in some unique way predetermined, anticipated—as only the act of meaning can anticipate reality.

1. “But are the steps then not determined by the algebraic formula?”—The question contains a mistake.

We use the expression: “The steps are determined by the formula.”.

How is it used?—We may perhaps refer to the fact that people are brought by their education (training) so to use the formula y = x2, that they all work out the same? value for y when they substitute the same number for x. Or we may say: “These people are so trained that they all take the same step at the same point when they receive the order ‘add 3’ ”. We might express this by saying: for these people the order “add 3” completely determines every step from one number to the next. (In contrast with other people who do not know what they are to do on receiving this order, or who react to it with perfect certainty, but each one in a different way.)

On the other hand we can contrast different kinds of formula, and the different kinds of use (different kinds of training) appropriate to them. Then we call formulae of a particular kind (with the appropriate methods of use) “formulae which determine a numbery for a given value of x”, and formulae of another kind, ones which “do not determine the number y for a given value of x”. (y = x2 would be of the first kind, y ≠ x2 of the second.) The proposition “The formula .... determines a number y” will then be a statement about the form of the formula—and now we must distinguish such a proposition as “The formula which I have written down determines j”, or “Here is a formula which determines y”, from one of the following kind: “The formula y = x2 determines the number y for a given value of x”. The question “Is the formula written down there one that determines y?” will then mean the same as “Is what is there a formula of this kind or that?”—but it is not clear off-hand what we are to make of the question “Is y = x2 a formula which determines y for a given value of x?” One might address this question to a pupil in order to test whether he understands the use of the word “to determine”; or it might be a mathematical problem to prove in a particular system that x has only one square.

1. It may now be said: “The way the formula is meant determines which steps are to be taken”. What is the criterion for the way the formula is meant? It is, for example, the kind of way we always use it, the way we are taught to use it.

We say, for instance, to someone who uses a sign unknown to us: “If by x!2 you mean x2, then you get this value for y if you mean 2x, that one.”—Now ask yourself: how does one mean the one thing or the other by “x!2”?

That will be how meaning it can determine the steps in advance.

1. “It is as if we could grasp , the whole use of the word in a flash.” Like what e.g.?—Can’t the use—in a certain sense—be grasped in a flash? And in what sense can it not?—The point is, that it is as if we could ‘grasp it in a flash’ in yet another and much more direct sense than that.—But have you a model for this? No. It is just that this expression suggests itself to us. As the result of the crossing of different pictures.
2. You have no model of this superlative fact, but you are seduced into using a super-expression. (It might be called a philosophical superlative.)
3. The machine as symbolizing its action: the action of a machine—I might say at first—seems to be there in it from the start. What does that mean?—If we know the machine, everything else, that is its movement, seems to be already completely determined.

We talk as if these parts could only move in this way, as if they could not do anything else. How is this—do we forget the possibility of their bending, breaking off, melting, and so on? Yes; in many cases we don’t think of that at all. We use a machine, or the drawing of a machine, to symbolize a particular action of the machine. For instance, we give someone such a drawing and assume that he will derive the movement of the parts from it. (Just as we can give someone a number by telling him that it is the twenty-fifth in the series i, 4, 9, 16, ... .)

“The machine’s action seems to be in it from the start” means: we are inclined to compare the future movements of the machine in their definiteness to objects which are already lying in a drawer

and which we then take out.-But we do not say this kind of thing

when we are concerned with predicting the actual behaviour of a machine. Then we do not in general forget the possibility of a distortion of the parts and so on.-We do talk like that, however, when

we are wondering at the way we can use a machine to symbolize a given way of moving—since it can also move in quite different ways.

We might say that a machine, or the picture of it, is the first of a series of pictures which we have learnt to derive from this one.

But when we reflect that the machine could also have moved differently it may look as if the way it moves must be contained in the machine-as-symbol far more determinately than in the actual machine. As if it were not enough for the movements in question to be empiric¬ ally determined in advance, but they had to be really—in a mysterious sense—already present. And it is quite true: the movement of the machine-as-symbol is predetermined in a different sense from that in which the movement of any given actual machine is predetermined.

1. When does one have the thought: the possible movements of a machine are already there in it in some mysterious way?—Well, when one is doing philosophy. And what leads us into thinking that? The kind of way in which we talk about machines. We say, for example, that a machine has (possesses) such-and-such possibilities of movement; we speak of the ideally rigid machine which can only move in

such-and-such a way.-What is this possibility of movement? It is

not the movement, but it does not seem to be the mere physical conditions for moving either—as, that there is play between socket and pin, the pin not fitting too tight in the socket. For while this is the empirical condition for movement, one could also imagine it to be otherwise. The possibility of a movement is, rather, supposed to be like a shadow of the movement itself. But do you know of such a shadow? And by a shadow I do not mean some picture of the movement—for such a picture would not have to be a picture of just this movement. But the possibility of this movement must be the possibility of just this movement. (See how high the seas of language run here!)

The waves subside as soon as we ask ourselves: how do we use the phrase “possibility of movement” when we are talking about a given machine?-But then where did our queer ideas come from?

Well, I shew you the possibility of a movement, say by means of a picture of the movement: ‘so possibility is something which is like reality’. We say: “It isn’t moving yet, but it already has the possibility of moving”-‘so possibility is something very near reality’. Though we may doubt whether such-and-such physical conditions make this movement possible, we never discuss whether this is the possibility of this or of that movement: ‘so the possibility of the movement stands in a unique relation to the movement itself; closer than that of a picture to its subject’; for it can be doubted whether a picture is the picture of this thing or that. We say “Experience will shew whether this gives the pin this possibility of movement”, but we do not say “Experience will shew whether this is the possibility of this movement”: ‘so it is not an empirical fact that this possibility is the possibility of precisely this movement’.

We mind about the kind of expressions we use concerning these things; we do not understand them, however, but misinterpret them. When we do philosophy we are like savages, primitive people, who hear the expressions of civilized men, put a false interpretation on them, and then draw the queerest conclusions from it.

1. “But I don’t mean that what I do now (in grasping a sense) determines the future use causally and as a matter of experience, but that in a queer way, the use itself is in some sense present.”—But of course it is, ‘in some sense’! Really the only thing wrong with what you say is the expression “in a queer way”. The rest is all right; and the sentence only seems queer when one imagines a different language-game for it from the one in which we actually use it. (Someone once told me that as a child he had been surprised that a tailor could ‘sew a dress’—he thought this meant that a dress was produced by sewing alone, by sewing one thread on to another.)
2. In our failure to understand the use of a word we take it as the expression of a queer process. (As we think of time as a queer medium, of the mind as a queer kind of being.)
3. “It’s as if we could grasp the whole use of a word in a flash.”— And that is just what we say we do. That is to say: we sometimes describe what we do in these words. But there is nothing astonishing, nothing queer, about what happens. It becomes queer when we are led to think that the future development must in some way already be present in the act of grasping the use and yet isn’t present.—For we say that there isn’t any doubt that we understand the word, and on the other hand its meaning lies in its use. There is no doubt that I now. want to play chess, but chess is the game it is in virtue of all its rules (and so on). Don’t I know, then, which game I want to play until I have played it? or are all the rules contained in my act of intending? Is it experience that tells me that this sort of game is the usual consequence of such an act of intending? so is it impossible for me to be certain what I am intending to do? And if that is nonsense—what kind of super-strong connexion exists between the act of intending

and the thing intended?-Where is the connexion effected between

the sense of the expression “Let’s play a game of chess” and all the rules of the game?—Well, in the list of rules of the game, in the teaching of it, in the day-to-day practice of playing.

1. “But how can a rule shew me what I have to do at this point? Whatever I do is, on some interpretation, in accord with the rule.”— That is not what we ought to say, but rather: any interpretation still hangs in the air along with what it interprets, and cannot give it any support. Interpretations by themselves do not determine meaning.

“Then can whatever I do be brought into accord with the rule?”— Let me ask this: what has the expression of a rule—say a sign-post— got to do with my actions? What sort of connexion is there here?— Well, perhaps this one: I have been trained to react to this sign in a particular way, and now I do so react to it.

But that is only to give a causal connexion; to tell how it has come about that we now go by the sign-post; not what this going-by-the- sign really consists in. On the contrary; I have further indicated that a person goes by a sign-post only in so far as there exists a regular use of sign-posts, a custom.

1. Is what we call “obeying a rule” something that it would be possible for only one man to do, and to do only once in his life?— This is of course a note on the grammar of the expression “to obey a rule”.

It is not possible that there should have been only one occasion on which someone obeyed a rule. It is not possible that there should have been only one occasion on which a report was made, an order given or understood; and so on.—To obey a rule, to make a report, to give an order, to play a game of chess, are custom (uses, institutions).

To understand a sentence means to understand a language. To understand a language means to be master of a technique.

200.It is, of course, imaginable that two people belonging to a tribe unacquainted with games should sit at a chess-board and go through the moves of a game of chess; and even with all the appropriate mental accompaniments. And if we were to see it we should say they were playing chess. But now imagine a game of chess translated according to certain rules into a series of actions which we do not ordinarily associate with a game—say into yells and stamping of feet. And now suppose those two people to yell and stamp instead of playing the form of chess that we are used to; and this in such a way that their procedure is translatable by suitable rules into a game of chess. Should we still be inclined to say they were playing a game? What right would one have to say so?

201.This was our paradox: no course of action could be deter¬ mined by a rule, because every course of action can be made out to accord with the rule. The answer was: if everything can be made out to accord with the rule, then it can also be made out to conflict with it. And so there would be neither accord nor conflict here.

It can be seen that there is a misunderstanding here from the mere fact that in the course of our argument we give one interpretation after another; as if each one contented us at least for a moment, until we thought of yet another standing behind it. What this shews is that there is a way of grasping a rule which is not an interpretation, but which is exhibited in what we call “obeying the rule” and “going against it” in actual cases.

Hence there is an inclination to say: every action according to the rule is an interpretation. But we ought to restrict the term “interpretation” to the substitution of one expression of the rule for another.

202.And hence also ‘obeying a rule* is a practice. And to think one is obeying a rule is not to obey a rule. Hence it is not possible to obey a rule ‘privately’: otherwise thinking one was obeying a rule would be the same thing as obeying it.

203.Language is a labyrinth of paths. You approach from one side and know your way about; you approach the same place from another side and no longer know your way about.”
(Ludwig Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations, 1953)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.iii. CONNIVANCE VS. KNOWLEDGE
François Jullien refers to "connivance" as another form of relation to the world, one that knowledge has often overlooked but has been unable to eradicate. He describes knowledge as speculative know-how that has disassociated itself from adapting to the world. By considering itself an end, it has disconnected from life.

On the other hand, connivance is a form of understanding that develops over time and stays integrated within a certain environment. It's a type of knowledge that remains beyond any possible demonstration and above any explicitness, and it doesn't distinguish theory from practice.

E1.6.D.3.7.a.iii.1. KNOWLEDGE IS BASED ON OBJECTIFICATION AND ABSTRACTION, WHILE CONNIVANCE IS BASED ON A TACIT UNDERSTANDING OF THE WORLD
"Knowledge is rooted in objectification and abstraction, while connivance stems from  a tacit understanding of the world. Connivance allows us to perceive the world in a more intimate way, uncovering a spiritual dimension and establishing a connection between us and the world. It's a shift from reason, not denying conscious reason, but harmonizing with the resonance and fluctuations of nature.
“In essence, this transformation occurs when a country becomes a landscape. What I grasp in it is no longer alien to me, but communicates, 'speaks to me', 'touches me'. It is not a self-projecting subject that casts itself into the landscape, making it the confidant of its emotion (the common stance of cheap romanticism), but rather the landscape, by standing out, pulls me into its field of tension, resonating with its variation. As Stendhal remarked, the landscape is like a bow "that played on my soul". From beneath the mind asserting itself autonomously (the island subject knowing and wanting), it revives my more original affiliation to the world, a world that has risen from its indifference and into which my vitality plugs in.”
"Knowledge is based on objectification and abstraction, while connivance is based on a tacit understanding with the world. Connivance allows us to perceive the world more intimately, discovering a spiritual dimension and creating a link between ourselves and the world. It's a return upstream from reason, not a rejection of knowing reason, but a resonance with the variation of nature. 
"In fact, this transmutation takes place: when a country becomes a landscape, what I apprehend in it is no longer foreign to me, but makes a sign, "speaks to me", "touches me". That it is not a subject-self that projects itself into the landscape, making it the confidant of its emotion (the banal posture of bad romanticism), but that it is the landscape that, by singling itself out, brings me into its field of tension, in resonance with its variation (the landscape is like a bow "that played on my soul", said Stendhal), brings back - from beneath the mind asserting itself autonomously (the island subject knowing and wanting) my more original belonging to the world: a world that has emerged from its indifference and onto which my vitality plugs in. "

E1.6.D.3.7.a.iii.1_REF1_PH "CONNIVANCE (VS. KNOWLEDGE) 1. In the face of knowledge and its hegemony over European culture, how can we name its other, which it has overshadowed and not taken into account? I will choose to call this other relationship to the world that knowledge has tended to bury, but has not been able to abolish, and whose "coherence" I must recall in the face of this established domination of knowledge. For the fact that knowledge, in its development into speculative knowledge, that is, knowledge for knowledge's sake, has detached itself, through science, from the need to adapt itself to the world from which it emerged, and has taken itself as an end in itself, has detached itself from the vital, now gives us this strictly correlative task: that of returning to that relationship which has been buried by reason and which, operating therefore in the shadows, nevertheless keeps us in a tacit understanding with things - but an "understanding" which we do not reflect upon. This "understanding" therefore remains implicit, beneath the relational work that reason itself performs, and which we can only illuminate by making reason retrace its steps, go back in its history, explore what it has strayed from: not what it heroically fought against (obscurantism versus enlightenment), but what it had to leave aside in its legitimate and powerful struggle to assert itself - and which now lies dormant, thus escaping our understanding. If, as we know, the opposite of knowledge is ignorance, its opposite is the collusion that is established with it on an equal footing, while at the same time turning their backs on each other. Connivere, as the Latin says: to get along "by winking".
For knowledge isolates a "nature" and turns it into an "object," methodically organizes its course, develops tools of abstraction and constructs mediations, renders spaces indifferent and projects an equal and planned time; it develops an argued discourse that promotes the conditions of science as well as politics. But is that all there is to knowledge? Doesn't life presuppose a mode of intelligence or, better, of "understanding" that, woven over the course of days, and even without us thinking about it, without us thinking about thinking about it, is held in adherence, instead of being distanced and edified in thought? For is knowledge not only the illuminated side, which is only made possible by its insidious reverse, to which it refers, but also by forgetting itself? Knowledge that is shadowy, that remains integrated in an environment, that does not abstract itself from a landscape, that does not extract itself from a conditioning, that does not separate theory from practice, that does not detach an "I" from the world: it remains below any possible exposure, above any explicitness, and above all, it does not question. 
Complicity is that knowledge that has not broken its attachment. [...]"
(François Jullien, Chinese thought vs philosophy, 2015)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.iii.1_REF2_PH FRANÇOIS JULLIEN EXPLORES THE NOTION OF LANDSCAPE AS A RELATIONSHIP OF CONNIVANCE WITH THE WORLD, WHERE OBJECTIVE OBSERVATION IS TRANSFORMED INTO A TACTILE UNDERSTANDING. Criticizing European Romanticism for its tendency to project subjectivity onto landscape, he proposes an approach in which landscape becomes a partner that awakens an affective and spiritual dimension. 
"There is 'landscape' when my cognitive capacity switches and is reversed into collusion; when the relationship of objectification, and above all of observation, that I maintain with the world is transformed into tacit understanding and communication: from knowing that I was vis-à-vis the 'country' (the knowledge of geography), I become collusive again in a landscape. Not, strictly speaking, that I "personify" elements of the landscape, or that I "project" myself into them, or that I lend my subjectivity to things, or that I animate the inanimate, as has been said and rehashed, as if to compensate for the rationalism of knowledge, the ordinary romanticism, the chatty romanticism, in Europe - all operations in which the subject still wants to be the master and which are only devices. But this transformation does take place: when the land becomes landscape, what I perceive in it is no longer alien to me, but beckons to me, "speaks to me," "touches me," as we say colloquially (but can we ever escape this colloquialism?). That is to say, as the Chinese literati painters so beautifully expressed it, that the perceptive becomes affective at the same time, or that I perceive then from within as from outside of myself; through this, that a dimension of infinity or of spirit then emanates and is released from the physicality of things, with which my mind "understands" (softly, as the Chinese strategically put it). The land becomes a landscape - do we know, or rather "do we really know", but the Chinese language of thought has proved particularly gifted in expressing this implicit, when this "corner of the land" establishes itself as a partner, the tension that it promotes integrates me and is shared: there is "landscape", in other words, when a relationship is established (re-established) with this "country" that makes me go back upstream - finds its source on this side of that which is established by knowing reason; when the place suddenly becomes a "link"; and when this "corner of the country" thus "becomes the world": when I connect with it as with that which makes the world. [...]
At the same time, there is no fusional shift, no compensatory slide into the ecstatic or the mystical, as so much bad lyricism in Europe has advocated, so I do not indulge in any irrationalism (this is an upstream of reason and not its polemical denial), where the famous "communion" or symbiosis with nature, which comes as reparation for knowing reason, at least leaves ambiguity hanging in the air. [...Let it not be a subject self that projects itself into the landscape, making it the confidant of its emotion (which I have just stigmatized as the banal attitude of bad romanticism), but let it be the landscape that, by setting itself apart, draws me into its field of tension, in resonance with its variation (the landscape is like a bow "that has played on my soul," said Stendhal), brings back - from beneath the mind that asserts itself as autonomous (the insular subject that knows and wants) - my more original belonging to the world: a world that has emerged from its indifference and to which my vitality is bound. [...]

"To tell the truth, we live in the alternation of these two registers, or rather of these two regimes [...] I press more on one key or the other of my inner keyboard; I constantly move the cursor between one pole and the other. Because we live by moving discreetly from one to the other, and in this agility, by advancing (asserting) the knowing, or by retreating, conniving, regressing from our autarkic self. Now, the ideal for the knowing subject is modeling. But how can we go one step further and name the other side of this, the side that has remained in the shadows, which means that the capacity is acquired and grows, but silently, without even paying attention to this continuous process, until we finally see the result?"
(François Jullien, Chinese thought vs philosophy, 2015)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.iii.2. CONNIVANCE, THE LOST PARADISE OF OUR CHILDHOOD?
Is connivance merely a vestige, maybe secretly nostalgic, but ultimately rooted in the past, the lost paradise of our childhood and humanity? Or does it continue to create a hidden but active web of understanding within us and among us, silently, beyond the realm of knowledge and ready to resurface?

E1.6.D.3.7.a.iii.2_REF1_PH FRANÇOIS JULLIEN EXPLORES THE IDEA OF CONNIVANCE BETWEEN INDIVIDUALS, SUGGESTING THAT IT CAN BE A SOURCE OF ACTIVE AND SUBTERRANEAN UNDERSTANDING. He illustrates how two lovers can experience this connivance by talking about "nothing", which strengthens their intimacy, where talking and remaining silent are equivalent, creating a space for intimate communication beyond formal knowledge.
"But is this connivance nothing more than a vestige for which we may secretly feel nostalgic, but which we have definitively closed off in the lost paradise of our childhood and of humanity? Or does it not always weave, silently, beneath the surface of knowledge and ready to resurface, an active, underlying foundation of understanding within us and between us? Don't two lovers experience this re-emergence between them? Or isn't it this re-emergence that makes them live as lovers? Isn't it this buried resource that they rediscover and nurture together, withdrawing from the commerce of knowledge and its busyness? To the point that they can talk to each other all day long without saying anything, in any case nothing that is worthy of interest, that can be made into an object, that can be remembered as a statement. Saying "nothing" that does nothing but express their complicity: "Have you seen this?" "Did you know that ... Beneath the banality of the exchange, as they breathe, they revive an agreement between them: the whole day is this blink of an eye-"loving chatter," as Rousseau put it. The fact that one can speak without saying anything can be understood in these two opposite senses: either it is in vain, speech is empty; or it is "full", if I may say so: they do not need to have "something" to say, as Aristotle wanted, since they speak only to communicate what is intimate between them. In this system of acquiescence, one can be silent as well as speaking, and the two are equivalent: to be silent is not muteness, not even reserve, it does not embarrass or burden one; and to speak, even to say nothing, is not talkativeness. [...]"
(François Jullien, Chinese thought vs philosophy, 2015)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.iv. HOW DO WE BECOME MORE LUCID?
Lucidity is a combined result: it is influenced by our experiences and our response to them. Not everyone who has undergone negative experiences becomes lucid; it also requires the individual's active engagement, allowing these experiences to be part of their reflection. Lucidity is formed from everything I've experienced, which has gradually dissolved and undone the obstructions clouding my consciousness. These obstructions often represent the mind's interpositions that unknowingly veil reality.

E1.6.D.3.7.a.iv_REF1_PH "CLARITY IS NOT INTELLIGENCE, WHOSE OWN QUALITY IS UNDERSTANDING. While intelligence, like language, is a faculty, even the most general, at least partially innate, which focuses on an object both spontaneously and in the moment, clarity, on the other hand, is not given to us, is not even the subject of study and training: it can only be achieved through a process and in a result-oriented manner - can this result even be communicated from one person to another? Lucidity is also not knowledge, which is more rooted in acquisition. While knowledge extends across fields and disciplines, lucidity is a global capacity that cannot be broken down or taught. If we also compare it with the terms that are given as synonyms for it, it seems that penetration and perspicacity (clairvoyance) presuppose that the mind has encountered a resistance - an opacity - and overcome it. Both refer prospectively to a situation whose difficulty is to be resolved. Their use requires a point of application, the former relying more on depth and the latter on clarity. But clarity, on the other hand, is the result of a process of becoming: one becomes clear through experience; it is achieved procedurally and through liberation: light comes of its own accord, by immanence, from all that one has lived and experienced. Insight and perspicacity denote an operative capacity of the mind; lucidity, a level attained by consciousness. While the former signifies the overcoming of an embarrassment that presents itself to the mind, the latter signifies the emergence from a state of obscurity in which one has allowed oneself to be deceived. Also, by signifying the emergence from the confusion in which one remained in one's past life, lucidity actually names the subject's ability to access the second life.
Strictly speaking, lucidity is not achieved by method or willpower. Can I even wish to become lucid? To tell the truth, I would prefer the opposite: to remain in a state of naive vagueness-a primitive confusion-that responds more directly to my desires; not to force myself to see reality stripped of its illusions or "as it is." While we would like to be more intelligent or have more knowledge, and even have a more perceptive or penetrating mind, wouldn't I, on the contrary, fear more clarity? Would I not rather want to protect myself from it? In any case, in order to understand what lucidity is, as well as the experience of the second type from which it proceeds, I must eliminate the opposition between the passive and the active that European language imposes; consequently, I must leave the register of intentionality and of free and conscious choice. For clarity, for its part, is co-creative: I was led to it by my experiences, and I myself contributed to it by taking them into account. Not all those who have had negative experiences have become lucid; it also requires the cooperation of the subject, who must accept to let them enter the field of his or her reflection. Clarity comes to me from all that I have experienced and that has been gradually dissolved and undone - eroded and fragmented, cracked and ruptured, by external coercion at the same time as personally assumed rectification - what clouded my consciousness as representations of the mind intervening without my knowledge and obscuring reality from me - "reality" then emerging from its nebulous ambiguity to signify precisely what remains after this withdrawal."
(François Jullien, A second life, 2017)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.iv_REF1.1_PH "CLARITY IS NOT DISCOVERY, BUT DISCOVERY. Like the refined outline of a watermark, lucidity is born of a stripping away that allows what is no longer embellished - neither coated nor fogged nor stuck - to emerge from beneath all that the mind has allowed to offend it. A "clear winter," as Mallarmé called it. [...] Indeed, from what is thus disinhibited, from all the 'languor' experienced, a 'gay knowledge' can result, as Nietzsche called it gaya scienza when describing illness (in his preface to The Gay Science). "Joyful," that is, alert, because of the joy of having finally taken the initiative, and of having done so by breaking through to the core of our connection with the vital, and thereby suddenly shattering all dogmatism at its foundations. Joyful because we have perceived life more at its roots, in its original risk-taking, because we have extracted more radicality from it, and because we are returning to the offensive, with the impetus of challenge, no longer afraid to dare and no longer wasting a minute of the little time that remains. [...] Plato said in one sentence how the clarity comes from this accumulated and decanted experience, from which we see the possibility of a second life: 
"Is it not inevitable, Theaetetus, that for the majority of those who heard such speeches at that age, a sufficient number of years will pass, advancing age, a closer examination of things, the trials that force them into clear contact with reality, will they not cause them to change the opinions they had then, to find small what seemed great to them, difficult what seemed easy, so that the illusions that the words conveyed will vanish before living reality? (Translation of A. Dies, Sophist, 234 d-e).
Plato clearly emphasizes the two common conditions: what time brings "as an addition," in other words, what is necessary to "advance" in life; but also that if we thus come "as close as possible" to the reality of things, toîs te oûsi prospiptontas egguthen [...], it is because we are forced to do so by the trials we have gone through. It also sheds light on its specific nature: that we then "touch" the "existing" in "full clarity" (ephaptesthai [...]: one puts one's "sure" finger), that is, at the same time one finds oneself placed in the light (enargôs [...]: this clarity is global) and one finds oneself directly in "contact" with things - such is indeed the effect of the contact that constitutes the experience. Finally, it illuminates the consequence: the reversal of the "opinions" formed in the mind, or rather suffered in this first stage of life. These representations, to which one previously adhered, were really "phantasms" based on discourse, and are now found to be "ruined".
(François Jullien, A second life, 2017)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.v. PLATON ASSERTS THAT IT IS IMPOSSIBLE FOR ANYONE TO DEVELOP COMPREHENSION WITHOUT BEING GUIDED BY A MASTER. Comprehension cannot be formulated as we do with sciences. The truth about these subjects can only be reached through personal experience. It's not beneficial for men to argue about these subjects, as only an elite can discover the truth for themselves with a few pointers. "It is only when names, definitions, perceptions of sight and impressions of the senses have been painstakingly rubbed against each other, when we have discussed in benevolent debates where envy dictates neither questions nor answers, that, on the object studied, the light of wisdom and intelligence shines with all the intensity that human forces can bear.”

E1.6.D.3.7.a.v_REF1_PH PLATO ASSERTS THAT IT IS IMPOSSIBLE TO FULLY UNDERSTAND CERTAIN COMPLEX ISSUES THROUGH READING ALONE. TRUTH EMERGES FROM THE MIND AFTER LONG REFLECTION AND INTERACTION WITH THE PROBLEMS. He argues that only those with a natural affinity for virtue and wisdom can achieve this understanding, and that writings on complex subjects are likely to be misinterpreted by others or lead to erroneous conclusions. Plato concludes that the writings should not be taken too seriously because the true thoughts of the author are often not expressed.
"In any case, this is what I can say about all those who have written or will write and who claim to be knowledgeable about what is the subject of my concern, having been taught about it by me or by others, or having discovered it personally: it is impossible, in my opinion, that they have understood anything at all about it. As far as I am concerned, there is no work on such subjects, and there certainly will never be. In fact, there is no way to put it into formulas, as is done with other sciences, but it is when one has dealt with these problems for a long time, when one has lived with them, that the truth suddenly springs forth in the soul, like light springs forth from a spark, and then grows of its own accord. No doubt I know that if I had to explain them in writing or orally, I would be the best person to do it; but I also know that if the explanation were faulty, I would suffer more than anyone else. If I had believed that they could be written down and sufficiently expressed for the people, what finer achievement could I have accomplished in my life than to demonstrate a doctrine so beneficial to mankind and to bring to light for all the true nature of things? Now, I do not think that arguing about it, as they say, is good for people, except for an elite who only need a few hints to discover the truth for themselves. As for the others, they would either be filled with unjust contempt, which is unbecoming, or with a vain and foolish sense of self-importance because of the grandeur of the teachings they have received. Moreover, I intend to elaborate on this subject: perhaps some of the points I am dealing with will become clearer once I have explained myself. There is, in fact, a serious reason why we should not try to write anything on such subjects, a reason which I have often stated before, but which I feel I must repeat again.

[...] In a word, those who have no affinity with the object will not obtain the vision either by their ease of mind or by their memory, because they will not first take root in a foreign nature. - Thus, whether it be those who have no inclination for what is just and beautiful and are not in harmony with these virtues, however well they may otherwise be gifted to learn and retain, or those who, having a kindred soul, are averse to science and lacking in memory, none of them will ever learn the whole truth about virtue and vice that it is possible to know. In fact, it is necessary to learn both at the same time, the false as well as the true of the whole essence, at the cost of much work and time, as I said at the beginning. Only when names, definitions, perceptions of sight and impressions of the senses have been painstakingly rubbed together, when they have been discussed in benevolent discussions where envy dictates neither questions nor answers, does the light of wisdom and intelligence shine on the object studied with all the intensity that human powers can bear. Therefore, every serious man will take care not to deal with serious questions in writing, thus exposing his thoughts to the envy and lack of intelligence of the crowd. From this we must draw the simple conclusion that when we see a written composition, whether by a legislator on laws, or by anyone else on any subject, we can be sure that the author has not taken the matter seriously, if he himself is serious, and that his thoughts are confined to the most valuable part of the writer".
(Plato, Letter VII, Text established by Joseph Souilhé, 1926)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.v_REF2_PH PLATO AFFIRMS THAT IT IS IMPOSSIBLE TO FULLY UNDERSTAND CERTAIN COMPLEX SUBJECTS THROUGH READING ALONE. TRUTH EMERGES FROM THE MIND AFTER LONG REFLECTION AND INTERACTION WITH THE PROBLEMS. He argues that only those with a natural affinity for virtue and wisdom can achieve this understanding, and that writings on complex subjects risk being misinterpreted or leading to erroneous conclusions by others. Plato concludes that writings should not be taken too seriously, as the true thoughts of the author often remain unexpressed.
"He who has no affinity with the object will develop a vision neither by his ease of mind, nor by his memory, - for in a foreign nature it will not take root. - Also, about those who have no propensity for the just and the beautiful and do not harmonize with these virtues, - as good as they may be otherwise at learning and memorizing, - or about those who, possessing the kinship of soul [with the virtues], are resistant to science and deprived of memory - none of them will ever learn about virtue and vice all the truth that it is possible to know about them. For indeed, it is necessary to learn both at the same time, the false as well as the true of the whole essence, putting in a lot of work and time [...] It is only after we have painfully rubbed against each other, names, definitions, perceptions of sight and impressions of the senses, after we have discussed them in benevolent discussions where envy does not dictate neither the questions nor the answers, that the light of wisdom and intelligence shines upon the object of study with all the intensity that human forces can withstand. That is why any serious man will be careful not to write down his thoughts on serious questions and thus abandon them to the envy and the ignorance of the crowd."
(Plato, Letter VII)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.vi. "UNDERSTAND HOW THE LEAST THING IS LINKED TO THE WHOLE; nothing exists in isolation. Therefore, the correct path often leads us beyond ourselves. In doing so, your thoughts will align with the universe, their true domain, and harmonize with the life of your body which is also interconnected with everything. Look into the distance.'

E1.6.D.3.7.a.vi_REF1_PH "THOUGHT MUST TRAVEL AND CONTEMPLATE, IF YOU WANT THE BODY TO FEEL GOOD. Science will lead us there, provided it is neither ambitious, nor talkative, nor impatient; provided that it distracts us from books and takes our gaze away, to the horizon. It must enable perception and travel. The true relations that you discover in an object lead you to another and to a thousand others, and this whirlwind of the river of thought carries your to the winds, to the clouds, and to the planets. True knowledge never comes down to something you have just before your eyes; for to know is to understand how the smallest thing relates to the whole; nothing has its reason in itself, and so the right direction is to move away from yourself; this is no less healthy for the mind than for the eyes. Thus your thought will rest in this universe which is its domain, and it will accord with the life of your body which is also linked to all things. When the Christian said: « Heaven is my domain », he could not put it better. Look far away."
(Alain, On happiness, May 15, 1911)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.vi_REF1.1_PH "TO THE MELANCHOLIC I HAVE ONLY ONE THING TO SAY: 'LOOK INTO THE DISTANCE. The melancholic is almost always a man who reads too much. The human eye is not made for this distance; it rests in wide open spaces. When you look at the stars or at the horizon of the sea, the eye is completely relaxed; when the eye is relaxed, the head is free, the gait is more secure; everything gradually loosens and softens, even down to the bowels. But don't try to make yourself more flexible with your will, because if you use your will on yourself, you'll make everything go wrong and end up strangling yourself; don't think about yourself, look into the distance.
It is very true that melancholy is a disease, and the doctor can sometimes guess the cause and prescribe the remedy, but this remedy brings the attention back to the body, and the worry about following a diet destroys its effect, which is why the doctor, if he is wise, refers you to the philosopher. But when you run to the philosopher, what do you find? A man who reads too much, who thinks myopically, and who is sadder than you.
The state should hold wisdom as a school of medicine. And how? By true science, which is the contemplation of things, and by poetry as great as the world. For the mechanics of our eyes, resting on the wide horizons, teach us a great truth. Thought must free the body and return it to the universe, which is our true home. There is a deep kinship between our human destiny and the functions of our body. As soon as the animals get no more from the world around them, they lie down and sleep; man thinks, and if it is an animal thought, woe to him. There he is, doubling his sufferings and his needs; there he is, working himself up with fear and hope; as a result of which his body never ceases to tense, to move, to launch, to hold back, according to the games of the imagination; always suspecting, always spying on things and people around him. And when he goes to free himself, he finds himself in books, in a universe that is still closed. Too close to his eyes. Too close to his passions. The mind becomes a prison and the body suffers, because to say that the mind narrows and to say that the body works against itself is to say the same thing. The ambitious man rehearses his speeches a thousand times, and the lover rehearses his prayers a thousand times. The mind must travel and contemplate if the body is to be well.
Wherever science may lead us, provided it is not ambitious, talkative, impatient; provided it takes our attention away from books and directs our gaze to the distant horizon. So it must be about perception and travel. One object, through the true relationships you discover there, leads you to another and to a thousand others, and this whirlwind of the river carries your thoughts to the winds, to the clouds, and to the planets. True knowledge never returns to some small thing close to the eyes; for to know is to understand how the smallest thing is connected with the whole; no thing has its reason in itself, and so the right movement takes us away from ourselves; this is no less healthy for the mind than for the eyes. There your thoughts will rest in this universe, which is their domain, and will be in harmony with the life of your body, which is also connected with all things. When the Christian said, "The sky is my home," he was not wrong. Look into the distance."
(Alain, On Happiness, May 15, 1911)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.vi_REF1.2_PO “WHEN I'M SAD, I GET UP AND GO AROUND THE WORLD”.
(Tomaž Šalamun)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.vi_REF2_PH "OUTLOOK

The open day is bright with images for people,
when the green shows itself from a distance,
even before the evening light begins to twilight,
and shimmers gently soften the sound of the day.
Often the inner world of the world seems clouded, closed,
man's mind full of doubts, sullen,
the splendid nature brightens his days
and the dark question of doubt is far away."
(Friedrich Hölderin, 1671)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.vii. THE MACHINES CAN ONLY EVER APPROACH [THE EXPERIENCE OF BEING] SECONDHAND. BUT SECONDHAND IS PRECISELY WHAT BEING HERE ISN’T. THE WORK OF BEING HERE—OF LIVING, SENSING, CHOOSING—STILL AWAITS US. AND THERE IS PLENTY OF IT. Being human is not to have answers. It is to have questions—and to live with them. The machines can’t do that for us. Not now, not ever.
“For the past seventy years or so, the university humanities have largely lost sight of this core truth. Seduced by the rising prestige of the sciences—on campus and in the culture—humanists reshaped their work to mimic scientific inquiry. We have produced abundant knowledge about texts and artifacts, but in doing so mostly abandoned the deeper questions of being which give such work its meaning.

Now everything must change. That kind of knowledge production has, in effect, been automated. As a result, the “scientistic” humanities—the production of fact-based knowledge about humanistic things—are rapidly being absorbed by the very sciences that created the A.I. systems now doing the work. We’ll go to them for the “answers.”

But to be human is not to have answers. It is to have questions—and to live with them. The machines can’t do that for us. Not now, not ever.

And so, at last, we can return—seriously, earnestly—to the reinvention of the humanities, and of humanistic education itself. We can return to what was always the heart of the matter—the lived experience of existence. Being itself.

All that surfaces anew, because we are left alone with that. It alone cannot be taken from us. […]

Historians have long extolled the “power of the archive.” Little did we know that the engineers would come along and *plug it in*. And it turns out that a huge amount of what we seek from a human person can be simulated through this Frankensteinian reanimation of our collective dead letters. What a discovery! We have a new whole of ourselves with which to converse now. Let’s take our time; there is plenty to learn.

But we’ll need vigilance, and a fighting courage, too, as we again take up this unending experience of coming into ourselves as free beings responsible for world-making. Because it is, of course, possible to turn the crank that instrumentalizes people, to brutalize them, to squeeze their humanity into a sickly green trickle called money and leave only a ruinous residue. The new machines are already pretty good at that. The algorithms that drive these systems are the same algorithms that drive the attention economy, remember? They will only get better.

What it is like to be us, in our full humanity—this isn’t out there in the interwebs. It isn’t stored in any archive, and the neural networks cannot be inward with what it feels like to be you, right now, looking at these words, looking away from these words to think about your life and our lives, turning from all this to your day and to what you will do in it, with others or alone. That can only be lived.

This remains to us. The machines can only ever approach it secondhand. But secondhand is precisely what being here isn’t. The work of being here—of living, sensing, choosing—still awaits us. And there is plenty of it.”
(D. Graham Burnett, Will the Humanities Survive Artificial Intelligence?, published in The Newyorker, April 26, 2025)

Read it in The Newyorker: https://www.newyorker.com/culture/the-weekend-essay/will-the-humanities-survive-artificial-intelligence

E1.6.D.3.7.a.viii. NIETZSCHE ALSO DENOUNCE A LACK OF UNDERSTANDING:
"The main cause of imperfection in social life lies in ignorance about what is detrimental in the setup of life, the division of time, the choice of relationships, in both work and leisure, command and obedience, the sensations from nature and art, as well as eating, sleeping, and thinking. It's the ignorance in the most trivial and everyday matters."

E1.6.D.3.7.a.viii_REF1_PH "THE IMPERFECTION OF THE EARTH AND ITS MAIN CAUSE. - 
[...] Not to know what is harmful to us in the order of existence, the division of the day, the weather, and the choice of relationships, in business and leisure, in command and obedience, in the sensations of nature and art, in eating, sleeping, and thinking, to be ignorant in the most trivial and everyday matters - this is what makes the earth a "meadow of shame" for so many people. Let it not be said that here, as everywhere, it is a question of the lack of reason in men: on the contrary, there is reason enough and more than enough, but it is misdirected and artificially diverted from these petty and immediate things. Priests, teachers, and the sublime tyranny of idealists of all sorts, both coarse and refined, persuade the child that it is a question of something quite different: the salvation of the soul, the service of the State, the progress of science, or even consideration and property as a means of rendering service to the whole of humanity, while the needs of the individual, his great and small necessities in the twenty-four hours of the day, are, it is said, something contemptible or indifferent. Socrates already warned against this arrogant neglect of man in favor of man, and he liked to remind us, by quoting Homer, of the limits of the true object of all care and reflection: "It is, he said, and it is only 'what happens to me for good or ill.'. [...]"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human III, Aphorism 6,  1878)

E1.6.D.3.7.a.ix. “MATURATION (VS MODELLING) [...]
I find it remarkable that the ancient Chinese art of war, as I have mentioned, does not consider modelling and application, or the means to an end, but rather conditions and consequences, and consequently processes and maturation. As we know, a good general is not one who draws up a plan in advance, but one who, based on an 'assessment' of the encountered conditions (the ancient meaning of 'ji'), detects the advantageous factors and realises this potential. Even this 'bringing' is too active and directive. It is better to say that he promotes the development of these favourable conditions by exploiting what constitutes a favourable 'terrain' [...]; or, as Laozi says, he helps what comes of its own accord. The art of strategy is therefore to ensure that the desired result proceeds from the situational development involved. There is no "goal" to aim for strictly speaking, but rather a "profit" to be "reaped" (harvested, written li: the ear of corn and the sickle to cut it). This is why, as long as these conditions are not ripe, he does not intervene or 'act'; when he acts, he no longer really has to 'act' — the famous theme of 'non-action', wu wei, which is not at all a renunciation or passivity: success then comes to him like a ripe fruit ready to fall. This requires not so much patience — a quality that is still too moral and psychological, and therefore linked to the subject — as the ability to allow the situation to produce its own effects from the 'seed' that has been sown, and to accompany its development as it takes place independently. I wait until the situation has reached maturity before intervening, and even then, only sparingly. [...]
cording to Mencius (II, A, 2), a farmer must refrain from 'pulling on the shoots' to make them grow; in other words, he must not seek the desired effect directly. Otherwise, he would be forcing the process already underway and the plant would soon wither. By importing and imposing his project, he would produce the opposite effect. But should he then do the opposite and remain passively at the edge of the field, simply watching it grow? I wait for it to grow... What should he 'do'? Every farmer knows that, from one day to the next and at intervals, they must hoe and weed at the foot of the shoot to encourage growth. Neither pull on the shoots (activism) nor simply watch them grow (passivity); neither force the process nor ignore it. There is nothing brilliant or heroic about this ('there is nothing to praise in the great general...'), but it is modest and discreet, and it alone is effective. Growth can be initiated, stimulated and assisted, but it happens by itself in its course.
This is true of all maturation, including that of the inner self, which, as Mencius tells us, follows its own course, just like the flow of water. Water only advances gradually — let us understand this seemingly simple phrase, which says so much: 'Until it has filled the cavity in its path, water does not go any further' (VII, A, 24). Now, 'penetrating' and 'understanding' are also processes of maturation. They involve accumulation and gradual progression, producing self-unfolding beyond our control. It is impossible to skip steps, leap over milestones or force understanding. Conversely, each time water fills the cavity it encounters, it overflows of its own accord in order to move forward. It continues to progress unperturbed, carried by its own momentum. The same is true of the mind: the light we have gained through our efforts spreads gradually, spreading and 'communicating' from one thought to another and from one reason to the next without our knowledge, spontaneously, through branching connections. This continues until, one day, we finally reap the fruit of our labour, like a hard-won victory, and suddenly realise that we have 'an idea', 'found' it.
(François Jullien, Chinese Thought vs. Philosophy, 2015)

E1.6.D.3.7.b. UNDERSTANDING THAT COMES WITH FULL AWARENESS IS THE FEELING THAT THE WORLD IS AN ORGANIC UNITY
"If a problem can be solved at all, to understand it and to know what to do about it are the same thing. On the other hand, doing something about a problem which you do not understand is like trying to clear away darkness by thrusting it aside with your hands. Light, here, means awareness - to be aware of life, of experience as it is at this moment, without any judgments or ideas about it. In other words, you have to see and feel what you are experiencing as it is, and not as it is named."
The transformation of one's understanding that comes with full awareness is the feeling that the world is an organic unity, rather than feeling separate from everything else. People can reason that the universe is a unity without feeling it to be so, and they can continue to feel separate and lonely even if they have the knowledge of the unity of the universe in theory. 

E1.6.D.3.7.b.i. IS THERE AN EXPERIENCER OR THINKER SEPARATE FROM THE EXPERIENCE?
Approach experiences, sensations, feelings, and thoughts with a fresh perspective, without prejudice, and observe what is happening in the present moment: question whether there is an experiencer or thinker separate from the experience? When we are aware of our thoughts, feelings, sensations, and desires, we cannot find an experiencer or thinker separate from the experience and the feeling that there is one is an illusion.

E1.6.D.3.7.b.i_REF1_PH "UNDERSTANDING COMES THROUGH AWARENESS. Can we, then, approach our experience - our sensations, feelings, and thoughts-quite simply, as if we had never known them before, and, without prejudice, look at what is going on? You may ask, "Which experiences, which sensations and feelings, shall we look at?" I will answer, "Which ones can you look at?" The answer is that you must look at the ones you have now.

That is surely rather obvious. But very obvious things are often overlooked. If a feeling is not present, you are not aware of it. There is no experience but present experience. What you know, what you are actually aware of, is just what is happening at this moment, and no more. [...]

While you are watching this present experience, are you aware of someone watching it? Can you find, in addition to experience itself, an experiencer? Can you, at the same time, read this sentence and think about yourself reading it? You will find that, to think about yourself reading it, you must for a brief second stop reading. The first experience is reading. The second experience is the thought, "I am reading." Can you find any thinker, who is thinking the thought, "I am reading?" In other words, when present experience is the thought, "I am reading," can you think about yourself thinking this thought?

Once again, you must stop thinking just, "I am reading." You pass to a third experience, which is the thought, "I am thinking that I am reading." Do not let the rapidity with which these thoughts can change deceive you into the feeling that you think them all at once. [...]

To be aware, then, is to be aware of thoughts, feelings, sensations, desires, and all other forms of experience. Never at any time are you aware of anything which is not experience, not a thought or feeling, but instead an experiencer, thinker, or feeler. If this is so, what makes us think that any such thing exists? [...]"
(Alan Watts, The wisdom of insecurity, 1951)

E1.6.D.3.7.b.ii. THE IDEA OF PROTECTING AN "I" IS AN ILLUSION
The notion of a separate thinker or "I" that is distinct from experience is an illusion created by memory and the rapidity of thought changes; so is our imagining memory as a direct knowledge of the past rather than a present experience. Trying to separate oneself from experience is impossible, and  there is no "I" apart from some present experience. Understanding this is to realize that life is entirely momentary, that there is no permanence nor security, and that the idea of protecting an "I" is an illusion.

E1.6.D.3.7.b.ii_REF1_PH "THE NOTION OF A SEPARATE THINKER, OF AN "I" DISTINCT FROM THE EXPERIENCE, COMES FROM MEMORY AND FROM THE RAPIDITY WITH WHICH THOUGHT CHANGES. It is like whirling a burning stick to give the illusion of a continuous circle of fire. If you imagine that memory is a direct knowledge of the past rather than a present experience, you get the illusion of knowing the past and the present at the same time. This suggests that there is something in you distinct from both the past and the present experiences. You reason, "I know this present experience, and it is different from that past experience. If I can compare the two, and notice that experience has changed, I must be something constant and apart."

But, as a matter of fact, you cannot compare this present experience with a past experience. You can only compare it with a memory of the past, which is a part of the present experience. When you see clearly that memory is a form of present experience, it will be obvious that trying to separate yourself from this experience is as impossible as trying to make your teeth bite themselves. There is simply experience. There is not something or someone experiencing experience! You do not feel feelings, think thoughts, or sense sensations any more than you hear hearing, see sight, or smell smelling. “I feel fine" means that a fine feeling is present. It does not mean that there is one thing called an "I" and another separate thing called a feeling, so that when you bring them together this "I" feels the fine feeling. There are no feelings but present feelings, and whatever feeling is present is "I." No one ever found an "I" apart from some present experience, or some experience apart from an "I" - which is only to say that the two are the same thing.

As a mere philosophical argument this is a waste of time. We are not trying to have an "intellectual discussion." We are being aware of the fact that any separate "I" who thinks thoughts and experiences experience is an illusion. To understand this is to realize that life is entirely momentary, that there is neither permanence nor security, and that there is no "I" which can be protected. [...]"
(Alan Watts, The wisdom of insecurity, 1951)

E1.6.D.3.7.b.iii. YOU MAY "KNOW" THE WORLD AND YOURSELF ARE A UNITY BUT DO NOT FEEL IT TO BE TRUE
The transformation of one's understanding that comes with full awareness is the feeling that the world is an organic unity, rather than feeling separate from everything else. Without awareness, people may "know" this as a matter of information but do not feel it to be true. Most people feel separate from their surroundings because they are split within themselves. Being aware of the unreality of this division, the universe does not seem foreign anymore.
People are not only what they know, but also what they don't know. The sensation of a house across the street or a star in outer space is no less "I" than an itch on the sole of their foot or an idea in their brain. The world is an inextricably interwoven process called the real world and, whether conscious or unconscious of it, it is all "I" in the sense that the sun, the air, and human society are just as vital to a person as their brain or their lungs.

E1.6.D.3.7.b.iii_REF1_PH "VII.THE TRANSFORMATION OF LIFE
[...] Something must therefore be said about the healed vision of life which comes with full awareness, for it involves a deep transformation of our view of the world. As well as words can describe it, this transformation consists in knowing and feeling that the world is an organic unity.

In the ordinary way, we "know" this as a matter of information but do not feel it to be true. Certainly most people feel separate from Everything that surrounds them. On the one hand there is myself, and on the other the rest of the universe. I am not rooted in the earth like a tree. I rattle around independently. I seem to be the center of everything, and yet cut off and alone. I can feel what is going on inside my own body, but I can only guess what is going on in others. My conscious mind must have its roots and origins in the most unfathomable depths of being, yet it feels as if it lived all by itself in this tight little skull.

Nevertheless, the physical reality is that my body exists only in relation to this universe, and in fact I am as attached to it and dependent on it as a leaf on a tree. I feel cut off only because I am split within myself, because I try to be divided from my own feelings and sensations. What I feel and sense therefore seems foreign to me. And on being aware of the unreality of this division, the universe does not seem foreign any more.

For I am what I know; what I know is I. The sensation of a house across the street or of a star in outer space is no less I than an itch on the sole of my foot or an idea in my brain. In another sense, I am also what I do not know. I am not aware of my own brain as a brain. In just the same way, I am not aware of the house across the street as a thing apart from my sensation of it. I know my brain as thoughts and feelings, and I know the house as sensations. In the same way and sense that I do not know my own brain, or the house as a thing-in-itself, I do not know the private thoughts in your brain.

But my brain, which is also I, your brain and the thoughts within it, as well as the house across the street, are all forms of an inextricably interwoven process called the real world. Conscious or unconscious of it as I may be, it is all I in the sense that the sun, the air, and human society are just as vital to me as my brain or my lungs. If, then, this brain is my brain-unaware of it as I am - the sun is my sun, the air my air, and society my society. [...]"
(Alan Watts, The wisdom of insecurity, 1951)

E1.6.D.3.7.b.iv. YOU HAVE TO FEEL IT!
People can reason that the universe is a unity without feeling it to be so, and they can continue to feel separate and lonely even if they have the knowledge of the unity of the universe in theory. They will only cease to feel isolated when they  develop the understanding that they are not separate from the world.

E1.6.D.3.7.b.iv_REF1_PH "V. ON BEING AWARE
The Question "WHAT SHALL WE DO ABOUT IT?" is only asked by those who do not understand the problem. If a problem can be solved at all, to understand it and to know what to do about it are the same thing. On the other hand, doing something about a problem which you do not understand is like trying to clear away darkness by thrusting it aside with your hands. When light is brought, the darkness vanishes at once. [...]

Light, here, means awareness-to be aware of life, of experience as it is at this moment, without any judgments or ideas about it. In other words, you have to see and feel what you are experiencing as it is, and not as it is named. This very simple "opening of the eyes" brings about the most extraordinary transformation of understanding and living, and shows that many of our most baffling problems are pure illusion. This may sound like an oversimplification because most people imagine themselves to be fully enough aware of the present already, but we shall see that this is far from true.¹ "

Note 1: The word "awareness" is used in the sense given to it by J. Krishnamurti, whose writings discuss this theme with extraordinary perception.

(Alan Watts, The wisdom of insecurity, 1951)

E1.6.D.3.7.b.iv_REF2_PH TRUE UNITY IS FELT WHEN ONE RECOGNIZES THEIR INSEPARABILITY FROM THEIR SENSATIONS AND EXPERIENCES, RATHER THAN MERELY REASONING IT. Genuine understanding transcends verbal expression and philosophical declarations, embodying a direct, unmediated experience of being part of the whole.
"Now there have been many theories about the unity of the universe. But they have not delivered human beings from the isolation of egotism, from conflict, and from the fear of life, because there is a world of difference between an inference and a feeling. You can reason that the universe is a unity without feeling it to be so. You can establish the theory that your body is a movement in an unbroken process which includes all suns and stars, and yet continue to feel separate and lonely. For the feeling will not correspond to the theory until you have also discovered the unity of inner experience. Despite all theories, you will feel that you are isolated from life so long as you are divided within.

But you will cease to feel isolated when you recognize, for example, that you do not have a sensation of the sky: you are that sensation. [...]

Plucking chrysanthemums along the East fence; 
Gazing in silence at the southern hills; 
The birds flying home in pairs
Through the soft mountain air of dusk 
In these things there is a deep meaning, 
But when we are about to express it, 
We suddenly forget the words.

The meaning is not the contemplative, twilight, and, perhaps, superficially idyllic atmosphere beloved of Chinese poets. This is already expressed, and the poet does not gild the lily. He will not, like so many Western poets, turn philosopher and say that he is "one with" the flowers, the fence, the hills, and the birds. This, too, is gilding the lily, or, in his own Oriental idiom, "putting legs on a snake." For when you really understand that you are what you see and know, you do not run around the countryside thinking, "I am all this." There is simply "all this."
(Alan Watts, The wisdom of insecurity, 1951)

E1.6.D.3.7.b.iv_REF2.1_PH ALAN WATTS ARGUES THAT THE PERCEPTION OF BEING SEPARATE FROM THE WORLD INFLUENCES THOUGHT AND ACTION, LEADING PHILOSOPHERS TO OVERLOOK THAT THEIR STATEMENTS ABOUT THE UNIVERSE ALSO APPLY TO THEMSELVES. He asserts that true understanding of reality requires being part of it rather than attempting to stand outside and describing it, which leads to the inherent failure of philosophical and theological systems.
"The feeling that we stand face-to-face with the world, cut off and set apart, has the greatest influence on thought and action. Philosophers, for example, often fail to recognize that their remarks about the universe apply also to themselves and their remarks. If the universe is meaningless, so is the statement that it is so. If this world is a vicious trap, so is its accuser, and the pot is calling the kettle black.

In the strictest sense, we cannot actually think about life and reality at all, because this would have to include thinking about thinking, thinking about thinking about thinking, and so ad infinitum. One can only attempt a rational, descriptive philosophy of the universe on the assumption that one is totally separate from it. But if you and your thoughts are part of this universe, you cannot stand outside them to describe them. This is why all philosophical and theological systems must ultimately fall apart. To "know" reality you cannot stand outside it and define it; you must enter into it, be it, and feel it.

Speculative philosophy, as we know it in the West, is almost entirely a symptom of the divided mind, of man trying to stand outside himself and his experience in order to verbalize and define it. It is a vicious circle, like everything else which the divided mind attempts."
(Alan Watts, The wisdom of insecurity, 1951)

E1.6.D.3.7.b.v_PH ON THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN UNDERSTANDING AND CONSCIOUSNESS: UNDERSTANDING IS TO BE CULTIVATED, CONSCIOUSNESS IS TO BE COMPREHENDED.
“Consciousness emerges out of the entire complex of interactions between an organism and its environment. Consciousness cannot be said to be the exclusive product of either something physical, whether an external sense object or a brain, or something mental, whether a feeling, a perception, or an inclination. Gotama recognizes that consciousness is a seamless whole that is not equivalent to the sum of its parts, much in the same way that a hand as a whole is not reducible to the sum of its fingers, skin, bones, nerves, and muscles. Just as my hand can pick up a glass of water and raise it to my lips (which none of the parts can do on their own), so consciousness has a total, unified awareness of what is happening that none of its constituents (feeling, perception, inclination, etc.) can achieve on their own. To know something (the defining quality of consciousness) differs from merely perceiving something (the quality of perception), because it is a holistic awareness in which all the nama factors of touch, feeling, perception, intention, and attention are integrated. By implication, for Gotama there can be no such thing as “pure” consciousness, an unconditioned or pristine “knowing” that exists independently of the phenomenal world of discrete physical things and mental processes. […]

If consciousness is produced by eyes and forms, then it is “visual consciousness”; if it is produced by ears and sounds, then it is “auditory consciousness,” and so on. Consciousness is as impermanent, contingent, compounded, and varied as anything else in experience. Open your eyes upon a blue summer sky, and visual consciousness occurs; close your eyes again, and that consciousness is gone. By contrast, we instinctively feel that consciousness lurks as a singular, constant “witness” somewhere in the background, waiting for the opportunity to see, hear, smell, taste, or touch something. As though to dispel this felt-sense of consciousness’s priority and privilege, Gotama emphasizes its derivative and mundane nature. He likens it to different kinds of fires. “Just as a fire is reckoned by what it burns—when it depends on logs, it’s called a ‘log fire,’ when it depends on dung, it’s called a ‘dung fire,’ . . . so consciousness too is reckoned by the particular conditions that give rise to it.

Sariputta, in his dialogue with Maha Kotthita, also presents consciousness as an emergent property, as something that occurs when the necessary conditions for it are in place. He denies that it is something to be refined or developed through dharma practice. Maha Kotthita asks him to explain the relation between consciousness (viññana) and understanding (pañña) or, as it is often translated, wisdom (note that in Pali both terms are rooted in ñña, “to know”). Sariputta says: “Understanding and consciousness, friend—these states are conjoined not disjoined. You cannot separate one from the other in order to describe the difference between them. For what you understand, you are conscious of; and what you are conscious of, you understand. The difference between them is this: understanding is to be cultivated (bhavana), consciousness is to be comprehended (pariñña).”
(Stephen Batchelor, After Buddhism, rethinking the dharma for a secular age, 2016)

E1.6.D.3.7.b.vi_PH ANY DIFFICULTY WE MIGHT HAVE IN SEEING OR AWAKENING TO THE BUDDHA’S TEACHING IS NOT PRIMARILY CONCEPTUAL BUT EXISTENTIAL.
“Since Gotama describes his awakening as a radical shift  in perspective from a “place” to a “ground,” the experience was more than just arriving at the solution to an intellectually challenging problem. It is true that Buddhist orthodoxies often present “conditioned arising” and “nirvana” as subtle and difficult concepts to grasp, yet their definitions in the Pali discourses are not that hard to understand. “Conditioned arising” boils down to the underlying principle of contingency, whereas “nirvana” is simply the ending (for shorter or longer durations) of reactivity. Any difficulty we might have in seeing or awakening to them is not primarily conceptual but existential. […] Conditioned arising and nirvana are not difficult to see and awaken to because they are tricky to grasp with the intellect. They are difficult to see and awaken to because they confront us with a groundless ground that can be overwhelming and terrifying. Conditioned arising entails that life is endlessly fluid, contingent, and unpredictable; nirvana implies that in the absence of our default reactions we find ourselves facing moral dilemmas that require us to risk a response that might make things worse.”
(Stephen Batchelor, After Buddhism, rethinking the dharma for a secular age, 2016)

E1.6.D.3.7.b.vii_PH TO EMBRACE LIFE WITH COMPREHENSION INVOLVES COPING. IT HAS MORE TO DO WITH HOW WE GET ABOUT, DEAL WITH CONFLICTS, REALIZE POSSIBILITIES, AND ENGAGE WITH OTHERS THAN WITH ACQUIRING KNOWLEDGE OF THE NATURE OF THE MIND OR REALITY.
“Suffering (dukkha) is to be comprehended (pariñña).
As the first step in moving from a vision of a twofold ground to the practice of a fourfold task, Gotama encourages comprehension: pariñña—literally, “total knowing.” The prefix pari (total) denotes “around, round about, all round, i.e. completely, altogether.” Such knowing is not concerned with the acquisition of knowledge about anything specific but with a holistic comprehension of a situation at a given moment. The task of knowing requires considering one’s situation from a range of different angles and perspectives.
Here is the classical definition of the dukkha (suffering) to be comprehended:

Birth is dukkha, aging is dukkha, sickness is dukkha, death is
dukkha, encountering what is not dear is dukkha, separation
from what is dear is dukkha, not getting what one wants is
dukkha. In short, these five bundles of clinging are dukkha

[…] The Buddha had no interest in describing what reality is. He is not a metaphysician or an ontologist. He wants people to start paying attention to features of their experience that they habitually overlook or ignore. His reason is entirely pragmatic: by not paying heed to the tragic dimension of life, we become enamored, seduced, and captivated by what is merely agreeable, which leads to cycles of reactive and addictive behavior that keep us trapped, frustrated, and afflicted. Comprehension, by contrast, encompasses the totality of what is happening: it is to embrace a life permeated equally by pain and pleasure, suffering and joy. […]

To embrace life with comprehension involves coping. It has more to do with how we get about, deal with conflicts, realize possibilities, and engage with others than with acquiring knowledge of the nature of the mind or reality. Comprehension requires the opposite of aloofness; it requires being embedded in a culture, a language, a society, not to mention a flesh-and-blood body that inhales and exhales, drinks and eats, pisses and shits.
The kind of knowing entailed in pariñña may therefore be more akin to connaître than to savoir, or to kennen than to wissen, to use French and German comparisons. […]

On one occasion at Savatthi, Gotama posed the rhetorical question “And what, bhikkhus, is comprehension (pariñña)?” to which he replied: “The ending of greed, the ending of hatred, the ending of confusion. That is called ‘comprehension.’” Such comprehension is neither inflected nor determined by the habitual reactivity of being greedy, full of hate, or confused. In positive terms, we might describe it as an understanding that is penhearted, clearheaded, compassionate, and equanimous.
We have already seen that the phrase “the ending of greed, the ending of hatred, the ending of confusion” is the definition of nirvana. If “comprehension” and “nirvana” are synonymous, then the four tasks must overlap. If the first task, to comprehend suffering, is equivalent to the ending of greed, hatred, and confusion, how does it differ from the third task, to behold the ceasing (of greed, hatred, confusion)—that is, the achievement of nirvana? The tasks emphasize different facets of a single experience. At times we might focus on comprehending the world in which we are embedded, and at other times we might focus on being aware that comprehension is devoid of attachment, aversion, and vanity. For this reason, I prefer to think of the tasks as combined into a single fourfold task.”
(Stephen Batchelor, After Buddhism, rethinking the dharma for a secular age, 2016)

E1.6.D.3.7.c. THE FEYNMAN TECHNIQUE HELPS TURN INFORMATION INTO EASILY ACCESSIBLE AND UNDERSTANDABLE KNOWLEDGE. It's based on the principle that information is truly learned when it can be explained and applied in various situations. This technique aids in identifying gaps in understanding and helps organize and simplify information for better retention.

E1.6.D.3.7.c.i. THE FEYNMAN TECHNIQUE HELPS TURN INFORMATION INTO EASILY ACCESSIBLE AND UNDERSTANDABLE KNOWLEDGE. It's based on the principle that information is truly learned when it can be explained and applied in various situations. This technique aids in identifying gaps in understanding and helps organize and simplify information for better retention.
The technique involves four steps: 
1. pretending to teach it to a child, 
2. identifying gaps in your explanation, 
3. organizing and simplifying the information,
4. reviewing the material frequently.

E1.6.D.3.7.c.i_REF1_PH "THE FEYNMAN LEARNING TECHNIQUE
The Feynman Technique is the best way to supercharge your learning. And it works no matter the subject. Devised by Nobel Prize-winning physicist Richard Feynman, it leverages the power of teaching for better learning. [...]

Information is learned when you can explain it and use it in a wide variety of situations. The Feynman Technique gets more mileage from the ideas you encounter instead of rendering anything new into isolated, useless factoids.

When you really learn something, you give yourself a tool to use for the rest of your life. The more you know, the fewer surprises you will encounter because most new things will connect to something you already understand.

Ultimately, the point of learning is to understand the world. But most of us don’t bother to deliberately learn anything.

We memorize what we need to as we move through school, then forget most of it. As we continue through life, we don’t extrapolate from our experiences to broaden the applicability of our knowledge. Consequently, life kicks us in the ass time and again.

To avoid the pain of being bewildered by the unexpected, the Feynman Technique helps you turn information into knowledge that you can access as easily as reaching for a chair. [...]

There are four steps to the Feynman Learning Technique, based on the method Richard Feynman originally used. We have adapted it slightly after reflecting on our own experiences using this process to learn. The steps are as follows [...]:

Step 1: Pretend to teach it to a child

Take out a blank sheet of paper. At the top, write the subject you want to master. Now write out everything you know about the subject as if you were teaching it to a child [...]

It turns out that one of the ways we mask our lack of understanding is by using complicated vocabulary and jargon. The truth is, if you can’t clearly and simply define the words and terms you are using, you don’t really know what you’re talking about. [...]

Some of capturing what you would teach will be easy. These are the places where you have a clear understanding of the subject. But you will find many places where things are much foggier.

Step 2: Identify gaps in your explanation

Areas, where you struggle in Step 1, are the points where you have some gaps in your understanding.

Identifying gaps in your knowledge—where you forget something important, aren’t able to explain it, or simply have trouble thinking of how variables interact—is a critical part of the learning process.

Filling those gaps is when you really make the learning stick.

Now that you know where you have gaps in your understanding go back to the source material. Augment it with other sources. Look up definitions. Keep going until you can explain everything you need to in basic terms.

Only when you can explain your understanding without jargon and in simple terms can you demonstrate understanding. Think about it this way. If you require complicated terminology to explain what you know, you have no flexibility. When someone asks you a question, you can only repeat what you’ve already said.

Simple terms can be rearranged and easily combined with other words to communicate your point. When you can say something in multiple ways using different words, you understand it really well.
Being able to explain something in a simple, accessible way shows you’ve done the work required to learn. Skipping it leads to the illusion of knowledge—an illusion that can be quickly shattered when challenged.

Identifying the boundaries of your understanding is also a way of defining your circle of competence. When you know what you know (and are honest about what you don’t know), you limit the mistakes you’re liable to make and increase your chance of success when applying knowledge.

Step 3. Organize and simplify

Now you have a set of hand-crafted notes containing a simple explanation. Organize them into a narrative that you can tell from beginning to end. Read it out loud. If the explanation sounds confusing at any point, go back to Step 2. Keep iterating until you have a story that you can tell to anyone who will listen.

If you follow this approach over and over, you will end up with a binder full of pages on different subjects. If you take some time twice a year to go through this binder, you will find just how much you retain.

Step 4: Transmit 

This part is optional, but it’s the logical result of everything you’ve just done.

If you really want to be sure of your understanding, run it past someone (ideally someone who knows little of the subject).

The ultimate test of your knowledge is your capacity to convey it to another. [...]
The questions you get and the feedback you receive are invaluable for further developing your understanding.

Hearing what your audience is curious about will likely pique your own curiosity and set you on a path for further learning. After all, it’s only when you begin to learn a few things really well do you appreciate how much there is to know.

[...]

What does it mean to “know?”
Richard Feynman believed that “the world is much more interesting than any one discipline.” He understood the difference between knowing something and knowing the name of something, as well as how, when you truly know something, you can use that knowledge broadly.

When you only know what something is called, you have no real sense of what it is.

You can’t take it apart and play with it or use it to make new connections and generate new insights. When you know something, the labels are unimportant because it’s not necessary to keep it in the box it came in. [...]

Knowing the name of something doesn’t mean you understand it. We talk in fact-deficient, obfuscating generalities to cover up our lack of understanding."
(FS Brain Food)

E1.6.D.3.7.c.ii. PRACTICE VS. CONCEPTS
Richard Feynman, a Nobel Prize-winning physicist, criticized a first-grade science book that attempted to teach kids about energy by showing pictures of a wind-up dog toy and asking "What makes it move?". Feynman argued that this approach is too abstract and does not impart real understanding. He suggested a more useful approach would be to take the toy apart and see how it works, learn about the way it's put together, and the ingenuity of people who made it.

E1.6.D.3.7.c.ii_REF1_PH “STUDY HARD WHAT INTERESTS YOU THE MOST IN THE MOST UNDISCIPLINED, IRREVERENT, AND ORIGINAL MANNER POSSIBLE.”
(Richard Feynman)

E1.6.D.3.7.c.ii_REF2_PH FEYNMAN EMPHASIZED THAT TRUE UNDERSTANDING COMES FROM BREAKING DOWN AND RECOMBINING CONCEPTS, which involves explaining ideas in simple language to reveal gaps in understanding.
"Nobel Prize-winning physicist Richard Feynman describes a dismal first-grade science book that attempts to teach kids about energy by showing a series of pictures about a wind-up dog toy and asking, “What makes it move?”

For Feynman, this was the wrong approach because it was too abstract. You can easily fool yourself into thinking you understand something when you don't. Saying that energy made the dog move was equal to saying ‘movability makes it move.’

Staying at the level of the abstract imparts no real understanding. Kids might subsequently get the question right on a test if they have a decent memory. But they aren’t going to have any real understanding of what energy actually is.

Echoing Albert Einstein, Feynman goes on to describe a more useful approach.

"Perhaps I can make the difference a little clearer this way: if you ask a child what makes the toy dog move, you should think about what an ordinary human being would answer. The answer is that you wound up the spring; it tries to unwind and pushes the gear around.

What a good way to begin a science course! Take apart the toy; see how it works. See the cleverness of the gears; see the ratchets. Learn something about the toy, the way the toy is put together, the ingenuity of people devising the ratchets and other things. That’s good."

Taking things apart allows us to see how they work. It also gives us context for how things fit together. But you need to do more than take things apart to learn. You need to recombine them.

Using the Feynman Technique to explain what we've learned surfaces areas that we don't understand.

When you write things out in simple language, misunderstanding has no place to hide."
(Shane Parrish, FS-Brain Food)

E1.6.D.3.7.c.ii_REF3_PH “Everyone wants the summary. But the summary is what's left after someone else decided what matters. Their priorities aren't yours. Their filters aren't yours. When you operate on summaries, you're thinking with someone else's brain.”
(Shane Parrish, FS-Brain Food, June 29, 2025)

E1.6.D.3.7.d. FOR SPINOZA, TO UNDERSTAND IS TO EXPERIENCE THE ETERNAL ESSENCE OF THINGS

E1.6.D.3.7.d_REF1_PH "PROPOSITION 30
Intellect, in function (actu) finite, or in function infinite, must comprehend the attributes of God and the modifications of God, and nothing else.

PROOF
A true idea must agree with its object [...] ; in other words (obviously), that which is contained in the intellect in representation must necessarily be granted in nature. But in nature [...] there is no substance save God, nor any modifications save those [...] which are in God, and [...] cannot without God either be or be conceived. Therefore the intellect, in function finite, or in function infinite, must comprehend the attributes of God and the modifications of God, and nothing else.

PROPOSITION 31
The intellect in function, whether finite or infinite, as will, desire, love, &c., should be referred to passive nature and not to active nature.

PROOF
By the intellect we do not (obviously) mean absolute thought, but only a certain mode of thinking, differing from other modes, such as love, desire, &c., and therefore [...] requiring to be conceived through absolute thought. It must [...], through some attribute of God which expresses the eternal and infinite essence of thought, be so conceived, that without such attribute it could neither be nor be conceived [...]. It must therefore be referred to nature passive rather than to nature active, as must also the other modes of thinking.
NOTE
I do not here, by speaking of intellect in function, admit that there is such a thing as intellect in potentiality : but, wishing to avoid all confusion, I desire to speak only of what is most clearly perceived by us, namely, of the very act of understanding, than which nothing is more clearly perceived. For we cannot perceive anything without adding to our knowledge of the act of understanding."
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics, Part One)

Read Spinoza´s Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.6.D.3.7.d_REF1.1_PH "PROPOSITION 40 [...]

NOTE 2
From all that has been said above it is clear, that we, in many cases, perceive and form our general notions : 1. From particular things represented to our intellect fragmentarily, confusedly, and without order through our senses [...] ; I have settled to call such perceptions by the name of knowledge from the mere suggestions of experience. 2. From symbols, e.g., from the fact of having read or heard certain words we remember things and form certain ideas concerning them, similar to those through which we imagine things [...]. I shall call both these ways of regarding things knowledge of the first kind, opinion, or imagination. 3. From the fact that we have notions common to all men, and adequate ideas of the properties of things [...] ; this I call reason and knowledge of the second kind. Besides these two kinds of knowledge, there is, as I will hereafter show, a third kind of knowledge, which we will call intuition. This kind of knowledge proceeds from an adequate idea of the absolute essence of certain attributes of God to the adequate knowledge of the essence of things."
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics, Part Two)

Read Spinoza´s Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.6.D.3.7.d_REF1.2_PH "PROPOSITION 43
He, who has a true idea, simultaneously knows that he has a true idea, and cannot doubt of the truth of the thing perceived. [...]

NOTE
[...] No one, who has a true idea, is ignorant that a true idea involves the highest certainty. For to have a true idea is only another expression for knowing a thing perfectly, or as well as possible. No one, indeed, can doubt of this, unless he thinks that an idea is something lifeless, like a picture on a panel, and not a mode of thinking - namely, the very act of understanding. And who, I ask, can know that he understands anything, unless he do first understand it? In other words, who can know that he is sure of a thing, unless he be first sure of that thing? Further, what can there be more clear, and more certain, than a true idea as a standard of truth? Even as light displays both itself and darkness, so is truth a standard both of itself and of falsity.  [...]"
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics, Part Two)

Read Spinoza´s Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.6.D.3.7.d_REF1.3_PH "PROPOSITION 44
It is not in the nature of reason to regard things as contingent, but as necessary.[...]

COROLLARY 2
It is in the nature of reason to perceive things under a certain form of eternity (sub quâdam æternitatis specie).

PROOF
It is in the nature of reason to regard things, not as contingent, but as necessary [...]. Reason perceives this necessity of things [...] truly, - that is [...], as it is in itself. But [...] this necessity of things is the very necessity of the eternal nature of God ; therefore, it is in the nature of reason to regard things under this form of eternity. We may add that the bases of reason are the notions [...], which answer to things common to all, and which [...] do not answer to the essence of any particular thing : which must therefore be conceived without any relation to time, under a certain form of eternity."
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics, Part Two)

Read Spinoza´s Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.6.D.3.7.d_REF1.4_PH "PROPOSITION 47
The human mind has an adequate knowledge of the eternal and infinite essence of God.

PROOF
The human mind has ideas [...], from which [...] it perceives itself and its own body [...] and external bodies [...] as actually existing ; therefore [...] it has an adequate knowledge of the eternal and infinite essence of God.

NOTE
Hence we see, that the infinite essence and the eternity of God are known to all. Now as all things are in God, and are conceived through God, we can from this knowledge infer many things, which we may adequately know, and we may form that third kind of knowledge of which we spoke in the Note 2, Prop. 40, and of the excellence and use of which we shall have occasion to speak in Part V. Men have not so clear a knowledge of God as they have of general notions, because they are unable to imagine God as they do bodies, and also because they have associated the name God with images of things that they are in the habit of seeing, as indeed they can hardly avoid doing, being, as they are, men, and continually affected by external bodies. Many errors, in truth, can be traced to this head, namely, that we do not apply names to things rightly.  [...]
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics, Part Two)

Read Spinoza´s Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.6.D.3.7.d_REF2_PH FOR SPINOZA, THE QUESTION IS NOT HOW TO DREAM OF ANOTHER LIFE BUT HOW TO UNDERSTAND OUR CURRENT LIFE SO THAT WE CAN RECOGNIZE OURSELVES IN IT, ACCEPT IT, AND ENJOY IT
"Unlike morality, which dictates duties to free will, ethics merely demonstrates how passions engender one another. It is unnecessary to dictate duties to wills that act out of necessity when they are free and suffer the forces that subjugate them when they are oppressed. The question that arises is no longer the one formulated by Kant: 'What should we do?' Rather, it is the question that urges us to understand the necessity that compels us to act. Salvation no longer depends on an imagined way of life, but rather on our more or less clear and profound awareness of the motives of our actions. This is why Spinoza's Ethics has sometimes been interpreted as quietism. This is true in that this wisdom does not claim to change the world. However, it is false in that it does not lead to the renunciation of the will. Rather, it leads to the joyful affirmation of the will's essence insofar as it obeys only its own intrinsic necessity. For Spinoza, the question is not how to dream of another life but how to understand our current life so that we can recognize ourselves in it, accept it, and enjoy it. The goal is not to change life but to recognize and adhere to the perfection of the present life: "By reality and perfection, I mean the same thing" (Definition 6 of Ethics II). Therefore, it is a matter of reconciling ourselves with reality. This is why human passions should not be dealt with in tones of moral condemnation, but rather with the necessity of a geometric demonstration. "It may seem surprising that I should undertake to treat the vices and infirmities of men in the manner of geometers and wish to demonstrate by rigorous reasoning what they constantly proclaim to be contrary to reason, vain, absurd, and worthy of horror. I will therefore consider human actions and appetites as if they were lines, surfaces, and solids" (Preface to Ethics III). However, this method of pure rationality leads only to a political ethic, as defined in Book IV. This ethic is based on the calculation of mutual interests and the reciprocal neutralization of enmities. The ethics of simple reason is therefore the purely negative ethics of political wisdom. At this point, it does not allow us to achieve a positive ethics that teaches us to recognize the actual content of bliss rather than simply removing the forces that stand in the way of this recognition. Perhaps this is the limit of the 'method of geometers', which recognises 'reason' only through the productive force of adequate ideas that are rigorously linked together in an understanding which obeys the inner necessity expressed within it and does not allow itself to be distracted by passionate distractions that would deprive it of its essence. However, according to Spinoza, this demonstrative and deductive reason, which presides over the writing of the Ethics itself and links propositions, demonstrations, scholia and corollaries, is not the highest faculty of knowledge granted to us. In fact, there is another kind of knowledge superior to this, through which we can access the real content of wisdom or supreme bliss, beyond the calculation of geometric reasoning based on well-understood interests. [...]

To transition from the alienating servitude of mutual passions to the sovereign affirmation of one's full nature, reason alone is insufficient. Another, higher, supra-rational knowledge is necessary. This is because reason links together adequate ideas, generated solely by the productive or generative logic of the understanding, and posits them as objective truths. However, to understand the inner power that gives us existence and drives us to act — the source of our most authentic life — we cannot know this truth as an objective truth. That is to say, we cannot posit it as an object in the external world and determine it by exposing it to our observations, which is the nature of rational knowledge. Instead, we must experience it internally as an intrinsic truth inseparable from our nature, which is intuitively understood rather than objectively determined. However, such intuitive knowledge goes beyond the limits of reasoning and requires a higher faculty capable of experiencing the vital impulse that lifts us into existence and determines our direction. It is no longer a matter of constructing a demonstrative discourse, but of feeling and experiencing the burst of life deep within ourselves.[...]"
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the Fullness of This World, 6- “We feel and experience that we are eternal,” 2017)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Spinoza/Introduction/Introd6.html

E1.6.D.3.7.d_REF2.1_PH THE THIRD KIND OF KNOWLEDGE, WHICH IS STRANGELY AKIN TO THE UNITIVE FRUITION OF THE SOUL THAT LOVINGLY UNITES ITSELF WITH THE GOD WHO CREATED IT AND LIFTED IT INTO EXISTENCE.
"There is, therefore, an almost symbiotic intimacy between the soul and the body to which it is united; between the individual substance of soul and body, and the greater whole of nature; and finally, between nature and God.' Through this 'close union', everything that exists is also intimately linked to the infinite life in God. We 'know' this not through demonstrative reason, but through an immediate feeling — the feeling of life springing from the depths of our being — which is an immediate intuition and not a chain of deduction. This knowledge is also 'regeneration' of ourselves (a notion that lies at the very foundation of the Reformed religion): When we perceive such effects, we can truly say that we are born again, because our first birth took place when we were united with the body. Through this union, such effects and movements of the animal spirits were produced. However, this second birth will take place when we perceive entirely different effects of love in ourselves, thanks to the knowledge of this immaterial object. These effects differ from the first as much as the corporeal differs from the incorporeal and the spirit from the flesh. This can be called regeneration all the more because only from this love and union can eternal and unalterable stability follow' (last words of chapter 22 of the Short Treatise II). In chapter 25 of the second part of the Short Treatise, Spinoza returns to the superiority of intuitive knowledge over objective rationality. Through this knowledge, we can experience the intimate fusion of life in God or nature and that which burns deep within ourselves. This connection gives rise to the highest bliss in those who are aware of it. : 'We finally realise that knowledge through reasoning is not the most important thing for us, but merely a means by which we achieve our desired goal. It is like a good spirit who brings us a true message from the Supreme Good, inspiring us to seek it and unite with it ourselves. Spinoza compares the third kind of knowledge, or intuitive knowledge, to the angel bearing the Good News, or eu-aggelos in Latin, which is the means by which we are inspired to seek the Supreme Good for ourselves. This union is our highest salvation and happiness.' This refers to the entire programme of work to be accomplished, which will be fully realised in the Ethics. [...]
From the scholium of V 23 (GF, p. 325) onwards, the entire sequence until the end (prop. 42) is a long, almost hymn-like development of the bliss that intuitive knowledge of the life of God within us brings. Proposition 25 states that 'the supreme effort (conatus) of the soul and its supreme virtue (virtus) is to know things through the third kind of knowledge' (GF, p. 325). We understand that this is no longer a matter of knowledge, but of bliss; the intimate proximity of God's life to our own, like a centre of eternity radiating throughout our entire being — at least while we remain alive and persevere in existence. 
And so the atheist Spinoza situates himself in the tradition of mystical experience. This is the third kind of knowledge, which is strangely akin to the unitive fruition of the soul that lovingly unites itself with the God who created it and lifted it into existence. However, it is not only the soul that enjoys this union, as is the case with mystics. Ecstasy is rapture; the body is abandoned like a lifeless, useless burden. Instead, it is experienced by both the mind (mens is the creator of concepts and the producer of rationality) and the body (which is raised to a blessed life of glory and health). Earthly bliss does not raise us to the third heaven, as Paul of Tarsus was raptured (2 Cor. 12), but keeps us firmly grounded. It affirms and cultivates our incarnate individuality and our own free will — the nature that expresses itself in us in a unique way. This is why Spinozist bliss must be distinguished from the spiritual deification accomplished by holy souls who have emptied themselves in order to welcome the divinity, at the cost of their own annihilation, as taught by Eckhart and prevalent in northern countries. The countries of the beguinages. Even so, Spinoza's words sometimes seem to echo this wisdom. The bliss of the fifth book of Ethics is one of self-affirmation, not renunciation; an exultation at being alive on Earth, not a detachment that renounces the self and the world, surrendering to rapture in the afterlife."
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the Fullness of This World, 6- “We feel and experience that we are eternal,” 2017)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Spinoza/Introduction/Introd6.html

E1.6.D.3.7.d_REF2.2_PH THE EXPERIENCE OF ETERNITY, WHICH IS ACCESSIBLE IN THIS LIFE AND NOT THE PRIVILEGE OF THE BLESSED IN THE HEREAFTER, RESULTS FROM THE THIRD KIND OF KNOWLEDGE.
"Reading is another example of the mind's synthetic grasp: the global method has taught us that the mind views the whole before the part. We do not learn to read by adding one letter to another; rather, we grasp the word as an indivisible whole that is immediately and intuitively recognisable to the mind. When we begin to read Ethics, do we not start by reading proposition by proposition? Perhaps we understand the meaning of this or that passage, but we are unable to grasp the guiding thought or the vision of the mind that inspires the text at a glance. And yet, through repeated reading of this text, we eventually perceive it as a poem that expresses and modulates a single joy of life in various ways throughout. Similarly, in the first lesson of music theory, the apprentice laboriously spells out the notes, whereas the virtuoso pianist reads them at a glance, translating them impetuously on the keyboard. Only the latter truly hears the music; the former merely counts what he does not understand. This final example perfectly illustrates Spinoza's point because the authentic pianist, a true automaton both physically and spiritually, adheres to the movement of the music and the necessity of its development. Through the divine necessity expressed in his performance, he experiences the most exhilarating freedom."

Therefore, it is true to say that, perhaps more than deduction, intuition is a mode of knowledge that can be cultivated and deepened. Even if we understand how the mind can translate temporal succession into the totality of eternity — which involves gathering the successive into the simultaneous — the reason why this third kind of knowledge allows us to access bliss itself is still unclear. Through this bliss, we feel and experience that we are eternal: 'sentimus experimurque nos aeternos esse' (V, scholium 23). This experience of eternity, which is accessible in this life and not the privilege of the blessed in the hereafter, results from the third kind of knowledge. It is therefore invoked in the scholium of prop. 23, which prepares for and announces the final movement of Book V, which is devoted to the third kind of knowledge (props. 25–32). 25: 'The supreme effort of the mind and its sovereign virtue is to understand things through the third kind of knowledge'), engendering 'intellectual love of God' (prop. 33 to 37; prop. 33: 'The intellectual love of God, which arises from the third kind of knowledge, is eternal'), leading to bliss (prop. 38 to the end, i.e. Prop. 42; Prop. 38: 'The more things the mind understands through the second and third kinds of knowledge, the less it suffers from evil feelings and the less it fears death'). 
The enigmatic theme of immediate and intuitive knowledge, hinted at since his earliest writings, thus finds its crowning glory and speculative fulfilment in the final book of the Ethics. All of this meditation was aimed solely at this ultimate goal. By 'bliss', Spinoza — who borrows the term from theologians, who use it to refer to the perfect enjoyment of the blessed in paradise, immersed in the vision of God — does not mean a passion due to an external cause. Rather, he means the fulfilment (gaudium) of our own nature, understood from the source that gives us life. Unlike joy (laetitia), which we experience when we encounter an external cause that increases our ability to act, bliss (beatitudo) has its source within ourselves. It is, in a sense, from ourselves — insofar as we experience our own existence — that we draw the strength to attain bliss. While Spinoza writes that this supreme enjoyment comes from our union with God, it must be noted that this God is an immanent cause, not a transitive or transcendent one — internal, not external (I, 18: 'God is the immanent but not transitive cause of all things'). Therefore, to understand how bliss can lead us to experience eternity, we must grasp the nature of our union with God and the intuition that lies at the root of this profound knowledge."
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the Fullness of This World, 6- “We feel and experience that we are eternal,” 2017)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Spinoza/Introduction/Introd6.html

E1.6.D.3.7.d_REF2.3_PH EXISTENCE, INSOFAR AS IT IS ENDOWED WITH CONSCIOUSNESS, IS ABLE TO EXPERIENCE THE ACTIVITY OF ITS OWN ESSENCE WITHIN ITSELF: THE DYNAMISM OF A DIVINE POWER, ABSOLUTE AND CREATIVE, THE GIVER OF EXISTENCE; THE ACTIVITY OF THE LIVING GOD, EXPRESSING AND RADIATING HIMSELF IN ALL THINGS ENDOWED WITH THE VIRTUE THAT MAINTAINS THEM IN BEING.
"Descartes' physics is static; Spinoza's ontology is dynamic.' This power, or rather this effort (conatus), is the essence of all existence — as the word itself suggests, indicating movement beyond oneself (ex-sistence), projecting oneself forward according to the continuity of one's trajectory or the fulfilment of one's destiny. This makes it universal, as the act that initiates existence and carries it forward is present in all things and beings, whether living or inert, conscious or unconscious. It is also a concrete universal since it can only be apprehended subjectively, by intuition and not deduction. Existence, insofar as it is endowed with consciousness, is able to experience the activity of its own essence within itself: the dynamism of a divine power, absolute and creative, the giver of existence; the activity of the living God, expressing and radiating Himself in all things endowed with the virtue that maintains them in being. The conatus achieves the paradox of being a singular universal since it is a notion that is both common to all and infinitely unique and singular in the intimacy of each individual. [...]

Therefore, let us focus our attention not on existence itself, but on its essence, striving to understand it better through intuitive, non-deductive knowledge — the third kind of knowledge — which, according to the order of reason, develops in the fifth and final book of the Ethics. We intuit this life of God within us as a perpetual source and a constant inclination to live and to live ever more fully. This movement of ecstasy drives us to act and to project ourselves forward through the power of continuous self-creation. 'Desire is the very essence of man insofar as he is determined by some affection to do something' (III, definition of affections, I). However, not all desires are essential; many are provoked by the imagination and find their cause in externality rather than in the essence of the desiring subject. Rather, it is the desire to desire that is essential: the desire to project one's existence with a view to its intensification and the increase in power that carries it beyond itself and determines it to persevere in its momentum. Existence is thus the movement of Being affected by itself — that is, by its essence — by the energy that carries and lifts it. 
Therefore, it is the same thing to grasp something intuitively as existing and alive, and to understand that this power—the act of divinity—is given to us. We are merely tenants, not owners; we receive it from God, who is its perpetual source. This power can have neither beginning nor end: it is a pure vital impulse that is at the origin of this miracle—that there is something rather than nothing—and this institution of Being is determined by its very essence to persevere throughout the ages, eternally present and alive. Therefore, if we are born and die, it is not due to the essential act that sustains and carries us into existence, but due to the myriad passions that cause us to suffer from encounters and the shocks we experience because we are subject to external causes. After all, we are part of nature: temporary creatures in a swarm of countless creatures that are all equally alive (albeit to varying degrees) and constantly transforming and regenerating themselves in the continuous metamorphoses of nature as a whole — God's play with himself."
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the Fullness of This World, 6- “We feel and experience that we are eternal,” 2017)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Spinoza/Introduction/Introd6.html

E1.6.D.3.7.d_REF2.4_PH WE FEEL AND EXPERIENCE THAT WE ARE ETERNAL [...] WE FEEL THAT OUR SPIRIT, INSOFAR AS IT ENCOMPASSES THE ESSENCE OF THE BODY IN THE CONTEXT OF ETERNITY, IS ETERNAL AND CANNOT BE DEFINED BY TIME.
"In this immense drama — the expanding sphere in which energy unfolds in the life of matter, like invention in the life of the mind — we have been assigned a role from which we cannot escape. However, we have the choice to either live it fully or deny it, passing into the light of Being without ever probing the infinite power that gives us life, existence and the ability to persevere in the bliss of pure existence. The lesson of ethics does not teach us how to choose our destiny — a vain pretension of the imagination which dreams with its eyes open and knows nothing of the life that is its essence — but rather how to live life to the fullest and embrace the knowledge that we are one expression among the infinite possibilities, all of which are destined for necessary realisation, of the living God who animates all things to varying degrees and has granted them the incomprehensible gift of existence. For what we have shown so far applies equally to humans and other individuals, all of whom are animated, albeit to varying degrees' (Scholion II, 13). Life is not valuable because of the choices we are able to make due to an imaginary freedom that we attribute to ourselves only because we are ignorant of the true causes that determine us and the necessity that guides us. Life is valuable because it offers us the experience, albeit limited in time and space, of participating in God's life, of feeling and experiencing ourselves as eternal beings: 
'We feel and experience that we are eternal [...] We feel that our spirit, insofar as it encompasses the essence of the body in the context of eternity, is eternal and cannot be defined by time. In other words, it cannot be explained by duration' (V, scholion 23). However, eternity is not immortality. The former takes Being into a dimension beyond time — a definition that is, admittedly, merely negative and not affirmative — whereas the latter extends the time granted to this singular existence indefinitely. In fact, the ancient Greeks knew only the latter form of bliss. They considered nothing to be more divine than being immortal and even made this attribute the name of divinity. They referred to their gods as the Immortals. However, the Jewish God knows himself as infinite, not indefinite. It is not enough for him to live indefinitely in time; he must live in the glory of eternity, which triumphs over the dissent and diaspora that form the intimate fabric of duration. He must re-establish himself in perfect harmony with himself, in the bliss of being and knowing himself fully and perpetually enjoying this fullness.
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the Fullness of This World, 6- “We feel and experience that we are eternal,” 2017)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Spinoza/Introduction/Introd6.html

E1.6.D.3.7.d_REF2.5_PH THIS EXTRAORDINARY WORK PARADOXICALLY TEACHES US THAT WE LIVE IN PARADISE AND ENJOY ETERNITY NOW.
"All men are born and die. But, as long as they are granted the gift of being and persevering in its glory, it is up to them to reconcile themselves with themselves and enjoy the flame that burns within them. They must quench their thirst at the source of life that radiates within them and grants them the infinite power of existence. To enjoy this eternity, it is not necessary to prolong our existence indefinitely. On the contrary, this bliss is given to us in the present moment, provided that we become aware of the life-giving power within us, and according to the depth that meditation gives to our intuitive knowledge of this infinite life of which we are a singular expression. Infinity is an intensive quantity, not an extensive one, and there is no limit to the intensity with which we can participate in the divine activity that carries us into existence and continually perseveres in this momentum through the exercise of attention and the penetration of consciousness. As we have seen, it is indeed the nature of intuitive knowledge to extend, through practice, the scope of its investigation and the radius of its horizon of evidence. This knowledge is accompanied by the highest enjoyment, as it enables us to experience the act of divine causation inwardly. This does not affect us passionately through the effect of an external cause, but rather fills us inwardly through the intuition of our very essence. Only creatures enjoy the infinite power of Being since they receive it from the immanent God who gives them life and not from God Himself, who gives existence through the necessity of His infinite power. Therefore, He cannot experience this power as a gift that fills Him since it is His very nature: 
'We conclude that a created thing can be said to enjoy existence because existence is not its essence. However, God cannot be said to enjoy existence because existence is God himself, as is his essence. Therefore, created things enjoy duration, but God does not enjoy it in any way” (Metaphysical Thoughts, II, 1; GF I, 359). This suggests that the creature's status is perhaps more enviable than God's, as he eternally produces the generation of bodies in matter and the succession of ideas in minds out of his own necessity, without being able to enjoy or even be aware of it. Spinoza's God is not a personal God who addresses His creatures by name — Abraham, Isaac or Jacob — He is the eternal activity of universal necessity, always in the process of giving birth, creating, generating and producing. The only wisdom is that which makes us aware of this and enables us to enjoy this force radiating through us while we exist in nature. Spinoza's God begets and produces; he neither loves nor knows — or rather, he loves only himself, insofar as he is the cause of himself and thus affects himself by giving himself existence. However, it is crucial for our happiness that we know him through intuitive, non-deductive knowledge that is subjective rather than objective. This knowledge must spring from an entirely intellectual love that originates in the depths of our being and not from the imprint or image that clouds our reason through an alienating encounter. This "intellectual love of God", which gives us the bliss of feeling and experiencing ourselves as eternal, is not passionate love of the imagination. It is an "intellectual" love born of intuitive knowledge of the mind's essence and the essence of the body of which it is the idea. It is knowledge of the conatus that sustains all existence in its effort to persevere. 
Unlike Tristan and Isolde, who are passionately in love with the fascinating and captivating images they have of each other, thus condemning themselves to lonely fantasies that make the dream of embracing each other seem unrealistic, God's intellectual love is like that of parents for their children. Parents rejoice in seeing their children flourish and in seeing life assert itself in them and triumph over the obstacles that oppress it. It is also like the love of a gardener for a bud bursting forth or a flower blooming. It rejoices in the universal germination that animates nature. It is a benevolent and non-jealous love that recognises the freedom of each individual to be themselves and to become what they are. It can also be the love of lovers, although Spinoza is rather discreet on this point. When the sweetness of love is sharpened by the intimacy of the embrace and both succeed, through the attention of intuitive intelligence, in coming as close as possible to the secret that beats in the other and in oneself, each knowing the other through the source of life that similarly pours forth in the other, they feel and experience themselves as eternal, like Abraham and Sarah. Mad love alienates us from the outside world and pursues an impossible fusion with another person who will always remain distinct from us. Intellectual love of God drinks from the fountain that springs from the depths of our being, enjoying the universal life that animates all things to varying degrees. The bliss arising from intellectual love of the God who gives us life and the power to exist — whose density, richness and depth we will never exhaust — is a kind of deification and regeneration of the creature; an authentic fusion or transfiguration of singular existence into the infinite activity of divine causation. 
Such bliss makes the wise man like the blessed in paradise, transported to a state that theologians call 'glory', the infinite enjoyment of the soul enraptured in contemplating the face of divinity (a privilege denied even to Moses in this life). The body is also redeemed from the humiliation caused by the original sin and restored to its original splendour as the image of God. It is restored to eternity by the resurrection of the flesh; without this, the soul alone would be like a mutilated part of the body, united to it by a divine bond. We clearly understand what our salvation, bliss or freedom consists of: a constant and eternal love of God or God's love for humanity. This love, or bliss, is called Glory in the sacred books, and not without reason. Whether this love relates to God or our intelligence, it is rightly called contentment of the spirit (acquiescentia animi), which is truly not distinct from glory. Insofar as this love relates to God, it is a joy accompanied by the idea of oneself, and the same applies when this love relates to the intellect. Moreover, since the essence of our intelligence consists solely in knowledge, of which God is the principle and foundation, this explains how and in what way our intelligence follows from the divine nature according to its essence and existence, and depends continually on God' (Scholium to V, Prop. 36).

According to Spinoza, life has no purpose other than itself and the intuitive knowledge of the infinite power that sustains it. Life has no meaning or purpose because it is its own meaning and purpose. Therefore, there is no need for any reward in the afterlife, as existence itself and the bliss it inspires in an attentive mind is the greatest gift of all. Living and being aware of the infinity of this gift is enough. It is also vain to hope for salvation as a reward for this supreme and inestimable gift: 'Bliss is not the reward of virtue, but virtue itself' (Prop. 42, the final proposition of Ethics). This extraordinary work paradoxically teaches us that we live in paradise and enjoy eternity now. We need only this world to find the eternity and perfection that people have only been able to imagine in another world. As it is written on the first page of Book I of Ethics: 'By eternity, I mean existence itself insofar as it is conceived as necessarily following from the mere definition of an eternal thing' (I, Def. 8). In other words, it is known through its essence, the effect of the infinite power of divine causation. This idea is reaffirmed on the first page of Book II: 'By reality and perfection, I mean the same thing.' This world is perfect. All is accomplished."
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the Fullness of This World, 6- “We feel and experience that we are eternal,” 2017)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Spinoza/Introduction/Introd6.html

E1.6.D.3.7.e. PHILOSOPHY IS ONLY ONE OF THE INCOMPLETE PRACTICES ON THE PATH TO UNDERSTANDING

E1.6.D.3.7.e_REF1_PH "PHILOSOPHY 
A theoretical (but not scientific) practice whose sole purpose is reason as a means and whose goal is wisdom. It is about thinking better in order to live better. 
Philosophy is not a science, nor even knowledge (it is not just another piece of knowledge, it is a reflection on existing knowledge), and therefore, as Kant said, one cannot learn philosophy: one can only learn to philosophize. [Philosophizing is thinking about your life and living your thoughts. Of course, this doesn't mean that you should be satisfied with introspection or egocentrism! Thinking about your life means thinking about it as it is: here and now, of course, but also in society, in history, in the world. And to live one's thoughts is to act, as much as one can, as much as one must, for otherwise one could only suffer or dream. Thus, philosophy is an activity in thought, which, at least in principle, leads to a more active, happier, clearer, freer - wiser life. It should be noted, however, that while happiness is one of the traditional goals of philosophy, it cannot be its standard. As a theoretical (discursive, rational, conceptual) practice, philosophy should submit only to what appears to be true. It is up to us to make happiness out of it, if we can. But truth is what counts. It is better to have true sadness than false joy".
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionnary, 2013)

E1.6.D.3.7.e_REF2_PH PHILOSOPHY IS A DEMYSTIFICATION ENTERPRISE THAT CREATES FREE MEN.
"When someone asks "what's the use of philosophy?" the reply must be aggressive, since the question tries to be ironic and caustic. Philosophy does not serve the State or the Church, who have other concerns. It serves no established power. The use of philosophy is to sadden. A philosophy that saddens no one, that annoys no one, is not a philosophy. It is useful for harming stupidity, for turning stupidity into something shameful. Its only use is the exposure of all forms of baseness of thought. Is there any discipline apart from philosophy that sets out to criticise all mystifications, whatever their source and aim, to expose all the fictions without which reactive forces would not prevail? Exposing as a mystification the mixture of baseness and stupidity that creates the astonishing complicity of both victims and perpetrators. Finally, turning thought into something aggressive, active and affirmative. Creating free men, that is to say men who do not confuse the aims of culture with the benefit of the State, morality or religion. Fighting the ressentiment and bad conscience which have replaced thought for us. Conquering the negative and its false glamour. Who has an interest in all this but philosophy? Philosophy is at its most positive as critique, as an enterprise of demystification. And we should not be too hasty in proclaiming philosophy's failure in this respect. Great as they are, stupidity and baseness would be still greater if there did not remain some philosophy which always prevents them from going as far as they would wish, which forbids them — if only by yea-saying — from being as stupid and base as they would wish. They are forbidden certain excesses, but only by philosophy. [...]
Thinking means the activity of thought; but thought has its own ways of being inactive which can occupy it and all its forces entirely. The fictions through which reactive forces triumph form the most base element in thought, the way in which it remains inactive and busies itself with not thinking. [...]
Thinking, like activity, is always a second power of thought, not the natural exercise of a faculty, but an extraordinary event in thought itself, for thought itself. Thinking is the n-th power of thought. It is still necessary for it to become "light", "affirmative", "dancing". But it will never attain this power if forces do not do violence to it. Violence must be done to it as thought, a power, the force of thinking, must throw it into a becoming-active. A constraint a training of this kind is what Nietzsche calls "Culture". Culture, according to Nietzsche, is essentially training and selection (UM III "Schopenhauer Educator" 6). It expresses the violence of the forces which seize thought in order to make it something affirmative and active. - We will only understand the concept of culture if we grasp all the ways in which it is opposed to method. Method always presupposes the good will of the thinker, "a premeditated decision". Culture, on the contrary, is a violence undergone by thought, a process of formation of thought through the action of selective forces, a training which brings the whole unconscious of the thinker into play. The Greeks did not speak of method but of paideia; they knew that thought does not think on the basis of a good will, but by virtue of the forces that are exercised on it in order to constrain it to think. Even Plato still distinguished what forces us to think and what leaves thought inactive; and in the myth of the cave he subordinated the paideia to the violence undergone by a prisoner, either in order to leave the cave or in order to return to it."
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophy, 1962)

E1.6.D.3.7.e_REF3_PH GROWING SMALL, I DISAPPEAR IN THE IMMENSE, MORE AND MORE FREE.
“CONVERSATION WITH JEANNE
Let us not talk philosophy, drop it, Jeanne.
So many words, so much paper, who can stand it.
I told you the truth about my distancing myself.
I've stopped worrying about my misshapen life.
It was no better and no worse than the usual human tragedies.

For over thirty years we have been waging our dispute
As we do now, on the island under the skies of the tropics.
We flee a downpour, in an instant the bright sun again,
And I grow dumb, dazzled by the emerald essence of the leaves.

We submerge in foam at the line of the surf,
We swim far, to where the horizon is a tangle of banana bush,
With little windmills of palms.
And I am under accusation: That I am not up to my oeuvre,
That I do not demand enough from myself,
As I could have learned from Karl Jaspers,
That my scorn for the opinions of this age grows slack.

I roll on a wave and look at white clouds.

You are right, Jeanne, I don't know how to care about the salvation of my soul.
Some are called, others manage as well as they can.
I accept it, what has befallen me is just.
I don't pretend to the dignity of a wise old age.
Untranslatable into words, I chose my home in what is now,
In things of this world, which exist and, for that reason, delight us:
Nakedness of women on the beach, coppery cones of their breasts,
Hibiscus, alamanda, a red lily, devouring
With my eyes, lips, tongue, the guava juice, the juice of la prune de Cythère,
Rum with ice and syrup, lianas-orchids
In a rain forest, where trees stand on the stilts of their roots.

Death, you say, mine and yours, closer and closer,
We suffered and this poor earth was not enough.
The purple-black earth of vegetable gardens
Will be here, either looked at or not.
The sea, as today, will breathe from its depths.
Growing small, I disappear in the immense, more and more free.”
(Czeslaw Milosz)

E1.6.E. SOCIAL COMMITMENT
Fighting courageously for a society that embraces our vision of progress, preserves the environment and makes equal opportunity a reality.

E1.6.E.1 WHERE DOES THE BALANCE LIE BETWEEN CARING FOR ONESELF AND CARING FOR OTHERS AND THE WORLD?

E1.6.E.1.1. TRUE HAPPINESS AND SELF-LOVE CANNOT EXIST WITHOUT JUSTICE AND LOVE FOR OTHERS
Self-interest should not be seen as a form of selfishness but rather a means to an end, the end being the general well-being of all. True happiness and self-love cannot exist without justice and love for others. We are all interconnected, thus by quieting the voices of civilization, one can hear the interconnectedness of life. "And yet we are habitually deafened to it by a kind of desensitization, a form of paralysis that comes from the sheer mismatch between the scale of the problems the world hurls at us and our individual locus of agency. The antidote to this paralysis is small action for “however meaningless and vain, however dead life appears, the man of faith, of energy, of warmth… steps in and does something"
"The joy of the courageous one is that of a pure and inspired heart, which is articulate to other hearts and says yes to becoming, rather than withdrawing from the world." "The courageous one, by his action alone, will set right what was upside down."

E1.6.E.1.1.a. “INTEREST
[...] It's a clear misunderstanding to perceive interest as an excuse for egoism. Instead, it is an attempt to overcome or sublimate it. It is in everyone's interest to pursue the common good. Who can achieve happiness alone? Who can love without considering oneself? This is where self-love develops into a love for justice or love for one's neighbor. As the Dalai Lama once stated, "Be selfish: Love one another!"”
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.6.E.1.1.b. SEEMINGLY SMALL ACTS COLLECTIVELY SHAPE HUMANITY'S COURSE
Elie Wiesel critiques the desensitization to global issues in modern society, attributing it to the vast scale of these problems and media sensationalism. Wiesel understands the emotional toll of continuous exposure to crises and promotes selective, impactful actions instead of paralysis. He agrees with Hannah Arendt's belief that small actions can lead to limitless effects, and he encourages individuals to pick a cause. He emphasizes that seemingly small actions, when taken together, can dramatically shape the course of humanity.

E1.6.E.1.1.b_REF1_LIT ELIE WIESEL DISCUSSES THE EMOTIONAL EXHAUSTION CAUSED BY CONSTANT EXPOSURE TO GLOBAL CRISES AND THE PARALYSIS IT INDUCES. He suggests that the antidote to this paralysis is small, meaningful actions, echoing Hannah Arendt's belief in the boundless impact of even the smallest deeds.
"In Conversations with Elie Wiesel (public library), the Biblical question Cain poses to God after killing Abel — “Am I my brother’s keeper?” — becomes a lens on what makes for brotherhood in the broadest humanistic sense. Wiesel reflects:

'We are all our brothers’ keepers… Either we see in each other brothers, or we live in a world of strangers… There are no strangers in a world that becomes smaller and smaller. Today I know right away when something happens, whatever happens, anywhere in the world. So there is no excuse for us not to be involved in these problems. A century ago, by the time the news of a war reached another place, the war was over. Now people die and the pictures of their dying are offered to you and to me while we are having dinner. Since I know, how can I not transform that knowledge into responsibility? So the key word is “responsibility.” That means I must keep my brother.'

Whenever we quiet the voices of so-called civilization — the voices of selfing and hard-edged individualism — that sense of the interconnectedness of life and of lives becomes audible. And yet we are habitually deafened to it by a kind of desensitization — the kind the poet May Sarton so poignantly captured as she contemplated how to live with tenderness in a harsh world. Much of it, Wiesel observes, is a form of paralysis that comes from the sheer mismatch between the scale of the problems the world hurls at us and our individual locus of agency — a particular pathology of the information age, further exploited by the news media and their crisis-mongering. Wiesel considers the consequence:

'We are careless. Somehow life has been cheapened in our own eyes. The sanctity of life, the sacred dimension of every minute of human existence, is gone. The main problem is that there are so many situations that demand our attention. There are so many tragedies that need our involvement. Where do you begin?' [...]

He traces the emotional attrition that happens when we are bombarded with news of crises and traumatic events — at first deeply moved and invested in allaying the suffering we see, we grow exhausted by trauma-sighting and help-canvassing, just as news of the latest calamity or injustice is piling atop the previous one:

'You couldn’t take it. There is a need to remember, and it may last only a day or a week at a time. We cannot remember all the time. That would be impossible; we would be numb. If I were to remember all the time, I wouldn’t be able to function. A person who is sensitive, always responding, always listening, always ready to receive someone else’s pain… how can one live?'

The antidote to this paralysis, Wiesel argues, is small action — a testament to Hannah Arendt’s conviction that “the smallest act in the most limited circumstances bears the seed of… boundlessness, because one deed, and sometimes one word, suffices to change every constellation.” A century and a half after Van Gogh insisted that “however meaningless and vain, however dead life appears, the man of faith, of energy, of warmth… steps in and does something,” Wiesel insists on choosing from among the innumerable causes soliciting your attention and aid just one in which to get involved — an act seemingly small that, on the cumulative scale of humanity, moves the world."
(Maria Popova's review of Conversations with Elie Wiesel in The Marginalian)

E1.6.E.1.1.b_REF1.1_CUR "I CAN’T ENJOY MYSELF. IF THERE IS ONE GUY DYING OF HUNGER IT KILLS IT FOR ME."
"Life is either terrible or miserable, you should be happy your life is only miserable."
(Woody Allen, Annie Hall, 1977)

Watch a selection of best scenes on YouTube: https://youtu.be/lyKrCAgki-Y?feature=shared

E1.6.E.1.1.b_REF1.2_PH OUR PERSONAL STRUGGLES AREN'T ISOLATED INCIDENTS BUT RATHER SHARED EXPERIENCES REFLECTING THE CHALLENGING AND TRANSFORMATIVE GROWTH OF HUMANITY AS A WHOLE.
“We ourselves are events in history. Things do not merely happen to us, they happen through us. […]

All of us, if we are really alive, are disturbed now in our emotions. We are faced by emotional problems that we do not know how to solve. They distract our minds, fill us with misgiving, and sometimes threaten to wreck our lives. That is the kind of experience to which we are committed. If anyone thinks they are peculiar to the difficulties of his own situation, let him… talk a little about them to other people. He will discover that he is not a solitary unfortunate. We shall make no headway with these questions unless we begin to see them, and keep on seeing them, not as our private difficulties but as the growing pains of a new world of human experience. Our individual tensions are simply the new thing growing through us into the life of mankind. When we see them steadily in this universal setting, then and then only will our private difficulties become really significant. We shall recognize them as the travail of a new birth for humanity, as the beginning of a new knowledge of ourselves and of God."
(John Macmurray, Reason and Emotion, 1935)

E1.6.E.1.1.b_REF2_PH TAKE ON CONCRETE, MODEST BUT VERY REAL ACTIONS
"Today, someone asked me about the pace of the world, what I thought about it and what we could do to improve it. More than ever, the Diamond Sutra once again imposed itself on me: the pace of the world is not the pace of the world, that's why I call it the pace of the world. No, the pace of the world is not the pace of the world. It does not boil down to my concepts, to my prejudices, to my ideas, to my ideology. It is much denser, more complex, richer, grander than what I perceive of it. I can never grasp it, I can never influence it. It goes on, which is why I call it the pace of the world.
There is no question however of retrieving from the world, of abdicating, of resigning but rather one should make his contribution, trying to improve it little by little, on one´s small scale, improving what can be improved. The Diamond Sutra, once again, invites me to be enchanted at what is, although it sometimes troubles me. While inviting me to take on concrete, modest but very real actions."
(Alexandre Jollien, La Pharmacopée n ° 27)

E1.6.E.1.1.b_REF3_PH “GOOD AND EVIL BOTH INCREASE AT COMPOUND INTEREST. That is why the little decisions you and I make every day are of such infinite importance. The smallest good act today is the capture of a strategic point from which, a few months later, you may be able to go on to victories you never dreamed of. An apparently trivial indulgence in lust or anger today is the loss of a ridge or railway line or bridgehead from which the enemy may launch an attack otherwise impossible.”
(C.S. Lewis)

E1.6.E.1.1.c. THE ONLY PROBLEM REALLY WORTH THINKING ABOUT IS HOW TO BE FAIR IN OUR LIFE
He would have always replied that the only problem truly worth contemplating was how to be fair in our life. However, when a claim is raised for an extended period without any progress, one's mind tends to drift off, much like an arm holding something aloft for hours tends to numb. Our thoughts, similar to soldiers parading in the summer heat, cannot remain perpetually upright. If they're made to wait too long, they lose consciousness and collapse. […]
He waited behind his persona,insofar as that term can be defined as the part of a man that allows itself to be shaped by the outside world and life's course. Meanwhile, his quiet despair, held back, rose a little more each day.

E1.6.E.1.1.c_REF1_LIT ULRICH IS OBSESSED WITH THE SEARCH FOR A JUST LIFE. DESPITE HIS EFFORTS IN MATHEMATICS AND SCIENCE, HE IS IN AN EXISTENTIAL CRISIS, LOATHING HIMSELF FOR HIS INACTION. He waits for a change that does not come, feeling trapped by his thoughts and inertia.
"The earth too, but Ulrich in particular, pays homage to the Utopian idea of Essayism. [...]
At any point during his work on mathematical and mathematico-logical problems or while he was concerned with natural science, if he had been asked what aim he had in mind, he would have answered that there was only one question really worth thinking about, and that was the question of right living. But when one has been making a demand for a
long time without any result, the brain goes to sleep, just as the arm does when it has been holding something up for too long. Our thoughts can no more remain standing for an indefinite period than soldiers can on parade in summer; if they have to wait too long, they simply fall down in a faint.

As Ulrich had completed the draft of his view of life when he was twenty-six, now, when he was thirty-two, it no longer seemed quite genuine. He had not elaborated his ideas any further, and apart from a vague, tense feeling, such as one has when waiting for something with one’s eyes shut, there was not much sign of personal emotion in him, now that the days of the first tremulous revelations had passed. [...]

It might be mentioned in his defence that at a certain age life runs away incredibly fast. But the day when one must begin to live out one’s last will, before one leaves the residue of it behind, lies far ahead and cannot be shifted. That had become menacingly clear to him since almost six months had passed without anything’s changing. While he let himself be moved to and fro in the minor and foolish activity that he had taken on, talking, liking to talk too much, living with the desperate persistence of a fisherman putting down his nets in an empty river, and yet doing nothing that was in accord with the person he nevertheless significantly was, and doing it deliberately, he waited. He waited hidden behind his person, in so far as this word refers to that part of a man formed by the world and the course of life; and his quiet desperation,
dammed up behind it, rose higher every day. He was in the worst state of emergency in his life and despised himself for his omissions. Are great ordeals the privilege of great personalities? He would have liked to believe that. But it is not true, for even the simplest neurotic personalities have their crises. So all he was actually left with in this great perturbation was that residue of imperturbability possessed by all heroes and criminals—it is not courage, it is not will-power, it is not confidence, but simply a tough capacity to hold on—something that is as difficult to drive out as the life out of a cat even when it is utterly mangled by the dogs.

To anyone who wants to visualise how such a man lives when he is alone, the most that can be said is that by night the lighted window-panes gaze into his room, and the thoughts, after they have been used, sit about like the clients in the waiting-room of a lawyer with whom they are not satisfied."
(Robert Musil, The Man Without Qualities, Volume 1, 1930)

E1.6.E.1.1.c_REF2_PH "HOW CAN HUMAN LIVES BE WEIGHED ONE AGAINST EACH OTHER? IS THIS EVEN POSSIBLE? John Broome who has a background in economics as well as in philosophy, discusses how governments should allocate scarce resources or make life and death decisions.
Purely utilitarist concepts such as QUALIs have to be balanced by considerations of fairness that introduce an equality of chance. Ex: If you can treat one of 2 patients only, it is not because one is blind and will produce less QUALIs for the rest of his life that the other patients who isn't blind should be favored with the treatment. Fairness of chance seems right in this example, choosing who will be cured by lottery." 
(John Broome on Weighing Lives)

Listen to the episode: http://philosophybites.com/2008/06/john-broome-on.html

E1.6.E.1.1.c_REF2.1_PH "HOW SHOULD SCARCE HEALTHCARE RESOURCES BE DISTRIBUTED?
The black report commissioned by the NHS 30 years after its creation in the late 70s showed that the well off still were healthier than the poor even when they had equal access to health services. Although this advocated for putting more resources in social services and less in healthcare this did not happen because of lobbying and interests of several groups.
The NHS uses cost effectiveness to allocate its budget: The goal is to maximize the QUALYs = Quality Adjusted Live Years for the population as a whole, which is a purely utilitarian approach. Utilitarism has been heavily criticized as a philosophical theory: Is it right to base the definition of NHS resources on it?
(Jonathan Wolff on Political Bioethics)

Listen to the episode: http://philosophybites.com/2012/06/jonathan-wolff-on-political-bioethics-originally-on-bioethics-bites.html

E1.6.E.1.1.d. THE HAPPY MUST SEE THE UNHAPPY AS THEIR MISFORTUNE
Victor Hugo suggests a profession of faith that harmonizes our actions and words, our ethos and logos. This faith involves love for self and others, viewing the rectification of public wrongs as the basis of our understanding. He advocates for the development of the courage or awareness of the non-reciprocity between fairness and law. The fortunate must see the misfortune of others as their own; social egoism is the start of a downfall. If we wish to thrive, we must intertwine our hearts and embrace our collective humanity. "The joy of the courageous is the joy of a pure and inspired heart, which connects with other hearts and affirms life, rather than retreating from the world."
"Above all, it is the irreversibility of time that guides us." The courageous, through their actions alone, can correct what is unbalanced.

E1.6.E.1.1.d_REF1_PH "COURAGE OR THE AWARENESS OF THE NON-RECIPROCITY BETWEEN RIGHT AND LAW [...] 
This could also be another name for the moral conscience that Hugo likes to invoke so often; the one that, feverishly, never falters. Democracy, or the history of the "permanent and perpetual confrontation of the law that makes men with the law that makes men". Democracy, or the regime that makes this confrontation the conduct of its policy. And Hugo's literary destiny is played out in the same movement: "Do not lose heart, oh pity! As for me, I will not tire, and what I have written in all my books, what I have testified by all my actions, [...] before the National Assembly of France as well as the stoned window of the Place des Barricades in Brussels, I will testify, I will write and I will say again and again: we must love one another, love one another, love one another! The fortunate must bear the misfortune of the unfortunate; social selfishness is the beginning of the grave; if we want to live, let us unite our hearts and be one great human race. Let us advance, let us retreat. [...] Let us help, protect, support, admit public wrongdoing and make amends. [...] The duty of the strong is the right of the weak". There is no romantic lyricism or naïve optimism in Hugo's declaration. On the contrary, it is a confession of faith. First of all, Hugo affirms the appropriateness - the moral imperative - of what he said and did, of his ethos and his logos. He wrote what he actually did and confirmed it by telling everyone. He did not divide the territories of courage, did not behave one way in one place and another in another. He always made this doing and saying the substance of his literature. Finally, he appeals to love. Not in the sense of passion for a woman, but in the sense of agape, that which is the ferment of the community of men. In short, the other name for concern for oneself and others, for the common good. "Let us want to live, let us unite our hearts", or the call to common courage. Finally, in the last act of the profession of faith, let us make the redemption of the public wrong, the democratic wrong itself, the ground of our understanding. Or let us make confrontation, the confrontation of rights and law, the political path of the human community; and thus the law will not be a sham, but on the contrary, the very consolation of the weak. Victor Hugo knows how much we are in danger when we lack courage. [...]
It is the other side of the political and moral work, a kind of embodied superego, not severe and therefore not fantastical. It is the stylization of a moral conscience. [...] Within democracy, literature seals a privileged pact with politics: a pact of conscience. It will be the guardian of public strategy. [...] And it is in the knowledge of this subterranean, sometimes forgotten, sometimes secret pact between literature and politics that the courageous construct their actions, find the strength they lack, and build hope for all. For public concern is undoubtedly the profane experience of hope. Certainly a concrete aspect, already a glimmer, but already in fact a providence. Public concern is the very proof that hope is not just an inappropriate passion, to be abandoned like fear. Hope is something like the other side of a moral paradigm of reason. Hugo preaches the efficacy of hope, its ethical and not strictly utopian character. Its voluntary nature, because hope is a sure sign of a will in motion, and therefore it is ethical. Because there is no reason to hope. The facts are never favorable. Everything conspires against hope. [...]"
(Cynthia Fleury, The end of courage, 2010)

E1.6.E.1.1.d_REF1.1_PH "THE JOY OF THE COURAGEOUS IS THE JOY OF A PURE AND INSPIRED HEART, IN CONNECTION WITH OTHER HEARTS, SAYING YES TO THE FUTURE, RATHER THAN WITHDRAWING FROM THE WORLD 
The parrhesiastical dimension to the attainment of joy is not without importance. To the extent that it allows one to be non-blissful, properly articulated in relation to reality and to others, it is not an out-of-world joy. The joy of the brave refers to the earthly horizon. It is the joy of the pure and inspired heart. Inspired above all by itself, but forgiving of others. "Pure", not in the puritanical sense or according to the canons of morality. But precisely in the sense that the heart is connected to other hearts, and in a way not pure, as irrevocably connected to others. It is the "pure" of mixing, of those who welcome the other and say yes to becoming. "Consciousness in the right place," writes Jankélévitch, "that ratifies becoming and movement, that affirms the existence of the other, is a consciousness that says yes: yes to the future, yes to the beloved; retrospection and self-love and egocentric concern say no, just as the fugitive says no (35). There are, of course, more solipsistic forms of innocence. That of Abraham, even when he is with his son. But the moment of sacrifice calls him to his strongest and most intimate solitude. Others will withdraw from the world like saints or monks. Their hearts will be inspired, but their joy will be less likely to nourish the world and confidence in its meaning. [...]

Note:
(35) Vladimir Jankélévitch, The Pure and the Impure."
(Cynthia Fleury, The end of courage, 2010)

E1.6.E.1.1.d_REF1.2_PH "WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED ABOUT INEQUALITY SINCE VICTOR HUGO?
"The happy ones must have the unfortunate ones as their misfortune; social selfishness is the beginning of the end; we want to live? Let our hearts mix and let us be part of the immense human race. Let us push forward and tow who is behind. [... ] Let us help, protect, rescue - Let us admit the public fault and repair it. [...] It is the right of the weakest that is the duty of the strongest" (Victor Hugo)
"Concern for the common good is arguably the secular experience of hope. Certainly, a concrete posture, already a glimmer of hope, and already in fact a providence. Concern for the common good is the very proof that hope is not just an inappropriate passion, which should be dropped like fear. For there resides in hope the basis of a moral paradigm of reason. Hugo departs from  strictly utopian hope, preaching for its effectiveness, its ethics and its voluntary character, because hope is a sure sign of a will on the move, and that is why it is ethical. Because there is no reason to hope. The facts are never indulgent. Everything conspires against hope." 
(Cynthia Fleury, The End of Courage, 2010)

E1.6.E.1.1.d_REF2_PH JANKÉLÉVITCH'S CONCEPT OF "PHILOSOPHY STRAIGHTENED UP" EMPHASIZES A DYNAMIC AND COURAGEOUS APPROACH TO LIFE.
"Jankélévitch has an expression: « philosophy straightened up ». Not that this philosophy is on the side of linearity alone. On the contrary, we have seen that it was conscious of the convolutions and contradictions of life, but that it remains valiant in its own dynamics. And it is in this sense that we must understand « straightened up ». The same « straight line » that we can perceive when a person invites us not to procrastinate, to simply go for it. « It is above all the irreversibility of time that points us in the right direction. » The courageous one, by his actions alone, will turn upright what was upside down. [...] This path of the philosophy straightened up, that says yes to the vocation of becoming, this path of the courageous remains irremediably a path that links people together. « The philosophy of Yes finds the straight path, via recta, the path that is straight and direct too: for it leads, on the one hand, to the future, and on the other hand, it connects without intermediary the I to the You and the first person to the second. »"
(Cynthia Fleury, The End of Courage, 2010)

E1.6.E.1.1.d_REF3_PH A QUESTION OF POSTAL ADDRESS
For Gilles Deleuze, the way in which we consider our place and action in the world, and which helps us to think about the right/left divide, calls upon the metaphor of the postal address. If we consider our address, and by equivalence, our role in a "zoom-in" movement (I am a citizen of the world, living in such and such a country, in such and such a region, in such and such a city, at such and such an address), we are "liberal". If we organize our attention in the sense of a "zoom-out", we are "conservative", because the universal is at the periphery of our attention, whereas in the "zoom-in" movement, we start by preoccupying ourselves with the general, and then move on to the particular.

E1.6.E.1.1.d_REF4_CUR BEUYS SHOWS US A WIDE-SCREEN PROJECTION OF A MAN BEING SHOT CLOSELY, SUFFERING FROM TERRIBLE ANXIETY, biting his lips and on the verge of tears. He seems to be telling us that social justice cannot begin if we do not even look at those who are suffering - so that we can then consider their condition and act on their behalf.

Watch an extract of Soziale Plastik on YouTube: https://youtu.be/_TRzOCbmCP8?feature=shared

E1.6.E.1.1.d_REF5_CUR IN THIS INSTALLATION, WHICH TRANSFORMS THE ISRAELI PAVILION OF THE VENICE Biennale 2019 INTO A VERY SPECIAL FIELD HOSPITAL, Aya Ben Ron uses the subterfuge of subjecting the visitor to the discipline of the medical facility to put him in the psychological state of hearing truths that are difficult to confront in other situations. 
Visitors first take a numbered ticket at the entrance of the building and wait their turn in the waiting room on the ground floor, watching their ticket number on a monitor that manages the queue. While they wait, a video scrolls on screens explaining the treatment process the patient will undergo - explained by nurses in white coats. Once called to the counter, the patient is given a wristband, just like when he or she is admitted to the hospital, and a description of the stages of treatment. He goes upstairs, where he is asked to put on a white crepe gown over his shoes, held in place by elastic bands, typical of sterile hospital areas. Then the "treatment" begins. The first stage consists of entering a soundproof chamber. Once inside and with the door closed, the patient follows the video instructions of a "care assistant" who asks him to shout at the top of his voice while performing arm exercises three times in a row - the "examination" will be recorded, we are told. Then the patient, now conditioned and already cooperating with the "care system," is seated by a "nurse" in a chair resembling a dentist's office, where he is shown a video through headphones in a room where the other patients are "treated" in the same way. The video shows a difficult social situation resulting from the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, with some videos being violent and difficult to watch. At this stage, however, the patient has been conditioned to cooperate with the process, and the vast majority of visitors watch the video to the end. At the end of the video, two "experts" in white coats are interviewed to interpret it: one of the experts is Israeli and the other is Palestinian, and each gives us his or her perspective on the social situation we have just witnessed - each in a calm and convincing manner. 
The process allowed visitors to see and hear what they would not have done if they had been free to leave at the first difficult scene presented in the videos. Like Joseph Beuys in Social Sculpture before her, Aya Ben Ron seems to be telling us that social justice cannot begin if we do not even look at those who suffer - in order to consider their condition and act on their behalf.

E1.6.E.1.1.e. "THE GOOD LIFE, AS I CONCEIVE IT, IS A HAPPY LIFE. I do not mean that if you are good you will be happy; I mean that if you are happy you will be good. Unhappiness is deeply implanted in the souls of most of us. […]

A way of life cannot be successful so long as it is a mere intellectual conviction. It must be deeply felt, deeply believed, dominant even in dreams. [...]

What I should put in the place of an ethic in the old sense is encouragement and opportunity for all the impulses that are creative and expansive. I should do everything possible to liberate men from fear, not only conscious fears, but the old imprisoned primeval terrors that we brought with us out of the jungle. I should make it clear, not merely as an intellectual proposition, but as something that the heart spontaneously believes, that it is not by making others suffer that we shall achieve our own happiness, but that happiness and the means to happiness depend upon harmony with other men. When all this is not only understood but deeply felt, it will be easy to live in a way that brings happiness equally to ourselves and to others. If men could think and feel in this way, not only their personal problems, but all the problems of world politics, even the most abstruse and difficult, would melt away. Suddenly, as when the mist dissolves from a mountain top, the landscape would be visible and the way would be clear. It is only necessary to open the doors of our hearts and minds to let the imprisoned demons escape and the beauty of the world take possession."
(Bertrand Russell, New Hopes for a Changing World, 1951)

E1.6.E.1.1.f. THE GOOD LIFE MUST BE LIVED IN A GOOD SOCIETY, AND IS NOT FULLY POSSIBLE OTHERWISE
The good life, we said, is a life inspired by love and guided by knowledge… [But] in all that differentiates between a good life and a bad one, the world is a unity, and the man who pretends to live independently is a conscious or unconscious parasite. […]
To live a good life in the fullest sense a man must have a good education, friends, love, children (if he desires them), a sufficient income to keep him from want and grave anxiety, good health, and work which is not uninteresting. All these things, in varying degrees, depend upon the community, and are helped or hindered by political events. The good life must be lived in a good society, and is not fully possible otherwise.”
(Bertrand Russell, What I believe, 1925)

E1.6.E.1.1.f_REF1_CUR ENERGY
"Until well into the 20th century, sculptures were generally made using solid materials such as stone, wood or bronze; from the 1960s onwards, however, the notion of sculpture was expanded to include ephemeral materials and performative acts. In this sense, Joseph Beuys regarded sculpture as "a constellation of forces [...] consisting of undetermined, chaotic, undirected energies, a crystalline principle of form and a mediating principle of movement." Applied to thermal properties, chaotic energy corresponds to warmth, and crystalline form corresponds to cold - a dualistic principle that underlies all of Beuys's works, including Richtkräfte einer neuen Gesellschaft (Directional Forces of a New Society). This piece originated in 1974, when Beuys discussed the structure of society with visitors to the exhibition Art into Society, Society into Art in London, and recorded this process on blackboards. Conceptual considerations thus produced mental energies, which Beuys equated with warmth. In 1977, he directed these energies by incorporating the blackboards into an installation at the Neue Nationalgalerie in Berlin. The recorded terms and ideas, parts of which are no longer visible, have been concentrated in a manner similar to the storage of energy in a battery. The multiple Capri-Batterie (Capri Battery) provides a charming illustration of Beuys's dualistic thinking."

E1.6.E.1.2. REVOLT WITHOUT RESENTMENT
For Camus, revolt represents the essence of life itself, embodying our defiance against suffering and injustice. However, we must acknowledge the impossibility of completely eliminating suffering and injustice from the world. Despite this, we should still strive for a future marked by true generosity, dedicating ourselves fully to the present.

E1.6.E.1.2_REF1_PH ALBERT CAMUS EXPLORES HUMAN REVOLT AGAINST INJUSTICE AND SUFFERING, AFFIRMING THAT REVOLT IS AN ACT OF LOVE AND GENEROSITY TOWARD PRESENT AND FUTURE LIFE. He criticizes revolutions that become tyrannical and destructive when they forget their generous origins.
"Beyond Nihilism. There does exist for man, therefore, a way of acting and of thinking which is possible on the level of moderation to which he belongs. Every undertaking that is more ambitious than this proves to be contradictory. The absolute is not attained nor, above all, created through history. Politics is not religion, or if it is, then it is nothing but the Inquisition. How would society define an absolute? Perhaps everyone is looking for this absolute on behalf of all. But society and politics only have the responsibility of arranging everyone's affairs so that each will have the leisure and the freedom to pursue this common search. History can then no longer be presented as an object of worship. It is only an opportunity that must be rendered fruitful by a vigilant rebellion.

"Obsession with the harvest and indifference to history," writes Rene Char admirably, "are the two extremities of my bow." If the duration of history is not synonymous with the duration of the harvest, then history, in effect, is no more than a fleeting and cruel shadow in which man has no more part. He who dedicates himself to this history dedicates himself to nothing and, in his turn, is nothing. But he who dedicates himself to the duration of his life, to the house he builds, to the dignity of mankind, dedicates himself to the earth and reaps from it the harvest that sows its seed and sustains the world again and again. Finally, it is those who know how to rebel, at the appropriate moment, against history who really advance its interests. To rebel against it supposes an interminable tension and the agonized serenity of which Rene Char also speaks. But the true life is present in the heart of this dichotomy. Life is this dichotomy itself, the mind soaring over volcanoes of light, the madness of justice, the extenuating intransigence of moderation. The words that reverberate for us at the confines of this long adventure of rebellion are not formulas for optimism, for which we have no possible use in the extremities of our unhappiness, but words of courage and intelligence which, on the shores of the eternal seas, even have the qualities of virtue.

No possible form of wisdom today can claim to give more. Rebellion indefatigably confronts evil, from which it can only derive a new impetus. Man can master in himself everything that should be mastered. He should rectify in creation everything that can be rectified. And after he has done so, children will still die unjustly even in a perfect society. Even by his greatest effort man can only propose to diminish arithmetically the sufferings of the world. But the injustice and the suffering of the world will remain and, no matter how limited they are, they will not cease to be an outrage. Dimitri Karamazov's cry of "Why?" will continue to resound; art and rebellion will die only with the last man. [...]

This insane generosity is the generosity of rebellion, which unhesitatingly gives the strength of its love and without a moment's delay refuses injustice. Its merit lies
in making no calculations, distributing everything it possesses to life and to living men. It is thus that it is prodigal in its gifts to men to come. Real generosity toward the future lies in giving all to the present. Rebellion proves in this way that it is the very movement of life and that it cannot be denied without renouncing life. Its purest outburst, on each occasion, gives birth to existence. Thus it is love and fecundity or it is nothing at all. Revolution without honor, calculated revolution which, in preferring an abstract concept of man to a man of flesh and blood, denies existence as many times as is necessary, puts resentment in the place of love. Immediately rebellion, forgetful of its generous origins, allows itself to be contaminated by resentment; it denies life, dashes toward destruction, and raises up the grimacing cohorts of petty rebels, embryo slaves all of them, who end by offering themselves for sale, today, in all the marketplaces of Europe, to no matter what form of servitude. It is no longer either revolution or rebellion but rancor, malice, and tyranny. Then, when revolution in the name of power and of history becomes a murderous and immoderate mechanism, a new rebellion is consecrated in the name of moderation and of life. We are at that extremity now. At the end of this tunnel of darkness, however, there is inevitably a light, which we already divine and for which we only have to fight to ensure its coming. All of us, among the ruins, are preparing a renaissance beyond the limits of nihilism. But few of us know it. [...]

They choose, and give us as an example the only original rule of life today: to learn to live and to die, and, in order to be a man, to refuse to be a god.

At this meridian of thought, the rebel thus rejects divinity in order to share in the struggles and destiny of all men. We shall choose Ithaca, the faithful land, frugal and audacious thought, lucid action, and the generosity of the man who understands. In the light, the earth remains our first and our last love. Our brothers are breathing under the same sky as we; justice is a living thing. Now is born that strange joy which helps one live and die, and which we shall never again postpone to a later time. On the sorrowing earth it is the unresting thorn, the bitter brew, the harsh wind off the sea, the old and the new dawn."
(Albert Camus, L´homme révolté, La pensée de midi, Au-delà du nÏhilisme)

E1.6.E.1.3. SPIRITUAL PRACTICES AND WORKS OF ART GIVE US ACCESS TO THE COMMUNITY OF REALITY
True freedom and joy can only be achieved by facing challenges and actively engaging with the world, not by focusing solely on personal desires and interests. So, how can spiritual or artistic experiences be charitable? How can we help alleviate others' suffering if we suspend the "I"?
Spiritual awakenings (or grace, depending on the wording of each spiritual practice) or works of art allow us access to shared experiences and the larger community of reality. The wise, compassionate individual or the artist can guide others to "recognize" reality and open up to the spiritual or artistic dimensions.
"To eternalize oneself by surpassing oneself. This self-improvement effort is necessary and this ambition is just. Many people devote themselves entirely to political activism and social revolution preparation. However, those who strive to make themselves worthy of the revolution are rare.”

E1.6.E.1.3.a. THIS WORK ON ONESELF IS NECESSARY, THIS AMBITION IS FAIR

E1.6.E.1.3.a_REF1_PH TO RECONCILE THE SEARCH FOR JUSTICE AND SPIRITUAL ASPIRATION THROUGH A DAILY SPIRITUAL EXERCISE OF IMPROVEMENT AND EXCELLENCE, WHILE REMAINING COMMITTED TO SOCIAL TRANSFORMATION.
"Some may see in these attitudes a form of flight, an escape, incompatible with the awareness that we must have of human suffering and misery, and they will think that the philosopher thus reveals himself to be irredeemably alienated from the world. I will simply respond by quoting this beautiful text by Georges Friedmann, written in 1942, which suggests the possibility of reconciling concern for justice and spiritual effort, and which an ancient Stoic might have written: "Take flight every day! At least one moment, which may be brief, as long as it is intense. A spiritual exercise every day, alone or in the company of someone else who also wants to improve... To go beyond the moment... To strive to free yourself from your own passions... To outlive yourself. This effort is necessary, this ambition is right. There are many who are totally absorbed in militant politics, in the preparation of the social revolution. Rare, very rare, are those who want to make themselves worthy of preparing the revolution."
(Pierre Hadot, In praise of ancient philosophy, 1983)

E1.6.E.1.3.a_REF2_PH THE 'I' AS THE BASIS OF EXPERIENCE IS SUSPENDED IN AWAKENING "Buddhism - The future belongs to those who awaken early The egological perspective (the 'I' as the basis of experience) is suspended in awakening. How can Buddhism be charitable in this case? How can I help alleviate the suffering of others when the "I" is suspended? In Mahayana, enlightenment gives us access to the common, to the community of being of the real. We are all Buddhas, and those who have attained enlightenment can help others to "see" the real in turn, to see the openness of the enlightened dimension. The challenge is not one of developing capacity, but of relationship. In the letting go that allowed the Buddha to finally achieve enlightenment after 6 years of stubborn willpower, we sometimes see "renunciation". A more faithful translation would be the Old French 'shame', the withdrawal, the humility that makes enlightenment possible (in Sanskrit, renunciation etymologically means to go back on one's word)".
(Les chemins de la philosophie, broadcast on France Culture)

E1.6.E.1.3.a_REF3_PO “YOU SPEAK OF CIVILIZATION AND HOW IT SHOULDN’T EXIST,
AT LEAST NOT AS IT IS.
You say that everyone, or almost everyone, suffers
From human life being organized in this way.
You say that if things were different, people would suffer less. You say things would be better if they were how you want
     them.
I hear you and don’t listen.
Why would I want to listen to you?
I’d learn nothing by listening to you.
If things were different, they’d be different: that’s all.
If things were how you want them, they’d be how you want
     them, ﬁne.
Too bad for you and for all who spend life
Trying to invent the machine for producing happiness!”
(Fernando Pessoa, A Little Larger Than the Entire Universe Selected Poems - signed as Albert Caeiro) 

E1.6.E.1.3.b. I HAVE AN OBLIGATION TO MANKIND AS I HAVE ONE TO KNOWLEDGE
”What's the point of action, if the thought that guides action leads to the discovery of meaninglessness? However, this realization is not immediately apparent: I must gradually come to this understanding, it can't be grasped all at once. [...] To reach this point, I am continually required to navigate through situations, each demanding something of me: I have a responsibility to mankind as well as to knowledge. History, politics, the economic and social universe, the physical world, and the heavens themselves envelop me in overlapping circles. I cannot escape them in thought without giving a piece of myself to each one. Like a pebble causing ripples in a pond as it sinks, to reach the bottom, I must first immerse myself in the water.”

E1.6.E.1.3.b_REF1_ANT I OWE MANKIND AS MUCH AS I OWE KNOWLEDGE "No doubt I also see the dangers of too hasty a resignation. This great religion of ignorance is not based on our inability to understand. It testifies to our capacity and elevates us to the point of discovering truth in the form of a mutual exclusion of Being and Knowing. With additional audacity, it has - alone with Marxism - reduced the metaphysical problem to that of human behavior. Its schism was proclaimed on the sociological level, the fundamental difference between the great and the small vehicle being whether or not the salvation of one depends on the salvation of all humanity.

The historical solutions of Buddhist morality, however, confront us with a frightening alternative: the person who answers the previous question in the affirmative locks himself away in a monastery; the other is easily satisfied by practicing a selfish virtue.

But injustice, misery, and suffering exist; they mediate this choice. We are not alone, and it is not up to us to remain deaf and blind to others, or to confess only the humanity within ourselves. Buddhism can remain coherent while accepting to respond to the calls from without. [...]

The contradiction remains only when I isolate the extremes: what is the point of acting if the thought that guides the action leads to the discovery of meaninglessness? But this discovery is not immediately accessible: I have to think it, and I cannot think it all at once. Whether there are twelve stages, as in Boddhi, or more or less, they all exist together, and to reach the end I am constantly called upon to experience situations, each of which demands something of me: I owe something to humanity and to knowledge. History, politics, the economic and social world, the physical world, and even the heavens surround me in concentric circles from which I cannot escape in my thoughts without conceding a part of myself to each. Like a stone hitting a wave, crisscrossing the surface as it goes, to reach the bottom I must first throw myself into the water."
(Claude Lévi-Strauss, Tristes Tropiques, 1955)

E1.6.E.1.3.c. HOW TO LIVE HONORABLY IN SHAMEFUL TIMES
"We have not overcome our condition, and yet we know it better. We know that we live in contradiction, but we also know that we must refuse this contradiction and do what is needed to reduce it. Our task as [humans] is to find the few principles that will calm the infinite anguish of free souls. We must mend what has been torn apart, make justice imaginable again in a world so obviously unjust, give happiness a meaning once more to peoples poisoned by the misery of the century. Naturally, it is a superhuman task. But superhuman is the term for tasks [we] take a long time to accomplish, that’s all."
(Albert Camus, The almond trees in Lyrical and Critical Essays, 1940)

E1.6.E.1.3.d. VIRTUE ETHICS
Does focussing on one's virtues deflects us from social and political ones? But is morality only thinking about others? Virtue ethics includes virtues like justice - virtues are directed towards other people, so that working on the virtues that you have benefits others. You have to focus on your life because it is how you interact with others. 

E1.6.E.1.3.d_REF1_PH "JULIA ANNAS OUTLINES THE KEY FEATURES OF VIRTUE ETHICS, the approach to living well derived from Aristotle's writings, and explains what she thinks the purpose of this ethical approach is.
The emphasis is on developing character traits. You don't learn virtues imitating the exact behavior you have witnessed in previous situations, you learn from the way and the reasons why virtuous people act and develop a critical view. We can pick up from virtues in different cultures - virtue ethics is not trapped in the model of a particular culture. Reflecting on what we do makes us less prone to our prejudices. After the fact we feel we could have behaved better when compared to the demand virtue requires os us. Virtue is demanding as well as being inspirational. It requires to work on your emotions. Does focussing on one's virtues deflects us from social and political ones? But is morality only thinking about others? Virtue ethics includes virtues like justice - virtues are directed towards other people, so that working on the virtues that you have benefits others. You have to focus on your life because it is how you interact with others. Consequentialism, such as utilitarism, focuses on end results - no matter how it was achieved and virtue ethics puts a stress on the relation between the individual and the end result."
(Julia Annas on What is Virtue Ethics For? in Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: http://philosophybites.com/2014/12/julia-annas-on-what-is-virtue-ethics-for.html

E1.6.C.2.4.c_REF1_PSIwE1.6.E.1.3.

E1.6.E.1.3. UTILITARIAN PHILOSOPHY CREATES A CONFUSION
Utilitarian philosophy creates confusion by equating individual interests with those of humanity. It assumes that a better life for the majority is always the ultimate good. While it's true that without the courage to endure suffering and face death for higher values, neither freedom nor lasting happiness can exist, the system falls short. Sacrificing the individual for the relentless pursuit of pleasure of the larger number (termed as happiness by utilitarians) is indicative of a crude, hedonistic system that lacks critical thinking.

E1.6.E.1.3_REF1_PH WITHOUT THE COURAGE TO SUFFER AND TO DIE, THERE IS NO FREEDOM.
"Hidden under [the attempts of utilitarian philosophy] as under other, less interesting variations of the sacred cult of selfishness and the pervasive power of individualism, [...] we find another reference point which in fact constitutes a much stronger principle than the pain-pleasure trade-off might offer, and that is the principle of life. What is asked of pain, pleasure, fear and desire in all these systems is not happiness, but rather the promotion of individual life or a guarantee of the perpetuation of individual life or a guarantee of the perpetuation of the species. If modern egoism was, as it claims to be, a relentless pursuit of pleasure (labeled happiness), it would not lack that indispensable argument constitutive of all true hedonistic systems : the radical justification of suicide. This limitation in itself indicates that it is in fact a philosophy of life of the most vulgar kind and least critical form. As a last resort, it always chooses life as the supreme standard against which everything is measured; the interests of the individual, the interests of humanity, are always equated with individual life, with the life of the species, as if it were obvious that life was the supreme good."
(Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition, 1958)

E1.6.E.1.3_REF2_PH JOHN STUART MILL DEFENDS UTILITARIANISM BY CLARIFYING THAT ITS STANDARD IS THE IMPARTIAL HAPPINESS OF ALL CONCERNED, NOT JUST THE AGENT'S OWN, AND THAT THIS PRINCIPLE JUDGES THE MORALITY OF AN ACTION BY ITS CONSEQUENCES, NOT BY THE MOTIVE BEHIND IT.
“Unquestionably it is possible to do without
happiness; it is done involuntarily by nineteen-twentieths of mankind,
even in those parts of our present world which are least deep in
barbarism; and it often has to be done voluntarily by the hero or the
martyr, for the sake of something which he prizes more than his
individual happiness. But this something, what is it, unless the
happiness of others, or some of the requisites of happiness? It is noble
to be capable of resigning entirely one's own portion of happiness, or
chances of it: but, after all, this self-sacrifice must be for some end;
it is not its own end; and if we are told that its end is not happiness,
but virtue, which is better than happiness, I ask, would the sacrifice
be made if the hero or martyr did not believe that it would earn for
others immunity from similar sacrifices? Would it be made, if he thought
that his renunciation of happiness for himself would produce no fruit
for any of his fellow creatures, but to make their lot like his, and
place them also in the condition of persons who have renounced
happiness? All honour to those who can abnegate for themselves the
personal enjoyment of life, when by such renunciation they contribute
worthily to increase the amount of happiness in the world; but he who
does it, or professes to do it, for any other purpose, is no more
deserving of admiration than the ascetic mounted on his pillar. He may
be an inspiriting proof of what men *can* do, but assuredly not an
example of what they *should*.

Though it is only in a very imperfect state of the world's arrangements
that any one can best serve the happiness of others by the absolute
sacrifice of his own, yet so long as the world is in that imperfect
state, I fully acknowledge that the readiness to make such a sacrifice
is the highest virtue which can be found in man. I will add, that in
this condition of the world, paradoxical as the assertion may be, the
conscious ability to do without happiness gives the best prospect of
realizing such happiness as is attainable. For nothing except that
consciousness can raise a person above the chances of life, by making
him feel that, let fate and fortune do their worst, they have not power
to subdue him: which, once felt, frees him from excess of anxiety
concerning the evils of life, and enables him, like many a Stoic in the
worst times of the Roman Empire, to cultivate in tranquillity the
sources of satisfaction accessible to him, without concerning himself
about the uncertainty of their duration, any more than about their
inevitable end.

Meanwhile, let utilitarians never cease to claim the morality of
self-devotion as a possession which belongs by as good a right to them,
as either to the Stoic or to the Transcendentalist. The utilitarian
morality does recognise in human beings the power of sacrificing their
own greatest good for the good of others. It only refuses to admit that
the sacrifice is itself a good. A sacrifice which does not increase, or
tend to increase, the sum total of happiness, it considers as wasted.
The only self-renunciation which it applauds, is devotion to the
happiness, or to some of the means of happiness, of others; either of
mankind collectively, or of individuals within the limits imposed by the
collective interests of mankind.

I must again repeat, what the assailants of utilitarianism seldom have
the justice to acknowledge, that the happiness which forms the
utilitarian standard of what is right in conduct, is not the agent's own
happiness, but that of all concerned. As between his own happiness and
that of others, utilitarianism requires him to be as strictly impartial
as a disinterested and benevolent spectator. In the golden rule of Jesus
of Nazareth, we read the complete spirit of the ethics of utility. To
do as one would be done by, and to love one's neighbour as oneself,
constitute the ideal perfection of utilitarian morality. As the means of
making the nearest approach to this ideal, utility would enjoin, first,
that laws and social arrangements should place the happiness, or (as
speaking practically it may be called) the interest, of every
individual, as nearly as possible in harmony with the interest of the
whole; and secondly, that education and opinion, which have so vast a
power over human character, should so use that power as to establish in
the mind of every individual an indissoluble association between his own
happiness and the good of the whole; especially between his own
happiness and the practice of such modes of conduct, negative and
positive, as regard for the universal happiness prescribes: so that not
only he may be unable to conceive the possibility of happiness to
himself, consistently with conduct opposed to the general good, but also
that a direct impulse to promote the general good may be in every
individual one of the habitual motives of action, and the sentiments
connected therewith may fill a large and prominent place in every human
being's sentient existence. If the impugners of the utilitarian morality
represented it to their own minds in this its true character, I know not
what recommendation possessed by any other morality they could possibly
affirm to be wanting to it: what more beautiful or more exalted
developments of human nature any other ethical system can be supposed to
foster, or what springs of action, not accessible to the utilitarian,
such systems rely on for giving effect to their mandates.

The objectors to utilitarianism cannot always be charged with
representing it in a discreditable light. On the contrary, those among
them who entertain anything like a just idea of its disinterested
character, sometimes find fault with its standard as being too high for
humanity. They say it is exacting too much to require that people shall
always act from the inducement of promoting the general interests of
society. But this is to mistake the very meaning of a standard of
morals, and to confound the rule of action with the motive of it. It is
the business of ethics to tell us what are our duties, or by what test
we may know them; but no system of ethics requires that the sole motive
of all we do shall be a feeling of duty; on the contrary, ninety-nine
hundredths of all our actions are done from other motives, and rightly
so done, if the rule of duty does not condemn them. It is the more
unjust to utilitarianism that this particular misapprehension should be
made a ground of objection to it, inasmuch as utilitarian moralists have
gone beyond almost all others in affirming that the motive has nothing
to do with the morality of the action, though much with the worth of the
agent. He who saves a fellow creature from drowning does what is morally
right, whether his motive be duty, or the hope of being paid for his
trouble: he who betrays the friend that trusts him, is guilty of a
crime, even if his object be to serve another friend to whom he is under
greater obligations.[B] But to speak only of actions done from the
motive of duty, and in direct obedience to principle: it is a
misapprehension of the utilitarian mode of thought, to conceive it as
implying that people should fix their minds upon so wide a generality as
the world, or society at large. The great majority of good actions are
intended, not for the benefit of the world, but for that of individuals,
of which the good of the world is made up; and the thoughts of the most
virtuous man need not on these occasions travel beyond the particular
persons concerned, except so far as is necessary to assure himself that
in benefiting them he is not violating the rights--that is, the
legitimate and authorized expectations--of any one else. The
multiplication of happiness is, according to the utilitarian ethics, the
object of virtue: the occasions on which any person (except one in a
thousand) has it in his power to do this on an extended scale, in other
words, to be a public benefactor, are but exceptional; and on these
occasions alone is he called on to consider public utility; in every
other case, private utility, the interest or happiness of some few
persons, is all he has to attend to. Those alone the influence of whose
actions extends to society in general, need concern themselves
habitually about so large an object. In the case of abstinences
indeed--of things which people forbear to do, from moral considerations,
though the consequences in the particular case might be beneficial--it
would be unworthy of an intelligent agent not to be consciously aware
that the action is of a class which, if practised generally, would be
generally injurious, and that this is the ground of the obligation to
abstain from it. The amount of regard for the public interest implied in
this recognition, is no greater than is demanded by every system of
morals; for they all enjoin to abstain from whatever is manifestly
pernicious to society. […]

If no more be meant by the objection than that many utilitarians look on
the morality of actions, as measured by the utilitarian standard, with
too exclusive a regard, and do not lay sufficient stress upon the other
beauties of character which go towards making a human being loveable or
admirable, this may be admitted. Utilitarians who have cultivated their
moral feelings, but not their sympathies nor their artistic perceptions,
do fall into this mistake; and so do all other moralists under the same
conditions. What can be said in excuse for other moralists is equally
available for them, namely, that if there is to be any error, it is
better that it should be on that side. As a matter of fact, we may
affirm that among utilitarians as among adherents of other systems,
there is every imaginable degree of rigidity and of laxity in the
application of their standard: some are even puritanically rigorous,
while others are as indulgent as can possibly be desired by sinner or by
sentimentalist. But on the whole, a doctrine which brings prominently
forward the interest that mankind have in the repression and prevention
of conduct which violates the moral law, is likely to be inferior to no
other in turning the sanctions of opinion against such violations. It is
true, the question, What does violate the moral law? is one on which
those who recognise different standards of morality are likely now and
then to differ. But difference of opinion on moral questions was not
first introduced into the world by utilitarianism, while that doctrine
does supply, if not always an easy, at all events a tangible and
intelligible mode of deciding such differences.”
(John Stuart Mill, Utilitarianism, 1861)

E1.6.E.1.4. PRIORITIZING THE OTHER IN REFLECTION.
Levinas contends that we must prioritize the other over oneself. He believes philosophy should shift from ontology to ethics, making the other the focal point of reflection. Unlike Heidegger, who views being as the core question of philosophy, Levinas argues that the other enables us to rise above the mundane. For Levinas, the other is a unique and inimitable phenomenological experience. He suggests that we all require the absolute and transcendence found in the other, albeit this is a challenging ideal to achieve. 
Fyodor Dostoyevsky, in a dream in the 1870s, revealed a perspective resonating with Levinas' view, which helped him find purpose in life. 
Yet, in order to prioritize others, must we not first have been a focus of someone else's attention? Must the self not first be established, then yield to the demands of the other? Even Freud acknowledged that negative forces exist within the human psyche, and to counteract them, we need the guidance of our parents and loved ones to steer us towards positivity, allowing us to reciprocate with others. Therefore, we may need to supplement Levinas' ethical proposition. 

E1.6.E.1.4_REF1_PH LEVINAS ARGUES THAT THE OTHER REPRESENTS AN ESCAPE FROM OBJECTIFICATION AND FULFILLS OUR NEED FOR TRANSCENDENCE THROUGH THEIR SURPRISING OTHERNESS. Levinas believes that ethical behavior requires prioritizing others over oneself, but this may necessitate first receiving attention and care from others in early education. 
"Whereas Heidegger's philosophical approach was the search for the meaning of the verb « to be » , the starting point for Levinas is no longer subjectivity, it is the other human being. He shifts from ontology to ethics. Ontology assumes that philosophy is an enterprise of knowledge. For Levinas, the other is an escape from the state of thing.
For Levinas, we all have a need for the absolute, for transcendence, an aspiration to something absolutely other. This need is fulfilled by how others surprise us. Otherness without transcendence is what one can reduce to a common kind: we are all of the human kind, we are a community, however the other is absolutely other in relation to me. He is an irreducible singularity that constitutes a phenomenologically describable experience. The other bursts in, disturbs me by transcendence, and must obsess me with his need. For Levinas, the other is not only the one I discover, but also the one who imposes a commandment, the one to whom the self submits. Everyday life brings us back to transcendence towards being; yet we must morally always put others before ourselves. 
However, in order to put others before ourselves, must we not have been the object of another's attention ourselves? Shouldn't the self be constructed first and then eclipsed making room for the injunction of the other? For Levinas, the great errors of humanity, such as Nazism, can be explained by philosophical errors about the right place of ontology. But Freud also tells us that there are negative forces in the human psyche and that, in order to escape them, our parents, our loves, must keep us in the positivity of life so that we can in turn open ourselves to others. We must therefore perhaps make some amendments to the Levinasian ethical requirement."


FOR LEVINAS, ETHICS BEGINS WITH THE ENCOUNTER WITH ANOTHER WHO IS ABSOLUTELY OTHER AND WHO IMPOSES A MORAL COMMAND ON US. He emphasizes that the quest for transcendence is fulfilled by others and invites us to take a critical stance toward language that confines others in labels.
"How to Face It, Levinas: Portrait of a Captive Philosopher Levinas's philosophy always places others before oneself. Sartre confronted consciousness with its responsibilities in a metaphysical philosophy of freedom, but without an absolute standard. In the end, he found a standard in history that would be realized through political change. The relationship of my responsibility to the vulnerability of others took a back seat to social structures. For Levinas, one must begin with the face-to-face; otherwise, one may arrive at politics, but not at justice.
Levinas criticizes Heidegger for saying that "being" is not the right answer to the philosophical approach, but rather an entanglement in things. Sartre, Levinas, Arendt are escape thinkers. For Sartre, we have to ask ourselves who is asking the question: it is my freedom. For Levinas, it is the other who lets me escape from things. For Hannah Arendt, it is the plurality of political discourses that allows us to escape the oppression of things.
Levinas moves from ontology to ethics. Whereas for Heidegger the philosophical approach was the search for the meaning of the verb "to be," for Levinas the starting point is no longer subjectivity, but the other. Ontology presupposes that philosophy is an enterprise of knowledge. For Levinas, the other is the escape from the state of things, towards an other that we do not know. The other is not only the one I discover, but also the one who imposes a commandment on me, the one to whom the self submits.

For Levinas, we all have a need for the absolute, for transcendence. We long for something absolutely different. This need is satisfied by the other and by surprise. Otherness without transcendence is what I can reduce to a common genre: we are all of the human race, we form a community. For Levinas, the other is absolutely other in relation to me, in an irreducible singularity. For him, it is a phenomenologically describable experience. The other bursts in, disturbs us through transcendence, and must obsess us with its need. It is an ideal that is difficult to achieve; Levinas is well aware of this (the example of the mother's obsession with her children). Everyday life brings us back to the transcendence of being, but we must always morally put others before ourselves. For Levinas, the self is hateful (Pascalian parallel); but in order to put others before ourselves, have we not ourselves been the object of another's attention? Doesn't the self first have to be constructed in order to then fade away in the face of the other's injunction? For Levinas, the great errors of humanity, such as Nazism, can be explained by philosophical errors regarding the proper place of ontology. But Freud also tells us that there are negative forces in the human psyche and that, in order to escape them, our parents and loved ones must keep us in a positive frame of mind so that we, in turn, can open up to others. So perhaps we need to add to Levinas's ethical requirement.
The moral imperative regarding refugees is to save everyone. This must be complemented by a policy of long-term management of reception capacity. The personal approach must be complemented by the political approach. Rousseau said, "He who would separate morality from politics will never understand either. For Levinas, the relationship between morality and religion is the same. He advocates an open religion without idolatry; what interests him in religion is morality.
The other is this absolute, this infinity that opens up the whole world (in the sense of a utopia of reality constructed in a Hegelian way). 
Levinas criticizes language, which "encloses the other through linguistic labels and masks the absolute that it represents".
(Frédéric Worms in the program Les chemins de la philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 02/04/2019)

listen to the podcast in French: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/comment-faire-face-levinas-14-portrait-dun-philosophe-captif

E1.6.E.1.4_REF2_LIT QUESTIONING NIHILISM "The story begins with the narrator wandering the streets of St. Petersburg on “a gloomy night, the gloomiest night you can conceive,” dwelling on how others have ridiculed him all his life and slipping into nihilism with the “terrible anguish” of believing that nothing matters. He peers into the glum sky, gazes at a lone little star, and contemplates suicide; two months earlier, despite his destitution, he had bought an “excellent revolver” with the same intention, but the gun had remained in his drawer since. Suddenly, as he is staring at the star, a little girl of about eight, wearing ragged clothes and clearly in distress, grabs him by the arm and inarticulately begs his help. But the protagonist, disenchanted with life, shoos her away and returns to the squalid room he shares with a drunken old captain, furnished with “a sofa covered in American cloth, a table with some books, two chairs and an easy-chair, old, incredibly old, but still an easy-chair.”

As he sinks into the easy-chair to think about ending his life, he finds himself haunted by the image of the little girl, leading him to question his nihilistic disposition. Dostoyevsky writes:"
(Maria Popova's review of Fyodor Dostoyevsky's A Writer’s Diary in teh Marginalian)

E1.6.E.1.4_REF2.1_LIT THE NARRATOR OF DOSTOYEVSKY'S STORY, FEELING RIDICULED AND NIHILISTIC, CONTEMPLATES SUICIDE ON A GLOOMY NIGHT IN ST. PETERSBURG. A distressed little girl briefly interrupts his thoughts, but he dismisses her and returns to his squalid room. Haunted by the girl's image, he begins to question his nihilism.
"I knew for certain that I would shoot myself that night, but how long I would sit by the table — that I did not know. I should certainly have shot myself, but for that little girl.

You see: though it was all the same to me, I felt pain, for instance. If any one were to strike me, I should feel pain. Exactly the same in the moral sense: if anything very pitiful happened, I would feel pity, just as I did before everything in life became all the same to me. I had felt pity just before: surely, I would have helped a child without fail. Why did I not help the little girl, then? It was because of an idea that came into my mind then. When she was pulling at me and calling to me, suddenly a question arose before me, which I could not answer. The question was an idle one; but it made me angry. I was angry because of my conclusion, that if I had already made up my mind that I would put an end to myself to-night, then now more than ever before everything in the world should be all the same to me. Why was it that I felt it was not all the same to me, and pitied the little girl? I remember I pitied her very much: so much that I felt a pain that was even strange and incredible in my situation…

It seemed clear that if I was a man and not a cipher yet, and until I was changed into a cipher, then I was alive and therefore could suffer, be angry and feel shame for my actions. Very well. But if I were to kill myself, for instance, in two hours from now, what is the girl to me, and what have I to do with shame or with anything on earth? I am going to be a cipher, an absolute zero. Could my consciousness that I would soon absolutely cease to exist, and that therefore nothing would exist, have not the least influence on my feeling of pity for the girl or on my sense of shame for the vileness I had committed? [...]

It became clear to me that life and the world, as it were, depended upon me."
(Fyodor Dostoyevsky, A Writer’s Diary)

E1.6.E.1.4_REF3_PSI KEVIN SIMLER AND ROBIN HANSON CONTRAST THE RATIONAL, RESULTS-ORIENTED IDEAL OF "EFFECTIVE ALTRUISM" WITH OUR ACTUAL CHARITABLE BEHAVIOR, WHICH, THROUGH PHENOMENA LIKE "SCOPE NEGLECT," REVEALS THAT OUR PRIMARY MOTIVE FOR GIVING IS NOT ACTUALLY TO HELP OTHERS IN THE MOST EFFICIENT WAY POSSIBLE.

“CHARITY

In 1972, Peter Singer—a man the New York Times would describe decades later as “perhaps the world’s most controversial ethicist”1—made a splash among moral philosophers with an essay titled, “Famine, Affluence, and Morality.” His argument began with a simple premise: If you notice a boy drowning in a shallow pond right in front of you, you have a moral obligation to try to rescue him. To do otherwise—to stand by and let him drown—would be unconscionable.
So far, this isn’t particularly controversial. But Singer went on to argue that you have the exact same moral obligation to rescue children in developing countries who are dying of starvation, even though they’re thousands of miles away. The fact that they aren’t dying right in your backyard isn’t justification enough to ignore their plight.
Singer’s conclusion tends to make people uncomfortable, especially since most of us don’t help starving children in far-off places with the same urgency we would help a boy drowning in the local pond. (Your two coauthors certainly don’t.) The argument implies that every time we take a vacation, buy an expensive car, or remodel the house, it’s morally equivalent to letting people die right in front of us. According to one calculation, for the cost of sending a kid through college in America, you could instead save the lives of more than 50 children (who happen to live in sub-Saharan Africa). Yes, many of us do try to help people in extreme need, but we also spend a lot on personal indulgences.
What Singer has highlighted with this argument is nothing more than simple, everyday human hypocrisy—the gap between our stated ideals (wanting to help those who need it most) and our actual behavior (spending money on ourselves). By doing this, he’s hoping to change his readers’ minds about what’s considered “ethical” behavior. In other words, he’s trying to moralize.
Our goal, in contrast, is simply to investigate what makes human beings tick. […]

EFFECTIVE ALTRUISM

To appreciate the contrast between our ideals and our actual behavior, it helps to portray what ideal charitable behavior looks like. Luckily, others have done this job for us.
In 2006, Holden Karnofsky and Elie Hassenfeld were working as hedge fund analysts in Connecticut. After making a comfortable living for a few years, they decided to donate a good portion of their earnings to charity. But they wanted to make sure their donations would be used effectively, so they began researching charities the same way they’d been trained to research investment opportunities, namely, by asking for data.
Along with a few friends, Karnofsky and Hassenfeld drafted up a list of promising charities and began reaching out for information. For each charity, they wanted to know how their donations would be spent, and more importantly, how the outcomes would be measured. They wanted to gauge how efficient the whole process was, in order to get the best bang for their charity buck. In financial terms, they were looking to maximize their return on investment (ROI)—or in this case, return on donation (ROD)—and were simply doing due diligence.
The response from the charities they contacted was disheartening. Some simply sent glossy brochures with photos of smiling children and a few pat assurances that good work was being done. Other charities were hostile. One accused Karnofsky and Hassenfeld of attempting to steal confidential information on behalf of a competitor. (Take a moment to consider why a philanthropist might want to keep a “trade secret.”) Almost none of the charities responded with the kind of hard, outcome-oriented data that would satisfy a financial analyst.
Eventually they realized that they weren’t getting the information they wanted “because the charities themselves didn’t have it.” But still Karnofsky and Hassenfeld thought the data was important, and they thought other donors would want it too. So in 2007, they decided to leave their jobs and start GiveWell, an organization dedicated to doing (and publicizing) quantitative research on different charities in order to determine which are the most effective, that is, have the highest ROD. This is similar in spirit to the approach taken by Consumer Reports or the Motley Fool, but instead of researching cars and cameras or stocks and bonds, GiveWell researches charities.

GiveWell now sits at the center of a growing social movement called effective altruism. Inspired by the work of Singer (along with Karnofsky, Hassenfeld, and others), effective altruists hope to change how people donate their time, effort, and money to good causes. And they’re using reason and evidence where others have relied mostly on emotion and gut instinct. This is a hard-nosed, data-driven approach that looks above all for results. In deciding how to give, effective altruists follow their heads, not their hearts.
This approach sounds sensible enough, but it can lead to some strange conclusions. In 2015, for example, GiveWell listed these as its three most effective charities:

1. The Against Malaria Foundation, which brings mosquito nets to sub-Saharan Africa.
2. GiveDirectly, an organization that distributes cash directly to people in need, no strings attached(!).
3. The Schistosomiasis Control Initiative, which helps treat people infected with a particular parasitic worm.

These are hardly the most popular or paradigmatic charities. They aren’t nearly as high-profile as the United Way, Salvation Army, or Make-A-Wish Foundation, for example. But they get results. According to GiveWell’s estimates, the Against Malaria Foundation can save a life for about $3,500.
Now, you may or may not agree that effective altruism is the ideal approach to charity. Among other things, the movement has been criticized for taking an overly narrow view of what makes a given charity “effective.” GiveWell, in particular, focuses almost exclusively on charities whose impact can be reliably measured, which causes it to ignore charities that try to effect more nebulous (political or cultural) changes. Still, by taking a rigorously results-oriented approach, effective altruism highlights how traditional charities have not been taking this kind of approach.
If we’re going to give money to charity, don’t we want our donations to be as useful as possible? Isn’t that the whole point? Unfortunately, when we start to look at real-world altruism, helping people efficiently doesn’t seem to be our top priority.

REAL-WORLD ALTRUISM
Taken at face value, Americans are a fairly generous people. Nine out of 10 of us donate to charity every year. In 2014, these donations amounted to more than$359 billion—roughly 2 percent of the country’s GDP. […]

The striking thing about real-world altruism is how sharply it deviates from effective altruism. The main recipients of American charity are religious groups and educational institutions. Yes, some of what we give to religious groups ends up helping those who desperately need it, but much of it goes toward worship services, Sunday school, and other ends that aren’t particularly charitable. Giving to educational institutions is arguably even less impactful […]. Overall, no more than 13 percent of private American charity goes to helping those who seem to need it most: the global poor. […]

When we analyze donation as an economic activity, it soon becomes clear how little we seem to care about the impact of our donations. Whatever we’re doing, we aren’t trying to maximize ROD. One study, for example, asked participants how much they would agree to pay for nets that prevent migratory bird deaths. Some participants were told that the nets would save 2,000 birds annually, others were told 20,000 birds, and a final group was told 200,000 birds. But despite the 10- and 100-fold differences in projected impact, people in all three groups were willing to contribute the same amount. This effect, known as scope neglect or scope insensitivity, has been demonstrated for many other problems, including cleaning polluted lakes, protecting wilderness areas, decreasing road injuries, and even preventing deaths. People are willing to help, but the amount they’re willing to help doesn’t scale in proportion to how much impact their contributions will make.
People also prefer to “diversify” their donations, making many small donations rather than a few strategic large ones to the most useful charities. […]”
(Kevin Simler and Robin Hanson, The Elephant in the Brain, 2017)

E1.6.E.1.4_REF3.1_PSI KEVIN SIMLER AND ROBIN HANSON ARGUE THAT CHARITY IS LESS ABOUT EFFECTIVELY HELPING OTHERS AND MORE ABOUT SOCIAL SIGNALING, AS OUR GIVING IS PRIMARILY DRIVEN BY UNCONSCIOUS MOTIVES TO ADVERTISE OUR POSITIVE TRAITS—LIKE WEALTH, LOYALTY, AND COMPASSION—TO A SOCIAL AUDIENCE.

“WARM GLOW” THEORY
In 1989, to explain some of these inefficiencies, the economist James Andreoni proposed a different model for why we donate to charity. Instead of acting strictly to improve the well-being of others, Andreoni theorized, we do charity in part because of a selfish psychological motive: it makes us happy. Part of the reason we give to homeless people on the street, for example, is because the act of donating makes us feel good, regardless of the results.
Andreoni calls this the “warm glow” theory. It helps explain why so few of us behave like effective altruists. Consider these two strategies for giving to charity:(1) setting up an automatic monthly payment to the Against Malaria Foundation, or (2) giving a small amount to every panhandler, collection plate, and Girl Scout. Making automatic payments to a single charity may be more efficient at improving the lives of others, but the other strategy—giving more widely, opportunistically, and in smaller amounts—is more efficient at generating those warm fuzzy feelings. When we “diversify” our donations, we get more opportunities to feel good.
As an ultimate explanation for our behavior, however, the warm glow theory is just a stopgap. The much more interesting and important question is why it feels good when we donate to charity. Digging beneath the shallow psychological motive (pursuing happiness), what deeper incentives are we responding to?
To figure this out, we’re going to examine five factors that influence our charitable behavior:

1. Visibility. We give more when we’re being watched.
2. Peer pressure. Our giving responds strongly to social influences.
3. Proximity. We prefer to help people locally rather than globally.
4. Relatability. We give more when the people we help are identifiable (via faces and/or stories) and give less in response to numbers and facts.
5. Mating motive. We’re more generous when primed with a mating motive. […]

In light of all [the] evidence, the conclusion is pretty clear. We may get psychological rewards for anonymous donations, but for most people, the “warm fuzzies” just aren’t enough. We also want to be seen as charitable.
Griskevicius calls this phenomenon “blatant benevolence.” Patrick West calls it “conspicuous compassion.” The idea is that we’re motivated to appear generous, not simply to be generous, because we get social rewards only for what others notice. In other words, charity is an advertisement, a way of showing off. […]
But while we can recognize this in the abstract, when we actually go to donate money or help people, we strongly prefer not to acknowledge that we’re doing it for the credit or glory. To donate with credit in mind hardly seems like charity at all. In fact, many people feel that the only “true” acts of charity are the perfectly anonymous ones. And yet, we mostly don’t donate anonymously; we are concerned (at least at an unconscious level) with getting credit. […]
The most obvious thing we advertise is wealth, or in the case of volunteer work, spare time. In effect, charitable behavior “says” to our audiences, “I have more resources than I need to survive; I can give them away without worry. Thus I am a hearty, productive human specimen.” This is the same logic that underlies our tendency toward conspicuous consumption, conspicuous athleticism, and other fitness displays. All else being equal, we prefer our associates—whether friends, lovers, or leaders—to be well off. Not only does some of their status “rub off” on us, but it means they have more resources and energy to focus on our mutual interests. Those who are struggling to survive don’t make ideal allies.
Charity also helps us advertise our prosocial orientation, that is, the degree to which we’re aligned with others.  […]
This is one of the reasons we’re biased toward local rather than global charities. We want leaders who look out for their immediate communities, rather than people who need help in far-off places. In a sense, we want them to be parochial. In some situations, it borders on antisocial to be overly concerned with the welfare of distant strangers. […]
There’s one final quality that charity allows us to advertise: the spontaneous, almost involuntary concern for the welfare of others. Variations on this trait go by various names—empathy, sympathy, pity, compassion. […]
For the psychologist Paul Bloom, this is a huge downside. Empathy, he argues, focuses our attention on single individuals, leading us to become both parochial and insensitive to scale. As Bertrand Russell is often reported to have said, “The mark of a civilized man is the capacity to read a column of numbers and weep,” but few of us are capable of truly feeling statistics in this way. If only we could be moved more by our heads than our hearts, we could do a lot more good. […]

VISIBILITY
Perhaps the most striking bias in how we do charity is that we give more when we’re being watched. […]
Charities know that people like to be recognized for their contributions. That’s why they commemorate donors with plaques, using larger and more prominent plaques to advertise more generous donations. Exceptionally generous donations are honored by chiseling the benefactor’s name in stone at the top of a building. […] By helping donors advertise their generosity, charities incentivize more donations. […]

Conversely, people prefer not to give when their contributions won’t be recognized. Anonymous donation, for example, is extremely rare. Only around 1 percent of donations to public charities are anonymous. Similarly, in lab experiments, people who donate seldom choose to remain anonymous. And even when people donate “anonymously” to public charities, we should be skeptical that their identities are kept completely hidden. “A London socialite once remarked to me that she knew many anonymous donors,” writes Miller. “They were well known within their social circle . . . even though their names may not have been splashed across the newspapers.” At the very least, most “anonymous” donors discuss their donations with their spouses and close friends.
Often charities bracket donations into tiers and advertise only which tier a given donor falls into (rather than an exact dollar amount). For example, someone who gives between $500 and $999 might be called a “friend” or “silver sponsor,” while someone who gives between $1,000 and $1,999 might be called a “patron” or “gold sponsor.” If you donate $900, then, you’ll earn the same label as someone who donates only $500. Not surprisingly, the vast majority of donations to such campaigns fall exactly at the lower end of each tier.30 Put another way: very few people give more than they’ll be recognized for.

PEER PRESSURE

Another strong influence on our charitable giving is peer pressure. Although donors often deny this influence,31 the evidence says otherwise. First of all, solicitation works: people donate when they’re asked for money, especially by friends, neighbors, and loved ones. People seldom initiate donations on their own; up to 95 percent of all donations are given in response to a solicitation. In-person solicitations, like when someone comes to your door or passes the collection plate at church, work better than impersonal solicitations like direct mail or TV advertisements. People are especially likely to donate when the solicitor is a close associate.
Certainly some of these effects are due to endorsements: When a friend asks for a donation, it’s likely to be a good cause, whereas if a stranger makes the request, you might suspect it of being fraudulent or otherwise unworthy. But even when a charitable cause is fully vetted, peer pressure is more effective than non-peer pressure. Universities, for example, often solicit donations from alumni by having other alumni from the same class call them up. This kind of solicitation is even more effective when the solicitor is a former roommate. Here the main relevant variable is the social distance between donor and solicitor.
Peer pressure plays a big role in many areas of life, of course, but it’s an especially strong influence on charitable decisions. Contrast how we make donations versus other financial decisions like investments and purchases. If we invested like we donate, we’d make 95 percent of our investments in response to a direct request from a friend, family member, church buddy, or even a stranger on the phone. Instead, when friends or strangers solicit investment (“a ground-floor opportunity!”), we typically eye it with suspicion. […]

PROXIMITY
We’re more disposed to help people who are closer to us, not just physically but socially. We’d sooner help people in our local communities than strangers in far-off places. […] Jonathan Baron and Ewa Szymanska call this bias parochialism.  […] To be fair, parochialism is an inescapable part of human nature, and it’s written all over our behavior. We treat close family better than friends, and friends better than strangers—so it’s no surprise that we often privilege our fellow citizens over people in foreign countries.

RELATABILITY
According to Singer, one of the most well-confirmed findings in behavioral studies of altruism is that we’re much more likely to help someone we can identify—a specific individual with a name, a face, and a story. First investigated by Thomas Schelling in 1968, this phenomenon has since come to be known as the identifiable victim effect. The corresponding downside, of course, is that we’re less likely to help victims who aren’t identifiable. As Joseph Stalin is reported to have said, “A single death is a tragedy; a million deaths is a statistic.”
Charities that raise a lot of money understand this, which is why they engage in so much storytelling. […]

MATING MOTIVE
One final factor influencing our generosity is the opportunity to impress potential mates. Many studies have found that people, especially men, are more likely to give money when the solicitor is an attractive member of the opposite sex. Men also give more to charity when nearby observers are female rather than male.”
(Kevin Simler and Robin Hanson, The Elephant in the Brain, 2017)

E1.6.E.1.5. A QUESTION OF LOVE
Once you've “understood” and developed a broad love for others and the world, the question of balancing self-concern with concern for others and the world no longer arises. As Alan Watts puts it, "If a problem can be solved, understanding it and knowing what to do about it are the same thing."

E1.6.E.1.5_REF1_PO "I SLEPT AND DREAMT
THAT LIFE WAS JOY.
I awoke and saw
that life was duty.
I worked — and behold,
duty was joy."
(Rabindranath Tagore)

E1.6.D.2.6.b_REF2_CUR.wE1.6.E.1.5 

E1.6.E.1.5_REF3_LIT I’M A SEEKER ON THE PATH ABOUT LOVE "If I were really asked to define myself, I wouldn’t start with race; I wouldn’t start with blackness; I wouldn’t start with gender; I wouldn’t start with feminism. I would start with stripping down to what fundamentally informs my life, which is that I’m a seeker on the path… a path about love. […]

If love is really the active practice — Buddhist, Christian, or Islamic mysticism — it requires the notion of being a lover, of being in love with the universe… To commit to love is fundamentally to commit to a life beyond dualism. That’s why love is so sacred in a culture of domination, because it simply begins to erode your dualisms: dualisms of black and white, male and female, right and wrong."
(Bell Hooks in an Interview)

E1.6.E.1.5_REF4_PO "TO BEGIN WITH, THE SWEET GRASS

[...]

The witchery of living 
is my whole conversation 
with you, my darlings.
All I can tell you is what I know.

Look, and look again.
This world is not just a little thrill for the eyes.

It's more than bones.
It's more than the delicate wrist with its personal pulse.
It's more than the beating of the single heart.
It's praising.
It's giving until the giving feels like receiving.
You have a life - just imagine that!
You have this day, and maybe another, and maybe still another. 

[...]

Let me ask you this.
Do you also think that beauty exists for some fabulous reason?

And, if you have not been enchanted by this adventure - 
your life - 
what would do for you?  

[...]

What I loved in the beginning, I think, was mostly myself. Never mind that I had to, since somebody had to.
That was many years ago.
Since then I have gone out from my confinements,
    though with difficulty. 

I mean the ones that thought to rule my heart.
I cast them out, I put them on the mush pile.
They will be nourishment somehow (everything is nourishment somehow or another).

And I have become the child of the clouds, and of hope.
I have become the friend of the enemy, whoever that is.
I have become older and, cherishing what I have learned,
I have become younger.

And what do I risk to tell you this, which is all I know? Love yourself. Then forget it. Then, love the world."
(Mary Oliver, Evidence, 2009)

E1.6.E.1.5_REF5_PO “TWO FINGERS FROM DEATH 
A FEW LASHES FROM NOT BEING 
WHAT IS THE SOCIAL QUESTION THEN? 

it is precisely the heart of being 
that is to say the other 
and it is unique 

it is even only there 
that the other is I that the other is me 
that I am another-self 

three lashes from non-being two fingers from death 
the social question 
is still on board”
(Serge Sautreau, The Antagony, 2007-2008)

E1.6.E.1.5_REF6_LIT ADRIENNE MAREE BROWN ON PLEASURE ACTIVISM: I WANT TO MAKE JUSTICE AND LIBERATION THE MOST PLEASURABLE EXPERIENCES THAT WE CAN HAVE

"Krista Tippett:Oh, one thing I do — I don’t want to end without getting to is 'Pleasure Activism'. I think it’s been so fascinating — it’s been fascinating for me because I have this cumulative conversation. And at some point in the last couple of years, over and over and over again people kept making this very clear, very insistent connection between justice and joy. [laughter] And you — and you talk about 'pleasure activism.' And so describe that.

Adrienne Maree Brown: I want to make justice and liberation the most pleasurable experiences that we can have, as a species. I want to make it feel like: Ahh. When I make the best choice, it feels good, and I know it, from my bones up and out. And I know that that means a deep reclamation, especially for those of us who’ve experienced oppression or trauma; that what gets taken from us, often, is the sense that we deserve pleasure, that we know how to feel it, that we’re allowed to feel it. So one of the things I say is, pleasure is not a frivolous thing. Actually, it’s a measure of freedom; that when you are free, one of the ways you know that is that you can feel pleasure. You can feel the present moment.

For most people, it’s really just being able to feel the erotic aliveness of a moment and the erotic yes, I am alive. I’m here right now, and this is how I want this moment to go. This is good. And I have to shout out the queen mother of our lineage for pleasure activism is Audre Lorde. She wrote an essay in 1978, called “The Uses of the Erotic as Power.” And I highly recommend listening to it. You can actually listen to her read it. […]

Krista Tippett: And you point out, when you write about pleasure activism, that so much of how we try to organize and mobilize and even inspire, orient — and yes, in social justice work, but in journalism, as well — is about planting facts and guilt and shame, even though — I mean, if we go back to that list of — if we go back to Octavia Butler and the way you’ve talked about what is successful life, right — that does not create change. But you’re talking about, how do we create practices and communities that everybody sees — that are magnetic, that you want to run towards?

Adrienne Maree Brown: Toni Cade Bambara said we have to make the “revolution irresistible.” And I think about that — she’s quoted, and there’s a whole essay from Alexis Pauline Gumbs in the book about her work. […]

And we want to make it feel good, smell good, taste good; we want to make sure that everyone feels like they could belong in it; we want to make everyone feel like their needs could be met in there. And we know that we can’t get there through punishment.

And there’s a pleasure — and I promise it. I always love to promise it to people, because I’m just like, I know everyone can experience this. There’s a pleasure from being present, truly present, where you’re like, I’m with the people I want to be with. I’m doing what I want to do. It only comes from being really present. And capitalism has us socialized to think we constantly have to be looking elsewhere for it, so we’re running around, not satisfied, not satisfiable, no sense of what that would be like.

And in our justice movements, that’s not a good look, because if we have no idea what it feels like to be satisfied, we won’t know when we win. [laughs] So I’m always like, we need to be satisfiable. We need to know what that feels like. And one of the fastest ways to know what that feels like is to be satisfied in the body. Like, you know what an orgasm feels like, most of us do, and even if we can’t feel an orgasm, we can feel pleasure. We can feel the beauty — […]

Krista Tippett: Yeah, I mean, you’re really I keep using this language of, how we really internalize in our bodies that this is what it’s about, that what you do, what you practice in your everyday, is a pattern that is part of that larger pattern that you want to see.

Adrienne Maree Brown: That’s right. And there’s so much awakening, so I always tell people that you’re always practicing things. So it’s not like you go from not practicing to practicing; but it’s, Are you practicing things on purpose? Are you practicing things you would want to practice, or are you practicing what someone else has told you [laughs] is the right way to do stuff? And once you start practicing on purpose, then you can actually practice liberation and justice and freedom and — then I think you begin to have this contentment that comes from practice. Like I know that I won’t see total liberation in my lifetime, but I also feel very satisfied with how I’m practicing liberation every single day and in every relationship.

Krista Tippett: And moving towards life.

Adrienne Maree Brown: And moving towards life, yeah. [laughs] Life moves towards life, you know. That’s the trick.”

(Adrienne Maree Brown in conversation with Krista Tippett, On Radical Imagination and Moving Towards Life, On Being, June 23, 2022)

Listen to the podcast or read the full transcript: https://onbeing.org/programs/adrienne-maree-brown-on-radical-imagination-and-moving-towards-life/

E1.6.E.1.5_REF7_LIT “HUMILITY DOES NOT MEAN SELF-ABNEGATION, LASSITUDE, DETACHMENT; it’s more a calm recognition that you must trust in that which does not make sense, that which is unreasonable, illogical, silly, ridiculous, crazy by the measure of most of our culture. You must trust that you being the best possible you matters somehow… That doing your chosen work with creativity and diligence will shiver people far beyond your ken. That being an attentive and generous friend and citizen will prevent a thread or two of the social fabric from unraveling. […]
This is what I know: that the small is huge, that the tiny is vast, that pain is part and parcel of the gift of joy, and that this is love, and then there is everything else. You either walk toward love or away from it with every breath you draw. Humility is the road to love. Humility, maybe, is love.”
(Brian Doyle, One Long River of Song: Notes on Wonder, 2019)

E1.6.D.3.7.wE1.6.E.1.5. THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN KNOWING AND UNDERSTANDING
The key is to understand, meaning to apply knowledge to transform one's life, rather than merely accumulating it.

E1.6.E.1.6. HOW CAN I CONTRIBUTE TO THE JOY OF OTHERS IF I'M NOT HAPPY MYSELF? 

E1.6.E.1.6.a. HOW CAN I CONTRIBUTE TO THE JOY OF OTHERS IF I HAVE LOST MINE?
It's important not to overextend oneself or lose sight of personal happiness when aiding the less fortunate. One must continuously nurture their own joy in order to effectively share it. After all, how can one contribute to the joy of others if they have lost their own?

E1.6.E.1.6.a_REF1_PH "« AND BECOME BRIGHT AGAIN » 
We, openhanded and rich in spirit, standing by the road like open wells with no intention to fend off anyone who feels like drawing from us--we unfortunately
do not know bow to defend ourselves where we want to: we have no way of preventing people from darkening us: the time in which we live throws into us what is most timebound; its dirty birds drop their filth into us; boys their gewgaws; and exhausted wanderers who come to us to rest, their little and large miseries. But we shall do what we have always done: whatever one casts into us, we take down into our depth -for we are deep, we do not forget-and become bright again."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, The Gay Science, 1882)

E1.6.E.1.6.b. LET'S BE SUPPORTIVE AND NOT JUST COMPASSIONATE
We should approach others with kindness and an inclination to encourage mutual joy, despite our differences. This is because we share a basic set of common values that form a society. However, the attitude in our commitment is crucial: we should aim to be supportive, not just compassionate!

E1.6.E.1.6.b.i. PASSING ON THE PRIVILEGE OF HAVING FOUND A PATH
"The authentic watermark running through the background of a life's work is an arrival at generosity and, as a mark of that generosity, delight in the hopes of the young: and the giving away to them, not only of rewards that may have been earned but the reward in the secret itself, the core artistry that made the journey a journey. Perhaps the greatest legacy we can leave from our work is the passing on of a sense of sheer privilege, of having found a road, a way to follow, and then having been allowed to walk it, often with others, with all its difficulties and minor triumphs."

E1.6.E.1.6.b.i_REF_PH "AMBITION

[...] Ambition is natural to the first steps of youth, who must experience its essential falsity to know the larger reality that stands behind it, but held on to too long, and especially in eldership, it always comes to lack surprise, turns the last years of the ambitious into a second childhood, and makes the once successful into an object of pity.

The authentic watermark running through the background of a life's work is an arrival at generosity and, as a mark of that generosity, delight in the hopes of the young: and the giving away to them, not only of rewards that may have been earned but the reward in the secret itself, the core artistry that made the journey a journey.

Perhaps the greatest legacy we can leave from our work is not to instil ambition in others, though this may be the first way we describe its arrival in our life, but the passing on of a sense of sheer privilege, of having found a road, a way to follow, and then having been allowed to walk it, often with others, with all its difficulties and minor triumphs; the underlying primary gift of having been both a witness to and a full participant in the conversation."
(David Whyte, Consolations, The Solace, Nourishment and Underlying Meaning of Everyday Words, 2015)

E1.6.E.1.6.b.ii. RESCUE THEM ONLY IN THE WAY YOU RESCUE YOURSELF: - I'll make them braver, more enduring, simpler, more joyful! I will teach them what now so few understand, what these preachers of pity, of compassionate solidarity understand least: solidarity in joy!"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, The Gay Science, 1882)

E1.6.E.1.6.b.ii_REF1_CUR HALSMAN AND COCTEAU IMAGINE A GUARDIAN ANGEL VERY NIETZSCHEAN, who does not make the task any easier - he lends a hand and shows "compassionate solidarity", but the responsibility for the faux pas lies with his protégé!

E1.6.E.1.6.b.iii. HOPE AND TRUST MAKE UP FOR A WONDERFUL ELIXIR

E1.6.E.1.6.b.iii_REF1_PH "THERE IS A KNOWLEDGE THAT DIMINISHES LIFE, A KNOWLEDGE THAT IS SAD, COMMONLY CALLED PITY, and which is one of the scourges of humanity. You have to see how a sensitive woman talks to a skinny man who is supposed to have tuberculosis. [So how can we do it? Here's how. We can't be sad; we have to be hopeful; you only give people the hope that you have. We have to rely on nature, see the future in a positive light, and believe that life will triumph. It's easier than you think because it's natural. All living things believe that life will triumph, otherwise they would die right away. This vital energy will soon make you forget that poor man, so we should give him this vital energy. You really shouldn't feel too sorry for him. Not to be hard and insensitive. But to show joyful friendship. No one likes to be pitied; and when a patient sees that he is not extinguishing the joy of a good person, he is uplifted and comforted. Trust is a wonderful elixir.
(Alain, On Happiness, October 5, 1909)

E1.6.E.1.6.b.iv. "THE SYMPATHETIC. SYMPATHETIC NATURES, ALWAYS HELPFUL IN A MISFORTUNE, ARE RARELY THE SAME ONES WHO SHARE OUR JOY: when others are happy, they
have nothing to do, become superfluous, do not feel in possession of their superiority, and therefore easily show dissatisfaction."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human, Aphorism 321, 1878)

"Pity is the opposite of the uplifting emotions that increase the energy of vital feeling: it is depressing. To sympathize is to lose strength. Compassion increases and amplifies the loss of strength that suffering alone already inflicts on life.
As for suffering, compassion makes it contagious. In some cases, it means that "the amount of life and vital energy lost is absurdly disproportionate to the importance of its cause."
(Nietzsche, The Antichrist, Aphorism 321)

E1.6.E.1.6.b.v. WE CAN NEVER DETERMINE IF THE "I" IN A CERTAIN INDIVIDUAL IS COMPLETELY EXTINGUISHED OR MERELY INERT.
”For those whose I is dead, nothing can be done, absolutely nothing. But we never know whether, in a given human being, the I is completely dead or merely inanimate. If it's not quite dead, love can revive it as if by a jolt. But it must be love that is completely pure, devoid of even a hint of condescension, as the slightest trace of disdain can precipitates it towards death.”

E1.6.E.1.6.b.v_REF1_PH "THE SELF
We possess nothing in the world—a mere chance can strip us of everything—except the power to say ‘I’. That is what we have to give to God—in other words, to destroy. There is absolutely no other free act which it is given us to accomplish—only the destruction of the ‘I’.

[...] Nothing in the world can rob us of the power to say ‘I’. Nothing except extreme affliction. Nothing is worse than extreme affliction which destroys the ‘I’ from outside, because after that we can no longer destroy it ourselves.

[...] In affliction the vital instinct survives all the attachments which have been torn away, and blindly fastens itself to everything which can provide it with support, like a plant fastens its tendrils. Gratitude (except in a base form) and justice are not conceivable in this state. Slavery. There is no longer the extra amount of energy required to support free-will by which man takes the measure of things. Affliction, from this point of view, is hideous as life in its nakedness always is, like an amputated stump, like the swarming of insects. Life without form. Survival is then the only attachment. That is where extreme affliction begins—when all other attachments are replaced by that of survival. Attachment appears then in its nakedness without any other object but itself—Hell.

It is by this mechanism that to those in affliction life appears as the one thing desirable, at the very time when their life is in no way preferable to death."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.6.E.1.6.b.v_REF1.1_CUR "IN JEZREEL VALLEY IN THE DARK, REAL MOLD SPORES GROW AND MULTIPLY in puzzle-shaped agricultural "plots" filled with coffee dregs and sugar. The Jezreel Valley - one of the emblems of the agricultural settlements founded by Zionist pioneers - has acquired the status of a mythological landscape in Israeli collective memory. In this work, Weinstein created an "agricultural laboratory" - an experiment in "mold agriculture" that grows on the black coffee fields of the Jezreel Valley, with spores nourished by the local Venetian micro-organisms in the air. Like the steel wool rusting gradually on the ground floor, this work too will be transformed in the course of the exhibition, as the coffee mixture thickens in the trays and the spore colonies growing upon it change their color and form. In an ironic inversion of agricultural processes, actions related to order, cultivation, and maintenance are replaced by inaction and neglect. Paradoxically, the mold symbolic of desolation and dissolution is the very element that infuses this iconic image of the valley with a sense of life and temporal duration."
(Curatorship, Istrael's Pavillion, Venice Biennale, 2017)

E1.6.E.1.6.b.v_REF1.2_PH "THE SELF
[...]  When we do a service to beings thus uprooted and we receive in exchange discourtesy, ingratitude, betrayal, we are merely enduring a small share of their affliction. It is our duty to expose 28 gravity and grace ourselves to it in a limited measure just as it is our duty to expose ourselves to affliction. When it comes we should endure
it as we endure affliction, without referring it back to particular people, for it cannot be referred back to anything. There is something impersonal in quasi-infernal affliction as there is in perfection.

For those whose ‘I’ is dead we can do nothing, absolutely nothing. We never know, however, whether in a particular person the ‘I’ is quite dead or only inanimate. If it is not quite dead, love can reanimate it as though by an injection, but it must be love which is utterly pure without the slightest trace of condescension, for the least shade of contempt drives towards death.

When the ‘I’ is wounded from outside it starts by revolting in the most extreme and bitter manner like an animal at bay. But as soon as the ‘I’ is half dead, it wants to be finished off and allows itself to sink into unconsciousness. If it is then awakened by a touch of love, there is sharp pain which results in anger and sometimes hatred for whoever has provoked this pain. Hence the apparently inexplicable vindictiveness of the fallen towards their benefactors.

It can also happen that the love of the benefactor is not pure. Then, in the ‘I’, awakened by love but immediately wounded afresh by contempt, there surges up the bitterest of hatreds, a hatred which is legitimate."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.6.E.1.6.b.v_REF1.3_PO 
"UNTO A BROKEN HEART 
NO OTHER ONE MAY GO 
Without the high prerogative 
Itself hath suffered too"
(Emily Dickinson, undated)

E1.6.E.1.6.b.v_REF1.4_PO 
"THEY MIGHT NOT NEED ME — YET THEY MIGHT —
I’ll let my Heart be just in sight —
A smile so small as mine might be
Precisely their necessity —"
(Emily Dickinson)

E1.6.E.1.6.b.v_REF2_PH "HOPE
In the political debate, at some point, aren’t your options either anger/revolution or resignation - when it becomes obvious that the good will not win out? Even anger is probably sustained by some kind of hope, so the only alternative to hope might be resignation. But if resignation is something that you do, you have to hope somehow that you can stop hoping in order to truly resign - creating a paradox - so isn't hope tied to agency? Every time you do something it is because you hope that what you do will succeed, otherwise you would not bother. Hope is impossible to eradicate so long as you are an agent. 
That is what Schopenhauer concludes:  you cannot escape willing yourself for it has to be drawn out of you either:
1. by suffering to a point when the will to live is killed in you or;
2. by the realization that your own perspective is limited and that you can't expand it -  in which case, you realize your joy is someone else's suffering, so that the will ceases to will."

Listen to the program: https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/m00017vl

E1.6.E.1.6.b.v_REF2.1_CUR "THE GERMAN ARTIST ANSELM KIEFER created his grand painting series titled Questi scritti, quando verranno bruciati, daranno finalmente un po' di luce (These writings, when burned, will finally cast a little light) between 2020 and 2021, specifically for the Sala dello Scrutinio in the Palazzo Ducale, or Doge's Palace. The invitation to Kiefer by the Fondazione Musei Civici dates back to 2019, and the decision to host his work in the Palazzo Ducale was aimed at showing the ability of this site-a symbol of the Serenissima Republic-to still serve as a dynamic cultural center and not just a memory. It was a great challenge because it involved adding, even if temporarily, a new series of paintings to these rooms after almost three hundred years, installing them on top of the older ones. Historically, this was something that happened in response to changing tastes or needs of the state. It was an even greater challenge for Kiefer to work alongside important painters from the past-Tintoretto, Palma il Giovane, Andrea Vicentino-who had been called upon by the Senate of the Republic to repaint the glory of Venice, on land and at sea, on the walls of the Sala dello Scrutinio after the devastating fire of 1577-

The result of Kiefer's impressive undertaking is before our eyes, beginning with the title, a quotation from the philosopher Andrea Emo; both he and the artist remind us that these paintings-as in the inevitable design of life-emerge from negation, from the cancellation of others on which they are superimposed. In a certain sense they are the outcome of the fire that destroyed the room's earlier decoration in 1577, and the new paintings, too, are destined to die when they are removed from the Palazzo Ducale. The tragic and irresolvable unity of opposites. Venice is at the center of this striking contemporary installation, not as an object to be celebrated, but rather as a grand metaphor for cultural transits and passages between East and West, as a pretext for a narrative that brings back to the surface the stratification of millennial myths, of solitudes and concerns to which the artist gives form through a new epic with accents as serious as the obscurity of our time."
(Curatorship: Gabriella Belli and Janne Sirén, 2022)

E1.6.E.1.6.b.vi. FORMS OF CHARITY
"The highest form of charity consists in assisting in the subsistence of a person before he becomes impoverished, by offering a substantial gift in a worthy manner, or by granting a suitable loan, or by helping him to find employment or that he may establish himself in business in such a way that it is not necessary for him to become dependent on others."

E1.6.E.1.6.b.vi_REF1_PH ACCORDING TO MAIMONIDES’S EIGHT-LEVELS RANKING OF CHARITY, to which level would correspond dropping coins on the beggers head through the slot?
"1. The highest form of charity is to help sustain a person before he becomes impoverished, by offering a substantial gift in a dignified manner, or by extending a suitable loan, or by helping him find employment or establish himself in business so as to make it unnecessary for him to become dependent on others.
2. A lesser level of charity than this is to give to the poor without knowing to whom one gives, and without the recipient knowing from whom he received.
3. A lesser level of charity than this is when one knows to whom one gives, but the recipient does not know his benefactor.
4. A lesser level of charity than this is when one does not know to whom one gives, but the poor person does know his benefactor.
5. A lesser level than this is when one gives to the poor person directly into his hand, but gives before being asked.
6. A lesser level than this is when one gives to the poor person after being asked.
7. A lesser level than this is when one gives inadequately, but gives gladly and with a smile.
8. A lesser level than this is when one gives unwillingly."
(Barbara Bloom, As it were… So to speak)

E1.6.E.1.6.b.vi_REF1.1_CUR "A SLEEPING BAG IN A PLEXIGLASS VITRINE; appearing almost shrine-like, yet with a slot for coins, the sculpture becomes akin to a donation box where the coins fall in the place where the head would have lain, opening up the reading to wider issues around homelessness, charity and the gaze. It was made by Nelson in memory of a close friend Erlend Williamson. He died while climbing in 1996 and it is his sleeping bag from childhood that occupies the plexiglass vitrine. For Nelson, the death of his friend was a pivotal moment and the work takes on the quality of a relic, reminding us of the powerful material traces of those who came before us.)"
(Curatorship: Art Basel)

E1.6.E.1.6.b.vii. "PSYCHOANALYSTS ARE WELL AWARE THAT GOOD INTENTIONS DON'T ALWAYS LEAD TO BENEFICIAL OUTCOMES FOR PEOPLE. IN FACT, QUITE OFTEN, THE RESULT IS THE OPPOSITE."

E1.6.E.1.6.b.vii_REF1_TH "THE PSYCHOANALYST'S WEAKNESS, HIS TENDENCY, HE KNOWS QUITE WELL THAT HE MUST BE CAREFUL OF GIVING IN TO IT, and in daily practice, of course, he keeps himself in check. On the other hand, the psychoanalyst taken collectively, if there is a crowd of psychoanalysts, a whole bunch of them, want people to know that they are there for the good of all. 
But they are very careful not to have the weakness of rushing too quickly to the good of the individual, to the good of the person with whom they are dealing, because they know very well that you don't get good for people by wanting it, and that in most cases it is even the opposite. Fortunately, this is an idea that they take for granted because of their experience. 
They are far from being real propagandists of psychoanalysis on the outside, whereas it would be healthy if more people knew that you don't do good to your neighbor by wanting too much good for him. It could be useful".
(Jacques Lacan, My Teaching, Place, Origin and End of My Teaching, 1967)

E1.6.E.1.6.b.vii_REF1.1_CUR "JOANNA PIOTROWSKA'S PSYCHOLOGICALLY CHARGED PHOTOGRAPHS PROBE HUMAN BEHAVIOUR AND THE DYNAMICS OF FAMILIAL RELATIONS, exploring intimacy, violence, control, and self-protection. The artist reveals moments of care as well as hierarchies of power, anxieties, and imposed conventions that play out in the domestic sphere. Piotrowska invites her subjects, for instance, to construct makeshift shelters in their own homes out of readily available domestic objects; an activity that, while reminiscent of the innocent children's activity of fort-building, also exposes the home as a space loaded with complex emotions and embodied memory. In one photograph a couple crouches, barely covered by their construction, while in another (both Untitled; 2017) a young woman lies on the floor surrounded by pillows and blankets - typically suppliers of comfort - with her arms raised in surrender and with a fixed gaze. The black-and-white photographs in Piotrowska's Self-Defense series (2014-2015) depict young women, most often in their bedrooms, performing gestures and actions from self-defense manuals, implying the possibility of rebellion against a patriarchal culture. Another series depicts family members in ambiguously intimate poses. Through these unsettling images, Piotrowska challenges conventional narratives of the family and the home and their irreconciled tension with the reality of the wider socio-political realm. LC"
(Curatorship: Venice Biennale)

E1.6.E.1.6.b.viii. SELF-RIGHTOUS CHARITY
"As action without content is agitation in a vacuum, so charity which loves no one with direct and primary love, and which becomes intoxicated with itself by reflection, or devours itself by autophagy, this charity is vain self-righteousness."

E1.6.E.1.6.b.viii_REF1_PH "A CHARITY « MODE » DEPRIVED OF A TARGET FOR ITS LOVE WOULD BE AS HOLLOW AS A THOUGHT WITHOUT THOUGHTFUL IDEAS, as vain and verbal as a representation of nothing at all. A charity mode deprived of its neighbor is like love that, for want of fuel or food, would love itself; who would love to love; would be illusory love of love; love squared or literary complacency. And as an action without content is an agitation in the void, like charity which has no direct and primary love, and which intoxicates itself by reflection, or devours itself by autophagy, this charity is a vain [...] hypocrisy"
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, The Vertues and Love, 1970)

E1.6.E.1.6.b.viii_REF2_PH MAXIMS OF RENÉ GIRARD ON TODAY’S DO-GOODERS:
"1. The current process of spiritual demagoguery and rhetorical overkill has transformed the concern for victims into a totalitarian command and a permanent inquisition.
2. Democracy is one vast middle-class court where the courtiers are everywhere and the king is nowhere.
3. We shouldn’t go so far as to allow good manners to prevent us from thinking.
4. There can be rivalries of renunciation rather than acquisition, of deprivation rather than of enjoyment.
5. On political correctness: It’s the religion of the victim detached from any form of transcendence.
6. In general, history is written by the victors. We’re the only society that wants history to be written by the victims, and we don’t see the unprecedented nature of the reversal.
7. It’s not enough to put people on the same social level because they’ll all find new ways of excluding one another.
8. Marxism wants of course to save victims, but it thinks that the process that makes victims is fundamentally economic.
9. It’s now no longer possible to persecute except in the name of victims."
(René Girard, All desire is a desire of being)

E1.6.E.1.6.c. ONE IS NOT ASKED TO SACRIFICE HIMSELF BUT TO PLACE HIS INTERESTS OUTSIDE HIMSELF
"A happy life is, to a great extent, the equivalent of a good life. Professional moralists have made too much of self-abnegation, and have thus put the emphasis where it should not be put. Conscious self-denial leaves a man absorbed in himself and preserves for him the memory of what he has sacrificed; that is why it often misses its immediate purpose and almost always its final goal. A man is not asked to sacrifice himself but to place his interests outside himself, which will spontaneously and naturally lead to the same acts that a person absorbed in the pursuit of his own virtue could accomplish through conscious sacrifice."
True happiness is something that is internal and comes from within us; its source is not common happiness: intimate and proper happiness is not contrary to virtue, but rather is itself virtuous.

E1.6.E.1.6.c_REF1_PH "THE HAPPY LIFE IS TO AN EXTRAORDINARY EXTENT THE SAME AS THE GOOD LIFE. Professional moralists have made too much of self-denial, and in so doing have
put the emphasis in the wrong place. Conscious self-denial leaves a man self-absorbed and vividly aware of what he has sacrificed; in consequence it fails often of its immediate object and almost always of its ultimate purpose. What is needed is not self-denial, but that kind of direction of interest outward which will lead spontaneously and naturally to the same acts that a person absorbed in the pursuit of his own virtue could only perform by means of conscious self-denial. I have written in this book as a hedonist, that is to say, as one who regards happiness as the good, but the acts to be recommended from the point of view of the hedonist are on the whole the same as those to be recommended by the sane moralist. The moralist, however, is too apt, though this is not, of course, universally true, to stress the act rather than the
state of mind. The effects of an act upon the agent will be widely different, according to his state of mind at the moment. If you see a child drowning and save it as the result of a direct impulse to bring help, you will emerge none the worse morally. If, on the other hand, you say to yourself, ‘It is the part of virtue to succour the helpless, and I wish to be a virtuous man, therefore I must save this child’, you will be an even worse man afterwards than you were before. What applies in this extreme case applies in many other instances that are less obvious."
(Bertrand Russell, The Conquest of Happiness, 1962)

E1.6.E.1.6.c_REF2_PH "WE HAVE SAID MANY THINGS ABOUT THE COUÉ METHOD. It is true that in the realm of spiritual life there is no magic wand, no instruction manual. But our good Emile Coué was right when he said: "The more good you do for others, the more good you do for yourself. The altruist finds without seeking what the egoist seeks without finding. What better invitation than to follow Coué's advice, at least in this respect? [...] The path to joy requires taking great care of oneself while paying little attention to oneself... [...]" 
(Alexandre Jollien, La Pharmacopée n°58)

E1.6.E.1.6.c_REF3_PH ALAIN DIFFERENTIATES BETWEEN TWO TYPES OF HAPPINESS: ONE THAT DEPENDS ON EXTERNAL CIRCUMSTANCES, SUCH AS INHERITANCE OR GLORY, AND ONE THAT DEPENDS ON OUR OWN ABILITIES, which is deeper and more lasting.
"There is a kind of happiness that does not belong to us any more than a coat. This is the happiness of inheritance or of winning the lottery; it is also the happiness of fame, because it depends on encounters. But the happiness that depends on our own powers is, on the contrary, incorporated; we are even more dyed with it than wool is dyed purple. [The sages of old sought happiness; not their neighbor's happiness, but their own. Today's wise men agree that personal happiness is not a noble thing to seek; some practice to say that virtue despises happiness, and this is not difficult to say; others teach that the common happiness is the true source of personal happiness, which is undoubtedly the most vacuous opinion of all, for there is no more futile occupation than to pour happiness into the people around you like into pierced wineskins; I have observed that those who are bored with themselves cannot be amused; and on the contrary, it is to those who do not beg that one can give something, for example, music to those who have become musicians. In short, there is no point in sowing in the sand; and I think I have understood, on reflection, the famous parable of the sower who judges those who lack everything to be incapable of receiving. Those who are powerful and happy by themselves will be happy and powerful by others. Yes, the fortunate will trade and barter well, but they must still have happiness within them to give it. And the resolute man must look once and for all in that direction, which distracts him from a certain kind of love that is of no use.
In my opinion, therefore, this intimate and proper happiness is not contrary to virtue, but rather is virtue itself, as that beautiful word of virtue warns us, which means power. For the most happy in the fullest sense is clearly the one who is best able to throw off other happiness, as one throws off a garment."
(Alain, On Happiness, 1922)

E1.6.E.1.6.c_REF4_PH "THEN AGAIN, DO NOT TELL ME, AS A GOOD MAN DID TO-DAY, OF MY OBLIGATION TO PUT ALL POOR MEN IN GOOD SITUATIONS. Are they my poor? I tell thee, thou foolish philanthropist, that I grudge the dollar, the dime, the cent I give to such men as do not belong to me and to whom I do not belong. There is a class of persons to whom by all spiritual affinity I am bought and sold; for them I will go to prison if need be; but your miscellaneous popular charities; the education at college of fools; the building of meeting-houses to the vain end to which many now stand; alms to sots, and the thousand-fold Relief Societies; though I confess with shame I sometimes succumb and give the dollar, it is a wicked dollar, which by and by I shall have the manhood to withhold.

Virtues are, in the popular estimate, rather the exception than the rule. There is the man and his virtues. Men do what is called a good action, as some piece of courage or charity, much as they would pay a fine in expiation of daily non-appearance on parade. Their works are done as an apology or extenuation of their living in the world-as invalids and the insane pay a high board. Their virtues are penances. I do not wish to expiate, but to live. My life is for itself and not for a spectacle. I much prefer that it should be of a lower strain, so it be genuine and equal, than that it should be glittering and unsteady. I wish it to be sound and sweet, and not to need diet and bleeding. I ask primary evidence that you are a man, and refuse this appeal from the man to his actions. I know that for myself it makes no difference whether I do or forbear those actions which are reckoned excellent. I cannot consent to pay for a privilege where I have intrinsic right."
(Ralph Waldo Emerson, Self-reliance, 1841)

E1.6.E.1.6.c_REF5_PH IT IS WHEN YOU DON'T NEED THE WORLD ANYMORE, THAT YOU CAN MAKE A REAL CONTRIBUTION TOWARD BRINGING ABOUT A BETTER ONE.
“Your primary task is not to seek salvation through creating a better world, but to awaken out of identification with form. You are then no longer bound to this world, this level of reality.  You can feel your roots in the Unmanifested and so are free of attachment to the manifested world.  You can still enjoy the passing pleasures of this world, but there is no fear of loss anymore, so you don't need to cling to them.  Although you can enjoy sensory pleasures, the craving for sensory experience is gone, as is the constant search for fulfillment through psychological gratification, through feeding the ego.  You are in touch with something infinitely greater than any pleasure, greater than any manifested thing.
In a way, you then don't need the world anymore.  You don't even need it to be different from the way it is.
It is only at this point that you begin to make a real contribution toward bringing about a better world, toward creating a different order of reality.  It is only at this point that you are able to feel true compassion and to help others at the level of cause.  Only those who have transcended the world can bring about a better world.
You may remember that we talked about the dual nature of true compassion, which is awareness of a common bond of shared mortality and immortality.  At this deep level, compassion becomes healing in the widest sense.  In that state, your healing influence is primarily based not on doing but on being.  Everybody you come in contact with will be touched by your presence and affected by the peace that you emanate, whether they are conscious of it or not.  When you are fully present and people around you manifest unconscious behavior, you won't feel the need to react to it, so you don't give it any reality.  Your peace is so vast and deep that anything that is not peace disappears into it as if it had never existed. […]
If you feel called upon to alleviate suffering in the world, that is a very noble thing to do, but remember not to focus exclusively on the outer; otherwise, you will encounter frustration and despair.  Without a profound change in human consciousness, the world's suffering is a bottomless pit.  So don't let your compassion become one-sided.  Empathy with someone else's pain or lack and a desire to help need to be balanced with a deeper realization of the eternal nature of all life and the ultimate illusion of all pain.  Then let your peace flow into whatever you do and you will be working on the levels of effect and cause simultaneously.”
(Eckhart Tolle, The Power Of Now, 1997)

E1.7.B.2.5.c. A SINCERE MIND IS INTERESTED IN PEOPLE AND PROBLEMS AND ACTS ACCORDING TO THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE MOMENT, NOT ACCORDING TO RULES. Its aim is liberty, not security. Morality based on rules and regulations cannot lead to freedom.

E1.6.E.2. WHAT IS AN ACTIVITY COMPATIBLE WITH THE COMMON GOOD?

E1.6.E.2.1. WHAT CONSTITUTES AN ACTIVITY COMPATIBLE WITH THE COMMON GOOD?
Some people have more talent for social, generous or philanthropic action; others will contribute to the common good by other more indirect means. What matters is that the pursuit of one's own happiness is compatible with the good of society as a whole, and that it engages us in activities that are objectively valuable. This means that they provide services to others, that they develop knowledge, that they promote excellence in a field, or that they are creative or aesthetic.

E1.6.E.2.1.a. DO YOU HAVE A GENUINE CALLING FOR CHARITABLE WORK ?
Henry David Thoreau posits that authentic charity should originate from genuine concern and compassion for others, not from duty or obligation. Reflecting on his experiences with philanthropic endeavors, he indicates that they don't coincide with his personal values or principles. He ultimately encourages others to follow their passions and vocations, rather than succumbing to pressure to participate in charitable work.

E1.6.E.2.1.a_REF1_PH "I WOULD NOT SUBTRACT ANYTHING FROM THE PRAISE THAT IS DUE TO PHILANTHROPY, but merely demand justice for all who by their lives and works are a blessing to mankind. I do not value chiefly a man’s uprightness and benevolence, which are, as it were, his stem and leaves. Those plants of whose greenness withered we make herb tea for the sick serve but a humble use, and are most employed by quacks. I want the flower and fruit of a man; that some fragrance be wafted over from him to me, and some ripeness flavor our intercourse. His goodness must not be a partial and transitory act, but a constant superfluity, which costs him nothing and of which he is unconscious. This is a charity that hides a multitude of sins. The philanthropist too often surrounds mankind with the remembrance of his own cast-off griefs as an atmosphere, and calls it sympathy. We should impart our courage, afid not our despair, our health and ease, and not our disease, and take care that this does not spread by contagion. [...]
I believe that what so saddens the reformer is not his sympathy with his fellows in distress, but, though he be the holiest son of God, is his private ail. Let this be righted, let the spring come to him, the morning rise over his couch, and he will forsake his generous companions without apology. [...]
Do not stay to be an overseer of the poor, but endeavor to become one of the worthies of the world."
(Henry David Thoreau, Walden, 1854)

E1.6.E.2.1.a_REF1.1_PH "BUT ALL THIS IS VERY SELFISH, I HAVE HEARD SOME OF MY TOWNSMEN SAY. I confess that I have hitherto indulged very little in philanthropic enterprises. I have made some sacrifices to a sense of duty, and among others have sacrificed this pleasure also. There are those who have used all their arts to persuade me to undertake the support of some poor family in the town; and if I had nothing to do—for the devil finds employment for the idle — I might try my hand at some such pastime as that. However, when I have thought to indulge myself in this respect, and lay their heaven under an obligation by maintaining certain poor persons in all respects as comfortably as I maintain myself, and have even ventured so far as to make them the offer, they have one and all unhesitatingly preferred to remain poor. While my townsmen and women are devoted in so many ways to the good of their fellows, I trust that one at least may be spared to other and less humane pursuits. You must have a genius for charity as well as for anything else. As for Doing-good, that is one of the professions which are full. Moreover, I have tried it fairly, and, strange as it may seem, am satisfied that it does not agree with my constitution. Probably I should not consciously and deliberately forsake my particular calling to do the good which society demands of me, to save the universe from annihilation; and I believe that a like but infinitely greater steadfastness elsewhere is all that now preserves it. But I would not stand between any man and his genius; and to him who does this work, which I decline, with his whole heart and soul and life, I would say, Persevere, even if the world call it doing evil, as it is most likely they will."
(Henry David Thoreau, Walden, 1854)

E1.6.E.2.1.b. WHAT IS OBJECTIVELY VALUABLE?
Susan Wolf contends that a meaningful life isn't necessarily a happy one or a life committed to others. Instead, it's a life separate from fulfillment or morality, engaged in activities with objective value. These activities can relate to personal relationships or a craft, like cooking for the family or making a Halloween costume. To discern what holds objective value, communal intuition can be useful. Ask whether the activity pursues knowledge or excellence, is creative or aesthetic, or offers a service to others. Striving for excellence in any field, such as athletics, can also be meaningful, serving as an example for others to practice virtues like discipline and teamwork.

E1.6.E.2.1.b_REF1_PH "WHAT MAKES A LIFE MEANINGFUL? IS THE CHOICE OF WHERE WE FIND MEANING COMPLETELY ARBITRARY? These questions are different from the question 'What is the meaning of life?'
The meaning of life is a metaphysical question - wether my life is meaningful is a different question. Meaning is one dimension of a good life, together with happiness/fulfillment and morality. Susan Wolf advocates that a meaningful life is not necessarily a happy one or one dedicated to others. Meaning is separate from fulfillment or morality: it requires one to have engagements that are objectively valuable. Even if sisyphus was happy, W. argues stone pushing does not constitute an objectively valuable good even if it is subjectively valuable to Sisyphus. So what is an objectively valuable? Activities that we engage in out of our personnel relationship with others - such as cooking meals for the family or making a halloween costume - or out of relationship with a craft - such as putting in long hours of piano practice to attain excellence.
For W. Sartre's existencialism collapses in the end if what you choose to spend your freedom on has no objective value. Finding your passion and going after it is not enough. 
What does make something objectively valuable then? We can use our communal intuition about what is valuable and what isn't. We can also ask if it is in the pursuit of knowledge or excellence? Is it creative or aesthetic? Does it provide a service to others?
The pursuit of excellence in any field (ex: athletic) is meaningful in that it poses the exercise of virtues as an example for others (discipline, team work, etc.) A recluse could do something that then goes to other people and becomes meaningful. Even if a beautiful work is destroyed and nobody ever has seen it except its creator, why is it we feel the life of this artist was still meaningful?
Like happiness that you attain better not trying too hard to reach it, meaning is better achieved not becoming obsessive about it."
(Susan Wolf on Meaning In Life in Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: http://philosophybites.com/2010/07/susan-wolf-on-meaning-in-life.html

E1.6.E.2.1.c. WHAT IS A VIABLE SOLUTION TO THE TASK OF STAYING ALIVE ?
"There are many ways in which man can find a solution to the task of staying alive and of remaining sane. Some are better than others and some are worse. By « better»  is meant a way conducive to greater strength, clarity, joy, independence; and by « worse » the very opposite. But more important than finding the better solution is finding some solution that is viable."

E1.6.E.2.1.c_REF1_PH "MAN IS BORN AS A FREAK OF NATURE, BEING WITHIN NATURE AND YET TRANSCENDING IT. He has to find principles of action and decision making which replace the principles of instinct. He has to have a frame of orientation that permits him to organize a consistent picture of the world as a condition for consistent actions. He has to fight not only against the dangers of dying, starving, and being hurt, but also against another danger that is specifically human: that of becoming insane. In other words, he has to protect himself not only against the danger of losing his life but also against the danger of losing his mind. The human being, born under the conditions described here, would indeed go mad if he did not find a frame of reference which permitted him to feel at home in the world in some form and to escape the experience of utter helplessness, disorientation, and uprootedness. There are many ways in which man can find a solution to the task of staying alive and of remaining sane. Some are better than others and some are worse. By « better»  is meant a way conducive to greater strength, clarity, joy, independence; and by « worse » the very opposite. But more important than finding the better solution is finding some solution that is viable."
(Erich Fromm, The Revolution of Hope: Toward a Humanized Technology, 1968)

E1.6.E.2.1.c_REF2_CUR NOT TO BE TAKEN AT FACE VALUE
"Because altruists are the least sexy 
people on earth, unable 
to say “I want” without embarrassment,

we need to take from them everything 
	they give,
then ask for more,

this is how to excite them, and because 
it’s exciting 
to see them the least bit excited 

once again we’ll be doing something 
for ourselves,
who have no problem taking pleasure,

always desirous and so pleased to be 
pleased, we who above all 
can be trusted to keep the balance."
(Stephen Dunn, Manifesto of the Selfish)

E1.6.E.2.1.d. HOW TO GIVE ?
"TO RICH GIVERS
What you give me I cheerfully accept,
A little sustenance, a hut and garden, a little money, as I rendezvous with my poems,
A traveler’s lodging and breakfast as journey through the States,—why
should I be ashamed to own such gifts? why to advertise for them?
For I myself am not one who bestows nothing upon man and woman,
For I bestow upon any man or woman the entrance to all the gifts of
the universe."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.6.E.2.1.e. “CHARITY SHOULD MAKE
THE GIVER SING
Charity should make the giver sing,
Happy in the undertow of sharing.
A gift should not be given out of duty,
Remiss in both its pleasure and its beauty,
Intent on rectitude, bereft of caring.
The burdens of the world may be worth bearing,
Yet gifts should still a certain lightness bring.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E1.6.E.2.2. HOW CAN WE MOTIVATE OURSELVES TO PROTECT THE CLIMATE? 
Given the urgency of the climate situation, we must take action to preserve the environment. To inspire ourselves to move away from materialism, we can question whether its primary appeal is simply to boost our self-esteem.

E1.6.E.2.2_REF1_PH KATE SOPER ARGUES THAT LIVING A VIRTUOUS LIFE IN FAVOR OF THE ENVIRONMENT CAN LEAD TO GREATER HAPPINESS THAN THE PREVAILING CONSUMERIST LIFESTYLE. She introduces the concept of "alternative hedonism," suggesting that non-consumerist ways of living can offer more enjoyment, such as more time together, less stress, and better health. 
"An unexpected twist to Aristotle's view of happiness deriving from virtue is to see a virtuous life as one in favour of the environment; and it might actually be a happier one than that of the prevailing consumerist way of life.
Kate Soper believes that we need to rethink how we live in the light of impending environmental catastrophe. But the unexpected element in her thought is that alternative ways of living can be more enjoyable than consumerism. This leads to her notion of alternative hedonism. All sorts of pleasures are missing from the consumerist way of life: more time to be together, more enjoyment of time and space delivered from the reliance on fast transportation methods - and it brings byproducts such as stress, overwork, ill-health, pollution, consumerisation of childhood, obesity. The phenomenon of work-alcoholism is a pretty new one: should we organize differently the work-leisure divide, people who today can't think of how they would occupy their lives without work might change their position. Capitalism is providing for the goods we desire at a cost that could be reduced in an alternative system - while increasing quality: Would we need Tinder if we had time for building relationships? Would we cram in gyms if it was enjoyable to exercise outside in our cities? Would we need escapes such as luxury holidays to regain our quality time? Would we enjoy more time to cook ourselves? 
One challenge of a post consumerist society would be how to provide for the need of human beings to satisfy « l'amour propre » in its definition by Rousseau. Consumerism is very efficient at letting us excel our neighbours in a quantified manner. It might explain part of its success!"
(Kate Soper on Alternative Hedonism, Philosophy Bites)

E1.6.E.2.2_REF1.1_CUR SUCH STRANGELY REFINED AESTHETIC AND SUCH CREATIVITY! It's hard to formulate a critique of  consumerism with more panache and humor! I absolutely need the huge backpack to do my shopping!

Watch the 2'50" video on Vimeo: https://vimeo.com/332745222

E1.6.E.2.2_REF1.2_PH "SELF-ESTEEM 
Self-love as seen through the eyes of the other: the desire to be loved, approved, and admired, and the horror of being hated or despised. La Rochefoucauld saw it as the mainspring of our passions and the driving force of all. Rousseau, more generously and correctly, distinguished it from self-love: "Self-love is a natural emotion which leads every animal to care for its own preservation, and which, directed in man by reason and modified by pity, produces humanity and virtue. Self-love is only a relative, artificial sentiment, born in society, which leads each individual to value himself above all others, which inspires in men all the evils they do to each other, and which is the true source of honor" (Discourse on the Origin of Inequality, note XV). The transition from the first to the second is all too clear. We live primarily for ourselves, but only with and through others. How could we not want to be loved in return? Self-esteem is this love of love centered on oneself and mediated by others. It is loving others only for oneself, and oneself only through others. A double error, or double trap, which explains why self-love, as Alain said, is an unhappy love. But these are small wounds compared to the great dramas of existence. True unhappiness sometimes heals from them. Perhaps so does true happiness."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.6.E.2.2_REF1.3_PH "EUDAIMONISM 
Any ethics that makes happiness (eudaimonia) the highest good. Since Socrates, this has been the case in almost all ancient schools, which agreed that everyone wants to be happy and that this is also the goal of philosophy. This did not prevent philosophers from resolutely disagreeing with each other - not about this goal, which they shared, but about its content or its conditions. What constitutes happiness? [These different forms of eudaimonism are more opposed than complementary. They seek the same thing - happiness - but they do not find the same happiness. Eudaimonism is a commonplace of Greek wisdom. But this place is an arena where philosophers confronted each other. Moderns prefer to talk about something else. Not that they have necessarily renounced happiness. But because they have renounced the sovereign good (see this word)".
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.6.E.2.2_REF1.4_PH "SOVEREIGN GOOD 
In every action, in every choice," wrote Aristotle, "the good is the end, for it is in view of this end that we accomplish everything else" (Nicomachean Ethics, I, 5). But most of the ends we pursue have no value in themselves: they are merely means to other ends. For example, work is an end (and therefore a good) for many of us only through the money it allows us to earn, just as money is a good only through the comfort or luxury it allows us to enjoy... But if every end were only a means to another end, which is only a means to another end, and so on ad infinitum, our desire would by definition be insatiable. It will be said that this is indeed the case, and yet it is what the Greeks refused to accept. Aristotle again: "If, then, there is an end of our activities which we desire for its own sake and the others only because of it, and if we do not endlessly choose one thing in view of another (for then we should go on like this ad infinitum, so that desire would be futile and vain), it is clear that this end can only be the good, the highest good" (ibid., I, 1). This is valid as a definition, at least in a formal sense: the highest good would be the final end, as Aristotle says, that is, the end that is not the means to any end, and of which all other ends are only the means. It would be the ultimate goal of all our actions. 
What is it? What is above all good, what do we desire for its own sake, and in view of what do we desire everything else? "Happiness, because we always choose it for its own sake and never in view of something else" (ibid., 1.5; see also X, 6). Epicurus would answer: "Pleasure", because happiness is worthwhile only insofar as it is pleasurable, while pleasure without happiness is still worthwhile. The Stoics would answer: "virtue," since it is sufficient to make us happy and is better than happiness, which, moreover, no one can claim to do without. Between these three ethics, centered on three sovereign goods, we will avoid widening the gap too much. Eudaimonism is the common lot of Greek wisdom: for Epicurus or Zeno, the idea that happiness might not be pleasant or virtuous was purely academic, something they never seriously considered. Happiness for all is the goal: it is activity in accordance with virtue (Aristotle), pleasure in the repose of the soul (Epicurus), or virtue in action (Zeno).
This is what proves Kant right, some two thousand years later, when he proves them wrong. The word "sovereign" is ambiguous, he notes in the "Dialectic of Practical Reason": it can mean "supreme" or "perfect". But even if virtue were, as Kant claims, "the supreme condition of everything that can seem desirable to us," it would only be "the complete and perfect good" if it were accompanied by happiness. Indeed, if the sovereign good is the absolutely desirable, everyone will agree that it cannot exist without either happiness or virtue: what we desire is the conjunction or, as Kant says, the "exact proportion" of the two. This is what the Epicureans (for whom happiness is virtue) and the Stoics (for whom virtue is happiness) sought. They were both wrong. The union of happiness and virtue, Kant explains, is synthetic, not analytical: they are two "completely different" concepts, the union of which is never guaranteed and almost never given on this earth (C. R. Praxis, I, II, ch. 2). We must therefore renounce the sovereign good or hope for it only in another life, after death. This is where modernity begins to separate us from happiness."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.6.E.2.3. WHY WORK TOWARDS REDUCING INEQUALITY?
Considering the existing inequalities and lack of social mobility, actions promoting fairness should lead to greater social justice. Striving for greater equality of opportunity should be a goal, irrespective of political views. This viewpoint aligns with Kant's assertion that such a position is reached through exercising reason. John Rawls helps us define the minimum acceptable comfort level that our society should guarantee for all. However, we must acknowledge that happiness inequality is decreasing, even as material inequalities continue to rise in economically and socially liberal societies. So, does inequality matter?

E1.6.E.2.3.a. SINCE CHANCE IS UNPREDICTABLE, EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY SHOULD NOT BE LEFT TO CHANCE - IT'S A QUESTION OF JUSTICE
We shouldn't rely on chance to deliver justice. Instead, it's about shielding the future, as much as possible, from the injustices of the past and even the present.

E1.6.E.2.3.a_REF1_CUR "IN A SEQUENCE OF PHOTOGRAPHS, AGUILAR HOLDS UP FIVE CARDBOARD SIGNS, staging herself in the position of someone asking passersby for help. Three of the cards show dictionarylike definitions of each term in the work's title, written in the artist's hand and separated by signs with plus and equal signs. Together they form the equation Access + Opportunity = Success. In the photos in which the artist is visible, the compositions are cropped such that the top half of her head is obscured- echoing the exclusions art institutions have historically committed by denying access and recognition to artists, like Aguilar, who identify as queer, Latinx, or disabled."
(Curatorship, MomA, NYC)

E1.6.E.2.3.a_REF2_PH "THAT LUCK IS UNFAIR IS PART OF ITS DEFINITION. Equality of opportunity is only an ideal that presupposes something other than luck. 
It is a mistake to believe that we can possess luck (if it is luck that possesses us) or that we deserve it (if everything deserves it). There is no need to be grateful. Luck is just a chance that happens, and happens by chance. 
But without it, there is no happiness. Fate is always stronger. Only luck sometimes gives us the feeling that the opposite is true. So do modest happiness or serene misfortune. Neither is deserved. [...]

FORTUNE
Chance or wealth. As Alain points out, the convergence of these two meanings is revealing. "It reduces the origin of wealth to pure chance, which it is in part because work does not enrich one without some stroke of luck. So, to ask whether fortune is fair is to ask whether the lottery is fair." Fortunately, there are taxes and social security."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.6.E.2.3.a_REF3_PH "EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES Chance, wherever it manifests itself, is always unequal. Take the lottery, health, beauty... If everyone won the jackpot, the lottery would no longer be a game of chance: it would no longer be chance, but justice. So why talk about equal chances? Because all players have the same chance of winning, with the same stakes: they are equal before the outcome. The calculation of probabilities predicts it. The rules of the game guarantee it. The officials supervise it. This puts us on the right track. Equal chances cannot depend on luck. This means that it depends on us, that it must be desired, organized, verified - instituted. It is not a matter of luck, but of justice. Not nature, but society. Not chance, but politics and laws. It is only an equality of rights to compensate for the de facto inequalities, which are innumerable. This does not condemn it. On the contrary, it makes it indispensable. We cannot rely on chance to put us in the right place. 
How can we be equal in the face of what is by definition unequal? By giving everyone the right, on the same basis as everyone else, to try their luck, to take full advantage of the opportunities they have, to compensate as much as possible for those they lack. [...] 
It is a matter of compensating, especially in school, for the inequalities that nature and society constantly create or perpetuate. Equality of opportunity means the right not to depend solely on luck or misfortune. It is the equal right of everyone to prove themselves, to make the most of their talents, to overcome, at least partially, their weaknesses: the right to succeed as much as one can deserve; the right not to remain a prisoner of one's origins, one's background or one's status. It is equality, but in the present, in the face of the future - the right to be free by giving oneself the means to become so. It is like anticipatory justice: it is about protecting the future as much as possible from the injustices of the past and even of the present. It is never fully achieved. All the more reason to strive to get closer and closer to it."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.6.E.2.3.a_REF4_CUR THE POLITICAL DIMENSIONS OF DISABILITY, ILLNESS, AND CARE
“Berenice Olmedo's is known for her sculptures and kinetic objects, in which she often integrates prostheses and orthoses, revealing the la political dimensions of disability, illness, and care. In Nakewé, Olmedo used different perspectives of tumors, visualized in computerized tomographies and processed in a medical software; from which, she transforms clinical materials into abstract forms that no longer directly reference the human body but instead en become autonomous entities. Through the assemblage and reconfiguration of orthopedic components, splints, and other medical devices, the artist challenges stereotypes, proposing alternative ways of being rooted in what is often overlooked, excluded, or considered residual. As Olmedo herself states, in the world she envisions, "there is no stigma of disability, but only variations of existence, variations of movement, variations of slowness and speed.”
(Curatorship: Jumex, Mexico City)

E1.6.E.2.3.b. FOR KANT, REASON IS NOT ONLY A FACULTY OF KNOWLEDGE, BUT ALSO AN AUTHORITY THAT PRESCRIBES A LAW FOR MORAL ACTION.
In Kant's Critique of Practical Reason, he explores the concept of freedom and questions our capacity for doing good. Kant suggests that the moral law might conflict with our desires, but there is a certain nobility in resisting temptation - this, he argues, is freedom. Furthermore, he posits that the moral law establishes freedom. We can't answer the question "What must I do?" without first addressing "What can I know?"

E1.6.E.2.3.b.i. IMPERATIVE
The imperative is a command expressed in the first person. It doesn't oppose freedom, but instead imposes itself upon it. Kant differentiates between two types of imperative: the hypothetical and the categorical. The hypothetical imperative is conditional, tied to a specific end, while the categorical imperative is universal and has no particular goal in sight. According to Kant, morality is universally applicable because it applies to each individual; the only duty is to be free.

E1.6.E.2.3.b.i_REF1_PH "IMPERATIVE
A command, but one expressed in the first person: not the opposite of freedom, but what it imposes on itself. It is not the same to obey a sovereign or a God (command) and to obey only oneself (imperative). To obey a commandment is to submit, and no doubt this is often necessary. To obey an imperative is to govern oneself, and it is always necessary. 
Since Kant, two types of imperatives have been distinguished: the hypothetical imperative and the categorical imperative. 
The first remains subject to a condition, which is usually the end sought. For example: "If you want your friends to be loyal to you, be loyal to them." Or, "If you want to avoid prison, be honest." These are only rules of prudence or skill. It is a matter of choosing means adapted to a certain end, and they are valid only on condition that the end is pursued.
The categorical imperative, on the other hand, is unconditional. It has nothing to do with an end. For example: "Be loyal to your friends." Or, "Don't lie." These are moral imperatives that are absolutely binding: they have nothing to do with success or efficiency, like prudence or skill, but with duty. Thus, Kant explains when it comes to testifying in court: "He who asks himself for what purpose he should tell the truth is already a wretch. 
Hypothetical imperatives remain particular: they are valid only for those who verify the condition, that is, for those who aim at a certain goal (loyal friends, security, success...). The categorical imperative, because it is unconditional and has no goal, is universal: it is valid for every finite, rational being, as Kant says, including those who do not submit to it. It is the universal itself, insofar as reason states it and prescribes it to itself. This is what determines Kant's well-known and demanding formulation: "Act only according to that maxim which makes it possible for you to want and at the same time makes it a universal law" (Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals, II). This means obeying only oneself (autonomy) by freeing oneself from oneself (universality). Morality is only valid for everyone because it is valid for each individual ("alone, as Alain said, universally"), and the only duty is to be free".
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.6.E.2.3.b.i_REF2_PH ARE WE FREE TO DO GOOD? "Kant's Critique of Practical Reason On the one hand, there is the humiliation of our self-respect by the moral law, which can contradict our desires, but there is a greatness that goes beyond this humiliation in the act of resisting temptation: it is freedom. What connects man to the world is not so much his sensitive dimension, which always connects him to his finiteness, but human dignity - a sense of power.
Kant is an excellent thinker to help us think about what is beyond us and transcends us - which is usually sudden - such as the ideas of metaphysics, the soul, or freedom. For Kant, transcendental means any philosophical inquiry that is not interested in the nature of an object, but in the conditions of possibility of its knowledge. He was the great "destroyer" of Platonic metaphysics, which held that there were essences and ideals that man could understand. Man has no access to the knowledge of that which transcends the limits of experience.
The Critique of Pure Reason is concerned with the question, "What can I know?" or "What are the conditions of possibility of knowledge? The Critique of Practical Reason addresses the question, "What should I do?" or "What are the conditions of possibility of freedom? With Kant, for the first time, reason is no longer defined solely as the ability to know, but also and primarily as an authority that prescribes a law for us to act morally. For Kant, the second question cannot be answered without having answered the first, because in order to do the good, one must know what the good is - and what it is cannot come from transcendental knowledge. Since Plato, good and evil have been a matter of knowledge ("No one is deliberately evil" - Plato). Kant separates theoretical knowledge from morality. The principle that saves us from moral relativism is that of the universal moral law: what comes first is not good and evil, but the moral law that makes it possible to distinguish them by judgment.

It is the moral law that establishes freedom, illustrated by the passage of the man who is free to obey or not to obey the imperative of the moral law imposed on him when he must either bear false witness against his friend or perish. And freedom and the moral law become clear when we contrast this example with that of the man who will renounce lust without remorse if the knowledge of it means death: in this second case there is only a calculation between two desires (to enjoy and to survive) - morality and freedom are not a choice between sensitive motives of greater or lesser intensity, it is a choice between the satisfaction of a desire and the moral law and its categorical imperative. Freedom is the possibility for man to autonomously abstract himself from all sensitive motives in order to conform to the universal law. On the other hand, there is no reason to renounce the satisfaction of a desire that does not conflict with the moral law. Kant explores the notion of autonomy that Rousseau reserved for politics: Freedom is not opposed to obedience, but it is linked to the conformity of our actions to a law which does not come to us from outside (divine laws, etc.), but which is dictated to us by the critical concept of autonomy, which allows us to discern the universal law of reason. A major difference between external law and the law of reason is that the latter has no content - it is not limited to material prescriptions. Its criterion is formal or logical. For example, lying is not a universalizable behavior because if everyone lied, lying would no longer make sense. Universalization is contradictory because the liar relies on the belief in the truth of the person to whom he is lying. The liar exempts himself from a law - one of the criteria is that he must hide from other people - a law that he recognizes. Evil is the act of deceiving others and, to some extent, oneself, as when the liar allows himself one last little lie. Morality is prescriptive, even for Kant, but the norm does not come from God, nor from society (Durkeim), but from two principles: universalization and non-contradiction - these two principles do not seem to depend on culturalism and thus resist moral relativism (even if there are differences in customs)".
(Michaël Foessel in the program Les chemins de la philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 10/08/2018)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/critique-de-la-raison-pratique-de-kant-14-sommes-nous-libres-de-faire-le-bien

E1.6.E.2.3.b.ii. AUTONOMY
Autonomy is the control one has over oneself, embodying the freedom that comes from obeying self-prescribed laws. This concept is primarily associated with Kant's philosophy, which defines autonomy as the capacity to adhere solely to one's own legislations, independent of any external or internal influences, and only to the universal aspect within oneself, that is, reason. As such, autonomy becomes the principle of morality because it signifies obeying the part of oneself that is free, or in other words, self-governance. The term is also regarded as an ideal, representing a process of liberation from all unfree elements within us. Autonomy is not a state but an ongoing process of empowerment.

E1.6.E.2.3.b.ii_REF1_PH "AUTONOMY It is to obey the law that we have prescribed for ourselves, as Rousseau said, and that is what it means to be free. 
The word, in its philosophical use, is mainly due to Kant. Autonomy is self-rule (freedom), but through the (nomos) that reason imposes on itself and imposes on us, which is the moral law. The will is autonomous, Kant explains, when it submits only to its own legislation (as practical reason), independently of any sensible or affective determination, thus independently of the body, but also of the self in its contingent particularity, and even of a law - in other words, only to the universal that one carries within oneself, which is oneself (hence the question of freedom), but as a rational and legislative being (hence the question of autonomy). 
However, the two concepts of autonomy and freedom do not completely overlap. Those who do evil certainly act freely, but without autonomy: they freely submit to the part of themselves that is not free (their instincts, passions, weaknesses, interests, fears). On the other hand, what is autonomy? It is freedom for the good: to be autonomous is to obey the part of oneself that is free, "independently of any of the objects of the faculty of desire," as Kant says, and even independently of the "dear self," in other words, of the particular individual that one is. This is why autonomy is the moral principle: egoism is the source of all evil; reason, which has no ego, is the source of all good. The only duty is to be free, and that is what autonomy means: it is to obey the duty to govern oneself.
If one is not a Kantian, the word has a special value as an ideal. It does not indicate a fact, but a horizon, a process, a task. It is a matter of freeing oneself as much as possible from everything in us that is not free. Reason alone makes this possible (Spinoza, Marx, Freud), and this is where the idea of autonomy retains its meaning. A free man", writes Spinoza, "is one who lives according to the sole commandment of reason...". This autonomy is never given: it is to be done and always to be done again. There is no autonomy; there is only a process, always unfinished, of becoming autonomous. One is not born free; one becomes free."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.6.E.2.3.b.iii. MORAL VS. ETHICS
”Morality encompasses our duties, i.e., obligations or prohibitions we impose on ourselves, regardless of any expected reward or sanction, or even hope. According to Kant, a moral action does not rely on its anticipated effects, but solely on the rule it follows, without any personal inclination or calculation. Morality does not require religion or any other end goal, making it secular, even among believers. It's the law that the individual sets for himself and follows unconditionally.

Ethics, on the other hand, involves knowledge and choices, forming a thoughtful, prioritized set of our desires. Ethics addresses the question, "How should we live?" It's always specific to an individual or a group. As an art of living, it aims for happiness and culminates in wisdom.

The mistake would be to choose between the two. No one can do without ethics, as morality provides only an incomplete answer to the question "How to live," and is insufficient for achieving happiness or wisdom. Only a wise person could do without morality, as for them, knowledge and love would suffice.”

E1.6.E.2.3.b.iii_REF1_PH "MORAL 
The whole of our duties, that is to say, the obligations or prohibitions which we impose on ourselves, independently of any expected reward or sanction, or even of any hope. [The present is enough for it. It does not need hope. The will is enough. "An action performed out of duty derives its value not from the end which it is intended to attain," Kant emphasizes, "but from the maxim by which it is determined. Its value does not depend on its expected effects, but only on the rule to which it is subject, regardless of any inclination, any selfish calculation, in short, "regardless of any object of the faculty of desire" and "regardless of the ends that can be attained by such an action" (Groundwork..., I). Even if you act for fame, for your happiness, for your salvation, and even if you act in accordance with morality in everything, you are still not acting morally. An action has true moral value, Kant explains, only insofar as it is selfless. [...] "It has no need of religion," Kant insists, "nor of any end or purpose whatsoever: -not even" (Religion within the Limits of Reason Alone. Preface). This is what makes it secular, even among believers, and absolutely obligatory, or at least that is how we feel. Whether God exists or not, what does that change about the duty to protect what we do not need to know about that existence in order to act humanely?
Let's imagine the opposite, an example we find in Kant, that God exists and is known to all. What would happen? "God and eternity, with their awe-inspiring majesty, would be constantly before our eyes. No one would dare to disobey. The fear of hell and the hope of heaven would give unparalleled power to the divine commandments. Self-interested or fearful submission would reign supreme as an absolute moral order: "Transgression of the law would, of course, be avoided; what is commanded would be done." But no morality would survive: "Most lawful acts would be produced by fear, few by hope, and none by duty, so that the moral value of acts, on which alone the value of man and even of the world in the eyes of supreme wisdom rests, would cease to exist" (C. R. Practice, Dialectic, II, 9). Not only is it not necessary to hope in order to do one's duty, but one can only truly do it on the condition, as Kant also says, that "one does not hope for anything in this respect" (Doctrine of Virtue, § 30). [It is the law that the individual prescribes to himself: in this he is free, as Rousseau would say ("obedience to the law which one has prescribed to himself is freedom"), or autonomous, as Kant would say (because the individual is subject only to "his own and yet universal legislation"). I believe, contrary to Kant and Rousseau, that this freedom or autonomy is itself only relative, but this does not change the feeling that we have of a practical absolute (which comes from the will, not from knowledge) and of a requirement that is unconditional for us. I am convinced that all morality is historical. But far from abolishing morality, it is, on the contrary, what makes it exist and subjects us to it: for we are in history and produced by it. Relative autonomy, then, but better than the slavery of inclinations or fears. [...]
If we leave aside a few painful archaisms that are due more to religious or historical inertia than to strictly moral judgments (I'm thinking in particular of the sexual question, the status of women, and so-called religious duties), we must recognize that what is meant by "good person" in France is not very different - and will undoubtedly become less and less so - from what the equivalent expressions can mean in America or India, Norway or South Africa, Japan or the Maghreb countries. [Where does this morality come from? From God? It is not impossible: as Rousseau believed, He may have placed within us the "immortal and heavenly voice" of conscience, which takes precedence, or should take precedence, over all other considerations, even those of our salvation or His own glory... But what if there is no God? Then we must accept that morality is purely human, that it is merely a product of history, that it is the set of standards that humanity has chosen, valued, and maintained over the centuries. Why these? No doubt because they were favorable to the survival and development of the species (this is what I call Darwinian morality), to the interests of society (this is Durkheimian morality), to the demands of reason (this is Kant's morality), and finally to the recommendations of love (this is Jesus' or Spinoza's morality). Imagine a civilization that advocated lying, selfishness, theft, murder, violence, cruelty, and hatred... [...]"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.6.E.2.3.b.iii_REF2_PH "ETHICS [...] In short, morality commands, ethics recommends. These oppositions lead to two different definitions, which I will only recall here:
By morality I mean the normative and imperative discourse that results from the opposition of good and evil, considered as absolute or transcendent values. It consists of do's and don'ts; it is the sum total of our duties. Morality answers the question, "What shall I do? It aims to be unified and universal. It tends toward virtue and culminates in holiness (in Kant's sense: in the sense that a holy will is a will that conforms in all respects to the moral law). 
And by ethics I mean a normative but non-imperative discourse (or without imperatives other than hypothetical ones), resulting from the opposition of good and evil, considered as immanent and relative values. It consists of knowledge and choices: it is the thoughtful and hierarchical whole of our desires. Ethics answers the question "How shall we live? It is always specific to an individual or a group. It is a way of life: it usually tends toward happiness and culminates in wisdom. 
The mistake would be to try to choose between the two. No one can do without ethics, since morality is a very incomplete answer to the question "How should we live?", since it is not enough for either happiness or wisdom. And only a sage could do without morality: because knowledge and love would be enough for him. We are far from that; that is why we need morality (see this word)".
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.6.E.2.3.b.iv. "CATEGORICAL 
Kant's notion of the categorical imperative]: it's the one that commands absolutely, unconditionally and without escape ("Don't lie"). They all boil down to a single one: "Act only in accordance with the maxim which makes it possible for you, at the same time, to will that it should become a universal law" (Foundations..., II). This is the law that the will imposes on itself, or must impose on itself, insofar as it is a legislator (as practical reason). Every man is free to violate it, but is autonomous only by respecting it."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.6.E.2.3.b.v. "GOLDEN RULE
It's found in different forms in most civilizations. It seems to be moral, in this case thought of as reciprocity or reversibility. [..]
This golden rule has two different formulations, one negative (the traditional one): "Do not do to others what you do not want done to you"; the other positive, found in the Gospels: "Whatever you want others to do for you, do it yourselves for them; this is the Law and the Prophets" (Mt 7:12; see also Lk 6:31)."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.6.E.2.3.c. A THEORY OF JUSTICE
John Rawls' "A Theory of Justice" advocates for a fair distribution of income and wealth based on three principles: the liberty principle, the fair opportunity principle, and the difference principle. According to the difference principle, inequalities are justified only if they result in the least advantaged being as well-off as possible. Rawls employs a thought experiment known as the original position, where individuals consider justice from behind a "veil of ignorance" without prejudice, to establish the minimum level of comfort anyone would consent to.

E1.6.E.2.3.c_REF1_PH "RAWLS' A THEORY OF JUSTICE, 1971 IS ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT WORKS OF POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY. In this podcast interview Nigel Warburton interviews Jonathan Wolff about Rawls' main ideas and their limitations.
Raw argues that what matters most is the position of the worst off in 3 principles:
1. The liberty principle, 2. The fair opportunity principle and 3. The difference principle. A fair distribution of income & wealth requires an equal distribution among people but they are cases when inequalities will be beneficial to everyone (ex: meritocracy encouraging the best to give their best and rewarding performance with higher salaries. However, Raw argues that inequalities are justified only if they make the worst off as well as possible (= the crux of the difference principle).
His argument to defend the difference principle is based on the thought experiment of the original position: when people disagree about justice it is mainly because they are biased by their own interests. Ex: If the rich & the poor could think about taxation oblivious of their own social status, they would come to an agreement. Behind the veil of ignorance - imagining themselves stripped of everything that biases their judgment in their favor - people will create, thinking out of their self-interest, the principles of a fair society.

An opposition would be that I might prefer to gamble that I might make it to the position of unfair privilege. Raw´s response is to ask if you would be ready to gamble with your liberty or opportunities - in the same vein, it would not be rational to gamble with economic fairness. Someone with a different temperament and who puts less weight on liberty, might still want to introduce a little gambling - associated with safety nets for the very poor - Raw's temperament colors the argument and is arguable.

Another critic to the original position though experiment is that it allows those who define the principles to smuggle in their prejudice. What if instead of well-intended philosophers you had fascists defining the principles? Raw's theory is based on the assumption that ignorance is a basis for impartiality. Raw assumes people intrinsically value the primary good he defines as liberty, opportunity, social basis for self-respect and money. What about a monk arguing that money is in the way? Raw would argue that the monk had the opportunity and liberty to chose this life, so he values liberty and opportunity. He might not value money for himself, but he wants the worst off to be as well as possible. A critic by communitarians is that Raw's theory is biased towards an individualistic liberal position: The monk might value other primary goods such as a kind of community that Raw's list of primary goods does not account for."
(Jonathan Wolff on John Rawls' A Theory of Justice in Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: http://philosophybites.com/2010/02/jonathan-wolff-on-john-rawls-a-theory-of-justice.html

E1.6.E.2.3.c_REF2_CUR "POPE.L STAGED THE GUERRILLA STREET ACTION DOCUMENTED IN THESE PHOTOGRAPHS in the guise of his alter ego, Mr. Poots. Wearing a business suit and holding a potted flower, he crawled military-style along the perimeter of Tompkins Square Park in the East Village until his boots crumbled. Since the 1980s, the park had been a site of ongoing riots involving the homeless population who took shelter there, squatters, activists, and police. By forcing onlookers to direct their gazes downward, Pope L aimed to make historically disenfranchised bodies and displaced communities visible. "My take on homelessness in New York was that we'd gotten tco used to seeing these people on the streets I wanted people to have this retarde"
(Curatorship, MomA, NYC)

E1.6.E.2.3.c_REF3_SOC "ARE AMERICAN PROGRESSIVES MAKING THEMSELVES SAD?
Conservatives seem more excited about change

Surely few developments could be less surprising than the recent news that America has slipped down the global happiness rankings. Gallup reported in mid-March that America had dropped out of the top 20 for the first time since it started taking its survey in 2012, falling in a year from 15th place to 23rd. (Yes, annoyingly, Finland came out on top, for the seventh straight year.)

Their economy and technology may be the envy of the world, but Americans are becoming a dyspeptic bunch, anxious about the future and uneasy about foundational institutions, from the armed forces to the press to organised religion. Yet all are not equally sad. Numerous studies and surveys—Americans are obsessed with this subject—show that some groups tend to lag behind others in the pursuit of happiness: bankers are said to be sadder than lumberjacks, the unmarried sadder than the married, teenage girls sadder than teenage boys.

One distinction that holds true today has persisted for decades: liberals are sadder than conservatives. This is a global symptom of political difference, but it is particularly strong in America. Of whatever age group or whichever sex, liberals are also far more likely than conservatives to report having been diagnosed with a mental illness.

In the new Gallup survey self-reported happiness fell for every age group, but most precipitously for those 30 and younger. Older Americans ranked tenth globally in happiness, whereas younger Americans ranked 62nd. That is a change from a decade ago, when the two groups reported similar levels of happiness. The trend is consistent with data from the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention, which surveys 17,000 high-school students every two years. Rates of mental-health problems have increased with every survey since 2011, and last year the cdc reported the highest rates of sadness found in a decade, particularly among girls.

In a study in 2021 called “The Politics of Depression”, a group of scholars zeroed in on the possible link between political ideology and unhappiness among teenagers. They found an alarming rise in depression among young people starting in 2012, and, like the cdc, a particular increase among girls. But ideological difference mattered more than gender difference. Liberal boys reported higher rates of depression than conservative boys or girls, and liberal girls reported the highest rates of all.

Disentangling correlation from cause to explain the happiness gap between conservatives and liberals has long vexed social psychologists and political commentators. So, no doubt, has the task of disentangling one’s own politics from one’s hypotheses. The authors of the study connected the rise of depression with the spread of social media. They also argued that conservative ideology may help protect mental health, for reasons that did not flatter conservatives: “This group presumably benefits from the American cultural myth of an equal playing field in which exceptional social positions are thought to be earned through hard work and talent rather than inherited through codified privilege.” Liberal adolescents, they wrote, may feel alienated in contrast to conservative peers “whose hegemonic views were flourishing”.

A possible flaw in this theory is that, in the first four years that young liberals’ mental health declined, Barack Obama was president and conservative views were not so successfully hegemonic. Even before 2012, when teenagers reported relatively stable mental health, young liberals, like older liberals, reported higher rates of depression. Sceptics of the authors’ hypothesis have noted that being conservative could confer psychological benefits for less cynical reasons. Conservatives tend to be healthier, more patriotic and more religious, and to report finding higher levels of meaning in their lives. These characteristics correlate with happiness.


It is possible that liberalism does not just correlate with sadness but may exacerbate it. Musa al-Gharbi, a sociologist at Stony Brook University, has noted that educated, affluent white liberals have come to endorse the idea that America is systemically racist, leading them to view other racial and ethnic groups more warmly than their own. “This tension—being part of a group that one hates—creates strong dissociative pressures on many white liberals,” he wrote in the journal American Affairs. Another hypothesis, advanced by Jonathan Haidt, a social psychologist, and Greg Lukianoff, a lawyer, is that liberals are performing a reverse cognitive behavioural therapy on themselves: promoting not resilience and optimism about incrementally improving the world but catastrophic rumination about problems such as climate change and fearfulness of disagreement even on university campuses. Such habits of mind can deepen depression."
(The Economist, April 4th 2024)

Listen to the article: https://www.economist.com/united-states/2024/04/04/are-american-progressives-making-themselves-sad

E1.6.E.2.3.d. UNEQUAL, YET HAPPY
Researchers have found that, although the US national average for happiness has remained consistent, inequality in happiness has significantly decreased in recent decades. This is true both in terms of the dispersion of answers and disparities among demographic groups. Studies also indicate a relationship between economic growth and reductions in happiness inequality, even when income inequality is simultaneously rising.
This could be because national income growth allows for the increased provision of public goods. Alternatively, it may be due to society's growing cultural diversity, which enables people to achieve similar levels of happiness despite differences in income, preferences, and consumption.

E1.6.E.2.3.d_REF1_SOC THE GENERAL SOCIAL SURVEY  IN THE US REVEALS THAT WHILE THE NATIONAL AVERAGE OF SELF-REPORTED LIFE SATISFACTION HAS REMAINED CONSTANT, HAPPINESS INEQUALITY HAS DECREASED SIGNIFICANTLY. Disparities in happiness between demographic groups, such as black-white and gender gaps, have narrowed. Other studies corroborate these findings, showing a correlation between economic growth and reductions in happiness inequality, even when income inequality rises. This trend is evident in rich countries with continuous GDP growth, where happiness inequality has generally declined.
"The General Social Survey (GSS) in the US is a survey administered to a nationally representative sample of about 1,500 respondents each year since 1972, and is an important source of information on long-run trends of self-reported life satisfaction in the country.

Using this source, Stevenson and Wolfers (2008) show that while the national average has remained broadly constant, inequality in happiness has fallen substantially in the US in recent decades.

The authors further note that this is true both when we think about inequality in terms of the dispersion of answers, and also when we think about inequality in terms of gaps between demographic groups. They note that two-thirds of the black-white happiness gap has been eroded (although today white Americans remain happier on average, even after controlling for differences in education and income), and the gender happiness gap has disappeared entirely (women used to be slightly happier than men, but they are becoming less happy, and today there is no statistical difference once we control for other characteristics).

The results from Stevenson and Wolfers are consistent with other studies looking at changes of happiness inequality (or life satisfaction inequality) over time. In particular, researchers have noted that there is a correlation between economic growth and reductions in happiness inequality—even when income inequality is increasing at the same time. The visualization below, from Clark, Fleche and Senik (2015) shows this. It plots the evolution of happiness inequality within a selection of rich countries that experienced uninterrupted GDP growth.

In this chart, happiness inequality is measured by the dispersion—specifically the standard deviation—of answers in the World Value Survey. As we can see, there is a broad negative trend. In their paper the authors show that the trend is positive in countries with falling GDP."
(Our world in data)

Read the full article:
https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/evolution-of-happiness-inequality-within-countries-during-periods-of-uninterrupted-economic-growth?time=1981..2007

E1.6.E.2.3.d_REF2_SOC "WHY COULD IT BE THAT HAPPINESS INEQUALITY FALLS WITH RISING INCOME INEQUALITY?

Clark, Fleche, and Senik argue that part of the reason is that the growth of national income allows for the greater provision of public goods, which in turn tighten the distribution of subjective well-being. This can still be consistent with growing income inequality, since public goods such as better health affect incomes and well-being differently.

Another possibility is that economic growth in rich countries has translated into a more diverse society in terms of cultural expressions (e.g. through the emergence of alternative lifestyles), which has allowed people to converge in happiness even if they diverge in incomes, tastes and consumption. Steven Quartz and Annette Asp explain this hypothesis in a New York Times article, discussing evidence from experimental psychology."
(Steven Quartz and Anette Asp, Unequal, yet happy, The New York Times, April 11, 2015)

Read the full article: https://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/12/opinion/sunday/unequal-yet-happy.html?smid=nytcore-ipad-share&smprod=nytcore-ipad&_r=0

E1.6.E.2.3.e. INEQUALITY IS DETRIMENTAL WHEN IT COMPROMISES HUMAN RELATIONSHIPS AND ERODES DIGNITY
Inequality becomes harmful when it results in both political and economic domination. For instance, if the threat of poverty restricts job mobility, inequality can damage human relationships and compromise the dignity of individuals forced to accept menial jobs. It also undermines societal values of friendship and a shared vision for a common societal goal. As Rousseau aptly put it, "In a just society, no man should be rich enough to buy another and no man poor enough to want to sell himself."

E1.6.E.2.3.e_REF1_PH "IN A JUST SOCIETY NO MAN SHOULD BE RICH ENOUGH TO BUY ANOTHER AND NO MAN POOR ENOUGH TO WANT TO SELL HIMSELF
"Does inequality really matter? Or is it better to strive for improving the lot of the worst off, even if there is still a huge disparity between what different individuals have? Is there ground to be preoccupied how we are doing in comparison with others at all? Joke: The first man asks to the second man: « How are your children? »; the second man responds: « Compared to what? ». Shouldn't we be concerned about how we are doing in absolute terms and not in relation to others? 
Inequality is wrong if it results in domination, both political and economic. Or if you can't change jobs because the risk of poverty makes it too risky; this corrodes human relations because some people have no choice but to become sub-servants , servile and robbed of their self-esteem and dignity. Values of friendship and of a shared purpose in society also become eroded. Paraphrasing Rousseau on the subject: In a just society no man should be rich enough to buy another and no man poor enough to want to sell himself. 
Inequality also matters because it determines the strength of peoples' claim on resources. Suppose 2 persons are disabled, one very severely, the other moderately. If it takes the same amount of resources to make the severely disabled moderately disabled than to make the moderately disabled, not disabled at all, the shared perception of fairness is that resources should be allocated to making the severely disabled moderately handicapped."
(Alex Voorhoeve on Inequality in Philosophy Bites)

E1.6.E.2.3.e_REF2_PH “WHETHER PROPERTY CAN BE SQUARED WITH JUSTICE.—When the injustice of property is strongly felt (and the hand of the great clock is once more at this place), we formulate two methods of relieving this injustice: either an equal distribution, or an abolition of private possession and a return to State ownership. The latter method is especially dear to the hearts of our Socialists, who are angry with that primitive Jew for saying, “Thou shalt not steal.” In their view the eighth commandment should rather run, “Thou shalt not possess.”—The former method was frequently tried in antiquity, always indeed on a small scale, and yet with poor success. From this failure we too may learn. “Equal plots of land” is easily enough said, but how much bitterness is aroused by the necessary division and separation, by the loss of time-honoured possessions, how much piety is wounded and sacrificed! We uproot the foundation of morality when we uproot boundary-stones. Again, how much fresh bitterness among the new owners, how much envy and looking askance! For there have never been two really equal plots of land, and if there were, man's envy of his neighbour would prevent him from believing in their equality. And how long would this equality, unhealthy and poisoned at the very roots, endure? In a few generations, by inheritance, here one plot would come to five owners, there five plots to one. Even supposing that men acquiesced in such abuses through the enactment of stern laws of inheritance, the same equal plots would indeed exist, but there would also be needy malcontents, owning nothing but dislike of their kinsmen and neighbours, and longing for a general upheaval.—If, however, by the second method we try to restore ownership to the community and make the individual but a temporary tenant, we interfere with agriculture. For man is opposed to all that is only a transitory possession, unblessed with his own care and sacrifice. With such property he behaves in freebooter fashion, as robber or as worthless spendthrift. When Plato declares that self-seeking would be removed with the abolition of property, we may answer him that, if self-seeking be taken away, man will no longer possess the four cardinal virtues either; as we must say that the most deadly plague could not injure mankind so terribly as if vanity were one day to disappear. Without vanity and self-seeking what are human virtues? By this I am far from meaning that these virtues are but varied names and masks for these two qualities. Plato's Utopian refrain, which is still sung by Socialists, rests upon a deficient knowledge of men. He lacked the historical science of moral emotions, the insight into the origin of the good and useful characteristics of the human soul. He believed, like all antiquity, in good and evil as in black and white—that is to say, in a radical difference between good and bad men and good and bad qualities.—In order that property may henceforth inspire more confidence and become more moral, we should keep open all the paths of work for small fortunes, but should prevent the effortless and sudden acquisition of wealth. Accordingly, we should take all the branches of transport and trade which favour the accumulation of large fortunes—especially, therefore, the money market—out of the hands of private persons or private companies, and look upon those who own too much, just as upon those who own nothing, as types fraught with danger to the community.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human III, Aphorism 285, 1878)

E1.6.E.2.3.f. "IN DIRE MISFORTUNE, THE SURPLUS ENERGY THAT SUPPORTS FREE WILL, ALLOWING MAN TO DISTANCE HIMSELF FROM THE WORLD, NO LONGER EXISTS. 
The vital instinct survives severed ties and blindly clings to anything that can support it, much like a plant clings with its tendrils. In this state, recognition and justice are inconceivable. It's akin to slavery."

E1.6.E.1.6.b.v_REF1_PH.wE1.6.E.2.3.f.

E1.6.E.2.3.g. WHEN YOU MAKE HAPPINESS A RIGHT YOU CHANGE THE NOTION OF HAPPINESS ITSELF INTO AN ACTIVE PURSUIT
In a secular culture happiness is not a promise you will experiment in an afterlife. If life presents contingencies such as illness or injustice, making happiness a right dictates we have a right and a duty to intervene against social injustice.

E1.6.E.2.3.g_REF1_PH "SUSAN NEIMAN DRAWS ON ENLIGHTENMENT THINKING TO ILLUMINATE THE VALUES WE SHOULD LIVE BY IN THE 21ST CENTURY.
People think there is widespread disagreement about moral principles but when you get them to talk about individual cases, it turns out there is a great deal more moral agreement than one thinks. 
One of the divides that remain is the clash between secular values and fundamentalist religions. Fundamentalism being on the rise is in great proportion attributable to the rampant consumism prevalent in liberal societies: people want their lives to mean more than that and want to be guided by certain ideals about the way the world should be. To defend the values of the enlightment is to defend the modern world with its possibilities for self-criticism and transformation. Susan Neiman identified 4 robust values from the enlightment that can guide us still today:
1. The right to happiness. In a secular culture happiness is not a promise you will experiment in an afterlife. If life presents contingencies such as illness or injustice, making happiness a right dictates we have a right and a duty to intervene against social injustice: when you make happiness a right you change the notion of happiness itself into an active pursuit.
2. The value of reason as opposed to superstition and blind authority.
3. Reverence detached from organized and established religion. Even if the enlightment did not get rid of the figure of a creator, the awe and gratefulness encompassed by the value of reverence can be directed to a world which we did not make - uniting secular and religious people alike. If you feel reverence for the world, you have to feel it towards other human beings as well.
4.  Hope, which is very different from optimism. That the enlightment believed in necessary universal progress is a contre-sens. See Kant and Voltaire in Candide. The perfectionability of man seen by Rousseau to be the root of regression as well as of progress. Pessimism is an attitude that may look brave, but if you only think things are going downhill you stop acting. Hope makes us responsible to make the world a better place."
(Susan Neiman on Morality in the 21st Century, Philosophy Bite)

Listen to the episode: http://philosophybites.com/2010/03/susan-neiman-on-morality-in-the-21st-century.html

E1.6.E.2.3.h. BEWARE OF POLITICIANS WHO PROMISE HAPPINESS FOR ALL WHILE THEIR ACTIONS FOCUS ONLY ON IMPROVING THEIR OWN LOT.
“I would rather be the unwilling subject of an absolute monarch than the willing slave of my own ignorance, of which advantage is taken by those who spend their time in endeavoring to prove to me that I am free and in singing the glories of my condition, to hoodwink my reason and to blind my perception… That system of government by which it is possible for a class of people to practice upon my credulity, and, under false pretenses, first entice me to acquiesce in laws by which immense corporations and monopolies are established, and then to induce me to submit to their extortions because they exist according to law, pursuing none but lawful means, is an infernal despotism, compared to which the Russian Czar is a thousand times to be preferred.”
(Victoria Woodhull, Manifesto published a few months before running for president of the USA, 1872)

E1.6.E.2.3.h_REF1_PH “THE REVOLUTION-SPIRIT AND THE POSSESSION-SPIRIT.—The only remedy against Socialism that still lies in your power is to avoid provoking Socialism—in other words, to live in moderation and contentment, to prevent as far as possible all lavish display, and to aid the State as far as possible in its taxing of all superfluities and luxuries. You do not like this remedy? Then, you rich bourgeois who call yourselves “Liberals,” confess that it is your own inclination that you find so terrible and menacing in Socialists, but allow to prevail in yourselves as unavoidable, as if with you it were something different. As you are constituted, if you had not your fortune and the cares of maintaining it, this bent of yours would make Socialists of you. Possession alone differentiates you from them. If you wish to conquer the assailants of your prosperity, you must first conquer yourselves.—And if that prosperity only meant well-being, it would not be so external and provocative of envy; it would be more generous, more benevolent, more compensatory, more helpful. But the spurious, histrionic element in your pleasures, which lie more in the feeling of contrast (because others have them not, and feel envious) than in feelings of realised and heightened power—your houses, dresses, carriages, shops, the demands of your palates and your tables, your noisy operatic and musical enthusiasm; lastly your women, formed and fashioned but of base metal, gilded but without the ring of gold, chosen by you for show and considering themselves meant for show—these are the things that spread the poison of that national disease, which seizes the masses ever more and more as a Socialistic heart-itch, but has its origin and breeding-place in you. Who shall now arrest this epidemic?”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 304, 1878)

E1.6.E.2.3.i. “DANGER IN WEALTH.—Only a man of intellect should hold property: otherwise property is dangerous to the community. For the owner, not knowing how to make use of the leisure which his possessions might secure to him, will continue to strive after more property. This strife will be his occupation, his strategy in the war with ennui. So in the end real wealth is produced from the moderate property that would be enough for an intellectual man. Such wealth, then, is the glittering outcrop of intellectual dependence and poverty, but it looks quite different from what its humble origin might lead one to expect, because it can mask itself with culture and art—it can, in fact, purchase the mask. Hence it excites envy in the poor and uncultured—who at bottom always envy culture and see no mask in the mask—and gradually paves the way for a social revolution. For a gilded coarseness and a histrionic blowing of trumpets in the pretended enjoyment of culture inspires that class with the thought, “It is only a matter of money,” whereas it is indeed to some extent a matter of money, but far more of intellect.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 310, 1878)

E1.6.E.2.4. WE ARE IN THIS TOGETHER
The emphasis one places on action versus contemplation can vary based on temperament. However, regardless of our personal tendencies, it is ethically challenging to dismiss our responsibilities to others under the pretense of pursuing individual happiness.

E1.6.E.2.4_REF1_LIT OLIVIA LAING ARGUES THAT IN LATE CAPITALISM, DIFFICULT EMOTIONS ARE SEEN AS A PROBLEM TO BE FIXED RATHER THAN A RESPONSE TO STRUCTURAL INJUSTICE or the nature of being human. She suggests that the cure for loneliness is not necessarily meeting someone, but rather learning to befriend oneself and understanding the impact of larger societal forces on individual experiences. She also emphasizes the importance of kindness, solidarity and staying open in navigating loneliness and the world. Loneliness is both personal and political and it is important to remember that the search for individual happiness does not excuse obligations to others.

E1.6.E.2.4_REF1.1_LIT "THERE IS A GENTRIFICATION THAT IS HAPPENING TO CITIES, AND THERE IS A GENTRIFICATION THAT IS HAPPENING TO THE EMOTIONS TOO, with a similarly homogenising, whitening, deadening effect. Amidst the glossiness of late capitalism, we are fed the notion that all difficult feelings — depression, anxiety, loneliness, rage — are simply a consequence of unsettled chemistry, a problem to be fixed, rather than a response to structural injustice or, on the other hand, to the native texture of embodiment, of doing time, as David Wojnarowicz memorably put it, in a rented body, with all the attendant grief and frustration that entails.

I don’t believe the cure for loneliness is meeting someone, not necessarily. I think it’s about two things: learning how to befriend yourself and understanding that many of the things that seem to afflict us as individuals are in fact a result of larger forces of stigma and exclusion, which can and should be resisted.

Loneliness is personal, and it is also political. Loneliness is collective; it is a city. As to how to inhabit it, there are no rules and nor is there any need to feel shame, only to remember that the pursuit of individual happiness does not trump or excuse our obligations to each another. We are in this together, this accumulation of scars, this world of objects, this physical and temporary heaven that so often takes on the countenance of hell. What matters is kindness; what matters is solidarity. What matters is staying alert, staying open, because if we know anything from what has gone before us, it is that the time for feeling will not last."
(Olivia Laing, The Lonely City: Adventures in the Art of Being Alone)

E1.6.E.2.4_REF2_PH "THE ANCESTRAL OPPOSITION BETWEEN CONFUCIUS AND LAO-TZU. Confucianism and Taoism: two great archetypes, two postulates, an eternal paradigm to be studied: the mythical paradigms; Plato/Aristotle, Voltaire/Rousseau, Dostoevsky/Tolstoy. Let us remember:

Confucius	                   Lao-Tzeu
Preaching → 			   Retreat
Legislation → 			   Nature
Social Man → 			   Individual
Harmony → 			   Rest 
Suitability → 			   Let go
« Do for nothing » →    	   « do nothing »"
(Roland Barthes, The Neutral, Course at the Collège de France, 1977-1978)

E1.6.E.2.4_REF3_PH "THE GREAT BEAST (5)

[...] To contemplate the social is as good a way of detachment as to retire from the world. That is why I have not been wrong to rub shoulders with politics for so long.

Note: 

(5) On the origin of this myth, cf. Plato, Republic, book VI. - To worship the 'great beast' is to think and act in accordance with the prejudices and reflexes of the crowd, to the detriment of any personal search for truth and goodness.”
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.6.E.2.5. HAPPINESS WITH AUTHENTICITY AND RESPONSIBILITY
Viktor Frankl argues that happiness cannot be pursued directly. Instead, it spontaneously arises as a byproduct of living authentically and with integrity. He perceives life as a duty and a significant obligation. Frankl suggests that the question of life's meaning is often misdirected: it is life that poses the questions and directs them at us. He insists that living equates to being questioned, and our existence is entirely about responding to and being responsible for life.

E1.6.E.2.5_REF1_PH FRANKL EMPHASIZES THAT LIFE POSES QUESTIONS TO US, AND OUR RESPONSIBILITY IS TO RESPOND MEANINGFULLY TO THESE QUESTIONS IN THE PRESENT MOMENT. The meaning of life is not a general question but a specific, situational one that varies for each individual. Thus, life always offers opportunities for meaningful existence, and we must continually answer life's questions with responsibility and awareness.
"In consonance with Camus’s view of happiness as a moral obligation — an outcome to be attained not through direct pursuit but as a byproduct of living with authenticity and integrity — Frankl reflects on Tagore’s poetic point:

"So, life is somehow duty, a single, huge obligation. And there is certainly joy in life too, but it cannot be pursued, cannot be “willed into being” as joy; rather, it must arise spontaneously, and in fact, it does arise spontaneously, just as an outcome may arise: Happiness should not, must not, and can never be a goal, but only an outcome; the outcome of the fulfillment of that which in Tagore’s poem is called duty… All human striving for happiness, in this sense, is doomed to failure as luck can only fall into one’s lap but can never be hunted down. [...]

At this point it would be helpful [to perform] a conceptual turn through 180 degrees, after which the question can no longer be “What can I expect from life?” but can now only be “What does life expect of me?” What task in life is waiting for me?
Now we also understand how, in the final analysis, the question of the meaning of life is not asked in the right way, if asked in the way it is generally asked: it is not we who are permitted to ask about the meaning of life — it is life that asks the questions, directs questions at us… We are the ones who must answer, must give answers to the constant, hourly question of life, to the essential “life questions.” Living itself means nothing other than being questioned; our whole act of being is nothing more than responding to — of being responsible toward — life. With this mental standpoint nothing can scare us anymore, no future, no apparent lack of a future. Because now the present is everything as it holds the eternally new question of life for us. [...]
The question life asks us, and in answering which we can realize the meaning of the present moment, does not only change from hour to hour but also changes from person to person: the question is entirely different in each moment for every individual.
We can, therefore, see how the question as to the meaning of life is posed too simply, unless it is posed with complete specificity, in the concreteness of the here and now. To ask about “the meaning of life” in this way seems just as naive to us as the question of a reporter interviewing a world chess champion and asking, “And now, Master, please tell me: which chess move do you think is the best?” Is there a move, a particular move, that could be good, or even the best, beyond a very specific, concrete game situation, a specific configuration of the pieces? [...]

One way or another, there can only be one alternative at a time to give meaning to life, meaning to the moment — so at any time we only need to make one decision about how we must answer, but, each time, a very specific question is being asked of us by life. From all this follows that life always offers us a possibility for the fulfillment of meaning, therefore there is always the option that it has a meaning. One could also say that our human existence can be made meaningful “to the very last breath”; as long as we have breath, as long as we are still conscious, we are each responsible for answering life’s questions."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings, Review on Viktor Frankl's  Yes to Life: In Spite of Everything, 1946)

E1.6.E.2.5_REF2_LIT "COMPETENCE IS HOW GOOD YOU ARE WHEN THERE IS SOMETHING TO GAIN. CHARACTER IS HOW GOOD YOU ARE WHEN THERE IS NOTHING TO GAIN. People will reward you for competence. But people will only love you for your character.”
(Mark Manson)

E1.6.E.2.6. THERE ARE MANY ACTIVITIES WE DO BECAUSE WE FEEL PART OF A HUMAN ENTERPRISE THAT WILL SURVIVE US

E1.6.E.2.6.a. CONSIDER THIS THOUGHT EXPERIMENT:
Imagine a forthcoming apocalypse that will wipe out humanity in a short time. Many activities we prioritize today may seem pointless in this scenario. This thought experiment encourages us to consider the impact of our actions on future generations. This argument holds power as it connects to the meaning of our present life, not just our moral responsibility to the future. While future generations are indeed dependent on us, this idea flips the narrative: our current life's significance heavily relies on future generations!

E1.6.E.2.6.a_REF1_PH "WHAT GIVES VALUE TO WHAT WE DO? IF ALL SENTIENT LIFE WERE TO END A FEW MINUTES AFTER MY DEATH, HOW WOULD THAT AFFECT THE MEANING OF WHAT I'M DOING NOW? Many of our activities would then seem pointless (Scientific research, Schooling, etc.). This though experiment demonstrates that there are many activities we do because we feel we are part of a human enterprise that will survive us. If the apocalypse was not to be sudden, but deferred permitting that all the people currently alive die a natural death (supposing all humans become infertile and no assisted reproduction is possible for example), the impact of the though experiment is the same - with a little less sadness due only to the fact that people we love will live their natural life.
Even activities which pleasure is wholly grounded in the present, like listening to music, have their value somewhat diminished in the scenario because our receptivity to art and beauty is dependent on our general state of mind.
It is interesting that the fact that humankind is actually doomed for extinction in a distant future, like all species, does not affect us in the same way the short-span scenario does. It might be because we hope for some solution of preservation that will be invented by our descendants (colonization of outer space for example). In addition to the world surviving for some finite length of time after we're gone, so will our legacy last for a finite time, too. Whether we're figuring out how to beat cancer, or designing a better bridge, what we do in this life will last for some time after we're gone, but not an infinite time. We might think of our legacy as having a "half life" of, say, 300 (or 10 or 1000) years. The half life of citations of scientific papers is actually measured and cataloged, so it's fair to use the weighted average of these half lives as a decent measure of a scientist's legacy. The point is: if I judge the half-life of my legacy to be longer than my expectation of the end of the world, then I would say, as Singer did, that schoolwork is pointless, and not otherwise.
It might also be because of a cognitive limitation we have of representing to ourselves the time span of millions of years - which seems to us equivalent to eternity. Another cognitive bias might be what Derek Parfit's called our "bias towards the near" (in time), which is also documented by Daniel Kanheman's WYSIATI (What You See Is All There Is). It also might be because we conform ourselves more easily to a scenario where Humans had a chance to live their natural cycle vs. a disruptive or accidental end. There might also be rational pressure to standardize our reaction to a distant dooms day perspective: one is to loose confidence in the value of our activities now. Another way to rationalize would be not to loose confidence in the value of our activities even in the short term case: we should apply to that case the indifference we display to the long-term natural disparition.
The thought experiment helps us weight the importance our actions on favoring or disfavouring future generations (depleting the environment for example) should have in the way we conduct our lives. The argument is especially powerful because it appeals to the meaning of our own life right now and does not rest on acceptance of a moral responsibility towards future generations. Of course future generations are dependant on us but we just reversed the argument: we are dependant on future generation for a large share of the meaning of our life today!"
(Samuel Scheffler on the Afterlife in Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: http://philosophybites.com/2013/07/samuel-scheffler-on-the-afterlife.html

E1.6.E.2.6.a_REF2_PH TAKING PERSONAL RISKS TO SAVE THE COLLECTIVE ARE“COURAGE” AND “PRUDENCE”SINCE YOU ARE LOWERING RISKS FOR THE COLLECTIVE.
"WHO IS “YOU”?
Let us return to the notion of “tribe.” One of the defects modern education and thinking introduces is the illusion that each one of
us is a single unit. In fact, I’ve sampled ninety people in seminars and asked them: “what’s the worst thing that can happen to you?” Eighty-eight people answered “my death.”
This can only be the worst-case situation for a psychopath. For after that, I asked those who deemed that their worst-case outcome was their own death: “Is your death plus that of your children, nephews, cousins, cat, dogs, parakeet, and hamster (if you have any of the above) worse than just your death?” Invariably, yes. “Is your death plus your children, nephews, cousins (…) plus all of humanity worse than just your death?” Yes, of course. Then how can your death be the worst possible outcome?
Unless you are perfectly narcissistic and psychopathic—even then—your worst-case scenario is never limited to the loss of only your life.
Thus, we see the point that individual ruin is not as big a deal as collective ruin. And of course ecocide, the irreversible destruction of our environment, is the big one to worry about.
To use the ergodic framework: my death at Russian roulette is not ergodic for me but it is ergodic for the system. The precautionary principle, as I formulated with a few colleagues, is precisely about the highest layer.
About every time I discuss the precautionary principle, some overeducated pundit suggests that “we take risks by crossing the street,” so why worry so much about the system? This sophistry usually causes a bit of anger on my part. Aside from the fact that the risk of being killed as a pedestrian is less than one in 47,000 years, the point is that my death is never the worst-case scenario unless it correlates to that of others."
(Nassim Nicholas Taleb, Skin in the game, 2017)

E1.6.E.2.6.b. FALLING IN LOVE WITH THE TREMENDOUSNESS OF THE FUTURE
"When you realize you are mortal you also realize the tremendousness of the future. You fall in love with a Time you will never perceive.”
(Etel Adnan)

E1.6.E.2.6.b_REF1_PO "DEAD STARS

Out here, there’s a bowing even the trees are doing.
            Winter’s icy hand at the back of all of us.
Black bark, slick yellow leaves, a kind of stillness that feels
so mute it’s almost in another year.

I am a hearth of spiders these days: a nest of trying.

We point out the stars that make Orion as we take out
      the trash, the rolling containers a song of suburban thunder.

It’s almost romantic as we adjust the waxy blue
      recycling bin until you say, Man, we should really learn
some new constellations.

And it’s true. We keep forgetting about Antlia, Centaurus,
      Draco, Lacerta, Hydra, Lyra, Lynx.

But mostly we’re forgetting we’re dead stars too, my mouth is full
      of dust and I wish to reclaim the rising —

to lean in the spotlight of streetlight with you, toward
      what’s larger within us, toward how we were born.

Look, we are not unspectacular things.
      We’ve come this far, survived this much. What

would happen if we decided to survive more? To love harder?

What if we stood up with our synapses and flesh and said, No.
      No, to the rising tides.

Stood for the many mute mouths of the sea, of the land?

What would happen if we used our bodies to bargain

for the safety of others, for earth,
      if we declared a clean night, if we stopped being terrified,

if we launched our demands into the sky, made ourselves so big
people could point to us with the arrows they make in their minds,

rolling their trash bins out, after all of this is over?"
(Ada Limón)

E1.6.E.2.6.b_REF2_CUR “WHEN YOU REALIZE YOU ARE MORTAL YOU ALSO REALIZE THE TREMENDOUSNESS OF THE FUTURE, YOU FALL IN LOVE WITH A TIME YOU WILL NEVER PERCEIVE.”
(Etel Adnan, Journey to Mount Tamalpais)

"The five limestone vats of Olivestone had been used to decant olive oil at the Palazzo Durini since the 18th century. Beuys inserted blocks from the same quarry into their cavities, leaving a gap into which oil is regularly poured. In decades to come the oil will be absorbed further and further into the stone, gradu ally turning it back into the fertile primeval slime from which it was created 50 million years ago."
(Curatorship: Kunsthaus Zürich)

E1.6.E.2.6.b_REF3_PO "LORSQUE L'ANGE FAIT SIGNE 
Nous savons que ce qui est né de nous 
      ne cessera plus d'advenir 
En avant de nous, à notre insu 
      soudain nous dépasse, nous sauve"
(François Cheng, Le livre du vide médian)

E1.6.E.2.6.b_REF4_PO "OLD AGE SUPERBLY RISING! O WELCOME, INEFFABLE GRACE OF DYING DAYS!

Every condition promulges not only itself, it promulges what grows after and out of itself,
And the dark hush promulges as much as any. [...] 

There is no stoppage and never can be stoppage,
If I, you, and the worlds, and all beneath or upon their surfaces, were this moment reduced back to a pallid float, it would not avail the long run,
We should surely bring up again where we now stand,
And surely go as much farther, and then farther and farther."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.6.E.2.6.c. WE ARE NOT ASKED TO SACRIFICE OURSELVES!
However, can we be content with a job that contributes to a better future but leaves us unfulfilled? It would take great generosity or resignation to be satisfied with such a situation.

E1.6.E.2.6.c_REF1_CUR THIS OCEAN DWELLING SPIRIT — called the Sea Monk [Umibōzu] because of his smooth monk-like round head — is said to capsize the ship of anyone who dares speak to it. The specific tale illustrated in Kuniyoshi's woodblock tells of a sailor Kawanaya Tokuzo who, despite it being considered unlucky in the world of seafaring, decides to go to sea on the last day of the year. A terrible storm breaks out, and the giant figure of the Sea Monk appears. Against the roar of the waves the apparition asks, « Name the most horrible thing you know! » Tokuzo yells in reply, « My profession is the most horrible thing I know! » The answer apparently satisfies the monster as he then disappears along with the storm.
"An honest man is not accountable for the vice or foolishness of his trade; and yet must not refuse to practice it. It is the custom of his country, and there is profit in it: One must live in the world, and take advantage of it, as one finds it." (Montaigne, Essays, III, X)

E1.6.E.2.7. ARE WE FORGING NEW VALUES FOR OUR TIME?

E1.6.E.2.7.a. ARE WE FORGING NEW VALUES FOR OUR TIME?
Are we living in a society where scientists and philosophers are creating new values for our era? Nihilism, for Nietzsche, occurs when we cease to believe in the established values of a society. Philosophers often respond with joy to this disappearance, embodying an active nihilism that will generate new values more conducive to life's flourishing. We are likely still in a period of passive nihilism...

E1.6.E.2.7.a_REF1_PH NIETZSCHE CRITICIZED PLATONIC AND CHRISTIAN VALUES, SEEING THEM AS FALSE AND INIMICAL TO LIFE. He distinguished between passive nihilism, which results from despair at the loss of these values, and active nihilism, which calls for the creation of new, more fulfilling values. Is today's society still in a period of nihilism, without having forged new values?

"God is Dead
We must understand the paradoxical nature of this sentence, which tells us the impossible: the immortal being is dead. To understand the meaning of this aphorism, we must return to the Nietzschean context, we must take this sentence out of its strictly theological environment: it is not a phrase that has a primarily and above all religious meaning. What Nietzsche means by the word God is not only the divinity that is the object of belief... [...] God is an image... Nietzsche almost always expresses himself in an imaginary way, he plays with it brilliantly, "God" means something that has a philosophical depth. Why choose this word? God represents the sacred, what we worship, what is most precious to us when we are believers, what constitutes the unquestionable, objective norm of existence, and it is precisely this that Nietzsche borrows from the concept of God in order to transfer it to the whole of human life... By God he will mean those things that are sacred, the fundamental, capital beliefs that regulate human life as it is organized in the West. Nietzsche tells us that the sacred, the inviolable (what he will technically call "values" when addressing philosophers), these values are in crisis, even in the process of losing their status as values, norms, references..."
(Patrick Wotling)

When the madman in paragraph 125 of The Gay Science proclaims the death of God in the marketplace and says that he has come too soon in the face of the incomprehension of his contemporaries, what he means is that the conditions of life, the values, the beliefs, and the truths to which a civilization is attached, change slowly and with great inertia.
Between Heraclitus and Nietzsche, philosophers have never questioned the notion of truth more (the Platonic era - Nietzsche will say in Beyond Good and Evil that Christianity is Platonism for the people). Perhaps only Dostoevsky, a little before N. in The Brothers Karamasov, with his "If God is dead, everything is permitted!" to justify the murder of the father. For N., this passive, nihilistic reading, which one draws out of despair as a consequence of the death of God, is that of those who have not understood - those with whom the madman is confronted in The Gay Science. For Nietzsche, our standards were choices, probably poorly chosen values - he is not saying that we can live without standards, but that we must choose better ones. There is no life without a value system. Passive nihilism is what unfortunately happened at the beginning of the 20th century.

For Nietzsche, nihilism is when one ceases to believe in values. The reaction of philosophers to the observation of this disappearance is one of joy, that of an active nihilism that will create new values more favorable to the fulfillment of life. N. will say that it is not his personal genius that allows him to make this diagnosis, but the very history of the evolution of values that allows him to arrive at the right moment. The Platonic values that lead one to think that the good is that which is not sensitive, that which is not alive, are crumbling in N.'s time.
Nietzsche is not a relativist because he does not say that all values are equal or that everyone has his own: a culture has chosen values that become conditions of life respected by its members. Unfortunately, values are often imposed by the law of the strongest and are not the best. So much so that there is no theoretical standard of comparison of values, but there is a hierarchy of values: some are more favorable to life. Example: the Greek miracle at the time of the pre-Socratic tragedy, which valued life. See also Human, all too human, preface of 1886, 6 &amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp; 7. The fact that fanaticism is still proliferating today is a confirmation, 150 years after N., of the despair proclaimed by those who experience the collapse of values in the form of passive nihilism.

Are we in a society where scientists and philosophers are forging new values for our time? We are probably still in the age of nihilism. See also Human, All Too Human 25."
(Patrick Wotling in the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 09/10/2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/quatre-malentendus-nietzscheens-24-dieu-est-mort

E1.6.E.2.7.a_REF2_PH "KNOWLEDGE BRINGS A SPECIFIC JOY, INDEPENDENT OF ITS PRACTICAL USE. This joy is possible because knowledge is a founding act that validates what is founded, and it is intrinsically linked to the joy of understanding.
The joy of founding has another dimension: "epistemological" and not just existential. The traveler of real life realizes this every time he engages in reflective thought or refers to theoretical texts. Knowledge that accounts for itself produces a specific joy, not to be confused with the satisfaction of being able to use the results of this knowledge at a later date; while all knowledge has an existential or practical purpose, being merely the means to a higher end, which is joy itself, it nevertheless has an intrinsic dimension of elation. And for some, the joy of understanding is not inferior to the joy of living, it is not even separable from it: the joy of founding is expressed here as the joy of knowing. 
Why is such joy possible, why is it almost universal, despite the complicit efforts of the will to ignorance? It is because knowledge (like reflective choice) is a founding act. But it does not found in the way one creates or establishes; it founds insofar as it affirms what is founded. Founding knowledge is necessarily super-reflexive: it redoubles the second foundation in which the subject considered itself and its action in order to validate it. [...]"
(Robert Misrahi, The Acts of Joy, 1987)

E1.6.E.2.7.b. MEN OF THE OLD WORLD KNEW BETTER HOW TO REJOICE
The men of the old world knew better how to rejoice. They managed to be less sad. As for humanity's suffering, the Ancients attempted to either forget or direct their emotions towards the pleasant side. They used palliatives, while we address the root causes of evil and prefer to take a prophylactic approach.

E1.6.E.2.7.b_REF1_PH "THE ANTIQUE WORLD AND PLEASURE.—The man of the antique world understood better how to rejoice, we understand better how to grieve less. They
continually found new motives for feeling happy, for celebrating festivals, being inventive with all their wealth of shrewdness and reflection. We, on the other hand, concentrate our intellect rather on the solving of problems which have in view painlessness and the removal of sources of discomfort. With regard to suffering existence, the ancients sought to forget or in some way to convert the sensation into a pleasant one, thus trying to supply palliatives. We attack the causes of suffering, and on the whole prefer to use prophylactics.—Perhaps we are only building upon a foundation whereon a later age will once more set up the temple of joy."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 187, 1878)

E1.6.E.2.7.c. SECESSION IS NECESSARY TO CREATE NEW VALUES. 
Wittgenstein considers that culture is born from the isolation of cultured people from other habits considered as "culture", that produce little innovation. The constant progression in distancing oneself from conventions is necessary to preserve the purity of a modernizing project.  which is why the rhythm of permanent secession characterizes the art of the twentieth century. This is why a rhythm of continuous secession characterizes 20th-century art. The concept of secession is significant for life's organizational forms, even in ancient manifestations. Finding the right form is a design mission that incorporates a moral and logical practice. Philosophy itself implies such a mission and can become mainstream because a school of thought, by its nature, is a secession phenomenon.

E1.6.E.2.7.c_REF1_PH SECESSION IS A NECESSARY BREAK WITH THE ESTABLISHED CONVENTIONS  IN ORDER TO PRESERVE THE PURITY OF THE MODERNIZING PROJECT BY CREATING NEW MODELS OF LIFE AND ORGANIZATION. Philosophy and culture are born from the individual's ability to transform his life.
“Culture is an observance.”

Twilight of life forms, Disciplinarity

Staggering without domination [...]

Culture arises out of secession [...] 

Wittgenstein's use of the concept of "culture" leaves no doubt: culture, in the ambitious sense of the word, arises in his eyes only through the isolation of truly cultivated people from the other so-called "culture," that confused aggregate of good or bad habits which, when added up, produces little more than ordinary "filth.
From this point, it is easier to explain why Wittgenstein is one of the few authors of modernity - perhaps the only one of high standing in the period between Nietzsche and Foucault, apart from Heidegger - in whom one could observe the retrograde metamorphosis of philosophy from a school subject to a committed discipline. [...] 

Only constant progress in distancing oneself from the misery of conventions can preserve the purity of the modernizing project - hence the rhythm of permanent secession that characterizes twentieth-century art and continues until there is nothing left to secede from. [...]

As Allan Janik and Stephen Toulmin have shown, secessionist motives in the broadest sense were inherent to Viennese Modernism. For its protagonists, the founding gesture of culture was to break out of the system of conventions in which the aristocratic bourgeois public of the imperial capital indulged. [...]

Form and Lifestyle 

I would not need to recall these contextual connections if the figure of the Secession, independent of its Viennese history, did not have great significance for everything that will be said in the following pages about the forms of organization of the practice of life, even in its ancient and very ancient manifestations. The act of secession as such already expresses the imperative without which there could never have been any "order," reform, or "revolution: You must change your life! Here it is assumed that life contains something for whose transformation the individual has - or can acquire - competence. In 1937, Wittgenstein observed: "That life is problematic means that your life does not correspond to the form of life. You must therefore change your life, and when it corresponds to such a form, the problem will disappear". [...] Finding the right form is a design task that involves a moral and logical practice. It is only because philosophy itself implies such a mission from the beginning that it can "set an example" - the school as such is already a phenomenon of secession, with Plato, the founder of the Academy, almost in the same way as with the Viennese moderns. Where there is secession, the reformers have reached the end of their patience with the given facts. They no longer want to see either the situations to which they are accustomed or their reproductions. The time has come to turn to models. The model does not reproduce life, it precedes it. One can almost speak of the birth of philosophy out of the spirit of secession - it is not entirely by chance that Plato opened his Athenian educational institution, founded in 387 B.C., in a decentralized place - and which operated continuously until its destruction by Sulla in 86 B.C.: it was a little more than a mile west of the city center, but very well located, next to a rather large area dedicated to sports, the gymnásion, which was obviously soon integrated into the educational curriculum.
To found a school is to reject the kitsch of fate, whether it goes back to the end of Athens or the end of the Habsburg Empire. It requires that questions of destiny be transformed into missions of discipline. [...] 

Let us be frank about the aim of these reflections: by showing that in Wittgenstein's concept of culture there is expressed a strongly secessionist understanding of the "work" on personal faults and those of collective sensibility, we remove all possibilities of recovering it in favor of the egalitarian and relativist ideology that goes hand in hand with the various variants of Anglo-Saxon analytic philosophy. In reality, Wittgenstein's "work" could embody the harshest manifestation of ethical elitism known in the 20th century, with the possible exception of Simone Weil, who is considered the only reformist elitist of equal stature. His secessionist and elitist approach descends to such depths that the author might even have preferred to withdraw from himself and his "filth" if that had been possible. Once Wittgenstein's inexorable elitism has been exposed-an elitism, moreover, that is as radical as it is apolitical and ahistorical-it will not only contaminate the understanding of his most successful theorem, the theory of "language games": Wittgenstein's role as a teacher also appears in a completely different light. [...]"
(Peter Sloterdijk, You must change your life, 2009)

E1.6.E.2.7.c_REF1.1_PH SECESSION IS A NECESSARY BREAK WITH ESTABLISHED CONVENTIONS TO PRESERVE THE PURITY OF THE MODERNIZING PROJECT BY CREATING NEW MODELS OF LIFE AND ORGANIZATION. Philosophy and culture arise from the individual's ability to transform their life.
"Only the constant progression in distancing oneself from the misery of convention can preserve the modernising projec's purity  - hence the rhythm of permanent secession that characterises twentieth-century art and remains in motion until there is nothing left with which to secede. [...] Secessionist motifs, in the broadest sense of the term, were inherent in Viennese modernity. For its protagonists, the founding gesture of culture consisted in breaking out of the system of conventions in which the aristocratic-bourgeois public of the empire's capital was indulging. [...]
The secession's gesture expresses the imperative without which there could never have been « a new order », « reform », « revolution »: You must change your life! Here it is assumed that  the individual has a competence for transforming his life - or can acquire it. In 1937, Wittgenstein noted: « If life is problematic, this means that your life does not fit the form of living. You must then change your life, and if it fits such a form, what is problematic will disappear. » [...]
Finding the right form is a design task that requires moral and logical practice. It is only because philosophy itself implies such a mission from the outset that it can « be passed on as the teachings of a school » - Plato's Academy was already a phenomenon of secession, almost in the same way as in the Viennese moderns. Where secession broods, the reformers have lost patience with the status quo. They want to depart from the situations they are used to and from their reproductions. The time has come to turn to a new model. The model does not reproduce life, it precedes it. One can almost speak of the birth of philosophy from the spirit of secession."
(Peter Sloterdijk, You must change your life, 2009)

E1.6.F. FORGETTING, FORGIVENESS, KINDNESS, AND GRATITUDE
Forgetting and forgiving often lead to happiness, even though they're largely involuntary. Can we not nurture these feelings by beginning with kindness and benevolence, and even gratitude if we're able to?

E1.6.F.1. FORGETTING

E1.6.F.1.1. HE WHO CANNOT FORGET WILL NEVER BE HAPPY
Happiness requires the ability to forget or to perceive things outside of their historical context. To be happy, one needs to free themselves from the constraints of the past by acknowledging their own freedom. A distinct, active, and delegated force should support consciousness, restoring its freshness, fluidity, and lightness at every moment. This force is the power of forgetting. A common mistake in psychology is to view forgetting as a negative trait, overlooking its active and positive nature. Nietzsche describes the power of forgetting as a "dampening apparatus", a "plastic, regenerative, and curative force."

E1.6.F.1.1.a. THE BENEFITS AND DRAWBACKS OF HISTORY FOR LIFE
According to Nietzsche, humans grapple with the weight of the past, which can feel like an invisible burden impeding progress. He underscores the importance of forgetting for happiness and critiques an overemphasis on historical perspective, noting that all action involves some degree of forgetting. High levels of historical consciousness can result in the weakening and even collapse of the individual, society, or civilization.

"Parmiggiani's work follows in the footsteps of Arte Povera, the Italian movement of the 1960s whose creative methods opposed the productivist logic of the consumer society. By creating a controlled fire, the artist in this case allowed a thin film of soot to form on the shelves of his well stocked bookcase. Once the furnishings were removed, an imprint with vaporous contours emerged in negative. "All that remained were the shadows of things, almost the ectoplasm of vanished forms, like the shadows of human bodies vaporised on the walls of Hiroshima."
(Curatorship: Musée de l’Orangerie, Paris)

E1.6.F.1.1.a_REF1_PH FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE CONTRASTS THE ANIMAL'S ABILITY TO LIVE ENTIRELY IN THE PRESENT WITH MAN'S BURDEN OF THE PAST, WHICH HINDERS HIS HAPPINESS AND PROGRESS. He argues that true happiness requires the ability to forget and live in the moment, free from historical perspective.
"The animal, [...] lives in a non-historical way: it resolves itself entirely in the present like a figure that divides itself without leaving any remainder, it does knows how to simulate, it hides nothing and appears every second as it is, therefore it can only be sincere. Man, on the other hand, bows against the ever more crushing burden of the past, which throws him to the ground or lays him on his side, which hinders his walk like an obscure and invisible burden. This burden, he may occasionally affect to deny it and, in the trade with his fellow men, denies it only too willingly in order to arouse their envy. But he is moved, as if by the memory of a lost paradise, when he sees the herd at pasture or, closer and more familiar, the child who does not yet have a past to deny and who plays, blind and fulfilled, between the barriers of the past and the future. However, his game will have to be disturbed, and he will only too soon be teared away from his unconsciousness. He will then learn to understand the expression « it used to be », a formulation which abons Man to fights, suffering and disgust, and reminds him that his existence is basically nothing else than an eternal imperfection. [...]
There is always one thing which makes happiness becomes happiness: the faculty to forget or, in more elaborate terms, the faculty to feel things, as long as happiness lasts, outside any historical perspective. He who does not know how to settle on the threshold of the moment, forgetting victory, standing on a single point, without fear and without vertigo, will never know what happiness is, and even worse: will never do anything to make others happy.
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Untimely Considerations II, 1874)

E1.6.F.1.1.a_REF2_PH NIETZSCHE ARGUES THAT HAPPINESS AND EFFECTIVE ACTION REQUIRE THE ABILITY TO FORGET. He contrasts the vitality of those with limited historical knowledge, who live with immediacy and vigor, against those who are consumed by constant reflection, without the capacity for oblivion.
"There is always one thing by which happiness becomes happiness : the faculty of forgetting or, in more scholarly terms, the faculty of feeling things, for as long as happiness lasts, isolated from any historical perspective. Whoever does not know how to settle on the threshold of the moment, forgetting victory, standing on a single point, without fear and without vertigo, will never know what happiness is, worse still : he will never do anything that makes others happy. [...] All action requires oblivion, just as all organic life requires not only light, but also darkness. A man who would like to feel things in an absolutely and exclusively historical way would resemble someone who has been forced to deprive himself of sleep or an animal which should live only by constantly ruminating on the same food. It is therefore possible to live, and even to live happily, almost without any memory, as the animal shows; but it is absolutely impossible to live without forgetting. Or, to explain myself even more simply on my subject : there is a degree of insomnia, of rumination, of historical meaning, beyond which the living being is shaken and finally destroyed, whether it is an individual, a people or a civilization. [...]

Everyone has already made the following observation on this subject: an individual's historical knowledge and sensitivity may be extremely limited, his horizon as bounded as that of an inhabitant of an Alpine valley, he may be unfair in all his judgments and believe himself to hold the exclusivity of every experience he makes - he enjoys, despite all his errors and injustices, a health, an irresistible vigor in which all eyes take pleasure; while by his side, the infinitely more just and learned man is consumed and withered, for his lines of horizin are constantly shifting, for he cannot free himself from the much more tenuous web of his justice and truth, to rediscover the elemental immediacy of will and desire. ""
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Untimely meditations II, 1874)

E1.6.F.1.1.a_REF3_PH CHARACTER INVOLVES THE COURAGE TO FORGE NEW PATHS, INSPIRE OTHERS AND THE ABILITY TO TRANSCEND PAST ADVERSITIES WITHOUT BEING HAUNTED BY THEM. 
"The difference between talents and character is adroitness to keep the old and trodden round, and power and courage to make a new road to new and better goals. Character makes an overpowering present; a cheerful, determined hour, which fortifies all the company, by making them see that much is possible and excellent that was not thought of. Character dulls the impression of particular events. When we see the conqueror, we do not think much of any one battle or success… The great man is not convulsible or tormentable; events pass over him without much impression. People say sometimes, ‘See what I have overcome; see how cheerful I am; see how completely I have triumphed over these black events.’ Not if they still remind me of the black event. True conquest is the causing the calamity to fade and disappear, as an early cloud of insignificant result in a history so large and advancing. [...]

The one thing which we seek with insatiable desire is to forget ourselves, to be surprised out of our propriety, to lose our sempiternal memory, and to do something without knowing how or why; in short, to draw a new circle. Nothing great was ever achieved without enthusiasm. The way of life is wonderful: it is by abandonment. The great moments of history are the facilities of performance through the strength of ideas… They ask the aid of wild passions… to ape in some manner these flames and generosities of the heart."
(Ralph Waldo Emerson, Circles, 1841 - Essays and Lectures)

E1.6.F.1.1.a_REF4_PH AN EXAMPLE OF SUFFERING DUE TO THE INABILITY TO FORGET “NOT BUYING TOO DEAR.—The things that we buy too dear we generally turn to bad use, because we have no love for them but only a painful recollection. Thus they involve a twofold drawback.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 395, 1878)

E1.6.F.1.1.a_REF5_PO “EVERYTHING THAT EXISTS IN THE WORLD
HAS A HISTORY
Except the frogs croaking in the depths 
Of my memory.

Every place in the world has somewhere
To be
Except the pond from where this croaking 
Is coming.

Within me a false moon rises
Over rushes,
And the pond appears, lit more and less 
By the moon.

In what life, where and how, was I
What I remember
Thanks to the frogs croaking in the wake 
Of what I forget?

Nothing—just silence dozing among rushes. 
At the end
Of my huge old soul the frogs croak 
Without me.”
(Fernando Pessoa, 13 August 1933)

E1.5.C.2.1.d_REF3_PO.wE1.6.F.1.1.a_REF3_PH 

E1.6.E.2.7.b.wE1.6.F.1.1.a_REF3_PH 

E1.6.F.1.1.b_REF1_PH "THE ANTIQUE WORLD AND PLEASURE.—The man of the antique world understood better how to rejoice, we understand better how to grieve less. They continually found new motives for feeling happy, for celebrating festivals, being inventive with all their wealth of shrewdness and reflection. We, on the other hand, concentrate our intellect rather on the solving of problems which have in view painlessness and the removal of sources of discomfort. With regard to suffering existence, the ancients sought to forget or in some way to convert the sensation into a pleasant one, thus trying to supply palliatives. We attack the causes of suffering, and on the whole prefer to use prophylactics.—Perhaps we are only building upon a foundation whereon a later age will once more set up the temple of joy."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 187, 1878)

E1.6.F.1.1.c. FREEING OURSELVES FROM PAST DETERMINISMS BY TAKING THE MEASURE OF OUR FREEDOM

E1.6.F.1.1.c_REF1_PH "SUFFERING FROM CULTURE’S PAST. — Whoever has clearly understood the problem of culture suffers from a feeling similar to that of a man who has
inherited riches that were acquired through illegal means, or a prince who rules because of his forefathers’ atrocities. He thinks of his origin with sadness, and is often ashamed, often irritable. The whole sum of the strength, will to life, and joy that he expends on his estate is often balanced by a deep weariness: he cannot forget his origin. He regards the future with melancholy: he knows in advance that his descendants will suffer from the past as he does."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human, Aphorism 249, 1878)

"Fill your heart with love today
Don't play the game of time
Things that happened in the past
Only happened in your mind
Only in your mind
Oh, forget your mind

And you'll be free yeah
The writing's on the wall
Free yeah
And you can know it all
If you choose
Just remember lovers never lose
'Cause they are free of thoughts unpure

And of thoughts unkind
Gentleness clears the soul
Love cleans the mind
And makes it free

Oh, happiness is happening
The dragons have been bled
Gentleness is everywhere
Fear's just in your head
Only in your head
Fear is in your head
Only in your head
So forget your head

And you'll be free yeah [...]"
(David Bowie, Fill your heart, 1968)

Listen to Fill Your Heart: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uD1M6XAQELg

E1.6.F.1.1.c_REF3_PO "I RESIST BECAUSE I AM NOT TOUGH 
I resist for you me us you they
Everything that touches my heartstrings to jolt me 
I have made a list of things to forget we will not lack
    anything
The bells may ring on the neck of life - that cow - we
    will have the mad wine we will have the gay time”
(Valérie Rouzeau, Va où [Go where], 2002)

"JE ME DÉFENDS PARCE QUE NE SUIS PAS DURE 
Je me défends pour toi moi nous vous ils
Tout ce qui tire sur ma corde sensible pour me secouer 
J'ai fait la liste des choses à oublier nous ne manquerons 
    de rien
Les cloches pourront sonner au cou de la vie vache nous 
    aurons le vin fou nous aurons le temps gai"
(Valérie Rouzeau, Va où, 2002)

E1.6.F.1.1.c_REF4_PO “BETTER THE FLIGHT OF THE BIRD THAT PASSES AND LEAVES NO TRACE
THAN THE PASSAGE OF THE ANIMAL, RECORDED IN THE GROUND.
The bird passes and is forgotten, which is how it should be. 
The animal, no longer there and so of no further use, 
Uselessly shows it was there.

Remembrance is a betrayal of Nature,
Because yesterday’s Nature isn’t Nature.
What was is nothing, and to remember is not to see.

Pass by, bird, pass, and teach me to pass!”
(Fernando Pessoa, 7 May 1914 - signed as Albert Caeiro)

E1.6.F.1.1.c_REF5_TH ”THE UNBEARABLE HEAVINESS OF REMEMBERING […] NORMAL VERSUS TRAUMATIC MEMORY
We all know how fickle memory is; our stories change and are constantly revised and updated. When my brothers, sisters, and I talk about events in our childhood, we always end up feeling that we grew up in different families—so many of our memories simply do not match. Such autobiographical memories are not precise reflections of reality; they are stories we tell to convey our personal take on our experience.
The extraordinary capacity of the human mind to rewrite memory is illustrated in the Grant Study of Adult Development, which has systematically followed the psychological and physical health of more than two hundred Harvard men from their sophomore years of 1939–44 to the present. Of course, the designers of the study could not have anticipated that most of the participants would go off to fight in World War II, but we can now track the evolution of their wartime memories. The men were interviewed in detail about their war experiences in 1945/1946 and again in 1989/1990. Four and a half decades later, the majority gave very different accounts from the narratives recorded in their immediate postwar interviews: With the passage of time, events had been bleached of their intense horror. In contrast, those who had been traumatized and subsequently developed PTSD did not modify their accounts; their memories were preserved essentially intact forty-five years after the war ended.
Whether we remember a particular event at all, and how accurate our memories of it are, largely depends on how personally meaningful it was and how emotional we felt about it at the time. The key factor is our level of arousal. We all have memories associated with particular people, songs, smells, and places that stay with us for a long time. Most of us still have precise memories of where we were and what we saw on Tuesday, September 11, 2001, but only a raction of us recall anything in particular about September 10.
Most day-to-day experience passes immediately into oblivion. On ordinary days we don’t have much to report when we come home in the evening. The mind works according to schemes or maps, and incidents that fall outside the established pattern are most likely to capture our attention. If we get a raise or a friend tells us some exciting news, we will retain the details of the moment, at least for a while. We remember insults and injuries best: The adrenaline that we secrete to defend against potential threats helps to engrave those incidents into our minds. Even if the content of the remark fades, our dislike for the person who made it usually persists.
When something terrifying happens, like seeing a child or a friend get hurt in an accident, we will retain an intense and largely accurate memory of the event for a long time. As James McGaugh and colleagues have shown, the more adrenaline you secrete, the more precise your memory will be. But that is true only up to a certain point. Confronted with horror—especially the horror of
“inescapable shock”—this system becomes overwhelmed and breaks down.
Of course, we cannot monitor what happens during a traumatic experience, but we can reactivate the trauma in the laboratory, as was done for the brain scans in chapters 3 and 4. When memory traces of the original sounds, images, and sensations are reactivated, the frontal lobe shuts down, including, as we’ve seen, the region necessary to put feelings into words, the region that creates our sense of location in time, and the thalamus, which integrates the raw data of incoming sensations. At this point the emotional brain, which is not under conscious control and cannot communicate in words, takes over. The emotional brain (the limbic area and the brain stem) expresses its altered activation through changes in emotional arousal, body physiology, and muscular action. Under ordinary conditions these two memory systems—rational and emotional—collaborate to produce an integrated response. But high arousal not only changes the balance between them but also disconnects other brain areas necessary for the proper storage and integration of incoming information, such as the hippocampus and the thalamus. As a result, the imprints of traumatic experiences are organized not as coherent logical narratives but in fragented sensory and emotional traces: images, sounds, and physical sensations. […]

Janet coined the term “dissociation” to describe the splitting off and isolation of memory imprints that he saw in his patients. He was also prescient about the heavy cost of keeping these traumatic memories at bay. He later wrote that when patients dissociate their traumatic experience, they become “attached to an insurmountable obstacle”: “[U]nable to integrate their traumatic memories, they seem to lose their capacity to assimilate new experiences as well. It is . . . as if their personality has definitely stopped at a certain point, and cannot enlarge any more by the addition or assimilation of new elements.” He predicted that unless they became aware of the split-off elements and integrated them into a story that had happened in the past but was now over, they would experience a slow decline in their personal and professional functioning. This phenomenon has now been well documented in contemporary research.
Janet discovered that, while it is normal to change and distort one’s
memories, people with PTSD are unable to put the actual event, the source of  those memories, behind them. Dissociation prevents the trauma from becoming integrated within the conglomerated, ever-shifting stores of autobiographical memory, in essence creating a dual memory system. Normal memory integrates the elements of each experience into the continuous flow of self-experience by a complex process of association; think of a dense but flexible network where each element exerts a subtle influence on many others. But in Julian’s case, the sensations, thoughts, and emotions of the trauma were stored separately as frozen, barely comprehensible fragments. If the problem with PTSD is dissociation, the goal of treatment would be association: integrating the cut-off elements of the trauma into the ongoing narrative of life, so that the brain can recognize that “that was then, and this is now.”
(Bessel Van Der Kalk, The Body Keeps the Score, 2014)

E1.6.F.1.1.c_REF5.1_CUR THE MEMORY AND TRAUMA: THE RESIDUE OF THINGS - THE THINGS YOU SEE WHEN YOU CLOSE YOUR EYES.
“Painter of the banality of evil, the Belgian artist Luc Tuymans works from images gleaned from the media. His color palette, seemingly overexposed, gives a feeling of faded images, washed out by time and weakened by memory. The brushstrokes applied horizontally become invisible. His glazes, thin layers of transparent colors superimposed on each other, function like stratified representations Interposed between the object and our perception of it. Sniper has its origins in a video found on the Internet that shows a sniper killing an American soldier in Iraq. By framing the viewfinder target (that of the killer, and the photographer) in the foreground, Tuymans distances himself from the "targeted" scene, drowning it in blur, to focus on this prosthesis of the eye: "I don't want to make art for art's sake but a painting of History, or rather a painting of memory and trauma (...). What interests me is the residue of things. The things you see when you close your eyes.”
(Curatorship: Musée de l’Orangerie, Paris)

E1.6.F.1.1.d. PSYCHOLOGY'S MISSTEP WAS TO VIEW FORGETTING AS A NEGATIVE DETERMINATION, OVERLOOKING ITS ACTIVE, POSITIVE NATURE
Consciousness requires an active force for its sustenance, to rejuvenate its fluidity, and its light, mobile chemical element. This active, supra-conscious ability is the power of forgetting.

Psychology erred in treating forgetting as a negative attribute, failing to recognize its active, positive character. Nietzsche portrays the power of forgetting “not as an inert force, as superficial thinkers would argue, but rather a mechanism of restraint, in the genuine meaning of the term - a "damping apparatus", a "plastic, regenerative, and curative force".

"What we absorb presents itself to our consciousness just as little during the state of digestion as the multiple processes that take place in our body as we assimilate our food... From this we can immediately conclude that no happiness, no serenity, no hope, no pride, no enjoyment of the present moment could exist without the faculty of forgetting."

E1.6.F.1.1.d_REF1_PH FREUD PROPOSED A HYPOTHESIS DISTINGUISHING BETWEEN CONSCIOUSNESS AND THE UNCONSCIOUS, WITH MEMORIES BEING UNCONSCIOUS AND CONSCIOUSNESS BEGINNING WHERE THE MNEMONIC TRAIL ENDS. Nietzsche shares this distinction, defining the unconscious as mnemonic traces and consciousness as receptivity to new stimuli. He emphasizes the importance of the ability to forget as an active and positive force, essential to happiness and serenity, as opposed to the passive digestion of impressions in the unconscious.
"Principle of Ressentiment

Freud often expounds a schema of life that he calls the "topical hypothesis". The system which receives an excitation is not the system which retains a lasting trace of it: the same system could not at one and the same time faithfully record the transformations which it undergoes and offer an ever fresh receptivity. "We will therefore
suppose that an external system of the apparatus receives the perceptible excitations but retains nothing of them, and thus has no memory; and that, lying behind this system there is another which transforms the momentary excitation of the first into lasting traces." These two systems or recordings correspond to the distinction between the conscious and the unconscious. "Our memories are by nature unconscious"; and conversely, "Consciousness is born at the point where the mnemonic trace stops". We must therefore see the formation of the conscious system as the result of a process of evolution: at the boundary between the outside and the inside, between the internal
world and the external world, we could say that "a skin has been formed which has been made so supple by the excitations it constantly receives, that it has acquired properties making it uniquely suited to receive new excitations", retaining only a direct and changeable image of objects completely distinct from the lasting or even changeless trace in the unconscious system.

Freud is far from accepting this topical hypothesis without reservations. The fact is that we find all the elements of this hypothesis in Nietzsche. Nietzsche distinguishes two systems within the reactive apparatus: the conscious and the unconscious. The reactive unconscious is defined by mnemonic traces, by lasting imprints. It is a
digestive, vegetative and ruminative system, which expresses "the purely passive impossibility of escaping from the impression once it is received". Of course, even in this endless digestion, reactive forces have a job to do, attaching themselves to the indelible imprint, investing the trace. But the inadequacy of this first kind of reactive
force is obvious. Adaptation would never be possible if the reactive apparatus did not have another system of forces at its disposal. Another system is necessary, a system in which reaction is not a reaction to traces but becomes a reaction to the present excitation or to [he direct image of the object. This second kind of reactive forces is
inseparable from consciousness: that constantly renewed skin surrounding an ever fresh receptivity, a milieu "where there is always room for new things". It will be emembered that Nietzsche wished to remind consciousness of its need for modesty: its origin, nature and function are wholly reactive. But consciousness can nevertheless
claim a relative nobility. The second kind of reactive forces show us in what form and under what conditions reaction can be acted: when reactive forces take conscious excitation as their object, then the corresponding reaction is itself acted.

But the two systems or the two kinds of reactive forces must still be separated. The traces must not invade consciousness. A specific active force must be given the job of supporting consciousness and renewing its freshness, fluidity and mobile, agile chemistry at every moment. This active super-conscious faculty is the faculty of forgetting.
Psychology's mistake was to treat forgetting as a negative determination, not to discover its active and positive character. Nietzsche defines the faculty of forgetting as "no mere vis inertiae as the superficial imagine; it is rather an active and in the strictest sense positive faculty of repression", "an apparatus of absorption", "a plastic, regenerative and curative force." Thus, there are two simultaneous processes: reaction becomes something acted because it takes conscious excitation as its object and reaction to traces remains in the unconscious, imperceptible. "What we experience and absorb enters our consciousness as little while we are digesting it . . . as does the thousandfold process involved in physical nourishment . . . so that it will be immediately obvious how there could be no happiness, no cheerfulness, no hope, no pride, no present, without forgetfulness" (GM I I1 pp. 57-58). [...]"
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophy, 1962)

E1.6.F.1.1.d_REF2_PH “FINISH EACH DAY AND BE DONE WITH IT. You have done what you could. Some blunders and absurdities no doubt crept in; forget them as soon as you can. Tomorrow is a new day; begin it well and serenely and with too high a spirit to be cumbered with your old nonsense.”
(Ralph Waldo Emerson)

E1.6.F.1.1.e. "RESSENTIMENT IS THE TRIUMPH OF THE WEAK AS WEAK, the revolt of the slaves and their victory as slaves. It is in their victory that the slaves form a type. The type of the master (the active type) is defined in terms of the faculty of forgetting and the power of acting reactions. The type of slave (the reactive type) is defined by a prodigious memory, by the power of ressentiment; several characteristics which determine this second type follow from this."
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophy, 1962)

E1.6.F.1.1.e_REF "RESSENTIMENT IS THE TRIUMPH OF THE WEAK AS WEAK, the revolt of the slaves and their victory as slaves. It is in their victory that the slaves form a type. The type of the master (the active type) is defined in terms of the faculty of forgetting and the power of acting reactions. The type of slave (the reactive type) is defined by a prodigious memory, by the power of ressentiment; several characteristics which determine this second type follow from this. 

Inability to admire, respect or love (BGE 260, GM 110). The memory of traces is itself full of hatred. Hatred or revenge is hidden even in the most tender and most loving memories. The ruminants of memory disguise this hatred by a subtle operation which consists in reproaching themselves with everything with which, in fact, they reproach the being whose memory they pretend to cherish. For this reason we must beware of those who condemn themselves before that which is good or beautiful, claiming not to nderstand, not to be worthy: their modesty is frightening. What hatred of beauty is hidden in their declarations of inferiority. Hating all that is experienced as lovable or admirable, diminishing by buffoonery or base interpretations, seeing traps to be avoided in all things: always saying, "please don't engage me in a battle of wits". What is most striking in the man of ressentiment is not his nastiness but his disgusting malevolence, his capacity for disparagement. Nothing can resist it. He does not even
respect his friends or even his enemies. He does not even respect misfortune or its causes. Think of the Trojans who, in Helen, respected and admired the cause of their own misfortune. But the man of ressentiment must turn misfortune into something mediocre, he must recriminate and distribute blame: look at his inclination to play down the value of causes, to make misfortune "someone's fault". By contrast, the aristocrat's respect for the causes of misfortune goes together with an ability to take his own misfortunes seriously. The way in which the slave takes his misfortunes seriously shows a difficult digestion and a base way of thinking which is incapable of feeling
respect."
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophy, 1962)

E1.6.F.1.2. HAVE FAITH IN YOUR POWER TO FORGET LATER WHAT YOU CANNOT ACCEPT IN THE PRESENT
Happiness, serenity, hope, pride, and enjoyment of the present moment all necessitate the ability to forget. "He who cannot linger on the threshold of the moment, forgetting his victories, standing on a single point without fear and vertigo, will never understand what happiness is. Worse yet, he will never make others happy."

John Cowper Powys initially struggled to deal with the harsh and loathsome aspects of the cosmos. Then he discovered the power of forgetting. Belief in his ability to forget what he couldn't accept was crucial to his happiness.

E1.6.F.1.2_REF1_LIT JOHN COWPER POWYS REFLECTS ON HIS INABILITY TO ACCEPT THE COSMOS IN A WALT WHITMAN-LIKE MANNER, FINDING SOLACE INSTEAD IN THE POWER OF FORGETTING WHAT HE CANNOT ACCEPT. Despite his outward optimism, he identifies as a pessimist due to the existence of unendurable suffering in the world, empathizing deeply with various victims of torment.
"I soon found that it was impossible for me to “accept” the cosmos — all these loathsome abominations, all these shifting Masks of Fear — in Walt Whitman’s tout ensemble style. For a long time the clue to any master-word for myself was obscure; but as the years passed I finally discovered this magic sign, this thaumaturgic gesture, in the word “forget.” Perhaps Walt Whitman really was the one man in the world who actually could envisage all and accept all. But I was different. Or did I see more than he saw? Were things worse than he knew? These are questions no man can answer! The nerves of the tortured alone know the torment. But I found by degrees that for me the clue lay in having faith in my power of “forgetting”’what I could not accept. Thus below all my energy and ebullience of spirit and Pangloss-like insistence on the best rather than the worst, at bottom I am a pessimist. How can I be anything else as long as there are entities in the world—human or sub-human—who are doomed to endure such unendurable things? I have enough imagination to become, although in a faint indirect half-and-half way, these children of perdition, these little ones “offended” by the First Cause, these lynched negroes, these victims of cancer, these animals in traps, these vivisected dogs."
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber, p. 374-376)

"What happiness from life we can attain, what revelations about life we can reach, what beauty in life we can respond to, must always have as their background—so, in my desperation I argued—an awareness of the terrible necessity of forgetting the unthinkable things which the cruelty of the First Cause has prepared both for those who accept Him and those who reject Him. What I endeavoured to indicate was that though we all had to forget so much, there was no reason why we should pretend there was nothing to forget, or nothing beyond what a sturdy nature was able to face."
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber, P. 463-464)

E1.6.F.1.2_REF1.1_LIT A SUBSTITUTE FOR THE NATURAL HUMAN ABILITY TO FORGET? "Now there is a path along the edge of the small stream flowing near this house where there grows an enormous and very ancient willow. To this aged tree I have given the mystic name of the “Saviour-Tree,” and here and now I recommend to all harassed and worried people who can find in their neighbourhood such a tree—and it needn’t necessarily be a willow—to use it as I do this one. For the peculiarity of this tree is that you can transfer by a touch to its earth-bound trunk all your most neurotic troubles! These troubles of yours the tree accepts, and absorbs them into its own magnetic life; so that henceforth they lose their devilish power of tormenting you. Of course we all of us only manage to live at all by means of our power of forgetting. This is Nature’s supreme gift. To “live according to Nature” is to possess the power to forget. No “Saviour-Tree” can ever take the place of the precious Fountain of Lethe in ourselves; into which we can acquire the power of flinging our neurotic troubles; but, as I am hinting, a tree of this kind can at least serve as “an outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace.”
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber, p.622-652)

E1.6.F.1.2_REF2_LIT "PERHAPS WALT WHITMAN REALLY WAS THE ONE MAN IN THE WORLD WHO ACTUALLY COULD ENVISAGE ALL AND ACCEPT ALL. But I was different. Or did I see more than he saw? Were things worse than he knew? These are questions no man can answer! The nerves of the tortured alone know the torment. But I found by degrees that for me the clue lay in having faith in my power of “forgetting”’what I could not accept."
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934)

E1.6.F.1.2_REF3_LIT "YOU CAN’T BRING BACK THE DEAD,
BUT YOU CAN HAVE THE WORDS FORGIVE AND FORGET HOLD HANDS
as if they meant to spend a lifetime together. And you can be grateful
for makeup, the way it kisses your face, half spice, half amnesia"
(Emily Levine, You can't have it all, Bite Every Sorrow)


E1.6.F.1.2_REF4_PH SOMETIMES FORGETFULNESS CAN BE A KIND OF SELF-DECEPTION
DECEPTION IN LOVE.—We forget and purposely banish from our minds a good deal of our past. In other words, we wish our picture, that beams at us from the past, to belie us, to flatter our vanity—we are constantly engaged in this self-deception. And you who talk and boast so much of “self-oblivion in love,” of the “absorption of the ego in the other person”—you hold that this is something different? So you break the mirror, throw yourselves into another personality that you admire, and enjoy the new portrait of your ego, though calling it by the other person's name—and this [pg 032]whole proceeding is not to be thought self-deception, self-seeking, you marvellous beings?—It seems to me that those who hide something of themselves from themselves, or hide their whole selves from themselves, are alike committing a theft from the treasury of knowledge. It is clear, then, against what transgression the maxim “Know thyself” is a warning."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 37, 1878)

E1.6.F.1.2_REF5_PO “TIME TENDS TO MAKE THE
BIGGEST PROBLEMS SMALL
Time tends to make the biggest problems small.
It heals the bitterest and deepest wound.
There is no pain, no agony at all
That Time won't turn into some sweet, sad tune.
So let Time take you as a river flows
Beyond the violent rapids where you are.
There are things that every woman knows
Once she can see her tempests from afar.
When you are young, your choices wait on you,
Or if they disappear, there'll soon be more.
The things you love and lose, the words you rue,
Sometimes, when you look back, look like a door.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E1.6.F.1.2_REF6_PO “EVENTUALLY, MEMORIES
SETTLE DOWN
Eventually, memories settle down;
Later still, perhaps, go back to sleep.
Life cannot hold so much of life for long,
Yet now I hold it dancing in my hands.
Though everything is now, now is not;
Each moment dances in a sea of light.
People were and will be, never are;
Present is a glass through which we wonder.
Everywhere are ghosts that dance in dreams
Rounded by the curvature of time.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E1.6.F.1.2_REF7_PO “LIFTING
Things face off –
and not that one
wins, but
tensions shift,
surges work
resistant levers,
and passing
from state to state
unlodges
forces in the body
that wake,
oppose,
then
lighten loads."
(Lia Purpura, It shouldn’t have been beautiful, 2015)

E1.6.F.1.3. THE DEPTH OF DIONYSIAN FORGETFULNESS
Dionysian forgetfulness refers to self-oblivion accompanied by a profound love for all beings and things. It paves the way for enduring joy, resulting from a sense of liberation. The Dionysian concept holds significant depth and universal relevance. It provides insight into the core reality of human existence and can be seen as a special gateway to the collective unconscious. The ecstatic Dionysian state, which dissolves the usual constraints and boundaries of existence, includes a lethargic element where all past personal experiences are submerged. This abyssal oblivion creates a divide between the world of everyday reality and the Dionysian realm.

E1.6.F.1.3_REF1_PH DIONYSIAN ECSTASY, ACCORDING TO NIETZSCHE, OPENS ACCESS TO A DEEP AND UNIVERSAL REALITY, REMOVING THE BARRIERS OF EVERYDAY EXISTENCE AND ALLOWING A CONNECTION WITH THE COLLECTIVE UNCONSCIOUS. 
"The depth and universal significance of Dionysianism is undeniable. It opens the heart of concrete being and gives access to what Nietzsche calls the Mother of Things or, as others do, the Great Asian Mother: on this subject, read Mythology, ou la Famille Olympienne by Clémence Ramnoux (A. Colin, 1962). Moreover, Nietzsche saw that oblivion closed off access to this profound reality: 

The ecstasy of the Dionysian state, with its abolition of the usual barriers and limits of existence, contains during its duration a lethargic element into which all that has been personally experienced in the past is absorbed. Through this abyss of oblivion, the world of everyday reality is separated from the world of Dionysian reality (Kroner I, p. 55).

However, forgetting is interpreted in the opposite sense to what psychoanalysis considers it today: not on the basis of superficial everyday reality, but on the basis of deep Dionysian reality or radical truth. According to this orientation, when we reach the region of deep being, we forget the empirical world, we fall into a lethargic state, we place ourselves in the actual alienation from the empirical world. Remarkably, all barriers are abolished, all censorship and prohibitions disappear, as well as the boundaries that separate one individual from another, since the principle of individuation then has no effect. Seen from the empirical world, Dionysian ecstasy thus appears to us as a privileged access to the collective unconscious: "Man externalizes himself as a member of a higher community" (Kroner I, p. 24). Moreover, the Dionysian emotion conveys to a mass precisely this impression of seeing itself "surrounded by a multitude of spirits with which it knows itself to be intimately united" (Kroner I, p. 60). Dionysian ecstasy involves true knowledge and, above all, the consciousness of a truth."
(Angèle Kremer-Marietti, Introduction to The Birth of Tragedy by Nietzsche, 1994)

E1.6.F.1.4. RECALL PAST ENCHANTING MOMENTS
Spinoza posits, "The free man thinks of nothing less than death, and his wisdom is a meditation not on death, but on life." He suggests we should overlook our finitude and live in the present. However, remembering past enchanting moments is beneficial as it can generate active joy in the present.

E1.6.F.1.4_REF1_PO "THINGS TO REMEMBER

Remember this
And never forget:
The first spring snowdrop,
All green and wet and unexpected,
A white flower blooming out of the dark
Never forget it.
Remember this
And never forget it:
That the bees flew about you
And the flowers bloomed
In the hot drowsy fields that smelled of summer
And smelled of noon
Never forget it.
And remember this:
The lightning bug
You caught in your hand,
And there was the light
In the palm of your hand 
And you held it.
Remember this"
(Margaret Wise Brown)

E1.6.F.1.4_REF2_CUR INSIDE OUT: EMOTIONAL THEORY COMES ALIVE (how accurate is the emotional theory that underlies the animated picture?) - 4'50" to 5'40"

A sense that experiences can be quantified pervades the film, which perhaps reflects our culture of the moment. Rather than Riley's subconscious, the scariest place for Joy and Sadness is rather the giant pit of memory loss, where memories are forgotten for good, with no hope of retrieving them ever. In a data-driven culture, where more data equals more truth, is the loss of information the greatest anxiety of all? But we could argue that to lose the ability to remember pasted joys is an impediment to forging active joy.
(Nerdwriter, Film & Art critic, Inside out)

Watch the video on You Tube:
https://youtu.be/xXYhua4IwoE

E1.5.D.1.1_REF2_PH.wE1.6.F.1.4. WE HAVE THE ILLUSION OF FREEDOM
The feeling of freedom when we are subject to affects, as when we feel free to love someone, is an illusion. Only an active joy that is not accompanied by the idea of an external cause lasts.

E1.6.F.1.5. ONE SHOULD ONLY REMEMBER THINGS THAT ARE OF INTEREST, OR OUT OF GRATITUDE OR LOYALTY

E1.6.F.1.5_REF1_PH "OBLIVION
It is the opposite not of memory, which oblivion requires, but of recollection: there is oblivion when I no longer remember something that I used to have, at least for a while, in memory. Far from being always a fault or pathological, it can often be seen as a form of mental health. This is what Nietzsche saw, in the second of his Untimely Meditations:
“Any action requires oblivion. [...] It is possible to live almost without remembering, and to live happily, as the animal demonstrates, but it is impossible to live without forgetting. There is a degree of insomnia, of rumination, of historical sense that harms and ultimately destroys the living, whether it is an individual, a nation or a civilization."
However, it is also impossible to forget everything, or it would mean giving up the spirit, that is, humanity. That is why forgetting is part of the exercizing of memory: it is its negative pole, like a compulsory selection pocess which would retain only what is useful, pleasant or required - which would be remembered only out of interest, gratitude or fidelity."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.6.F.2. FORGIVING OTHERS AND ONESELF

E1.6.F.2.1. FORGIVENESS IS A WAY OF ASSUMING A LARGER IDENTITY 
"To forgive is to assume a larger identity than the person who was first hurt, to mature and bring to fruition an identity that can put its arm, not only around the afflicted one within but also around the memories seared within us by the original blow and through a kind of psychological virtuosity, extend our understanding to one who first delivered it."

E1.6.F.2.1.a. "TO FORGIVE IS TO PUT ONESELF IN A LARGER GRAVITATIONAL FIELD OF EXPERIENCE THAN THE ONE THAT FIRST SEEMED TO HURT US
We reimagine ourselves in the light of our maturity and we reimagine the past in the light of our new identity, we allow ourselves to be gifted by a story larger than the story that first hurt us and left us bereft."

E1.6.F.2.1.a_REF1_PH "FORGIVENESS is a heartache and difficult to achieve because strangely, it not only refuses to eliminate the original wound, but actually draws us closer to its source. To approach forgiveness is to close in on the nature of the hurt itself, the only remedy being, as we approach its raw center, to reimagine our relation to it. [...]
Strangely, forgiveness never arises from the part of us that was actually wounded. The wounded self may be the part of us incapable of forgetting, and perhaps, not actually meant to forget, as if, like the foundational dynamics of the physiological immune system our psychological defenses must remember and organize against any future attacks — after all, the identity of the one who must forgive is actually founded on the very fact of having been wounded.
Stranger still, it is that wounded, branded, un-forgetting part of us that eventually makes forgiveness an act of compassion rather than one of simple forgetting. To forgive is to assume a larger identity than the person who was first hurt, to mature and bring to fruition an identity that can put its arm, not only around the afflicted one within but also around the memories seared within us by the original blow and through a kind of psychological virtuosity, extend our understanding to one who first delivered it. Forgiveness is a skill, a way of preserving clarity, sanity and generosity in an individual life, a beautiful way of shaping the mind to a future we want for ourselves; an admittance that if forgiveness comes through understanding, and if understanding is just a matter of time and application then we might as well begin forgiving right at the beginning of any drama rather than put ourselves through the full cycle of festering, incapacitation, reluctant healing and eventual blessing.
To forgive is to put oneself in a larger gravitational field of experience than the one that first seemed to hurt us. We reimagine ourselves in the light of our maturity and we reimagine the past in the light of our new identity, we allow ourselves to be gifted by a story larger than the story that first hurt us and left us bereft."
(David Whyte , Consolations: The Solace, Nourishment and Underlying Meaning of Everyday Words)

E1.6.F.2.1.a_REF2_PH MAKING ONE LIFE OUT OF OUR REGRETS, OUR SELF-COMPASSION, AND OUR FORGIVENESS "MATURITY is the ability to live fully and equally in multiple contexts; most especially, the ability, despite our grief and losses, to courageously inhabit the past the present and the future all at once. The wisdom that comes from maturity is recognized through a disciplined refusal to choose between or isolate three powerful dynamics that form human identity: what has happened, what is happening now and what is about to occur.

Immaturity is shown by making false choices: living only in the past, or only in the present, or only in the future, or even, living only two out of the three.

Maturity is not a static arrived platform, where life is viewed from a calm, untouched oasis of wisdom, but a living elemental frontier between what has happened, what is happening now and the consequences of that past and present; first imagined and then lived into the waiting future.

Maturity calls us to risk ourselves as much as immaturity, but for a bigger picture, a larger horizon; for a powerfully generous outward incarnation of our inward qualities and not for gains that make us smaller, even in the winning. [...]

Maturity is the breakdown of elemental frontiers, between different epochs of our life, between life and death, between the part of us that has been a fine, upstanding citizen and the darker, helpless parts of us that have caused harm and damage. Maturity is the time when these tidal forces meet and break apart our life, making one life out of our regrets, our self-compassion, and our forgiveness forged into a future made real by a radical change in our behaviour: real maturity can only be sustained by real silence, by a daily discipline of silence and an inhabitation of spaciousness, a foundational giving away. Maturity is the discipline of giving up and giving away, to see what is left and what is real. [...]

Our previous stage of immaturity always beckons, offering a false haven and false accounting, an ersatz safety in one state or the other: a hiding place and disappearance in the past, a false isolation of the present, or an unobtainable sure prediction of the future. But maturity beckons also, asking us to be larger, more fluid, more elemental, less cornered, less unilateral, a living conversational intuition between the inherited story, the one we are privileged to inhabit and the one, if we are large enough and broad enough, moveable enough and even, here enough, just, astonishingly, about to occur."
(David Whyte , Consolations: The Solace, Nourishment and Underlying Meaning of Everyday Words)

E1.6.F.2.1.a_REF2.1_LIT AN INVENTED WORD TO DESCRIBE THE BITTERSWEETNESS OF HAVING ARRIVED HERE IN THE FUTURE, WHERE YOU CAN FINALLY GET THE ANSWERS TO HOW THINGS TURN OUT IN THE REAL WORLD
“énouement  n. the bittersweetness of having arrived here in the future, where you can finally get the answers to how things turn out in the real world—who your baby sister would become, what your friends would end up doing, where your choices would lead you, exactly when you’d lose the people you took for granted—which is priceless intel that you instinctively want to share with anybody who hadn't already made the journey, as if there was some part of you who had volunteered to stay behind, who was still stationed at a forgotten outpost somewhere in the past, still eagerly awaiting news from the front.”
(John Koenig, The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021)

E1.6.F.2.1.a_REF3_PO "THE WEIGHING

The heart’s reasons
seen clearly,
even the hardest
will carry
its whip-marks and sadness
and must be forgiven.

As the drought-starved
eland forgives
the drought-starved lion
who finally takes her,
enters willingly then
the life she cannot refuse,
and is lion, is fed,
and does not remember the other.

So few grains of happiness
measured against all the dark
and still the scales balance.

The world asks of us
only the strength we have and we give it.
Then it asks more, and we give it."
(Jane Hirshfield, The Beauty, 2015)

E1.6.F.2.1.a_REF4_CUR WHAT I LOVE ABOUT KARA WALKER'S FONS AMERICANUS IS THAT IT IS NOT AN ACCUSATION ALTHOUGH IT IS A POWERFUL ACCOUNT OF THE SUFFERING OF THE BLACK PEOPLE.
"My work has always been a time machine looking backwards across decades and centuries to arrive at some understanding of my "place" in the contemporary moment."
(Kara Walker)

For the 2019 Hyundai Commission, Kara Walker has created a large-scale public sculpture in the form of a fountain. Fons Americanus questions how we remember history in our public monuments. At the same time, the work presents a narrative on the origins of the African diaspora.

Fons Americanus is inspired by the Victoria Memorial in front of Buckingham Palace, London. The memorial was designed in 1901 to honour Queen Victoria. Rather than a celebration of the British Empire, Walker present a provocative critique. Her fountain inverts the usual function of a memorial and questions narratives of power. Walker explores the interconnected histories of Africa, America and Europe. She uses water as a key theme, referring to the transatlantic slave trade and the ambitions, fates and tragedies of people from these three continents. Bringing together fact, fantasy and fiction, Fons Americanus is an allegory of the Black Atlantic.

The full title of the work is painted on the Turbine Hall wall, written in Walker's own words. Encouraging us to confront a history often misremembered in Britain, she presents the artwork as a "gift... to the heart of an Empire that redirected the fates of the world". She has signed the work "Kara Walker", NTY, or "Not Titled Yet", in a play on British honours awards such as "OBE" (Order of the British Empire).

Walker's sculptural figures derive from an array of art historical, literary and cultural sources. Among them are British landscape painter J.M.W. Turner's "Slave Ship, 1840", North American seascape painter Winslow Homer's "Gulf Stream, 1899", and British artist Damien Hirst formaldehyde shark" The Physical Impossibility of Death in the Mind of Someone Living, 1991". The 19th-century slave trade propaganda image "The Voyage of the Sable Venus, from Angola to the West Indies", by British artist Thomas Stothard is also a reference. Other images of the Roman goddess Venus, standing on a shell, have inspired the grotto sculpture in front of the fountain. In her place is a crying boy, filling the shell with his tears. The figure of Venus instead stands at the top of the fountain. For the artist, this is a priestess from Afro-Brazilian and Caribbean religions. Water springs from her breasts and neck, representing a history of violence and suffering but also a possibility of liberation as she towers over the monument as the daughter of waters.

(Curated by Clara Kim, The Daskalopoulos Senior Curator, International Art and Priyesh Mistry. Assistant Curator, International Art)

Listen to Kara Walker's interview on the BBC: https://www.bbc.com/news/entertainment-arts-49876928

E1.6.F.2.1.a_REF4.1_CUR "IT IS WITH AN OVERABUNDANCE OF GOOD CHEER 
and 
Great Enthusiasm 
that
We Present the Citizens
of the
OLD WORLD
(Our Captors, Saviours and Intimate Family)
A GIFT and TALISMAN
Toward the Reconciliation of
Our Respective Mother-lands.
AFRIQUE and ALBION
WITNESS !
the
FONS AMERICANUS
- THE DAUGHTER OF WATERS -
An      Allegorical      Wonder
Behold! The Sworling Drama 
of the Merciless Seas, Routes and Rivers, 
upon which our dark fortunes were traded 
and on whose frothy shores 
lay prostrate Captain, Slave and Starfish, alike.

Come, One and All, to Marvel and Contemplate 
The Monumental Misrememberings
 Of Colonial Exploits Yon.

Gasp Plaintively, 
Sigh Mournfully, 
Gaze Knowingly, 
And 
R  E G A R D
the Immaterial Void of the Abyss 
etc. etc.
in a 
Delightful Family Friendly Setting
____________________________________________________
Created by that Celebrated Negress of the New World
Madame Kara E. Walker, NTY"

E1.6.F.2.1.b. LOVING, GIVING, FORGIVING, CREATING - THESE FOUR WORDS DESIGNATE FOUR FORMS OF INITIATIVE, FOUR FORMS OF INNOCENCE.
In these forms, consciousness makes a direct outward movement towards others, without reflecting back on itself.

E1.6.F.2.1.b_REF1_PH "LOVE, LIKE INSURRECTION, OVERTHROWS A CERTAIN JUSTICE IN ORDER TO ESTABLISH ANOTHER THAT IS CONTRARY TO IT; it is therefore in its essence both faithful and unfaithful, it boldly sets a bad example of conversion. Its purpose is not to restore old manic attachments, but to inaugurate a new era. Even more than a gift, forgiveness reveals the gratuitousness of the charitable moment, because it expresses the independence of our choice from any reason for it, and thus reveals more clearly the artificial, petty and ridiculous character of retrospective motives. It is the apology that needs reasons in order to absolve the guilty: because the apology, without the guilt due to extenuating circumstances or the finding that the guilt is null and void, the apology is conservative and levelling. Forgiveness forgives precisely because the fault is inexcusable. Intellectualism, which confuses apology and forgiveness, calls on love to provide its "proof: Prove that you are right to love! Prove it! But love is not about proving that it is right; love is not about being taken for granted... 
To love, to give, to forgive, to create - these four words denote four forms of initiative, four forms of innocence: in these four forms, consciousness makes an efferent and direct movement towards the other or the object, a movement without turning in on itself".
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, The Vertues and Love, 1970)

E1.6.F.2.1.b_REF1_PH TO BE TAKEN SECOND HAND: this is apologizing, not forgiving :-)
“I have always forgiven those who have offended me... but I have the list.”
(Jean-Jacques Sempé, Sempé's World, volume 1)

E1.6.F.2.1.c. "IF YOU HAVE BEEN BETRAYED, IT IS NOT THE BETRAYAL THAT MATTERS; IT IS THE FORGIVENESS IT HAS SOWN IN YOUR SOUL, and the more or less general, more or less elevated, more or less thoughtful nature of this forgiveness, which will turn your existence towards the peaceful, clearer side of destiny where you will fair better than if you had not been bertrayed. But if the betrayal has not increased the simplicity, the higher confidence, the breadth of your love, you will have been betrayed quite unnecessarily."

E1.6.F.2.1.c_REF1_PH "SUFFERING IS ALWAYS CONNECTED TO REDEMPTION [...] :« If you love, says Maeterlinck, it is not this love that is part of your destiny; it is the awareness of yourself that you will find in the depths of this love that will change your life. If you have been betrayed, it is not the betrayal that is important; it is the forgiveness that it has given rise to in your soul, and the more or less general, more or less elevated, more or less thoughtful nature of this forgiveness, which will direct your existence towards the peaceful and clearer side of destiny where you will find yourself better than if you had not been cheated. But if the betrayal has not increased your simplicity, confidenceand the extent of your love, you will have been betrayed quite unnecessarily, and you will see no notable improvement in yourself. »  How better to say that we keep from the past only what serves our progress, only what relates to a rational system of sympathy and affection. Only that which has reasons to last lasts. Duration is thus the first phenomenon of the principle of sufficient causality  for the interconnection of moments. In other words, there is only one principle of continuity in the earthly powers : that is the permanence of rational conditions, of the conditions of moral and aesthetic success. These conditions command the heart as well as the mind. They make it possible for the solidarity of moments to be perceived as progress. The intimate duration is always wisdom. What coordinates the world is not the forces of the past, but the harmony in tension that the world will achieve. We can speak of a pre-established harmony, but it cannot be a pre-established harmony in things; there can only be action through a pre-established harmony in reason. All the power of time is condensed in the innovative moment when sight is unblinded [...] by the touch of a divine redeemer who gives us joy and reason in a single gesture, and the means to be eternal through truth and goodness."
(Gaston Bachelard, The Intuition of the Instant, 1931)

E1.6.F.2.1.d. MARSHALL ROSENBERG EXPLAINS THAT CONNECTING COMPASSIONATELY WITH OURSELVES INVOLVES A PROCESS OF MOURNING OUR IMPERFECTIONS WITHOUT SELF-BLAME, PRACTICING SELF-FORGIVENESS BY UNDERSTANDING THE NEEDS BEHIND OUR PAST ACTIONS, AND CONSCIOUSLY CHOOSING TO ACT OUT OF A PLAYFUL DESIRE TO CONTRIBUTE TO LIFE RATHER THAN OUT OF OBLIGATION.

“Connecting Compassionately With Ourselves […]

Mourning in NVC is the process of fully connecting with the unmet needs and feelings that are generated when we have been less than perfect. It is an experience of regret, but regret that helps us learn from what we have done without blaming or hating ourselves. We see how our behavior ran counter to our own needs and values, and we open ourselves to feelings that arise out of that awareness. When our consciousness is focused on what we need, we are naturally stimulated towards the creative possibilities of how to get that need met. In contrast, the moralistic judgments we use when blaming ourselves tend to obscure such possibilities and to perpetuate a state of self-punishment. 

Self-Forgiveness
We follow up on the process of mourning with self-forgiveness. Turning our attention to the part of the self which chose to act in the way that led to the present situation, we ask ourselves, “When I behaved in the way which I now regret, what need of mine was I trying to meet?” I believe that human beings are always acting in the service of needs and values. This is true whether the action does or does not meet the need, or whether it’s one we end up celebrating or regretting.
When we listen empathically to ourselves, we will be able to hear the underlying need. Self-forgiveness occurs the moment this empathic connection is made. Then we are able to recognize how our choice was an attempt to serve life, even as the mourning process teaches us how it fell short of fulfilling our needs.
An important aspect of self-compassion is to be able to empathically hold both parts of ourselves—the self that regrets a past action and the self that took the action in the first place. The process of mourning and self-forgiveness free us in the direction of learning and growing. In connecting moment by moment to our needs, we increase our creative capacity to act in harmony with them. […] We are compassionate with ourselves when we are able to embrace all parts of ourselves and recognize the needs and values expressed by each part. 

“Don’t do anything that isn’t play!”
In addition to the process of mourning and self-forgiveness, another aspect of self-compassion I emphasize is the energy behind whatever action we take. When I advise, “Don’t do anything that isn’t play!” some take me to be radical, even insane. I earnestly believe, however, that an important form of self-compassion is to make choices motivated purely by our desire to contribute to life rather than out of fear, guilt, shame, duty, or obligation. When we are conscious of the life-enriching purpose behind an action we take, when the sole energy that motivates us is simply to make life wonderful for others and ourselves, then even hard work has an element of play in it. Correspondingly, an otherwise joyful activity performed out of obligation, duty, fear, guilt or shame will lose its joy and eventually engender resistance.
In Chapter 2, we considered replacing language that implies lack of choice with language that acknowledges choice. Many years ago I engaged in an activity which significantly enlarged the pool of joy and happiness available to my life, while diminishing depression, guilt, and shame. I offer it here as a possible way to deepen our compassion for ourselves, to help us live our lives out of joyous play by staying grounded in a clear awareness of the life-enriching need behind everything we do. We want to take action out of the desire to contribute to life rather than out of fear, guilt, shame, or obligation.

Translating “Have to” To “Choose to”
Step One
What do you do in your life that you don’t experience as playful?List on a piece of paper all those things that you tell yourself you have to do, any activity you dread but do anyway because you perceive yourself to have no choice.
When I first reviewed my own list, just seeing how long it was gave me insight as to why so much of my time was spent not enjoying life. I noticed how many things in an ordinary day I was doing by tricking myself into believing that I had to do them.
The first item on my list was “write clinical reports.” I hated doing these reports, yet I was spending at least an hour of agony over them every day. My second item was “drive the children’s carpool to school.”
Step two
After completing the list, clearly acknowledge to yourself that you are doing these things because you choose to do them, not because you have to. Insert the words “I choose to . . . ” in front of each item you listed.
I recall my own resistance to this step. “Writing clinical reports,” I insisted to myself, “is not something I choose to do! I have to do it. I’m a clinical psychologist. I have to write these reports.”
Step three
With every choice you make, be conscious of what need it serves.  After having acknowledged that you chose to do a particular activity, get in touch with the intention behind the choice by completing the statement, “I choose to ____ because I want _____.”
At first I fumbled to identify what I wanted from writing clinical reports. Several months earlier, I had already determined that the reports did not serve my clients enough to justify the time they were taking, so why was I continuing to invest so much energy in their preparation? Finally I realized that I was choosing to write the reports solely because I wanted the income they provided. As soon as I recognized this, I never wrote another clinical report. I can’t tell you how joyful I feel just thinking of how many clinical reports I haven’t written since that moment 35 years ago! When I realized that money was my primary motivation, I immediately saw that I could find other ways to take care of myself financially, and that in fact, I’d rather scavenge in garbage cans for food than to write another clinical report.

The next item on my list of unjoyful tasks was driving the children to school. When I examined the reason behind that chore, however, I felt appreciation for the benefits my children received from attending their current school. They could easily walk to the neighborhood school, but their own school was far more in harmony with my educational values. I continued to drive, but with a different energy; instead of “Oh, darn, I have to drive carpool today,” I was conscious of my purpose, which was for my children to have a quality of education that was very dear to me. Of course I sometimes needed to remind myself two or three times during the drive to refocus my mind on what purpose my action was serving. […]”
(Marshall Rosenberg, Nonviolent communication a language of life, 1999)

E1.6.F.2.2. TO FACILITATE FORGIVENESS, ONE SHOULD SEPARATE THE ACT FROM THE PERSON RESPONSIBLE
To make forgiving someone else or oneself easier, view transgressions as sufferings, not sins. This process is aided by the belief that we are generally good people who sometimes do bad things. Forgiveness is the key component that brings us out of darkness and back into the world.

E1.6.F.2.2_REF1_PH NICKCAVE EMPHASIZES THE IMPORTANCE OF FORGIVENESS, EVEN FOR SEEMINGLY UNFORGIVABLE ACTS, AS A CRUCIAL HUMAN CAPACITY NECESSARY FOR PERSONAL AND COLLECTIVE SURVIVAL. He advises separating the act from the person, condemning the act but showing mercy to the individual. Their feelings of regret indicate growth and highlight the inherent goodness in people despite their actions. We should view trespasses as sufferings rather than sins.
"The Truth is that I betrayed the very essence of my soul and No knowledge can heal that wound. Is like constantly moving in the fog with nowhere to go or be. I just can't forgive myself.
THOMAS, LONDON, UK

Dear Thomas,

As far as I can see your options are rather limited — you either remain suspended in a state of misery and self-loathing or you move toward some sort of self-forgiveness. In your estimation you feel you have committed an unforgivable act, which may or may not be true. There are indeed some acts that are reprehensible, that are simply beyond the pale, and we need to be alert to this, to be repelled by these acts, in order that we do not repeat them, or draw these offences back into our lives. It runs contrary to our own sense of human dignity and justice to think otherwise. However, even though the act may appear unforgivable, forgive we must.

To forgive is perhaps the supreme human capacity, it can feel counter-intuitive yet it is wholly crucial to our survival, not just of our own selves, but also of our species in general. It is what Derrida calls, 'a madness of the impossible’. In short, we must strive to forgive the unforgivable.

This act of radical forgiveness is exceedingly difficult because our instinct for justice and vengeance feels far more natural and human than to find it in ourselves to forgive, however, as is clear from your letter, this instinct turned inward can be absolutely disastrous.

There is a way forward though, and it is this — we must attempt to separate the act itself from the person who has carried it out. We condemn the act but we are merciful to the one who committed it. This can feel like an impossibility, especially when the person who needs clemency is oneself. However, the fact that you feel so abject about whatever you did indicates that you are indeed heading toward some form of absolution.

We all have regrets and, as bad as they may feel, they are signals of our growth as human beings. A person with no regrets is simply leading an unexamined life. Personally I try to look at our trespasses not as sins but as sufferings — that we have at our core an essential goodness, but that over time this goodness is loaded up with layers of suffering that lead ultimately to all manner of fucked-up behaviour.

It is worth bearing in mind that we are mostly good people who do bad things — all of us — and forgiveness, as contrary to our instincts as it so often feels, is the crucial component that can usher us out of the darkness and back to the world.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #175 / NOVEMBER 2021)

Read it on The Red Hand Files: https://www.theredhandfiles.com/i-just-cant-forgive-myself/

E1.6.F.2.2_REF2_PH FORGIVENESS IMPLIES A DETACHMENT AND A RECOGNITION OF OUR TRUE NATURE, distinct from our imagination and its desire for revenge, in search of balance.
"VOID AND COMPENSATION
[...] It is impossible to forgive whoever has done us harm if that harm has lowered us. We have to think that it has not lowered us, but has revealed our true level.

[...] To forgive. We cannot do this. When we are harmed by someone reactions are set up within us. The desire for vengeance is a desire for essential equilibrium. We must seek equilibrium on another plane. We have to go as far as this limit by ourselves. There we reach the void.

[...] Men owe us what we imagine they will give us. We must forgive them this debt. To accept the fact that they are other than the creatures of our imagination is to imitate the renunciation of God.
I also am other than what I imagine myself to be. To know this is forgiveness."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.6.F.2.2_REF3_PH "IF WE CONSIDER WHAT WE ARE AT A DEFINITE MOMENT—THE PRESENT MOMENT, CUT OFF FROM THE PAST AND THE FUTURE—WE ARE INNOCENT.
We cannot at that instant be anything but what we are: all progress implies duration. It is in the order of the world at this instant that we should be such as we are.
To isolate a moment in this way implies pardon. But such isolation is detachment."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.6.F.2.2_REF4_PH SHANTIDEVA REMINDS US THAT THE RESTRICTIONS ON OUR FREEWILL MAKES A CASE FOR FORGIVING WRONGDOERS. They also provide us with the opportunity to practice patience.
“THE PERFECTION OF PATIENCE […]
31
Hence everything is governed by other
factors (which in turn) are governed by
(others),
And in this way nothing governs itself.
Having understood this, I should not become
angry
With phenomena that are like apparitions.
32

(If everything is unreal like an apparition)
then who is there to restrain what (anger)?
Surely (in this case) restraint would be
inappropriate
It would not be inappropriate. because
(conventionally) I must maintain
That in dependence upon restraining (anger)
the stream of suffering is severed.
33
So when seeing an enemy or even a friend
Committing an improper action,
By thinking that such things arise from
conditions
I shall remain in a happy frame of mind.
34
If things were brought into being by choice,
Then since no one wishes to suffer,
Suffering wood not occur
To any embodied creature.
35
Through not being careful
People even harm themselves with thorns
and other things,
And for the sake of obtaining women and the
like
They become obsessed and deprive
themselves of food.
36
And there are some who injure themselves
Through the unmeritorious deeds
Of hanging themselves, leaping from cliffs,
Eating poison and unhealthy foods.
37
If, when under the influence of disturbing
conceptions,
People will even kill their treasured selves,
How can they be expected not to cause harm
To the bodies of other living beings?
38
Even if I cannot develop compassion for all
such people
Who through the arisal of disturbing
conceptions,
Set out to try and kill me and so forth,
The last thing I should do is to become angry
with them.
39
Even if it were the nature of the childish
To cause harm to other beings,
It would still be incorrect to be angry with
them.
For this would be like begrudging fire for
having the nature to burn.
40
And even if the fault were temporary
In they who are by nature reliable,
It would still be incorrect to be angry.
For this would be like begrudging space for
allowing smoke to arise in it.
41
If I become angry with the yielder
Although I am actually harmed by his stick,
Then since he too is secondary, being in turn
incited by hatred,
42
Previously I must have caused similar harm
To other sentient beings.
Therefore it is right for this harm to be
returned
To me who is the cause of injury to others.
43
Both the weapon and my body
Are the causes of my suffering.
Since he gave rise to the weapon and I to the
body,
With whom should I be angry? […]
107
Therefore, just like treasure appearing in my
house
Without any effort on my behalf to obtain it,
I should be happy to have an enemy
For he assists me in my conduct of
Awakening.
108
And because I am able to practice (patience)
with him,
He is worthy of being given
The very first fruits of my patience,
For in this way he is the cause of it.
109
But why should my enemy be venerated,
He has no intention for me to practice
patience?
Then why venerate the sacred Dharma?
(It too has no intention) but is a fit cause for
practice.
110
But surely my enemy is not to be venerated
For he intends to cause me harm
But how could patience be practiced
If, like doctors, people always strove to do
me good?
111
Thus since patient acceptance is produced
In dependence upon (one with) a very hateful
mind,
That person should be worthy of veneration
just like the sacred Dharma,
Because he is a cause of patience.”
(Shantideva, A Guide to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life, translated by Stepahn Bachelor, 8th century AD)

E1.6.F.2.3. FORGIVENESS IS THE MODIFICATION OF THE CONTENT OF AN EMOTION
Forgiveness is puzzling because it occurs in situations when we feel justified resentment, and is different from explaining or justifying. It is the modification of the content of an emotion, when we shift the way we look at someone. While we can reason ourselves towards forgiveness, we do not control the tipping point of the change of heart. Forgiveness is not obligatory and shares characteristics with love and trust, which are not based purely on rational elements either. 

E1.6.F.2.3_REF1_PH "WHAT IS FORGIVENESS? WHOM DOES IT BENEFIT? IS IT EVER OBLIGATORY?
Forgiveness is puzzling because it occurs in situations when we feel justified resentment. It is different from explaining or justifying because in these cases there is no blame. Forgiveness is the modification of the content of an emotion, when we shift the way we look at someone away just from what he/she deserves : It corresponds to a change of heart.
We can somewhat reason ourselves on the path to forgiveness, but we do not control the tipping point of the change of heart. Sometimes we would like to forgive or we think we forgave and we realize we didn't. Forgiveness is not obligatory. It shares characteristics with love and trust that are not based purely on rational elements and are emotions that make us distinctively human vs. an ever more performing rational AI."
(Lucy Allais on Forgiveness, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode:
http://philosophybites.com/2015/01/lucy-allais-on-forgiveness.html

E1.6.F.2.3_REF2_PH “CAN WE FORGIVE?—How can we forgive them at all, if they know not what they do? We have nothing to forgive. But does a man ever fully know what he is doing? And if this point at least remains always debatable, men never have anything to forgive each other, and indulgence is for the reasonable man an impossible thing. Finally, if the evil-doers had really known what they did, we should still only have a right to forgive if we had a right to accuse and to punish. But we have not that right.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human III, Aphorism 68, 1878)

E1.6.F.2.3_REF3_LIT HOW DOES IT FEELS WHEN YOU FINALLY MANAGE TO FORGIVE?
“This shocks me, the first time I feel this on the road: the space in my heart for forgiveness — forgiveness! The moment I felt that was like getting hit in the head with a basketball — a freakish pang, a dull ache in the skull. I almost fell into a bush. I was hyperventilating — realizing my heart had expanded in some immeasurable, beyond-physics way that hearts can expand, and in that expansion I had new space. There’s a word in Japanese that sums up this feeling better than anything in English: *yoyū*. A word that somehow means: the excess provided when surrounded by a generous abundance. It can be applied to hearts, wallets, Sunday afternoons, and more… This extra space, this yoyū, this abundance… carried with it patience and — gasp — maybe even… love?”
(Craig Mod, Things become other things)

E1.6.F.2.3_REF4_PSI SOMETIMES WE JUST CAN’T TRANSFORM THE CONTENT OF OUR EMOTIONS IN ORDER TO BE ABLE TO FORGIVE.
“There are tests of parental love. A parent may habitually lie or rage against a child without explanation. And when the child cannot muster the love or sympathy that a father, for example, thinks himself owed, anger may emerge unprotected by the shield of entitlement to it:

Two years ago my father quit his job and in the process admit-ted himself into Langley Porter Psychiatric Hospital for treatment of what was then diagnosed as manic-depressive psycho-sis. After being released, he admitted to the family many cruel and deceiving things he had been doing behind our backs for the past ten years. At the time I remember thinking that I should show him my love now more than ever before, that 1 should forgive this pitiful man who had lost the respect of his wife, his co-workers, his friends, his children, and most of all himself. But all I could feel was anger at his deception, anger at his once "funny" behavioral quirks that now suddenly came into sharp focus. I fought the obligation to love because I needed to hate. I had to resolve my own feelings before I could worry about his.

This son really wanted to forgive his father and to respond to his father's desperate need for self-respect; he also felt obliged to feel forgiving. Yet because he himself felt deceived and angry at being deceived, he could not feel as he wanted to and thought he ought to. He could not see his father's activities as "quirks"; he could not sustain that as if and feel the love he would experience if they were just quirks. Instead, these activities felt like deceptions. And given the serious reality of the deception, the boy felt angry. He did not revise what he sensed he owed his father-loyalty and love. He did not reconceive of his former love for his father as overpayment. He did not conceive of his father as being in emotional debt. Rather, the rule stayed in place and he "fought the obligation to love" because he needed to hate. He did not change the feeling rule. He acted on a strong need to violate it.”
(Arlie Russell Hochschild, The managed heart, 2003)

E1.6.F.2.4. NOT FORGIVING ONESELF OR OTHERS IS A LACK OF LOVE AND INDULGENCE
Forgiveness puts the forgiver in a position of power, and once the offender is repentant, it creates a responsibility of the offended towards the offender. 

Forgiveness is a form of self-rescue that can prevent anger, pain, and bitterness. It is an act of self-love and can be a way to self-preservation. Attempting to forgive can touch the borders of grace and be a form of resistance against malevolence. 

Forgiving someone who has done something truly terrible is a struggle but can be seen as an act of insubordination, a gift to oneself in the form of self-protection. 

To try and fail at forgiveness is still a form of betterment.

E1.6.F.2.4.a. TO CEASE BEING HAUNTED, ONE NEEDS TO CONFRONT THE PAST, FORGIVE ONESELF, AND ALTER ONE'S BEHAVIOR TOWARDS OTHERS AND ONESELF. 
This enables us to actively participate in the world, dispelling fear and making peace with what once haunted us. “As we develop love, appreciation, and forgiveness for others over time, we may accidentally develop those things toward ourselves, too.”

E1.6.F.2.4.a_REF1_PH "HAUNTED

is a word that denotes an unresolved parallel, a presence that is not quite a presence; a visitation by the as yet unspeakable. It is also emblematic of the longing for incarnation, of an unbearable substrate of wanting, of not finding a home in this world or in the next, someone or something that walks the halls of our house or our mind looking for what will help to lay its own self to rest.

What haunts us is always something that seeks its own disappearance: it wants to become fully itself and so depart. If we feel continually haunted, over time we begin to become ghost-like ourselves and roam with intent whilst not quite knowing the object of our intention. Looking in the mirror, our face begins to look like our not-quite-incarnated life. We walk not exactly existing in the world we visit. Like the spirits and half-beings we imitate at Halloween, we roam the streets as if looking for an abode on this earth we are unable to locate, demanding tribute from those who dwell within. The exorcism of an unwanted spirit is consistent the world over: an invitation to return home; for it and for us to find our way back, to cease our restless ways and to quit disturbing others' lives or walking their houses by night.

We cease to be haunted when we cease to be afraid of making what has been untouchable real and touchable again: especially our understandings of the past, and especially those we wronged, those we were wronged by, or those we did not help. We become real by forgiving ourselves, and we forgive ourselves most authentically by changing the foundational pattern of our behaviour, especially our behaviour to those we have hurt. A fear of ghosts, or a fear of our own haunted mind, is the measure of our absence in this world. We cease to be afraid when we give away what was never ours in the first place and begin to be present to our own lives just as we find them, in our earthly vulnerabilities, even in facing what we have banished from our thoughts and made homeless, even when we do not know the way forward ourselves. When we make a friend of what we previously could not face, what once haunted us now becomes an invisible, parallel ally, a beckoning hand to our future.

We banish the misaligned when we align with what we are called to; we become visible and real when we give our gift and stop waiting for the gift to be given to us. We wake into our lives again, as if for the first time, laying to rest what previously had no home, through beginning to speak, beginning to make real and beginning to live, those elements constellating inside us that long to move from the invisible to the visible."
(David Whyte, Consolations, The Solace, Nourishment and Underlying Meaning of Everyday Words, 2015)

E1.6.F.2.4.a_REF2_LIT "We’ve got to be as clear-headed about human beings as possible, because we are still each other’s only hope,” James Baldwin told Margaret Mead in their historic conversation about forgiveness. “To forgive is to assume a larger identity than the person who was first hurt,” poet and philosopher David Whyte observed a generation later in considering the measure of maturity — an observation as astute on the scale of individuals as it is on the scale of society. How few of us are capable of such largeness when contracted by hurt, when the clench of injustice has tightened our own fists. And yet in the conscious choice to unclench our hearts and our hands is not only the measure of our courage and our strength, not only the wellspring of compassion for others, but the wellspring of compassion for ourselves and the supreme triumph of personhood. “As we develop love, appreciation, and forgiveness for others over time,” Anne Lamott wrote as she contemplated the relationship between brokenness and joy, “we may accidentally develop those things toward ourselves, too.”
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings)

E1.6.F.2.4.a_REF3_PO "ALMOST A LAST JUDGMENT

My doing nothing as I walk the streets lives on
and is released into the night’s multiplicity.
The night is a long and lonely celebration.
In my secret heart I justify and glorify myself. 
I have witnessed the world; I have confessed to the
strangeness of the world.
I’ve sung the eternal: the bright returning moon and the faces
craved by love.
I’ve recorded in poems the city that surrounds me
and the outlying neighborhoods tearing themselves apart.
I’ve said astonishment where others said only custom.
Faced with the song of the tepid, I ignited my voice in sunsets.
I’ve exalted and sung my blood’s ancestors and the ancestors
of my dreams.
I have been and I am.
I’ve fixed my feelings into durable words 
when they could have been spent on tenderness.
The memory of an old infamy returns to my heart.
Like a dead horse flung on the beach by the tide, it returns
to my heart.
And yet, the streets and the moon are still at my side.
Water keeps flowing freely in my mouth and poems don’t deny me their music. 
I feel the terror of beauty; who will dare condemn me when
this great moon of my solitude forgives me?"
(Jorge Luis Borges, Poetic work, 1925-1965)

E1.6.F.2.4.a_REF4_PH "WHEN YOU FORGIVE OTHERS THEY MAY NOT NOTICE BUT YOU WILL HEAL. Forgiveness is not something we do for others; it is a gift to ourselves. […]
Forgiveness is accepting the apology you will never get."
(Kevin Kelly,  Excellent Advice for Living: Wisdom I Wish I’d Known Earlier, 2023)


E1.6.F.2.4.a_REF5_PH “A DEFECTIVE EAR.—“We still belong to the mob so long as we always shift the blame on to others; we are on the track of wisdom when we always make ourselves alone responsible; but the wise man finds no one to blame, neither himself nor others.”—Who said that? Epictetus, eighteen hundred years ago.—The world has heard but forgotten the saying.—No, the world has not heard and not forgotten it: everything is not forgotten. But we had not the necessary ear, the ear of Epictetus.—So he whispered it into his own ear?—Even so: wisdom is the whispering of the sage to himself in the crowded market-place.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 386, 1878)

E1.6.F.2.4.a_REF6_PH YOU CANNOT TRULY FORGIVE YOURSELF OR OTHERS AS LONG AS YOU DERIVE YOUR SENSE OF SELF FROM THE PAST.
"Forgiveness" is a term that has been in use for 2000 years, but most people have a very limited view of what it means.  You cannot truly forgive yourself or others as long as you derive your sense of self from the past.  Only through accessing the power of the Now, which is your own power, can there be true forgiveness. This renders the past powerless, and you realize deeply that nothing you ever did or that was ever done to you could touch even in the slightest the radiant essence of who you are.  The whole concept of forgiveness then becomes unnecessary.

And how do I get to that point of realization?

When you surrender to what is and so become fully present, the past ceases to have any power.  You do not need it anymore.  Presence is the key.  The Now is the key.

How will I know when I have surrendered?

When you no longer need to ask the question.”
(Eckhart Tolle, The Power Of Now, 1997)

E1.6.F.2.4.b. NEVER GIVE IN TO REMORSE, BUT TELL YOURSELF RIGHT AWAY: THAT WOULD BE ADDING A SECOND MISTAKE TO THE FIRST

E1.6.F.2.4.b_REF1_PH "REPENTANCE. Never allow repentance free play, but say at once to yourself, " That would be adding a second piece of folly to the first." If you have worked evil, you must bethink yourself of doing good. If you are punished for your actions, submit to the punishment with the feeling that by this very submission you are somehow doing good, in that you are deterring others from falling into the same error. Every malefactor who is punished has a right to consider himself a benefactor to mankind."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 323, 1878)

E1.6.F.2.4.b_REF2_PH SCHOPENHAUER SEES REMORSE AS AN INTELLECTUAL ILLUSION, WHILE NIETZSCHE SEES IT AS MORAL INDECENCY, A LACK OF SELF-LOVE AND FORGIVENESS.
"Schopenhauer saw remorse as a misunderstanding of the conscience, which then believes that it is entitled to distance itself from its inner being, i.e. from its own will: it believes that it should have acted differently, but this retroactive wish makes no sense (to act differently, it would have had to want differently, therefore to have a different will, therefore to be a different person). Nietzsche, for his part, sees remorse as an expression of indecency in the sense of Nietzschean morality: for showing insufficient love to oneself, for lacking indulgence, which is one of the absolute rules of love. For Schopenhauer, remorse is only an intellectual illusion (even if it causes psychological and moral suffering); for Nietzsche, it is a vice".
(Clément Rosset, The Major Force, 1983)

E1.6.F.2.4.b_REF3_PH “I DO NOT DESERVE TO GRIEVE MYSELF, FOR I HAVE NEVER WILLFULLY GRIEVED ANOTHER.”
(Marc-Aurelle, Meditations, Book VIII, XLII, 180)

E1.6.F.2.4.b_REF4_PO "REMORSE - IS MEMORY - AWAKE -
Her Parties all astir -
A Presence of Departed Acts -
At window - and at Door -

It’s Past - set down before the Soul 
And lighted with a match -
Perusal - to facilitate -
And help Belief to stretch -

Remorse is cureless - the Disease 
Not even God - can heal -
For ‘tis His institution - and 
The Adequate of Hell -"
(Emily Dickinson, 1863)

E1.6.F.2.4.c. FORGIVENESS PUTS THE FORGIVER IN A POSITION OF POWER BECAUSE FORGIVING IS FORMALIZING THAT WRONG HAS BEEN DONE BY THE OFFENDER
Ounce the offender is repentant, this creates a responsibility of the offended towards the offender.

E1.6.F.2.4.c_REF1_PH "MAIMONIDES OFFERS A FASCINATING AND VERY PRECISE PRESCRIPTION [FOR CLOSURE - AFTER HARM HAS BEEN DONE]: The wounder should make three earnest attempts at apology, showing both repentance and transformation — evidence that they are no longer the type of person who, in the same situation, would err in the same way; if after the third attempt they are still rebuffed by the wounded, then — and this is Maimonides’s brutal twist — the sin now belongs to the wounded for withholding forgiveness. The intimation is that a person who, in the face of genuine remorse and evidence of change, remains embittered is too small of spirit and too cut off from their own noblest nature. Maimonides wrote:

It is forbidden for a person to be cruel and not appeased; instead, a person should be satisfied easily and get angry slowly. And at the moment when the sinner asks for pardon — pardon with a whole heart and a desirous soul. And even if they caused them suffering and sinned against them greatly, [the victim] should not take revenge or hold a grudge."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.6.F.2.4.d. IS GUILT AN INEFFECTIVE RESPONSE TO THE ATROCITIES OF OUR HUMAN HISTORY?

E1.6.F.2.4.d_REF1_CUR "LUC TUYMANS USED A PHOTOGRAPH OF A SCULPTURE SEEN IN SPAIN, OF THE KIND SHOWN IN HOLY WEEK'S PROCESSIONS. These figures representing the Virgin or a saint are generally dressed with an embroidered velvet coat. Penitence, which evokes a highly Catholic ritual, is here presented next to Toter Gang, which evokes utter evil and the possibility of redemption. Sculpted by craftsmen to be adored by the so-called "penitents" during Holy Week, these figures have also been used as models by great Spanish painters, such as the Baroque master Zurbarán. Here, the image is truncated and we do not see the head. It is taken from below, which places the viewer (of the painting and of the real procession, where figures are carried at arm's length above the crowd) in a position of both adoration and submission, reinforced by the figure's imposing format and the costume's deep black color. 
By placing this penitence near the closed door of Nazism, Tuymans tackles the philosophical, almost psychoanalytical theme of guilt seen as a bad solution with regard to the atrocities of our history, of our human stories."
(Caroline Bourgeois, from the catalogue of the La Pelle / Luc Tuymans exhibition at Palazzo Grassi, Venice, 2019)

E1.6.F.2.5. FRIENDSHIP IS A MIRROR TO PRESENCE AND A TESTAMENT TO FORGIVENESS
"Friendship not only helps us see ourselves through another’s eyes, but can be sustained over the years only with someone who has repeatedly forgiven us for our trespasses as we must find it in ourselves to forgive them in turn."
Love is about acknowledging and forgiving each other's humanity through vigilant perception, recognizing and seeing the complexities of one's being. It is the presence of a migratory spirit of mercy and compassion. Love says, "I see you, I am beside you, look for me."

E1.6.F.2.5_REF1_PH "FRIENDSHIP is a mirror to presence and a testament to forgiveness. Friendship not only helps us see ourselves through another’s eyes, but can be sustained over the years only with someone who has repeatedly forgiven us for our trespasses as we must find it in ourselves to forgive them in turn. A friend knows our difficulties and shadows and remains in sight, a companion to our vulnerabilities more than our triumphs, when we are under the strange illusion we do not need them. An undercurrent of real friendship is a blessing exactly because its elemental form is rediscovered again and again through understanding and mercy. All friendships of any length are based on a continued, mutual forgiveness. Without tolerance and mercy all friendships die. [...]
In the course of the years a close friendship will always reveal the shadow in the other as much as ourselves, to remain friends we must know the other and their difficulties and even their sins and encourage the best in them, not through critique but through addressing the better part of them, the leading creative edge of their incarnation, thus subtly discouraging what makes them smaller, less generous, less of themselves. [...]
The dynamic of friendship is almost always underestimated as a constant force in human life: a diminishing circle of friends is the first terrible diagnostic of a life in deep trouble: of overwork, of too much emphasis on a professional identity, of forgetting who will be there when our armored personalities run into the inevitable natural disasters and vulnerabilities found in even the most average existence. […]
But no matter the medicinal virtues of being a true friend or sustaining a long close relationship with another, the ultimate touchstone of friendship is not improvement, neither of the other nor of the self, the ultimate touchstone is witness, the privilege of having been seen by someone and the equal privilege of being granted the sight of the essence of another, to have walked with them and to have believed in them, and sometimes just to have accompanied them for however brief a span, on a journey impossible to accomplish alone. [...]
(David Whyte , Consolations: The Solace, Nourishment and Underlying Meaning of Everyday Words)

E1.6.F.2.5_REF2_PH LOVE INVOLVES TRULY SEEING AND ACKNOWLEDGING OTHERS, WHICH BRINGS THEM FROM ISOLATION INTO THE OBSERVED WORLD. This act of witnessing is a form of compassion and forgiveness, recognizing our shared humanity.
"If you feel that he is beside you… and within you, why would you need to look for him? (This is not a challenge, there is no aggression in this question; I simply want you to think about it and elucidate).
TOM, MANCHESTER, UK

What is love for you?
PABLO, GUARDAMA DEL SEGURA, SPAIN

Dear Tom and Pablo,

The voice in ‘Ghosteen Speaks’ is not my own. It is the emergent expression of an invisible, migratory spirit — the Ghosteen. It is the spirit of love and mercy. Throughout the song, the Ghosteen announces its presence — I am beside you. Look for me.

It says — I am invisible, but I am here. Search for me, and you will find me.

It calls to the compassionate act of witnessing — of seeing.

Love has something to do with the notion of being seen — the opposite of invisibility. The invisible, the unwitnessed, the unacknowledged, the isolated, the lonely — these are the unloved. Loving attention illuminates the unseen, escorting them from the frontiers of lovelessness into the observed world. To truly see someone — anyone — is an act that acknowledges and forgives our common and imperfect humanity. Love enacts a kind of vigilant perception — whether it is to a partner, a child, a co-worker, a neighbour, a fellow citizen, or any other person one may encounter in this life. Love says softly — I see you. I recognise you. You are human, as am I.

To pay witness to another, in an alert and loving manner, is essentially an act of forgiveness for it is to acknowledge with compassion our mutual human capacity for all things, both good and evil.

When we reduce each other to symbols or representations, rather than see each other as the complex, flawed human beings that we are, we engage in the very antithesis of mercy — heartlessness, condemnation and sanctimoniousness. Within this baleful clamour the luminous spirits of compassion retreat.

I am beside you. Look for me — call the windswept voices of love, to all that have the forbearance to hear.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #103 / JULY 2020)

Read it on The Red Hand Files: https://www.theredhandfiles.com/if-he-is-beside-you/

E1.6.F.2.6. USE YOUR REGRETS AS MOTIVATION TO HELP REHABILITATE THE WORLD
"There are certain regrets that, as they emerge, can accompany us on the incremental bettering of our lives. Regrets are forever floating to the surface… They require our attention. You have to do something with them. One way is to seek forgiveness by making what might be called living amends, by using whatever gifts you may have in order to help rehabilitate the world."

E1.6.F.2.6_REF1_PH "IN MY OWN EXPERIENCE, NOTHING SEEDS CYNICISM MORE READILY THAN THE WITHHOLDING OF FORGIVENESS — forgiveness of others, of the world, of Father Chance and Mother Circumstance; above all, of oneself. Self-forgiveness is indeed the most potent antidote to cynicism I know. Cave shines a sidewise gleam on the same intimation. [...]

      We all have regrets and most of us know that those regrets, as excruciating as they can be, are the things that help us lead improved lives. Or, rather, there are certain regrets that, as they emerge, can accompany us on the incremental bettering of our lives. Regrets are forever floating to the surface… They require our attention. You have to do something with them. One way is to seek forgiveness by making what might be called living amends, by using whatever gifts you may have in order to help rehabilitate the world. [...]

Art does have the ability to save us, in so many different ways. It can act as a point of salvation, because it has the potential to put beauty back into the world. And that in itself is a way of making amends, of reconciling us with the world. Art has the power to redress the balance of things, of our wrongs, of our sins… By “sins,” I mean those acts that are an offence to God or, if you would prefer, the “good in us” — that live within us, and that if we pay them no heed, harden and become part of our character. They are forms of suffering that can weigh us down terribly and separate us from the world. I have found that the goodness of the work can go some way towards mitigating them."
(Maria Popova's review of Nick Cave's Faith, Hope and Carnage)

E1.6.F.2.6_REF2_LIT "REGARDING THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE REPENTANT, AND THE COMPLEX QUESTION OF WHAT REPENTANCE EVEN LOOKS LIKE IN ORDER TO BE EFFECTIVE TOWARD REPAIR:
"Addressing harm is possible only when we bravely face the gap between the story we tell about ourselves — the one in which we’re the hero, fighting the good fight, doing our best, behaving responsibly and appropriately in every context — and the reality of our actions. We need to summon the courage to cross the bridge over that cognitively dissonant gulf and face who we are, who we have been — even if it threatens our story of ourselves. It’s the only way we can even begin to undertake any possible repair of the harm we’ve done and become the kind of person who might do better next time. (And that, in my opinion, is what’s truly heroic.) […]

This work is challenging enough when facing the smaller failings in our lives — how much more difficult is it when our closest relationships or our professional reputation is at stake, or even the possibility of facing significant consequences? And yet this is the brave work we have to do. All of us. We are each, in a thousand different ways, both harmdoer and victim. Sometimes we are hurt. Sometimes we hurt others, whether intentionally or not. The path of repentance is one that can help us not only to repair what we have broken, to the fullest extent possible, but to grow in the process of doing so."
(Danya Ruttenberg,  On Repentance And Repair: Making Amends in an Unapologetic World, 2022)

E1.6.F.2.6_REF3_PH "HOW TO APOLOGIZE: QUICKLY, SPECIFICALLY, SINCERELY. DON’T RUIN AN APOLOGY WITH AN EXCUSE.[…]
A proper apology consists of conveying the 3 Rs: regret (genuine empathy with the other) responsibility (not blaming someone else) and remedy (your willingness to fix it)."
(Kevin Kelly,  Excellent Advice for Living: Wisdom I Wish I’d Known Earlier, 2023)

E1.6.F.2.6_REF4_PH "HOW DOES ONE RECONCILE THE QUESTION, “COULD I HAVE DONE MORE TO PREVENT THIS LOSS?” I have faced similar circumstances and feel so much guilt that I could have done something more to help. HELEN, NOTTINGHAM, UK […]

Dear Helen […],

“What if I had done this?” “If only I had done that.” These are the thoughts that keep us entrenched in our self-loathing. Guilt-ridden, we turn in on ourselves. We punish ourselves in the hope that this will bring absolution. “If I’d just been more like that,” we think, as we grow accustomed to our abjectness, not realising that these thoughts are a paralysing, self-negating wickedness. “Could I have done more to prevent this loss?” The answer is probably yes. Now, Helen, let’s be rid of this morbid interiority and move on.

We are broken things, amongst other broken things. We are imperfect and characterised by our capacity to fuck things up, yet still we can move incrementally towards the greater good. This serves as grounds for both self-forgiveness and hope, and reflects our inherent human loveliness.

We all have a job to do, and it is urgent business. We must make this world as bearable as we can. I believe, with no small amount of awe, that we have tremendous potential to achieve just that. I marvel at our collective and individual ingenuity. We are broken, yet - wow, o wow - look what we can do! We can be good to one another! We can love one another! We can be kind!

I have witnessed such kindness from people - ordinary kindness from broken individuals. Kindness that dismantles the structures of self-hatred and cynicism by recognising our shared condition. We are in this life together, each woven into the other, with our individual sorrows being merely a drop in a vast sea of mutuality.

We need one another, Helen, to hell with shame and guilt. We have work to do.

Love, Nick”
(NickCave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #311 / JANUARY 2025)

Read it in The Red Hand Files: https://www.theredhandfiles.com/desert-island-discs/

E1.6.F.2.6_REF5_PO “REGRET
It’s definitely a place.
A land
I wish I hadn’t
visited, but
I belong there.
It’s a field,
it’s wide
and operates
by admitting
new thoughts,
by charging
admission.
It was expensive there
once, very costly,
but not
until now.”
(Lia Purpura, It shouldn’t have been beautiful, 2015)

E1.6.F.2.7. FORGIVENESS IS ESSENTIAL FOR MAINTAINING FREEDOM AND RELEASING PEOPLE FROM THEIR PAST ACTIONS
Forgiveness facilitates a release from past actions, whereas keeping promises promotes security and continuity. These actions require the involvement of others since self-forgiveness and self-promising lack authenticity. Hannah Arendt asserts that forgiveness is crucial for maintaining freedom and liberating people from their past actions. She distinguishes forgiveness from vengeance, which perpetuates a cycle of reaction and extends consequenes. In contrast, forgiveness acts in new and unexpected ways, liberating both the forgiver and the forgiven from the repercussions of their actions. Arendt proposes that love, with its capacity to disclose a person's identity and forgive them, is the most potent antipolitical force.

E1.6.F.2.7.a. FORGIVENESS IS THE OPPOSITE OF REVENGE, AS IT OCCURS UNEXPECTEDLY AND LIBERATES BOTH PARTIES FROM THE CONSEQUENCES OF AN ACTION
According to Jesus, the power to forgive originates from humans, not God. Forgiveness is essential for life to continue, given that shortcomings are prevalent in human relationships. It provides an escape from vengeance and the relentless cycle of tit-for-tat actions.

E1.6.F.2.7.a_REF1_PH UNLIKE REVENGE, WHICH PERPETUATES THE CONSEQUENCES OF WRONGDOING, FORGIVENESS FREES BOTH THE ONE WHO FORGIVES AND THE ONE WHO IS FORGIVEN, thus breaking the cycle of the relentless automatism of revenge.
"It is decisive in our context that Jesus maintains against the "scribes and pharisees" first that it is not true that only God has the power to forgive,76 and second that this power does not derive from God—as though God, not men, would forgive through the medium of human beings—but on the contrary must be mobilized by men toward each other before they can hope to be forgiven by Crod also. Jesus' formulation is even more radical. Man in the gospel is not supposed to forgive because God forgives and he
must do "likewise," but "if ye from your hearts forgive," God shall do "likewise. 12" [...]

But trespassing is an everyday occurrence which is in the very nature of action's constant establishment of new relationships within a web of relations, and it needs forgiving, dismissing, in order to make it possible for life to go on by constantly releasing men from what they have done unknowingly.80 Only through this constant mutual release from what they do can men remain free agents, only by constant willingness to change their minds and start again can they be trusted with so great a power as that to begin something new. 

In this respect, forgiveness is the exact opposite of vengeance, which acts in the form of re-acting against an original trespassing, whereby far from putting an end to the consequences of the first misdeed, everybody remains bound to the process, permitting the chain reaction contained in every action to take its unhindered course. In contrast to revenge, which is the natural, automatic reaction to transgression and which because of the irreversibility of the action process can be expected and even calculated, the act of forgiving can never be predicted; it is the only reaction that acts in an unexpected way and thus retains, though being a reaction, something
of the original character of action. Forgiving, in other words, is the only reaction which does not merely re-act but acts anew and unexpectedly, unconditioned by the act which provoked it and therefore freeing from its consequences both the one who forgives and the one who is forgiven. The freedom contained in Jesus' teachings of forgiveness is the freedom from vengeance, which incloses both doer and sufferer in the relentless automatism of the action process, which by itself need never come to an end."

Note: 12   Matt. 18:35; cf. Mark 11;25; "And when ye stand praying, forgive, . . . that your Father also which is in heaven may forgive you your trespasses." Or:
"If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you: But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your
trespasses" (Matt. 6:14-15). In all these instances, the power to forgive is primarily a human power: God forgives "us our debts, as we forgive our debtors."
(Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition, 1958)

E1.6.F.2.7.a_REF21_PH HANNAH ARENDT ARGUES THAT FORGIVENESS AND MAKING PROMISES ARE ESSENTIAL FACULTIES FOR HUMAN RELATIONSHIPS. Forgiveness allows individuals to move beyond past actions, while promises create stability in an uncertain future. 
"The possible redemption from the predicament of irreversibility — of being unable to undo what one has done though one did not, and could not, have known what he was doing — is the faculty of forgiving. The remedy for unpredictability, for the chaotic uncertainty of the future, is contained in the faculty to make and keep promises. The two faculties belong together in so far as one of them, forgiving, serves to undo the deeds of the past… and the other, binding oneself through promises, serves to set up in the ocean of uncertainty, which the future is by definition, islands of security without which not even continuity, let alone durability of any kind, would be possible in the relationships between [us]. [...]
Without being forgiven, released from the consequences of what we have done, our capacity to act would, as it were, be confined to one single deed from which we could never recover; we would remain the victims of its consequences forever, not unlike the sorcerer’s apprentice who lacked the magic formula to break the spell. Without being bound to the fulfillment of promises, we would never be able to keep our identities; we would be condemned to wander helplessly and without direction in the darkness of each man’s lonely heart, caught in its contradictions and equivocalities — a darkness which only the light shed over the public realm through the presence of others, who confirm the identity between the one who promises and the one who fulfills, can dispel. Both faculties, therefore, depend on plurality, on the presence and acting of others, for no one can forgive himself and no one can feel bound by a promise made only to himself; forgiving and promising enacted in solitude or isolation remain without reality and can signify no more than a role played before one’s self. [...]"
(Hannah Arendt,  The Human Condition, 1958)

E1.6.F.2.7.a_REF3_PH FORGIVENESS IS ESSENTIAL FOR MAINTAINING HUMAN FREEDOM AND RELATIONSHIPS. UNLIKE VENGEANCE, WHICH PERPETUATES A CYCLE OF RETRIBUTION, FORGIVENESS BREAKS THIS CHAIN BY ACTING UNEXPECTEDLY AND UNCONDITIONALLY, liberating both the forgiver and the forgiven from the consequences of the original transgression.
"Trespassing is an everyday occurrence which is in the very nature of action’s constant establishment of new relationships within a web of relations, and it needs forgiving, dismissing, in order to make it possible for life to go on by constantly releasing men from what they have done unknowingly. Only through this constant mutual release from what they do can men remain free agents, only by constant willingness to change their minds and start again can they be trusted with so great a power as that to begin something new. [...]
In this respect, forgiveness is the exact opposite of vengeance, which acts in the form of re-acting against an original trespassing, whereby far from putting an end to the consequences of the first misdeed, everybody remains bound to the process, permitting the chain reaction contained in every action to take its unhindered course. In contrast to revenge, which is the natural, automatic reaction to transgression and which because of the irreversibility of the action process can be expected and even calculated, the act of forgiving can never be predicted; it is the only reaction that acts in an unexpected way and thus retains, though being a reaction, something of the original character of action. Forgiving, in other words, is the only reaction which does not merely re-act but acts anew and unexpectedly, unconditioned by the act which provoked it and therefore freeing from its consequences both the one who forgives and the one who is forgiven. The freedom contained in Jesus’ teachings of forgiveness is the freedom from vengeance, which incloses both doer and sufferer in the relentless automatism of the action process, which by itself need never come to an end."
(Hannah Arendt,  The Human Condition, 1958)

E1.6.F.2.7.a_REF3.1_PH HANNAH ARENDT ARGUES THAT FORGIVENESS IS A DEEPLY PERSONAL ACT DRIVEN BY LOVE, WHICH UNIQUELY REVEALS AND ACCEPTS A PERSON'S TRUE SELF, REGARDLESS OF THEIR ACTIONS. Love, being unworldly and apolitical, transcends the qualities and flaws of the loved one. In contrast, respect operates in the public sphere, maintaining a regard for individuals from a distance, independent of admiration or esteem. 
"Forgiving and the relationship it establishes is always an eminently personal (though not necessarily individual or private) affair in which what was done is forgiven for the sake of who did it… It is the reason for the [Christian] conviction that only love has the power to forgive. For love, although it is one of the rarest occurrences in human lives, indeed possesses an unequaled power of self-revelation and an unequaled clarity of vision for the disclosure of who, precisely because it is unconcerned to the point of total unworldliness with what the loved person may be, with his qualities and shortcomings no less than with his achievements, failings, and transgressions. Love, by reason of its passion, destroys the in-between which relates us to and separates us from others… Love, by its very nature, is unworldly, and it is for this reason rather than its rarity that it is not only apolitical but antipolitical, perhaps the most powerful of all antipolitical human forces. [...]
If it were true, therefore, as Christianity assumed, that only love can forgive because only love is fully receptive to who somebody is, to the point of being always willing to forgive him whatever he may have done, forgiving would have to remain altogether outside our considerations. Yet what love is in its own, narrowly circumscribed sphere, respect is in the larger domain of human affairs. Respect, not unlike the Aristotelian philia politikē, is a kind of “friendship” without intimacy and without closeness; it is a regard for the person from the distance which the space of the world puts between us, and this regard is independent of qualities which we may admire or of achievements which we may highly esteem. Thus, the modern loss of respect, or rather the conviction that respect is due only where we admire or esteem, constitutes a clear symptom of the increasing depersonalization of public and social life."
(Hannah Arendt,  The Human Condition, 1958)

E1.6.F.2.7.a_REF3.2_PH “I was angry with my friend; I told my wrath, my wrath did end. I was angry with my foe; I told it not, my wrath did grow.”
(Robert Blake)

E1.6.F.2.7.a_REF4_PH "FORGIVENESS FOR HANNAH ARENDT
In relation to the past, to which we are bound by promises and actions, forgiveness allows us to reintroduce the unpredictable. Forgiveness itself is unpredictable; it is not a moral obligation. To be able to bind ourselves again in the future with a new commitment, we must be able to unbind ourselves from the past through forgiveness."

Watch Olivier Abel´s interview: http://editionsartulis.fr/artulis/olivier-abel.html

E1.6.F.2.7.a_REF5_PH "REWARD AND PUNISHMENT.—No one accuses without an underlying notion of punishment and revenge, even when he accuses his fate or himself. All complaint is accusation, all self-congratulation is praise. Whether we do one or the other, we always make some one responsible."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 78, 1878)

E1.6.F.2.7.b. OUR ACTIONS ENTRENCH THE POWER OF THE LIGHT ON THIS PLANET. That is why forgiveness and compassion must become more important principles in public life.

E1.6.F.2.7.b_REF1_PH JOHN LEWIS EMPHASIZES THE POWER OF POSITIVE THOUGHTS AND ACTIONS IN PROMOTING LIGHT AND GOODNESS "Our actions entrench the power of the light on this planet. Every positive thought we pass between us makes room for more light. And if we do more than think, then our actions clear the path for even more light. That is why forgiveness and compassion must become more important principles in public life. [...]
Anchor the eternity of love in your own soul and embed this planet with goodness. Lean toward the whispers of your own heart, discover the universal truth, and follow its dictates. Release the need to hate, to harbor division, and the enticement of revenge. Release all bitterness. Hold only love, only peace in your heart, knowing that the battle of good to overcome evil is already won. Choose confrontation wisely, but when it is your time don’t be afraid to stand up, speak up, and speak out against injustice. And if you follow your truth down the road to peace and the affirmation of love, if you shine like a beacon for all to see, then the poetry of all the great dreamers and philosophers is yours to manifest in a nation, a world community, and a Beloved Community that is finally at peace with itself."
(John Lewis, Across That Bridge: Life Lessons and a Vision for Change, 2012)

E1.6.F.2.8. IS THERE ANY POSSIBILITY OF REDEMPTION EVEN FOR UNREPENTANT ABSOLUTE EVIL ?
"What to do? To forgive or to curse? By definition, there is no solution for us to the tragic dilemma, just as there is no way out of the situation of unrequited love. Forgiveness is as infinite as evil."

E1.6.F.2.8.a. FORGIVING SOMEONE WHO HAS DONE SOMETHING TRULY TERRIBLE IS A STRUGGLE, but it can also be seen as an act of insubordination, a gift to oneself in the form of self-protection.
Forgiveness can serve as a form of self-rescue, potentially preventing feelings of anger, pain, and bitterness. It is an act of self-love and can contribute to self-preservation. The attempt to forgive can touch the realm of grace and serve as a form of resistance against malevolence. Even if one fails at forgiving, the attempt itself is a form of improvement.

E1.6.F.2.8.a_REF1_PH "HOW DO YOU FORGIVE SOMEBODY WHOM YOU LOVE VERY MUCH BUT HAS DONE SOMETHING TRULY TERRIBLE?
MEL, TRENTON, USA

Dear Mel,

Forgiveness is a form of self-rescue that goes, at times, against our very nature. Forgiveness can prevent us from becoming the living definition of the injury that has been inflicted upon us – from being consumed by anger, pain, resentment and bitterness. But how difficult it is to sometimes forgive; how unfair it seems to reward offence with compassion. Yet, despite our intuitions, despite the seeming insanity of the enterprise, we must try, because forgiveness can be the way to self-preservation. Forgiveness is an act of self-love where the malignancy you have endured can become the motivating force that helps enlarge the capacity of the heart.

How to forgive the unforgivable? Now there is a question. Sometimes we feel the crime is such a violation, and so egregious, that it is beyond absolution – but the struggle to forgive is where it can find its true meaning. Even the attempt to move toward forgiveness allows us the opportunity to touch the borders of grace. To try is an act of resistance against the forces of malevolence – a form of defiant grace.

There are some who have found ways to forgive all manner of horrors and we look at them with awe. In Michigan, recently, a mother stood in court and told the murderer of her 17-year-old son. “I forgive you from the bottom of my heart. I pray for you as a mother. You are a child to me.” The mother of one of the victims of the Manchester bombing also publicly forgave the murderer of her child. These are forms of defiant grace, by people who refuse to be bowed by the malevolence of the world, and who rise to heights of compassion way beyond the reach of most of us, their acts of forgiveness a saintlike mixture of beauty, lunacy and courage.

So, Mel, how do you forgive the one you love for doing something truly terrible? I would try to see the idea of forgiveness as an act of insubordination, a non-compliance to the forces of malevolence, a recognition that you will not be defined by the offence that has been inflicted upon you. See forgiveness as a gift, not to the person who has committed the injury, but to yourself, in the form of self-protection. The sooner you start the process, the less time you may spend imprisoned by resentment and bitterness, hopefully moving toward a more resilient self. To try and fail is in itself a form of betterment. There are times forgiveness is beyond us but still we must reach, still we must strive.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #58 / SEPTEMBER 2019)

E1.6.F.2.8.a_REF2_LIT "EVE ENSLER CONFRONTS HER OWN MONSTROUSLY ABUSIVE FATHER, LONG AFTER HIS DEATH, IN THE APOLOGY (public library) — a rare dual triumph of absolute self-possession and radical empathy, radiating Dostoyevsky’s hard-earned conviction that there are no inherently bad people despite the worst of human acts and James Baldwin’s insistence that “freedom is not something that anybody can be given; freedom is something people take and people are as free as they want to be.”
(Maria Popova, Brain Picking´s review on Eve Ensler´s The Apology, 2019)

E1.6.F.2.8.a_REF2.1_LIT AN APOLOGY IS A HUMBLING ACT OF ADMISSION, SURRENDER, INTIMACY, AND CONNECTION THAT REQUIRES SELF-KNOWLEDGE AND INSIGHT. "I am done waiting. My father is long dead. He will never say the words to me. He will not make the apology. So it must be imagined. For it is in our imagination that we can dream across boundaries, deepen the narrative, and design alternative outcomes.
This letter is an invocation, a calling up. I have tried to allow my father to speak to me as he would speak. Although I have written the words I needed my father to say to me, I had to make space for him to come through me.
There is so much about him, his history, that he never shared with me, so I have had to conjure much of that as well.
This letter is my attempt to endow my father with the will and the words to cross the border, and speak the language, of apology so that I can finally be free. […]

What is an apology? It is a humbling. It is an admission of wrongdoings and a surrender. It is an act of intimacy and connection which requires great self-knowledge and insight."
(Eve Ensler´s The Apology, 2019)

E1.6.F.2.8.a_REF2.1.a_LIT A GENUINE APOLOGY MUST BE THOROUGH, ACKNOWLEDGING THE CRIME, UNDERSTANDING ITS IMPACT, SEEING THE VICTIM AS A HUMAN, FEELING REMORSE, AND TAKING RESPONSIBILITY. 
"Channeling her father’s voice — the voice he never used to speak the words of apology that every survivor of violence wishes to hear from the perpetrator of that violence — she writes:

"An apology must be thorough and can only be trusted in its veracity and dedication to details. I have done my best. I have followed your very strict guidelines: Recognize what I have done as a crime. Face how deeply my actions and violations have impacted and devastated you. See you as a human being. Attempt to experience or feel what it felt like inside you. Feel profound remorse and regret over my actions. And finally, take responsibility for my actions by doing extensive work to understand what made me do what I did."

What emerges from these intensely beautiful and harrowing pages is the reminder that redemption for our suffering is not something we get from others but something we claim for ourselves — that most difficult, most rewarding pinnacle of personal responsibility."
(Maria Popova, Brain Picking´s review on Eve Ensler´s The Apology, 2019)

E1.6.F.2.8.a_REF2.1.a.1_LIT MY APOLOGY TO THE EARTH, HERSELF "After I finished writing The Apology, a book in which I wrote a letter from my father to myself apologizing and exploring, explaining in detail all the ways he had abused and harmed me, I realized there was an apology I needed to make — an apology that would force me to confront my deepest sorrow, guilt and shame, an apology that I had been avoiding since I moved out of the city to the woods where I now live with the oaks, locust and weeping willows, Lydia the snapping turtle, running spring water, foxes, deer, coyotes, bears and cardinals and my precious dog, Pablo. It is my offering to you. It is my apology to the Earth, herself."

E1.6.F.2.8.a_REF2.1.a.2_LIT "DEAR MOTHER,

It began with the article about the birds, the 2.9 billion missing North America birds, the 2.9 billion birds that disappeared and no one noticed. The sparrows, black birds, and swallows who didn’t make it, who weren’t ever born, who stopped flying or singing or making their most ingenious nests, who didn’t perch or peck their gentle beaks into moist black earth. It began with the birds. Hadn’t we even commented in June, James and I that they were hardly here? A kind of eerie quiet had descended. But later they came back. The swarms of barn swallows and the huge ravens landing on the gravel one by one. I know it was after hearing about the birds, that afternoon I crashed my bike. Suddenly falling, falling, unable to prevent the catastrophe ahead, unable to find the brakes or make them work, unable to stop the falling. I fell and spun and realized I had already been falling, that we have been falling, all of us, and crows and conifers and ice caps and expectations — falling and falling and I wanted to keep falling. I didn’t want to be here to witness everything falling, missing, bleaching, burning, drying, disappearing, choking, never blooming. I didn’t want to live without the birds or bees and sparkling flies that light the summer nights. I didn’t want to live with hunger that turned us feral or desperation that gave us claws. I wanted to fall and fall into the deepest, darkest ground and be finally still and buried there.

But Mother, you had other plans. The bike landed in grass and dirt and bang, I was ten-years-old, fallen in the road, my knees scraped and bloody. And I realized that even then nature was something foreign and cruel, something that could and would hurt me because everything I had ever known or loved that was grand and powerful and beautiful became foreign and cruel and eventually hurt me. Even then I had already been exiled, or so I felt, forever cast out of the forest. I belonged with the broken, the contaminated, the dead. 
 
Maybe it was the sharp pain in my knee and elbow, or the dirt embedded in my new jacket, maybe it was the shock or the realization that death was preferable to the thick tar of grief coagulated in my chest, or maybe it was just the lonely rattling of the spokes of the bicycle wheel still spinning without me. Whatever it was. It broke. It broke. I heard the howling. 
 
Mother, I am the reason the birds are missing. I am the cause of salmon who cannot spawn and the butterflies unable to take their journey home. I am the coral reef bleached death white and the sea boiling with methane. I am the millions running from lands that have dried, forests that are burning or islands drowned in water. 
 
I didn’t see you, Mother. You were nothing to me. My trauma-made arrogance and ambition drove me to that cracking pulsing city. Chasing a dream, chasing the prize, the achievement that would finally prove I wasn’t bad or stupid or nothing or wrong. Oh my Mother, what contempt I had for you. What did you have to offer that would give me status in the market place of ideas and achieving? What could your bare trees offer but the staggering aloneness of winter or greenness I could not receive or bear. I reduced you to weather, an inconvenience, something that got in my way, dirty slush that ruined my overpriced city boots with salt. I refused your invitation, scorned your generosity, held suspicion for your love. I ignored all the ways we used and abused you. I pretended to believe the stories of the fathers who said you had to be tamed and controlled — that you were out to get us.
 
I press my bruised body down on your grassy belly, breathing me in and out. I have missed you, Mother. I have been away so long. I am sorry. I am so sorry. 
 
I am made of dirt and grit and stars and river, skin, bone, leaf, whiskers and claws. I am a part of you, of this, nothing more or less. I am mycelium, petal pistil and stamen. I am branch and hive and trunk and stone. I am what has been here and what is coming. I am energy and I am dust. I am wave and I am wonder. I am an impulse and an order. I am perfumed peonies and the single parasol tree in the African savannah. I am lavender, dandelion, daisy, dahlia, cosmos, chrysanthemum, pansy, bleeding heart and rose. I am all that has been named and unnamed, all that has been gathered and all that has been left alone. I am all your missing creatures, all the sweet birds never born. I am daughter. I am caretaker. I am fierce defender. I am griever. I am bandit. I am baby. I am supplicant. I am here now, Mother. I am yours. I am yours. I am yours.
 
Eve Ensler"

E1.6.F.2.8.a_REF3_PH "WHEN WE SAY CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY ARE UNFORGIVABLE, it can mean that 1) no one can psychologically forgive or that 2) those crimes shouldn't be forgiven but it is difficult to argue philosophically there would be anything that would be wrong to forgive.
Some say forgiveness should be extended because it has the virtue to free the offended from the anguish of withheld resentment, but one can disagree because there are many other ways to free oneself from ruminating an offense without necessarily forgiving the offender."
(Lucy Allais on Forgiveness, Philoophy Bites)

Listen to the episode:
http://philosophybites.com/2015/01/lucy-allais-on-forgiveness.html

E1.6.F.2.8.b. HOW DO YOU GIVE ADVICE TO SOMEONE WHO IS RIGHTEOUSLY ANGRY AND SAD ?

E1.6.F.2.8.b_REF1_PH ANGER IS A JUSTIFIED AND COMPASSIONATE CONNECTION AFTER ONE’S LOSS, PROTECTING THEIR MEMORY. "I have a question about grief. You have written exquisitely on the subject, and I have found great comfort in your words, and have great empathy for you and your family’s devastating loss of your precious son.

My mom was murdered with an AR-15 by a white supremacist in our synagogue, killed because this 19-year-old felt Jews were ‘destroying’ the white race. It has been almost 8 months, I stopped counting out of numbness, and I still don’t have anger towards the shooter, but more so for people who my mother was close to, and in her death, claimed my mother as their own, and exploited the situation for their own gain. I am afraid to let go of the anger, because I feel it connects me to my mother, and to the tragedy where she died, my last experience with her. I am afraid to move forward in any way. Family members are grieving in a different way than I am and that makes things even more uncomfortable. I am afraid to connect or feel my mother’s spirit in any way.

Do you have any advice on these components of grief: the anger; the fear.

With utmost gratitude towards your input,
HANNAH, CALIFORNIA, USA

[...] It feels to me, that the meaning exists within the anger. Not only is your anger justified, it is compassionate and essential and, as you said, connects you to your mother, even as those around you take possession of her, eclipsing your feelings with their own needs. The righteous energy of your anger is the flaming sword you hold above your mother’s memory. It may be the very thing that protects her, shielding her from the suffocating demands of the world. Perhaps, at this time, your anger is a way of safekeeping the spirit of your mother, of caring for her, of seeking her, of calling her to you. It is a pure and holy anger.

But there is another place too, a quieter place that patiently awaits you, and maybe in time you will find a moment to temporarily lay down the sword and, speaking into the sacred silence, talk to your mother, in grief, in longing, and in her presence, and perhaps find some solace there. I very much hope so.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #74 / DECEMBER 2019)

Read it on The Red Hand Files: https://www.theredhandfiles.com/question-about-grief/

E1.6.F.2.8.c. FORGIVENESS IS AS INFINITE AS EVIL

E1.6.F.2.8.c_REF1_PH "EITHER FORGIVENESS MAKES NO SENSE, OR IT PRECISELY CONSISTS OF FORGIVING EVIL, that is to say, that which is inexcusable and without extenuating circumstances: it is made for that, it is its job to forgive. To the unforgivable infinite, infinite forgiveness! [...] Forgiveness only takes on its full redemptive meaning only when we experience it as an incomprehensible, irrational and painfully unjust act. For it is in the very nature of forgiveness to be scandalous, and this scandal is due to its supernatural function. But at the same time, evil always gets the upper hand; evil is stronger than forgiveness, because of the incurable, elusive and infinite nature of wickedness. So what i to be done? Forgive or curse? By definition, there is no solution to the tragic dilemma for us, just as there is no way out of a situation of unrequited love. Forgiveness is infinite, like evil.”
(Vladimir Jankélévitch)

E1.6.F.2.8.d. NIETZSCHE WARNS US: FORGIVENESS MUST NOT BE GRANTED OUT OF COWARDICE

E1.6.F.2.8.d_REF1_PH "NON-ASSERTION OFOUR RIGHTS. The exertion of power is laborious and demands courage. That is why so many do not assert their most valid rights, because their rights are a kind of power, and they are too lazy or too cowardly to exercise them. Indulgence and patience are the names given to the virtues that cloak these faults."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too human II, Aphorism 251, 1878-1880)

E1.6.F.2.8.d_REF2_CUR IN FRANÇOIS OZON'S FILM "BY THE GRACE TO GOD", a fictional rendering based on real events, we find an illustration of the instrumentalization of forgiveness by the Catholic Church's executives in order to try to escape the judgment of civil society. The film critically shows us how the notion of forgiveness, rooted in the cult of the Catholic religion, can be manipulated - not always in a cynical and cold way - perhaps unconsciously at times. This is all the subtlety of the film. Church officials sometimes lie, but courageously confess on other occasions. We witness a psychoanalysis of the cult when the representatives of the Church think they can forgive themselves since God is able to forgive sinners. Similarly, Cardinal Philippe Barbarin tends to minimize the seriousness of pedophilia since the etymological root of the word is "to love your children", which is the message of a God whose patriarchal authority is incontestable over his disciples. This psychological confusion is at its peak when the priest Bernard Preynat asks a young boy that he is going to abuse to follow him by telling him "come pray with me".
The psychological confusion does not exonerate the evil committed but explains the inability of the Church to make a diagnosis and to take adequate measures. Obviously the Church continues to be blind - if not hypocritical and cynical - since Pope Francis refused the resignation of Cardinal Philippe Barbarin addressed to him by the latter at the end of his trial (sentenced to 6 months in prison for not having denounced crimes of sexual abuse that he was aware of).
Confusion about what it is to forgive, confusion about what it is to love, confusion about what is right - in all instances of the organization, from the parish priest to the Pope - under these conditions, how could the Church still be a school of life?

Watch the trailer on OmdB: https://www.imdb.com/video/vi2285091353/?playlistId=tt8095860&ref_=tt_pr_ov_vi

E1.6.F.2.9. PUNISHMENT IS ANOTHER POSSIBILITY, BY NO MEANS CONTRADICTORY
It has this in common with forgiveness that it attempts to put an end to something that, without intervention, could continue indefinitely. It is therefore very significant, and a structural element of human affairs, that human beings are unable to forgive what they cannot punish, and that they are unable to punish what proves unforgivable. 

E1.6.F.2.9_REF1_PH "FORGIVENESS IS THE ONLY REACTION THAT DOES NOT MERELY RE-ACT, BUT ACTS IN A NEW AND UNEXPECTED WAY, unconditioned by the act that provoked it, and therefore frees both the forgiver and the forgiven from the act´s consequences. The freedom contained in the doctrine of forgiveness [...] delivers from revenge, which locks both the agent and the patient in the implacable automatism of an action's process which, of itself, can never stop. [...]
Punishment is another possibility, by no means contradictory: it has this in common with forgiveness that it attempts to put an end to something that, without intervention, could continue indefinitely. It is therefore very significant - it is a structural element of human affairs - that human beings are unable to forgive what they cannot punish, and that they are unable to punish what proves unforgivable. This is the true mark of the offenses that have been called since Kant "radically evil" and about which we know so little, even we who have been exposed to one of their rare public outbursts. All we know is that we can neither punish nor forgive these offenses, and that therefore they transcend the realm of human affairs and the potential of human power, both of which they radically destroy wherever they make their appearance."
(Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition, 1958)

E1.6.F.2.9_REF1.1_CUR "HERE, LUC TUYMANS ONCE AGAIN TACKLES NAZISM, A RECURRING THEME THROUGHOUT HIS OEUVRE. It He used the image of the steel entrance door of Hitler's Berchtesgaden bunker and its network of tunnels. But here, nothing informs the viewer about the source and the German title, which means "the corridor of the dead", is not directly informative either. 
The artist hence did not wish to see this painting interpreted as a comment about Nazism. The theme that is clearly apparent. on the other hand, is confinement, but presented here in a paradoxical way. Indeed, on what side of this closed door are we standing? Inside or outside? Are we protected or detained? Both options are open. 
As often in Luc Tuymans' work, the subject is decontextualized: the door is not related to any architectural element and the composition is abstract, with two black horizontal strips— black being the color of all colors, rarely used ly the artist and in figurative painting— framing the black, vertical rectangle of the door, It is surrounded by a semi-circular halo of light, which gives the door a surreal, metaphysical dimension, as if it was inviting us to cross over to the hereafter. 
The question is whether there is a possibility of redemption behind the door, including for the absolute evil that was Nazism. The painting also questions the veracity of images. This image is an incomplete record of our history; it reminds us that we should not forget this dark period while also pointing to our own ambivalence."
(Caroline Bourgeois, from the catalogue of the La Pelle / Luc Tuymans exhibition at Palazzo Grassi, Venice, 2019)

E1.6.F.2.9_REF1_PSI "ALTRUISTIC PUNISHMENT COULD WELL BE THE GLUE THAT HOLDS SOCIETIES TOGETHER. However, our brains are not designed to reward generosity as reliably as they punish meanness."

E1.6.F.2.9_REF1.1_PSI IMPOSING UNFAIR LOSSES CAN BE RISKY DUE TO POTENTIAL RETALIATION, AND OBSERVERS OFTEN JOIN IN PUNISHING UNFAIR BEHAVIOR. "Unfairly imposing losses on people can be risky if the victims are in a position to retaliate. Furthermore, experiments have shown that strangers who observe unfair behavior often join in the punishment [of the offender]. Neuroeconomists (scientists who combine economics with brain research) have used MRI machines to examine the brains of people who are engaged in punishing a stranger for behaving unfairly to another stranger. Remarkably, altruistic punishment is accompanied by increased activity in the « pleasure centers » of the brain. It appears that maintaining social order and rules of fairness in this fashion are in themselves their own reward. Altruistic punishment could well be the glue that holds societies together. However, our brains are not designed to reward generosity as reliably as they punish meanness. Here again, we find a marked asymmetry between losses and gains."
(Daniel Kahneman, Thinking Fast and Slow, 2011)

E1.6.F.2.9_REF1.2_PSI LE SENTIMENT D'INJUSTICE
(Sur les épaules de Darwin, Émission diffusée sur France Inter le 20/04/2019)

Écouter le podcast: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceinter/podcasts/sur-les-epaules-de-darwin/le-sentiment-d-injustice-7763447

E1.6.F.3. KINDNESS AND BENEVOLENCE

E1.6.F.3.1. DESPITE RECOGNIZING THE IMPORTANCE OF KINDNESS, MANY PEOPLE STRUGGLE TO LET IT GUIDE THEIR LIVES.
People often behave kindly in private but lack the language and cultural support to express it publicly. Although kindness is sometimes seen as a weakness, it actually provides immense pleasure and a feeling of well-being. Children naturally exhibit kindness, but societal influences often change this as they grow. Kindness involves acknowledging one's own vulnerabilities as well as those of others. It's an unpredictable exchange, intertwining one's needs and desires with others'. True kindness, which goes beyond mere understanding, can change people's lives.

E1.6.F.3.1_REF1_PH "NOTHING BROADENS THE SOUL MORE THAN THE TOUCH OF KINDNESS, given or received, and nothing shrivels it more than a flinch of unkindness, given or received — something we have all been occasionally lashed with, and something of which we are all occasionally culpable, no matter how ethical our lives and how well-intentioned our conduct. Everyone loves the idea of kindness — loves thinking of themselves as a kind person — but somehow, the practice of it, the dailiness of it, has receded into the background in a culture rife with selfing and cynicism, a culture in which we have come to mistake the emotional porousness of kindness for a puncture in the armor of our hard individualism. And yet kindness remains our best antidote to the fundamental loneliness of being human."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.6.F.3.2_REF2_PH KINDNESS, OFTEN PERCEIVED AS A WEAKNESS IN A COMPETITIVE SOCIETY, IS ACTUALLY FUNDAMENTAL TO HUMAN WELL-BEING. Despite living secretly kind lives, people lack the language and cultural support to express this. True kindness involves bearing the vulnerability of others and oneself, which can be uncomfortable but is deeply satisfying. 
"The kind life — the life lived in instinctive sympathetic identification with the vulnerabilities and attractions of others — is the life we are more inclined to live, and indeed is the one we are often living without letting ourselves know that this is what we are doing. People are leading secretly kind lives all the time but without a language in which to express this, or cultural support for it. Living according to our sympathies, we imagine, will weaken or overwhelm us; kindness is the saboteur of the successful life. [...]
Kindness — that is, the ability to bear the vulnerability of others, and therefore of oneself — has become a sign of weakness [...] . If we think of humans as essentially competitive, and therefore triumphalist by inclination, as we are encouraged to do, then kindness looks distinctly old-fashioned, indeed nostalgic, a vestige from a time when we could recognize ourselves in each other and feel sympathetic because of our kind-ness…[...] 
We need to know how we have come to believe that the best lives we can lead seem to involve sacrificing the best things about ourselves; and how we have come to believe that there are pleasures greater than kindness…
In one sense kindness is always hazardous because it is based on a susceptibility to others, a capacity to identify with their pleasures and sufferings. Putting oneself in someone else’s shoes, as the saying goes, can be very uncomfortable. But if the pleasures of kindness — like all the greatest human pleasures — are inherently perilous, they are nonetheless some of the most satisfying we possess. […]
In giving up on kindness — and especially our own acts of kindness — we deprive ourselves of a pleasure that is fundamental to our sense of well-being."
(Adam Phillips and Barbara Taylor, On Kindness)

E1.6.F.3.1_REF2.1_PH ADAM PHILLIPS AND BARBARA TAYLOR EXPLORE THE CONCEPT OF KINDNESS AS AN INSTINCTIVE AND FUNDAMENTAL ASPECT OF HUMAN LIFE, OFTEN OVERSHADOWED BY SOCIETAL VALUES THAT EQUATE SUCCESS WITH COMPETITIVENESS AND SELF-SUFFICIENCY. They discuss how kindness is learned and unlearned, the inherent risks and pleasures of being kind, and the deep-seated human need for mutual vulnerability. 
"The kind life — the life lived in instinctive sympathetic identification with the vulnerabilities and attractions of others — is the life we are more inclined to live, and indeed is the one we are often living without letting ourselves know that this is what we are doing. People are leading secretly kind lives all the time but without a language in which to express this, or cultural support for it. Living according to our sympathies, we imagine, will weaken or overwhelm us; kindness is the saboteur of the successful life. We need to know how we have come to believe that the best lives we can lead seem to involve sacrificing the best things about ourselves; and how we have come to believe that there are pleasures greater than kindness…
In one sense kindness is always hazardous because it is based on a susceptibility to others, a capacity to identify with their pleasures and sufferings. Putting oneself in someone else’s shoes, as the saying goes, can be very uncomfortable. But if the pleasures of kindness — like all the greatest human pleasures — are inherently perilous, they are nonetheless some of the most satisfying we possess. […]
In giving up on kindness — and especially our own acts of kindness — we deprive ourselves of a pleasure that is fundamental to our sense of well-being. [...]
Today it is only between parents and children that kindness is expected, sanctioned, and indeed obligatory… Kindness — that is, the ability to bear the vulnerability of others, and therefore of oneself — has become a sign of weakness (except of course among saintly people, in whom it is a sign of their exceptionality)… All compassion is self-pity, D. H. Lawrence remarked, and this usefully formulates the widespread modern suspicion of kindness: that it is either a higher form of selfishness (the kind that is morally triumphant and secretly exploitative) or the lowest form of weakness (kindness is the way the weak control the strong, the kind are only kind because they haven’t got the guts to be anything else). If we think of humans as essentially competitive, and therefore triumphalist by inclination, as we are encouraged to do, then kindness looks distinctly old-fashioned, indeed nostalgic, a vestige from a time when we could recognize ourselves in each other and feel sympathetic because of our kind-ness… And what, after all, can kindness help us win, except moral approval; or possibly not even that, in a society where « respect » for personal status has become a leading value. [...]
We usually know what the kind thing to do is — and kindness when it is done to us, and register its absence when it is not… We are never as kind as we want to be, but nothing outrages us more than people being unkind to us. There is nothing we feel more consistently deprived of than kindness; the unkindness of others has become our contemporary complaint. Kindness consistently preoccupies us, and yet most of us are unable to live a life guided by it. [...]
The forms kindness can take … are partly learned from the societies in which we grow up, and so can be unlearned or badly taught or resisted… Children begin their lives « naturally » kind, and that something happens to this kindness as they grow up in contemporary society. [...]
Everybody is vulnerable at every stage of their lives; everybody is subject to illness, accident, personal tragedy, political and economic reality. This doesn’t mean that people aren’t also resilient and resourceful. Bearing other people’s vulnerability — which means sharing in it imaginatively and practically without needing to get rid of it, to yank people out of it — entails being able to bear one’s own. Indeed it would be realistic to say that what we have in common is our vulnerability; it is the medium of contact between us, what we most fundamentally recognize in each other. [...]
The child’s first, formative trauma is his growing acknowledgment of his need for others (in actuality the mother is as vulnerable to her need for her baby as the baby is to his need for her; parents need their children not to worry them too much). The needy child experiences a trauma of concern (“How can I take care of my mother to ensure that she takes care of me?”), which calls up his natural kindness; but this concern — and the later forms of kindness that emerge from it — is too easily turned away from. This turning away we call self-sufficiency, and when we want to pathologize it we call it narcissism. The pleasure of kindness is that it connects us with others; but the terror of kindness is that it makes us too immediately aware of our own and other people’s vulnerabilities (vulnerabilities that we are prone to call failings when we are at our most frightened). Vulnerability — particularly the vulnerability we call desire — is our shared biological inheritance. Kindness, in other words, opens us up to the world (and worlds) of other people in ways that we both long for and dread. [...]
If there is no invulnerability anywhere, suddenly there is too much vulnerability everywhere. […]
It is not that real kindness requires people to be selfless, it is rather that real kindness changes people in the doing of it, often in unpredictable ways. Real kindness is an exchange with essentially unpredictable consequences. It is a risk precisely because it mingles our needs and desires with the needs and desires of others, in a way that so-called self-interest never can… Kindness is a way of knowing people beyond our understanding of them."
(Adam Phillips and Barbara Taylor, On Kindness, 2009)

E1.6.F.3.1_REF4_CUR A REFLECTION ON CHOOSING KINDNESS AS A RESULT OF GAINING A "COSMIC CONSCIOUSNESS"

Watch the trailer: https://youtu.be/wxN1T1uxQ2g

E1.6.F.3.1_REF5_PH "WHENEVER YOU HAVE A CHOICE BETWEEN BEING RIGHT OR BEING KIND BE KIND. No exceptions. Don’t confuse kindness with weakness."
(Kevin Kelly,  Excellent Advice for Living: Wisdom I Wish I’d Known Earlier, 2023)

E1.6.F.3.2. PRACTICING KINDNESS EVERY DAY TO EVERYONE, ONE WILL REALIZE THAT THEY ARE ALREADY IN HEAVEN! 

E1.6.F.3.2_REF1_PH "« PRACTICE KINDNESS ALL DAY TO EVERYBODY AND YOU WILL REALIZE YOU’RE ALREADY IN HEAVEN NOW », Jack Kerouac wrote in a beautiful letter to his first wife and lifelong friend. Somehow, despite our sincerest intentions, we repeatedly fall short of this earthly divinity, so readily available yet so easily elusive. And yet in our culture, it has been aptly observed, « we are never as kind as we want to be, but nothing outrages us more than people being unkind to us ». In his stirring Syracuse commencement address, George Saunders confessed with unsentimental ruefulness: « What I regret most in my life are failures of kindness ». I doubt any decent person, upon candid reflection, would rank any other species of regret higher. To be human is to leap toward our highest moral potentialities, only to trip over the foibled actualities of our reflexive patterns. To be a good human is to keep leaping anyway."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings)

E1.6.F.3.2_REF2_PH “BE KIND WHENEVER POSSIBLE. IT IS ALWAYS POSSIBLE.”
(Dalai Lama)

E1.6.F.3.2_REF3_LIT "THE KINDER AND THE MORE THOUGHTFUL A PERSON IS, THE MORE KINDNESS HE CAN FIND IN OTHER PEOPLE.

Kindness enriches our life; with kindness mysterious things become clear, difficult things become easy, and dull things become cheerful."
(Leo Tolstoi, A Wise Thought for Every Day, 1902)

E1.6.F.3.2_REF3.1_LIT "YOU SHOULD RESPOND WITH KINDNESS TOWARD EVIL DONE TO YOU, and you will destroy in an evil person that pleasure which he derives from evil."
(Leo Tolstoi, A Wise Thought for Every Day, 1902)

E1.6.F.3.2_REF3.2_LIT "KINDNESS IS FOR YOUR SOUL AS HEALTH IS FOR YOUR BODY: you do not notice it when you have it."
(Leo Tolstoi, A Wise Thought for Every Day, 1902)

E1.6.F.3.2_REF4_PH ON THE SHARED HUMAN EXPERIENCE OF JOY, GRIEF, AND THE IMPORTANCE OF APPROACHING THESE EMOTIONS LIGHTLY "I must confess I got to know you just today. One of my classmates said this website inspired her, and I got interested. We are at an art school in Chelsea. I was reading some questions – coronation, father’s death, tattoo, inspiration and love. I couldn’t help but start crying. I don’t know why. It’s 6 pm in the library. It’s sunny, and I am clearly sober. I wonder why this page makes me so emotional. I think it’s really beautiful what you are doing. It’s such a humane act. I just wanted to tell you this.
RYU, LONDON, UK

Dear Ryu,

This is my first File for a few weeks as I’ve been busy in the studio working on a new album. I’ve spent the last few days reading more than a thousand questions — a vast, sustaining river of need and joy and grief. I had become, to put it mildly, overwhelmed and so I asked my wife, Susie, how I should approach it. ‘Lightly and with a smile’, she said.

Later that night, when I reopened the Files, I landed on your letter straight away, Ryu. Something resonated. As I read what you had written, I thought of the deep, mysterious reserves of feeling we all carry around with us that are suddenly and inexplicably triggered by small recognitions of our common struggles. I thought of the intricate sorrows that are threaded through our lives, binding us all together, the shared tears that wash clear our eyes to better see the many tasks set in front of us. And I remembered what Susie had said – that we should go lightly among them. If we are consumed by these things then we become of little value to ourselves, each other, or the world. This is something I must learn and relearn constantly.

Anyway, I am very pleased to meet you. To introduce myself, my name is Nick Cave and I am a singer who has somehow ended up with a website where I answer people’s questions. I have no idea how I arrived at this place, nor where this thing is going, but here I am waving to you across town, ‘lightly and with a smile’.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #238 / JUNE 2023)

E1.6.A.2.2.d_REF1_PH.wE1.6.F.3.2

E1.6.A.2.2.d_REF1.1_PH.wE1.6.F.3.2

E1.6.F.3.2_REF6_PO "HELLO, SUN IN MY FACE.

Hello, you who make the morning
and spread it over the fields
and into the faces of the tulips
and the nodding morning glories,
and into the windows of, even, the
miserable and crotchety–

 
best preacher that ever was,
dear star, that just happens
to be where you are in the universe
to keep us from ever-darkness,
to ease us with warm touching,
to hold us in the great hands of light–
good morning, good morning, good morning.

 
Watch, now, how I start the day
in happiness, in kindness."

(Mary Oliver)

E1.6.F.3.2_REF7_CUR HIRAYAMA (KOJI YAKUSHO) CLEANS TOKYO’S PUBLIC TOILETS FOR A LIVING, rising before dawn to gently water the seedlings he grows in his home and then drive off to begin his shift.Hirayama clearly derives enjoyment from performing his work well, but there’s more to his life than labor, and more to this movie than a simplistic celebration of manual toil.

Hirayama is a man of few words, observing Tokyo and its inhabitants with a tenderness and patience that, if overlooked, could be mistaken for a simple disposition. He deeply observes people and his surroundings, finding immense satisfaction in the beauty of nature, music, literature, and human interactions. His interactions are devoid of pride, even when overlooked due to his job, and he exhibits no anger, even when faced with adversity. He displays empathy and tenderness towards people of all ages, being able to establish intimate relationships inrecord time with kids, adolescent and adults alike.

Hirayama is an educated man who reads a classical literature book each month. He is adaptable, despite adhering to a routine. He understands that his wisdom cannot be conveyed merely through words, but through smiles, loving actions, jokes, and games. Hirayama embodies the traits of a Zen master.

Watch the trailer: https://www.imdb.com/title/tt27503384/?ref_=ext_shr_lnk

E1.6.F.3.2_REF8_PH "ALL THESE GIFTS AT CHRISTMAS TIME END UP GENERATING MORE SADNESS THAN JOY. For no one is rich enough to enter the new year without a dent in his budget; and more than one will groan in secret over the dust nests which he will have received, as he will have given to others, to enrich the merchants. I can still hear this little girl, whose parents have many friends, saying, as she considered the first blotter she received at the end of the year: « Here we go, here come the blotters ». There is a lot of indifference, and also pent-up anger, in this fury of giving presents. Obligation spoils everything. And at the same time chocolates fill the stomach and feed misanthropy. Let's exchange presents quickly and eat quickly; it's only a moment to pass.
And let's focus on what really matters. I wish you good humor. That is what we should offer and receive. This is the true politeness that enriches everyone, and first of all the giver. That is the treasure that multiplies through exchange."
(Alain, Reflections on happiness, 1910)

E1.6.F.3.3. "WE HAVE A DUTY TO REMAIN CONSTANT PROVIDERS OF GENEROUS INTERPRETATIONS OF THE LIVES OF OTHERS
Such is our proclivity for error and our vulnerability to reversals of fortune, we are all on the verge of needing someone to come to our imaginative aid. And therefore, if for no other reason, we have a duty to remain constant providers of generous interpretations of the lives of others."

E1.6.F.3.3_REF1_PH ALAIN DE BOTTON EMPHASIZES THE IMPORTANCE OF KINDNESS AND EMPATHY, URGING US TO OFFER GENEROUS INTERPRETATIONS OF OTHERS' LIVES and to be compassionate, as we are all prone to errors and misfortunes.
"In a passage evocative of that splendid Seamus Heaney verse — « On your way up, show consideration / To the ones you meet on their way down. / The Latin root of condescension / Means we all sink ». — De Botton adds:
Such is our proclivity for error and our vulnerability to reversals of fortune, we are all on the verge of needing someone to come to our imaginative aid. And therefore, if for no other reason, we have a duty to remain constant providers of generous interpretations of the lives of others. We must be kind in the sense not only of being touched by the remote material suffering of strangers, but also of being ready to do more than condemn and hate the sinful around us, hopeful that we too may be accorded a tolerable degree of sympathy in our forthcoming hour of failure and shame."
(Maria Popova's review on Alain de Botton's School of life, 2019)

E1.6.F.3.3_REF2_PH "BEFORE YOU ARE OLD ATTEND AS MANY FUNERALS AS YOU CAN BEAR AND LISTEN. Nobody talks about the departed’s achievements. The only thing people will remember is what kind of person you were while you were achieving."
(Kevin Kelly, Excellent Advice for Living: Wisdom I Wish I’d Known Earlier)

E1.6.F.3.3_REF3_PH NICK CAVE SUGGESTS THAT TEMPORARILY SETTING ASIDE DISBELIEF TO PRAY FOR A FRIEND DEMONSTRATES GENEROSITY, CONFIDENCE IN ONE'S BELIEFS, AND TRUE FRIENDSHIP. Cave argues that such an act, though potentially seen as intellectually dishonest, can be a profound gesture of love and kindness, showing willingness to support loved ones in times of need.
"Over the years I detached myself from religion until I became an atheist. Yesterday, I had video contact with friends in the USA and a husband of one, Paul E, an American banjo player with whom I play, has cancer and is very weak. His wife asked us to think of him, which I do all the time, but also to pray for him. I find myself caught between my desire to respond to the request and that of preserving an intellectual honesty that would avoid being confronted with a lie.
JEAN-MARC, MARSEILLE, FRANCE

Dear Jean-Marc,

Although I am not an atheist myself, I have a lot of time for their position, because I do struggle with the notion of God’s existence to a certain extent. Atheists, though, fall decisively on one side of the dividing line, whereas I have moved back and forth across that line over the years, spending more time with the believers than the non-believers these days. Many atheists are well informed on religion and hold a view on the significance of the nature of the theological struggle, and so I feel closer to them than I do to the spiritually complacent, the religiously dogmatic or those who are simply indifferent to these matters. I think complacency and indifference are more of a problem for the embattled soul of the world than emphatic disbelief.

But in regard to your dilemma, Jean-Marc, I can’t think of an act more generous than an atheist at prayer, who temporarily puts aside their disbelief in a god in order to bring comfort to a friend. Loosening your position for a moment, and doing something difficult because it has been asked of you by someone you care for, demonstrates a confidence in your beliefs, and shows that they are not so prideful or absolutist that they manifest into a smallness of being. Of course, to some this act will seem intellectually dishonest, a sham and a lie, but to others it will appear as the purest kindness, where heart eclipses mind, a true and complex gesture of what it means to love somebody. We show that in times of need we can do whatever is required of us, with a magnanimous heart, bending to the will of those we love. Understandably, it will be difficult for you to pray, but that is the very reason to do it. What is true friendship if we are not tested at times, if we are not prepared to soften our cherished ideals as an act of fidelity and commitment to those we love. In the end, this act of friendship may be the most eloquent prayer of all.

If it is appropriate, please send Paul E my thoughts and prayers.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #265 / DECEMBER 2023)

E1.6.F.3.3_REF4_PH "OCCASIONALLY, THIS BACKFIRES, BUT IT HELPS YOU MOVE FAST WITHOUT MUCH STRESS. (Farnam Street - Brain Food)
“I always prefer to believe the best of everybody; it saves so much trouble.”
(Rudyard Kipling)

E1.6.F.3.4. THE KEY TO KINDNESS IS MAINTAINING A PURE, LUCID, MODERATE, AND JUST MIND
"The key to kindness, he [Marcus Aurelius] observes, is keeping “the purity, lucidity, moderation, and justice of your mind” from being sullied by the actions of those you encounter, no matter how disagreeable and discomposed by unreason they may be."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings)

E1.6.F.3.4_REF1_PH MARCUS AURELIUS EMPHASIZES THE IMPORTANCE OF MAINTAINING KINDNESS, HONESTY, AND JUSTICE THROUGHOUT LIFE, REGARDLESS OF THE BEHAVIOR OF OTHERS. He compares this to a clear spring that remains pure despite attempts to pollute it.
"Only one thing is important: to behave throughout your life toward the liars and crooks around you with kindness, honesty, and justice. [...] 
Suppose someone standing by a clear, sweet spring were to curse it: it just keeps right on bringing drinkable water bubbling up to the surface. Even if he throws mud or dung in it, before long the spring disperses the dirt and washes it out, leaving no stain. So how are you to have the equivalent of an ever-flowing spring? If you preserve your self-reliance at every hour, and your kindness, simplicity, and morality. [...]
Try living the life of a good man and see how it too suits you — a man who’s gratified by the lot he’s been assigned by the universe and satisfied with the justice of his acts and the kindness of his character. [...]
If you carry out every present task by following right reason assiduously, resolutely, and with kindness; if, rather than getting distracted by irrelevancies, you keep your guardian spirit unspoiled and steady…; if you engage with the task not with expectations or evasions, but satisfied if your current performance is in accord with nature and if what you say and express is spoken with true Roman honesty, you’ll be living the good life. And there’s no one who can stop you doing so!"
(Marcus Aurelius, Meditations)

E1.6.F.3.4_REF2_PH "ANGER IS NOT THE PROPER RESPONSE TO ANGER. When you see someone angry you are seeing their pain. Compassion is the proper response to anger."
(Kevin Kelly,  Excellent Advice for Living: Wisdom I Wish I’d Known Earlier, 2023)

E1.6.F.3.5. NON-INTERFERENCE WITH OTHER PEOPLE’S’ OWN PECULIAR WAYS OF BEING HAPPY
The first thing to learn in intercourse with others is non-interference with their own peculiar ways of being happy, provided those ways do not assume to interfere by violence with ours. No one has insight into all the ideals. No one should presume to judge them off-hand. The pretension to dogmatize about them in each other is the root of most human injustices and cruelties.

E1.6.F.3.5_REF1_PH HUMAN BEINGS OFTEN MISTAKE THEIR PERSPECTIVES FOR REALITY AND FORGET THE DIVERSITY OF BEAUTIFUL LIVES. Overcoming self-righteousness is a rare but important existential maturity. 
"To be human is to continually mistake our frames of reference for reality itself. We so readily forget that our vantage point is but a speck on the immense plane of possible perspectives. We so readily forget that there are infinitely many kinds of beautiful lives.

The discipline of countering our reflex for self-righteousness is a triumph of existential maturity — one increasingly rare in a culture where most people would rather armor themselves with judgment than tremble with uncertainty, would rather be right than understand.

The pioneering psychologist and philosopher William James (January 11, 1842–August 26, 1910), who coined the term “stream of consciousness,” explores the making of that triumph in a pair of wonderful lectures — “On a Certain Blindness in Human Beings” and “What Makes Life Significant” — posthumously collected in the 1911 volume Talks to Teachers on Psychology: And to Students on Some of Life’s Ideals"
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.6.F.3.4_REF3_TH MARSHALL ROSENBERG REDEFINES ANGER AS A PRODUCT OF OUR OWN JUDGMENTAL THINKING RATHER THAN OTHERS' ACTIONS, AND IT OUTLINES A FOUR-STEP PROCESS TO TRANSFORM THAT ANGER INTO A CONSTRUCTIVE EXPRESSION BY CONNECTING WITH AND COMMUNICATING OUR UNDERLYING UNMET NEEDS.

“Expressing Anger Fully

Distinguishing Stimulus From Cause
The first step to fully expressing anger in NVC is to divorce the other person from any responsibility for our anger. We rid ourselves of thoughts such as, “He, she, or they made me angry when they did hat.” Such thinking leads us to express our anger superficially by blaming or punishing the other person. Earlier we saw that the behavior of others may be a stimulus for our feelings, but not the cause. We are never angry because of what someone else did. We can identify the other person’s behavior as the stimulus, but it is important to establish a clear separation between stimulus and cause. […] 

The cause of anger lies in our thinking—in thoughts of blame and judgment. […] Whenever we are angry, we are finding fault—we choose to play God by judging or blaming the other person for being wrong or deserving of punishment. I would like to suggest that this is the cause of anger. Even if we are not initially conscious of it, the cause of anger is located in our own thinking. […]

For example, if someone arrives late for an appointment and we need reassurance that she cares about us, we may feel hurt. If, instead, our need is to spend time purposefully and constructively, we may feel frustrated. If, on the other hand, our need is for thirty minutes of quiet solitude, we may be grateful for her tardiness and feel pleased. Thus, it is not the behavior of the other person, but our own need that causes our feeling. When we are connected to our need, whether it is for reassurance, purposefulness, or solitude, we are in touch with our life energy. We may have strong feelings, but we are never angry. Anger is a result of life-alienating thinking that is disconnected from needs. It indicates that we have moved up to our head to analyze and judge somebody, rather than focus on which of our needs are not getting met. […]

All Anger Has A Life-Serving Core […]

Use anger as a wake-up call. […] At the core of all anger is a need that is not being fulfilled. Thus anger can be valuable if we use it as an alarm clock to wake us up—to realize we have a need that isn’t being met and that we are thinking in a way that makes it unlikely to be met. To fully express anger requires full consciousness of our need. In addition, energy is required to get the need met. Anger, however, co-opts our energy by directing it toward punishing people rather than meeting our needs. Instead of engaging in “righteous indignation,” I recommend connecting empathically with our own needs or those of others. This may take extensive practice, whereby over and over again, we consciously replace the phrase “I am angry because they . . . ” with “I am angry because I am needing . . . ” […] When we become aware of our needs, anger gives way to life-serving feelings. […]

Judgments of others contribute to self-fulfilling prophecies. […] I would like to suggest that when our heads are filled with judgments and analyses that others are bad, greedy, irresponsible, lying, cheating, polluting the environment, valuing profit more than life, or behaving in other ways they shouldn’t, very few of them will be interested in our needs. If we want to protect the environment and we go to a corporate executive with the attitude, “You know, you are really a killer of the planet, you have no right to abuse the land in this way,” we have severely impaired our chances of getting our needs met. It is a rare human being who can maintain focus on our needs when we are expressing them through images of their wrongness. Of course, we may be successful in using such judgments to intimidate people into meeting our needs. If they feel so frightened, guilty, or ashamed that they change their behavior, we may come to believe that it is possible to “win” by telling people what’s wrong with them.
With a broader perspective, however, we realize that each time our needs are met in this way, we not only lose, but we have contributed very tangibly to violence on the planet. We may have solved an immediate problem, but we will have created another one. The more people hear blame and judgment, the more defensive and aggressive they become and the less they will care about our needs in the future. So even if our present need is met, in the sense that people do what we want, we will pay for it later.
Four Steps To Expressing Anger

Anger
Let’s look at what the process of fully expressing our anger actually requires in concrete form. The first step is to stop and do nothing except to breathe. We refrain from making any move to blame or punish the other person. We simply stay quiet. Then we identify the thoughts that are making us angry. […] We take the next step and connect to the needs behind those thoughts. […] To fully express ourselves, we now open our mouths and speak the anger—but the anger has been transformed into needs and need-connected feelings. To articulate these feelings, however, may require a lot of courage. […]

Steps to expressing anger:

1. Stop. Breathe.
2. Identify our judgmental thoughts.
3. Connect with our needs.
4. Express our feelings and unmet needs.

Offering Empathy First
In most cases, however, another step needs to take place before we can expect the other party to connect with what is going on in us. Because it will often be difficult for others to receive our feelings and needs in such situations, we would need first to empathize with them if we want them to hear us. The more we empathize with what leads them to behave in the ways that are not meeting our needs, the more likely it is that they will be able to reciprocate afterwards. […] People do not hear our pain when they believe they are at fault. […]

Taking Our Time
Probably the most important part of learning how to live the process we have been discussing is to take our time. We may feel awkward deviating from the habitual behaviors that our conditioning has rendered automatic, but if our intention is to consciously live life in harmony with our values, then we’ll want to take our time. […]

I would suggest the following exercise. As we have seen, our anger comes from judgments, labels, and thoughts of blame, of what people “should” do and what they “deserve.” List the judgments that float most frequently in your head by using the cue, “I don’t like people who are. . . . ” Collect all such negative judgments in your head and then ask yourself, “When I make that judgment of a person, what am I needing and not getting?” In this way, you train yourself to frame your thinking in terms of unmet needs rather than in terms of judgments of other people.
Practice is essential, because most of us were raised, if not on the streets of Detroit, then somewhere only slightly less violent. Judging and blaming have become second nature to us. […]”
(Marshall Rosenberg, Nonviolent communication a language of life, 1999)

E1.6.F.3.5_REF1.1_PH WILLIAM JAMES EMPHASIZES THE IMPORTANCE OF RECOGNIZING AND RESPECTING THE DIVERSE WAYS IN WHICH INDIVIDUALS FIND HAPPINESS AND MEANING IN LIFE. He argues that no single person has complete insight into all ideals and that dogmatizing others' ways of being leads to injustice and cruelty. 
"Only in some pitiful dreamer, some philosopher, poet, or romancer, or when the common practical man becomes a lover, does the hard externality give way, and a gleam of insight into the ejective world… the vast world of inner life beyond us, so different from that of outer seeming, illuminate our mind. Then the whole scheme of our customary values gets confounded, then our self is riven and its narrow interests fly to pieces, then a new centre and a new perspective must be found. [...]

It absolutely forbids us to be forward in pronouncing on the meaninglessness of forms of existence other than our own; and it commands us to tolerate, respect, and indulge those whom we see harmlessly interested and happy in their own ways, however unintelligible these may be to us. Hands off: neither the whole of truth nor the whole of good is revealed to any single observer, although each observer gains a partial superiority of insight from the peculiar position in which he stands. [...]
The first thing to learn in intercourse with others is non-interference with their own peculiar ways of being happy, provided those ways do not assume to interfere by violence with ours. No one has insight into all the ideals. No one should presume to judge them off-hand. The pretension to dogmatize about them in each other is the root of most human injustices and cruelties, and the trait in human character most likely to make the angels weep."
(William James, “On a Certain Blindness in Human Beings” and “What Makes Life Significant”, Talks to Teachers on Psychology: And to Students on Some of Life’s Ideals, 1911)

E1.6.F.3.6. KINDNESS IS UNDERSTANDING

E1.6.F.3.6_REF_PH UNDERSTANDING IS THE ESSENCE OF LOVE. IF YOU CANNOT UNDERSTAND, YOU CANNOT LOVE "Loving-kindness is not only the desire to make someone happy, to bring joy to a beloved person; it is the ability to bring joy and happiness to the person you love, because even if your intention is to love this person, your love might make him or her suffer.

Training is needed in order to love properly; and to be able to give happiness and joy, you must practice deep looking directed toward the person you love. Because if you do not understand this person, you cannot love properly. Understanding is the essence of love. If you cannot understand, you cannot love. That is the message of the Buddha."
(Thich Nhat Hanh, True Love: A Practice for Awakening the Heart, 1997)

E1.7.C.3.3.wE1.6.F.3. “IN THE PRE-SCIENTIFIC WORLD, IN THE BLIND OLD WORLD WITH ITS OLD LANGUAGE, WE HAD A WORD FOR THOSE PEOPLE MOST AWAKE TO THE SACRED WONDER OF REALITY, most capable of awakening the native kindness of human beings — the kindness that flows naturally between us when we are stripped of our biases and liberated from our small, constricting frames of reference. That word was “saint.” Saints still walk our world, though now we might simply call them heroes, if we recognize them at all — heroes whose superpower is love.”
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.6.F.4. GRATITUDE

E1.6.F.4.1. GRATITUDE IS A STATE OF ETERNAL INDEBTEDNESS TO THE PAST AND FUTURE, DEVOID OF BITTERNESS.
It's an expression of absolute love, complete acceptance, and openness to the world. It's essential for full presence, emerging from awareness of one's existence - the acknowledgment that something exists rather than nothing. An ungrateful person is unwise, lacking discernment and failing to appreciate their good fortune. "The discipline of not taking anything for granted is the most powerful self-protective mechanism in life."

E1.6.F.4.1_REF1_LIT "I HAVE ALWAYS HAD A VERY STRONG, AN ALMOST HURTINGLY STRONG SYMPATHY WITH TRAMPS. I would identify myself, in a sort of imaginative projection of my spirit, with these strange wayfarers. There is an awareness that has been the accompaniment of all my days; namely an intense realization of the privilege of having a roof over my head, a blanket over my bed, dry boots on my feet, a good fire to warm my shins, and a dish of bread and milk in front of me! Never have I taken for granted the inestimable privilege of being assured of the necessities of life. It is the one point where I drop my touchy individualism and grow humanly and most humbly thankful. I feel grateful not only to Chance, but to the actual human race, whose “collective” activities in this great twenty-five thousand years “Plan” of theirs, have given me protection from these elements I am always praising so!"
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber, p. 274-277)

E1.6.F.4.1_REF2_PH "UNLUCKY IS THE MAN WHO IS BORN WITH GREAT EXPECTATIONS, AND WHO FINDS NOTHING IN LIFE QUITE UP TO THE MARK.
One of the best things a man can bring into the world with him is a natural humility of spirit. About the next best thing he can bring, and they usually go together, is an appreciative spirit — a loving and susceptible heart."
(John Burroughs, The Art of Seeing Things, 1904)

E1.6.F.4.1_REF3_PO "OH DO YOU HAVE TIME
TO LINGER
FOR JUST A LITTLE WHILE
out of your busy
and very important day
for the goldfinches
that have gathered

in a field of thistles
for a musical battle,
to see who can sing
the highest note,
or the lowest,
or the most expressive of mirth,
or the most tender?
Their strong, blunt beaks
drink the air
as they strive
melodiously
not for your sake
and not for mine
and not for the sake of winning
but for sheer delight and gratitude –
believe us, they say,
it is a serious thing
just to be alive
on this fresh morning
in the broken world.
I beg of you,
do not walk by
without pausing
to attend to this

rather ridiculous performance.
It could mean something.
It could mean everything.
It could be what Rilke meant, when he wrote:
You must change your life."
(Mary Oliver)

E1.6.F.4.1_REF4_PO MAYBE GRATITUDE ISN’T BEST MEASURED BY COMPARISON.

“NATURAL DISASTER
That someone has less
might make you
happy with yours –
or unhappy
to think about
portions at all.
Those who have
very little,
studies say, are more
inclined to
give half away.
Maybe being closer
to nothing
makes stuff
not matter so much,
(or a few things
matter a lot).
Maybe gratitude
isn’t best measured
by comparison.”
(Lia Purpura, It shouldn’t have been beautiful, 2015)

E1.6.F.4.1_REF5_LIT GRATITUDE IS PART OF THIS TRANSCENDENT REALM OF FEELING
“Fun, like awe, is one of several self-transcendent states, a space of emotions that transport us out of our self-focused, threat-oriented, and status quo mindset to a realm where we connect to something larger than the self. Joy, the feeling of being free, for the moment, of worldly concerns, is part of this space, as is ecstasy (or bliss), when we sense ourself to dissolve completely (in awe we remain aware, although faintly, of our selves). And fun, the mirth and lighthearted delight we feel when imagining alternative perspectives upon our mundane lives we so often take too seriously.
Gratitude is part of this transcendent realm of feeling, the reverence we feel for the gifts of life.”
(Dacher Keltner, Awe, The New Science of Everyday Wonder, 2023)

E1.6.F.4.2. THE TRANSFORMATIVE POWER OF RECOGNITION
Gratitude primarily involves recognizing what we have received. This requires something tangible to be grateful for. Recognizing this leads to a sense of openness to the world, a deep-seated gratitude that goes beyond the act of exchange. This transition from passive to active gratitude lasts and persists within the individual. To truly experience gratitude, one needs to balance a reduction in self-centeredness with an expansion of the self as a life-affirming and accepting force.

E1.6.F.4.2.a. ACCORDING TO JANKÉLÉVITCH, BEING IN A STATE OF GRATITUDE MEANS WE ARE ETERNALLY INDEBTED TO BOTH THE PAST AND THE FUTURE, BUT WITHOUT HARBORING ANY BITTERNESS.

Gratitude is an expression of absolute love, total acceptance, and a complete embrace of the world - it reflects Nietzsche's concept of amor fati. It is a necessity for genuinely being present in the world. This gratitude comes from an acute awareness of existence - a thankfulness that something exists rather than nothing. As Jankélévitch puts it, "The ingrate is a fool," lacking discernment and unaware of his good fortune.

Firstly, gratitude involves acknowledging that you have received something, indicating that there must be something to be grateful for. Following this, there's an openness, as if a deeper, unconditional gratitude exists that surpasses the very act of exchange.

Expressing gratitude implicitly recognizes our vulnerability. It should be considered in dialectic with forgiveness, as the latter is necessary for the former's existence. Nonetheless, forgiving does not equate to forgetting the past – a lesson that needs to be imparted to the frivolous, the forgetful, and the indifferent.

E1.6.F.4.2.a_REF1_PH GRATITUDE IMPLIES A CONTINUOUS AND INFINITE RECOGNITION, ACCEPTING OUR VULNERABILITY AND OUR DEBT TO THE PAST AND THE FUTURE. "In gratitude there is an excess, that is, in fact, thanking never exhausts thanking. In fact, when you are in a state of gratitude, you are in a way saying thank you forever. In fact, there is always a blur, there is something immense, something that never ends, I am in infinite debt to the past and the future, I welcome in a certain way, without bitterness, that is what gratitude is. When I express it, it's actually impossible to conclude that that's it, it's over, this story, everybody goes home and that's it; that's the difference, if I may say, with money - money closes things. 
It is very, very hard for some of us to acknowledge that we have been in need; it makes us feel weak, it means that we have been lacking, that we have been in need. When we express gratitude, we implicitly acknowledge that we have been vulnerable.

Jankélévitch expresses himself in two ways: he will talk about quidity, which is the essence of a thing, the concept, the question, the theoretical approach to gratitude, and then he will talk about le quodity, which is the experience of gratitude and no longer the concept. It's the same with all the great virtues, and one is not more important than the other, one feeds off the other, that is, there is a transition from those moments when we experience gratitude and then to those other moments when we hold it in our mind like a regulating idea that we would like to achieve. There is an absolutely necessary dialectic between the two because, again, it is something that goes beyond the moment. Gratitude is always what remains, the surplus. So, of course, it would be wonderful to feel gratitude for what we have not received, which is the masterful gesture. Gratitude from the beginning is when we are in a state of absolute acceptance; it is Nietzsche's amor fati. Gratitude for the simple fact of being in the world, acquiescing to the world - not acceptance, which would already be a concession - welcoming the fact of having been created, of being in debt, but again not in resentful debt - gratitude is on the side of the vital impulse, the conatus.

Embracing the present moment requires gratitude, and this is very interesting in understanding the truth of morality in Jankélévitch.
Gratitude is always secondary - it needs forgiveness: “Forgiveness needs a material for its work of forgiveness which is heartbreaking oblivion, and gratitude needs a material for its labor of gratitude which is faithful remembering. 'Thank you' and ‘I forgive you’ are both secondary movements in response to a primary movement which is ‘service rendered’ or ‘fault committed’. Gratitude arises on the condition that there has been a benefactor and benefits, and only on that condition. Conditions? What does that mean? That love needs benefits to love, so love would not love if it did not receive gifts? And what kind of love is it, please, that loves on condition? We answer: It is precisely a conditional and therefore hypothetical love, which is subject to reservations. And therefore, it is not love. To the extent that heartfelt gratitude thanks the benefactor and adds to the gratuitous sum the infinite, inestimable, imponderable weight of its gratitude and affection; to the extent that the legal obligation of repayment is tinged with love, gratitude is indeed related to grace and is somewhat charitable in its way. But to the extent that it pays his debt, it is more a matter of commutative justice and even of mercenariness; it is, therefore, intermediate between the order of free giving and the order of give and take".

Very often we start from a place with Jankélévitch and then we make a loop, well, I mean, he starts by telling us that gratitude is secondary, that is, that a substrate is necessarily required, and therefore he comes to say the opposite of the position that argues that gratitude should be primary: It must be an absolute welcome. Gratitude is primarily the recognition that something has been received, and therefore necessarily requires a substance, something. Then we have an opening, as if there were a more ontological, unconditional gratitude that goes beyond the act of exchange. It is as if in gratitude there is both the moment of the gift - a past event to which I am indebted - but at the same time it is as if there is an aura of that event that makes me indebted forever, because what happened in that moment of receiving is matrix-like; because when you receive something you have absolutely no idea of the temporality of the effect of what you have received. It is matrix-like because I myself will be able to give in return. He says "the qualitative and pneumatic way of giving. So we ourselves will move from passive gratitude to an active gratitude that continues the act and continues through us; it is especially a question of memory, of the relationship with the past. So we see that gratitude is not about give and take, but rather about the free gift - it is a mediator. Pure altruism cannot exist, because for there to be gratitude, there must be a part of me that recognizes that I have received. It is necessary to combine a movement of disappearance of the ego in its egocentric power with an expansion of the ego as a power of welcome, a power of life. A substratum is necessary, an ego that does not necessarily experience itself as an "I", but rather as a world.

Gratitude is justified by the realization of being here-the gratitude that there is something rather than nothing-it is pregnant with a beginning; one can build bridges with the thought of Levinas or that of Plotinus. "He who is ungrateful is a fool", he lacks discernment and does not appreciate his good fortune. There are many ways of expressing gratitude; in a given situation, one may not be able to express gratitude for everything, but there is almost always some aspect for which one can give thanks (for example, one may not like the company, but one may like the place, the food, the climate, etc.). This is possible if one has good will. The ungrateful person has a quantitative approach that fails to appreciate the dynamic matrix of the event, its fertility over time, which means that a tiny thing can change a life.

In addition to gratitude as "welcome", its counterpart, its pain is the duty that leads us to history and transmission.
"The dead depend entirely on our fidelity. This is the case with the past in general. The past needs to remind the frivolous, the forgetful and the indifferent that our celebration saves it from nothingness, or at least delays the non-being to which it is condemned. The past needs us to come together deliberately to commemorate it, because the past needs our memory. No, the struggle is not equal between the irresistible tide of oblivion, which in the long run submerges everything, and the desperate but intermittent protests of memory. By recommending oblivion, the teachers of forgiveness are advising us what does not need advising; the forgetful will take care of it themselves, that is all they ask. It is the past that demands our compassion and our gratitude, because the past does not defend itself like the present and the future, and young people want to know about it and suspect that we are hiding something from them. [...] By evoking the days of wrath, calamity and tribulation, we protest against the exterminating work and against the oblivion that would complete and seal this work forever.”
(HOW TO BECOME VIRTUOUS WITH JANKÉLÉVITCH (4 EPISODES) Episode 3: Giving, without expecting anything in return? Cynthia Fleury in Les chemins de la philosophie on France Culture on 02/04/2021)

Listen to the podcast in French:
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/comment-devenir-vertueux-avec-jankelevitch-34-donner-sans-rien-attendre-en-retour-0

E1.6.F.4.2.a_REF1.1_PH PAUL MCCARTNEY, GRATITUDE
Écouter suer YouTube: https://youtu.be/_Z0_oiZZyfg

E1.6.F.4.2.a_REF2_PH "GRATITUDE IS FIRST OF ALL RECOGNIZING THAT ONE HAS RECEIVED, SO NECESSARILY THERE MUST BE A SUBSTANCE, SOMETHING IS NEEDED. Then we have an opening, as if there were a more ontological, unconditional gratitude that goes beyond the act of exchange. So we ourselves will move from passive gratitude to an active gratitude that continues the act and continues through us. Pure altruism cannot exist, because for there to be gratitude, there must be a part of me that recognizes that I have received. It is necessary to combine a movement of disappearance of the ego in its egocentric power with an expansion of the ego as a power of welcome, a power of life.

E1.6.F.4.2.b. WANT TO BE HAPPY? BE GRATEFUL

Watch on Ted Talks:
https://www.ted.com/talks/david_steindl_rast_want_to_be_happy_be_grateful?utm_campaign=tedspread&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=tedcomshare

E1.6.F.4.2.b_REF1_PH “IT ISN’T WHAT YOU HAVE, OR WHO YOU ARE, OR WHERE YOU ARE, OR WHAT YOU ARE DOING that makes you happy or unhappy. It is what you think about.”
(Dale Carnegie)

E1.6.F.4.2.c. I AM GRATEFUL, NOT BECAUSE IT BENEFITS ME, but because it pleases me.

E1.6.F.4.2.c_REF1_PH SENECA ARGUES THAT ENCOUNTERING UNGRATEFUL PEOPLE SHOULD NOT DETER ONE FROM BEING GENEROUS. Benefits should be conferred for their intrinsic value and the virtue they represent, not for potential reciprocation.
"You complain that you have met with an ungrateful person. If this is your first experience of that sort, you should offer thanks either to your good luck or to your caution. In this case, however, caution can effect nothing but to make you ungenerous. For if you wish to avoid such a danger, you will not confer benefits; and so, that benefits may not be lost with another man, they will be lost to yourself.
It is better, however, to get no return than to confer no benefits. Even after a poor crop one should sow again; for often losses due to continued barrenness of an unproductive soil have been made good by one year’s fertility. In order to discover one grateful person, it is worth while to make trial of many ungrateful ones. [...]
Benefits, as well as injuries, depend on the spirit… Our feeling about every obligation depends in each case upon the spirit in which the benefit is conferred; we weigh not the bulk of the gift, but the quality of the good-will which prompted it. So now let us do away with guess-work; the former deed was a benefit, and the latter, which transcended the earlier benefit, is an injury. The good man so arranges the two sides of his ledger that he voluntarily cheats himself by adding to the benefit and subtracting from the injury. [...]
We should try by all means to be as grateful as possible. For gratitude is a good thing for ourselves, in a sense in which justice, that is commonly supposed to concern other persons, is not; gratitude returns in large measure unto itself. There is not a man who, when he has benefited his neighbour, has not benefited himself, — I do not mean for the reason that he whom you have aided will desire to aid you, or that he whom you have defended will desire to protect you, or that an example of good conduct returns in a circle to benefit the doer, just as examples of bad conduct recoil upon their authors, and as men find no pity if they suffer wrongs which they themselves have demonstrated the possibility of committing; but that the reward for all the virtues lies in the virtues themselves. For they are not practised with a view to recompense; the wages of a good deed is to have done it. I am grateful, not in order that my neighbour, provoked by the earlier act of kindness, may be more ready to benefit me, but simply in order that I may perform a most pleasant and beautiful act; I feel grateful, not because it profits me, but because it pleases me."
(Seneca, Letters from a Stoic)

E1.6.F.4.2.d. "TO RICH GIVERS
What you give me I cheerfully accept,
A little sustenance, a hut and garden, a little money, as I rendezvous with my poems,
A traveler’s lodging and breakfast as journey through the States,—why
should I be ashamed to own such gifts? why to advertise for them?
For I myself am not one who bestows nothing upon man and woman,
For I bestow upon any man or woman the entrance to all the gifts of
the universe."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.6.F.4.2.e. "PRACTICING GRATITUDE
To express gratitude for his morning coffee, the writer AJ Jacobs found joy in traveling the globe—from iron mines in Minnesota to coffee farms in Colombia—thanking everyone who made his cup of coffee possible (Jacobs 2018). Researchers theorize that experiencing gratitude causes a perspective shift in our lives as a whole, leading us to see our experiences and circumstances through a more positive lens (e.g., Emmons & McCullough 2003, Layous et al. 2014, Nelson-Coffey et al. 2023). According to broaden-and-build theory (Fredrickson 2004), this perspective shift creates an upward spiral of well-being. Thus, aside from being a positive emotion in its own right, gratitude may lead to long-term changes in mindsets that further increase well-being.

One online study provided evidence for the immediate benefits of gratitude but failed to find any long-term benefits (Nelson-Coffey et al. 2023). American parents wrote a single gratitude letter to someone in their lives (n = 395) or simply wrote about how they had spent their previous week (n = 217). There were no significant between-group differences in negative affect or subjective happiness, but parents who wrote a gratitude letter were in a significantly more positive mood immediately after the writing task relative to the control condition. Five days after the intervention, however, the two groups no longer differed in positive affect.

Using a slightly longer intervention, Walsh and colleagues (2023) assigned undergraduates to express gratitude on three different days, reporting their happiness the next day (n’s ≈ 229).2 Depending on condition, participants expressed gratitude through text messages, social media, or through messages they wrote but did not share. Meanwhile, control participants wrote lists of their daily activities. Participants who expressed gratitude in any form reported higher positive affect and greater life satisfaction compared to controls (although there was no significant difference in negative affect).

In summary, both preregistered studies provide strong evidence for the immediate benefits of expressing gratitude in American samples. Theoretically, gratitude should have long-term benefits, but these studies do not provide evidence that the benefits last longer than a day after the gratitude practice ends.."
(Dunigan Folk and Elizabeth Dunn, How Can People Become Happier? A Systematic Review of Preregistered Experiments, 2023)

Read the full article: https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.1146/annurev-psych-022423-030818#abstractSection

E1.6.F.4.3. A CONSCIOUS STATE OF BEING
Gratitude is more than a passive response to a received gift; it's an active state of attention and awareness. It emerges from acknowledging everything in our lives, both internally and externally. Gratitude isn't only expressed after an event; it's a deep-rooted state of being that reflects a profound understanding and appreciation of life. It signifies recognizing that millions of elements converge to enable us to take even one more breath, and that our existence as living, participating human beings is a privilege. Even in moments of pain or despair, we reside in a living world filled with genuine experiences and sensations.

E1.6.F.4.3_REF1_PH "GRATITUDE
is not a passive response to something we have been given; gratitude arises from paying attention, from being awake in the presence of everything that lives within and without us. Gratitude is not necessarily something that is shown after the event; it is the deep, a priori state of attention that shows we understand and are equal to the gifted nature of life.
Gratitude is the understanding that many millions of things come together and live together and mesh together and breathe together in order for us to take even one more breath of air, that the underlying gift of life and incarnation as a living, participating human being is a privilege, that we are miraculously part of something, rather than nothing. Even if that something is temporarily pain or despair, we inhabit a living world, with real faces, real voices, laughter, the colour blue, the green of the fields, the freshness of a cold wind, or the tawny hue of a winter landscape. [...]
Thankfulness finds its full measure in generosity of presence, both through participation and witness. We sit at the table as part of every other person's world while making our own world without will or effort; this is what is extraordinary and gifted, this is the essence of gratefulness, seeing to the heart of privilege."
(David Whyte, Consolations, The Solace, Nourishment and Underlying Meaning of Everyday Words, 2015)

E1.6.F.4.3_REF2_PO "THE PLACE I WANT TO GET BACK TO
is where
in the pinewoods
in the moments between
the darkness
and first light
two deer
came walking down the hill
and when they saw me
they said to each other, okay,
this one is okay,
let’s see who she is
and why she is sitting
on the ground like that,
so quiet, as if
asleep, or in a dream,
but, anyway, harmless;
and so they came
on their slender legs
and gazed upon me
not unlike the way
I go out to the dunes and look
and look and look
into the faces of the flowers;
and then one of them leaned forward
and nuzzled my hand, and what can my life
bring to me that could exceed
that brief moment?
For twenty years
I have gone every day to the same woods,
not waiting, exactly, just lingering.
Such gifts, bestowed,
can’t be repeated.
If you want to talk about this
come to visit. I live in the house
near the corner, which I have named
Gratitude."
(Mary Oliver)

E1.6.F.4.3_REF3_PO "THE WEIGHING

The heart’s reasons
seen clearly,
even the hardest
will carry
its whip-marks and sadness
and must be forgiven.

As the drought-starved
eland forgives
the drought-starved lion
who finally takes her,
enters willingly then
the life she cannot refuse,
and is lion, is fed,
and does not remember the other.

So few grains of happiness
measured against all the dark
and still the scales balance.

The world asks of us
only the strength we have and we give it.
Then it asks more, and we give it."
(Jane Hirshfield, The Beauty, 2015)

E1.6.F.4.3_REF4_PO LONG LIVE!

This country is only a wish of the 
mind, a counter-sepulchre.

In my country, the tender signs of spring and the
scantily clad birds are preferred to distant goals.

Truth awaits dawn by candlelight. The window pane
is neglected. What does it matter to the attentive?

There is no malicious shadow on the capsized boat.

Just 'Good morning' is hardly known in my country.

We only borrow what we can pay back augmented.
There are leaves, many leaves on the trees in
my country. The branches are free to have no fruit.

We do not believe in the winner's good faith.

In my country, we say thank you."
(René Char, La Sieste blanche [The white nap], 1969)

"QU’IL VIVE!

Ce pays n’est qu’un vœu de 
l’esprit, un contre-sépulcre.

Dans mon pays, les tendres preuves du printemps et les
oiseaux mal habillés sont préférés aux buts lointains.

La vérité attend l’aurore à côté d’une bougie. Le verre de
fenêtre est négligé. Qu’importe à l’attentif.

Dans mon pays, on ne questionne pas un homme ému.

Il n’y a pas d’ombre maligne sur la barque chavirée.
 
Bonjour à peine, est inconnu dans mon pays.

On n’emprunte que ce qui peut se rendre augmenté.
Il y a des feuilles, beaucoup de feuilles sur les arbres de
mon pays. Les branches sont libres de n’avoir pas de fruits.

On ne croit pas à la bonne foi du vainqueur.

Dans mon pays, on remercie."
(René Char, La Sieste blanche, 1969)

E1.6.F.4.3_REF5_PH "LOVE

[...] Love of God is pure when joy and suffering inspire equal gratitude."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.6.F.4.3_REF6_PO “HERE WE ARE, LIVING THESE LIVES BRIGHT AND PERISHABLE AS A POPPY, HARD AND SHIMMERING AS OBSIDIAN. We know that they are entirely improbable, that we bless that bright improbability with each flash of gratitude for it all, that if we pay attention closely and generously enough we are always repaid in gladness, that it is the handle of the door to the world. And yet over and over we choose to live in the cage of complaint, too preoccupied with how the will of life betrayed our wishes, the wanting monster always growling in the other corner of the cage.  Imagine parting the bars and stepping out. Imagine waking up with a rush of gladness at everything we were never promised but got anyway — trees and music, clouds and consciousness […]
In our age of competitive prostration, this is a headstand hard to hold for long. But it is trainable. It is possible to become strong enough to be tender, it is. […]”

Artist and poet Rachel Hébert offers a bright patch of training ground in The Book of Thanks: A Catalogue of Gratitudes […]. A taste:

What do we say to longing?

If you have sat in the chill
of early morning bleakness

and watched as the deep blue
sighed and blushed, touched

by the warm curve of dawn
and pinker than pink then

apricot soft and spreading its
glow, you know. You know.

How
— in this dim parade of brutality —
might all be well?

But if we trouble it with light,
train our sights on
the rebellious good,

and work
to make it
truer.

What do we say to longing?

If you have sat in the chill
of early morning bleakness

and watched as the deep blue
sighed and blushed, touched

by the warm curve of dawn
and pinker than pink then

apricot soft and spreading its
glow, you know. You know.

Beneath the face
of the water,
wonder.

In dark woods,
a gate.

In the chapter
called lostness,
a friend.

All the help
we could not
yet see.

It cannot be always comfortable.
So love the thousand knives as they enter
and see your shape still sitting.

See that you too belong to paws
of soft silent hungers, to thirst-tangled
roots, to silver-spun constellations.

Know you’re no sicker than the rest of us.
The big secret is this: No one else can brave you.
Messy, yes. And marvelous. […]”
(Maria Popova’s review of Rachel Hébert’s  The Book of Thanks: A Catalogue of Gratitudes in The Marginalian)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2025/11/16/rachel-hebert-thanks/?mc_cid=94ff04da88&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E1.6.F.4.4. REVERENCE CAN BRING TOGETHER PEOPLE OF DIFFERENT BELIEFS
"Reverence detached from organized and established religion: Even if the enlightment did not get rid of the figure of a creator, the awe and gratefulness encompassed by the value of reverence can be directed to a world which we did not make - uniting secular and religious people alike. If you feel reverence for the world, you have to feel it towards other human beings as well."

E1.6.F.4.4_REF1_PH "SUSAN NEIMAN DRAWS ON ENLIGHTENMENT THINKING TO ILLUMINATE THE VALUES WE SHOULD LIVE BY IN THE 21ST CENTURY.
People think there is widespread disagreement about moral principles but when you get them to talk about individual cases, it turns out there is a great deal more moral agreement than one thinks. 
One of the divides that remain is the clash between secular values and fundamentalist religions. Fundamentalism being on the rise is in great proportion attributable to the rampant consumism prevalent in liberal societies: people want their lives to mean more than that and want to be guided by certain ideals about the way the world should be. To defend the values of the enlightment is to defend the modern world with its possibilities for self-criticism and transformation. Susan Neiman identified 4 robust values from the enlightment that can guide us still today:
1. The right to happiness. In a secular culture happiness is not a promise you will experiment in an afterlife. If life presents contingencies such as illness or injustice, making happiness a right dictates we have a right and a duty to intervene against social injustice: when you make happiness a right you change the notion of happiness itself into an active pursuit.
2. The value of reason as opposed to superstition and blind authority.
3. Reverence detached from organized and established religion. Even if the enlightment did not get rid of the figure of a creator, the awe and gratefulness encompassed by the value of reverence can be directed to a world which we did not make - uniting secular and religious people alike. If you feel reverence for the world, you have to feel it towards other human beings as well.
4.  Hope, which is very different from optimism. That the enlightment believed in necessary universal progress is a contre-sens. See Kant and Voltaire in Candide. The perfectionability of man seen by Rousseau to be the root of regression as well as of progress. Pessimism is an attitude that may look brave, but if you only think things are going downhill you stop acting. Hope makes us responsible to make the world a better place."
(Susan Neiman on Morality in the 21st Century, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode:
http://philosophybites.com/2010/03/susan-neiman-on-morality-in-the-21st-century.html

E1.6.F.4.5. PRAYER IS A CONVERSATION WITH THE SELF, IN WHICH WE CONTEMPLATE WHAT WE LOVE AND CHERISH
Prayer asks us to present ourselves to the unknown as we are, devoid of pretence and affectation, and to contemplate exactly what it is we love or cherish. Through this conversation with our inner self we confront the nature of our own existence.

E1.6.F.4.5.a. A PRAYER TO WHO?
PATRICK, MELBOURNE, AUSTRALIA

"Dear Patrick,

The act of prayer is by no means exclusive to religious practise because prayer is not dependent on the existence of a subject. You need not pray to anyone. It is just as valuable to pray into your disbelief, as it is to pray into your belief, for prayer is not an encounter with an external agent, rather it is an encounter with oneself. There is as much chance of our prayers being answered by a God that exists as a God that doesn’t. I do not mean this facetiously, for prayers are very often answered.

A prayer provides us with a moment in time where we can contemplate the things that are important to us, and this watchful application of our attention can manifest these essential needs. The act of prayer asks of us something and by doing so delivers much in return — it asks us to present ourselves to the unknown as we are, devoid of pretence and affectation, and to contemplate exactly what it is we love or cherish. Through this conversation with our inner self we confront the nature of our own existence. [...]

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #92 / APRIL 2020)

E1.6.F.4.5.a_REF1_PO "I PRAYED, AT FIRST, A LITTLE GIRL, 
BECAUSE THEY TOLD ME TO -
But stopped, when qualified to guess 
How prayer would feel - to me -

If I believed God looked around, 
Each time my Childish eye 
Fixed full, and steady, on his own 
In Childish honesty -

And told him what I’d like, today, 
And parts of his far plan 
That baffled me -
The mingled side 
Of his Divinity -

And often since, in Danger, 
I count the force ‘twould be 
To have a God so strong as that 
To hold my life for me 

Till I could take the Balance 
That tips so frequent, now, 
It takes me all the while to poise -
And then - it does’nt stay -"
(Emily Dickinson, 1863)

E1.6.F.4.5.b. IT’S MY VIEW THAT THE SIMPLEST EXPLANATION IS THAT THERE IS NO GOD. No one created the universe and no one directs our fate. This leads me to a profound realisation: there is probably no heaven and afterlife either. I think belief in an afterlife is just wishful thinking. There is no reliable evidence for it, and it flies in the face of everything we know in science. I think that when we die we return to dust. But there’s a sense in which we live on, in our influence, and in our genes that we pass on to our children. We have this one life to appreciate the grand design of the universe, and for that I am extremely grateful. 

E1.6.F.4.5.b_REF1_SCI STEPHEN HAWKING DISCUSSES THE LAWS OF NATURE, SUGGESTING THEY ARE UNCHANGEABLE AND UNIVERSAL, AND POSITS THAT THE UNIVERSE COULD HAVE SPONTANEOUSLY CREATED ITSELF FROM NOTHING, WITHOUT THE NEED FOR A DIVINE CREATOR. The Big Bang produced equal amounts of positive and negative energy, balancing out to zero, and time itself began with the Big Bang, leaving no room for a creator. 
"If you believe in science, like I do, you believe that there are certain laws that are always obeyed. If you like, you can say the laws are the work of God, but that is more a definition of God than a proof of his existence. [...]
I believe that the discovery of these laws has been humankind’s greatest achievement, for it’s these laws of nature — as we now call them — that will tell us whether we need a god to explain the universe at all. The laws of nature are a description of how things actually work in the past, present and future. In tennis, the ball always goes exactly where they say it will. And there are many other laws at work here too. They govern everything that is going on, from how the energy of the shot is produced in the players’ muscles to the speed at which the grass grows beneath their feet. But what’s really important is that these physical laws, as well as being unchangeable, are universal. They apply not just to the flight of a ball, but to the motion of a planet, and everything else in the universe. Unlike laws made by humans, the laws of nature cannot be broken — that’s why they are so powerful and, when seen from a religious standpoint, controversial too. […]
One could define God as the embodiment of the laws of nature. However, this is not what most people would think of as God. They mean a human-like being, with whom one can have a personal relationship. When you look at the vast size of the universe, and how insignificant and accidental human life is in it, that seems most implausible.
I use the word “God” in an impersonal sense, like Einstein did, for the laws of nature, so knowing the mind of God is knowing the laws of nature. My prediction is that we will know the mind of God by the end of this century. […]
I think the universe was spontaneously created out of nothing, according to the laws of science. […]
Despite the complexity and variety of the universe, it turns out that to make one you need just three ingredients. Let’s imagine that we could list them in some kind of cosmic cookbook. So what are the three ingredients we need to cook up a universe? The first is matter — stuff that has mass. Matter is all around us, in the ground beneath our feet and out in space. Dust, rock, ice, liquids. Vast clouds of gas, massive spirals of stars, each containing billions of suns, stretching away for incredible distances.
The second thing you need is energy. Even if you’ve never thought about it, we all know what energy is. Something we encounter every day. Look up at the Sun and you can feel it on your face: energy produced by a star ninety-three million miles away. Energy permeates the universe, driving the processes that keep it a dynamic, endlessly changing place.
So we have matter and we have energy. The third thing we need to build a universe is space. Lots of space. You can call the universe many things — awesome, beautiful, violent — but one thing you can’t call it is cramped. Wherever we look we see space, more space and even more space. Stretching in all directions. […]
As I was growing up in England after the Second World War, it was a time of austerity. We were told that you never get something for nothing. But now, after a lifetime of work, I think that actually you can get a whole universe for free.
The great mystery at the heart of the Big Bang is to explain how an entire, fantastically enormous universe of space and energy can materialise out of nothing. The secret lies in one of the strangest facts about our cosmos. The laws of physics demand the existence of something called “negative energy.”
To help you get your head around this weird but crucial concept, let me draw on a simple analogy. Imagine a man wants to build a hill on a flat piece of land. The hill will represent the universe. To make this hill he digs a hole in the ground and uses that soil to dig his hill. But of course he’s not just making a hill — he’s also making a hole, in effect a negative version of the hill. The stuff that was in the hole has now become the hill, so it all perfectly balances out. This is the principle behind what happened at the beginning of the universe.
When the Big Bang produced a massive amount of positive energy, it simultaneously produced the same amount of negative energy. In this way, the positive and the negative add up to zero, always. It’s another law of nature.
So where is all this negative energy today? It’s in the third ingredient in our cosmic cookbook: it’s in space. This may sound odd, but according to the laws of nature concerning gravity and motion — laws that are among the oldest in science — space itself is a vast store of negative energy. Enough to ensure that everything adds up to zero.
I’ll admit that, unless mathematics is your thing, this is hard to grasp, but it’s true. The endless web of billions upon billions of galaxies, each pulling on each other by the force of gravity, acts like a giant storage device. The universe is like an enormous battery storing negative energy. The positive side of things — the mass and energy we see today — is like the hill. The corresponding hole, or negative side of things, is spread throughout space.
So what does this mean in our quest to find out if there is a God? It means that if the universe adds up to nothing, then you don’t need a God to create it. The universe is the ultimate free lunch. […]
Since we know the universe itself was once very small — perhaps smaller than a proton — this means something quite remarkable. It means the universe itself, in all its mind-boggling vastness and complexity, could simply have popped into existence without violating the known laws of nature. From that moment on, vast amounts of energy were released as space itself expanded — a place to store all the negative energy needed to balance the books. But of course the critical question is raised again: did God create the quantum laws that allowed the Big Bang to occur? In a nutshell, do we need a God to set it up so that the Big Bang could bang? I have no desire to offend anyone of faith, but I think science has a more compelling explanation than a divine creator. […]
Imagine a river, flowing down a mountainside. What caused the river? Well, perhaps the rain that fell earlier in the mountains. But then, what caused the rain? A good answer would be the Sun, that shone down on the ocean and lifted water vapour up into the sky and made clouds. Okay, so what caused the Sun to shine? Well, if we look inside we see the process known as fusion, in which hydrogen atoms join to form helium, releasing vast quantities of energy in the process. So far so good. Where does the hydrogen come from? Answer: the Big Bang. But here’s the crucial bit. The laws of nature itself tell us that not only could the universe have popped into existence without any assistance, like a proton, and have required nothing in terms of energy, but also that it is possible that nothing caused the Big Bang. Nothing. […]
Something very wonderful happened to time at the instant of the Big Bang. Time itself began.
To understand this mind-boggling idea, consider a black hole floating in space. A typical black hole is a star so massive that it has collapsed in on itself. It’s so massive that not even light can escape its gravity, which is why it’s almost perfectly black. It’s gravitational pull is so powerful, it warps and distorts not only light but also time. To see how, imagine a clock is being sucked into it. As the clock gets closer and closer to the black hole, it begins to get slower and slower. Time itself begins to slow down. Now imagine the clock as it enters the black hole — well, assuming of course that it could withstand the extreme gravitational forces– it would actually stop. It stops not because it is broken, but because inside the black hole time itself doesn’t exist. And that’s exactly what happened at the start of the universe. […]
As we travel back in time towards the moment of the Big Bang, the universe gets smaller and smaller and smaller, until it finally comes to a point where the whole universe is a space so small that it is in effect a single infinitesimally small, infinitesimally dense black hole. And just as with modern-day black holes, floating around in space, the laws of nature dictate something quite extraordinary. They tell us that here too time itself must come to a stop. You can’t get to a time before the Big Bang because there was no time before the Big Bang. We have finally found something that doesn’t have a cause, because there was no time for a cause to exist in. For me this means that there is no possibility of a creator, because there is no time for a creator to have existed in. […]
It’s my view that the simplest explanation is that there is no God. No one created the universe and no one directs our fate. This leads me to a profound realisation: there is probably no heaven and afterlife either. I think belief in an afterlife is just wishful thinking. There is no reliable evidence for it, and it flies in the face of everything we know in science. I think that when we die we return to dust. But there’s a sense in which we live on, in our influence, and in our genes that we pass on to our children. We have this one life to appreciate the grand design of the universe, and for that I am extremely grateful. […]
One day, I hope we will know the answers to all these questions. But there are other challenges, other big questions on the planet which must be answered, and these will also need a new generation who are interested and engaged, and have an understanding of science. How will we feed an ever-growing population? Provide clean water, generate renewable energy, prevent and cure disease and slow down global climate change? I hope that science and technology will provide the answers to these questions, but it will take people, human beings with knowledge and understanding, to implement these solutions. Let us fight for every woman and every man to have the opportunity to live healthy, secure lives, full of opportunity and love. We are all time travellers, journeying together into the future. But let us work together to make that future a place we want to visit. Be brave, be curious, be determined, overcome the odds. It can be done."
(Stephen Hawking, Brief Answers to the Big Questions, 2018)

E1.6.F.4.5.c. "THE WORLD YOU SEE IS JUST A MOVIE IN YOUR MIND.
Rocks dont see it.
Bless and sit down.
Forgive and forget.
Practice kindness all day to everybody
and you will realize you’re already
in heaven now.
That’s the story.
That’s the message.
Nobody understands it,
nobody listens, they’re
all running around like chickens with heads cut
off. I will try to teach it but it will
be in vain, s’why I’ll
end up in a shack
praying and being
cool and singing
by my woodstove
making pancakes."
(Jack Kerouac in a letter sent to his first wife, Edie Kerouac Parker, in late January of 1957, a decade after their marriage had been annulled. Found in The Portable Jack Kerouac)

E1.6.F.4.5.d. "PRAYING

It doesn't have to be
the blue iris, it could be
weeds in a vacant lot, or a few
small stones; just
pay attention, then patch

a few words together and don't try
to make them elaborate, this isn't
a contest but the doorway

into thanks, and a silence in which
another voice may speak."
(Mary Oliver)

E1.6.F.4.5.d_REF1_PO "GRATITUDE - IS NOT THE MENTION 
OF A TENDERNESS,
But it’s still appreciation 
Out of Plumb of speech -

When the Sea return no Answer 
By the Line and Lead 
Proves it there’s no Sea, or rather 
A remoter Bed ?"
(Emily Dickinson, 1865)

E1.6.F.4.5.d_REF2_PO “PRAYER
Its occasion
could be
a spot of sun,
bar sign, label
on jeans,
carnation, red
light where you
wait and
gratitude hits.
Or a name
the length
of a subway car
that only makes sense
when you say it aloud
in your head
as it passes.”
(Lia Purpura, It shouldn’t have been beautiful, 2015)

E1.6.G. BODY ENJOYMENT: SENSITIVITY, SEX AND SPORT
We've seen how much the body determines our mental affects - "how can we access joy, how can we practice generosity, how can we live free and light if we neglect this instrument of life, this tool, this gift of existence?" asks Alexandre Jollien.

E1.6.G.1. BODILY PRACTICES ENABLE US TO BE FULLY PRESENT IN EXISTENCE

E1.6.G.1.1. PRACTICE FOR THE BODY'S SAKE, NOT AS A MEANS TO AN END.

E1.6.G.1.1_REF1_PH "IS THERE A CONNECTION BETWEEN PHILOSOPHY AND RUNNING? 
Getting hooked on running or on another physical and playfull activity, you get an opportunity to do something for its on sake and not as a mean to something else. Things we do for their own sake are intrinsically good for us. Kids have the ability to engage in games for their own sake and reach a point where there is nothing that they would be rather doing than playing - adults tend to loose this ability. Sports, dance and physical games offer an opportunity to learn something through our body and not through an intellectual mental process. It is also an opportunity to experience a very ample kind of freedom, when reasons tend to have less authority over us - a sort of borderline of reasons - a kind of existencialism."
(Mark Rowlands on Philosophy and Running, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode:
http://philosophybites.com/2013/03/mark-rowlands-on-philosophy-and-running.html

E1.6.G.1.1_REF2_SONG BEN MAZUÉ, QUAND JE MARCHE

Whatch it on YouTube:
https://youtu.be/pkFxOX9k5IA

E1.6.G.1.2. MENS SANA IN CORPORE SANO : 
A HEALTHY MIND IN A HEALTHY BODY

E1.6.G.1.2_REF1_PH "IT IS BEAUTIFUL TO SEE HOW A MAN CHASES AWAY AN UNWANTED IDEA; you see him shrug his shoulders and shake his chest, as if he were unraveling his muscles; you see him turn his head to give himself other perceptions and other reveries; he throws away his cares with a free gesture and snaps his fingers, which is the beginning of a dance. [But the secret of the wise is even more beautiful, according to which the will does not control the passions, but directly controls the movements. It is easier to pick up a violin and play it than, as they say, to make up one's mind".
(Alain, Propos sur le bonheur, February 16, 1922)

E1.6.G.1.2_REF2_PH "HOW DO YOU EXPLAIN THAT A PIANIST WHO THINKS HE IS GOING TO DIE OF FEAR WHEN HE GOES ON STAGE IS INSTANTLY CURED AS SOON AS HE PLAYS? We could say that the pianist no longer thinks about being afraid, and that is true; but I prefer to think about the fear itself, and to understand that the artist shakes off the fear and dispels it with those supple finger movements. For, since everything is connected in our machine, the fingers cannot be unbound if the chest is not also unbound; suppleness, like stiffness, invades everything; and in this well-governed body there can be no fear. True song and true eloquence are no less reassuring because of this measured work that is then imposed on all the muscles. It is remarkable, and too seldom noticed, that it is not thought that frees us from our passions, but action. We do not think as we wish, but when the actions are sufficiently familiar, when the muscles are trained and made supple by gymnastics, we act as we wish. In moments of anxiety, do not try to think, because your thinking will turn in spikes against yourself; but rather try these arm raises and bends that we are now learning in all schools; the result will amaze you. So the philosophy teacher refers you to the physical education teacher".
(Alain, Propos sur le bonheur, March 16, 1922)

E1.6.G.1.2_REF3_SCI The WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION recommends a minimum of:
7 hours of sport per week for 5-17 year olds;
3.5 to 5 hours of sport per week for over 18s;

Have you done at least 30 minutes of sport today?

E1.6.G.1.3. WE ARE NOT TALKING ABOUT THE MINDFULNESS BUSINESS HERE !

E1.6.G.1.3_REF1_SOC THE MINDFULNESS BUSINESS "Esse crescente coletivo de pessoas que cavam em si mesmas buscando a felicidade, já conseguiu instalar um novo narcisismo, um egocentrismo new age, um egoísmo raivosamente autorreferencial que, pelo caminho, veio alterar o famoso equilíbrio latino de mens sana in corpore sano, desviando-o descaradamente para o corpo. O guru do século XXI convida seus pupilos a consentir-se a si mesmos, a tratar-se estupendamente enquanto encontram a porta da felicidade, os anima a descobrir os mistérios do mundo em seus próprios umbigos."
(Jordi Soler, The mindfulness business, El País, 2017)

E1.6.G.1.4. SPORT AS AN ASCETIC SPIRAL
From the concept of the athlete-god as a model of transformation in antiquity, we transitioned to a despiritualization of the athlete's religion with the 20th century Olympic movement. Sport evolved into a secular industry. Despite competitive sport reflecting the despiritualization of asceticism, we can each still incorporate sport as an ascetic spiral in our personal lives.

E1.6.G.1.4_REF1_PH "THE WORLD OF EXERCISERS

The order that came from the stone

Rilke's experience [...]

Rilke leads, in his domain and with his means, an operation that could be described from a philosophical point of view as the “transformation of Being in the mode of the message” (vulgo: linguistic turn). “Being that can be understood is language,” said Gadamer [...]

ARCHAIC TORSO OF APOLLO

We cannot know his legendary head
with eyes like ripening fruit. And yet his torso
is still suffused with brilliance from inside,
like a lamp, in which his gaze, now turned to low,

gleams in all its power. Otherwise
the curved breast could not dazzle you so, nor could
a smile run through the placid hips and thighs
to that dark center where procreation flared.

Otherwise this stone would seem defaced
beneath the translucent cascade of the shoulders
and would not glisten like a wild beast’s fur:

would not, from all the borders of itself,
burst like a star: for here there is no place
that does not see you. You must change your life.
(Rainer Maria Rilke)

Anyone who has a fairly clear idea from the first reading will understand this: we are talking about a perfection here, a perfection that seems all the more imperative and mysterious because it is the perfection of a fragment. One can assume that with this work Rilke is thanking Rodin, the master of his Parisian period, for the concept of the autonomous torso that he discovered from him. The perfection invoked in these fourteen lines finds the basis of its existence in the fact that, without mentioning the mutilation of the material vector, it has all the power to constitute a message that launches an appeal from itself. This power of appeal is wonderfully manifested in the object represented here. Perfect is that which articulates a whole sentence of being. The role of the poem is no more and no less than to perceive the phrase of Being in the thing and to compare it with its own existence with the aim of becoming a creation with the same capacity to be a message [...]."
(Peter Sloterdijk, You must change your life, 2009)

E1.6.G.1.4_REF2_CUR BODYBUILDING PUSHED TO ITS EXTREME can be seen as the idolization of the body in a self-centered world lacking spirituality, where societal ideals are crumbling. Alternatively, one might view the thousands of hours these women spend sculpting their bodies as a form of asceticism in line with the modern movement identified by Peter Sloterdijk. He suggests that the constant ambition for improvement seen in our contemporaries arises from the value we place on our ability to become a "creation capable of delivering a message".These champions have taken Rilke's exclamation, "You must change your life!", quite literally.

"ARCHAIC TORSO OF APOLLO

We cannot know his legendary head
with eyes like ripening fruit. And yet his torso
is still suffused with brilliance from inside,
like a lamp, in which his gaze, now turned to low,

gleams in all its power. Otherwise
the curved breast could not dazzle you so, nor could
a smile run through the placid hips and thighs
to that dark center where procreation flared.

Otherwise this stone would seem defaced
beneath the translucent cascade of the shoulders
and would not glisten like a wild beast's fur:

would not, from all the borders of itself,
burst like a star: for here there is no place
that does not see you. You must change your life!"
(Rainer Maria Rilke)

Watch an excerpt from Tropical Breeze : https://youtu.be/dtkDV30Gkcw

E1.6.G.1.4_REF3_PH PETER SLOTERDIJK EXAMINES THE EXEMPLARY ROLE OF THE BODY OF THE ATHLETIC GOD AND HOW THIS FIGURE INFLUENCES MODERN ETHICS, MARKING A HISTORICAL TURNING POINT TOWARD THE DESPIRITUALIZATION OF ASCETICISM. 
"You must change your life! [...] It is the authority of another life in this life. This authority strikes me in a subtle insufficiency, older and freer than sin. It is my most intimate not-yet. In my most conscious moment, I am struck by the absolute objection to my status quo: my transformation is what is urgent. If you really want to change your life in this way, you are doing nothing other than what you want with your best will, as soon as you feel how a vertical tension that you think is valid for you is making your life go off the rails.
In addition to this ethical and revolutionary reading, we are offered more concrete and psychologically appealing interpretations of the poem on the torso.[...]

The authoritative body of the Athlete-God acts immediately on the observer through his exemplary character. He, too, says succinctly, "You must change your life," and at the same time he shows on what model the transformation should be based. [...] 
With this way of feeling things, the poet would have been nothing more or less than a sensitive contemporary of the end of the European Renaissance, which entered a critical stage around 1900. Its characteristic feature is the return of the athlete as a key figure of ancient somatic idealism. The process of post-Christian cultural transformation, which had begun around 1400 in the form of a philological and artistic renaissance, thus entered its phase of mass culture. Its most powerful feature is sport, the depth of which in the ethics of modernity cannot be overestimated. With the revival of the Olympic Games (and the excessive popularization of football in Europe and South America), it began its triumphal procession, the end of which is difficult to predict, except to interpret the current corruption that doping represents as a sign of imminent collapse - although today no one knows what could take the place of athletics. The cult of sport, which has exploded since 1900, has an eminent importance in the history of the mind, or rather in the history of ethics and asceticism, because it manifests a change of emphasis that marks a historical turning point in the attitude towards movement, a transformation that could best be described as a re-somatization or de-spiritualization of asceticism. From this point of view, sport is the most explicit realization of Young Hegelianism, the philosophical movement whose key word was the "resurrection of the flesh in this world". Of the two great ideas of the 19th century, socialism and somatism, only the latter was clearly capable of being imposed everywhere, and one does not need to be a prophet to assert that the 21st century, even more than the 20th, will belong entirely to it. [...]"
(Peter Sloterdijk, You must change your life, 2009)

E1.6.G.1.4_REF4_PH "TRANSITION Religions do not exist: from Pierre de Coubertin to L. Ron Hubbard [...] 

"Music and sport have always been for me the most perfect 'polling booths,' the most fruitful instruments of reflection and vision, as well as powerful incentives for perseverance and like 'massages of the will.' In short, after difficulties and dangers, all immediate concerns were put aside". 1

With the remarkable term "isolator" Coubertin refers to the ability of religion to divide reality into ordinary and extraordinary situations. Where there is sport and music, there is also, in his eyes, and for this reason, religion - as long as its characteristic is given, namely its effect of breaking up the everyday and of breaking up worries. If we develop the term "isolator" further, we arrive at the following statement: That which brings about a state of exception is religious. For Coubertin, religion is the establishment of the other state by sporting means - here begins one of the paths leading to the culture of the event. As is often the case in extreme situations, these must be both triggered and kept under control - both would be the tasks of a fully developed sports religion. Athletic exercises prepare for the state of exception in competitions, the cult of the stadium then channels the surging emotions into the prescribed channels. In the "voting booth" of Bayreuth Coubertin finally understood why only a religion founded de novo could fulfill his intentions. Like Richard Wagner, he wanted to make people step out of their ordinary lives for a few immeasurable moments in order to set them free into the world, transformed, elevated and changed. In the esoteric atmosphere of the Wagner Festival Coubertin found the confirmation of his basic inclination. Just as the most direct form of the religion of art was at home in Bayreuth, the analogous expression of the religion of sport should find its home in Olympism. [...]

Through its de-spiritualization, the Olympic movement of the twentieth century demonstrates how a "religion" is capable of spontaneously regressing to the format of its actual content - anthropotechnical in basis, as embodied in a system of graded exercises and stratified disciplines, integrated into a superstructure of hierarchical administrative acts, routine associative relations, and professionalized media representations. All that remains of the structural characteristics of a full-fledged "religion" is the hierarchy of officials and a system of exercises, which, in keeping with their secular nature, are called training units. The Vatican of the IOC in Lausanne has no other mission than to manage the fact that God is also dead from the Olympic point of view.

From this perspective, it can be said that the "religion of the athlete" is the only phenomenon in the history of faith that has disenchanted itself and by its own means [...]. As a non-religion demanded by countless people, the athletic renaissance was able to spread to large parts of the world. Its development shows how zeal is transformed into industry. [...] 

In the 20th century, there is no more powerful example of the trend toward the de-spiritualization of asceticism than the Olympic movement. [...]

Note: 1. Pierre de Coubertin, Olympic Memories"
(Peter Sloterdijk, You must change your life, 2009)

E1.6.G.1.5. THE MASTERY OF THE BODY CAN ENHANCE OUR PERCEPTION OF REALITY, BUT ONLY THROUGH FRAGMENTED AND CONFUSED KNOWLEDGE.

E1.6.G.1.5_REF1_PH  "PROPOSITION 13 [...]

NOTE [...]
I will only say generally, that in proportion as any given body is more fitted than others for doing many actions or receiving many impressions at once, so also is the mind, of which it is the object, more fitted than others for forming many simultaneous perceptions ; and the more the actions of one body depend on itself alone, and the fewer other bodies concur with it in action, the more fitted is the mind of which it is the object for distinct comprehension. We may thus recognize the superiority of one mind over others, and may further see the cause, why we have only a very confused knowledge of our body, and also many kindred questions, which I will, in the following propositions, deduce from what has been advanced. [...]

PROPOSITION 14
The human mind is capable of perceiving a great number of things, and is so in proportion as its body is capable of receiving a great number of impressions.

PROOF
The human body (by Post. 3 and 6) is affected in very many ways by external bodies, and is capable in very many ways of affecting external bodies. But (Prop. 12) the human mind must perceive all that takes place in the human body ; the human mind is, therefore, capable of perceiving a great number of things, and is so in proportion, &c. Q.E.D. [...]

PROPOSITION 16
The idea of every mode, in which the human body is affected by external bodies, must involve the nature of the human body, and also the nature of the external body.

PROOF
All the modes, in which any given body is affected, follow from the nature of the body affected, and also from the nature of the affecting body [...], wherefore their idea also necessarily [...] involves the nature of both bodies ; therefore, the idea of every mode, in which the human body is affected by external bodies, involves the nature of the human body and of the external body.

COROLLARY 1
Hence it follows, first, that the human mind perceives the nature of a variety of bodies, together with the nature of its own."
(Baruch Spinoza, The Ethics, Part Two)

E1.6.G.1.5_REF1.1_PH "PROPOSITION 12
Whatsoever comes to pass in the object of the idea, which constitutes the human mind, must be perceived by the human mind, or there will necessarily be an idea in the human mind of the said occurrence. That is, if the object of the idea constituting the human mind be a body, nothing can take place in that body without being perceived by the mind."
(Baruch Spinoza, The Ethics, Part Two)

Read the Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.6.G.1.5_REF1.2_PH "PROPOSITION 19
The human mind has no knowledge of the body, and does not know it to exist, save through the ideas of the modifications whereby the body is affected.

PROOF
The human mind is the very idea or knowledge of the human body [...], which [...] is in God, in so far as he is regarded as affected by another idea of a particular thing actually existing : or, inasmuch as [...] the human body stands in need of very many bodies whereby, it is, as it were, continually regenerated ; and the order and connection of ideas is the same as the order and connection of causes [...] ; this idea will therefore be in God, in so far as he is regarded as affected by the ideas of very many particular things. Thus God has the idea of the human body, or knows the human body, in so far as he is affected by very many other ideas, and not in so far as he constitutes the nature of the human mind ; that is [...], the human mind does not know the human body. But the ideas of the modifications of body are in God, in so far as he constitutes the nature of the human mind, or the human mind perceives those modifications [...], and consequently [...] the human body itself, and as actually existing [...]; therefore the mind perceives thus far only the human body."
(Baruch Spinoza, The Ethics, Part Two)

Read the Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.6.G.1.5_REF1.2.a_PH"PROPOSITION 23
The mind does not know itself, except in so far as it perceives the ideas of the modifications of the body. [...]

PROPOSITION 24
The human mind does not involve an adequate knowledge of the parts composing the human body.

PROOF
The parts composing the human body do not belong to the essence of that body, except in so far as they communicate their motions to one another in a certain fixed relation [...], not in so far as they can be regarded as individuals without relation to the human body. The parts of the human body are highly complex individuals [...], whose parts [...]can be separated from the human body without in any way destroying the nature and distinctive quality, of the latter, and they can communicate their motions [...] to other bodies in another relation ; therefore [...] the idea or knowledge of each part will be in God, inasmuch [...] as he is regarded as affected by another idea of a particular thing, which particular thing is prior in the order of nature to the aforesaid part [...]. We may, affirm the same thing of each part of each individual composing the human body ; therefore, the knowledge of each part composing the human body is in God, in so far as he is affected by very many ideas of things, and not in so far as he has the idea of the human body only, in other words, the idea which constitutes the nature of the human mind [...] ; therefore [...], the human mind does not involve an adequate knowledge of the human body.

PROPOSITION 25
The idea of each modification of the human body does not involve an adequate knowledge of the external body.

PROOF
We have shown that the idea of a modification of the human body, involves the nature of an external body [...], in so far as that external body conditions the human body in a given manner. But, in so far as the external body is an individual, which has no reference to the human body, the knowledge or idea thereof is in God [...], in so far as God is regarded as affected by the idea of a further thing, which [...] is naturally prior to the said external body. Wherefore an adequate knowledge of the external body is not in God, in so far as he has the idea of the modification of the human body ; in other words, the idea of the modification of the human body, does not involve an adequate knowledge of the external body. [...]

PROPOSITION 28
The idea of the modifications of the human body, in so far as they have reference only to the human mind, are not clear and distinct, but confused.
PROOF
The ideas of the modifications of the human body involve the nature both of the human body and of external bodies [...] ; they must involve the nature not only of the human body but also of its parts ; for the modifications are modes [...], whereby the parts of the human body, and, consequently, the human body as a whole are affected. But [...] the adequate knowledge of external bodies, as also of the parts composing the human body, is not in God, in so far as he is regarded as affected by the human mind, but in so far as he is regarded as affected by other ideas. These ideas of modifications, in so far as they are referred to the human mind alone, are as consequences without premisses, in other words, confused ideas. [...]

PROPOSITION 29 [...]

COROLLARY
Hence it follows that the human mind, when it perceives things after the common order of nature, has not an adequate but only a confused and fragmentary knowledge of itself, of its own body, and of external bodies. For the mind does not know itself, except in so far as it perceives the ideas of the modifications of body [...]. It only perceives its own body [...] through the ideas of the modifications, and only perceives external bodies through the same means (Prop. 26); thus, in so far as it has such ideas of modification, it has not an adequate knowledge of itself [...], nor of its own body [...], nor of external bodies [...], but only a fragmentary and confused knowledge thereof [...]

NOTE
I say expressly, that the mind has not an adequate but only a confused knowledge of itself, its own body, and of external bodies, whenever it perceives things after the common order of nature ; that is, whenever it is determined from without, namely, by the fortuitous play of circumstance, to regard this or that ; not at such times as it is determined from within, that is, by the fact of regarding several things at once, to understand their points of agreement, difference, and contrast. Whenever it is determined in anywise from within, it regards things clearly and distinctly, as I will show below."
(Baruch Spinoza, The Ethics, Part Two)

Read the Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.6.G.1.5_REF1.2.a.i_PH "PROPOSITION 38
Those things, which are common to all, and which are equally in a part and in the whole, cannot be conceived except adequately. [...]

COROLLARY
Hence it follows that there are certain ideas or notions common to all men ; for [...] all bodies agree in certain respects, which [...] must be adequately or clearly and distinctly perceived by all.

PROPOSITION 39
That, which is common to and a property of the human body and such other bodies as are wont to affect the human body, and which is present equally in each part of either, or in the whole, will be represented by an adequate idea in the mind. [...]

COROLLARY
Hence it follows that the mind is fitted to perceive adequately more things, in proportion as its body has more in common with other bodies."
(Baruch Spinoza, The Ethics, Part Two)

E1.6.G.1.6. WHEN IT HURTS

E1.6.G.1.6_REF1_PO "A SCIENTIT´S ADVICE ON HEALING

Try to accept
this fat red hurt
is your starting point,
in the way a pen must be put to paper
     in one particular spot,

then move

beyond
the globby flap
of blame
     and past
          the mono-sulk
               of pain.

Change the subject,
before it’s too late.
Sketch out
what health
you do possess,
what signal-cascades,
what flotilla of cells
circumnavigate you,

then draw yourself back
     together again,
in a language
     of your own.

Your body’s talk
is loose as lymph —
it’ll have you open out
     as a tree,
or sneak up on pain
     as assassin,
     sidekick,
     or wolf.

Encourage this
for healing won’t come at you
     straight.
Embrace the lack of heroics —
this isn’t Hollywood,
it’s you,
in a plot
that may
or may not resolve."
(Christy Ducker, Messenger)

Watch Kate Sweeney's animation on Christy Ducker's poem "A scientit´s advice on healing": https://player.vimeo.com/video/163933380

E1.7.C.3.1.wE1.6.G.1.6. TO FULLY APPRECIATE LIFE, WE MUST ACCEPT AND BE PRESENT IN ALL EXPERIENCES WITHOUT TRYING TO ESCAPE FROM THEM. Comparing experiences to past memories leads to a superficial understanding, while being aware of the present moment helps us adapt to things we can't escape from. This requires a shift in mindset and openness to experience.

E1.6.G.2. THE SENSUAL AS A DOOR TO EXHILARATION

E1.6.G.2.1. NIETSZCHE IN RAREFIED MOUNTAIN AIR

E1.6.G.2.1_REF1_PH "I SIT HERE BREATHING THE BEST AIR,
  the air of paradise, in truth, 
  the clear, light, golden-striped air,
  as good as it ever was 
             from the moon..." (Nietzsche)
For Nietzsche, air is the very substance of our freedom, the substance of superhuman joy. Air is a kind of overcome matter as Nietzschean joy is an overcome human joy. [...] 
The Nietzschean air is then a strange substance: it is the substance without substantial qualities. It can thus characterize being as adequate to a philosophy of total becoming. In the reign of imagination, air frees us from substantial, intimate, digestive reveries. It frees us from our attachment to matter: it is thus the matter of our freedom. To Nietzsche, air brings nothing. It gives nothing. It is the immense glory of Nothingness. But isn't giving nothing the greatest of gifts. The great giver with empty hands rids us of the desires of the outstretched hand. He accustoms us to cancel our perception, and therefore to take in everything. Nietzsche asks: « Is it not for the giver to thank the one who is willing to receive? »"
(Gaston Bachelard, Air and Dreams - Essay on the Imagination of Movement, 1943)

E1.6.G.2.1_REF2_PH NIETZSCHE USES THE IMAGE OF THE ABYSS TO FUEL A CONSCIOUSNESS OF ASCENT. "The bottom, contemplated from a height from which one will no longer fall, is an additional impetus towards the peaks. As a result, static images will receive a very special dynamic life. Keeping in touch with Nietzsche's work [...], we are going to study the vertical dynamization of certain images familiar to Nietzsche. 
For example, here is the pine tree at the edge of the abyss. Schopenhauer contemplated it. He made it a testimony of the will to live, describing the hard symbiosis of the plant with rocks, the effort of the tree to defend itself against the forces of gravity. For Nietzsche, the tree is less bent, it is a more vertical being, it taunts the fall: 
- But you, Zarathustra, 
do you also love the abyss, like the pine tree does?
The pine clutches its roots,
where rocks themselves
look into the depths with a shudder... 
This shuddering will never become vertigo. Nietzscheanism is essentially a surmounted vertigo. Near the abyss, Nietzsche comes to look for dynamic images of ascent. The reality of the abyss gives Nietzsche, through a well-known dialectic of pride, the consciousness of being a surging force."
(Gaston Bachelard, Air and Dreams - Essay on the Imagination of Movement, 1943)

E1.6.G.2.1_REF3_PH NIETZSCHE CITES THE AIR OF THE PEAKS AS A SYMBOL OF FREEDOM AND SUPERNATURAL JOY. AIR, A SUBSTANCE WITHOUT SUBSTANTIAL QUALITIES, FREES US FROM MATERIAL ATTACHMENTS AND SUBSTANTIAL DREAMS. For Nietzsche, the pure air of mountain peaks represents the awareness of the free moment and the opening to a future without the chains of smells that bind memories and desires.
"For Nietzsche, air is the substance of our freedom, the substance of superhuman joy. Air is a kind of transcended matter, just as Nietzsche's joy is a transcended human joy.[...]

Nietzsche's air is then a strange substance: it is the substance without substantial qualities. It can therefore characterize being as adequate to a philosophy of total becoming. In the realm of the imagination, air frees us from substantial, intimate, digestive reveries. It frees us from our attachment to matter: it is therefore the matter of our freedom. For Nietzsche, air brings nothing. It gives nothing. It is the immense glory of nothing. But isn't giving nothing the greatest gift of all? The great giver with empty hands frees us from the desire for the outstretched hand. He accustoms us to perceive nothing and therefore to take everything. "Is it not for the giver," Nietzsche asks, "to thank the one who has been so kind as to take? [...] 
For a true Nietzschean, the nose must give the happy certainty of odorless air, the nose must bear witness to the immense happiness, the blissful consciousness, of feeling nothing. It is the guarantor of the nothingness of odors. The sense of smell, of which Nietzsche was so often proud, is not an attractive virtue. It is given to the superman so that he can detect the slightest hint of impurity. A Nietzschean cannot take pleasure in a smell. Baudelaire, the Countess of Noailles-both earthly, which is of course another sign of power-dream and meditate on smells. Perfumes, then, have infinite resonances; they link memories to desires, an immense past to an immense and unformulated future. On the contrary, here is Nietzsche: 

Breathing in the purest air, 
his nostrils swollen like beakers, 
without a future, without memory...

Pure air is awareness of the free moment, of a moment that opens up a future. Nothing more. Smells are sensitive sequences; they have continuity in their very body. There are no discontinuous smells. On the contrary, pure air is an impression of youth and novelty (p. 260): “From his nostrils he absorbed the air slowly and as if to question, like someone who, in new countries, tastes new air.” We would venture to say: a new emptiness and a new freedom, because there is nothing exotic, heady or intoxicating about this new air. The climate is made up of pure, dry, cold and empty air. 

I sit here, breathing the best air, 
heavenly air, in truth, 
clear, light air streaked with gold,
as good as ever 
fell from the moon...

Nietzsche's imagination abandons smells to the extent that it detaches itself from the past. All nostalgia dreams of indestructible smells. To anticipate is the opposite of smelling. [...] If the air symbolizes a moment of rest and relaxation, it also brings awareness of the action to come, an action that frees us from a concentrated will. Even in the simple joy of breathing pure air, we find a promise of power: "The air is full of promise; I feel the breath of unknown lips passing over me - here comes the great freshness...". 
How better to say, in this sudden freshness, that unknown lips are promises of intoxication? 
With this freshness - this great freshness that is to come - a Nietzschean value is introduced which, under perceptible aspects, denotes a profound reality. It is a type of those direct and real metaphors which, for a doctrine of the imagination, constitute immediate and elementary data. Basically, for Nietzsche, this freshness is the true invigorating quality of air, the quality that makes breathing a pleasure, the quality that animates motionless air-a true animation in depth, which is the very life of the dynamic imagination. [...]"
(Gaston Bachelard, Air and Dreams - Essays on the imagination of movement, 1943)

E1.6.G.2.2. FOR JOHN COWPER POWYS, WHAT WE DO IS IMPORTANT; 
BUT IT IS LESS IMPORTANT THAN WHAT WE FEEL

E1.6.G.2.2_REF1_LIT POWYS CONTRASTS THE ABSTRACT PURSUIT OF PHILOSOPHICAL IDEALS WITH THE PROFOUND, YET OFTEN OVERLOOKED, MOMENTS OF TRANSCENDENTAL JOY FOUND IN EVERYDAY EXPERIENCES. He questions why society prioritizes politics, religion, and ambition over these fleeting, magical feelings, arguing that their inherent value lies in their ability to connect us to something beyond the mundane.
“Gooch used frequently to express to me the spiritual difficulty he had in realizing the Pantheistic Absolute which was the object of Spinoza’s singular love. I can see his long white face and curious mouth and unhappy intellectual eyes as he said: “I can’t catch the thing, Powys. I can’t catch the thing!” and he uttered the words just as if the Absolute were a sort of “Questing Beast” and he was Sir Pallenure. Isn’t it Walter Pater, that grave Pyrrhonian monk of God, the man whom these mathematical Cantabs took damned good care to hide away from me, who says somewhere that one curve of a solitary rose-petal is worth the whole of the Spinozistic Absolute? But it was not the flawless, aesthetic beauty of the rose-leaf I was after. No! not that; not that at all! Like poor Gooch under his favourite trees by the river-bank, in the wide spaces of King’s, I too am sorely put to it; I too am fain to fumble and grope, and to hum and drum for want of words in a most disconcerting manner. How can I catch that stir, that rustle, that indraw sigh, that indescribable silence which emanates from the passing of my voyaging soul over all these little, casual chance-groupings of the Inanimate? How can I find the right expression for the feelings that  came to me in those days when the wind blew in a certain way as I followed some muddy grass-track along the edge of the Ely Road or the London Road? How can I describe the feeling I got, as if all the scarce-noticed sensations that had come lightly and incidentally to long generations of my ancestors, when they met the rain, or felt the sun, or heard the calling of rooks or the twittering of sparrows, or saw the smoke rising from human hearths, were rushing over me, in a hardly bearable flood of ecstatic happiness, simply because, on that undistinguished road to the railway station, I heard some patient shop assistant mowing his scrap of grass behind a privet-hedge? 

I know perfectly well that everybody born into the world has the feelings I am describing, is visited by these indescribable and apparently causeless transports. I am not in the least suggesting that I am peculiar in this. But why, in the Devil’s name, then, do we go on making a cult of everything else except these? Why must politics, religion, philosophy, ambition, revolution, reaction, business, pleasure—all be considered intensely important, and these rare magical feelings not to be considered at all? 

“Because, my good John,” you will answer, “these feelings come of themselves, and go of themselves, and don’t leave us any wiser or cleverer or kinder or richer! “ 

You have said it. It is because they are different from these things; it is because they represent something totally beyond these things, that such feelings are so precious! A time will come when these feelings will no longer be the monopoly of women and babies and lovers and saints and mystics and idiots! “ 
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber, p. 193-194)

E1.6.G.2.2_REF2_LIT JOHN COWPER POWYS ARGUES THAT MODERN INTELLECTUALS SUFFER FROM A LACK OF FAITH IN THEIR OWN INNER POWER, INFLUENCED BY TRANSIENT SCIENTIFIC THEORIES. He advocates for a return to a "magical view of life," emphasizing the importance of faith in the potentialities of the ego, as celebrated by great poets and philosophers.
"What is wrong with so many clever people to-day is the fatal distrust lodged in their minds—and lodged there by a superstitious awe in the presence of transitory scientific theories—of the power in their own souls. What we need—and the key to it lies in ourselves—is a bold return to the magical view of life. I don’t mean to the magic of Madame Blavatsky, but to that kind of faith in the potentialities of the ego, with which all great poetry and all great philosophy has been concerned. That feeling of exultant liberation from the immediate pressure of practical life, which any “logos” from the arena of Goethe, or Spinoza, or Leonardo, or Plato, or Heraclitus, or Epictetus, or the old Chinese Taoists conveys, is what we need. 
Science has not changed the human soul. Science has not changed the basic relations between the human soul and the mystery surrounding it. We are still potential magicians as long as we have faith in the power within us to create and to destroy. Social justice is one thing. The free life of the individual soul under any system is another thing. What we do is important; but it is less important than what we feel; for it is our feeling that alone is under the control of our will. In action we may be weak and clumsy blunderers, or on the other hand sometimes incompetent and sometimes competent. All this is largely beyond our control. What is not beyond our control is our feeling about it. 

“I am a cowardly, blundering, incompetent worm.” 

Very good. So be it. But it is in my power to be a worm with a deep, calm, resolute cheerfulness, if not with a magical exultation."
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber, p.622-652)

E1.6.G.2.2_REF3_LIT "BY SLOW DEGREES IT HAS MADE ITSELF MANIFEST TO ME THAT THE PURPOSE OF MY LIFE WAS TO DODGE—when I could get leave of absence from my exacting conscience—all obligations to humanity, and to cultivate certain totally useless, purposeless, unprofitable feelings. These feelings, which to me have come to be precious beyond any power of description, are regarded by many as pathetically colourless and sapless, by others as a kind of wilful insanity, by a few as a damnable affectation! “
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber, p. 167)

E1.6.G.2.2_REF4_LIT JOHN COWPER POWYS REFLECTS ON HIS LIFE, EMPHASIZING THE VALUE OF PERSONAL SENSATIONS AND LIVING IN THE PRESENT OVER AMBITION OR SOCIETAL EXPECTATIONS. He justifies his seemingly selfish behavior by valuing the unique, indescribable sensations he experiences, which he views as Nature's self-expression. 
"I moved blindly, desperately, and with a certain abandoned recklessness, along my obscure “Gloucester Road” of lonely personal sensations. How do I justify such behaviour? How do I justify —do you mean—my being “the soulless monster of selfishness” that some have called me? Indirectly, my friend, I do this, indirectly, indirectly; for I am too wise an antediluvian monster to argue with you in your language. But the truth is the transports of thrilling delight that these indescribable sensations of mine give me, these feelings that I would describe as the marginal sensations of the human race itself, seem to me so valuable a thing to come to consciousness in this world at all, that I—as this thing’s “medium,” or hollow reed—am entirely justified in being as I am."
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber, p. 294)

“It is most important in writing the tale of one’s days not to try to give them the unity they possess for oneself in later life. A human story, to bear any resemblance to the truth, must advance and retreat erratically, must flicker and flutter here and there, must debouch at a thousand tangents. But it is quite clear, and borne out in a thousand cases and incidents, that I lived so completely in the present all along that what is called ambition had no room or time to sprout. Ambitious people are forced—as one learns from reading their lives—to cut down rigidly upon their contemplative tendencies, to harden themselves against their momentary sensations. I lived for sensations; and have always, in my deepest heart regarded such a life as the only adequate return we can make to Nature for giving us birth! 

Human sensations are Nature’s self-expression. They are the earth’s awareness of herself. They are like the blossoming of flowers—the only way in which the rooted life of the organism can realize itself and be itself. Besides, as long as I had enough to eat and drink, enough to purchase a certain measure of privacy, enough to buy tobacco and cigarettes, enough to take me where I could turn upon the ankles of women my idolatrous and ravished stare, enough to save me from working in a school or an office or a barber’s shop or a factory or a farm or a mine or on ship-board, enough in plain words to dodge, avoid, shirk, run away from, sneak out of that manual labour upon which—and don’t you suppose I didn’t always know it!—we other men are privileged and petted parasites, what on earth did I want a career for? You will say —putting one’s duty to humanity aside—”for the sake of winning reputation, approval, respect, honour, renown!” But, my good friend, you are forgetting “the rock whence I was hewn and the pit whence I was digged.” You are forgetting my father! I inherited from him, and was strengthened and fortified in, by watching him and listening to him, an abysmal personal pride that was sufficient to itself under all conceivable conditions."
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber, p. 237-238)

E1.6.G.2.2_REF5_LIT "IN THE FIRST PLACE WHAT IS THE DEEPEST, SECRETEST PURPOSE OF MY LIFE?  I can answer categorically: “To enjoy the sensations that I like enjoying, when I am most entirely and shamelessly myself.” Now I know, not only from looking in the looking-glass when I shave, but from certain realistic photographs, that there is an unmistakable ninny-look or zany-look in my face. This look answers to what I feel, and to what I let myself feel, and to what I maliciously encourage myself to feel! And why not? Why should I devote myself to feeling and expressing only noble, monumental and dignified sentiments?"
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber, p.537)

E1.6.G.2.3. "I'M FULL OF FLOWER AND BIRDS: NOTHING OF WHAT I LOVED IN LIFE IS GONE AND I CAN BARELY WALK  UNDER SO MUCH WEIGHT"
(Ferreira Gullar)

E1.6.G.2.3_REF1_PO "WHEN WE ARE NO LONGER CHILDREN WE ARE ALREADY DEAD."
(Constantin Brancusi)

"BEHIND MY FACE

I think I imagine myself more
than I live
or what I am doesn't fit
into what I can be
  and just smolders
behind this tanned mask
that was once a boy's face.

I keep going
under my skin
a fire one meter and seventy tall.

I don't want to scare anyone.
But if everyone hides behind smiles
   in the mastery of words
I must say
that the poet Gullar is a child
  who can't die

and who can
at any moment
disintegrate into tears.

You will laugh if I tell you
that I'm full of flower and birds:
that nothing
of what I loved in life is gone
  and I can barely walk
  under so much weight.

Can you calculate how many tons of light
  holds
  a simple brush of hands?
  or the sweet penetration
  of the loving woman?

I only have my body
to operate the miracle
  this miracle
  that life offers
   and zip
   dissipates with laughter."
(Ferreira Gullar, Noises, 1980-1987)

E1.6.G.2.4. "SINCE FEELING IS FIRST
WHO PAYS ANY ATTENTION
TO THE SYNTAX OF THINGS
WILL NEVER WHOLLY KISS YOU"
(E.E. CUMMINGS)

E1.6.G.2.4_REF1_PO "since feeling is first
who pays any attention
to the syntax of things
will never wholly kiss you;
wholly to be a fool
while Spring is in the world

my blood approves,
and kisses are a better fate
than wisdom
lady I swear by all flowers. Don't cry
- the best gesture of my brain is less than
your eyelids' flutter which says

we are for each other: then
laugh, leaning back in my arms
for life's not a paragraph

And death I think is no parenthesis"
(Edward Estlin Cummings)

E1.6.G.2.5. "I WON'T TALK, I WON'T THINK ABOUT ANYTHING"
(Arthur Rimbaud)

E1.6.G.2.5_REF1_PO "AT THE GREEN INN, FIVE IN THE EVENING

For a whole week I had ripped up my boots
On the stones of the roads. I walked into Charleroi;
Into the Green Inn: I asked for some slices
Of bread and butter, and some half-cooled ham.

Happy, I stuck out my legs under the green
table: I studied the artless patterns of the
Wallpaper - and it was charming when the girl
With the huge breasts and lively eyes,

- A kiss wouldn't scare that one! -
Smilingly brought me some bread and butter
And lukewarm ham, on a coloured plate; -

Pink and white ham, scented with a clove of garlic -
And filled my huge beer mug, whose froth was turned
Into gold by a ray of late sunshine."
(Arthur Rimbaud, October 1870)

"AU CABARET-VERT, CINQ HEURES DU SOIR

Depuis huit jours, j'avais déchiré mes bottines 
Aux cailloux des chemins. J'entrais à Charleroi. 
- Au Cabaret-Vert : je demandai des tartines 
De beurre et du jambon qui fût à moitié froid.

Bienheureux, j'allongeai les jambes sous la table 
Verte: je contemplai les sujets très naïfs 
De la tapisserie. - Et ce fut adorable, 
Quand la fille aux tétons énormes, aux yeux vifs,

- Celle-là, ce n'est pas un baiser qui l'épeure! — 
Rieuse, m'apporta des tartines de beurre, 
Du jambon tiède, dans un plat colorié,

Du jambon rose et blanc parfumé d'une gousse 
D'ail, - et m'emplit la chope immense, avec sa mousse, 
Que dorait un rayon de soleil arriéré."
(Arthur Rimbaud, Octobre 1870)

E1.6.G.2.5_REF2_PO "SENSATION

On the blue summer evenings, I shall go down the paths,
Getting pricked by the corn, crushing the short grass:
In a dream I shall feel its coolness on my feet.
I shall let the wind bathe my bare head.

I shall not speak, I shall think about nothing:
But endless love will mount in my soul;
And I shall travel far, very far, like a gipsy,
Through the countryside - as happy as if I were with a woman."
(Arthur Rimbaud, March 1870)

"SENSATION

Par les soirs bleus d'été, j'irai dans les sentiers, 
Picoté par les blés, fouler l'herbe menue : 
Rêveur, j'en sentirai la fraîcheur à mes pieds. 
Je laisserai le vent baigner ma tête nue.

Je ne parlerai pas, je ne penserai rien : 
Mais l'amour infini me montera dans l'âme, 
Et j'irai loin, bien loin, comme un bohémien, 
Par la Nature, heureux comme avec une femme."
(Arthur Rimbaud, Mars 1870)

E1.6.G.2.6. FOR ROLAND BARTHES, THE DELICACY OF PERCEPTION IS THE FABRIC OF LIFE

E1.6.G.2.6_REF_PH ROLAND BARTHES DISTINGUISHES BETWEEN TWO CONCEPTS OF LIFE: LIFE AS POWER, WHICH SCORN DELICACY, AND LIFE AS DURATION, WHERE THE INFINITELY FUTILE BECOMES THE VERY ESSENCE OF THIS VITAL DURATION. Delicacy is thus perceived as the fabric of life, activating the perception and enjoyment of being alive.
“I come back to Delicacy because I have the persistent impression that I did not explain well why I gave so much importance to all the sophisticated protocols of Japanese tea. So I come back to the scintillation. Meticulousness. When going out in the evening at dusk, intensely perceiving the tiniest, perfectly futile details in the street: a menu written in chalk on the window of a café (mashed cockerel, 16 francs 50 - kidneys with crème fraîche, 16 francs 10), a tiny priest in a cassock going up rue Médicis, etc., I had this keen intuition (for me the urban twilight has a great power of clarity, of activation, it's almost a drug) that to descend into the infinitely futile, it allowed one to acknowledge the sensation of life → (it is, after all, a rule of romance). → Delicacy is therefore on the side of the living, of what makes life felt, of what activates its perception: the flavor of pure life, the enjoyment of being alive → of course, we must agree on life, a catch-all word → well, life: 1) as power, wanting to seize, wanting to enjoy: this has nothing to do with delicacy, it despises it, rejects it as decadent, deliquescent, exhausted, as that which is about to die; 2) but also, life as duration: that which is duration is enjoyment duration of life: Tao value (cf. the magic of immortality of the real body): the infinitely futile then becomes like the very grain of this vital duration → delicacy = fabric of life in its grain.”
(Roland Barthes, The Neutral, Course at the Collège de France, 1977-1978)

E1.6.G.2.7. "ALL COMES BY THE BODY, ONLY HEALTH PUTS YOU RAPPORT WITH THE UNIVERSE"
(WALT WHITMANN)

E1.6.G.2.7_REF1_PO "HOUSES AND ROOMS ARE FULL OF PERFUMES, the shelves are crowded with perfumes,
I breathe the fragrance myself and know it and like it, 
The distillation would intoxicate me also, but I shall not let it.

The atmosphere is not a perfume, it has no taste of the distillation, it is odorless,
It is for my mouth forever, I am in love with it,
I will go to the bank by the wood and become undisguised and naked,

I am mad for it to be in contact with me.

The smoke of my own breath,
Echoes, ripples, buzz'd whispers, love-root, silk-thread, crotch and vine, 
My respiration and inspiration, the beating of my heart, the passing of blood and air through my lungs,
The sniff of green leaves and dry leaves, and of the shore and dark- color'd sea-rocks, and of hay in the barn,

The sound of the belch'd words of my voice loos'd to the eddies of the wind, 
A few light kisses, a few embraces, a reaching around of arms,
The play of shine and shade on the trees as the supple boughs wag, 
The delight alone or in the rush of the streets, or along the fields and hill-sides,
The feeling of health, the full-noon trill, the song of me rising from bed and meeting the sun.

Have you reckon'd a thousand acres much? have you reckon'd the earth much?
Have you practis'd so long to learn to read?
Have you felt so proud to get at the meaning of poems?

Stop this day and night with me and you shall possess the origin of all poems,
You shall possess the good of the earth and sun, (there are millions of suns left,)
You shall no longer take things at second or third hand, nor look through the eyes of the dead, nor feed on the spectres in books,
You shall not look through my eyes either, nor take things from me, 
You shall listen to all sides and filter them from your self."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.6.G.2.7_REF2_PO "TO BE IN ANY FORM, WHAT IS THAT?
(Round and round we go, all of us, and ever come back thither,)
If nothing lay more develop’d the quahaug in its callous shell were enough.

Mine is no callous shell,
I have instant conductors all over me whether I pass or stop,
They seize every object and lead it harmlessly through me.

I merely stir, press, feel with my fingers, and am happy,
To touch my person to some one else’s is about as much as I can stand.

Is this then a touch? quivering me to a new identity,
Flames and ether making a rush for my veins,
Treacherous tip of me reaching and crowding to help them,
My flesh and blood playing out lightning to strike what is hardly different from myself,
On all sides prurient provokers stiffening my limbs,
Straining the udder of my heart for its withheld drip,
Behaving licentious toward me, taking no denial,
Depriving me of my best as for a purpose,
Unbuttoning my clothes, holding me by the bare waist,
Deluding my confusion with the calm of the sunlight and pasture-fields,
Immodestly sliding the fellow-senses away,
They bribed to swap off with touch and go and graze at the edges of me,
No consideration, no regard for my draining strength or my anger,
Fetching the rest of the herd around to enjoy them a while,
Then all uniting to stand on a headland and worry me.

The sentries desert every other part of me,
They have left me helpless to a red marauder,
They all come to the headland to witness and assist against me.

I am given up by traitors,
I talk wildly, I have lost my wits, I and nobody else am the greatest traitor,
I went myself first to the headland, my own hands carried me there.

You villain touch! what are you doing? my breath is tight in its throat,
Unclench your floodgates, you are too much for me."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.6.G.2.7_REF3_PO "I HAVE PERCEIV’D THAT TO BE WITH THOSE I LIKE IS ENOUGH,
To stop in company with the rest at evening is enough,
To be surrounded by beautiful, curious, breathing, laughing flesh is enough,
To pass among them or touch any one, or rest my arm ever so lightly
   round his or her neck for a moment, what is this then?
I do not ask any more delight, I swim in it as in a sea.

There is something in staying close to men and women and looking on 
    them, and in the contact and odor of them, that pleases the soul well,
All things please the soul, but these please the soul well."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)


E1.6.G.2.7_REF4_PO "BY BLUE ONTARIO’S SHORE
[...]

All comes by the body, only health puts you rapport with the universe."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.6.G.2.7_REF5_SCI “HOW OUR LONGEST NERVE ORCHESTRATES THE MIND-BODY CONNECTION. Like a highway system, the vagus nerve branches profusely from your brain through your organs to marshal bodily functions, including aspects of mind such as mood, pleasure and fear.
It is late at night. You are alone and wandering empty streets in search of your parked car when you hear footsteps creeping up from behind. Your heart pounds, your blood pressure skyrockets. Goose bumps appear on your arms, sweat on your palms. Your stomach knots and your muscles coil, ready to sprint or fight.
Now imagine the same scene, but without any of the body’s innate responses to an external threat. Would you still feel afraid?
Experiences like this reveal the tight integration between brain and body in the creation of mind — the collage of thoughts, perceptions, feelings and personality unique to each of us. The capabilities of the brain alone are astonishing. The supreme organ gives most people a vivid sensory perception of the world. It can preserve memories, enable us to learn and speak, generate emotions and consciousness. But those who might attempt to preserve their mind by uploading its data into a computer miss a critical point: The body is essential to the mind.
How is this crucial brain-body connection orchestrated? The answer involves the very unusual vagus nerve. The longest nerve in the body, it wends its way from the brain throughout the head and trunk, issuing commands to our organs and receiving sensations from them. Much of the bewildering range of functions it regulates, such as mood, learning, sexual arousal and fear, are automatic and operate without conscious control. These complex responses engage a constellation of cerebral circuits that link brain and body. The vagus nerve is, in one way of thinking, the conduit of the mind. [...]
All complex body systems require the equivalent of brakes and a gas pedal to maintain control, and the vagus nerve serves these roles for many of our innate responses, nearly all of which occur involuntarily. Signals between the brainstem and the body travel up and down the nerve to twist your gut for digestion, marshal your immune system to keep microbial threats at bay, pace your heart, and dial your blood pressure up and down. The vagus nerve squeezes your bronchial tubes to pipe air into your lungs, triggers your gag reflex and makes you cough.
Its influence goes beyond basic life support: The vagus nerve is critical to generating mind by integrating the brain and body. Choking is terrifying because death could be mere minutes away. That heightened mental state is dependent on signals coming from the body — the inability to breathe or swallow — and the vagus nerve both senses and controls the choking response. If your heart suddenly starts racing, you might experience a panic attack; controlling heart rate is a prime function of the vagus nerve. Many other mental states, sexual arousal for example, depend on the mind-body connection that involves information going to the brain (sensual touching, for example) and out of the brain (to arouse bodily responses). The vagus nerve is that connection. Its length and widespread nature throughout the brain as well as the body allow it to coordinate such diverse bodily functions in a way that independent nerves could not.
The primary function of the vagus nerve is to dampen the body’s responses. After a fear episode, for example, the body’s powerful, life-saving threat response must be terminated to restore resting heartbeat, respiration, blood flow and the rest. So powerful is its influence, the vagus nerve can literally stop the beating heart. Conversely, the vagus nerve can also stimulate bodily responses by releasing the brakes to accelerate. [...]”
(R. Douglas Fields, Quanta Magazine, August 26, 2024)

Read the full article on Quanta Magazine: https://www.quantamagazine.org/how-our-longest-nerve-orchestrates-the-mind-body-connection-20240826/?mc_cid=94caee8978&mc_eid=de38e9b771

E1.6.G.2.8. "PERHAPS THE FIRST RULE OF EVERYTHING WE ENDEAVOR TO DO IS TO PAY ATTENTION. PERHAPS THE SECOND IS TO BE PATIENT. AND PERHAPS A THIRD IS TO BE ATTENTIVE TO WHAT THE BODY KNOWS."
(BARRY LOPEZ)

E1.6.G.2.8_REF1_LIT BARRY LOPEZ ARGUES AGAINST THE STEREOTYPE THAT INDIGENOUS PEOPLE'S CONNECTION TO PLACE IS PRIMITIVE, EMPHASIZING THE PROFOUND VALUE OF PHYSICAL INTIMACY WITH THE NATURAL WORLD. He suggests that modern civilization's existential loneliness and sense of meaninglessness stem from neglecting the therapeutic relationship with nature. Lopez believes that knowing a place deeply fosters a sense of belonging and reciprocity, which reinforces one's significance in the world. 
"[Drawing on his longtime immersion in indigenous cultures and his lifelong travel with native companions, Lopez counters the hollow stereotype that indigenous people’s connection to place is a sort of “primitive” sensitivity to be contrasted with “advanced” civilization (Maria Popova, The Marginalian)]

"Such a dismissive view, as I have come to understand it, ignores the great intangible value that achieving physical intimacy with a place might provide. I’m inclined to point out to someone who condescends to such a desire for intimacy, although it might seem rude, that it is not possible for human beings to outgrow loneliness. Nor can someone from a culture that condescends to nature easily escape the haunting thought that one’s life is meaningless.

Existential loneliness and a sense that one’s life is inconsequential, both of which are hallmarks of modern civilizations, seem to me to derive in part from our abandoning a belief in the therapeutic dimensions of a relationship with place. A continually refreshed sense of the unplumbable complexity of patterns in the natural world, patterns that are ever present and discernible, and which incorporate the observer, undermine the feeling that one is alone in the world, or meaningless in it. The effort to know a place deeply is, ultimately, an expression of the human desire to belong, to fit somewhere. [...] 

The determination to know a particular place, in my experience, is consistently rewarded. And every natural place, to my mind, is open to being known. And somewhere in this process a person begins to sense that they themselves are becoming known, so that when they are absent from that place they know that place misses them. And this reciprocity, to know and be known, reinforces a sense that one is necessary in the world. [...]

Intimacy with the physical Earth apparently awakens in us, at some wordless level, a primal knowledge of the nature of our emotional as well as our biological attachments to physical landscapes. Based on my own inquiries, my impression is that we experience this primal connection regularly as a diffuse, ineffable pleasure, experience it as the easing of a particular kind of longing. [...]

Perhaps the first rule of everything we endeavor to do is to pay attention. Perhaps the second is to be patient. And perhaps a third is to be attentive to what the body knows."
(Barry Lopez,  Embrace Fearlessly the Burning World, 2022)

E1.6.G.2.9. "FROM THE PRESENT YOU EXTRACT ALL THE ESSENCES WHICH CAN NOURISH THE SENSES"
(ANAÏS NIN)

E1.6.G.2.9_REF1_LIT "HERE IN MEXICO THEY SEE ONLY THE PRESENT. This communion of eyes and smiles is elating. In New York people seem intent on not seeing each other. Only children look with such unashamed curiosity. Poor white man, wandering and lost in his proud possession of a dimension in which bodies become invisible to the naked eye, as if staring were an immodest act. Here I feel incarnated and in full possession of my own body. [...]

To me Acapulco is the detoxicating cure for all the evils of the city: ambition, vanity, quest for success in money, the continuous contagious presence of power-driven, obsessed individuals who want to become known, to be in the limelight, noticed, as if life among millions gave you a desperate illness, a need of rising above the crowd, being noticed, existing individually, singled out from a mass of ants and sheep… Here, all this is nonsense. You exist by your smile and your presence. You exist for your joys and your relaxations. You exist in nature. You are part of the glittering sea, and part of the luscious, well-nourished plants, you are wedded to the sun, you are immersed in timelessness, only the present counts, and from the present you extract all the essences which can nourish the senses, and so the nerves are still, the mind is quiet, the nights are lullabies, the days are like gentle ovens in which infinitely wise sculptor’s hands re-form the lost contours, the lost sensations of the body… As you swim, you are washed of all the excrescences of so-called civilization, which includes the incapacity to be happy under any circumstances."
(Anaïs Nin,  The Diary of Anaïs Nin, Volume 5)

E1.6.G.2.10. "JOUISSANCE EXPOSES THE VISION OF WHAT DESIRE HAD ONLY UNCOVERED" 
(PASCAL QUIGNARD)

E1.6.G.2.10_REF1_LIT PASCAL QUIGNARD EXPLORES THE TRANSFORMATION OF GREEK EROTICISM INTO A FRIGHTENED MELANCHOLY UNDER THE ROMAN EMPIRE, WHERE THE TERM “PHALLUS” IS REPLACED BY “FASCINUS”. He emphasizes that fascination immobilizes and that fright is linked to beauty and enjoyment, which mixes fear and ecstasy.
“When Augustus reorganized the Roman world in the form of the empire, the joyful, anthropomorphic and precise eroticism of the Greeks was transformed into frightened melancholy. Faces of women filled with fear, their lateral gaze fixed on a blind spot.

The word “phallus” does not exist. The Romans called what the Greeks called “phallos” “fascinus”. In the human world as in the animal kingdom, fascination compels the beholder to keep his gaze fixed. He is immobilized in place, without will, in terror.

Plato made terror the first present of beauty. Every man and woman is passive when it comes to orgasm. The lover raises her arms in primal passivity. In orgasm there is a fear of what bursts in, of the intrusive emotion. Her surprise is the surprise. Orgasm can never distinguish absolutely between fear and ecstasy.

Orgasm snatches away the vision of what desire had only revealed.”
(Pascal Quignard, Sex and terror, 1994)

E1.6.G.2.11." THE HUMAN BODY, IN CONTRAST TO THAT OF THE BEAST, IS AVAILABLE FOR ALL POSSIBLE WORLDS, destined for the wonder of discovery rather than the comfort of home."
(Jacques Darriulat on Spinoza)

E1.6.G.2.11_REF1_PH SPINOZA AFFIRMS THAT THE HUMAN BODY IS SUPERIOR TO THAT OF AN ANIMAL BECAUSE IT IS MORE CAPABLE OF ACTION AND REACTION, WHICH ALLOWS THE SOUL TO THINK MORE. The human body, unlike that of an animal, is not limited to a specific environment and is capable of adapting and exploring new worlds. 
"Spinoza asserts [...] in a formula that may appear confusing at first reading, that the human body is superior to the animal body in that it is better able to act and to suffer. It is repeated several times throughout the development of the Ethics, and can be summarized in this proposition, formulated in Chapter 27 of the Appendix to Book IV: "The more the body is capable of being affected in many ways, and of affecting external bodies in a great number of ways, the more the soul is capable of thinking. What does this mean? We understand that human thought, by rising to self-knowledge, can rise to a higher power and thus transcend the limited life expressed in animality. But it is less clear in what sense the human body surpasses the animal body in its performance, the instinct and power of which have long been celebrated by humans: were not the first idols before which humans bowed their heads in the form of animals, not of humans themselves? But here we must consider what the body is, or, to use Spinoza's phrase, what a body can do. For the living body cannot be confined to the bag of skin that encloses it; it necessarily belongs to an environment without which it could not exist, nourish itself, or reproduce. The part is by no means isolated; it is in the whole, like the limb in the organism. In an extraordinary and essential letter, Letter 32 to Oldenburg, Spinoza compares the individual, a part of nature, to a worm that would be found in the blood of a living organism, and for which the blood would not be considered according to the unity of its essence, but would be broken down into lymph, chyle, and the other parts that compose it. For us, on the other hand, who know the whole organism-something of which the worm could not have the slightest idea-the blood can be considered as a single substance, itself integrated into the whole living organism. "We can therefore," Spinoza concludes in this strange text, "conceive of all the bodies of nature in the same way that we have just conceived of blood" (GF IV, 237). This leads us to think that the distinction between the part and the whole is always relative from the point of view of the part, and that in truth the part diffuses and radiates into the whole, without it being possible to strictly delimit the sphere of its power of action, nor the extension of the causality of which it is the active and living source. Thus, the body is not limited to the organism as a closed system. On the contrary, every living organism must be conceived as a system open to the world - since the part necessarily participates in the life of the whole - and inseparable from the environment, in which alone it can affirm and develop the vital force that seeks to express itself by its nature. The living body is not an interior that preserves itself from all exteriority, a fortress hermetically sealed from the world that extends beyond its walls. Rather, it should be seen as a system of exchange, an ever-active center whose richness depends on its multiple connections with the surrounding world, like a city built at the crossroads of many roads, a meeting place that is also the place where the market originated [...] 

Every organism thus stays alive only thanks to the regulation of its metabolism, through the optimal balance that is established at the maximum of unity and the maximum of dispersion, between concentration and expansion, condensation and diffusion. We can then understand in what sense it is possible to say that the living body is all the more perfect because it is in active connection with an environment that is all the more vast, rich and complex. And it is in this sense that the superiority of the human body over the animal body can be conceived, because while the animal remains confined to a specific environment to which it is adapted and from which it cannot free itself, animals show extreme sensitivity to the delimitation of the boundaries that define their horizon of existence, Man, on the other hand, is the transgressor animal par excellence, the explorer of unknown lands, the outsider always gnawed by the desire to leave, the homo viator who is only truly himself when he sets out on his journey. And in this sense, the human body, unlike the animal body, is available to all possible worlds, destined for the wonder of discovery rather than the comfort of habitat."
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the Fullness of this World, 4- “Desire is the very essence of man”, 2017)

E1.6.G.2.12. "IN THIS HERE PLACE, WE FLESH; FLESH THAT WEEPS, LAUGHS; FLESH THAT DANCES ON BARE FEET IN GRASS. LOVE IT. LOVE IT HARD"
(TONI MORRISON)

E1.6.G.2.12_REF1_LIT "IN THIS HERE PLACE, WE FLESH; FLESH THAT WEEPS, LAUGHS; FLESH THAT DANCES ON BARE FEET IN GRASS. LOVE IT. LOVE IT HARD [...]
Love your hands! Love them. Raise them up and kiss them. Touch others with them, pat them together, stroke them on your face… Love your mouth… This is flesh… Flesh that needs to be loved. Feet that need to rest and to dance; backs that need support; shoulders that need arms, strong arms… Love your neck; put a hand on it, grace it, stroke it and hold it up. And all your inside parts that they’d just as soon slop for hogs, you got to love them. The dark, dark liver — love it, love it, and the beat and beating heart, love that too. More than eyes or feet. More than lungs that have yet to draw free air. More than your life-holding womb and your life-giving private parts… love your heart. For this is the prize."
(Toni Morrison,  Beloved, 1987)

E1.6.G.2.12_REF2_CUR "IN SMITH'S LONG-STANDING ENGAGEMENT WITH THE BODY, she has often addressed issues of sexuality, feminism, and mortality. This work is composed of glass water-cooler bottles coated with silver and etched with the names of twelve bodily fluids: tears, urine, milk, blood, saliva, vomit, sperm, etc. Drawn from the theology of Smith's Catholic faith, the fluids constitute the sacramental body. The German Gothic lettering on the bottles is a reference to a medieval book of hours, a Christian prayer book. According to the artist, "I was very influenced by the lives of the saints when I was a kid - you have a body with attributes and artifacts evoked by a sort of magic."
(Curatorship, MomA, NYC)

E1.6.G.2.12_REF3_CUR “I AM INTERESTED IN THE IDEA OF SHARED HUMAN EXPERIENCE, creating environments and resurrecting mythical archetypes. I make works with the intention to evoke nostalgia or cathartic experiences that can be shared. I incorporate reflective surfaces, video, and wet bodily elements such as oil paints or plasters into my works to implicate the viewer, summon shared memories which tickle different senses and reactions. I am curious in telling an overarching story of the underdog with themes of hope and optimism in the face of mundanity and adversity. The appeal of making these works is to create a shared experience, to illuminate memories that bring people together in solidarity - creating new myth.”
(Rosalind Breen)

E1.6.G.2.12_REF4_PO “I HAVE FORGOTTEN WHAT IT FEELS LIKE TO CURL ONE’S BODY INTO THE CURL OF ANOTHER
and wait out the night swaddled in cathedral silence,
just a kiss or two at the nape of one’s neck
for assurances, because, after all, this moment
is one of the great palaces of the world: intimacies
in borrowed light of the moon or lamp-like glow of a hundred fireflies just outside your window, 
you listening to wave after wave of latticed sounds filling each room
with the possibility of surviving the night, and waking the next day eager for the hours to shave away until you reach
the hour when everything repeats.”
(D. Antwan Steart)

E1.6.G.2.13. "HAVE YOU GOT A BROOK IN YOUR LITTLE HEART,
Where bashful flowers blow, 
And blushing birds go down to drink -
And shadows tremble so"
(Emily Dickinson)

E1.6.G.2.13_REF1_PO "HAVE YOU GOT A BROOK IN YOUR LITTLE HEART,
Where bashful flowers blow, 
And blushing birds go down to drink -
And shadows tremble so -

And nobody knows, so still it flows, 
That any brook is there,
And yet your little draught of life 
Is daily drunken there -

Why - look out for the little brook in March, 
When the rivers overflow, 
And the snows come hurrying from the hills, 
And the bridges often go -

And later, in August it may be,
When the meadows parching lie,
Beware, lest this little brook of life,
Some burning noon go dry !"
(Emily Dickinson, 1859)

E1.6.G.2.14. SEX AND OTHER PHYSICAL CONTACTS

E1.6.G.2.14_REF1_LIT "NOTHING IS DREADFUL IN LIBERTINAGE, because everything that libertinism inspires is also inspired by nature."
(The Marquis de Sade, Philosophy in the Boudoir, 1795)

E1.6.G.2.14_REF2_PH "ST. FRANCIS DE SALES SAID : « ONE MUST TAKE CARE OF ONE'S BODY FOR THE SOUL TO FEEL GOOD IN IT. ».
The body is the instrument of life. Faithful among all, it certainly deserves my respect and yet ... It never lies. For those who know how to listen to it, it always speaks freely, without mask. Today he is tired, I am listening to it. I like the words of Saint Francis de Sales. Before embarking on ascetic paths, before mortifying oneself, learn to reside gently in this body."
(Alexandre Jollien, La Pharmacopée n°37)

E1.6.G.2.14_REF3_CUR "IANNONE’S VISION EMBRACES LIFE, BURSTING WITH ENERGY AND THE SEARCH FOR CONNECTION. Her work considers freedom—personal, sexual, political, creative—as something to be continually claimed and celebrated."
(Rose Bouthillier, Curator)

"When I was young, I aspired to complete intimacy with my partner, but as I evolved, I understood it was ultimate union with the beloved that I was seeking, and later, I called it ecstatic unity. [...] But it still includes Eros and mothers and children and friends and patrons and colleagues, even strangers, and everyone else that I have ever celebrated."
(Dorothy Iannone)

E1.6.G.2.14_REF4_CUR CIA. DEBORAH COLKER, BELLE

Watch the extract of the show on youTube:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=osHgbCugnj4

E1.6.G.2.14_REF5_PO "SERVEUSE, UN BOL DE VIN ! EN CE MONDE ÉPHÉMÈRE 
C’est déjà beau d’avoir un bonheur sommaire ! 
Alors est bon tout ce qui vient, est bien tout destin ; 
Le bonheur pas sommaire est une chimère."
(Omar Khayam, Rubayat)

E1.6.G.2.14_REF6_PO EROTIC DREAMS REMIND US OF THE ECSTASY OF SEX, the importance of which we might consciously diminish when we rationalize our lives too much.

E1.6.G.2.14_REF6.1_PO "SALOMÉ

Purple insomnia. The light turning to fear, 
Dead moonlight, more soul than moon... 
She dances, she creaks. The flesh, naked alcohol, 
Spreads towards me in a spasm of secrecy...

Everything is whimsy around her, in fatuous shadows ... 
The scent has gone mad, it's burst in color, it's shattered... 
I'm cold... Alabaster!... My soul has frozen... 
And her body slides projecting statues... Switch off

She calls me in Iris. Nimbly losing me, 
She strikes me with her bare breasts, she shakes me in dismay... 
Helms, helmets, daggers... The madwoman wants me dead:

She bites herself crying - there are sexes in her tears... 
I rise in sound, I sway, and I leave, and I'm going to burn 
In the imperial mouth that humanized a Saint...”
(Mário de Sá-Carneiro, Indícios de Oiro [Hints of Gold], Paris, Novembrer 1913)


"SALOMÉ

Insónia rôxa. A luz a virgular-se em medo, 
Luz morta de luar, mais Alma do que a lua... 
Ela dança, ela range. A carne, alcool de nua, 
Alastra-se pra mim num espasmo de segredo...

Tudo é capricho ao seu redor, em sombras fátuas (1) ... 
O arôma endoideceu, upou-se (1) em côr, quebrou... 
Tenho frio... Alabastro!... A minh'Alma parou... 
E o seu corpo resvala (3) a projectar estátuas... Desligar

Ela chama-me em Iris. Nimba-se (4) a perder-me, 
Golfa-me os seios nus, ecôa-me em quebranto... 
Timbres, elmos, punhais... A doida quer morrer-me:

Mordoura-se a chorar - ha sexos no seu pranto... 
Ergo-me em som, oscilo, e parto, e vou arder-me 
Na boca imperial que humanisou um Santo..."
(Mário de Sá-Carneiro, Indícios de Oiro, Paris, novembro 1913)

Anotações:
(1)  Petulante
(2) Saltou
(3) Desliza
(4) Ornaa-se

E1.6.G.2.14_REF6.2_PO "A CERTAIN VOICE IN THE NIGHT, ROARING...

The elusive sorcery of that voice, opiated 
In amaranth-colored sounds, in nights of uncertainty, 
That I remember, I don't know where - the voice of a Princess 
Dancing half-naked between the flashes of a sword.

Leonine, she throws her purple flesh;
And drunk with herself, gasping with Beauty, 
Waxes her naked breasts, discovers her sex... Calls
The spasm that bursts in her copulated Soul...

I've never seen her, not even in a vision. Only
Her voice pierces my memory. So 
I don't want her flesh - her non-existent flesh...

The astral dancer is only a voice-in-echo - 
And in that voice-statue, ah! in that total-voice, 
I dream of emptying myself into vices of ivory..."
(Mário de Sá-Carneiro, Indícios de Oiro [Hints of Gold], Paris, January 1914)


"CERTA VOZ NA NOITE, RUIVAMENTE...

Esquivo sortilégio o dessa voz, opiada 
Em sons côr de amaranto, ás noites de incerteza, 
Que eu lembro não sei d'Onde - a voz duma Princesa 
Bailando meia nua entre clarões de Espada.

Leonina (1), ela arremessa a carne arroxeada;
E bebada de Si, arfante (2) de Beleza, 
Acera (3) os seios nus, descobre o sexo... Reza 
O espasmo que a estrebucha em Alma copulada...

Emtanto nunca a vi, mesmo em visão. Sómente
A sua voz a fulcra (4) ao meu lembrar-me. Assim 
Não lhe desejo a carne - a carne inexistente...

É só de voz-em-cio a bailadeira astral - 
E nessa voz-Estátua, ah! nessa voz-total, 
É que eu sonho esvair-me em vicios de marfim..."
(Mário de Sá-Carneiro, Indícios de Oiro, Paris, janeiro 1914)

Anotações:
(1) Confiante 
(2) Ofgante
(3) Afia
(4) Associa

E1.6.G.2.14_REF7_SOC TEA AND CONSENT. If you’re still struggling with consent just imagine instead of initiating sex you’re making them a cup of tea.

Watch the vidoe on YouTube: https://youtu.be/pZwvrxVavnQ?si=3p-DGyfT7b8-0Nng

E1.6.G.2.14_REF8_LIT AN INVENTED WORD TO DESCRIBE AN INNOCUOUS TOUCH BY SOMEONE JUST DOING THEIR JOB
“contact high-five n. an innocuous touch by someone just doing their job—a barber, yoga instructor or friendly waitress—that you enjoy more than you’d like to admit, a feeling of connection so stupefyingly simple that it cheapens the power of the written word, so that by the year 2025, aspiring novelists would be better off just giving people a hug.”
(John Koenig, The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021)

E1.6.G.2.14_REF9_CUR “THE LINK MADE BY MANY, BETWEEN GUSTATORY AND SEXUAL, GASTRO AND CARNAL, OUR LIBIDINAL PLEASURES, IS OBVIOUS - they are evolutionary bedrock, a link literalized in so many cultural totems: foodplay, body shots, vorarephilia, Nyotaimori, the Greek bread dildo, Claes Oldenburg, breastaraunts, etc.

All attempting equivocation of our two most hardwired pleasures. The lighting of food photography and pornography is the same.

The high-powered brilliance of commodity photography searing off defect and distraction. It is the omniscient white light of God. Ring flash halo reflected in a model's eyes. Filtered by soft-boxes that mimic the heavens. Shadowless, exposed, it turns your head into the camera, hands you its evaluatory flashlight. No matter how many times we hear of buns made of silicone, beefy parts arranged with surgical precision, we still believe in the white light's certification. But really certification comes from others: The US's governing food safety authority assigns "Defect Action Levels", standarzing the amount of defect, e.g. an allowable percentage of ECONOMIC ADULTERATION: "the intentional addition or substitution of cheaper food or ingredient to a product." Or FOREIGN MATTER: "objectionable matter such as sticks, stones, burlap bagging, cigarette butts." MAMMALIAN EXCRETA: a little more self explanatory, allowed in 1mg per pound, but INSECT FILTH can account for as much a 5%, MOLD in 40% of samples allowed.”
(Curatorship: Venice Bienal)

E1.6.G.2.14_REF10_PO “ODE TO DR. LADD’S BLACK SLIT SKIRT
Praise to the little girl whose grandmother taught her to embroider, 
slip the tip of the needle through the taut cloth and scallop the
    clouds,
fasten the feathers to bluebird wings.

And praise to the student who gulped muddy coffee
and memorized maps of muscles, puzzle of bones,
slid tendons through their shafts, curling and uncurling
each finger of the corpse like a deft puppeteer.

When I got to the ER Janet lay there, the morphine
not strong enough to blunt the pain.
Her arm looked like a carcass where a lion had fed.

Praise Dr. Ladd pulling green scrubs over her head
and gathering her long hair under a cap.

All the days we drove up to Stanford and waited for hours
in the room with the ugly orange carpet,
thumbing through tarnished pages of National Geographic, 
wondering what Dr. Ladd would be wearing,
until we heard the strike of her high heels on the hallway linoleum, 
distinctive as the first notes of Beethoven’s Fifth.

Praise her hands that lifted Janet’s hand, her fingertips brushing
the gnarled scars, flesh lumped like redwood burl.

Praise her for getting up early to outline her eyelids,
slick her lips. And praise to her blouses, the silk creamy 
as icing on a cake, the generous buttons open
like windows in summer. And praise

her bracelets’ coiled gold and her wide leather belts 
encircling her waist like two strong hands about to lift her. 
Praise to her earrings, little jangling tambourines,
and her perfume that braced us like a dry martini.

But most of all, praise to her slim black skirt
with the slit up the front so that when she sat down
and crossed her legs, the two panels parted like the Red Sea 
and we were seized by the curve of her calves,
the faceted shine of her knees sheathed in sheer black mesh, 
a riff of diamonds rippling up her thighs.”
(Ellen Bass, Like a beggar, 2014)


E1.6.G.2.15. SPIRITUAL PRACTICE CAN HELP BREAK THE CIRCLE OF ADDICTION

E1.6.G.2.15_REF1_PH "THE CYCLE OF ADDICTION [...] 

An addiction always has two contradictory and complementary phases - a phase A in which one indulges and a phase B in which one tries to resist. The two moments call each other because they are systemically linked: A leads to B, which leads to A, which leads to B, in an endless cycle... The more we fight against alcoholism, the further we get from the possibility of being free of it, and it is precisely this fight that makes the addiction exist. [...] 

In fact, the symptom and its rejection form a system: they form a vicious circle from which we should escape as a whole, instead of continuing to fight one of its two components in an exhausting war that absorbs all our inner resources. It would be better to recognize that psychological states or behaviors that appear to be absolutely opposite are linked by their very struggle, which makes them dependent on each other beyond their difference.

This interdependence impoverishes interiority, which tends to be reduced to it; and as a result, one could say, paraphrasing Freud, that spiritual practice is the "negative" of addiction - one expands the inner space, the other narrows it; one defeats the struggle, the other intensifies it; one calls for invention, the other prevents it...

[...] If, as has been said, the struggle against [addictions] strengthens them, how can we get out of this familiar impasse? How can we escape our inner prison if its structure is circular? The Palo Alto therapists call this operation "decentering" - so it would be a matter of leaving a "framework" or changing it. And this is what, even more radically, spiritual practice invites, calling us to "leap" and live without reference points...".
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond wisdom, How to live?, 2023)

E1.6.G.2.16. FOR JOHN MACMURRAY, OUR EMOTIONAL AND SENSORY EXPERIENCES ARE FUNDAMENTAL TO A RICH HUMAN LIFE, FOSTERING A DEEP CONNECTION AND APPRECIATION FOR THE WORLD, which is essential for genuine living, unlike a purely intellectual existence focused on external achievements.
"Our sense-life is central and fundamental to our human experience. The richness and fullness of our lives depends especially upon the richness and fullness, upon the delicacy and quality of our sense-life. […]

Living through the senses is living in love. When you love anything, you want to fill your consciousness with it. You want to affirm its existence. You feel that it is good and that it should be in the world and be what it is. You want other people to look at it and enjoy it too. You want to look at it again and again. You want to know it, to know it better and better, and you want other people to do the same. In fact, you are appreciating and enjoying it for *itself*, and that is all that you want. This kind of knowledge is primarily of the senses. It is not of the intellect. You don’t want merely to know about the object; often you don’t want to know about it at all. What you do want is to know it. Intellectual knowledge tells us about the world, it gives us knowledge *about* things, not knowledge *of* them. It does not reveal the world as it is. Only emotional knowledge can do that. […]

The fundamental element in the development of the emotional life is the training of this capacity to live in the senses, to become more and more delicately and completely aware of the world around us, because it is a good half of the meaning of life to be so. It is training in sensitiveness… If we limit awareness so that it merely feeds the intellect with the material for thought, our actions will be intellectually determined. They will be mechanical, planned, thought-out. Our sensitiveness is being limited to a part of ourselves — the brain in particular — and, therefore, we will act only with part of ourselves, at least so far as our actions are consciously and rationally determined. If, on the other hand, we live in awareness, seeking the full development of our sensibility to the world, we shall soak ourselves in the life of the world around us; with the result that we shall act with the whole of ourselves. […]

If we allow ourselves to be completely sensitive and completely absorbed in our awareness of the world around, we have a direct emotional experience of the real value in the world, and we respond to this by behaving in ways which carry the stamp of reason upon them in their appropriateness and grace and freedom. The creative energy of the world absorbs us into itself and acts through us. This, I suppose, is what people mean by “inspiration.” […]

The reason why our emotional life is so undeveloped is that we habitually suppress a great deal of our sensitiveness and train our children from the earliest years to suppress much of their own. It might seem strange that we should cripple ourselves so heavily in this way… We are afraid of what would be revealed to us if we did not. In imagination we feel sure that it would be lovely to live with a full and rich awareness of the world. But in practice sensitiveness hurts. It is not possible to develop the capacity to see beauty without developing also the capacity to see ugliness, for they are the same capacity. The capacity for joy is also the capacity for pain. We soon find that any increase in our sensitiveness to what is lovely in the world increases also our capacity for being hurt. That is the dilemma in which life has placed us. We must choose between a life that is thin and narrow, uncreative and mechanical, with the assurance that even if it is not very exciting it will not be intolerably painful; and a life in which the increase in its fullness and creativeness brings a vast increase in delight, but also in pain and hurt. […]

The emotional life is not simply a part or an aspect of human life. It is not, as we so often think, subordinate, or subsidiary to the mind. It is the core and essence of human life. The intellect arises out of it, is rooted in it, draws its nourishment and sustenance from it, and is the subordinate partner in the human economy. This is because the intellect is essentially instrumental. Thinking is not living. At its worst it is a substitute for living; at its best a means of living better… The emotional life is our life, both as awareness of the world and as action in the world, so far as it is lived for its own sake. Its value lies in itself, not in anything beyond it which it is a means of achieving. […]

The education of the intellect to the exclusion of the education of the emotional life… will inevitably create an instrumental conception of life, in which all human activity will be valued as a means to an end, never for itself. When it is the persistent and universal tendency in any society to concentrate upon the intellect and its training, the result will be a society which amasses power, and with power the means to the good life, but which has no correspondingly developed capacity for living the good life for which it has amassed the means… We have immense power, and immense resources; we worship efficiency and success; and we do not know how to live finely. I should trace the condition of affairs almost wholly to our failure to educate our emotional life.”
(John Macmurray, Reason and Emotion, 1935)