E1.7. THE PATH OF SPIRITUAL PRACTICE IS A TECHNIQUE OF THE SELF, founded on a relationship with life, the world, and others. It aims to instigate inner transformation in the person who partakes in it, towards liberation.
"Days of Inertia is a sculpture made up of several fragments of ceramic tile, randomly broken and scattered on the floor. Each tile is coated with a layer of hydrophobic varnish: a limpid water emerges, transforming t
he slabs into an archipelago of fractioned surfaces with shimmering reflections. The artist exploits the plasticity of water, which interests her as much for its essential link with human life as for its chemical characteristics. Supported by ordinary elements, both irregular and transitory, the slow, imperceptible evaporation that occurs invites the viewer to admit states of instability. Here, Nina Canell reveals the invisible energies that animate matter."
(Curatorship Pinault Collection)

E1.7.A. SPIRITUAL PRACTICES AIM TO ELIMINATE SUFFERING LINKED TO OUR ENDLESS DESIRES AND ATTACHMENT TO REALITY, PREPARING US FOR JOYFUL DETACHMENT. 
These practices also strive to help us perceive reality more clearly by freeing us from the images we've created, which distract us from true presence.
These traditions often critique the limitations of language as a tool for understanding them. Despite this, we will attempt to introduce them, as they seem essential to a comprehensive approach to the philosophy of happiness.

E1.7.A.1. THE EXPERIENCE OF ETERNITY CAN ONLY TAKE PLACE IN TOTAL SINGULARITY, WITHOUT ACTIVITY OR SPEECH. This experience cannot be expressed or understood through human words or actions.

E1.7.A.1.1. THE EXPERIENCE OF THE ETERNAL NEITHER GIVES RISE TO ANY ACTIVITY NOR CAN IT DO SO. Even the mental activity that continues within us, aided by words, is not only clearly incapable of expressing it, but it can moreover only interrupt and undermine the experience itself.

E1.7.A.1.1_REF1_PH. METAPHYSICAL REFLECTION ON ETERNITY "In our context it is of no great importance whether Socrates himself or Plato discovered the eternal as the true center of strictly metaphysical thought. It weighs heavily in favor of Socrates that he alone among the great thinkers—unique in this as in many other respects—never cared to write down his thoughts; for it is obvious that, no matter how concerned a thinker may be with eternity, the moment he sits down to write his thoughts he ceases to be concerned primarily with eternity and shifts his attention to leaving some trace of them. He has entered the vita activa and chosen its way of permanence and potential immortality. One thing is certain: it is only in Plato that concern with the eternal and the life of the philosopher are seen as inherently contradictory and in conflict
with the striving for immortality, the way of life of the citizen, the bios politikos.

The philosopher's experience of the eternal, which to Plato was arrheton ("unspeakable"), and to Aristotle aneu logon ("without word"), and which later was conceptualized in the paradoxical nunc stans ("the standing now"), can occur only outside the realm of human affairs and outside the plurality of men, as we know from the Cave parable in Plato's Republic, where the philosopher, having liberated himself from the fetters that bound him to his fellow men, leaves the cave in perfect "singularity," as it were,
neither accompanied nor followed by others. Politically speaking, if to die is the same as "to cease to be among men," experience of the eternal is a kind of death, and the only thing that separates it from real death is that it is not final because no living creature can endure it for any length of time. And this is precisely what separates
the vita contemplativa from the vita activa in medieval thought. Yet it is decisive that the experience of the eternal, in contradistinction to that of the immortal, has no correspondence with and cannot be transformed into any activity whatsoever, since even the activity of thought, which goes on within one's self by means of words, is obviously not only inadequate to render it but would interrupt and ruin the experience itself."
(Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition, 1958)

E1.7.A.1.1_REF2_PO. “THE WORDS THAT WILL COME UP KNOW ABOUT US WHAT WE DON'T KNOW ABOUT THEM. For a moment we will be the crew of this fleet made up
of unruly units and, for the duration of a squall, its admiral. Then the open sea will take it back, leaving us to our silty brooks and our frosted barbed wire”
(René Char, The vine leaf, Songs of the balandrane, 1977)


"LES MOTS QUI VONT SURGIR SAVENT DE NOUS CE QUE NOUS IGNORONS D’EUX. Un moment nous serons l’équipage de cette flotte composée
d’unités rétives et le temps d’un grain, son amiral. Puis le large le reprendra, nous laissant à nos torrents limoneux et à nos barbelés givrés"
(René Char, La feuille vineuse, Chants de la Balandrane, 1977)

E1.7.A.1.1_REF3_CUR HIRAYAMA (KOJI YAKUSHO) CLEANS TOKYO’S PUBLIC TOILETS FOR A LIVING, rising before dawn to gently water the seedlings he grows in his home and then drive off to begin his shift.Hirayama clearly derives enjoyment from performing his work well, but there’s more to his life than labor, and more to this movie than a simplistic celebration of manual toil.

Hirayama is a man of few words, observing Tokyo and its inhabitants with a tenderness and patience that, if overlooked, could be mistaken for a simple disposition. He deeply observes people and his surroundings, finding immense satisfaction in the beauty of nature, music, literature, and human interactions. His interactions are devoid of pride, even when overlooked due to his job, and he exhibits no anger, even when faced with adversity. He displays empathy and tenderness towards people of all ages, being able to establish intimate relationships inrecord time with kids, adolescent and adults alike.

Hirayama is an educated man who reads a classical literature book each month. He is adaptable, despite adhering to a routine. He understands that his wisdom cannot be conveyed merely through words, but through smiles, loving actions, jokes, and games. Hirayama embodies the traits of a Zen master.

Watch the trailer: https://www.imdb.com/title/tt27503384/?ref_=ext_shr_lnk

E1.7.A.1.2. "MOST OF WHAT FOLLOWS WILL HAVE TO HAVE A RATHER NEGATIVE QUALITY. The truth is revealed by removing things that stand in its light, an art not unlike sculpture, in which the artist creates, not by building, but by hacking away."

E1.7.A.1.2_REF1_PH. "V. ON BEING AWARE
[...] Because awareness is a view of reality free from ideas and judgments, it is clearly impossible to define and write down what it reveals. Anything which can be described is an idea, and I cannot make a positive statement about something - the real world - which is not an idea. I shall therefore have to be content with talking about the false impressions which awareness removes, rather than the truth which it reveals. The latter can only be symbolized with words which mean little or nothing to those without a direct understanding of the truth in question.
What is true and positive is too real and too living to be described, and to try to describe it is like putting red paint on a red rose. Therefore most of what follows will have to have a rather negative quality. The truth is revealed by removing things that stand in its light, an art not unlike sculpture, in which the artist creates, not by building, but by hacking away."
(Alan Watts, The wisdom of insecurity, 1951)

E1.7.B.2.4.d.i.wE1.7.A.1.2. SCULPT YOUR SOUL TO REVEAL ITS ORIGINAL BEAUTIFUL FORM
Plotinus asserts that the soul can only perceive God when illuminated by Him. To achieve this, we must strip away all excess and return to our innate simplicity. The soul must then contemplate its principle under the overabundant light of the Uncreated One. Plotinus encourages us to sculpt our soul by removing excess until its inherent beauty is unveiled. In doing so, the soul reaches a pure, unified state, transforming into a vision.

E1.7.A.1.3. “ZEN IN ITS ENTIRETY APPEARS AS A VAST PRACTICE DEVISED TO HALT LANGUAGE. It aims to disrupt the constant inner chatter that resonates within us, even in our sleep. Its purpose is to empty, to stupefy, and to silence the soul's incessant chatter.”

E1.7.A.1.3_REF1_PH  "HOW ADMIRABLE HE IS
Who does not think "Life is ephemeral"
when he sees a flash of lightning.
[Basho] [...]

EXEMPTION FROM MEANING

When the Sixth Patriarch gives his instructions concerning the 'mondo', a question-and-answer exercise, he recommends, in order to confuse the paradigmatic functioning more completely, as soon as a term is posited, to shift toward its adverse term ("If, questioning you, someone interrogates you about non-being, answer with being. If you are questioned about the ordinary man, answer by speaking about the master, etc." ) , so as to make the mockery of the paradigm and the mechanical character of meaning all the more apparent. What is aimed at (by a mental technigue whose precision, patience, refinement, and learning attest to how difficult Oriental thought regards the peremption of meaning), what is aimed at is the establishment of the sign, i.e., classification (maya); constrained to the classification par excellence, that of language, the haiku
functions at least with a view to obtaining a flat language which nothing grounds (as is infallible in our poetry) on superimposed layers of meaning, what we might call the
"lamination" of symbols. When we are told that it was the noise of che frog which wakened Basho to the truth of Zen, we can understand (thought this is still too Western a way of speaking) that Basho discovered in this noise, not of course the motif of an "illumination," of a symbolic hyperesthesia, but rather an end of language: there is a moment when language ceases (a moment obtained by dint of many exercises), and it is this echoless breach which institutes at once the truth of Zen and the form - brief and empty - of the haiku. The denial of "development" is radical here, for it is not a question of halting language on a heavy, full , profound , mystical silence, or even on an emptiness of the soul which would be open to divine communicatton (Zen knows no God) ; what is posited must develop neither in discourse nor in the end of discourse: what is posited is 'matte', and all that one can do with it is to scrutinize it; this is what is recommended to the apprentice who is working on a koan (or anecdote proposed to him by his master): not to solve it, as if it had a meaning, nor even to perceive its absurdity (which is still a meaning), but to ruminate it "until the rooth falls out." 

All of Zen, of which the haiku is merely the literary branch, thus appears as an enormous praxis destined to halt language, to jam that kind of internal radiophony
continually sending in us, even in our sleep (perhaps this is the reason the apprentices arc sometimes kept from falling asleep) , to empty out, to stupefy, to dry up the soul's incoercible babble; and perhaps what Zen calls satori, which Westerners can translate only by certain vaguely Christian words (illumination, revelation, intuition), is no more than a panic suspension of language, the blank which erases in us the reign of the Codes, the breach of that internal recitation which constitutes our person; and if this state of a-language is a liberation, it is because, for the Buddhist experiment, the proliferation of secondary thoughts (the thought of thought), or what might be called the infinite supplement of supernumerary signifieds - a circle of which language itself is the depository and the model - appears as a jamming: it is on the
contrary the abolition of secondary thought which breaks the vicious infinity of language. In all these experiments, apparently, it is not a matter of crushing language beneath the mystic silence of the in effable, but of mastering it, of halting that verbal top which sweeps into its gyration the obsessional play of symbolic substitutions. In short, it is the symbol as semantic operation which is attacked."
(Roland Barthes, The Empire of Signs, 1970)

E1.7.A.1.3_REF1.2_PH  HAIKU, PERFECT ADEQUACY BETWEEN THE SIGNIFIER AND THE SIGNIFIED "In the haiku, the limitation of language is the object of a concern which is inconceivable to us, for it is not a question of being concise (i.e., shortening the signifier without diminishing the density of the signified) but on the contrary of
acting on the very root of meaning, so that this meaning will not melt, run, internalize, become implicit, disconnect, divagate into the infinity of metaphors, into the spheres of the symbol. The brevity of the haiku is not formal ; the haiku is not a rich thought reduced to a brief form, but a brief event which immediately finds its proper form. The measurement of language is what the Westerner is most unfit for: not that his utterance is too long or too short, but all his rhetoric obliges him to make signifier and signified disproportionate, either by "diluting" the latter beneath the garrulous waves of the former, or by "deepening" form toward the implicit regions of content. The haiku's accuracy (which is nor at all an exact depiction of reality, but an adequation of signifier and signified, a suppression of margins, smudges, and interstices which usually exceed or perforate the semantic relation), this accuracy obviously has something musical about it (a music of meanings and not necessarily of sounds) : the haiku has the purity, the sphericality, and the very emptiness of a note of music; perhaps that is why it is spoken twice, in echo; to speak this exquisite language only once would be to attach a meaning to surprise, to effect, to the suddenness of perfection; to speak it many times would postulate that meaning is to be discovered in it, would simulate profundity; between the two, neither singular nor profound, the echo merely draws a line under the nullity of meaning."
(Roland Barthes, The Empire of Signs, 1970)

E1.7.A.1.3_REF2_PO  "THE WAY YOU CAN GO
isn’t the real way.
The name you can say
isn’t the real name.

Heaven and earth
begin in the unnamed:
name’s the mother
of the ten thousand things.

So the unwanting soul
sees what’s hidden,
and the ever-wanting soul
sees only what it wants."
(Lao Tzu: Tao Te Ching, a "rendition, not a translation" of the Tao Te Ching by Ursula Le Guin)

E1.7.A.1.4. "IS THAT WHAT THIS IS?" THE ANSWER CAME TO HIM IMMEDIATELY: NO, THAT, NOR ANYTHING IN THE WORLD CAN EVER BE ANYTHING BUT A NAME OF "IT", and names are just empty sounds. At that moment, the gap between him and it disappeared; or, as the philosophers say, there was no longer any separation between subject and object."

E1.7.A.1.4_REF1_TH "MAN STRUGGLES IN A NEVER-ENDING QUEST, CONSTANTLY SEEKING ANSWERS WITHOUT QUESTIONING THE QUEST ITSELF "Yet, seen from the outside, the trap in which he struggled was quite ordinary. He questioned only the fruits of his quest, not the quest itself. This made it endless, for there are an infinite number of places where one can find what one is looking for.[...]

From this perspective, there seemed to be no solution other than the Manichean opposition between finding and not finding. And it was precisely in this zero-sum game he was playing with himself that our man had locked himself in. 
It is very difficult to show clearly and convincingly how he became aware of the possibility of escaping. One of the factors that contributed to this was the undeniable fact that destiny seldom denied him the goal that seemed to him to be the goal. For, as we have seen, there is nothing more disappointing than a hope fulfilled, and nothing more attractive than a hope not yet realized.
He had reached the point where he was fully aware of his quest and the eternal question he asked himself about all aspects and contents of the world: "Is this it? And then, one day, a very small change occurred, one of those changes that are small enough to have great effects. As unlikely as it may seem, it was nothing more than a tiny shift: he no longer put the emphasis on this food over that. And suddenly the question became: "Is that it?" The answer came to him immediately: No, neither this nor anything else in the world can ever be just a name for "it," and names are just empty sounds. At that moment, the separation between him and it disappeared; or, as the philosophers say, there was no longer any separation between subject and object. No, this could never be it. "What the world does not have, it cannot hold," he kept saying aloud to himself; he also kept repeating these strangely meaningful words: "I am more myself than I am." It was clear now that the only reason he had not found what he was looking for was the search itself; it was because out there, in the world, you cannot find, and therefore never have, what you already are.
Then the words of the Apocalypse came true for him, "Time will be no more," and he fell into the eternity of the present moment.
But he remained in this timelessness only for a second, because he clung to it and, wanting to have it forever, he immediately resorted to the ultrasolution, which consists in naming this experience and trying to repeat it... "
(Paul Watzlawick, How to succeed in failing, 1988)

E1.7.A.2. CAN´T THIS LEVEL OF AWARENESS REALLY NOT BE SHARED?
"Synthetic description isn't suitable in this case - it assumes that our objective is always clear and all we need to do is unveil an already complete understanding to the reader. However, the process is progressive and personal, requiring us to accompany the learner step by step, address their comprehension gaps, and accommodate sudden revelations. Therefore, the only possible way to recount such an experience is through a narrative"... or a metaphor.

E1.7.A.2_REF1_PO "APPARITIONS
A vague mist hanging ‘round half the pages:
(Sometimes how strange and clear to the soul,
That all these solid things are indeed but apparitions, concepts, non-realities.)"
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.7.A.2_REF2_PH "THERE ARE TIMES IN LIFE when the question of whether it is possible to think differently or perceive differently is essential to continue to observe or reflect.
(Michel Foucault)

[...]

Getting started

[...]

Daisetz Teitaro Suzuki wrote about Zen that it is not only the prerogative of Buddhism, but that it is found in other philosophies or religions, such as Taoism, Christianity or Islam, and that it is precisely this "Zen element" that makes them "vital" and "inspiring": the research referred to here tries to situate itself on this global level, without any desire for syncretism or synthesis. I am convinced that, despite the spectacular diversity of its forms, we can speak globally of a "path" and propose a description of it. All paths present themselves as an attitude towards oneself, one's mind and one's body, in short, as what Michel Foucault calls a practice or technique of the self, the aim of which is to bring about an inner change in the person who engages in it. He introduces this notion in his Histoire de la sexualité, defining these "arts of being" - another name he gives to them - as "reflective and voluntary practices by which people not only establish rules of conduct for themselves, but also seek to transform themselves, to modify their individual being, and to make their life a work that has certain aesthetic values and meets certain criteria of style". Well, this book tries to make a study of spiritual practice in this spirit. Therefore, I wanted to characterize the "foundations" of spirituality and explore what underlies it, its purpose, its technique, its internal logic and, above all, its concept of inner change. Why? To better understand the answer it offers to the question that has always been central to me - how to live? It is this fundamental question that will animate all the descriptions and analyses - until it finally reveals its limitations when the path we follow goes beyond it".
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond wisdom, How to live?, 2023)

E1.7.A.2_REF2.1_PH SPIRITUALITY DOES NOT REQUIRE MYSTICAL EXPERIENCES OR PRIOR KNOWLEDGE. "Rest assured, however, that it is not necessary to have had mystical experiences, to have been in trance, or to have had visions in order to acquire the right to deal with them. Ecstasy is not mandatory. Nor is it necessary to have reached the end of the road, if indeed there is one. Everyone is, or can be, qualified in different degrees and in different ways. No prior knowledge is required - you just have to want it. Because you can be happy, lead an exciting life, be useful to others and to society without ever coming across this path, understanding it, or even identifying it, because, as we will see, spirituality is not defined by the content of a life, but by a relationship to life. But if you find the path and want to walk it, you have to be completely personal, deeply subjective, which means you have to have the courage to rely on your own inner self and what it allows you to glimpse, however dimly. It is from this intimate focus that knowledge must be approached, interpreted, revisited, reshaped, regardless of the corpus to which it belongs or the label that is attached to it.

It is therefore understandable that a summary is inappropriate here - it would assume that what we are looking for is already clear, and that all that remains is to present the reader with a complete understanding; but this is a gradual and personal process, so that the student must be followed step by step, addressing what he understands or does not understand, and opening himself to what is suddenly revealed to him - the presentation of such an experience can therefore only be a narrative".
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond wisdom, How to live?, 2023)

E1.7.A.2_REF2.1.a_PH "PLAYING WITH THE FRAMEWORK [...]

the stakes are high, because what is at issue here is the compatibility between two ways of being, two conceptions of existence. One is in tune with so-called everyday life, and even enlivens it; the other is fundamentally foreign to it, and puts it on hold. Do we have to choose, like Achilles, between these two lives? Is that really possible? Or do we have to do something other than choose?

The answer is simple: we have to do something other than choose

What then?

Study, examine.

But what?

The way we see things.

If we take a closer look, in order to better understand the nature of the opposition between the frame and what is outside of it, we realize that it is we who interpret it as an exclusion, positing frame and non-frame as terms between which a choice must necessarily be made. Indeed, language seems to invite us to do this through the binary nature of its syntax, but this is a verbal illusion, because the symmetry it presents does not necessarily imply this: the terms it opposes can in fact tolerate each other. When we become aware of this trap set by words, a new perspective opens up: we discover that the frame can enter into a relationship with its exteriority and compose an astonishing assemblage with what it excludes: and that it is precisely this constitution that gives certain psychological or anthropological configurations a meaning that can be described as "spiritual". [...]

BISSOCIATION

Can we describe more precisely the psychological disposition, the inner position that allows transgression or humor? It is complex. One is both inside and outside the framework; one mocks it and upholds it; one departs from it without losing sight of it... Arthur Koestler, the author of The Quest for the Ultimate Nature of Reality, studied this configuration in a very rich essay, Archimedes' Scream, and gave it the name 'bissociation'. It is, he says, "the perception of a situation or an idea (...) on two levels of reference (...) each of which has its own internal logic, but which are usually incompatible. [...]

Koestler defines three categories of bissociation: humor, where the two frames of reference collide; aesthetic experience, where they confront each other; and invention, where they merge. [...]"
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond wisdom, How to live?, 2023)

E1.7.A.2_REF3_PO "SEMI-DARKNESS
I was in one of those forests where the sun has no access but where, at night, the stars penetrate. This place was only allowed to exist, because the states' inquisition had forgotten it. The abandoned trails showed me their contempt. I had lost the compulsion to punish. In places, the memory of a force caressed the peasant fugue of the grass. I governed myself without doctrine, with a serene vehemence. I was the equal of things whose secret held under the ray of a wing. For most of us, the essential is never born, and those who possess it cannot exchange it without harming themselves. No one is willing to lose what he has conquered at the apex of his effort! Otherwise it would be youth and grace, source and delta would have the same purity. 

I was in one of those forests where the sun has no access but where, at night, the stars penetrate for implacable hostilities."
(René Char, The loyal adversaries)

"PÉNOMBRE 
J’étais dans une de ces forêts où le soleil n’a pas accès mais où, la nuit, les étoiles pénètrent. Ce lieu n’avait le permis d’exister, que parce que l’inquisition des États l’avait négligée. Les servitudes abandonnées me marquaient leur mépris. La hantise de punir m’était retirée. Par endroit, le souvenir d’une force caressait la fugue paysanne de l’herbe. Je me gouvernais sans doctrine, avec une véhémence sereine. J’étais l’égal de choses dont le secret tenait sous le rayon d’une aile. Pour la plupart, l’essentiel n’est jamais né, et ceux qui le possèdent ne peuvent l’échanger sans se nuire. Nul ne consent à perdre ce qu’il a conquis à la pointe de sa peine! Autrement ce serait la jeunesse et la grâce, source et delta auraient la même pureté. 

J’étais dans une de ces forêts où le soleil n’a pas accès mais où, la nuit, les étoiles pénètrent pour d’implacables hostilités."
(René Char, Les loyaux adversaires)

E1.7.A.2_REF4_PH "WEAKNESS 
The word is inappropriate. I derive it from a certain affinity between the idea I want to express and the word of the Gospel: my strength is in my weakness; but I understand it more in the sense of the Tao, that is, outside any transcendence: the Tao practitioner, in fact, attenuates his own state to be able to plunge into the darkness of others: He is hesitant like someone crossing a river in winter; indecisive like someone afraid of his neighbors; respectful like a guest; trembling like ice about to melt; simple like a piece of wood not yet carved; empty like a valley; shapeless like troubled water. → Perhaps the extraordinary boldness (as opposed to arrogance) of this Neutral comes from the unexpected beauty of the metaphors? Would the Neutral depend on the metaphor?"
(Roland Barthes, The Neutral, Course at the Collège de France, 1977-1978)

E1.7.A.2_REF5_LIT “THE DICTIONARY OF OBSCURE SORROWS: UNCOMMONLY LOVELY INVENTED WORDS FOR WHAT WE FEEL BUT CANNOT NAME
Words are events, they do things, change things. They transform both speaker and hearer; they feed energy back and forth and amplify it. They feed understanding or emotion back and forth and amplify it,” Ursula K. Le Guin wrote in her exquisite manifesto for the magic of real human conversation. Each word is a portable cathedral in which we clarify and sanctify our experience, a reliquary and a laboratory, holding the history of our search for meaning and the pliancy of the possible future, of there being richer and deeper dimensions of experience than those we name in our surface impressions. In the roots of words we find a portal to the mycelial web of invisible connections undergirding our emotional lives — the way “sadness” shares a Latin root with “sated” and originally meant a fulness of experience, the way “holy” shares a Latin root with “whole” and has its Indo-European origins in the notion of the interleaving of all things.
Because we know their power, we ask of words to hold what we cannot hold — the complexity of experience, the polyphony of voices inside us narrating that experience, the longing for clarity amid the confusion. There is, therefore, singular disorientation to those moments when they fail us — when these prefabricated containers of language turn out too small to contain emotions at once overwhelmingly expansive and acutely specific.

John Koenig offers a remedy for this lack in The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows (public library) — a soulful invitation to “get to work redefining the world around us, until our language more closely matches the reality we experience.”
The title, though beautiful, is misleading — the emotional states Koenig defines are not obscure but, despite their specificity, profoundly relatable and universal; they are not sorrows but emissaries of the bittersweet, with all its capacity for affirming the joy of being alive: maru mori (“the heartbreaking simplicity of ordinary things”), apolytus (“the moment you realize you are changing as a person, finally outgrowing your old problems like a reptile shedding its skin”), the wends (“the frustration that you’re not enjoying an experience as much as you should… as if your heart had been inadvertently demagnetized by a surge of expectations”), anoscetia (“the anxiety of not knowing ‘the real you'”), dès vu (“the awareness that this moment will become a memory”).
Koenig composites his imaginative etymologies from a multitude of sources: names and places from folklore and pop culture, terms from chemistry and astronomy, the existing lexicon of languages living and dead, from Latin and Ancient Greek to Japanese and Māori. […]

Emerging from the various entries is a reminder, both haunting and comforting, that despite how singular our experience feels, we are all grappling with just about the same core concerns; that our time is short and precious; that all of our confusions are a single question, the best answer to which is love.”
(Maria Popova's review of John Koenig's The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021 - in The Marginalian)

E1.7.A.2_REF5.a_LIT “IN LANGUAGE, ALL THINGS ARE POSSIBLE. Which means that no emotion is untranslatable. No sorrow is too obscure to define. We just have to do it. […]
Despite what dictionaries would have us believe, this world is still mostly undefined. […]"
(John Koenig, The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021)

E1.7.A.2_REF5.b_LIT “THERE ARE WORDS THAT ANCHOR US IN BOTH THE SMALLNESS AND THE GRANDEUR OF EXISTENCE, its fierce fragility, its devastating beauty; words tasked with holding the hardest truth — that we are children of chance, born of a billion bright improbabilities that prevailed over the infinitely greater odds of nonexistence, living with only marginal and mostly illusory control over the circumstances of our lives and other people’s choices, forever vulnerable to the accidents of a universe insentient to our hopes.”
(Maria Popova's review of John Koenig's The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021 - in The Marginalian)

E1.7.A.2_REF5.b.i_LIT “GALAGOG
n. the state of being simultaneously entranced and unsettled by the vastness of the cosmos, which makes your deepest concerns feel laughably quaint, yet vanishingly rare.

From galaxy, a gravitationally bound system of millions of stars + agog, awestruck. Pronounced “gal-uh-gawg.”
(John Koenig, The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021)

E1.7.A.2_REF5.b.ii_LIT “CRAXIS
n. the unease of knowing how quickly your circumstances could change on you—that no matter how carefully you shape your life into what you want it to be, the whole thing could be overturned in an instant, with little more than a single word, a single step, a phone call out of the blue, and by the end of next week you might already be looking back on this morning as if it were a million years ago, a poignant last hurrah of normal life.

Latin crāstinō diē, tomorrow + praxis, the process of turning theory into reality. Pronounced “krak-sis.”
(John Koenig, The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021)

E1.7.A.2_REF5.b.iii_LIT “SUERZA
n. a feeling of quiet amazement that you exist at all; a sense of gratitude that you were even born in the first place, that you somehow emerged alive and breathing despite all odds, having won an unbroken streak of reproductive lotteries that stretches all the way back to the beginning of life itself.

Spanish suerte, luck + fuerza, force. Pronounced “soo-wair-zuh.”
(John Koenig, The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021)

E1.7.A.2_REF5.b.iv_LIT “MAHPIOHANZIA
n. the frustration of being unable to fly, unable to stretch out your arms and vault into the air, having finally shrugged off the burden of your own weight, which you’ve been carrying your entire life without a second thought.

Lakota mahpiohanzi, “a shadow caused by a cloud.” Pronounced “mah-pee-oh-han-zee-uh.”
(John Koenig, The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021)

E1.7.A.3. AS MOMENTS OF PRESENCE AND GRACE ESCAPE RATIONALITY, POETS KNOW HOW TO FORMULATE THESE EXPERIENCES ON THE EDGE OF LANGUAGE AND THE UNSPEAKABLE, and share them with us. Is this not even the essence of poetry?
"I know the skies in thunderbolts, a whirlwind’s might,
And the surf, and the currents, to dusks I have been,
And dawns as sublime as exalted doves in flight,
And I saw at times that which man but thinks he’s seen!"
(Arthur Rimbaud, The Drunken Boat, 1871)

E1.7.A.3.1. POETRY: AN ART THAT CONVEYS A SENSE OF THE UNIVERSE.
Paul Valéry characterizes poetry and poetic emotion as an emerging perception of a world or comprehensive system of relationships. In this system, beings, things, events, and actions are indistinctly but accurately linked to the modes and laws of our general sensibility. To preserve this emotion, humans have devised methods to capture and replicate it through various arts, including music, painting, and architecture.

E1.7.A.3.1_REF1_PH  POETRY COMBINES INDIVIDUAL INTERESTS WITH A UNIVERSAL FEELING "The particular interests and affections of an individual never fail to combine with
that sense of a universe which is characteristic of poetry. 

I said: sense of a universe. I meant that the poetic state or emotion seems to me to consist in a dawning perception, a tendency toward perceiving a world, or complete system of relations, in which beings, things, events, and acts, although they may resemble, each to each, those which fill and form the tangible world—the immediate world from which they are borrowed—stand, however, in an indefinable, but wonderfully accurate, relationship to the modes and laws of our general sensibility. So, the value of these well-known objects and beings is in some way altered. They respond to each other and combine quite otherwise than in ordinary conditions. They become—if you will allow the expression—musicalized, somehow commensurable, echoing each other. The poetic universe defined in this way bears a strong analogy to the universe of dream.

Since this word dream has found its way into my talk, I shall add, by the way, that in modern times, since Romanticism, there has arisen an understandable but rather regrettable confusion between the notion of poetry and that of dream. Neither a dream nor a reverie is necessarily poetic. They can be so; but figures formed by chance are only by chance harmonious figures. However, a dream makes us see by a common and frequent experience how our consciousness can be invaded, filled, made up by an assembly of productions remarkably different from the mind's ordinary reactions and perceptions. It gives us the familiar example of a closed world where all real things can be represented, but where everything appears and is modified solely by the fluctuations of our deepest sensibility. 

In very much the same way the poetic state begins, develops, and dissolves within us. That is, it is wholly irregular, inconstant, involuntary, fragile, and we lose it, as we acquire it, by accident. There are times in our Hfe when this emotion and these precious formations do not appear. We do not even thinIc them possible. Chance gives them and chance takes them away.

But man is man only through his will and power to preserve or to re-establish what it is importan t for him to salvage from the natural decay of things. Man has thus done for this higher emotion what he has done or tried to do for all things that perish and are regretted. He has sought and found means of filing and reviving at will his finest or purest states, of reproducing, communicating, and preserving for centuries the formulas of his enthusiasm, his ecstasy, and his own peculiar responses; and as a fortunate and wonderful consequence, the invention of these methods ofpreservation has simultaneously given him the idea and the power of artificially developing and enriching the fragments of poetic life with which his nature from time to time presents him. He has learned to retrieve from the flight of time, and to detach from events,
these miraculous, fortuitous forms and perceptions which would have been irrevocably lost if the ingenious and sagacious mind had not helped the mind of the moment—had not
brought the aid of its inventions to the purely sensitive self. All the arts have been created to perpetuate and change, each according to its essence, an ephemeral moment of delight into the certainty of an infinity of delightful moments. A work is no more than the material instrument of this potential increase or reproduction. Music, painting, architecture are the different means corresponding to the different senses. Now among these means of producing or reproducing a poetic world, of organizing it so as to endure, and of amplifying it by conscious work, the most ancient, perhaps the most direct, and certainly the most complex, is language. [...]

If poetry really affects someone, it is not by dividing him in his nature, by communicating to him illusions of a fancied and purely mental life. It does not impose on him a false reality that demands the docility of the mind and hence the absence of the body. Poetry must extend over the whole being; it stimulates the muscular organization by its rhythms, it frees or unleashes the verbal faculties, ennobling their whole action, it regulates our depths, for poetry aims to arouse or reproduce the unity and harmony of the living person, an extraordinary unity that shows itself when a man is possessed by an intense feeling that leaves none ofhis powers disengaged. In fact, the difference between the action of a poem and of an ordinary narrative is physiological. The poem unfolds itself in a richer sphere of our functions of movement, it
exacts from us a participation that is nearer to complete action, whereas the story and the novel transform us rather into slaves of a dream and of our faculty of being hallucinated. But I repeat that innumerable degrees and transitional forms exist between these two limits of literary expression."
(Paul Valéry, REMARKS ON POETRY IN ART, AESTHETICS, POETRY - 9 Conférences, Speeches and Remarks 1923-1939)

E1.6.G.2.5_REF2_PO.wE1.7.A.3.1

E1.7.A.3.1_REF3_PO "AT THE STILL POINT OF TURNING WORLD. Neither flesh nor fleshness; 
Neither from nor towards; at the still point, there the dance is, 
But neither arrest nor movement. 
And do not call it fixity. 
Where past and future are gathered. Neither movement from nor towards. 
Neither ascent nor decline. Except for the point, the still point, 
There would be no dance, and there is only the dance. 
I can only say, there we have been: but I cannot say where. 
And I cannot say, how long, for that is to place it in time. 
The inner freedom from the practical desire. 
The release from action and suffering, release from the inner 
And the outer compulsion, yet surrounded 
By a grace of sense, a white light still and moving. 
Movement without motion, concentration 
Without elimination, both a new world 
And the old made explicit, understood 
In the completion of its partial ecstasy. 
The resolution of its partial horror [...]."
(T.S. Eliot, The Four Quartets, 1943)

E1.7.A.3.1_REF4_PO "FROM HERE                                                   TO THE HORIZON
Across the meadow
of duvets dusted 
Something has been interrupted
the tenuous thread of a kite
the gray ribbon of the snail
the too distant call of a woman
or the circle of birdsong
whose nest suddenly was undone

In spite of everything
a breath persists 
in chasing its shadow
Until it loses its breath
over the meadow
covered in smoke

From here                                                      to the horizon”
(François Cheng, The book of the median void, 2004)


"D'ICI                                                   À L'HORIZON
Par-dessus la prairie
                           de duvets saupoudrée     
Quelque chose s'est interrompu
       le fil ténu d’un cerf-volant
       le gris ruban de l'escargot
       l'appel trop lointain d’une femme
       ou le cercle des chants d´oiseaux
                            au nid défait d'un coup

En dépit de tout
       un souffle s´obstine   
                            à pourchasser son ombre
Jusqu'à en perdre haleine
       par-dessus la prairie
                             à la fumée livrée

D'ici                                                      à l'horizon"
(François Cheng, Le livre du vide médian, 2004)

E1.7.A.3.1_REF4.1_PO "ENTER INTO QUIETNESS
So that in you
rhythm
is reborn
Enter into silence
So that from afar
music returns to you
May nostalgia
no longer be a tear
May hope
no longer be waiting
May lost life become
Another heart beating
in the depths of your body
More than the uncompromising seasons
sovereign”
(François Cheng, The book of the median void, 2004)


"ENTRER DANS LA QUIÉTUDE
Pour qu’en toi
renaisse la rythmique
Entrer dans le silence
Pour que de loin
te revienne la musique
Que nostalgie
ne soit plus déchirure
Qu’espérance
ne soit plus attente
Que la vie perdue devienne
Un cœur autre qui bat
au fin fond de ton corps
Plus que les saisons intransigeantes
souverain"
(François Cheng, Le livre du vide médian, 2004)

E1.7.A.3.1_REF5_PO ""I AM GRATEFUL for the steps that lead you aimlessly to a square with a fountain. 
For the whim that leads the hiker from the ridge to the path of blackberries. 
For all these blessings of fruit, rain, sun, or wind, of unbuttoned streets, clouds in windows, and songs heard behind doors. 
I am grateful for chance, for its arrows of every kind. 
For the friend in the bar, for the smile of an encounter, for the lover of a moment. 
For that little happiness to which we finally surrender what really matters.
(Michel Baglin, Alcohol of the wind, 2010)


"JE RENDS GRÂCE À ces pas qui vous mènent sans but sur une place à fontaine. 
Au caprice conduisant le randonneur de crêtes sur le chemin des mûres. 
A toutes ces aubaines de fruits, de pluies, de soleil ou de vent,
de rues dégrafées, de nuages dans les vitres, et de chansons surprises derrière les portes. 
Je rends grâce au hasard, à ses flèches de tout bois. 
A l’ami du comptoir, au sourire de rencontre, à l’amoureuse d’un instant. 
A ce petit bonheur auquel on abandonne au bout du compte ce qui compte vraiment."
(Michel Baglin, L’Alcool des vents, 2010)

E1.7.A.3.1_REF6_PO  AWAKENED COSMOS: POETRY AS SPIRITUAL PRACTICE
"Poetry is the cosmos awakened to itself. Narrative, reportage, explanation, idea: language is the medium of self-identity, and we normally live within that clutch of identity, identity that seems to look out at and think about the Cosmos as if from some outside space. But poetry pares language down to a bare minimum, thereby opening it to silence. And it is there in the margins of silence that poetry finds its deepest possibilities — for there it can render dimensions of consciousness that are much more expansive than that identity-center, primal dimensions of consciousness as the Cosmos awakened to itself. At least this is true for classical Chinese poetry, shaped as it is by Taoist and Ch’an (Zen) Buddhist thought into a form of spiritual practice. In its deepest possibilities, its inner wilds, poetry is the Cosmos awakened to itself — and the history of that awakening begins where the Cosmos begins. [...]

Although ancient Chinese poets and philosophers didn’t describe it in these scientific terms, this same sense of consciousness as the Cosmos open to itself was an operating assumption for them — though perhaps here existence is a better word than Cosmos, as it suggests the sense of all reality as a single tissue. This existence-tissue is the central concern of Lao Tzu’s Tao Te Ching (sixth century B.C.E.) — the seminal work in Taoism, the spiritual branch of Chinese philosophy that eventually evolved into Ch’an Buddhism. Lao Tzu called that existence-tissue Tao, which originally meant “Way,” as in a road or pathway. But Lao Tzu used it to describe the empirical Cosmos as a single living tissue that is inexplicably generative… an ontological pathway by which things emerge from the existence-tissue as distinct forms, evolve through their lives, and then vanish back into that tissue, only to be transformed and reemerge in new forms. It is a majestic and nurturing Cosmos, but also a refugee Cosmos: all change and transformation, each of the ten thousand things in perpetual flight, always on its way somewhere else. [...]

The abiding aspiration of spiritual and artistic practice in ancient China was to cultivate consciousness as that existence-tissue Cosmos open to itself, awakened to itself: looking at itself, hearing and touching itself, tasting and smelling itself, and also thinking itself, feeling itself — all in the singular ways made possible by the individuality of each particular person. This is consciousness in the open, wild and woven into the generative Cosmos: wholesale belonging. […]

At its deepest level, the tissue of Tao is described by that cosmology in terms of two fundamental elements: Absence (無) and Presence (有). Presence is simply the empirical universe, the ten thousand things in constant transformation, and Absence is the generative void from which this ever-changing realm of Presence perpetually emerges. And so, Tao is the generative process through which all things arise and pass away — Absence burgeoning forth into the great transformation of Presence… The concepts of Absence and Presence are simply an approach to the fundamental nature of things. In the end, of course, they are the same: Presence grows out of and returns to Absence and is therefore always a manifestation of it. Or to state it more precisely, Absence and Presence are simply different ways of seeing Tao: either as a single formless tissue that is somehow always generative, or as that tissue in its ten thousand distinct and always changing forms. [...]

A poem is not simply about its apparent content — the particular life-experience described in the poem — as it seems from the perspective of our own cultural assumptions, which is the view we see in a translation of such a poem. It is, instead, about the emptiness surrounding it, each poem revealing that emptiness in a singular way. And what is that emptiness? It is, finally, the wild existence-tissue Cosmos open to itself, awakened to itself in the form of human consciousness. [...]

However confused and unenlightened our lives may seem, however blind to that everyday enlightenment we may be — we are always already wild consciousness in the open, always already the Cosmos aware of itself, awakened to itself. […]

This awakening is the nature of everyday experience, the very fabric of our lives, for in the actual moment of pure perception, there is no self involved. If we look closely at what happens in consciousness, we find nothing more than the perceptual experience itself. It is only upon reflection afterward that we describe it as an “I” hearing — a description dictated not by experience itself, but by a body of philosophical assumptions."
(David Hinton, Awakened Cosmos: The Mind of Classical Chinese Poetry, 2019)

E1.7.A.3.1_REF7_PO "THE POETS LIGHT BUT LAMPS -
Themselves - go out -
The Wicks they stimulate 
If vital Light 

Inhere as do the Suns -
Each Age a Lens 
Disseminating their 
Circumference -"
(Emily Dickinson, 1865)

E1.7.A.3.1_REF8_PO ”FOREVER IS A
METAPHOR FOR NOW
Forever is a metaphor for now,
Imagining the moment shorn of motion,
Finding its analogy in how
The sense of self is separate from the notion.
Years erode us more than we allow.
Fear not, for in poetry is truth.
Our place among the gods remains assured.
Upon the rock of beauty lies the proof
Regarding what of wonder has endured.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

“FOREVER IS THE
STRANGEST THING
Forever is the strangest thing:
It's shorter than you think.
It starts at any time you like
And ends in just a wink.
You can forever be: right now
Is just as good as then.
The moment is quite all there is,
No matter where or when.
The moment is eternity,
And now is just a dream.
We see our lives in futures past,
But that's just how things seem.
Beyond the motion of the mind
Is something that is true:
As awesome as the universe,
As small as me and you.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E1.7.A.3.2. POEMS DO NOT SIMPLY EXPRESS. THEY MAKE, THEY FIND, THEY SOUND THINGS UNDISCOVERABLE BY OTHER MEANS. 
"Poetry itself, when allowed to, becomes within us a playable organ of perception, sounding out its own forms of knowledge and forms of discovery. Poems do not simply express. They make, they find, they sound (in both meanings of that word) things undiscoverable by other means. [...]
A poem plucks the interconnection of the experiencing self and all being. In poetry’s words, life calls to life with the same inevitability and gladness that bird calls to bird, whale to whale, frog to frog. Listening across the night or ocean or pond, they recognize one another and are warmed by that knowledge."

E1.7.A.3.2_REF1_PH "GOOD ART IS A TRUING OF VISION, in the way a saw is trued in the saw shop, to cut more cleanly. It is also a changing of vision. Entering a good poem, a person feels, tastes, hears, thinks, and sees in altered ways. Why ask art into a life at all, if not to be transformed and enlarged by its presence and mysterious means? … And by changing selves, one by one, art changes also the outer world that selves create and share…. Inside the intricate clockworks of language and music, event and life, what allows and invites us to feel and know as we do, and then increase our feeling and knowing? Such a question cannot be answered. “We” are different, from one another and, moment by moment, from even ourselves. “Art,” too, is a word deceptively single of surface. Still, following this question for thirty years has given me pleasure, and some sense of approaching more nearly a destination whose center cannot ever be mapped or reached. [...]

A mysterious quickening inhabits the depths of any good poem—protean, elusive, alive in its own right…. We feel something stir, shiver, swim its way into the world when a good poem opens its eyes. Poetry’s work is not simply the recording of inner or outer perception; it makes by words and music new possibilities of perceiving…. The eyes and ears must learn to abandon the habits of useful serving and take up instead a participatory delight in their own ends. A work of art is not a piece of fruit lifted from a tree branch: it is a ripening collaboration of artist, receiver, and world. […]

All writers recognize this surge of striking; in its energies the objects of the world are made new, alchemized by their passage through the imaginal, musical, world-foraging and word-forging mind.

This altered vision is the secret happiness of poems, of poets. It is as if the poem encounters the world and finds in it a hidden language, a Braille unreadable except when raised by the awakened imaginative mind. [...]


Poetry itself, when allowed to, becomes within us a playable organ of perception, sounding out its own forms of knowledge and forms of discovery. Poems do not simply express. They make, they find, they sound (in both meanings of that word) things undiscoverable by other means. […]

A poem is not the outer event or phenomenon it ostensibly describes, nor is it the feeling or insight it may seem to reveal or evoke. A poem may involve both, but is, more complexly, a living fabrication of new comprehension — “fabrication” meaning, not accidentally, both “lie,” “falsehood,” and, more simply and fundamentally, anything created and made: the bringing of something freshly into being. Fabric, whether of material or mind, is an interwoven invention: some substance — silk or cotton, wool or image — made stronger, larger than itself, by the dual-natured meeting of warp thread and weft thread. A work of art holds our lives as they are known when fully engaged with the multiple, crossing experience-strands of self, language, culture, emotion, senses, and mind. [...]

The desire of monks and mystics is not unlike that of artists: to perceive the extraordinary within the ordinary by changing not the world but the eyes that look… To form the intention of new awareness is already to transform and be transformed. [...]

A poem plucks the interconnection of the experiencing self and all being. In poetry’s words, life calls to life with the same inevitability and gladness that bird calls to bird, whale to whale, frog to frog. Listening across the night or ocean or pond, they recognize one another and are warmed by that knowledge."
(Jane Hirshfield,  Ten Windows: How Great Poems Transform the World, 2015)

E1.7.A.3.2_REF2_PO "PAPER BOATS

Poems are usually made of words
on paper [...]

Folded on themselves, 
they launch themselves into the world 
with the suicidal courage 
of paper boats."
(Ana Martins Marques, Paper Boats, Life Underwater, 2009)

E1.7.A.3.2_REF3_PO "TRULY, WE LIVE WITH MYSTERIES TOO MARVELOUS
TO BE UNDERSTOOD.

How grass can be nourishing in the
mouths of the lambs.
How rivers and stones are forever
in allegiance with gravity
while we ourselves dream of rising.
How two hands touch and the bonds will
never be broken.
How people come, from delight or the
scars of damage,
to the comfort of a poem.

Let me keep my distance, always, from those
who think they have the answers.

Let me keep company always with those who say
“Look!” and laugh in astonishment,
and bow their heads."
(Mary Oliver)

E1.7.A.3.2_REF4_PO “TO KNOW HOW TO CHANGE THE GAS CYLINDER 
is a detour, I know, to say something 
else 
some condition through which we eke out an existence to 
expand to 
redensify consciousness like bones 
to get out of the flow, but is it 
identifiable what happens then, is there 
a human way 
to describe what happens then or to talk about it that can 
emerge from the dark torrent 
of obscure sensations to rediscover oneself 
dry-dry-dry"
(Anne Belin, Keeping a distance from bodies, 2010)


"SAVOIR CHANGER LA BOUTEILLE DE GAZ 
	c’est un détour je le sais bien pour dire quelque 
chose d’autre 
	quelque condition par où nous vivotons pour 
élargir pour 
	redensifier la conscience comme des os 
sortir du flux mais est-ce 
	identifiable ce qui s’y passe existe-t-il 
humainement un moyen 
	de désigner ce qui s’y passe ou d’en parler qui peut 
sortir du torrent 
obscur des sensations obscures pour se retrouver 
sec a sec" 
(Anne Belin, À distance des corps, 2010)

E1.7.A.3.2_REF5_SCI "WHEN IT COMES TO ATOMS, LANGUAGE CAN BE USED ONLY AS IN POETRY. The poet, too, is not nearly so concerned with describing facts as with creating images and establishing mental connections."
(Niels Bohr to quantum pioneer Werner Heisenberg)

E1.7.A.3.2_REF6_PO "A soft Sea washed around the House
A Sea of Summer Air
And rose and fell the magic Planks
That sailed without a care-
For Captain was the Butterfly
For Helmsman was the Bee
And an entire universe
For the delighted crew."
(Emily Dickinson, poem 1198, circa 1871)


“UNE MER BRUISSAIT DOUCE AUTOUR DE LA MAISON
Une Mer de Brise d'Été 
Et l'esquif de Planches par magie 
Aux voiles sans souci tanguait - 
Pour Capitaine, le Papillon 
À la Barre se tenait l'Abeille 
Et un univers tout entier 
Formait l'équipage enchanté -”
(Emily Dickinson, poème 1198, traduit par Valérie Rouzeau)

E1.7.A.3.2_REF7_PO ALL DESIRES SAVE ONE ARE FLEETING, BUT THAT ONE LASTS FOREVER. THAT IS THE DESIRE FOR WISDOM. AND WHAT TO DO WITH THAT WISDOM? I WOULD MAKE A POEM.

“Patti Smith on the One Desire That Lasts Forever […]

Ezra Klein: You write about the book of Irish fairy tales that belonged to somebody you had cared about when you were young and who passed away. Your sister found a version of it for you as an adult.

A passage of that book that you wrote about said, “All desires save one are fleeting, but that one lasts forever. That was the desire for wisdom.” And when that character was asked what to do with that wisdom, he said, “I would make a poem.”

Patti Smith: I know. I just love that so much.

Ezra Klein: Well, I read that, and having read your memoirs, that almost felt like your whole path.

Patti Smith: I used to ask a very old Irish woman — the great-grandmother of a neighbor, named Aggie — to read me that over and over — which she did. She didn’t mind at all.

And I had forgotten it. I had forgotten it because I was 5 years old when she died, and after that, the book disappeared. I never saw it again. And truthfully, I’m ashamed to say that I had totally forgotten the passage.

When my sister researched, found the book and sent it to me — when I read that page, I felt almost that feeling of just being hit in the stomach. It was very powerful. It was like I reverberated right back to that child and remembered how it made me feel — yet I didn’t really know why.

It’s another one of these great mysteries: Why did that particular passage strike me so much when I was kindergarten age? But it did, and it probably, as you said, has something to do with being one of the main stones on my path.

Ezra Klein: I think so many people would hear that and think: If you had all that wisdom, why, of all things, a poem? What could a poem contain? And my sense is that you do have a sense of why a poem and what a poem could contain.

So why a poem?

Patti Smith: It’s like the bread of life, a poem. I’m not an analyst. I can’t really break these things down. It’s just that, for me, true poetry is the hardest and the highest thing to write. There are a million poetry books and poet laureates and poetry prizes. But I’m talking about something that’s so exceptional that maybe a great poet — Rimbaud or Sylvia Plath or Dylan Thomas — only writes 10 of them.

But if you get the greatest of poems, it can distill everything like a teardrop. If you’re thirsty and you get that drop of water, it suddenly becomes like a liter of water. Then you’re satisfied. And that’s what a poem can do. […]”
(Ezra Klein Show, November 18, 2025)

Listen to the full Podcast: https://www.nytimes.com/2025/11/18/opinion/ezra-klein-podcast-patti-mith.html?smid=url-share

E1.7.A.3.2_REF8_PO POETRY IS THE VERBAL ART-FORM BY WHICH WE CAN ACTUALLY CREATE SILENCE.
"The object in meditation and all of our contemplative disciplines is silence. But… that silence is in order for you to perceive something other than yourself — what you’ve arranged as yourself to actually perceive this frontier between what you call your self and what you call other than your self, whether that’s a person or a landscape. [...]
One of the greatest arts of poetry is actually to create silence through attentive speech — speech that says something in such a way that it appears as a third frontier between you and the world, and invites you into a deeper and more generous sense of your own identity and the identity of the world… Poetry is the verbal art-form by which we can actually create silence."
(David Whyte in conversation with Sam Harris, Waking up)

E1.7.A.3.3. POETRY REVEALS THE "ORDINARY WORLD" TO BE ASTONISHING AND THE IMPORTANCE OF WONDER
“Astonishing” is an epithet concealing a logical trap. We’re astonished, after all, by things that deviate from some well-known and universally acknowledged norm, from an obviousness we’ve grown accustomed to. Now the point is, there is no such obvious world. Our astonishment exists per se and isn’t based on comparison with something else.

E1.7.A.3.3_REF1_PO  EVERY ELEMENT OF EXISTENCE IS UNIQUE AND REMARKABLE"The world — whatever we might think when terrified by its vastness and our own impotence, or embittered by its indifference to individual suffering, of people, animals, and perhaps even plants, for why are we so sure that plants feel no pain; whatever we might think of its expanses pierced by the rays of stars surrounded by planets we’ve just begun to discover, planets already dead? still dead? we just don’t know; whatever we might think of this measureless theater to which we’ve got reserved tickets, but tickets whose lifespan is laughably short, bounded as it is by two arbitrary dates; whatever else we might think of this world — it is astonishing.

But “astonishing” is an epithet concealing a logical trap. We’re astonished, after all, by things that deviate from some well-known and universally acknowledged norm, from an obviousness we’ve grown accustomed to. Now the point is, there is no such obvious world. Our astonishment exists per se and isn’t based on comparison with something else.

Granted, in daily speech, where we don’t stop to consider every word, we all use phrases like “the ordinary world,” “ordinary life,” “the ordinary course of events” … But in the language of poetry, where every word is weighed, nothing is usual or normal. Not a single stone and not a single cloud above it. Not a single day and not a single night after it. And above all, not a single existence, not anyone’s existence in this world."
(Wisława Szymborska, Nobel Prize acceptance speech, 1996, published in Nobel Lectures: From the Literature Laureates, 1986 to 2006)

E1.7.A.3.3_REF2_PO "TENDERNESS, THE MOMENT WHEN THE SELF IS STRIPED OF ALL THAT DRESSES IT, disguises it, distinguishes it from the tiny child that is in each of us, essential and hidden, the germ or the pure feeling of life. Tenderness is a weakness of a divine nature, a loss of consciousness in sweetness. What could be stronger than this weakness, which robs us of all these forces, events, predictions, ideas... 

And here I tell you, theis most precious in life, and the only thing that  can make it be loved, kept, regretted, is precisely that which refuses it, dominates it, appeases it and consumes it, and which is found or is found again in presence and correspondence: the incredible, silent advent of that which I don't know about myelf, about you, nor of me, against that which I don't know about you, nor of you. 

There is no glory, no power, no gold that can match this certainty when it declares itself, and I give everything for it.”
(Paul Valéry, Lust IV, unpublished, My Faust)


"TENDRESSE, MOMENT OÙ LE MOI SE DÉPOUILLE DE TOUT CE QUI LE REVÊTAIT, le déguisait, le distinguait du tout petit enfant qui est en chacun de nous, essentiel et caché, le germe ou le sentiment tout pur de vivre. Tendresse est une faiblesse de nature divine, une perte de connaissance dans la douceur. Quoi de plus fort que cette faiblesse qui nous dérobe à toutes ces forces, aux événements, aux prévisions, aux idées... 

Et voici ce que je te dis, ce qu'il y a de plus précieux dans la vie, et qui seul peut la faire aimer, garder, regretter, c'est précisément ce qui la refuse, la domine, l'apaise et la consomme et qui se trouve ou se retrouve dans la présence et la correspondance : l'échéance inouïe, muette, de ce je ne sais pas en moi, en toi, ni de moi, contre ce je ne sais pas en toi, ni de toi. 

II n'est de gloire, de pouvoir, ni d'or qui vaillent cette certitude quand elle se déclare, et je donne tout pour elle."
(Paul Valéry, Lust IV, inédits, Mon Faust)

E1.7.A.3.3_REF3_PO "SO MUCH DEPENDS
UPON

A red wheel
Barrow

Glazed with rain
Water

Beside the white
Chickens"
(William Carlos Williams)

E1.7.A.3.3_REF4_PO “DRESSED FROM THE FIELD
SMOKEY POTATOES
see the butter melt in their core
The smell that emanates from them
- the scent of a brief summer -
Appeals very aptly
To the fresh hue of lettuce
crunchy in the mouth As the memory traces its path
From the terrace where we are
to the cloudy horizon
The peaches placed there

On the ledge of the balustrade
Bare haloed patches on their duvets
Signs of stormy weather

The swallows fly lower, faster
In spite of their impatience
Still reluctant to tear themselves away
From the impenetrable flavor this place"
(François Cheng, The book of the median void, 2004)


"EN ROBE DES CHAMPS
LES POMMES DE TERRE FUMANTES
voient fondre le beurre en leur cœur
L´odeur qui en émane
- odeur remémorée d’un bref été -
Appelle très à propos
La fraîche teinte d’une laitue
croquante à souhait dans la bouche Pendant que la mémoire trace sa voie
Depuis la terrasse où l’on est
jusqu’à l’horizon embrumé
Les pêches posées là

Sur le rebord de la balustrade
Portent sur leur duvet des taches auréolées
signe d’un temps orageux

Les hirondelles volent plus bas, plus vite
En dépit de leur impatience
Rechignent encore à s’arracher
à l’impénétrable saveur d’ici"
(François Cheng, Le livre du vide médian, 2004)

E1.7.A.3.3_REF5_PO “I SIMPLY SPEAK OF THE MARVEL
the modesty of the living sky
the small golden weight of a bee 
the brilliance of salt that is all white
you different but the same

I simply speak of the marvel 
of every day meeting you again.”
(Claude Roy)


"JE DIS SIMPLEMENT LA MERVEILLE
la modestie du ciel vivant
le petit pesant d'or d'une abeille 
l'éclat du sel qui est tout blanc
toi différente mais pareille

Je dis simplement la merveille 
de tous les jours te retrouver."
(Claude Roy)

E1.7.A.3.3_REF6_PO “A POT OF BASIL GAVE ME JOY
As if I were having lunch with Frank O'Hara
It exults from the windowsill in the south
To my nose as sensitive as a green bird 
Fragrant basil, intoxicating plant
In the heart of my little kitchen where an egg is cooking
Where the tomatoes blush like lovers
It's my lunch hour, so I go...
As if I were on my way to the laburnum
Laburnum which would also offer pleasure
And without competing with the aromatic leaves
At twelve noon, the clock struck exultantly
A pot of basil gave me joy
The happiness of the plant that feels at home here.”
(Valérie Rouzeau, Sens Averse, 2018)


"UN POT DE BASILIC M'A DONNÉ DE LA JOIE
Comme si je déjeunais avec Frank O'Hara
Il exulte du bord de la fenêtre au sud
À mon tarin sensible autant qu'un oiseau vert 
Basilic odorant capiteux végétal
Au cœur de ma petite cuisine où cuit un œuf
Où les tomates rougissent comme des amoureuses
It's my lunch hour, so I go...
On peut même prononcer it is comme dans cytise
Cytise qui offrirait aussi de l'agrément
Et sans faire concurrence aux feuilles aromatiques
À midi douze fois sonné exaltement
De la joie m'a donné un pot de basilic
Le bonheur de la plante qui se sent bien ici."
(Valérie Rouzeau, Sens Averse, 2018)

E1.7.A.3.3_REF6.1_PO “THE BROOM IS A WITCH'S AFFAIR
I pissed off the cat at the foot of the buffet 
And soon its angry fox tail 
Brought out a big gray dust bunny
A group of big fat bunnies 
A lump of brown sugar a Sioux feather 
And two or three mouse droppings 
Trying to look like well-hidden cachous 
But no love note, just a balled-up bill 
Illegible with four alphabet feet
An abandoned seashell an incongruous 
Check with no funds signed in pieces 
Paper perhaps annoyed to be presented like this 
Like a jigsaw puzzle or carnival confetti.”
(Valérie Rouzeau, Sens Averse, 2018)


"LE BALAI EST UNE AFFAIRE SORCIÈRE
J'ai fâché le chat au pied du buffet 
Et bientôt sa queue de renard agacée 
Fit apparaître un gros mouton gris 
Un troupeau de gros moutons gras 
Un morceau de sucre roux une plume de Sioux 
Et deux ou trois crottes de souris 
Essayant d'avoir l'air de cachous bien cachés 
Mais pas de billet doux qu'une facturette en boule 
Illisible avec quatre pâtes alphabet 
Une coquille abandonnée un incongru 
Chèque sans provision signé en miettes 
Papier dépité peut-être d'être ainsi présenté 
Façon puzzle ou confettis carnavalerie."
(Valérie Rouzeau, Sens Averse, 2018)

E1.7.A.3.3_REF6.1.a_PO “THE SEAGULL HAS PLAYED A DIRTY TRICK ON ME
But it may also be a matter of the horizon 
For the bird as for the woman a gift
Of the sky less white than snow where one can live 
Laughing crying forgetting
That we lose feathers and hair of the beast
Beak and nails and all
And blue is also possible
The wandering moon the milky way
Free again for how many seasons.”
(Valérie Rouzeau, Sens Averse, 2018)


"LA MOUETTE CHIEUSE M'A JOUÉ UN VILAIN TOUR
Mais c'est peut-être aussi une affaire d'horizon 
Pour l'oiseau comme pour la femme un don
Du ciel moins blanc que neige où pouvoir vivre 
Rire pleurer oublier
Que nous y perdons plumes et poils de la bête
Bec et ongles et tutti quanti
Et le bleu est possible aussi
La lune mobile la voie lactée
Libre encore pour combien de saisons."
(Valérie Rouzeau, Sens Averse, 2018)

E1.7.A.3.3_REF7_PO “NARROW THE APERTURE OF YOUR ATTENTION ENOUGH TO TAKE IN ANY ONE THING FULLY, AND IT BECOMES A PORTAL TO EVERYTHING. Anneal that attention enough so that you see whatever and whoever is before you free from expectation, unfiltered through your fantasies or needs, and it becomes love. Come to see anything or anyone this clearly — a falcon, or a mountain, or a patch of moss — and you will find yourself loving the world more deeply.”
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

Gratitude

“Remember the sky that you were born under, know each of the star’s stories.
Remember the moon, know who she is.
Remember the sun’s birth at dawn, that is the strongest point of time. 
Remember sundown and the giving away to night.
Remember your birth, how your mother struggled to give you form and breath. You are evidence of her life, and her mother’s, and hers.
Remember your father. He is your life, also.
Remember the earth whose skin you are: red earth, black earth, yellow earth, white earth brown earth, we are earth.
Remember the plants, trees, animal life who all have their tribes, their families, their histories, too. Talk to them, listen to them. They are alive poems.
Remember the wind. 
Remember her voice. She knows the origin of this universe.
Remember you are all people and all people are you.
Remember you are this universe and this universe is you.
Remember all is in motion, is growing, is you.
Remember language comes from this.
Remember the dance language is, that life is.
Remember.”
(Joy Harjo)

E1.7.A.3.3_REF8_PO THE REST OF THE WORLD GOES SILENT. FOR A WHILE.
“Reading Neruda’s “Ode to the Onion”
My son brings the poem to his farm crew
gathered with coffee in the makeshift lean-to, 7 a.m., 
the sun already at its green work, and they don’t believe it 
when Neruda says the onion is more beautiful
than a bird of dazzling feathers… heavenly globe…
dance of the snowy anemone.

These young people bury the black seeds.
Weed, water, watch over them,
then pull the fat bulbs from sweet dirt.
I’ve seen my son walk the rows,
nudging the drip hose over the small shoulder
of soil toward the stem of a plant.

I say, long live their insistence on reality.
May they always muddy their hands in the actual, 
handle the hard evidence of the earth.

But if Neruda could stretch the accordion of time,
he’d explain that when he says he loves the onion
more than the birds, it doesn’t mean
he loves the birds less.

When he thinks of the onion, there is nothing
but onion-ness, translucent sleeves that give way
to only themselves. When he praises the onion,
nothing else exists, like nothing else exists
in the center of the onion. Like nothing else exists 
when you fall in love.

The rest of the world goes silent.
For a while.

And then the earth starts to turn again.
Seasons reappear.
You get hungry and want a sandwich.
One day you read a book.
You may even fall in love with someone else.

The great ones regard every moment like this,
catch it as it swims—onion, bird, flower, fish—
the way a bear scoops a salmon from the river.
They love the oily orange flesh and the fins,
the pewter eye, the slimy entrails, and the harp of bones. 
The masters eat everything right up to their death.
 And then they grab that, too, in their failing fist.”
(Ellen Bass, Like a beggar, 2014)

E1.7.A.3.4. POETRY MAKES US EXPERIENCE THE INEFFABLE COMPONENT OF JOY.
"A lot of people think or believe or know they feel — but that’s thinking or believing or knowing; not feeling. And poetry is feeling — not knowing or believing or thinking."

E1.7.A.3.4_REF1_PH TRUE JOY OFTEN LIES BEYOND EXTERNAL CIRCUMSTANCES AND RESIDES IN THE DEPTHS OF ONE'S PSYCHOLOGY AND IMAGINATION. "The ground of a man’s joy is often hard to hit. It may hinge at times upon a mere accessory, like the lantern; it may reside… in the mysterious inwards of psychology… It has so little bond with externals… that it may even touch them not, and the man’s true life, for which he consents to live, lie together in the field of fancy…. In such a case the poetry runs underground. The observer (poor soul, with his documents!) is all abroad. For to look at the man is but to court deception. We shall see the trunk from which he draws his nourishment; but he himself is above and abroad in the green dome of foliage, hummed through by winds and nested in by nightingales. And the true realism were that of the poets, to climb after him like a squirrel, and catch some glimpse of the heaven in which he lives. And the true realism, always and everywhere, is that of the poets: to find out where joy resides, and give it a voice far beyond singing.

For to miss the joy is to miss all. In the joy of the actors lies the sense of any action. That is the explanation, that the excuse… for no man lives in the external truth among salts and acids, but in the warm, phantasmagoric chamber of his brain, with the painted windows and the storied wall."
(Robert Louis Stevenson, The Lantern-Bearers,  Across the Plains, 1892)

E1.7.A.3.4_REF2_PO "A POET IS SOMEBODY WHO FEELS, and who expresses his feelings through words.

This may sound easy. It isn’t.

A lot of people think or believe or know they feel — but that’s thinking or believing or knowing; not feeling. And poetry is feeling — not knowing or believing or thinking.

Almost anybody can learn to think or believe or know, but not a single human being can be taught to feel. Why? Because whenever you think or you believe or you know, you’re a lot of other people: but the moment you feel, you’re nobody-but-yourself.

To be nobody-but-yourself — in a world which is doing its best, night and day, to make you everybody else — means to fight the hardest battle which any human being can fight; and never stop fighting. [...]

As for expressing nobody-but-yourself in words, that means working just a little harder than anybody who isn’t a poet can possibly imagine. Why? Because nothing is quite as easy as using words like somebody else. We all of us do exactly this nearly all of the time — and whenever we do it, we’re not poets.

If, at the end of your first ten or fifteen years of fighting and working and feeling, you find you’ve written one line of one poem, you’ll be very lucky indeed.

And so my advice to all young people who wish to become poets is: do something easy, like learning how to blow up the world — unless you’re not only willing, but glad, to feel and work and fight till you die.

Does that sound dismal? It isn’t.

It’s the most wonderful life on earth.

Or so I feel."
(E.E. Cummings, from “A Poet’s Advice to Students,” E.E. Cummingsrepublished in A Miscellany Revised)

E1.7.A.3.4_REF3_PO "FOX

You don't ever know where 
a sentence will take you, depending 
on its roll and fold. I was walking 
over the dunes when I saw 
the red fox asleep under the green 
branches of the pine. It flared up 
in the sweet order of its being, 
the tail that was over the muzzle 
lifting in airy amazement 
and the fire of the eyes followed 
and the pricked ears and the thin 
barrel body and the four 
athletic legs in their black stockings and it 
came to me how the polish of the world changes 
everything, I was hot I was cold I was almost 
dead of delight. Of course the mind keeps 
cool in its hidden palace-yes, the mind takes 
a long time, is otherwise occupied than by 
happiness, and deep breathing. Still, 
at last, it comes too, running 
like a wild thing, to be taken 
with its twin sister, breath. So I stood 
on the pale, peach-colored sand, watching the fox 
as it opened like a flower, and I began 
softly, to pick among the vast assortment of words 
that it should run again and again across the page 
that you again and again should shiver with praise."
(Mary Oliver, West wind, 1997)

E1.7.A.3.4_REF4_PO "DRIFTING

I was enjoying everything: the rain, the path 
    wherever it was taking me, the earth roots 
    beginning to stir.

[...]

It's wonderful to walk along like that, 
    thought not the usual intention to reach an answer 
    but merely drifting.

Like clouds that only seem weightless 
    but of course are not.
Are really important.
I mean, terribly important. 
Not decoration by any means. 
By next week the violets will be blooming. 
Anyway, this was my delicious walk in the rain. 
What was it actually about?

Think about what it is that music is trying to say. 
It was something like that."
(Mary Oliver, Blue horses, 2014)

E1.7.A.3.4_REF5_PO “RUNNING UNDER OUR SKIN
A RIVER DWELLS WITHIN US

It moves inside our limbs
It rises to our lips

Sometimes more alive

Than the bodies that shelter it

How many dead hours
Must we cross?

Of burning plains
Of bottomless wells?

How many shadows must we dissolve
Loosen beaks and claws?

To penetrate these waters
In peace and quiet, without a lamp,

And immerse ourselves
At length.”
(Andrée Chedid)


"TERRÉ SOUS NOTRE PEAU
UN FLEUVE NOUS HABITE

Se meut parmi nos membres
Monte jusqu'à nos lèvres

Plus vif parfois

Que nos corps qui l'abritent

Combien d'heures éteintes
Faudra-t-il traverser?

De plaines mises à feu
De puits insondables?

Dissoudre combien d'ombres
Desserrer becs et griffes?

Pour pénétrer cette eau
Dans la quiétude sans lampe

Et s'immerger
Longuement."
(Andrée Chedid)

E1.7.A.3.4_REF6_PO "MARGIN

At the end of the page 
just like at the end of the ancient world 
there is a precipice.

Although those who read prose in general 
take more risks 
because they're almost at the edge of the abyss 
be careful when you reach the edge of the poem."
(Ana Martins Marques, Paper Boats, Life Underwater, 2009)

E1.7.A.3.4_REF7_PO "IF I COULD TELL HOW GLAD I WAS
I should not be so glad -
But when I cannot make the Force 
Nor mould it into word
I know it is a sign 
That new Dilemma be 
From mathematics further off 
Than from Eternity"
(Emily Dickinson, undated)

E1.7.A.3.4_REF8_PO ”TODAY SOMEONE READ ME ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.
I LISTENED AND COULDN’T BELIEVE MY EARS.
How could a man who was so fond of things
Never have looked at them or understood what they were?

Why call water my sister if water isn’t my sister?
To feel it better?
I feel it better by drinking it than by calling it something— Sister, or mother, or daughter.
Water is beautiful because it’s water.
If I call it my sister,
I can see, even as I call it that, that it’s not my sister
And that it’s best to call it water, since that’s what it is, Or, better yet, not to call it anything
But to drink it, to feel it on my wrists, and to look at it, Without any names.”
(Fernando Pessoa, 21 May 1917)

E1.7.A.3.4_REF9_PO “ALL THE OPINIONS EVER FORMED ABOUT NATURE
NEVER MADE A FLOWER BLOOM OR A BLADE OF GRASS GROW.
All the knowledge there is of things
Was never something I could seize, like a thing.
If science aspires to be true,
What truer science than that of things without science?
I close my eyes, and the reality of the hard earth I’m lying on Is so real that even the bones in my back feel it.
Where I have shoulder blades I don’t need reason.”
(Fernando Pessoa, 29 May 1918 - signed as Albert Caeiro)

E1.7.A.3.4_REF10_PO “ONLY NATURE IS DIVINE, AND SHE IS NOT DIVINE…
If I sometimes speak of her as a person
It’s because I can only speak of her by using the language
of men,
Which imposes names on things
And gives them personality.
But things have no name or personality:
They just are, and the sky is vast, the earth wide,
And our heart the size of a closed ﬁst...
Blessed am I for all I don’t know.
That’s all I truly am...
I enjoy it all as one who knows that the sun exists.”
(Fernando Pessoa, A Little Larger Than the Entire Universe Selected Poems - signed as Albert Caeiro)

E1.7.A.3.4_REF11_PO “A ROW OF TREES IN THE DISTANCE, TOWARD THE SLOPE...
But what is a row of trees? There are just trees.
“Row” and the plural “trees” are names, not things.
Unhappy human beings, who put everything in order,
Draw lines from thing to thing,
Place labels with names on absolutely real trees,
And plot parallels of latitude and longitude
On the innocent earth itself, which is so much greener and full
     of ﬂowers!”
(Fernando Pessoa, 7 May 1914 - signed as Albert Caeiro)

E1.7.A.3.4_REF12_PO ”LANGUAGE CANNOT BE
BUT IN THE HEART
Language cannot be but in the heart,
A sense beyond all sense both loud and clear.
None may master it but by the art,
Grasped through mime, of holding being dear.
Underneath all words, then, must be love,
Articulate and frank, though rarely spoken,
Gift of those who through our maelstroms move,
Each a mirror in a line unbroken.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E1.7.A.4. EVERY HUMAN BEING HARBORS A DESIRE FOR LIBERATION—BE IT SOCIAL, MORAL, OR ECONOMIC—AND SPIRITUALITY SERVES AS A RESPONSE TO THIS YEARNING. Moral liberation can manifest through various channels such as art, philosophy, and religion. Philosophy, in particular, effectively counters prejudice, intellectual habits, and opinions. However, there also exists a conceptual philosophy that merely describes the world without offering any tools for liberation. While engaging with philosophy requires substantial background knowledge, spirituality can be embraced in the simplest of ways. Answering "What do you want to free yourself from?" is often simpler than answering "What do you think of Descartes?"

E1.7.A.4.1. "A GOOD IDEA IS NEVER AS GOOD AS NO IDEA AT ALL." (Zhaozhou, Master Ch'an)
Many introductions to Eastern philosophies can mislead us when they describe awakening or awareness - the culmination of these practices - as a state in which "one thinks of nothing". This misunderstanding can be avoided by recognizing that these philosophies aim at non-thinking, not at "thinking of nothing", which implies will. Non-thought refers to the contemplation of reality without the use of language, ideas, or representation. It's simply attention focused on the world, without motive, judgment, appreciation, or will - like a silent mirror. A mirror so perfect that consciousness of the "I" disappears.

E1.7.A.4.1._REF1_PH "EVERYTHING IS ECSTASY, INSIDE. We just don’t know it because of our thinking-minds. But in our true blissful essence of mind is known that everything is alright forever and forever and forever. Close your eyes, let your hands and nerve-ends drop, stop breathing for 3 seconds, listen to the silence inside the illusion of the world, and you will remember the lesson you forgot, which was taught in immense milky way soft cloud innumerable worlds long ago and not even at all. It is all one vast awakened thing. I call it the golden eternity. It is perfect."
(Jack Kerouac in a letter sent to his first wife, Edie Kerouac Parker, in late January of 1957, a decade after their marriage had been annulled. Found in The Portable Jack Kerouac)

E1.7.A.4.1._REF1.1_PO “STONE

Go inside a stone
That would be my way.
Let somebody else become a dove
Or gnash with a tiger’s tooth.
I am happy to be a stone.
From the outside the stone is a riddle:
No one knows how to answer it.
Yet within, it must be cool and quiet
Even though a cow steps on it full weight,
Even though a child throws it in a river,
The stone sinks, slow, unperturbed
To the river bottom
Where the fishes come to knock on it
And listen.
I have seen sparks fly out
When two stones are rubbed.
So perhaps it is not dark inside after all;
Perhaps there is a moon shining
From somewhere, as though behind a hill —
Just enough light to make out
The strange writings, the star charts
On the inner walls.”
(Charles Simic)

E1.7.A.4.1._REF2_PO "THE WORLD YOU SEE IS JUST A MOVIE IN YOUR MIND.
Rocks dont see it.
Bless and sit down.
Forgive and forget.
Practice kindness all day to everybody
and you will realize you’re already
in heaven now.
That’s the story.
That’s the message.
Nobody understands it,
nobody listens, they’re
all running around like chickens with heads cut
off. I will try to teach it but it will
be in vain, s’why I’ll
end up in a shack
praying and being
cool and singing
by my woodstove
making pancakes."
(Jack Kerouac in a letter sent to his first wife, Edie Kerouac Parker, in late January of 1957, a decade after their marriage had been annulled. Found in The Portable Jack Kerouac)

E1.7.A.4.2. "CONSCIOUSNESS CANNOT BE LIBERATED WHILE IT'S ENTANGLED WITH THOUGHT, as disturbances of thought, including moral and psychological torments, become disturbances of consciousness. Consciousness remains alienated as long as it identifies itself with the mind.
This is not just a matter of knowledge but also of practice, such as yoga. Philosophy plays an important role as it acts like the ladder in Wittgenstein's analogy - you climb it to a certain height and then abandon it behind you to ascend further by other means. Philosophy serves as a means."

E1.7.A.4.2_REF1_PH "INDIANS ARE THE GREATEST GRAMMARIANS IN THE WORLD: they developed a school of rigor and rationality based on this discipline. And it is also from this discipline that they began to develop a certain number of philosophical reflections and discourses. There is philosophy in India, and as in the West, it has developed in two ways, to put it simply: on the one hand, in a spiritual quest, and on the other hand, in a certain number of argumentative discourses with the aim of enabling man to have the most precise knowledge of the world: rationality and spirituality. The great originality of Indian philosophy is that it combines the two, sees no incompatibility, one goes with the other...".
(Marc Ballanfat)

For Marc Ballanfat, there is a desire for liberation in every human being, and spirituality is a response to this desire for liberation (social, moral, economic). Moral liberation can be expressed through art, philosophy, religion - the liberating aspect of philosophy would be particularly effective against prejudices, intellectual habits and opinions. However, there is a conceptual philosophy that merely describes the world without offering instruments of liberation. 
To benefit from philosophy, you need to have studied a lot, whereas spirituality can be approached in the simplest way. It is easier to focus on the question, "What do you want to liberate yourself from?" than on the question, "What do you think of Descartes?
The Bhagavad Gita, a literary text from the 2nd century B.C., gradually acquired a sacred meaning but also a philosophical interpretation from the 8th century B.C. onwards.
To achieve liberation, the mind must be purified and dissociated from consciousness (a distinction of Brahmanic origin from the 3rd century BC). As long as consciousness is confused with thought, liberation is not possible because the disturbances of thought (moral and psychological torment) also become disturbances of consciousness. Consciousness is alienated as long as it thinks it is the mind.
It is not only a question of knowledge, but also of practice like yoga. Philosophy is important insofar as it is the conceptual construction that corresponds to Wittgenstein's image of the ladder - you climb it and then push it behind you. Philosophy is a means.
(Marc Ballanfat in the program Les chemins de la philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 10/29/2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: 
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/spiritualite-es-tu-la-24-philosophie-de-linde-une-pensee-venue-du-ciel

E1.7.A.4.2_REF2_PH SUPREME INTELLIGENCE COMES FROM THAT FREEDOM, BUT IT NEVER ARISES FROM THOUGHT.
"In order to learn how to 'observe' your wife, your neighbor, your government, the harshness of poverty, and the horrors of war, you must be free. However, we refuse to be free because we are afraid of being alone.
 
What did we hear when we listened to the speaker? What did we gather—words and ideas that ultimately have no meaning? Have you seen for yourself how important it is not to be hurt? It means never having an image of yourself. Have you seen the importance and urgency of understanding relationships and having an unbusy mind? When the mind is not busy, it is extraordinarily free and sees great beauty. But the petty, secondhand mind is always busy with knowledge, becoming this or that, informing itself, and arguing. It is never calm or empty. Supreme intelligence comes from that freedom, but it never arises from thought.
(Krishnamurti, The Flame of Attention, 1983)

E1.7.A.4.3. "FOR INDIANS, WHAT MATTERS IS NOT THE QUESTION OF TRUTH, BUT THAT OF LIBERATION.
Philosophical discourse is valuable to the extent that it enables access to liberation. Truth is always a convention, valid as a value within a specific culture (in line with Nietzsche's position). There are endless possible perspectives on reality, and the one we accept as truth is conventional – a path to be taken. A truth should be pragmatic and stem from lived experience. Certain perspectives should be rejected as they trap us or lead to dead ends. However, there's always the option to choose a different path. The Indian term for philosophy actually translates to "point of view". The liberating truth operates on a different level: it would be the totalization of all points of view."

(Marc Ballanfat au micro de l'émission Les chemins de la philosophie, diffusée sur France Culture le 29/10/2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: 
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/spiritualite-es-tu-la-24-philosophie-de-linde-une-pensee-venue-du-ciel

E1.7.A.4.3_REF2_PH "SPIRITUALITY AND WISDOM When he gains access to it, he can clearly articulate what distinguishes spiritual practice from all wisdom-except "crazy" wisdom, in Trungpa's sense. Wisdom seeks to answer the question "How to live? - which we asked at the beginning - while spirituality answers the question of where to live? - I would even say, where to live? From what inner place do you approach life? Our initial question and the way we approached the path are thus overwhelmed, surpassed, deconstructed: spiritual research changes its object and leads to its redefinition. A wisdom offers rules derived from an observation of the world, often relevant and subtle, but even if it means disappointing some people, spirituality has nothing to say about it, at least not directly, because it is not its place to intervene, and this is what makes its nature more difficult to grasp, the rules to be applied give way here to the natural consequences of a psychic revolution. It unfolds in a dimension "prior" to all rules, it inhabits a land that is absolutely upstream. It is the place from which I live, from which I speak, from which I love, and from which I see who, as such, is its object. The consequences for the content of existence will come of themselves and are in any case the personal business of each individual. But then, some will say, the seeker is left helpless in the face of the choices, the commitments, the great problems of life? So while he was looking for a guide, he was not given one? Yes and no. Spiritual practice leaves him to face his choices and responsibilities - it does not exempt him from them, it even emphasizes their importance; but it allows him to relate to them and to face them. If it does not offer ready-made solutions, it is because only what one has discovered for oneself has an effect on what one is. The rules or commandments are therefore up to each individual... but they are self-imposed, and that is why the question of "how to live" no longer arises. My actions and words, thanks to the path I have taken, become improvisations based, without appearing to be so, on the patient research that has made them possible - so that from now on, as a Buddhist saying I like very much puts it, "my master is the situation"."
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond wisdom, How to live?, 2023)

E1.7.A.4.3_REF2.1_PH  "THE WAY

Birth of the way [...]

FREEDOM, PLEASURE AND THE SPACE OF POSSIBILITIES The feeling of narrowness thus diminishes. The researcher experiences a new freedom, and it is a well-founded feeling, for it is a sign that the range of his inner possibilities has expanded. He opens himself to other behaviors, other sensations, other thoughts. He is now connected to all possible choices, to the diversity of alternative solutions - the path is the very place where this connection occurs. The space he feels emerging is therefore not only visual and concrete; it is also that of all the ideas and behaviors that are now within his reach - the spiritual quest, like psychotherapy or psychoanalysis, causes a spectacular expansion of this field. Heinz von Foerster - a researcher and thinker who played a major role in opening up the human sciences to cybernetics - drew a rule of life from his experience and work: "Always act in a way that increases the number of possible choices." Thanks to spiritual practice, the researcher becomes aware that the vision of the world in which he was enclosed has considerably reduced this number. And his inner state appears to him as a compressed microcosm, psychologically constricted, somewhat stunted - a world rebellious to exteriority, cluttered with useless thoughts, the distance from which he can now measure its limits. Conversely, the expansion that occurs when one is no longer attached to what one is doing or thinking creates a sense of well-being that, in my opinion, should be welcomed wholeheartedly. [...]"
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond wisdom, How to live?, 2023)

E1.7.A.4.3_REF2.1.a_PH "THE TEXTURE OF THE WAY

What, in fact, becomes of the fabric of life when it is crossed by the path? A succession of actions that stand out against the background of being. Everything counts, and the details are no longer just details: because they take time to unfold, they slow down the almost always too fast passage of time through the attention we pay to them. Everything that happens, even what is considered secondary, is indexed to the fact of existence. Everything receives the sign of being. The path transforms everything it touches into a path.

Does this eliminate the distinction between the important and the trivial? Yes, in the initial dazzle; afterwards it is put back in its place, but the path accurately gathers the secondary things, which are no longer confused with 'nothing'. And the seeker realizes that, in their own way, they express Being or the Way or Life more purely than the important things, because the latter, by the nature of their content, can hardly refer to anything other than themselves. This is why Zen masters insist on humble tasks. One of them asked a student who was asking him about the nature of Buddhism: "Have you had breakfast?" "Yes," replied the disciple. "Good, go wash your bowl. Tchu-Chan, friend and companion of the poet Han-Shan and a fine figure of Chinese spirituality, is often depicted with a broom because he cleaned the monasteries. Why shouldn't sweeping be a skill of the same order as noble archery? Is there an insurmountable obstacle? The answer is no: you just have to decide to do it.

In a sense, the seeker finds himself here at the antipodes of Heidegger's perception of the everyday. For him, everyday life is "inauthentic"; in spiritual experience, it is not; nor is it particularly authentic, in fact, it does not exist. Dissolved by the meticulous attention paid to it, it merges with the path, which makes it brilliant.

"It never happens that nothing happens," say Paul Watzlawick and the Palo Alto therapists. Just as the details of a fabric cease to be when looked at closely, so the insignificant things in life, or those that are thought to be so, are encompassed by the Way, for the Way transforms everything it crosses into a Way. But you have to live life closely, which is what the spiritual anthropologist does, and one of the most spectacular consequences of this way of being is that he ceases to be bored, because in the inner posture that it implies, boredom has difficulty taking root - if it tries, which sometimes happens... it vegetates.

So everything counts. Being is everywhere, you just have to welcome it. The truth sought in psychoanalysis, writes Lacan, is to be found in details, in small incomprehensible and somewhat silly things, "the groundless fascination of the mediocre and the seductive impasse of the absurd" - the path resembles this mischievous truth."
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond wisdom, How to live?, 2023)

E1.7.A.4.3_REF2.1.b_PH “THE MAN” OF SPIRITUAL SEARCH

When life becomes a succession of acts and events, each of which counts in itself, what happens to the person who performs them? Unlike the man of psychoanalysis, who is an enigma to himself between his consciousness and his unconscious, the man of spirituality appears as a whole, expressed by the act, even an insignificant one, that he performs. Spiritual practice is a work on the conscience; therefore it has nothing specific to say about the unconscious - the individual is seen in it from another perspective, according to another cut, where he appears as a unit.

This cut is the cut of the present. We are born into this situation. Sartre, for whom this notion is fundamental, is unexpectedly joined here. We must "dance with situations," says Trungpa, in relation to existence, where the inner observer that always paralyzes him disappears. The great dancer is at one with the music, she is absolutely at one with herself in her movements, and it is this coincidence with herself in the moment that is called grace. Now, this inner state in which the movements impose themselves and the gestures are accomplished beyond all intention is what the practitioner of a Zen art such as archery achieves. It is called shen in Chinese, and its movement, writes Anne Cheng, "is not that of the unconscious, and even less that of the unconscious, but that of the forgetting of consciousness. It cannot be described in words: only the dazzling perfection of the gesture, which through practice and refinement is no longer conscious, can evoke it".

Let us not conclude from this that preparation is unnecessary. Grotowski has already shown us that, on the contrary, it must be intense, and all the masters insist on this work; but, as we have seen, in the accomplishment of the performance, the act or the gesture takes the place of the preparation, they abolish it by realizing it. And the man on the track resembles the aforementioned lecturer who is suddenly freed from his notes and, carried away by the momentum of his improvisation, utters words he had not anticipated.

THE SITUATION IS A HOUSE

So what the spiritual seeker experiences and sees, what unfolds before him and makes up a changing world, is the situation, this ephemeral configuration that surrounds him. We do not fully appreciate its uniqueness, which is one of the attractions of life. Always new, it presents itself like a painting, a field of psychological forces, a situation that we think is predictable but is not, an almost magnetic space. It implies that we find our place in it, and its practice helps the seeker to do so without thinking about it. He becomes able to avoid what has often happened to him before - being in the wrong place, playing a role that is not his, struggling to play another, etc. By taking shape, the presence of the situation is accentuated until it becomes, as its name suggests, a place, and more than that, a shelter, a home. It is limited, because it is only a temporary configuration; but it is also immense, because the space has expanded; and since, through the intensity of the present, it eclipses everything that is not it, it is valid for every place and every moment. Contrary to what the stubborn insufficiency of the moment seemed to indicate in ordinary perception, there is no need to look for an "other" place or moment. This place and this moment, which would be of a special nature or of a higher order, always present in the mind as implicit references, do not exist - they are chimeras. The researcher knew this, as everyone knows it, but he did not experience it. When he really feels it, the situation loses its appearance of an imperfect edifice and becomes absolutely central. The particular becomes a sign of the general, the part is worth as much as the whole, the place where I am is worth as much as the world, and this moment is worth as much as all of time.

Ecstasy is the extreme form of this experience. The path that is not necessarily ecstatic is often less spectacular and more familiar; nevertheless, whatever form it takes, the defect of the present is abolished, not because it has been overcome, but because it simply ceases to exist. The path, like love, takes its place."
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond wisdom, How to live?, 2023)

E1.7.A.4.3_REF2.1.c_PH "BUT WHAT IS HE TALKING ABOUT? [...] 

Catherine Despeux, commenting on Laozi, speaks of "the presence of the Way within oneself that one discovers, that one actualizes in order to let it act through oneself" - for the seeker, it presents itself as a "place" in which to live, a way of seeing, a relationship to the world and a way of understanding it, which constitute an always personal experience. It can certainly be conceptualized and thus described theoretically, but in a way that remains incomplete.

The incapacity of analytical language in this matter, which is a major theme of Zen, was also affirmed by the great Taoist thinkers, Laozi (Lao-Tseu) or Zhuangzi (Tchouang-Tseu). Since I cannot go into detail here, I refer the reader once again to the illuminating analysis of Anne Cheng and Catherine Despeux. The spiritual seeker faces this difficulty and understands that the theoretical status of the path cannot be deduced from its practice. Is it an absolute principle, external to the subject and the individual? The seeker finds it very difficult to admit this; deep down he does not believe it... but it does not matter. Identifying with the Dao what he feels he is reaching, preferring the term "Being" to it, refusing to choose, or, more subtly, postponing any such choice by pushing it into a future that never arrives...is an individual decision that does not belong to spiritual research proper."
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond wisdom, How to live?, 2023)

E1.7.A.4.4. "WHY INTERPRET WHEN SEEING IS ALL THAT MATTERS? 
Ch'an opposes idealism, dogmatism, and devotion. It is a wisdom that peaks at the moment it abolishes itself. This is why it is often described as mysticism, quietism, cynicism (in the sense of Diogenes), realism, detachment, materialism, freedom, rawness, provocation, iconoclasm, blasphemy, unholy spirituality, and wisdom without faith or law. The Ch'an master believes in nothing. This sets him apart from his disciples, who believe in Ch'an and mastery. Thus, even meditation can become a trap: "They sit as if dead, waiting for enlightenment!" In contrast, the master expects nothing: he is content simply to live."

E1.7.A.4.4_REF1_PO « SKY IS FREE.
Ocean is blissful.
Trees are divine.
Rocks are enlightened.
So are we.
Who is still searching….
For what? »
(Anam Thubten Rinpoch)

E1.7.A.4.4_REF2_PH “WHAT IS TAO [...] Beneath all forms, that which has no form, that which sees without eyes, that which guides without knowing, the ignorance that is the supreme knowledge. Would it be wrong to call the Mother this sap, this secret flavor of things, this taste of Cause, this thrill of authenticity, this milk that teaches of the Source? Ah, we are in the midst of nature like a litter of piglets suckling on a dead sow! What does Lao Tzu tell us if not to close our eyes and put our mouths to the very source of Creation.”
(Paul Claudel, Knowledge of the East, 1900)

E1.7.A.4.4_REF3_PO "THE BUDDHA'S LAST INSTRUCTION

"Make of yourself a light," 
said the Buddha, 
before he died.

I think of this every morning [...]"
(Mary Oliver, House of light, 1990)

E1.7.A.4.4_REF4_PH "ZEN 
A form of Buddhism, part of the Great Vehicle, derived from the Chinese tch'an that developed in Japan. It seeks enlightenment (satori) through "pure and simple sitting concentration" (shikantaza), which can be prepared or accompanied by a number of exercises (koans, archery, flower arranging, martial arts, etc.). Or rather, you don't look for anything (Bodhidharma: "When you don't look for anything, you are on the path"), and therefore you have the chance to reach it. The goal is to achieve absolutely pure attention, which creates, or rather allows, a state of inner peace and emptiness to unfold. Those who have experienced it speak of it as an experience of fulfillment. It is a matter of neutrally and calmly observing one's own functioning, however disturbed it may be, to the point of experiencing that there is nothing substantial there (that all these processes are impermanent and empty). The real goes on, or rather, it goes on all the better - because we are no longer separated from it by the ego. It empties itself so that there is nothing but everything.
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.7.A.4.4_REF5_PO "TCH'AN 
Buddhism, which originated in India, gradually spread throughout Asia. It reached China around the 6th century A.D., where, as elsewhere, it took on a particular character. Tch'an, which itself has several branches, is the Chinese version. It gave rise to Sôn in Korea and Zen in Japan. It is like a synthesis, but surprisingly concrete and free, between Buddhism and Taoism: doctrine is less important than practice (Ch'an comes from the Sanskrit dhyâna, which means "meditation"), practice less than the attention given to it, attention less than simplicity, simplicity less than nothing? A good idea," said Zhaozhou, "is never as good as no idea at all. And to a disciple who asked him, "What is the living meaning of t'ch'an?" he replied, "The cypress tree at the end of the courtyard. You might say that this makes no sense, and indeed, it seems to me that this is the point. Why interpret when seeing is enough? No need for a guru, unless you want to get rid of them all. Linji: "If you meet the Buddha, kill him!" It is the opposite of idealism, dogmatism, and devotion, like a wisdom that culminates at the very point where it abolishes itself. It has also been described as mysticism, quietism, cynicism (in the sense of Diogenes), realism, simplicity, materialism, freedom, rawness, provocation, iconoclasm, blasphemy, unholy spirituality, wisdom without faith or law... The Master of Ch'an does not believe in anything. This is what distinguishes him from his disciples, who believe in ch'an and in mastery. Even meditation is just another trap: "They sit as if they were dead, waiting for enlightenment! The Master, on the other hand, expects nothing: "He is content to live.
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.7.A.4.5 "INTELLIGENCE IS CHARACTERIZED BY A NATURAL LACK OF UNDERSTANDING OF LIFE". Intelligence helps us organize and find patterns in the diversity of phenomena, allowing us to generalize. This enhances our knowledge about reality. However, the problem lies in that intelligence often overlooks the duration, movement, and density of our personal experience - our own life. To make life more exciting, we must sometimes set intelligence aside and return to the most unique and organic aspects of our existence: our perceptions, emotions, and sensations.

E1.7.A.4.5_REF1_PH "BERGSON: 'INTELLIGENCE IS CHARACTERIZED BY A NATURAL LACK OF UNDERSTANDING OF LIFE.'
How can intelligence not understand life? This seems an exaggeration. On the contrary, it is intelligence that enables us to rise above our primary reflexes and prejudices, and that is what we lack in our world. To understand Henri Bergson, let us begin with what intelligence is. It is what gives order: in the diversity of phenomena it allows us to discover invariants, laws - it allows us to generalize, which is wonderful! It allows us to develop our knowledge of reality, but the problem is that by working in this way, intelligence suppresses the duration, the movement, the density that is specific to our personal experience - the one we have in the light this morning. In other words, intelligence makes us miss life - our own life. Do you ever get bored? It's probably because you're too smart! Let's take an example: You're going to have lunch at your in-laws' house - as soon as you arrive, you know in advance what you're going to eat, what's going to be said, and it weighs on you. With your intelligence you generalize the food. You are not going to taste this tomato salad, you are going to taste the abstraction of a tomato salad. This salad has become, for your intelligence, a salad that you know, not this unique, incomparable salad that takes a certain amount of time to taste. If you want your life to be more exciting, you have to put your intelligence aside and return to what is least general and least mechanical about you: your perceptions, your emotions, your sensations. Of course, it takes an effort to move from our usual intelligence to this dense and unique experience - but it's worth it. If you want to be happy, you have to trust yourself to this, to seeing yourself in a new way all the time.
(Fabrice Midal, 3 minutes of philosophy to become human again, broadcast on France Culture on 07/24/2019)

Listen to the podcast in French:
https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/3-minutes-de-philosophie-pour-redevenir-humain/bergson-l-intelligence-est-caracterisee-par-une-incomprehension-naturelle-de-la-vie-4432121

E1.7.B. A STATE OF ATTENTION NOT MOTIVATED BY THE WILL IS REQUIRED TO ACHIEVE THIS STATE 
We've all experienced it many times - as children, marvelling at the world without expectation - as adults, in a contemplation that imposes itself on us - let's pay attention! But how can we fix our attention and stop wanting ?

E1.7.B.1. WHEN WE ARE REMINDED OF THE "PLEASURE INHERENT IN EXISTENCE ITSELF", IN SPITE OF OURSELVES, BY OURSELVES - LET'S LISTEN !

E1.7.B.1.1. CONSIDER THOSE MOMENTS OF "INHERENT PLEASURES OF LIVING" when, like Christophe Béguin, we declare: "I admit that I exist. It's astonishing and natural. To be here. The truth is that I am capable of enjoying what makes me me." How can we pay attention to these moments? Can we provoke them?

E1.7.B.1.1_REF1_PO "FREED FROM MYSELF, I AM BORN, MAN OF THE REAL. Unparalleled and without center. Nothing moves except the fan. Singularity reverses sleep. The eye knows the difference. A volume of air enters my being like a wing. Parousia strikes me, I have eyes and bones. [...] 

A journey into the obvious

I admit that I exist. 
It is amazing and natural. 
To be here. 
I meet myself every day.
Time is a sham when it regulates this. 
With discretion and persistence I explore the full flavor of the world. 
I am a "conductor" in the electrical sense. 
Joy is a conquest over expectation. 
It is the presence of oneself in the open day of possibility. 
One must dare to be tender, ignorant, sensual. 
The truth is that I am capable of enjoying what I am. 
This is knowledge, and a laziness of knowledge, a lasciviousness of being. 
For the factual beehive of the world and the stormy space of the mind do the rest."
(Christophe Béguin, Warof beauty, Spotless, 2011)


"DÉMIS DU MOI, JE NAIS, HOMME DU RÉEL. Sans pareil et sans centre. Rien ne bouge, sauf l’éventail. La singularité renverse le sommeil. L’œil connaît la différence. Un volume d’air entre comme une aile dans mon être. La parousie me cingle, j’ai des yeux et des os. [...]

Une virée dans l’évidence 

J’avoue que j’existe. 
C’est stupéfiant et naturel. 
D’être là. 
Je me rencontre tous les jours.
Le Temps est une imposture s’il gouverne cela. 
Avec discrétion et ténacité, j’explore la pleine saveur du monde. 
Je suis « conducteur » au sens électrique du terme. 
La joie est une conquête sur l’attente. 
Elle est présence à soi dans le jour ouvert du possible. 
Il faut oser être tendre, ignorant, sensuel. 
La vérité, c’est ce que je suis capable de jouir de ce qui me fait. 
C’est cela la connaissance, et une paresse du savoir, une lascivité d’être. 
Puisque la ruche factuelle du monde et l’espace tempétueux du mental font le reste."
(Christophe Béguin, Guerre de beauté, Impeccables, 2011)

E1.7.B.1.1_REF2_PH "NO MAN KNOWS HOW MUCH HE IS AN OPTIMIST, even when he calls himself a pessimist, because he has not really measured the depths of his debt to whatever created him and enabled him to call himself anything. At the back of our brains… [there is] a forgotten blaze or burst of astonishment at our own existence. The object of the artistic and spiritual life [is] to dig for this submerged sunrise of wonder; so that a man sitting in a chair might suddenly understand that he [is] actually alive, and be happy [...]
The primary problem for me, certainly in order of time and largely in order of logic… was the problem of how men could be made to realise the wonder and splendour of being alive, in environments which their own daily criticism treated as dead-alive, and which their imagination had left for dead."
(G.K. Chesterton, The Autobiography of G.K. Chesterton)

E1.7.B.1.1_REF2.1_PO "TWENTY REASONS FOR BEING

notice the rage

notice the silence - silence and the presence

of everything:

small truths

and other surprises

what we nurture

how we live with loss

saved by the beauty of the world

seeking language

large enough

a life worthy of our breath

when no question

seems big enough:

what if we get this

right?

this tiny slice of eternity mathematics, mystery, and the universe

this fantastic argument

of being alive."
(Krista Tippett)

E1.7.B.1.1_REF3_PH “THE FEELING OF EXISTENCE STRIPPED OF ALL OTHER AFFECTION is in itself a precious feeling of contentment and peace that would be enough on its own to make this existence dear and sweet”

E1.7.B.1.1_REF3.1_PH "SUCH IS THE STATE WHICH I OFTEN EXPERIENCED ON THE ISLAND OF SAINT-PIERRE in my solitary reveries, whether I lay in a boat and drifted where the water carried me, or sat by the shores of the stormy lake, or elsewhere, on the banks of a lovely river or a stream murmuring over the stones.
What is the source of our happiness in such a state? Nothing external to us, nothing apart from ourselves and our own existence; as long as this state lasts we are self-sufficient like God. The feeling of existence unmixed with any other emotion is in itself a precious feeling of peace and contentment which would be enough to make
this mode of being loved and cherished by anyone who could guard against all the earthly and sensual influences that are constantly distracting us from it in this life and troubling the joy it could give us."
(Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Reveries of the Solitary Walker, Fith Walk, 1782)

E1.7.B.1.1_REF3.2_PH DANS "IN THE REVERIES OF THE SOLITARY WALKER, Jean-Jacques Rousseau seeks refuge from the persecution of his freedom of thought. He finds an island in the middle of Lake Bienne, where he indulges in the pleasure of doing nothing for several months. He tries to rediscover the lost paradise and to merge with nature. Letting himself be carried by the movement of the water, he merges with the world and achieves a blissful existence that touches the very heart of being and elevates the temporary life to the fullness of eternity. This experience allows him to enjoy naked existence, to experience himself, and to find inner peace."

E1.7.B.1.1_REF3.2.a_PH A UNION WITH THE NATURAL WORLD AND ENTRANCE INTO A SORT OF BLESSED ETERNITY "In the 'Fifth Walk' of Jean-Jacques Rousseau's Reveries of the Solitary Walker, the author seeks refuge from the persecution to which he is subjected because of his works and the freedom of thought they demonstrate. Arriving at Lake Biel, not far from Neuchâtel, he discovered an island in the middle of the lake named after Saint Peter, the gatekeeper of the kingdom, and there he devoted himself for a few months to the happiness of doing nothing: "Everything I did during my stay was in fact the delightful and necessary occupation of a man devoted to idleness. It is about going back to the beginning of time, finding the lost paradise and melting into the bosom of Mother Nature, like a child who knows he is perfectly safe (Wittgenstein), cradled by a caring mother: "... I would throw myself into a boat, which I would sail across the middle of a lake when the water was calm, and there, lying full length in the boat with my eyes turned towards the sky, I would let myself go and drift slowly with the water, sometimes for several hours, immersed in a thousand confused but delightful reveries, which, without having any specific or constant object, were a hundred times preferable to anything I had found most pleasant in what are called the pleasures of life. Letting himself go with the rhythm and the breath of the world, in his boat like a child in its cradle, Jean-Jacques merged with the secret life that breathes in nature, blissfully disappearing into the world, not to flee from it, but to unite with it. His breathing synchronizes with the movement of the water, and the dreamer, having finally reached his resting place, living the life that animates the great whole, enters eternity: "The ebb and flow of the water, its constant noise, but swollen at intervals, relentlessly hitting my eyes and ears, compensated for the inner movements that reverie had extinguished in me, and were enough to make me feel my existence with pleasure, without bothering to think. From time to time, there would be a faint and brief reflection on the instability of the things of this world, of which the surface of the water offered me a picture: but soon these light impressions would fade into the uniformity of the continuous movement that shook me and that, without any active participation on the part of my soul, did not allow me to anchor myself at the point from which, called by the hour and by the agreed signal, I could not tear myself away without effort". In this admirable text, which invents a new genre that the following century will call "prose poem", a dreamy and pre-reflective phenomenology is achieved that manages to highlight the pure fact of existence. A blissful existence that touches the heart of being, elevates the provisional life to the fullness of divine eternity, and reconciles us with ourselves by reducing us to the essential, the quintessence of our being, which is to enjoy naked existence, to experience the delicious feeling of pure being: "What do we enjoy in such a situation? Nothing outside of oneself, nothing but oneself and one's own existence; as long as this state lasts, one is self-sufficient like God. The feeling of existence, stripped of all other affections, is in itself a precious feeling of contentment and peace, which alone would be enough to make this existence dear and sweet to those who know how to ward off all the sensual and earthly impressions that constantly distract us and disturb our sweetness here below."
(Jacques Darriulat, Being and Existence, 3-Experiencing Existence, 2020)

E1.7.B.1.1_REF4_PH MOMENTS OF “PLEASURE INHERENT IN EXISTENCE ITSELF” that have nothing to do with truth, beauty or love? We agree in the sense that these experiences escape the limits of language.

E1.7.B.1.1_REF4.1_PH "THE GREAT SECRET OF PROUST, the sacred message that I so persistently seek in every author, certainly has something to do with the little Madeleine biscuit dipped in a cup of tea, as well as two or three other circumstances conducive to this kind of revelation, up to the one that culminates at the end of the book, But the reality remains - astonishing as it may be - that the kind of ecstasy described by Proust, and of which many people, as he himself recognizes, are unaware and will remain unaware all their lives, is a sensation that has nothing to do with what we call "beauty", nor with what we call "truth", nor even with what we call "love". It is a feeling, or rather a moment, when we are "delighted" beyond all expression by what Wordsworth called "the pleasure inherent in existence itself.
(John Cowper Powys cited by Denis Grozdanovitch, in his Short treatise on casualness, 2012)

E1.7.B.1.1_REF4.2_PH JOHNS COWPER POWYS COMES CLOSE TO SPINOZA'S INTUITION OF ETERNITY and active joy.
"Did I share at such times the sub-thoughts, or over-thoughts, that the old earth herself has, as she turns upon her axis, or that the vast volume of the ocean has, as his tide gathers along his beaches or draws back hoarsely into his gulfs? 
They were at any rate what might be called sensation-thoughts. [...] What I would like to emphasize just here is that the pleasure I got from these things of my solitary walks did not present itself to me as an aesthetic pleasure, nor did it call up in my mind the idea of beauty. What gave me these sensations seemed to be some mysterious “rapport” between myself and these things. It was like a sudden recognition of some obscure link, some remote identity, between myself and these objects. Posts, palings, hedges, heaps of stones —they were part of my very soul.
But the mere movement of walking, the mere contact with earth and air and the breath of the free wind as I left the town behind, always seemed able to engender in me a mood in which the present took to itself a sort of winnowed essence of similar memories from the past and thus became a continuity of half-forgotten feelings that welled up in my consciousness and reduced the future to complete non-existence. I thus became on these lonely walks like one who has found the clue to the obliteration of the future; and although I did not feel as though I touched the Eternal, I certainly felt as though I ceased to want anything or wish for anything that I did not already possess. What I possessed was in fact—if I may put it so—a sort of half-eternity, made up of a fusion of past and present, with the future, and all its wants and wishes, totally annihilated."
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber, p. 169-170)

E1.7.B.1.1_REF4.3_PH JEAN D'ORMESSON, AMBASSADOR OF JOY
Don't hide your joy #27

Watch the video (less than 3 minutes) on YouTube in French :
https://youtu.be/vbi5BOpl_30

E1.7.B.1.1_REF5_PH THERE IS NOTHING MORE FRUITFUL OR AMUSING THAN TO BE DISTRACTED FROM ONE THING BY ANOTHER.
(Charles Albert Cingria)

E1.7.B.1.1_REF6_PH WONDER IS ESSENTIAL TO A FULFILLING LIFE "It bears repeating that what makes life livable is our ability — our willingness — to move through the world wonder-smitten by reality. The most wonderful thing about wonder is that it knows no scale, no class, no category — it can be found in a geranium or in a galaxy, in the burble of a brook or in the Goldberg Variations. “A leaf of grass is no less than the journey work of the stars,” wrote Walt Whitman, eternal patron saint of wonder.

Wonder, after all, is what we look for when we are looking and the richest recompense of learning how to look. G.K. Chesterton knew this when, in his wonderful meditation on the dandelion and the meaning of life, he observed that the object of the creative life, of the full life, is to dig for the “submerged sunrise of wonder.” Dylan Thomas knew it in the recognition that “children in wonder watching the stars, is the aim and the end.” Rachel Carson knew it when she insisted that the greatest gift a parent can give a child is “a sense of wonder so indestructible that it would last throughout life, as an unfailing antidote against the boredom and disenchantments of later years, the sterile preoccupation with things that are artificial, the alienation from the sources of our strength.” Goethe knew it when he exclaimed: “I am here, that I may wonder!”

How to live into that knowledge with the full capacity of our creaturely potential is what Hermann Hesse (July 2, 1877–August 9, 1962) explores in a soulful century-old reflection included in Butterflies: Reflections, Tales, and Verse"
(Maria Popova's review of Hermann Hesse's Butterflies: Reflections, Tales, and Verse - in The Marginalian)

E1.7.B.1.1_REF6.1_PH "WONDER IS WHERE IT STARTS, and though wonder is also where it ends, this is no futile path. Whether admiring a patch of moss, a crystal, flower, or golden beetle, a sky full of clouds, a sea with the serene, vast sigh of its swells, or a butterfly wing with its arrangement of crystalline ribs, contours, and the vibrant bezel of its edges, the diverse scripts and ornamentations of its markings, and the infinite, sweet, delightfully inspired transitions and shadings of its colors — whenever I experience part of nature, whether with my eyes or another of the five senses, whenever I feel drawn in, enchanted, opening myself momentarily to its existence and epiphanies, that very moment allows me to forget the avaricious, blind world of human need, and rather than thinking or issuing orders, rather than acquiring or exploiting, fighting or organizing, all I do in that moment is “wonder,” like Goethe, and not only does this wonderment establish my brotherhood with him, other poets, and sages, it also makes me a brother to those wondrous things I behold and experience as the living world: butterflies and moths, beetles, clouds, rivers and mountains, because while wandering down the path of wonder, I briefly escape the world of separation and enter the world of unity."
(Hermann Hesse, Butterflies: Reflections, Tales, and Verse)

E1.7.B.1.1_REF6.1.a_PH UNIVERSITIES OFTEN FOCUS ON FRAGMENTED KNOWLEDGE RATHER THAN HOLISTIC WISDOM "Our universities fail to guide us down the easiest paths to wisdom… Rather than teaching a sense of awe, they teach the very opposite: counting and measuring over delight, sobriety over enchantment, a rigid hold on scattered individual parts over an affinity for the unified and whole. These are not schools of wisdom, after all, but schools of knowledge, though they take for granted that which they cannot teach — the capacity for experience, the capacity for being moved, the Goethean sense of wonderment."
(Hermann Hesse, Butterflies: Reflections, Tales, and Verse)

E1.7.B.1.1_REF6.1.b_PO “SINGING AT THE CENTER
OF YOUR SOUL
Singing at the center of your soul,
Long may you dance across your inner stage,
Regarding neither rectitude nor rage,
Pursuing neither destiny nor goal.

Suffering is nothing but the road:
You, the traveler, are sheer delight,
A little wisp of lovely, lilting light
Torn from a joy that pain cannot corrode.

Be, then, whatever person time will tell.
Do what reason and the heart deem good.
Take whatever will or fortune would,
Always west of heaven, east of hell.

Within, you are more beautiful than you
Can ever comprehend, though you can feel
A wonder and a passion that are real,
Wandering like a wind through what you do.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E1.7.B.1.1_REF6.2_PO "BEING BUT MEN

Being but men, we walked into the trees
Afraid, letting our syllables be soft
For fear of waking the rooks,
For fear of coming
Noiselessly into a world of wings and cries.

If we were children we might climb,
Catch the rooks sleeping, and break no twig,
And, after the soft ascent,
Thrust out our heads above the branches
To wonder at the unfailing stars.

Out of confusion, as the way is,
And the wonder, that man knows,
Out of the chaos would come bliss.

That, then, is loveliness, we said,
Children in wonder watching the stars,
Is the aim and the end.

Being but men, we walked into the trees."
(Dylan Thomas)

E1.7.B.1.1_REF7_PH "THE PRACTICE OF KÔAN [...]

In satori, the framework of the search implodes, the reference points disappear, the leap extends to everything, letting go is absolute. One cannot say that “This is it! That was it!” Or, like Linji, whose master was Huangbo: ‘In the end, there's not much to Huangbo's Buddhism!’ Or, like Taihuwei, a 12th-century master whose words on enlightenment I particularly like because of their discreet holiday feel: “It's like a racing boat for the holidays, left in some quiet corner, but built to win regattas.” To express what is perhaps the most profound experience of life with such unexpected simplicity, through such a familiar and charming image, is, I find, dazzling... [...]"
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond Wisdom, How to Live?, 2023)

E1.7.B.1.1_REF7.1_PH "QUESTIONS ABOUT THE WAY [...] 

Ecstasy is beyond concepts and words, but when it subsides, the path is established like a landscape. The spiritual perception of the world then proves strong enough to accommodate names and concepts without being distorted. Does the intensity of the experience remain? Honesty obliges us to say no, but something remains that is an inner treasure. Spiritual experience becomes a practicable art of living, and the seeker's view of the world is immensely enriched by it. The relationship between word and thing changes because the space between them becomes perceptible in itself. The name returns, like a bird, to alight on the thing, but we see that it belongs to another domain, and that the whole forms an assemblage, not a fusional unit. The arbitrary character of the sign, emphasized by Saussure, becomes manifest".
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond Wisdom, How to Live?, 2023)

E1.7.B.1.2. SOME LIFE EXPERIENCES OF PRESENCE CANNOT BE APPROACHED BY STUDY OR RATIONAL THOUGHT we must live them, cherish them, become one with them and try to communicate the experience to others.

E1.7.B.1.2.a. SOME LIFE EXPERIENCES CANNOT BE APPROACHED BY STUDY OR RATIONAL THOUGHT; WE MUST LIVE THEM, CHERISH THEM, AND BECOME ONE WITH THEM
The environment influences our emotions and can lead us to confuse our "false self" imposed by society with our "true self." These battles within ourselves can result in a storm that tears us apart, but every time we survive, we grow. Thich Nhat Hanh experienced such a storm while browsing a book in a library, and he had a moment of insight. He realized that he was empty of ideals, hopes, viewpoints, and allegiances. He felt as carefree as a grasshopper on a blade of grass, where there is no separation, resistance, or blame.

E1.7.B.1.2.a_REF1_PH "IT’S FUNNY HOW MUCH OUR SURROUNDINGS INFLUENCE OUR EMOTIONS. Our joys and sorrows, likes and dislikes are colored by our environment so much that often we just let our surroundings dictate our course. We go along with “public” feelings until we no longer even know our own true aspirations. We become a stranger to ourselves, molded entirely by society… Sometimes I feel caught between two opposing selves — the “false self” imposed by society and what I would call my “true self.” How often we confuse the two and assume society’s mold to be our true self. Battles between our two selves rarely result in a peaceful reconciliation. Our mind becomes a battlefield on which the Five Aggregates — the form, feelings, perceptions, mental formations, and consciousness of our being — are strewn about like debris in a hurricane. Trees topple, branches snap, houses crash.
These are our loneliest moments. Yet every time we survive such a storm, we grow a little. Without storms like these, I would not be who I am today. But I rarely hear such a storm coming until it is already upon me. It seems to appear without warning, as though treading silently on silk slippers. I know it must have been brewing a long time, simmering in my own thoughts and mental formations, but when such a frenzied hurricane strikes, nothing outside can help. I am battered and torn apart, and I am also saved. [...]
[He goes on to detail what occasioned the storm of his unselfing] The feeling began shortly before eleven o’clock at night on October first. I was browsing on the eleventh floor of Butler Library. I knew the library was about to close, and I saw a book that concerned the area of my research. I slid it off the shelf and held it in my two hands. It was large and heavy. I read that it had been published in 1892, and it was donated to the Columbia Library the same year. On the back cover was a slip of paper that recorded the names of borrowers and the dates they took it out of the library. The first time it had been borrowed was in 1915, the second time was in 1932. I would be the third. Can you imagine? I was only the third borrower, on October 1, 1962. For seventy years, only two other people had stood in the same spot I now stood, pulled the book from the shelf, and decided to check it out. I was overcome with the wish to meet those two people. I don’t know why, but I wanted to hug them. But they had vanished, and I, too, will soon disappear. Two points on the same straight line will never meet. I was able to encounter two people in space, but not in time. [...]
I feel as though I’ve lived a long time and have seen so much of life. I’m almost thirty-six, which is not young. But that night, while standing amidst the stacks at Butler Library, I saw that I am neither young nor old, existent nor nonexistent. My friends know I can be as playful and mischievous as a child. I love to kid around and enter fully into the game of life. I also know what it is to get angry. And I know the pleasure of being praised. I am often on the verge of tears or laughter. But beneath all of these emotions, what else is there? How can I touch it? If there isn’t anything, why would I be so certain that there is?
Still holding the book, I felt a glimmer of insight. I understood that I am empty of ideals, hopes, viewpoints, or allegiances. I have no promises to keep with others. In that moment, the sense of myself as an entity among other entities disappeared. I knew that this insight did not arise from disappointment, despair, fear, desire, or ignorance. A veil silently lifted effortlessly. That is all. If you beat me, stone me, or even shoot me, everything that is considered to be “me” will disintegrate. Then, what is actually there will reveal itself — faint as smoke, elusive as emptiness, and yet neither smoke nor emptiness, ugly, nor not ugly, beautiful, yet not beautiful. It is like a shadow on a screen. [...]
At that moment, I had the deep feeling that I had returned. My clothes, my shoes, even the essence of my being had vanished, and I was carefree as a grasshopper pausing on a blade of grass… When a grasshopper sits on a blade of grass, he has no thought of separation, resistance, or blame… The green grasshopper blends completely with the green grass… It neither retreats nor beckons. It knows nothing of philosophy or ideals. It is simply grateful for its ordinary life. Dash across the meadow, my dear friend, and greet yesterday’s child. When you can’t see me, you yourself will return. Even when your heart is filled with despair, you will find the same grasshopper on the same blade of grass… Some life dilemmas cannot be solved by study or rational thought. We just live with them, struggle with them, and become one with them… To live, we must die every instant. We must perish again and again in the storms that make life possible."
(Thich Nhat Hanh, Fragrant Palm Leaves: Journals, 1962–1966)

E1.7.B.1.2.a_REF2_PO "IT COMES UNADORNED

Unadorned
Like a phrase
Strong enough to cast a spell;
It comes
Unbidden,
Like the turn of sun through hills
Or stars in wheels of song.
The jeweled feet of women dance the earth.
Arousing it to spring.
Shoulders broad as a road bend to share the weight of years.
Profiles breach the distance and lean
Toward an ordinary kiss.
Bliss.
It comes naked into the world like a charm."
(Toni Morrison)

E1.7.B.1.2.a_REF3_PO "IN MANY AND REPORTLESS PLACES 
We feel a Joy -
Reportless, also, but sincere as Nature 
Or Deity -

It comes, without a consternation -
Dissolves - the same -
But leaves a sumptuous Destitution -
Without a Name -

Profane it by a search - we cannot -
It has no home -
Nor we who having once waylaid it -
Thereafter roam. "
(Emily Dickinson, 1876)

E1.7.B.1.2.b. "A DEEP SPIRITUAL EXPERIENCE IS BOUND TO EFFECT A CHANGE IN THE MORAL STRUCTURE OF ONE’S PERSONALITY
Our ordinary life only touches the fringe of personality, it does not cause a commotion in the deepest parts of the soul… We are … made to live on the superficiality of things. We may be clever, bright, and all that, but what we produce lacks depth, sincerity, and does not appeal to the inmost feelings… A deep spiritual experience is bound to effect a change in the moral structure of one’s personality."

E1.7.B.1.2.b_REF1_PH "LIFE AS IT IS LIVED SUFFICES. It is only when the disquieting intellect steps in and tries to murder it that we stop to live and imagine ourselves to be short of something. Let the intellect alone, it has its usefulness in its proper sphere, but let it not interfere with the flowing of the life-stream. If you are at all tempted to look into it, do so while letting it flow. The fact of flowing must under no circumstances be arrested or meddled with… […]
The great fact of life itself … flows altogether outside of these vain exercises of the intellect or of the imagination. [...]
Zen … must be directly and personally experienced by each of us in his inner spirit. Just as two stainless mirrors reflect each other, the fact and our own spirits must stand facing each other with no intervening agents. When this is done we are able to seize upon the living, pulsating fact itself. Freedom is an empty word until then. [...]
Zen may be considered a discipline aiming at the reconstruction of character. Our ordinary life only touches the fringe of personality, it does not cause a commotion in the deepest parts of the soul… We are … made to live on the superficiality of things. We may be clever, bright, and all that, but what we produce lacks depth, sincerity, and does not appeal to the inmost feelings… A deep spiritual experience is bound to effect a change in the moral structure of one’s personality."
(D.T.Suzuki, Essays in Zen Buddhism, 1927)

E1.7.B.1.2.c. TRY TO BE ASTONISHED THAT THE WORLD EXISTS
Ludwig Wittgenstein, in his only public lecture, shared what he believed to be the very meaning of life: "to be astonished that the world exists". Try to marvel at the sheer existence of the world. While it may seem abstract, it's actually quite simple. The challenge lies in truly experiencing this sense of wonder.

E1.7.B.1.2.c.i. TRY TO BE ASTONISHED THAT THE WORLD EXISTS
Ludwig Wittgenstein, in his only public lecture, shared what he believed to be the very meaning of life: "to be astonished that the world exists". Try to marvel at the sheer existence of the world. While it may seem abstract, it's actually quite simple. The challenge lies in truly experiencing this sense of wonder.

E1.7.B.1.2.c.i_REF1_PH "WITTGENSTEIN: "I AM AMAZED AT THE EXISTENCE OF THE WORLD"
"Ludwig Wittgenstein has given only one  public lecture in his life. At the end of the lecture, he confides what constitutes for him the very meaning of life: " to be amazed at the existence of the world". From a strictly rigorous point of view, this sentence does not make sense. I can be surprised to meet a dog as big as a sheep in the courtyard of my building, in other words, I am astonished when a fact occurs that should not have happened. But to be astonished at the existence of the world is inconsistent because I cannot imagine that the world does not exist. But that does not mean, insists Wittgenstein immediately, that this astonishment should not be recognized as important. It says something very profound about the meaning of life. Now try to amaze yourself that the world is. This exercise may seem abstract to you, yet it is very simple. However the difficulty is that you have to live this experience. It is as if I were conjuring up a fruit that you had never tasted before: the more I would tell you about it, the more obscure my words would seem to you, yet you will agree, the fruit I am talking about is not at all abstract - you might eat it one day. Well, philosophy consists in making us taste an unknown fruit, in making us experience things, our life or our difficulties, in a completely different way. Philosophy wants us to change our angle of vision, our point of view, to really enlighten us. Conversely, the whole of philosophy that gives advice of wishdom and that thinks it is practical, only locks us into our mistakes and our blindness. The difference between these two approaches is the capacity to be astonished that the world is, to take nothing at face value, and it is this adventure which is deeply philosophical because it transforms our whole way of being.”
(Fabrice Midal, 3 minutes of philosophy to become human again)

Listen to the Podcast (in French); https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/3-minutes-de-philosophie-pour-redevenir-humain/wittgenstein-je-metonne-de-lexistence-du-monde

E1.7.B.1.2.c.ii. YOU CAN'T SAY THE ABSOLUTE, BUT YOU CAN SHOW IT
Wittgenstein discusses the challenge of expressing one's astonishment at the existence of the world. Rational language can only articulate propositions relative to one another, and it fails to encapsulate the true essence of ethics. Ethics should be rooted in an experience or sentiment with absolute, rather than relative, value. The absolute is present in the experience of Beauty, the imperative of Good, and the conviction of Faith. It cannot be spoken, but it can be shown. Wittgenstein describes his personal astonishment at the existence of the world as a prime example of the Absolute.

E1.7.B.1.2.c.ii_REF1_PH WITTGENSTEIN EXPLORES THE DIFFICULTY OF COMMUNICATING ETHICAL CONCEPTS BEYOND RATIONAL LANGUAGE "In the Conference on Ethics [1992], Wittgenstein threw away the ladder and attempted to think beyond what can be formulated. What he says at the beginning, albeit in a veiled way: "I feel that I will have great difficulty in communicating to you what I think" [...] The difficulty of saying or "communicating" stems from the fact that all rational language, that is, scientifically based language, can only express propositions whose terms are relative to each other, describing "facts" or "states of affairs" whose elements refer to each other and thus always elude the grasp of the proper meaning; [...]

We can therefore base ethics only on an experience or a feeling - not on a concept, for here we are beyond what language is allowed to formulate - whose value is absolute and not relative. This is why, according to Wittgenstein, the ethical question is inseparable from the aesthetic and religious questions: The good, beauty, and faith only make sense if they are based on an absolute, which necessarily loses this dignity as soon as it becomes part of the relational logic of human language. Wittgenstein, whose moral rigidity was often emphasized by his contemporaries, could not renounce ethical demands. The absolute is not an empty word, since, according to Wittgenstein, we experience it in the feeling of beauty, through the imperative of goodness, through the commitment of faith. In this sense, the Absolute is present; it is not to be sought in another world, it is here and now, it is even so obvious that it stares us in the face. It cannot be said, one must remain silent about it. But instead of saying it, we can show it: "Surely there is something unspeakable. It shows itself. It is the mystical."

A leap is then necessary, a break in the course of the discourse, a hole in the fabric of language that, at the heart of the demonstration, gives rise to the demonstration of the Absolute: "One of you might choose as a typical example the feeling one experiences when taking a walk on a beautiful summer's day. This is the situation I find myself in when I want to stop and think about what I call in my mind an ethical value or an absolute value. And, as always in my case, the idea of a particular experience presents itself to me, an idea that is, in a sense, my experience par excellence; that is why, in addressing you, I will make this experience my prime example. (As I have just said, this is an entirely personal matter, and someone else could come up with other and more striking examples!) I will describe this experience in a way that will lead you to mention identical or similar experiences, if possible, and thus give us a common basis for our investigation. I think the best way to describe it is to say that when I do this experiment, I wonder about the existence of the world (I wonder about the existence of the world, to wonder about having more the value of wondering than of being amazed). And then I tend to use phrases like: "How extraordinary that anything exists!" or "How extraordinary that the world exists!"
(Jacques Darriulat, Being and Existence, 1- To encounter existence, 2020)

E1.7.B.1.2.c.iii. WITTGENSTEIN BELIEVES THAT MYSTICAL EXPERIENCES ARE PERSONAL AND CAN ONLY BE UNDERSTOOD THROUGH PERSONAL EXPERIENCE.
The focus of this experience is not the beauty of individual things, but the existence of the world as a whole. While this is accessible to everyone, it's confined by our personal horizons. By experiencing the world's existence, one acknowledges their own dignity and participates in nature's divinity.

E1.7.B.1.2.c.iii-REF1_PH WITTGENSTEIN REGARDS THE MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE OF THE EXISTENCE OF THE WORLD AS A PERSONAL AND INDESCRIBABLE REVELATION, ESSENTIAL TO AESTHETICS, ETHICS, AND RELIGION. "What Wittgenstein means [...] by saying that this experience is a 'personal matter' is that it only makes sense on the condition that it has been personally experienced, felt in the depths of oneself, by a kind of overwhelming revelation, by what Wittgenstein calls 'the mystical element'. So everyone can have it. And that is precisely why Wittgenstein presents this experience to his listeners, so that they in turn can evoke an "identical or similar" experience. But we need to be more precise. For the object of this astonishment - which we may well call fundamental, since without it neither aesthetics nor ethics nor religion would have any meaning - is not this landscape before our eyes, however beautiful it may be, but the "existence of the world" in its totality, as present in the highest mountain as in a crumb of bread.
For existence is not in this or that singular object, but in the world in its totality, even if this totality is accessible to us only within the limits of our horizon: "To contemplate the world sub specie aeterni is to contemplate it as a totality, but as a limited totality. The sense of the world as a limited totality is the mystical element. "Mystical" in that it refers to the unspeakable, that is, to that which must be kept silent, but which nevertheless "shows itself".

"Mystical", yes; but why "ethical"? What is so "ethical" about being surprised that the world exists? It is too early to answer this question. Let us content ourselves with noting that commentators have often compared Wittgenstein's philosophy to that of the Greek Stoics. For the ancients, the world and man, as living and thinking beings, were animated by the same fire, which burns in the soul of the world as well as in that of the individual, in the whole as well as in the part. It is therefore possible for man, the only living being capable of recognizing through reason the necessity and perfection of all things, to commune with the whole of nature, since both are imbued with the same divine breath. Man participates in the divinity of the whole and thus attains ethical dignity. By recognizing the truth of the world, that is, by marveling at its very existence, he also recognizes the divinity within himself. Admittedly, this connection with Stoicism, which to my knowledge was never emphasized by Wittgenstein himself, remains puzzling, but it allows us to imagine how it would be possible to connect the feeling that leads us to marvel at the existence of the world with that other feeling whose moral value we immediately understand, that of our own dignity, because we are part of the same mystery, which we nevertheless do not know how to formulate. [...]

This interpretation, through the Stoic reference, is all the more likely because it is consistent with what Wittgenstein adds rather enigmatically after the passage we have just quoted: "Without dwelling on this, I will continue with this other experience with which I am also familiar, and which will no doubt be familiar to many of you: what one might call the experience of feeling absolutely secure, rather than 'secure'. By this I mean that state of mind in which we are inclined to say: I have a clear conscience, nothing can hurt me, whatever happens [I am safe, nothing can hurt me, whatever happens]. This second experience is related to the first in that, marveling at the existence of the world, I commune with it and feel perfectly safe in the bosom of nature, like a child in its mother's arms. And such a feeling can also have an ethical value, as the Stoic sage, whose own life is in harmony and in tune with the life of nature as a whole - "to live in harmony with nature" is the fundamental maxim of Stoic morality - participates at every moment in the necessity as well as in the perfection of this universal Mother, of whom he feels himself to be a creature.
It is not enough to say that the experience that leads us to wonder, to marvel at the existence of the world, is indescribable, beyond the limits of any human language: it is also necessary to add that it is resolutely inconceivable. In fact, what amazes me surprises me and can only surprise me to the extent that I was expecting something else. [...]

But how is it that we can be surprised by the existence of the world? Since our birth, that is, since we were "brought into the world," have we not been accustomed to the "existence of the world? How can we be surprised at what we have always been accustomed to? [I am surprised that there is existence, independent of this or that thing, which I know I can determine in its particularity. How can such an experience be possible?"
(Jacques Darriulat, Being and Existence, 1- To encounter existence, 2020)

E1.7.B.1.2.c.iv. THE APPROPRIATE WAY TO EXPRESS THE MIRACLE OF THE WORLD'S EXISTENCE IS THE VERY EXISTENCE OF LANGUAGE. DESPITE ITS LIMITATIONS, LANGUAGE ALLOWS US TO CHANGE OUR PERSPECTIVE AND MARVEL AT OUR OWN EXISTENCE.

E1.7.B.1.2.c.iv_REF1_PH "[...] WE CAN SAY THAT THE EXISTENCE OF THE WORLD IS AN ENIGMA, that it is even the enigma, in the sense that we cannot question it, since we cannot even say it, but we can show it, and that is even what it does, it shows itself in the absence of being said, it manifests itself in the eyes of those who have encountered it, it hides itself from those who are accustomed to not seeing it. If, according to Wittgenstein, "the riddle does not exist," it is because it is existence itself. The riddle of existence is a question without an answer. Therefore, it is important to distinguish the enigma from the mystery, the enigma of the existence of the world from the mystery of the universe (Mysterious Universe). The mystery - for example, that of the Yellow Room (Gaston Leroux, whose hero is Rouletabille) or that of the Great Pyramid (Edgar P. Jacobs, whose heroes are Blake and Mortimer) - is always hidden, kept secret by dangerous conspirators, as conspiracy theories and the paranoid delusion of persecution tend to believe. The mystery, however, is not insurmountable, for it is enough to bring it to light to neutralize the threat. On the contrary, the mystery is all the more incomprehensible the more it is revealed, and all the more enigmatic the more majestically it manifests itself. The popular novel loves conspiracy theories; but nothing is more mysterious to the philosopher than the clarity of the obvious. A mystery is a secret by concealment, but a riddle is a secret by display. So there is no mystery here, nothing to be seen behind the curtain, for all the enigma lies in the obvious, not in the occult. The existence of the world is a riddle by ostentation. The "mystic" is entirely of this world. [...]
To see the world as a miracle is to learn to see what we have always seen as what we have never seen, for this is Wittgenstein's definition of a miracle: "an event such as we have never seen before. It is not, then, a matter of glimpsing another world, but of this world being offered to our gaze, but on the condition that we see it with unprecedented intensity, in the brilliance of its majesty, in the splendor of its appearance. One could speak here of a "revelation of the immanent," or even of a conversion to the obvious. This experience, which presupposes that the gaze regains a certain naiveté and sees the world beyond our habits, beyond the words that name it, the techniques that control it, in its still untouched magnificence, is not unlike the experience of the painter, and especially that of Cézanne. "What does it mean, then, that we perceive this miracle at certain moments and not at others?" Wittgenstein asks again. It means that we can consider the world either within the circle of language, as a collection of facts that can be named and linked together according to the thread and order of discourse, or outside language, as it shows itself, "reveals itself" to the eyes of those who know how to receive it as a miracle. Wittgenstein then adds this disturbing remark: "I am tempted to say that the correct way to express in language the miracle of the world's existence, although it is not a proposition of language, is the existence of language itself. Indeed, if the gaze is turned away from language, to where it is shown and not to where it is spoken, through a change of perspective that allows language to be considered as an object situated in the exterior, thanks to this distance it is possible to be surprised by language itself, by "the existence of language itself", as an object that is foreign to us, as opposed to the point of view of someone who is in language and uses it without being surprised by it. It is then that we can consider language as a miracle, but not as an object of knowledge that we can subject to laws".
(Jacques Darriulat, Being and Existence, 1- To encounter existence, 2020)

E1.7.B.1.2.c.iv_REF2_LIT “I USED TO WANT TO BE A WRITER. MY DREAM WAS TO WRITE A NOVEL THAT HELD EVERYTHING I LOVED, INCLUDING UNLOVABLE THINGS. LIKE A LITTLE CABINET.”
“What do you want to do in the future, I mean. Looks like you’re some kind of bookworm.” She took a long drag from her cigarette, the smoke blowing out the hallway past his face.
He put the book down and stared at a dusty landscape painting hanging across the hall. “You’ll think it’s stupid.”

“Maybe,” she said. “No promises.” Her amber bracelet clacked against the iron as she flicked ashes in the water.
“I used to want to be a writer. My dream was to write a novel that held everything I loved, including unlovable things. Like a little cabinet.” He shut his eyes— it sounded even more ridiculous aloud. “But that was back in high school. Before I realized it wasn’t real.”
“You wanna be a writer and you want to jump off a bridge? That’s pretty much the same thing, no? A writer just takes longer to hit the water.” She tried to laugh but started coughing.
(Ocean Vuong, The emperor of gladness, 2025)

E1.7.B.1.2.c.v. THE EXPERIENCE OF THE EXISTENCE OF THE WORLD IS NONSENSICAL, UNFORMULABLE AND NON-THEORETICAL. IT CANNOT BE REDUCED TO A SCIENCE. Wittgenstein considers that the world's existence is magnificent due to its nonsensical nature and pure gratuity. The effort to express the ineffable is valid because this sense of wonder is a deep inclination of the human spirit that warrants respect. However, creating a science of ethics, aesthetics, or religion is impossible.

E1.7.B.1.2.c.v_REF1_PH THE EXPERIENCE OF THE EXISTENCE OF THE WORLD, ALTHOUGH IT CANNOT BE FORMULATED, CAN BE FELT AND UNDERSTOOD THROUGH THE EMOTIONS IT EVOKES, SUCH AS ADMIRATION, FEAR, OR ECSTASY. "Have we finally defined what we know, a knowledge that is a taste, a "sweetness" and not a theorem, a demonstration and not a proof, when we experience the existence of the world? No, because our knowledge, which then lies in the unformulable and therefore in nonsense, can never be constituted as a science: "What amounts to saying this," Wittgenstein continues: "I see now that if these expressions did not make sense, it was not because the expressions I had found were not correct, but because their essence was that they did not make sense. In fact, all I wanted to achieve with them was to go beyond the world, that is, beyond meaningful language. All I was striving for-and, I think, all people who have ever tried to write or speak about ethics or religion are striving for-was to confront the limits of language. It is utterly, absolutely hopeless to confront the walls of our cage in this way. "These expressions did not make sense because their essence is not to make sense": how can this be understood? What was trying to be said in the necessarily wobbly images that were successively offered to make up for the failure of meaning is that the very existence of the world is nonsense, and it is this nonsense that we experience when we happen to be surprised and amazed by it. There are thinkers who emphatically complain that this world seems absurd to them. It seems that for Wittgenstein, on the contrary, the nonsense of the appearing world is also the true foundation of its splendor, that the pure gratuitousness of the phenomenon is the condition of its splendor, and that there is nothing more admirable than a world that means nothing, a world whose existence remains irreducible to its being put into words. Didn't Wittgenstein imply that the experience of being surprised by the existence of the world is also the source of a secret and deep joy, since he associated it with the feeling of living in complete security, "whatever happens", which cannot make any sense, at least for those who have never experienced such a feeling? So it is not in vain to go to the limits of language, as the poet does, to evoke the absent form of the mystery. What is in vain is not the effort itself, but the illusion that leads us to believe that a science of ethics, aesthetics, or religion is possible. On the contrary, it is important to understand that these are "experiences" that are part of the unformulable, and to think about them, failing to describe them adequately, while remaining silent. This experience "informs us of a tendency [to express the unspeakable] that exists in the human mind, a tendency that I can only deeply respect for myself, and that I could not possibly make fun of in my life." [...]

Whether it makes sense or not, the experience of being amazed at the existence of the world is still a feeling, that of astonishment or wonder. Admittedly, it is not a common feeling, since its object is a non-object: existence is in fact not an object of our experience, since it is at once nowhere - no phenomenon can embody existence on its own - and everywhere - since it is the act that causes every phenomenon to appear, to "make its appearance" - as one says of an actor who makes a successful entrance. But if we abandon the attempt to define integrally not the thing that manifests itself, but the pure fact of its existence, it is possible, on the contrary, to define the nature of the feeling, since we experience it, we feel it "in our own depths", and consequently, at least in a certain way, we become acquainted with it. It will therefore be up to us to define more precisely the modalities of such a feeling - is it of the order of love, hate, curiosity, joy, sadness or jealousy? Is it admiration or fear, astonishment or curiosity, hallucination or ecstasy?"
(Jacques Darriulat, Being and Existence, 1- To encounter existence, 2020)

E1.7.B.1.2.c.vi_REF1_MU DIALOGUE BETWEEN INTERIORITY AND EXTERIORITY

Schubert Allegro in A minor from *Lebensstürme* (*Life's Storms*) *D947*

Listen to it on YouTube: https://youtu.be/hkR-cPkJg2E?feature=shared

E1.7.B.1.2.d. "THE PERSONAL AND SUBJECTIVE NATURE OF OUR SPIRITUAL EXPERIENCES CANNOT BE FULLY UNDERSTOOD BY REASON.
The spiritual experiences we have can arise from atoms and molecules. At the same time, some of these experiences, and certainly their very personal and subjective nature, cannot be fully understood in terms of atoms and molecules."

E1.7.B.1.2.d_REF1_PH "I’M A SCIENTIST AND HAVE ALWAYS HAD A SCIENTIFIC VIEW OF THE WORLD — by which I mean that the universe is made of material stuff, and only material stuff, and that stuff is governed by a small number of fundamental laws. Every phenomenon has a cause, which originates in the physical universe. I’m a materialist. Not in the sense of seeking happiness in cars and nice clothes, but in the literal sense of the word: the belief that everything is made out of atoms and molecules, and nothing more. Yet, I have transcendent experiences. I communed with two ospreys that summer in Maine. I have feelings of being part of things larger than myself. I have a sense of connection to other people and to the world of living things, even to the stars. I have a sense of beauty. I have experiences of awe. And I’ve had transporting creative moments. [...]
I believe that the spiritual experiences we have can arise from atoms and molecules. At the same time, some of these experiences, and certainly their very personal and subjective nature, cannot be fully understood in terms of atoms and molecules. I believe in the laws of chemistry and biology and physics — in fact, as a scientist I much admire those laws — but I don’t think they capture, or can capture, the first-person experience of making eye contact with wild animals and similar transcendent moments. Some human experiences are simply not reducible to zeros and ones. [...]

A common feature of all aspects of spirituality is a loss of self, a letting go, a willingness to embrace something outside of ourselves, a willingness to listen rather than talk, a recognition that we are small and the cosmos is large. […]

Most transcendent experiences are completely ego-free. In the moment, we lose track of time and space, we lose track of our bodies, we lose track of our selves. We dissolve. And yet… spirituality emerges from consciousness and the material brain. And the paramount signature of consciousness is a sense of self, an “I-ness” distinct from the rest of the cosmos. Thus, curiously, a thing centered on self creates a thing absent of self. […]

More self, less connection to the larger world."
(Alan Lightman, The Transcendent Brain: Spirituality in the Age of Science, 2023)

E1.7.B.1.2.d_REF1.1_CUR PAINTING BY PORTUGUESE ARTIST, HISTORIAN, AND PHILOSOPHER FRANCISCO DE HOLANDA, a student of Michelangelo’s, envisioning the creation of the Ptolemaic universe by an omnipotent creator

E1.7.B.1.2.d_REF1.2_PH NOT ALL THINGS ARE SUBJECT TO QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS "Although as a child I developed a scientific view of the world, I also understood that not all things were subject to quantitative analysis… I was about nine years old. It was a Sunday afternoon. I was alone in a bedroom of my home in Memphis, Tennessee, gazing out the window at the empty street, listening to the faint sound of a train passing a great distance away. Suddenly I felt that I was looking at myself from outside my body. For a brief few moments, I had the sensation of seeing my entire life, and indeed the life of the entire planet, as a brief flicker in a great chasm of time, with an infinite span of time before my existence and an infinite span of time afterward. My fleeting sensation included infinite space. Without body or mind, I was somehow floating in the gargantuan stretch of space, far beyond the solar system and even the galaxy, space that stretched on and on and on. I felt myself to be a tiny speck, insignificant. A speck in a huge universe that cared nothing about me or any living beings and their little dots of existence — a universe that simply was. And I felt that everything I had experienced in my young life, the joy and the sadness, and everything that I would later experience meant absolutely nothing in the grand scheme of things. It was a realization both liberating and terrifying at once… Despite the dismal feeling that the universe didn’t care a whit about me, I did feel connected to something far larger than myself."
(Alan Lightman, The Transcendent Brain: Spirituality in the Age of Science, 2023)

E1.7.B.1.2.e. "THE GREAT PARADOX OF CONSCIOUSNESS IS THAT IT CONSTITUTES BOTH OUR ENTIRE EXPERIENCE OF REALITY AND OUR BLINDFOLD TO REALITY AS IT REALLY IS. Forever trapped within it, we mistake our concepts of things for the things themselves, our theories for the universe, continually seeing the world not as it is but as we are. The supreme frontier of human freedom may be the ability to accept that something exists beyond understanding, that understanding is a machination of the mind and not a mirror of the world — that the world simply is, and our consciousness is a participant in its being but not a creator of it."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.7.B.1.2.e_REF1_PH HUMAN CONSCIOUSNESS OFTEN MISINTERPRETS REALITY "It is notorious that the operations of the average human consciousness unite the self, not with things as they really are, but with images, notions, and aspects of things. The verb “to be,” which [the self] uses so lightly, does not truly apply to any of the objects amongst which the practical man supposes himself to dwell. For him, the hare of Reality is always ready-jugged [jugged hare is a traditional English dish of hare marinated in wine and juniper berries, cooked in the animal’s blood]: he conceives not the living, lovely, wild, swift-moving creature which has been sacrificed in order that he may be fed on the deplorable dish which he calls “things as they really are.” So complete, indeed, is the separation of his consciousness from the facts of being, that he feels no sense of loss. He is happy enough “understanding,” garnishing, assimilating the carcass from which the principle of life and growth has been ejected. He is happy enough “understanding,” garnishing, assimilating the carcass from which the principle of life and growth has been ejected, and whereof only the most digestible portions have been retained."
(Evelyn Underhill, Practical Mysticism, 1914)

E1.7.B.1.2.e_REF1.1_PH "BECAUSE MYSTERY IS HORRIBLE TO US, we have agreed for the most part to live in a world of labels; to make of them the current coin of experience, and ignore their merely symbolic character, the infinite gradation of values which they misrepresent. We simply do not attempt to unite with Reality. But now and then that symbolic character is suddenly brought home to us. Some great emotion, some devastating visitation of beauty, love, or pain, lifts us to another level of consciousness; and we are aware for a moment of the difference between the neat collection of discrete objects and experiences which we call the world, and the height, the depth, the breadth of that living, growing, changing Fact, of which thought, life, and energy are parts… Then we realise that our whole life is enmeshed in great and living forces; terrible because unknown… The more sacred plane of life and energy which seems to be manifested in the forces we call “spiritual” and “emotional” — in love, anguish, ecstasy, adoration — is hidden from us too. Symptoms, appearances, are all that our intellects can discern: sudden irresistible inroads from it, all that our hearts can apprehend. The material for an intenser life, a wider, sharper consciousness, a more profound understanding of our own existence, lies at our gates. But we are separated from it, we cannot assimilate it; except in abnormal moments, we hardly know that it is."
(Evelyn Underhill, Practical Mysticism, 1914)

E1.7.B.1.2.e_REF1.1.a_PH MYSTICISM IS A PRACTICAL APPROACH AVAILABLE TO EVERYONE "The visionary is a mystic when his vision mediates to him an actuality beyond the reach of the senses. The philosopher is a mystic when he passes beyond thought to the pure apprehension of truth. The active man is a mystic when he knows his actions to be a part of a greater activity. Blake, Plotinus, Joan of Arc, and John of the Cross — there is a link which binds all these together: but if he is to make use of it, the inquirer must find that link for himself."

This practical mysticism, she argues as she contrasts it with an “indolent and useless mysticality,” is available to the ordinary person as an invitation “to a training of his latent faculties, a bracing and brightening of his languid consciousness, an emancipation from the fetters of appearance, a turning of his attention to new levels of the world.” She offers a sentiment of winged assurance:

"As the beautiful does not exist for the artist and poet alone — though these can find in it more poignant depths of meaning than other men — so the world of Reality exists for all; and all may participate in it, unite with it, according to their measure and to the strength and purity of their desire. [...]

Mysticism [is] the art of union with Reality [and], above all else, a Science of Love. Hence, the condition to which it looks forward and towards which the soul of the contemplative has been stretching out, is a condition of being, not of seeing. "
(Maria Popova's review in The Marginalian of Evelyn Underhill's  Practical Mysticism, 1914)

E1.7.B.1.2.e_REF1.1.b_PH BY SURRENDERING EGO AND EMBRACING A UNIFIED VISION, ONE CAN SEE THE WORLD AS ARTISTS AND MYSTICS DO "The attitude which it involves is an attitude of complete humility and of receptiveness; without criticism, without clever analysis of the thing seen. When you look thus, you surrender your I-hood; see things at last as the artist does, for their sake, not for your own. The fundamental unity that is in you reaches out to the unity that is in them: and you achieve the “Simple Vision” of the poet and the mystic — that synthetic and undistorted apprehension of things which is the antithesis of the single vision of practical men. The doors of perception are cleansed, and everything appears as it is. The disfiguring results of hate, rivalry, prejudice, vanish away. Into that silent place to which recollection has brought you, new music, new colour, new light, are poured from the outward world. The conscious love which achieves this vision may, indeed must, fluctuate… But the will which that love has enkindled can hold attention in the right direction. It can refuse to relapse to unreal and egotistic correspondences; and continue, even in darkness, and in the suffering which such darkness brings to the awakened spirit, its appointed task, cutting a way into new levels of Reality."
(Evelyn Underhill, Practical Mysticism, 1914)

E1.7.B.1.2.e.wE1.6.C.1.1.b_REF1.1_PH

E1.7.B.1.2.e.wE1.6.C.1.1.b_REF1.2_PH

E1.7.B.1.2.f. "INSTRUCTIONS FOR LIVING A LIFE:
Pay attention.
Be astonished.

E1.7.B.1.2.f_REF1_PO "SOMETIMES

[...]

2.

Sometimes 
melancholy leaves me breathless.

3.

Later I was in a field full of sunflowers. 
I was feeling the heat of midsummer. 
I was thinking of the sweet, electric 
    drowse of creation,

when it began to break.

In the west, clouds gathered. 
Thunderheads. 
In an hour the sky was filled with them.

In an hour the sky was filled 
    with the sweetness of rain and the blast of lightning. Followed by the deep bells of thunder.

Water from the heavens! Electricity from the source! 
Both of them mad to create something!

The lightning brighter than any flower. 
The thunder without a drowsy bone in its body.

4.

Instructions for living a life: 
Pay attention. 
Be astonished. 
Tell about it.

5.

Two or three times in my life I discovered love. 
Each time it seemed to solve everything. 
Each time it solved a great many things 
    but not everything.
Yet left me as grateful as if it had indeed, and 
thoroughly, solved everything."
(Mary Oliver, Red bird, 2008)

E1.7.B.1.3. EXISTENCE IS OFTER NEGLECTED AND TAKEN FOR GRANTED in our daily lives. However, it is intrinsically linked to truth and is at the heart of philosophy.  Neglecting the concept of being can result in a decline in thought and a loss of meaning in existence.

E1.7.B.1.3.a. HAVE WE DISPENSED WITH THOSE REGIONS OF THE MYSTERIOUS WHERE OUR BASIC EXPERIENCES OF ENCHANTMENT, CONNECTION, AND BELONGING COME ALIVE ?
"Are we living through the fall of a civilization — a civilization that has reduced every askable question to an algorithmically answerable datum and has dispensed with the unasked, with those regions of the mysterious where our basic experiences of enchantment, connection, and belonging come alive?"
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.7.B.1.3.a_REF1_PH "PRESENCE IS FAR MORE INTRICATE AND REWARDING AN ART THAN PRODUCTIVITY. Ours is a culture that measures our worth as human beings by our efficiency, our earnings, our ability to perform this or that. The cult of productivity has its place, but worshipping at its altar daily robs us of the very capacity for joy and wonder that makes life worth living — for, as Annie Dillard memorably put it, “how we spend our days is, of course, how we spend our lives.”
(Maria popova, The Marginalian)

E1.7.B.1.3.a_REF2_PH "IF WONDER SPRINGS FROM THE QUALITY OF ATTENTION we pay to things and joy springs from our capacity for presence with wonder, then the quality of our attention shapes the quality of our lives. It is a dangerous falsehood that to find wonder in reality is to relinquish our realism — rather, this attentive gladness, this fluency in the native poetry of the universe, may be the truest realism we have.

That is what Robert Louis Stevenson (November 13, 1850–December 3, 1894) explores in some breathtaking passages from his long essay “The Lantern-Bearers,” found in his 1892 collection of personal writings Across the Plains"
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.7.B.1.3.a_REF2.1_PH "THERE IS ONE FABLE THAT TOUCHES VERY NEAR THE QUICK OF LIFE, — the fable of the monk who passed into the woods, heard a bird break into song, hearkened for a trill or two, and found himself at his return a stranger at his convent gates; for he had been absent fifty years, and of all his comrades there survived but one to recognize him. It is not only in the woods that this enchanter carols, though perhaps he is native there. He sings in the most doleful places. The miser hears him and chuckles, and his days are moments. With no more apparatus than an evil-smelling lantern, I have evoked him on the naked links. All life that is not merely mechanical is spun out of two strands, — seeking for that bird and hearing him. And it is just this that makes life so hard to value, and the delight of each so incommunicable. And it is just a knowledge of this, and a remembrance of those fortunate hours in which the bird has sung to us, that fills us with such wonder when we turn to the pages of the realist. There, to be sure, we find a picture of life in so far as it consists of mud and of old iron, cheap desires and cheap fears, that which we are ashamed to remember and that which we are careless whether we forget; but of the note of that time-devouring nightingale we hear no news."
(Robert Louis Stevenson, The Lantern-Bearers,  Across the Plains, 1892)

E1.7.B.1.3.a_REF2.1.a_PH "THE GROUND OF A MAN’S JOY IS OFTEN HARD TO HIT. It may hinge at times upon a mere accessory, like the lantern; it may reside… in the mysterious inwards of psychology… It has so little bond with externals… that it may even touch them not, and the man’s true life, for which he consents to live, lie together in the field of fancy…. In such a case the poetry runs underground. The observer (poor soul, with his documents!) is all abroad. For to look at the man is but to court deception. We shall see the trunk from which he draws his nourishment; but he himself is above and abroad in the green dome of foliage, hummed through by winds and nested in by nightingales. And the true realism were that of the poets, to climb after him like a squirrel, and catch some glimpse of the heaven in which he lives. And the true realism, always and everywhere, is that of the poets: to find out where joy resides, and give it a voice far beyond singing.

For to miss the joy is to miss all. In the joy of the actors lies the sense of any action. That is the explanation, that the excuse… for no man lives in the external truth among salts and acids, but in the warm, phantasmagoric chamber of his brain, with the painted windows and the storied wall."
(Robert Louis Stevenson, The Lantern-Bearers,  Across the Plains, 1892)
 
E1.7.B.1.3.a_REF2.1.b_PH “THE THREE GOOD THINGS.—Greatness, calm, sunlight—these three embrace all that a thinker desires and also demands of himself: his hopes and duties, his claims in the intellectual and moral sphere, nay even in his daily manner of life and the scenic background of his residence. Corresponding to these three things are, firstly thoughts that exalt, secondly thoughts that soothe, and thirdly thoughts that illuminate—but, fourthly, thoughts that share in all these three qualities, in which all earthly things are transfigured. This is the kingdom of the great trinity of joy.”(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human III, Aphorism 332, 1878)

E1.7.B.1.3.a_REF3_LIT “RIGHT NOW, YOU ARE MISSING THE VAST MAJORITY OF WHAT IS HAPPENING AROUND YOU. YOU ARE MISSING THE EVENTS UNFOLDING IN YOUR BODY, IN THE DISTANCE, AND RIGHT IN FRONT OF YOU.
"By marshaling your attention to these words, helpfully framed in a distinct border of white, you are ignoring an unthinkably large amount of information that continues to bombard all of your senses: the hum of the fluorescent lights, the ambient noise in a large room, the places your chair presses against your legs or back, your tongue touching the roof of your mouth, the tension you are holding in your shoulders or jaw, the map of the cool and warm places on your body, the constant hum of traffic or a distant lawn-mower, the blurred view of your own shoulders and torso in your peripheral vision, a chirp of a bug or whine of a kitchen appliance. […]

Minor clashes between my dog’s preferences as to where and how a walk should proceed and my own indicated that I was experiencing almost an entirely different block than my dog. I was paying so little attention to most of what was right before us that I had become a sleepwalker on the sidewalk. What I saw and attended to was exactly what I expected to see; what my dog showed me was that my attention invited along attention’s companion: inattention to everything else. […] Together, we became investigators of the ordinary, considering the block — the street and everything on it—as a living being that could be observed. […]

I would find myself at once alarmed, delighted, and humbled at the limitations of my ordinary looking. My consolation is that this deficiency of mine is quite human. We see, but we do not see: we use our eyes, but our gaze is glancing, frivolously considering its object. We see the signs, but not their meanings. We are not blinded, but we have blinders.

In this way, the familiar becomes unfamiliar, and the old the new. […]

Though paying attention seems simple, there are numerous forms of payment. … To concentrate, to *pay attention*, is viewed as a brow-furrowing exercise. Sit still, don’t blink, and *attend*. […]

This may do for a moment of concentration, but it is not the way to better attention in your daily life. For that, we need to know what attention is. The very concept is odd. Is it an ability, a tendency, a skill? Is it processed in a special nugget in the brain, or by your eyes and ears? …

The longtime model used by psychologists is that of a “spotlight” that picks out particular items of interest to examine, bringing some things into focus and awareness while leaving other things in the dim, dusty sidelines. The metaphor makes me feel like a headlight-wearing spelunker who can only see what is right in front of her in the darkness of the cave. Such a comparison can be misleading, because in fact one can still report on what was within one’s peripheral vision at rates better than chance. And despite that spotlight, we seem to miss huge elements of the thing we are ostensibly attending to.

A better way of thinking about attention is to consider the problems that evolution might have designed “attention” to solve. The first problem emerges from the nature of the world. The world is wildly distracting. It is full of brightly colored things, large things casting shadows, quickly moving things, approaching things, loud things, irregular things, smelly things. […]

One perceptual constraint that I knowingly labor under is the constraint that we all create for ourselves: we summarize and generalize, stop looking at particulars and start taking in scenes at a glance—all in an effort to not be overwhelmed visually when we just need to make it through the day. The artist seems to retain something of the child’s visual strategy: how to look at the world before knowing (or without thinking about) the name or function of everything that catches the eye. An infant treats objects with an unprejudiced equivalence: the plastic truck is of no more intrinsic worth to the child than an empty box is, until the former is called a toy and the latter is called garbage. My son was as entranced by the ubiquitous elm seeds near our doorstep as any of the menus, mail, flyers, or trash that concern the adults. […]

I had not noticed, until forced to by Kalman’s sociability, how I was engaging in a fundamentally social activity by walking out in public.

Still, we all have a sense of the “appropriate” personal space around us — a kind of zone of privacy that we wear, even on the social sidewalk. Indeed, we have many concentric circles of personal *spaces*, plural. The Swiss zoologist Heini Hediger, elaborating from studies of animal behavior, proposed that the personal zones around us fall into a few categories. Those with whom we do not mind “inescapable involvement” — as our loved ones — can broach the closest zone and get nearer than eighteen inches to us. At that proximity, we can smell them, feel the heat of their bodies, their breath, hear the small sounds they mutter or emit. We can whisper together. Most social interactions take place in a comfortable zone about one and a half to four feet away — closer in some cultures (Latin American) than others (North American). Friends can waltz through; acquaintances can hover on the edge. We have a social distance up to twelve feet from our bodies for more formal transactions, or for those we don’t know well. Beyond that is a kind of public distance in which we use our “outdoor” voice. All of these zones are artificial, varying with differing relationships, based on context and the physical setting — but we have a bodily sense of the reality of these spaces. Violate them, and we may feel stressed and anxious. […]

[From geologist Sidney Horenstein of the American Museum of Natural History we learn that our entire world consists of only two types of things: minerals and the biomass of plants and animals (Maria Popova).] Viewed with this lens, the city feels less artificial. The cold stone is natural, almost *living*: it absorbs water, warms under the sun, and sloughs its skin in rain. Like us, stone is affected by time, its outer layer softened and its veins made more prominent. And viewed as a natural landscape, the city feels less permanent: even the strongest-looking behemoth of an apartment tower is gradually deteriorating under the persistent, patient forces of wind, water, and time. […]

[Luunk Tinbergenearly, a twentieth-century bird-watcher,] noticed that songbirds did not prey on just any insect that had recently hatched in the vicinity; instead, they tended to prefer one kind of bug — say, a particular species of beetle — at a time. As the numbers of young beetles rose through a season, the birds gorged on these beetlettes, ignoring any other available young insects nearby. Tinbergen suggested that, once the birds found a food they liked, they began to look *just for that food*, ignoring all others. He called this a search image: a mental image of a beetle—with its characteristic beetly shape, size, and colors—with which the bird scans her environment. […] The thing you are doing now affects the thing you see next. […]

“Half of tracking is knowing where to look, and the other half is looking.” If you understand even the most superficial elements of the life histories of different animals — such as what kinds of things they are attracted to — once you start looking, you are going to find them everywhere. … A small bit of knowledge goes a long way when thinking about “where to look.” … Once you have an eye for these things, even when you’re not looking for them, they just jump out at you. Everything is a sign of something.” (Susan Morse) […]

Part of what restricts us seeing things is that we have an expectation about what we will see, and we are actually perceptually restricted by that expectation. In a sense, expectation is the lost cousin of attention: both serve to reduce what we need to process of the world “out there.” Attention is the more charismatic member, packaged and sold more effectively, but expectation is also a crucial part of what we see. Together they allow us to be functional, reducing the sensory chaos of the world into unbothersome and understandable units. […]

After a handful of city walks I realized that what many of them were missing was any experience other than a visual experience. This was not terribly surprising. After all, humans are visual creatures. Our eyes have prime positioning on our faces. We have trichromatic vision, which is sufficient to paint a Technicolor, million-colored landscape of the world. Our brains’ visual areas, with hundreds of millions of neurons designed to make sense of what we see, takes up a full fifth of each of our cortices. The resplendent scene our eyes carry to us is entrancing. As a result, we humans generally do not bother paying attention to much other than the visual. What we wear, where we live, where we visit, even whom we love is based in large part on appearance — visual appearance.

But the world around us is not entirely or even mostly defined by its light-reflective qualities. What of the odors of the molecules making up every object, and those loosened odors wafting in the space around us? Or the perturbations of air that we can hear as sound — and the frequencies higher or lower than we can hear? I imagined that someone who has lost her sense of sight could lead me, however superficially, into the invisible block that I miss with my wide open eyes. […]

What makes that “noise” and not just neutral “sound” is another question. The avant-garde composer John Cage famously declared that “music is sounds,” and thus appropriated ordinary sounds to be his music. In one of his compositions, the orchestra is silent for four minutes and thirty-three seconds; whatever sounds come in through the window of the concert hall or emerge from the increasingly restless and puzzled audience constitute his music. Still, if Cage was right, it need not follow that all sounds are music(al). Any sound we do not like we call *noise*, thereby introducing a subjective assessment to the din. That subjectivity is always there in talking about noise. […]
What I heard had morphed from noxious urban noise into being the characteristic, flavorful clatter of my city. I enjoyed the roar of traffic and the buzz of flies; I looked at pigeons hoping they would coo; I stared down passersby, silently egging them on to hum or cough. I counted squeals and squeaks and squawks and measured them against whines and whistles. Each sound felt invited, a pleasure. […]

A simple walk had become unrecognizably richer. … Part of seeing what is on an ordinary block is seeing that everything visible has a history. It arrived at the spot where you found it at some time, was crafted or whittled or forged at some time, filled a certain role or existed for a particular function. It was touched by someone (or no one), and touches someone (or no one) now. It is evidence.

The other part of seeing what is on the block is appreciating how limited our own view is. We are limited by our sensory abilities, by our species membership, by our narrow attention — at least the last of which can be overcome. […]

Our brains are changed by experience — in a way directly related to the details of that experience. If we have enough experience doing an action, viewing a scene, or smelling an odor to become an “expert” in a field, then our brains are functionally — and visibly — different from nonexperts. […] Follow me here: your brain will begin to change as you do.”
(Alexandra Horowitz, On Looking: Eleven Walks with Expert Eyes, 2013)

“Evolution’s problem-solving left us modern humans with two kinds of attention: *vigilance*, which allows us to have a quick and life-saving fight-or-flight response to an immediate threat, be it a leaping lion or a deranged boss, and *selective attention*, which unconsciously curates the few stimuli to attend to amidst the flurry bombarding us, enabling us to block out everything except what we’re interested in ingesting. (Selective attention, of course, can mutate to dangerous degrees, producing such cultural atrocities as the filter bubble.) Much like French polymath Henri Poincaré argued that to invent is simply to choose ideas, to attend, it turns out, is simply to choose stimuli — but what sounds so deceptively simple turns out to be marvelously complex. In her walks with expert companions, Horowitz tickles this latter type of attention to unravel all the unseen, unsmelled, and unheard miracles of a city block, the wonderlands of sensation and awareness that bloom behind the looking glass of our evolutionarily primed everyday inattention.”
(Maria Popova´s review of Alexandra Horowitz’s On Looking: Eleven Walks with Expert Eyes, 2013 - in The Marginalian)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/?ui=2&ik=f18494bc2f&view=lg&permmsgid=msg-f:1835940089342798765

E1.7.B.1.3.a_REF4_LIT “WHAT’S YOUR SKILL ANYWAY? YOU HAVE ANY SKILLS OR WHAT?” HE BIT HIS LIP, THINKING. “WELL, I’M GOOD AT LOOKING AT THINGS. AND, I GUESS, CONSIDERING THEM, LIKE IDEAS AND STUFF.”
“Considering!” she said with a wheezing laugh. “That’s a first. I’m afraid being considerate is not a skill. Not in America. Maybe the Vatican, if you’re lucky.”
“It’s called observing. Introspection,” he said, miffed.
“You’re kidding. That’s it?” The cigarette hissed as she chucked it in the water. “Okay, then give me an example.”
“Of what?”
“Of you considering. What do you consider?”
“I dunno.” Even though she couldn’t see him behind the wall, he hid his face between his knees.
The rain was droning steady over the roof shingles. “The rain. Maybe raindrops are like people . . . Well, that’s not what I mean—” His voice cracked and he suddenly felt unmoored, incredulous. A child.
“Ha! The rain? Every writer who ever lived talked about rain. You know what writing really is?” She paused for effect. “Complaining. About weather. Beautiful complaining. No wonder why Stalin shipped them to Siberia.”
“Please don’t laugh at me,” he mumbled to the floor, surprised at how much this stung.
Grazina grew quiet. A trickle of water. “You know what? Good for you, boy. You’re good at observing. And tomorrow you’ll go to town. You’ll go to town and get a job where you can be the most considerate observer this county has ever known. You hear me?”
(Ocean Vuong, The emperor of gladness, 2025)

E1.7.B.1.3.a_REF5_LIT TO BE ABLE TO NOTICE, YOU HAVE TO SUSPEND YOUR FEAR
”There is not, as many think, any air at all in a jellyfish, just organized cilia and bell muscles, a gelatinous scaffolding for hydrostatic propulsion. These simplest drifters are like bubbles of milky glass — and who doesn’t want to see through to a thing’s inner workings, the red nerves, and blood and poison with a clear pulse, circulating… In order to see their particular beauty, to see them, we have to suspend our fear. We have to love contraction. Filtration. The word “gelatinous,” too. The words “scull” and “buoyancy” are easy. We have to suspend “mucus web.” And realize that their bioluminescence, which is a show to see at night, is used to confuse and startle prey. You can look right through them. As if into a lit front room when it’s night outside.”
(Lia Purpura, On Looking)

E1.7.B.1.3.b. SOCIALIZED INDIVIDUALS HAVE GIVEN UP TRYING TO LEAVE THE "CAVE" OF EVERYDAY LIFE, LOSING THEIR ABILITY TO MARVEL AT REALITY AS IT IS.
Values have become entities of exchange, and their worth is determined by society, not the individual. Platonic ideas have lost their independent power, transforming into standards and units that regulate rational thinking.

E1.7.B.1.3.b_REF1_PH  "NIETZSCHE'S DEVALUATION OF VALUES, like the Marxist theory of "labor value," arises from the incompatibility between traditional "ideas," which had served as transcendent units for recognizing and measuring human thought and action, and modern society, which had dissolved all such norms in the relations between its members and established them as functional "values. Values are articles of society that have no meaning in themselves, but which, like other articles, exist only in the ever-changing relativity of social relations and commerce. Through this relativization, the things that man produces for his use and, at the same time, the norms according to which he lives, undergo a decisive change; they become objects of exchange and the holder of their "value" is society and not the man who produces, uses and judges. The "good" loses its character as an idea, as a standard by which good and evil can be weighed and recognized; it has become a value that can be exchanged for other values, such as those of comfort or power. The possessor of values may refuse this exchange and become an "idealist" who values "good" more than comfort; but this does not make the "value" of good any less relative. [...]
Since the birth of modern science, whose spirit is expressed in the Cartesian philosophy of doubt and suspicion, the conceptual framework of the tradition was no longer secure. The dichotomy between contemplation and action, the traditional hierarchy according to which truth is ultimately perceived only in a vision without words and without action, could not be maintained under the conditions in which science became active and sought to know. With the loss of confidence in the appearance of things as they really are, the concept of truth as revelation had become doubtful, and with it the blind faith in a revealed God. The term "theory" changed its meaning. It no longer denoted a system of reasonably unified truths, not made as such, but given to reason and the senses. Instead, it became a modern scientific theory, a working hypothesis that changes according to the results it produces and whose validity depends not on what it "proves" but on whether it "works. By the same process, Platonic ideas lost their autonomous power to illuminate the world and the universe. They first became what they had only been for Plato in their relation to the political domain, to standards and units of measurement, or to the regulative forces that limit the rational mind specific to man, as they appear in Kant. Then, after the primacy of reason over action, of the mind imposing its rules on the actions of men, was lost in the transformation of the whole world by the Industrial Revolution-a transformation whose success seemed to prove that the facts and inventions of man impose their rules on reason-these ideas finally became simple values whose validity is determined not by one or more men, but by society as a whole in its ever-changing functional needs.
These values in their e- and inter- interchangeability are the only "ideas" left to (and understood by) "socialized men". These are men who have decided never to leave what for Plato was the "cave" of everyday human affairs, and never to venture out on their own into a world and a life that the integral functionalization of modern society has perhaps deprived of one of its most elementary characteristics: to be filled with wonder in the face of what is as it is".
(Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition, 1954)

E1.7.B.1.3.b_REF2_PO "THE SUN

such wild love -
do you think there is anywhere, in any language, 
a word billowing enough
for the pleasure

that fills you, 
as the sun 
reaches out, 
as it warms you

as you stand there, 
empty-handed - 
or have you too 
turned from this world -

or have you too 
gone crazy 
for power, 
for things?"
(Mary Oliver, New and selected poems: Volume one, 1992)

E1.7.B.1.3.b_REF3_LIT AN INVENTED WORD TO DESCRIBE THE EERIE, FORLORN ATMOSPHERE OF A PLACE THAT'S USUALLY BUSTLING WITH PEOPLE BUT IS NOW ABANDONED AND QUIET
“kenopsia n. the eerie, forlorn atmosphere of a place that's usually bustling with people but is now abandoned and quiet—a school hallway in the evening, an unlit office on a weekend, vacant fairgrounds—an emotional afterimage that makes it seem not just empty but hyper-empty, with a total population in the negative, who are so conspicuously absent they glow like neon signs.”
(John Koenig, The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021)

E1.7.B.1.3.c. EXISTENCE IS SOMEWHAT NEGLECTED AND TAKEN FOR GRANTED in our daily lives. However, existence is linked to truth and is at the heart of philosophy. The philosophical wonder of Wittgenstein and Heidegger focuses on existence and being, rather than on individual things. Heidegger shifted the emphasis from thought to being, and emphasized that thinking about being is essential to philosophy. Forgetting about being leads to the decay of thought and the loss of meaning in existence.

E1.7.B.1.3.c_REF1_PH "EXISTENCE, OFTEN FORGOTTEN, IS AT THE HEART OF THE PHILOSOPHICAL MEDITATION OF WITTGENSTEIN AND HEIDEGGER "At every moment, assaulted by existence, immersed in it, we no longer know how to be surprised by it. Everywhere and nowhere at the same time, always present and yet always absent, existence makes itself forgotten, it remains incognito among us. Always the same, never questioned, existence therefore has no history for us. [To follow the thread of Wittgenstein's meditation, the "world" tries to show its existence to the man who thinks it.
For about two centuries now, the "existence" of the world has no longer been taken for granted by modern man. To exist then means "to be real," not in an apparent but in an authentic reality. We can suspect that existence is not unrelated to truth. [What can it mean to think the nonsense of the world's existence "authentically"?
It was undoubtedly necessary for us to meet Heidegger on our way, since he was one of the first - the first to listen to him since Parmenides - to shift the axis of philosophical wonder from thinking to being. Plato founded philosophy in the sense that he was the first to think that there is nothing more astonishing for thought than the power to think and conceive that is in thought, a consciousness that he calls "reminiscence" or "anamnesis" in the sense that thought has always known it but has forgotten it. Heidegger begins the foundation of philosophy anew - at least that is his claim - by thinking that there is nothing more astonishing and more worthy of thought for thought than the fact of being, the single source from which all the determined, singular existences that come before our eyes, that come to hand, proceed. What he calls "Being" [...], multiple and diverse, while Being (capitalized) is necessarily one. What Heidegger calls the "decadence" of philosophy, or the "decay" of thought, comes from the fact that thought forgets to think - not thought itself, as the tradition of the classics taught - but being. Forgetting to think of Being, we no longer consider anything other than the beings that come to hand, which we can use as we please, like so many tools that we handle, and no longer as riddles that require thinking. There is no need to think: it is enough to work and master the world thanks to our technical skills. For philosophy to be reborn, therefore, we would have to go back to the beginning of philosophy, before the Platonic foundation, to the time of the Presocratics, mainly Heraclitus and Parmenides. [Heidegger's question is not about the diversity of things, but about what they have in common and what unites them, namely "existence".
(Jacques Darriulat, Being and Existence, 2-Speaking of Existence, 2020)

E1.7.B.1.3.c_REF2_LIT ANNE MORROW LINDBERGH ARGUES THAT MODERN LIFE HAS NEGLECTED THE ESSENTIAL VALUES OF THE "HERE, THE NOW, AND THE INDIVIDUAL" IN ITS RACE FOR THE FUTURE AND THE MASS, AND THAT THE ONLY WAY TO SOLVE OUR GREATER PROBLEMS IS TO FIRST REDISCOVER THESE CORE REALITIES BY STARTING FROM THE CENTER OF OURSELVES.
“If we stop to think about it, are not the real casualties in modern life just these centers I have been discussing: the here, the now, the individual and his relationships. The present is passed over in the race for the future; the here is neglected in favor of the there; and the individual is dwarfed by the enormity of the mass. America, which has the most glorious present still existing in the world today, hardly stops to enjoy it, in her insatiable appetite for the future. Per-haps the historian or the sociologist or the philosopher would say that we are still propelled by our frontier energy, still conditioned by our pioneer pressures or our Puritan anxiety to "do ye next thing." Europe, on the other hand, which we think of as being enamored of the past, has since the last war, strangely enough, been forced into a new appreciation of the present. The good past is so far away and the near past is so horrible and the future is so perilous, that the present has a chance to expand into a golden eternity of here and now. Europeans today are enjoying the moment even if it means merely a walk in the country on Sunday or sipping a cup of black coffee at a sidewalk café.
Perhaps we never appreciate the here and now until it is challenged, as it is beginning to be today even in America. And have we not also been awakened to a new sense of the dignity of the individual because of the threats and temptations to him, in our time, to surrender his individuality to the mass—whether it be industry of war or standardization of thought and action? We are now ready for a true appreciation of the value of the here and the now and the individual.
The here, the now, and the individual, have is always been the special concern of the saint, the _ artist, the poet, and—from time immemorial— the woman. In the small circle of the home she has never quite forgotten the particular unique-ness of each member of the family; the spontaneity of now; the vividness of here. This is the basic substance of life. These are the individual elements that form the bigger entities like mass, future, world.. We may neglect these elements, but we cannot dispense with them. They are the drops that make up the stream. They are — the essence of life itself. It may be our special function to emphasize again these neglected realities, not as a retreat from greater responsibilities but as a first  real step toward a deeper understanding and solution of them. When we start at the center of ourselves, we discover some-thing worthwhile extending toward the periphery of the circle. We find again some of the joy in the now, some of the peace in the here, some of the love in me and thee which go to make up the kingdom of heaven on earth.”
(Anne Morrow Lindbergh, Gift from the sea, 1955)

E1.7.B.1.3.d. WE CAN ALSO FEEL NAUSEATED BY EXISTENCE
In "La Nausée", Sartre tells the story of Antoine Roquentin, a man who gradually becomes overwhelmed by the inertia of his surroundings. One day, while sitting in a public garden, he is suddenly struck by the horror of existence, revealed through the raw materiality of life. The contingency, randomness, and lack of necessity in things disgust him.

E1.7.B.1.3.d.i. FOR ROQUENTIN, EXISTENCE REVEALS ITSELF IN THE OBSCENE AND CAPTIVATING EXPANSION OF A VISCOUS MATTER THAT THREATENS TO ENGULF US. In contrast, Heidegger views the question of Being as a poetic opening beyond the oppressive closeness of our surroundings. For Sartre, the unfolding of possibilities revealed by the concern with Being is consumed in a hopelessly trapped situation with no escape.

E1.7.B.1.3.d.i_REF1_PH "IN 'NAUSEA' SARTRE DESCRIBES EXISTENCE AS A VISCID AND MENACING MATTER" Heidegger's striking analysis is translated into the style of the popular novel Nausea, published by Jean-Paul Sartre in 1938. Antoine Roquentin, a well-traveled adventurer who has seen it all, is engaged in vague research into the life of an 18th-century marquis when he ends up in Bouville, not unlike Le Havre, where the author, an exiled Parisian, spent his first bitter years as a teacher. Roquentin gets stuck in Bouville as one gets stuck in the mud, gradually sinking as if absorbed by the inertia of things, by their overwhelming presence. One day, feeling depressed, Roquentin sits down in the public garden of Bouville, a common place where the bored go on Sundays to mope. Sartre then devotes some ten impressive pages to the brutal, shattering revelation of the monstrosity of existence: "Never, before these last days, had I felt what it meant to exist [...] Suddenly it was there, it was clear as day: existence had suddenly revealed itself. It had lost its harmless appeal as an abstract category: it was the very substance of things. For Heidegger, the question of Being is a poetic opening beyond the oppressive proximity of the things that surround us; for Sartre, the unfolding of the possibilities that the concern with Being discovers for thought is trapped in a situation that is irremediably trapped and without exit. Existence manifests itself in the obscene and fascinating expansion of a viscous matter that threatens to engulf us. Absorbed in the contemplation of the roots of the chestnut tree in front of him, Roquentin sees them transformed into a menacing animal, a snake or a vulture's beak, obscene and whose putrid smell reminds us of death. This "extraordinary moment", this "terrible ecstasy" is also the revelation of the radical - which is at the "root" - contingency of things and of existence in general: "The essential is contingency. I mean that existence, by definition, is not necessity. To exist is simply to be there; existing things appear, allow themselves to be encountered, but they can never be deduced [...] Existence is not something that can be thought about from a distance: it has to suddenly overwhelm you, stop you in your tracks, weigh on your heart like a great, motionless beast."
(Jacques Darriulat, Being and Existence, 3- Experiencing Existence, 2020)

E1.7.B.1.3.d.ii. IN "NOCES À TIPASA", ALBERT CAMUS RECOUNTS AN EXPERIENCE THAT RUNS CONTRASTS WITH ROQUENTIN'S METAPHYSICAL DISGUST IN "LA NAUSÉE".
In this tribute to a magnificent landscape, he celebrates the vitality of life in an earthly paradise where the gods reside in the flowers and scenery. Here, life is self-sufficient, eliminating the need to seek meaning in existence, as it is already full and complete.

E1.7.B.1.3.d.ii_REF1_PH CAMUS, INSPIRED BY THE MEDITERRANEAN LANDSCAPES AND THE SIMPLE PLEASURES OF LIFE, CELEBRATES A FULL AND IMMEDIATE EXISTENCE "in an even more lyrical mode and with the dazzling sensuality of a man who has not forgotten the splendor of his youth, Sartre's contemporary at the time when the philosopher wrote Nausea, the exact opposite of the metaphysical disgust that Roquentin experiences in the horrible public garden of Bouville. Albert Camus was twenty-three years old when he wrote an extraordinary text, inspired by swimming, flirting, and walks among absinthe and roses, in which he exalted his youth, when, on vacation days, he went with his friends in a bus "the color of buttercups" to Tipasa, a town on the Mediterranean coast, seventy kilometers from Algiers, a magnificent place where you can reach the sea by crossing the ruins of an ancient Roman city, among temples and sarcophagi. I have often thought that Camus would not have dedicated his life to writing had it not been for the miracle of this inspired text, which he would never forget, since, almost twenty years later, he would return to this place like a pilgrim returning to the source of life: "Once you have had the chance to love deeply, life is spent searching for that ardor and that light". The first of these two texts, "Noces à Tipasa" (Wedding at Tipasa), is a pagan hymn to the glory of a landscape created to celebrate a wedding day between man and earth, swimmer and wave, flesh and flower, eye and light vibrating with heat: "In spring, Tipasa is inhabited by the gods, and the gods speak in the sun and the scent of wormwood, the sea armored in silver, the sky ecru blue, the ruins covered with flowers, and the light seething in the piles of stones. At certain hours, the landscape is black with sun". In this rediscovered paradise, where flowers abound - wormwood, bougainvillea, pinks, hibiscus, tea roses, blue irises, buttercups, heliotropes, rosemary - the earth is a realm of abundance that is its own justification. The gods are here on Earth, and there is no longer any need to forge a mythology or a religion to give meaning to the full and complete existence that is given here and now to those who know how to take it: "How poor are those who need myths. Here the gods serve as beds or landmarks in the course of the days. I describe and say: "This is red, this is blue, this is green. That is the sea, the mountains, the flowers." Hegel's dreary "That's the way it is" becomes an enthusiastic hymn to our brother the sun, our sister the sea. "And what do I need," Camus continues, "to speak of Dionysus, to say that I like to crush lentisk balls under my nose [...] To see, and to see on this earth, how can I forget the lesson? In the Eleusinian Mysteries it was enough to contemplate. Here I know that I will never get close enough to the world. I must be naked and then plunge into the sea, still perfumed with the essences of the earth, wash myself in it, and bind on my skin the embrace for which the earth and the sea have been sighing lip to lip for so long" (ibid.). Swimming in the sea of salt is baptism, and returning to the shore is rebirth. There is no need to give, much less seek, meaning to this accomplishment: it is self-sufficient. What need is there for a god, since it is divine in itself? The meaninglessness of the world, the absurdity of the fact of existence, is splendor. The world is without a why. Without this gratuitousness, without this grace, it would not appear in its splendor. Nothing is more magnificent than a world, a life that has no meaning, because it has no meaning other than itself. We should thank God for giving us the grace of His non-existence. It is not by marveling at the existence of the world that we reach the Absolute, but by feeding on its mystery, by tasting the life that lifts the flowers, swells the fruits, pulsates on the waves of the sea, vibrates in the terrible sun of summer, and makes the heart of a young man beat impatiently and eagerly for eternity: "The sea, the landscape, the silence, the scents of this land, I filled myself with a fragrant life and bit into the already golden fruit of the world, overwhelmed to feel its sweet and strong juice running down my lips."
(Jacques Darriulat, Being and Existence, 3- Experiencing Existence, 2020)

E1.7.B.1.3.d.iii. CAMUS DEVOTED HIS LIFE TO ARTICULATING THIS INEFFABLE EXPERIENCE THROUGH HIS WRITING. His piece "Retour à Tipasa" (Return to Tipasa), written in 1952, describes his return to the same location after twenty years. Initially, Camus had hoped to recapture the freedom he once experienced there, but the ravages of war had tainted his perception. His first attempt to reconnect was unsuccessful. However, during his second attempt, Camus experienced a profound connection with nature that dispelled years of anger and darkness. This connection led to a tragic understanding of existence, a key aspect of his philosophy. It offered a way to illuminate the enigma of existence.

E1.7.B.1.3.d.iii_REF1_PH IN 1952, ALBERT CAMUS RETURNED TO TIPASA, A PLACE OF BRIGHT MEMORIES AND FREEDOM. DESPITE THE LOSS OF INNOCENCE DUE TO THE WAR, HE FINDS COMMUNION WITH NATURE AND AN INNER RENAISSANCE. "In 1952, Camus felt an irrepressible desire to return to this place of greatness. The text he wrote at the time, 'Return to Tipasa', has the value of a memorial to the incandescence: 'I hoped, I believe, to find there a freedom that I could not forget. Indeed, in this place, more than twenty years ago, I spent whole mornings wandering among the ruins, inhaling the wormwood, warming myself against the stones, discovering the small roses, quickly stripped of their petals, that survive in the spring. Only at noon, when even the cicadas fell silent, did I flee, dazed, from the greedy blaze of a light that devoured everything. Sometimes at night I slept with my eyes open under a sky dripping with stars. But the revenant has lost his innocence, the barbarity of war has polluted the world. A first attempt, under a gray and rainy sky, fails. But Camus insisted: "I set out again for Tipasa." And the miracle is repeated, the horror of the great massacres is forgotten, time lost becomes time regained: "In that light and silence, the years of rage and night slowly melted away. I heard within myself an almost forgotten sound, as if my heart, which had stopped beating long ago, was slowly beginning to beat again. And now that I was awake, I recognized one by one the imperceptible sounds that made up the silence: The constant background noise of birds, the light, short sighs of the sea at the foot of the rocks, the vibration of the trees, the indiscriminate singing of the columns, the rustling of the wormwood, the stealthy lizards. I could hear it, I could also hear the happy waves rising inside me. It seemed to me that I had finally returned to port, at least for a moment, and that this moment would never end. This communion, which compensates for the despondency of boredom, for the oppression of fear, is knowledge, and this knowledge, a celebration of the highest bliss, is tragic in that it exposes man, with no possibility of escape, to the violence of a sacredness that ignores him and remains silent: "O Light! This is the cry of all the characters in the ancient drama who face their fate. This last resort was ours too, and I knew it now. In the middle of winter, I finally learned that there was an invincible summer within me. Such knowledge cannot be expressed "in pagan words" (A Season in Hell), in the inauthenticity of a common language, or even in any language, and that is why Albert Camus devoted his whole life and his love of life to writing. The essential knowledge that sustains our life remains at the heart of existence and brings the enigma into the light: "But perhaps one day, when we are ready to die of exhaustion and ignorance, I could renounce our garish tombs, lie down in the valley, under the same light, and learn for the last time what I know".
(Jacques Darriulat, Being and Existence, 3- Experiencing Existence, 2020)

E1.7.B.1.3.d.iii_REF2_LIT " […] IN TIPASA I REDISCOVERED THAT IT WAS NECESSARY TO KEEP A FRESHNESS WITHIN, a source of joy, to love the day that escapes injustice, and to return to the struggle with this light that had been won. Here I found the ancient beauty, a young sky, and I appreciated my good fortune, finally understanding that in the worst years of our madness, the memory of this sky had never left me. It was this that had finally saved me from despair. I had always known that the ruins of Tipasa were younger than our construction sites or our rubble. The world began anew there every day in a new light. O Light! is the cry of all the characters in the ancient drama, facing their fate. This last resort was ours, too, and I knew it now.

In the middle of winter, I finally learned that there was an invincible summer within me.
(Albert Camus, Return to Tipasa, 1953)

E1.7.B.1.4. WONDER IS THE BY-PRODUCT OF THE KIND OF UNENCUMBERED FIRST SIGHT, OR VIRGINAL NOTICING, TO WHICH THE ADULT BRAIN HAS TOO OFTEN CLOSED ITSELF

E1.7.B.1.4.a. WONDER IS THE BY-PRODUCT OF PRECISELY THE KIND OF UNENCUMBERED FIRST SIGHT, OR VIRGINAL NOTICING, TO WHICH THE ADULT BRAIN HAS CLOSED ITSELF

E1.7.B.1.4.a_REF1_PH TIMOTHY LEARY WAS AN AMERICAN WRITER, PSYCHOLOGIST AND ENTHUSIAST FOR THE RESEARCH AND USE OF PSYCHEDELIC SUBSTANCES, WHICH HE OBJECTED NAMING DRUGS AND PREFERED CALLING ECSTATIC TECHNOLOGIES.
"One of the things that commends travel, art, nature, work, and certain drugs to us is the way these experiences, at their best, block every mental path forward and back, immersing us in the flow of a present that is literally wonderful — wonder being the by-product of precisely the kind of unencumbered first sight, or virginal noticing, to which the adult brain has closed itself. (It’s so inefficient!) Alas, most of the time I inhabit a near-future tense, my psychic thermostat set to a low simmer of anticipation and, too often, worry. The good thing is I’m seldom surprised. The bad thing is I’m seldom surprised."
(Michael Pollan How to Change Your Mind: What the New Science of Psychedelics Teaches Us About Consciousness, Dying, Addiction, Depression, and Transcendence)

E1.7.B.1.4.a_REF2_PH BUT BEWARE OF ADDICTION:
"Marilyn Manson said in an interview:
‘I was in a drug rehab program once, but they kicked me out. That bored me to death. I asked the therapist if he could name a single artist who made more exciting art after rehab. He then sent me to a psychiatrist, who told me he didn’t treat artists, that was hopeless: they needed the ups and downs for their art, I should just make sure that I had more ups. It’s a constant struggle. Many great musicians, actors, painters or writers have suffered throughout their lives – and great art has emerged from their pain.’
What do you think about that? [ ]
CHRISTOPHER, MUNICH, GERMANY

My life is a mess. I am a drug addict now for fifteen years. I am worried about giving it up because I am an artist, a painter, and I don’t want to lose my edge. I can’t create without it.
THOM, BRISTOL, UK

Dear Christopher and Thom,

The idea that if you stop drinking or taking drugs then you stop making interesting art is a delusional claim. It is one routinely made by those who have not really experienced the full reach of life, that is to say those who have only really experienced the addicted life. If I correctly understand some of what Marilyn Manson is saying then I can tell you that in my younger, addicted days I most likely shared a similar view. I don’t know when Marilyn Manson said this, it could well be a quote from his younger days too. It certainly feels like it. What I myself did not understand at that time was that true suffering, or rather, meaningful suffering, only begins when we stop taking drugs. It is then that we are forced to live life on life’s terms, without the insulating effects of alcohol or drugs. We learn, in sobriety, our true and complex relationship to the world, and the profound nature of suffering. We also find, to our surprise, that happiness is possible as life broadens into something intricate and nuanced and interesting and strange, and potentially deeply creative. Life in sobriety becomes, as the greatly missed comic genius, Barry Humphries, once said, ‘funny’. The cossetted, flattened, self-obsessed life of the alcoholic or drug addict knows little of these things.

We often hear the grandiose presumption that the artist-addict experiences a kind of ‘holy ’suffering, that their struggle is special or somehow elevated beyond the ordinary heartache of the world. This is simply not the case and indicates little understanding of the nature of suffering or addiction or, indeed, art. The artist-addict, cocooned within their addiction, always has the validating recourse of their art, whilst the ordinary person, dealing with the hardships and devastations of life, must deal with raw existence simply as it comes. I find there is considerable courage, beauty and humanity in that common struggle.

Art is the agent best equipped to bring light to the world. That is its purpose. That is its promise. That it is predicated upon a unique suffering that is somehow linked to drink and drugs is self-serving, self-piteous nonsense. Don’t fall for it.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #234 / APRIL 2023°

E1.7.B.1.4.a_REF2_PH VIRGINIA WOOLF’S VIVID CHILDHOOD MEMORY OF OBSERVING A FLOWER "In the spring of 1939, looking back on her life, Virginia Woolf recounted [...] her most vivid childhood memory, also of a flower, in the garden by the large white house on the Celtic Sea coast where she grew up:
« I was looking at the flower bed by the front door; “That is the whole”, I said. I was looking at a plant with a spread of leaves; and it seemed suddenly plain that the flower itself was a part of the earth; that a ring enclosed what was the flower; and that was the real flower; part earth; part flower. It was a thought I put away as being likely to be very useful to me later. »"
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.7.B.1.4.a_REF3_PH "WE DISMISS WONDER COMMONLY WITH CHILDHOOD. Much later, when life’s pace has slackened, wonder may return. The mind then may find so much inviting wonder the whole world becomes wonderful. Then one thing is scarcely more wonderful than is another. But, greatest wonder, our wonder soon lapses. A rainbow every morning who would pause to look at? The wonderful which comes often or is plentifully about us is soon taken for granted. That is practical enough. It allows us to get on with life. But it may stultify if it cannot on occasion be thrown off. To recapture now and then childhood’s wonder, is to secure a driving force for occasional grown-up thoughts."
(Charles Scott Sherrington, Man on his nature, 1937)

E1.7.B.1.4.a_REF4_PH “GENIUS IS NOTHING MORE NOR LESS THAN CHILDHOOD RECOVERED AT WILL,” Baudelaire wrote — something Newton embodied in looking back on his life of revolutionary discoveries, only to see himself appearing “like a boy playing on the seashore, and diverting myself in now and then finding a smoother pebble or a prettier shell than ordinary, whilst the great ocean of truth lay all undiscovered before me.” What we are really recovering from childhood in those moments of discovery and exaltation is a way of looking at the world — looking for a glimpse of some small truth that illuminates the interconnectedness of all things, looking and being wonder-smitten by what we see."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.7.B.1.4.a_REF4.1_PH STEINBECK REFLECTS ON THE DEEPER HUMAN SEARCH FOR TRUTH, UNDERSTANDING, AND CONNECTION "As always when one is collecting, we were soon joined by a number of small boys. The very posture of search, the slow movement with the head down, seems to draw people. “What did you lose?” they ask.

“Nothing.”

“Then what do you search for?” And this is an embarrassing question. We search for something that will seem like truth to us; we search for understanding; we search for that principle which keys us deeply into the pattern of all life; we search for the relations of things, one to another, as this young man searches for a warm light in his wife’s eyes and that one for the hot warmth of fighting. These little boys and young men on the tide flat do not even know that they search for such things too. We say to them, “We are looking for curios, for certain small animals.”

Then the little boys help us to search. [...]

Small boys have such sharp eyes, and they are quick to notice deviation. Once they know you are generally curious, they bring amazing things. Perhaps we only practice an extension of their urge. It is easy to remember when we were small and lay on our stomachs beside a tide pool and our minds and eyes went so deeply into it that size and identity were lost, and the creeping hermit crab was our size and the tiny octopus a monster. Then the waving algae covered us and we hid under a rock at the bottom and leaped out at fish. It is very possible that we, and even those who probe space with equations, simply extend this wonder."
(John Steinbeck, The Log from the Sea of Cortez, extract depicting a collecting expedition in the tide pools of coastal Mexico, 1951)

E1.7.B.1.4.a_REF5_PO "ICEBERG

Our childhood has separated from us 
like an iceberg 
we watch it drift away 
slowly 
the blinding glare of ice against the sun 
and everything they say is underneath."
(Ana Martins Marques, the other night, Life under water, 2009

E1.7.B.1.4.a_REF6_LIT PATTI SMITH ABOUT CREATIVITY
”It’s sort of alchemy. That miracle area, that unspoken thing that’s our alchemical — I don’t know how else to say it. Because in alchemy you take all of these elements and produce something else. It could be gold, but it could also be some wisdom or enlightenment or just understanding of your own material. But that’s a precious realm, and you’ve articulated it perfectly.

But it also has to be nourished. Years of what you do, years of what I’ve done — we have to develop certain disciplines, and those disciplines come to hand.

It’s all the magic in creation. My mother could transform a bag of potatoes when my father was on strike and there was no other food — just a big bag of potatoes.

My mother would look at that bag of potatoes and think about it, in tears, because that’s all she had to give us. And by the end of the evening, she had created a mystical mountain of the best French fries ever, the best potato pancakes ever, and put it all on the newspaper, on the floor and let us watch “Frankenstein.” Then you weren’t conscious at all of the fact that they were struggling and that we were sort of hungry or that the cupboards were bare. All we knew was the magic that she had created for us.”
(Ezra Klein, Interview with Patti Smith, November 18, 2025)

Listen to the podcast: https://www.nytimes.com/2025/11/18/opinion/ezra-klein-podcast-patti-smith.html?smid=url-share

E1.7.B.1.4.b. WE SHOULD LEARN TO SUSPEND OUR JUDGMENTS AND CONVICTIONS TO ALLOW THE STILL SMALL VOICE OF THE UNIVERSE TO SPEAK TO US.
John Cowper Powys encourages us to rely on our own individuality and resist the pressures of public opinion and the majority for what is most intrinsic and valuable to us is not tied to our work or community obligations. This essence of ourselves is a delicate and rare thing, which can be dulled and hardened by the weight of strong convictions and social pressures. ince our time on Earth is brief, we should strive to maintain joy, originality, unpredictability, interest, and imagination in our lives. Søren Kierkegaard expresses a similar perspective.

E1.7.B.1.4.b_REF1_LIT "SUSPENDED JUDGMENTS

[...] We too - encouraged by these great individualists have a right to fall back upon whatever individuality may have been left to us; and, resting upon that, sinking into the soul of that, to defy all that public opinion and the voice of the majority may be able to do.

And we shall be wise also if we recognise, before it is too late, that what is most intrinsic and inalienable in ourselves is just that very portion of us which has nothing to do with our work in life, nothing to do with our duty to the community.

We shall be wise if we recognise, before it is too late, that the thing most sacred in us is that strange margin of unoccupied receptivity, upon which settle, in their flight over land and sea, the beautiful wild birds of unsolicited dreams.

We shall be wise if, before we die, we learn a little of the art of suspending our judgment - the art of "waiting upon the spirit."

For it is only when we have suspended our judgment; it is only when we have suspended our convictions, our principles, our ideals, our moralities, that "the still small voice" of the music of the universe, sad and sweet and terrible and tender, drifts in upon us, over the face of the waters of the soul.

The essence of us, the hidden reality of us, is too rare and delicate a thing to bear the crude weight of these sturdy opinions, these vigorous convictions, these social ardours, without growing dulled and hardened.

We all have to bear the burden of humanity; and the artists among us may be thankful that the predatory curse resting upon the rich is very seldom ours: but the burden of humanity must not be allowed to press all joy, all originality, all waywardness, all interest, all imagination out of our lives.

It is not for long, at best or worst, that we know what it is to be conscious of being living children of the human race upon this strange planet."
(John Cowper Powys, Suspended Judgments, 1916)

E1.7.B.1.4.b_REF1.1_LIT POWYS SUGGESTS THAT TRUE REVELATIONS COME WHEN WE SUSPEND JUDGMENT AND CRITICISM, ALLOWING DEEPER, IMAGINATIVE INSIGHTS TO EMERGE FROM BEYOND THE REALMS OF HUMANITY AND NATURE. "The days pass quickly, and the seasons and the years. From the graves of the darlings of our souls there comes a voice and a cry. A voice bidding us sink into our own true selves before we too are numbered with the dead; a cry bidding us sacrifice everything before we sacrifice the prerogative of our inmost identity, the right to feel and think and dream as persons born into a high inheritance, the inheritance of the mind that has the right to question all things and to hold fast what pleases it in defiance of opinion and logic and probability and argument.

For it is only when we suspend our judgments and leave arguing and criticising, that the quiet gods of the moonlit shores of the world murmur their secrets in our ears.

They come without our seeking for them, these rare intimations; without our seeking for them, and, sometimes, without our desiring them; but when they come they come as revelations of something deeper in us than any mere soul of humanity. They come from a region that is as far beyond humanity as it is beyond nature. They come from the fairy-land of that mysterious country wherein dwell the dreams and the fancies of those lonely ones among the sons of men who have been possessed by imagination. They come from the unknown land where those inhabit who are, as the Psalmist says, "free among the dead." They come from the land which we left when we were born, and to which we return when we die. And whether this is a land of nothingness and oblivion none knoweth; for none hath returned to tell us. Meanwhile we can imagine what we will; and we can suspend our last judgment until we ourselves are judged."
(John Cowper Powys, Suspended Judgments, 1916)

E1.7.B.1.4.b_REF2_PH SØREN KIERKEGAARD ARGUES THAT TRUE TRUTH AND STRENGTH LIE WITH THE MINORITY WHO HOLD GENUINE OPINIONS, WHILE THE MAJORITY OFTEN FOLLOW WITHOUT UNDERSTANDING. "One can very well eat lettuce before its heart has been formed; still, the delicate crispness of the heart and its lovely frizz are something altogether different from the leaves. It is the same in the world of the spirit. Being too busy has this result: that an individual very, very rarely is permitted to form a heart; on the other hand, the thinker, the poet, or the religious personality who actually has formed his heart, will never be popular, not because he is difficult, but because it demands quiet and prolonged working with oneself and intimate knowledge of oneself as well as a certain isolation. [...]
The evolution of the world tends to show the absolute importance of the category of the individual apart from the crowd… But as yet we have not come very far concretely, though it is recognized in abstracto. That explains why it still impresses people as prideful and overweening arrogance to speak of the separate individual, whereas this precisely is truly human: each and every one is an individual. [...]
Truth always rests with the minority, and the minority is always stronger than the majority, because the minority is generally formed by those who really have an opinion, while the strength of a majority is illusory, formed by the gangs who have no opinion — and who, therefore, in the next instant (when it is evident that the minority is the stronger) assume its opinion, which then becomes that of the majority, i.e., becomes nonsense by having the whole [mass] on its side, while Truth again reverts to a new minority.
In regard to Truth, this troublesome monster, the majority, the public, etc., fares in the same way as we say of someone who is traveling to regain his health: he is always one station behind. [...]
I want people to sit up and take notice, to prevent them from idling away and wasting their lives. Aristocrats take it for granted that a lot of people will always go to waste. But they keep silent about it; they live sheltered lives pretending that all these many, many people simply do not exist. That is what is ungodly about the superior status of the aristocrats; in order to be comfortable themselves they do not even call attention to anything. [...]
I will call the attention of the crowd to their own ruination. And if they don’t want to see it willingly, I shall make them see it by fair means or foul. Please understand me — or, at least, do not misunderstand me. I do not intend to beat them… I will force them to beat me. Thus I actually compel them. For if they begin to beat me, they will probably pay attention; and if they kill me, they most definitely will pay attention, and I shall have won an absolute victory. [...]
Nobody wants to be this strenuous thing: an individual; it demands an effort. But everywhere services are readily offered through the phony substitute: a few! Let us get together and be a gathering, then we can probably manage. Therein lies mankind’s deepest demoralization."
(Søren Kierkegaard, The Diary of Søren Kierkegaard)

E1.7.B.1.4.b_REF3_PH A PATH IS ANIMATED BY PERPLEXITY AND OBSTRUCTED BY FIXED IDEAS.
“From Home to Homelessness […]

As religions grow from humble beginnings into churches and orthodoxies, the narrow path turns into a brightly lit highway. The risk of embarking on a journey into the unknown is replaced by the confidence of setting off on a well-planned excursion. Homelessness starts to feel like home again. The freedom of the open road is replaced by the drudgery of repeating a cycle of routines. As we proceed along the well-trodden paths of Buddhism, Christianity, Judaism, or Islam, we may begin to weary of their certainties. Perilous trails that branch off the main track and peter out in the anarchy of wilderness catch our attention. We realize that the path we are taking might disappear into a pathless land. […]

A path is animated by perplexity and obstructed by fixed ideas. Confusion reigns in its free, purposive, and shared space. We do not know where our questions will lead, but they compel us to seek a response. Yet with each insight we risk being halted in our tracks by the devil. As the imposer of limits and ends, Mara cannot tolerate the limitless and endless nature of astonishment. He is that part of us that is prone to regard any provisional answer as though it were the final word on the matter. When crystallized into an ideology, even the most lucid understanding will trap us rather than free us. “If you meet Buddha,” advises the Zen patriarch Lin-chi, “kill him.”
The destination of a path depends on the kind of questions that propel one along it. An existential question is presented not only in words but by the wordless astonishment at being alive. Its resolution too is rooted in this dumb surprise. Gotama’s existential awakening is already prefigured in the scream of a newborn baby, the anguish of ageing, the humiliation of disease, the decay of a corpse. For only when these things become questions for him can his quest for awakening begin to unfold. His path both originated and culminated in an awareness of the “great matter of birth and death.”
Astonishment is a gift. No amount of effort can peel off the stubborn veneer of banality that renders the world flat, routine, and opaque. The mystery that there is anything at all glimmers in the margins of awareness but rarely strikes home in all its intensity. “Because it is so very close, you cannot get this truth out of your eyes,” said the twelfth-century Chinese Zen monk Ta-hui. “But if you try to receive it by stirring your mind, you have already missed it by eighteen thousand miles.” In spite of Mara’s desperate attempts to replace astonishment with a consoling opinion or belief, you only remain true to your quest by allowing the riddle of the world to disclose itself.”
(Stephen Batchelor, Living with the Devil, 2004)

E1.7.B.1.4.c. EVERYTHING THAT IS IMPORTANT AND VALUABLE AND GOOD BELONGS WITH THE LITTLE PIECE OF US WHICH IS NOT MECHANICAL.

E1.7.B.1.4_REF1_LIT "CAUSALITY AND CHANCE … are the same things looked at two ways. Of course we are rather mechanical, and psychoanalysis can offer us some useful generalities about ourselves. But everything that is important and valuable and good belongs with the little piece of us which is not mechanical and no one who is not bemused by philosophy or a youthful mood really doubts the existence of this piece.

I think the sage who saw us as naturally reaching out towards the good had got something. We know, in the best part of ourselves, to use Platonic language, that great art is good, that work is often good and love often good. And if we have any certainties in the human condition these are they, and much more evident certainties than semi-philosophical stuff about all is flux. Of course much is flux, perhaps most is flux — but there is the other small thing and by this and in this one lives — I think almost involuntarily. (It’s very bad really to believe that certain aspects of love in one’s life are meaningless or worthless.)"
(Iris Murdoch, Living on Paper: Letters from Iris Murdoch, 1934–1995)

E1.7.B.1.4_REF2_PO "BEING BUT MEN

Being but men, we walked into the trees
Afraid, letting our syllables be soft
For fear of waking the rooks,
For fear of coming
Noiselessly into a world of wings and cries.

If we were children we might climb,
Catch the rooks sleeping, and break no twig,
And, after the soft ascent,
Thrust out our heads above the branches
To wonder at the unfailing stars.

Out of confusion, as the way is,
And the wonder, that man knows,
Out of the chaos would come bliss.

That, then, is loveliness, we said,
Children in wonder watching the stars,
Is the aim and the end.

Being but men, we walked into the trees."
(Dylan Thomas)

E1.7.B.1.4_REF3_PH "A CHILD’S WORLD IS FRESH AND NEW AND BEAUTIFUL, full of wonder and excitement. It is our misfortune that for most of us that clear-eyed vision, that true instinct for what is beautiful and awe-inspiring, is dimmed and even lost before we reach adulthood. If I had influence with the good fairy who is supposed to preside over the christening of all children I should ask that her gift to each child in the world be a sense of wonder so indestructible that it would last throughout life, as an unfailing antidote against the boredom and disenchantments of later years, the sterile preoccupation with things that are artificial, the alienation from the sources of our strength.

If a child is to keep alive his inborn sense of wonder without any such gift fairies, he needs the companionship of at least one adult who can share it, rediscovering with him the joy, excitement and mystery of the world we live in. [...]

I sincerely believe that for the child, and for the parent seeking to guide him, it is not half so important to know as to feel. If facts are the seeds that later produce knowledge and wisdom, then the emotions and the impressions of the senses are the fertile soil in which the seeds must grow. The years of early childhood are the time to prepare the soil. Once the emotions have been aroused — a sense of the beautiful, the excitement of the new and the unknown, a feeling of sympathy, pity, admiration or love — then we wish for knowledge about the subject of our emotional response. Once found, it has lasting meaning. It is more important to pave the way for the child to want to know than to put him on a diet of facts he is not ready to assimilate. [...]

What is the value of preserving and strengthening this sense of awe and wonder, this recognition of something beyond the boundaries of human existence? Is the exploration of the natural world just a pleasant way to pass the golden hours of childhood or is there something deeper?

I am sure there is something much deeper, something lasting and significant. Those who dwell, as scientists or laymen, among the beauties and mysteries of the earth are never alone or weary of life. Whatever the vexation or concerns of their personal lives, their thoughts can find paths that lead to inner contentment and to renewed excitement in living. Those who contemplate the beauty of the earth find reserves of strength that will endure as long as life lasts. There is symbolic as well as actual beauty in the migration of the birds, the ebb and flow of the tides, the folded bud ready for the spring. There is something infinitely healing in the repeated refrains of nature — the assurance that dawn comes after night, and spring after the winter."
(Rachel Carson, The Sense of Wonder, posthumously published , 1965)

E1.7.B.1.4_REF4_PO "WHAT THE LIVING DO

Johnny, the kitchen sink has been clogged for days, some utensil probably fell down there.
And the Drano won’t work but smells dangerous, and the crusty dishes have piled up

waiting for the plumber I still haven’t called. This is the everyday we spoke of.
It’s winter again: the sky’s a deep, headstrong blue, and the sunlight pours through

the open living-room windows because the heat’s on too high in here and I can’t turn it off.
For weeks now, driving, or dropping a bag of groceries in the street, the bag breaking,

I’ve been thinking: This is what the living do. And yesterday, hurrying along those
wobbly bricks in the Cambridge sidewalk, spilling my coffee down my wrist and sleeve,

I thought it again, and again later, when buying a hairbrush: This is it.
Parking. Slamming the car door shut in the cold. What you called that yearning.

What you finally gave up. We want the spring to come and the winter to pass. We want
whoever to call or not call, a letter, a kiss—we want more and more and then more of it.

But there are moments, walking, when I catch a glimpse of myself in the window glass,
say, the window of the corner video store, and I'm gripped by a cherishing so deep

for my own blowing hair, chapped face, and unbuttoned coat that I’m speechless:
I am living. I remember you."
(Marie Howe, 1998)

E1.7.B.1.4.d. WE KNOW WE ARE ON THE RIGHT TRACK WHEN OUR RELATION WITH TIME STARTS TO CHANGE
”After finishing your coffee, it still gives you time to reflect.” By taking a break to enjoy your drink, you reconnect with your mind. Its movement is not like a continuous train, but more like a dance with a constantly changing rhythm. You can perform this exercise with anything that allows you to take a pause and, in turn, alter your relationship with time.

E1.7.B.1.4.d_REF1_PH "GERTRUDE STEIN: « WHEN YOU HAVE FINISHED YOUR COFFEE, IT STILL GIVES YOU TIME TO THINK. »
Strange, how does drinking coffee would allow us to think? For most of us, thought is linked to intellectual reflection; daily life occupations  - although they can give us pleasure - remain rather superficial and banal. Gertrude Stein thought the exact opposite: everyday events can have a very deep meaning and allow us to transform our lives.
Are you stressed ?... I have a proposal for you: drink a cup of coffee. The important thing is just to drink it, because just by doing this you are changing your relationship with time. You inhale the extraordinary smell of coffee, savor its unique taste, and while you sip it you liberate yourself; you enter into the thickness of time. In other words, you let go of your usual preoccupations and that is why this moment can bring about new ideas. When the coffee is over, that moment is there for a while longer because the important thing is that by taking this break everything has changed. [...] 
Before moving to Paris, Gertrude Stein was one of William James' most passionate students. This American philosopher rethought what is consciousness; the life of the spirit, he explained, is comparable to a bird which alternates between periods of flight and periods of rest and it is by renewing with this alternation that human beings can rediscover the joy of living. When you stop for your drink, you encounter your own spirit, the movement of which is not that of a runaway train, but that of a dancer whose rhythm keeps changing.”
(Fabrice Midal; 3 minutes of philosophy to become human again, broadcast on France Culture on 07/26/2019)

Listen to the podcast (in French):
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/3-minutes-de-philosophie-pour-redevenir-humain/gertrude-stein-le-cafe-lorsque-vous-lavez-termine-il-vous-donne-encore-le-temps-de-reflechir

E1.7.B.1.4.e. SOME PEOPLE REFUSE TO EVEN TRY!
Ulrich, a character in Robert Musil's The Man Without Qualities, has renounced making himself available to reality, despite understanding its wonder... what a pity!

E1.7.B.1.4.e_REF1_LIT ULRICH THOUGHT ABOUT THE MISTAKENLY CONFUSED DIFFERENCE BETWEEN INSIDE AND OUTSIDE IN HIS CHILDHOOD, WHERE OBJECTS AND EVENTS SEEMED TO MERGE WITH HIS OWN FEELINGS. ". The Siamese twins. [Ulrich replied sharply: "When I think back to my younger years, I would say that the inside and the outside were almost indistinguishable. When I crawled toward an object, the object flew toward me; when something important to us happened, we weren't the only ones moved: the objects themselves began to seethe. I'm not saying we were happier than we were later. We did not yet possess ourselves; deep down we were not yet ourselves, our personal states were not yet clearly separated from those of the world. It may seem strange, but it is true to say that our feelings, our impulses, ourselves, were not yet fully within us. Stranger still, I could say that we were not yet completely out of ourselves. In fact, today, when you think you are in full possession of yourself, when you ask yourself who you are, in the end you will discover that you always see yourself from the outside, like an object. You will find that one occasion makes you sad and another makes you angry, just as your coat is sometimes damp and sometimes hot. If you observe yourself with all the attention you can muster, you will at best be able to see behind you, never within. Whatever you do, you remain outside yourself, except for those rare moments when others say you are outside yourself. To compensate for this, we adults have been given the power to say I am on every occasion when it pleases us. You see a car and at the same time you see, like a shadow, the phrase: I see a car. You feel love, or you feel sad, and you realize that you feel sad. But strictly speaking, neither the car, nor your sadness, nor your love, nor you yourself are fully there. Nothing is more fully there than in childhood. Everything you touch, as soon as you manage to become a personality, freezes to the very core of you. All that is left is a thin thread of self-awareness and troubled self-esteem, surrounded by a completely external life. So what's wrong? You feel that something, you don't know what, can still be corrected. How can we say that a child's experience is completely different from an adult's? I don't have a definitive answer to these questions, although we can certainly come up with one or two ideas. But I found my own answer a long time ago: by losing all love for this way of being and for this kind of world."
(Robert Musil, The Man without Qualities, Part III, 1930)

E1.7.B.1.4.e_REF2_PO "TWO TRAVELERS
One of us in the compartment stares
Out of his window the whole day long
With attentive mind, as if he knows,
There is hid in the journeying scene a song
To recall or compose
From snatches of vision, hints of vanishing airs.

He'll mark the couched hares
In grass where over the lapwing reel and twist:
He notes how the shockheaded sunflowers climb

Like boys on the wire by the railway line;
And for him those morning rivers are love-in-a-mist,
And the chimney stacks prayers.

The other is plainly a man of affairs,
A seasoned commuter. His looks assert,
As he opens a briefcase intent on perusing
Facts and figures, he'd never divert
With profitless musing
The longest journey, or notice the dress it wears."
(Cecil Day-Lewis)

E1.7.B.1.5. LACAN EXPLORES HOW TRUTH CAN BE REVEALED BY SURPRISING MEANS, such as dreams, slips of the tongue, equivocations and silences. He suggests that these moments of language failure serve as cracks in the symbolic world's fortress, allowing truth to manifest. Ultimately, uncovering truth requires indirect and often subtle methods, necessitating a form of "judo with truth".

E1.7.B.1.5_REF1_PH ACCORDING TO LACAN, TRUTH OFTEN MANIFESTS ITSELF THROUGH ERROR, CONFUSION, OR FAILURE, RATHER THAN THROUGH DIRECT DISCOURSE. "The symbolic world, however, within which all that is human remains confined, is not a hermetic universe, completely impervious to external pressures. Cracks eat away at the fortress, depressions break through the wall of language. Truth may elude the symbolic order, but it reveals itself in the gaps of discourse, in the tension of speech. It is a paradox to which Lacan often returns: truth always comes to us through error, confusion, or failure. Dreams, slips of the tongue, ambiguities, shifts of meaning (metaphor and metonymy), denials, silences... The repressed disrupts the construction of the sentence, and the truth speaks not through what we say, but through what we do not want to or cannot say. And it is because it is always the intruder that we did not expect that it is so difficult to silence. Let us listen to the voice of truth: "So that you may find me where I am, I will teach you how to recognize me. Men, listen, I will give you the secret. I, the Truth, speak [...] Whether you flee from Me in deception or think to catch up with Me in error, I join you in the error from which there is no escape. Where the most careful word stumbles a little, it fails in its perfidy. I am publishing it now, and it will therefore be a little more difficult to act as if nothing had happened, in society, good or bad. But there is no need to tire yourself out trying to watch yourself more closely. Even if the combined jurisdictions of courtesy and politics were to declare inadmissible everything that claims to come from me in such an illicit manner, you would not be off the hook for so little, for the most innocent intention is disconcerted when it can no longer claim that its failed actions are the most successful, and that its failure rewards its most secret desire". An extraordinary prosopopoeia of truth, bursting in the middle of a lecture given in Vienna in November 1955, the published text of which is a reworking. [Truth does not speak with words - or with portmanteau words, twisted words, coined words, witty words, puns - it speaks with things: "The long-distance trade of truth is no longer through thought: strangely enough, it now seems to be through things, rebus," Lacan adds, alluding to a famous passage from Freud's The Interpretation of Dreams, which compares the dream to the rebus. To speak with things, with "the thing," is not to refer meaning to meaning in an indefinite series of relays, but, on the contrary, to show meaning in person, to make it appear in the theater of mental representation. Where words fail, the thing shows itself, and where the thing shows itself, the subject has no words left to express it. Truth beckons where it is least expected, not in the thread of demonstration, but in the gaps of discourse: "I wander," truth itself continues, "in what you consider to be the least true in essence: in the dream, in the challenge to the sense of the most gongoric point and the nonsense of the most grotesque pun, in chance, and not in its law, but in contingency, and I never proceed more surely to change the face of the world than to give it the profile of Cleopatra's nose." [...]
Sometimes the truth can be guessed, sometimes it eludes us. And this is why Lacan compares his search, and by analogy the games of hide-and-seek of analysis or teaching, to "judo with the truth," that is, to the art of stumbling one's opponent not by confronting him head-on, but on the contrary by accompanying him into the failures of his own discourse. Truth cannot be a function of the formalism of demonstration alone, which is only the verification of the coherence of the discourse, which may well be insane: the delirium of the paranoiac is unfalsifiable, only truth can be refuted. Truth does not come from demonstration, it comes from the event. [...] Truth is therefore always disturbing, it is necessarily impertinent, which means precisely that it makes us lose our bearings: "With a new truth," writes Lacan, "we cannot be content to make room for it, because it is a question of taking our place in it [which requires us to change places...] It requires us to be disturbed. We cannot just get used to it. We get used to reality [which here is just the established order]. We suppress the truth. What we are not used to always seems new to us, and this is also what Lacan likes to point out, quoting Max Jacob: "The truth is always new."
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Listen to madness, IV - The truth, 2019)

Read the entire essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Lacan/Ecouterlafolie/Ecouterlafolie4.html

E1.7.B.1.5_REF1.1_CUR COULD THESE ROCKS, FLOATING ON THE WAVES AND DEFYING ALL EXPECTATIONS, be a metaphor for truth according to Jacques Lacan, for whom truth is always disturbing because it is buried in the unconscious. It suddenly emerges as an event to shake up our habits.

E1.7.B.2 HOW CAN WE BE FULLY ATTENTIVE TO ALLOW REALITY TO MANIFEST ITSELF? DIRECT YOUR GAZE...

E1.7.B.2.1. IT'S CRUCIAL TO BE CAREFUL WHEN SHAPING OUR ENVIRONMENTS, AS THEY CAN DIRECTLY INFLUENCE OUR MENTAL PROCESSES. Our daily experiences are molded by predictions, which subsequently affect our perception. Emotions, moods, and planning are also based on predictions. By modifying our expectations, we can improve our lives. As dynamic systems of prediction, our minds are coordinated by the brain, body, and world. Hence, it's essential to be cautious when creating our environments, as they can significantly impact our mental processes.

E1.7.B.2.1_REF1_SCI ANDY CLARK'S "THE EXPERIENCE MACHINE" ARGUES THAT OUR PERCEPTIONS AND EXPERIENCES ARE DEEPLY ROOTED IN PAST PREDICTIONS MADE BY OUR BRAINS. "Incoming sensory signals help correct errors in prediction, but the predictions are in the driver’s seat now. This means that what we perceive today is deeply rooted in what we experienced yesterday, and all the days before that. Every aspect of our daily experience comes to us filtered by hidden webs of prediction — the brain’s best expectations rooted in our own past histories. […]

When the brain strongly predicts a certain sight, a sound, or a feeling, that prediction plays a role in shaping what we seem to see, hear, or feel.

Emotion, mood, and even planning are all based in predictions too. Depression, anxiety, and fatigue all reflect alterations to the hidden predictions that shape our experience. Alter those predictions (for example, by “reframing” a situation using different words) and our experience itself alters. [...]

Since experience is always shaped by our own expectations, there is an opportunity to improve our lives by altering some of those expectations, and the confidence with which they are held. [...]

To perceive is to find the predictions that best fit the sensory evidence. To act is to alter the world to bring it into line with some of those predictions… It is this deep reciprocity between prediction and action that positions predictive brains as the perfect internal organs for the creation of extended minds — minds enhanced and augmented by the use of tools, technologies, and the complex social worlds in which we live and work. Extended minds are possible because predictive brains automatically seek out actions that will improve our states of information, reducing uncertainty as we approach our goals (highly predicted future states). When such actions become parts of habit systems that call upon resources that are robustly available, trusted, and fully woven into our daily ways of dealing with the world, we become creatures whose effective cognitive apparatus exceeds that of the biological brain alone. [...)

Human minds are not elusive, ghostly inner things. They are seething, swirling oceans of prediction, continuously orchestrated by brain, body, and world. We should be careful what kinds of material, digital, and social worlds we build, because in building those worlds we are building our own minds too."
(Andy Clark, The Experience Machine: How Our Minds Predict and Shape Reality, 2023)

E1.7.B.2.1_REF2_PH “WHEREVER YOU ARE, STOP WHAT YOU’RE DOING
Nothing magnifies life — in the proper sense of the word, rooted in the Latin for “to make greater, to glorify” — more than the act of noticing its details, and nothing sanctifies it more: Kneeling to look at a lichen is a devotional act. We bless our own lives by recognizing and reverencing the details, the miniature marvels that make this improbable world what it is. And yet consciousness evolved to filter them out, to blur them into more abstract pictures we can parse, to sieves relevance from reality in order to save us from being too wonder-smitten by the flickering morning light on the edge of the kitchen sink and the iridescent eye of the house fly to move through our days. Cognitive scientists know this necessary ailment of consciousness: “Right now, you are missing the vast majority of what is happening around you,” Alexandra Horowitz wrote in one of my favorite books, examining the “intentional, unapologetic discriminator” that is attention. Poets know the remedy: “Attention without feeling,” Mary Oliver wrote, “is only a report.”
Paying conscious attention, then, is our primary instrument of loving the world, abiding by Iris Murdoch’s splendid definition of love as “the extremely difficult realisation that something other than oneself is real.” But because nothing abstract is real except mathematics, because love is made of the particular and the specific, to love anything — a person, a planet, your life — is at bottom a practice of noticing, which is always a devotional practice.”
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

Read it on the Marginalian:
https://www.themarginalian.org/2025/01/04/the-comfort-of-crows/?mc_cid=693f2b9af1&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E1.7.B.2.1_REF3_LIT “LIVING AGAINST TIME: VIRGINIA WOOLF ON THE ART OF PRESENCE AND THE “MOMENTS OF BEING” THAT MAKE YOU WHO YOU ARE
”Whatever has happened, whatever is going to happen in the world, it is the living moment that contains the sum of the excitement, this moment in which we touch life and all the energy of the past and future,” the poet Muriel Rukeyser wrote in one of my favorite books a century after Kierkegaard asserted in his classic on anxiety that “the moment is not properly an atom of time but an atom of eternity… the first reflection of eternity in time, its first attempt, as it were, at stopping time.”  

Given that nearly every cell in your body has changed since the time you were a child, given that nearly all of your values, desires, and social ties are now different, given that you are, biologically and psychologically, a different person from one moment to the next, what makes you and the child you were the same person — what makes a self — is nothing more than the thread of selective memory and internal narrative stringing together the most meaningful beads of experience into the rosary of meaning that is your personhood.

Virginia Woolf (January 25, 1882–March 28, 1941) called these beads “moments of being” — the “scaffolding in the background” of life, “invisible and silent” yet shaping the foreground of experience: our relationship to other people, our response to events, the things we make with our hands and our minds in our daily living. 

The most intensely felt of these moments, she believed, “have an existence independent of our minds; are in fact still in existence”; we don’t call them to memory — they call us into being. They are the antipode of what she called “non-being” — the lull of habit and mindless routine that drags us through our days in a state of near-living.

In Moments of Being  — the posthumous collection of her autobiographical writings — she writes:

‘A great part of every day is not lived consciously. One walks, eats, sees things, deals with what has to be done; the broken vacuum cleaner; ordering dinner; writing orders to Mabel; washing; cooking dinner; bookbinding. When it is a bad day the proportion of non-being is much larger.’

In her 1925 novel *Mrs. Dalloway* — part love letter to these moments of being, part lamentation about the proportion of non-being we choose without knowing we are choosing — she locates the key to righting the ratio in “the power of taking hold of experience, of turning it round, slowly, in the light.” Placing one of the characters in one such vivid moment of being — “coming out of Regent’s Park, and holding his hat in hand” — she writes him thinking:

‘Life itself, every moment of it, every drop of it, here, this instant, now, in the sun, in Regent’s Park, was enough. Too much, indeed. A whole lifetime was too short to bring out, now that one had acquired the power, the full flavour; to extract every ounce of pleasure, every shade of meaning.’

This question of life’s fullness — what fills it, what syphons it, how to live when it overflows beyond what we can hold — animates Woolf’s entire body of work. In the spring of 1928, while working on her trailblazing novel *Orlando* (“which is wretched,” she told her sister Vanessa in a letter, then wrote the relationship between creativity and self-doubt into the novel itself) — she reflected in her diary:

‘A bitter windy rainy day… Life is either too empty or too full. Happily, I never cease to transmit these curious damaging shocks. At 46 I am not callous; suffer considerably; make good resolutions — still feel as experimental & on the verge of getting at the truth as ever… And I find myself again in the driving whirlwind of writing against time. Have I ever written with it?’

In a sense, to live in the moment is always to live against time. Woolf captured this with uncommon splendor in another autobiographical fragment:
’The past only comes back when the present runs so smoothly that it is like the sliding surface of a deep river. Then one sees through the surface to the depths. In those moments I find one of my greatest satisfactions, not that I am thinking of the past; but that it is then that I am living most fully in the present. For the present when backed by the past is a thousand times deeper than the present when it is pressed so close that you can feel nothing else, when the film on the camera reaches only the eye. But to feel the present sliding over the depths of the past, peace is necessary. The present must be smooth, habitual. For this reason — that it destroys the fullness of life — any break — like that of house moving — causes me extreme distress; it breaks; it shallows; it turns the depth into hard thin splinters.’

As Woolf was thinking these beautiful thoughts and writing these beautiful sentences, she was enduring regular visitations the acute depression that would eventually lead her to fill her coat-pockets with stones and wade into the river, never to return. She had come to the brink once before, in her twenties. That she lived to fifty-nine despite such suffering, that she wrote the flashes of eternity she did, is an astonishing achievement of the spirit — a testament to her own power “of taking hold of experience, of turning it round, slowly, in the light.”

It is through her protagonist in Mrs. Dalloway that Woolf best captures these luminous building blocks of personhood:

‘Clarissa (crossing to the dressing-table) plunged into the very heart of the moment, transfixed it, there — the moment of this June morning on which was the pressure of all the other mornings, seeing the glass, the dressing-table, and all the bottles afresh, collecting the whole of her at one point (as she looked into the glass), seeing the delicate pink face of the woman who was that very night to give a party; of Clarissa Dalloway; of herself.’

These moments, Woolf knew and devoted her life to having us know, are our best listening device for hearing the soul beneath the self — the soul that is little more than the quality of attention we pay to being alive.  

It was one such almost painfully acute moment of being while walking through her garden that lifted what Woolf called “the cotton wool of daily life” and sparked her epiphany about why she became a writer — a lens on a larger truth about what it means to be an artist, a person of creative fire in the river of time — prompting her to exult in the revelation:

‘I reach… the idea… that behind the cotton wool is hidden a pattern; that we — I mean all human beings — are connected with this; that the whole world is a work of art; that we are parts of the work of art. Hamlet or a Beethoven quartet is the truth about this vast mass that we call the world. But there is no Shakespeare, there is no Beethoven; certainly and emphatically there is no God; we are the words; we are the music; we are the thing itself.’”
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2025/02/12/virginia-woolf-moments-of-being/?mc_cid=2afb17e3f9&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E1.7.B.2.2. THE SPIRITUAL IS NOT TO BE SEPARATED FROM THE MATERIAL, NOR THE WONDERFUL FROM THE ORDINARY
"Spiritual and mystical suggest something rarefied, otherworldly, and loftily religious, opposed to an ordinary material life which is simply practical and commonplace. The whole point of these essays is to show the fallacy of this opposition, to show that the spiritual is not to be separated from the material, nor the wonderful from the ordinary. We need, above all, to disentangle ourselves from habits of speech and thought which set the two apart, making it impossible for us to see that this - the immediate, everyday, and present experience - is IT"

E1.7.B.2.2.a. "THE SPIRITUAL IS NOT TO BE SEPARATED FROM THE MATERIAL, NOR THE WONDERFUL FROM THE ORDINARY"

E1.7.B.2.2.a_REF1_PH "PREFACE 

ALTHOUGH written at different times during the past four years, the essays here gathered together have a common point of focus - the spiritual or mystical experience and its relation to ordinary material life. Having said this, I am instantly aware that I have used the wrong words; and yet there are no satisfactory alternatives. Spiritual and mystical suggest something rarefied, otherworldly, and loftily religious, opposed to an ordinary material life which is simply practical and commonplace. The whole point of these essays is to show the fallacy of this opposition, to show that the spiritual is not to be separated from the material, nor the wonderful from the ordinary. We need, above all, to disentangle ourselves from habits of speech and thought which set the two apart, making it impossible for us to see that this - the immediate, everyday, and present experience - is IT, the entire and ultimate point for the existence of a universe. But the recognition that the two are one comes to pass in an elusive, though relatively common, state of consciousness which has fascinated me beyond all else since I was seventeen years old."
(Alan Watts, This is it, 1958)

E1.7.B.2.2.b." IT DEPENDS UPON THE VISION WHICH COULD TRANSFORM US INTO THE KIND OF PEOPLE WHO CAN DO IT
The possibility of [experiencing] this depends entirely upon the presence of the vision which could transform us into the kind of people who can do it, not upon exhortation or appeals to our persistent, but consistently uncreative, sense of guilt."

E1.7.B.2.2.b_REF1_PH "I AM NEITHER A PREACHER NOR A REFORMER, for I like to write and talk about this way of seeing things as one sings in the bathtub or splashes in the sea. There is no mission, nor intent to convert, and yet I believe that if this state of consciousness could become more universal, the pretentious nonsense which passes for the serious business of the world would dissolve in laughter. We should see at once that the high ideals for which we are killing and regimenting each other are empty and abstract substitutes for the unheeded miracles that surround us - not only in the obvious wonders of nature but also in the overwhelmingly uncanny fact of mere existence. Not for one moment do I believe that such an awakening would deprive us of energy or social concern. On the contrary, half the delight of it - though infinity has no halves - is to share it with others, and because the spiritual and the material are inseparable this means the sharing of life and things as well as insight. But the possibility of this depends entirely upon the presence of the vision which could transform us into the kind of people who can do it, not upon exhortation or appeals to our persistent, but consistently uncreative, sense of guilt. Yet it would spoil it all if we felt obliged, by that same sense, to have the vision. [...]"
(Alan Watts, This is it, 1958)

E1.7.B.2.2.c. "IT APPEARS AS A VIVID AND OVERWHELMING CERTAINTY THAT THE UNIVERSE IS RIGHT
The most impressive fact in man's spiritual, intellectual, and poetic experience has always been, for me, the universal prevalence of those astonishing moments of insight which Richard Bucke called "cosmic consciousness." From all historical times and cultures we have reports of this same unmistakable sensation emerging, as a rule, quite suddenly and unexpectedly and from no clearly understood cause.
To the individual thus enlightened it appears as a vivid and overwhelming certainty that the universe, precisely as it is at this moment, as a whole and in every one of its parts, is so completely right as to need no explanation or justification beyond what it simply is."

E1.7.B.2.2.c_REF1_PH "THIS IS IT

THE most impressive fact in man's spiritual, intellectual, and poetic experience has always been, for me, the universal prevalence of those astonishing moments of insight which Richard Bucke called "cosmic consciousness." There is no really satisfactory name for this type of experience. To call it mystical is to confuse it with visions of another world, or of gods and angels. To call it spiritual or metaphysical is to suggest that it is not also extremely concrete and physical, while the term "cosmic consciousness" itself has the unpoetic flavor of occultist jargon. But from all historical times and cultures we have reports of this same unmistakable sensation emerging, as a rule, quite suddenly and unexpectedly and from no clearly understood cause.

To the individual thus enlightened it appears as a vivid and overwhelming certainty that the universe, precisely as it is at this moment, as a whole and in every one of its parts, is so completely right as to need no explanation or justification beyond what it simply is. Existence not only ceases to be a problem; the mind is so wonder-struck at the self-evident and self-sufficient fitness of things as they are, including what would ordinarily be thought the very worst, that it cannot find any word strong enough to express the perfection and beauty of the experience. Its clarity sometimes gives the sensation that the world has become transparent or luminous, and its simplicity the sensation that it is pervaded and ordered by a supreme intelligence. At the same time it is usual for the individual to feel that the whole world has become his own body, and that whatever he is has not only become, but always has been, what everything else is. It is not that he loses his identity to the point of feeling that he actually looks out through all other eyes, becoming literally omniscient, but rather that his individual consciousness and existence is a point of view temporarily adopted by something immeasurably greater than himself.

The central core of the experience seems to be the conviction, or insight, that the immediate now, whatever its nature, is the goal and fulfillment of all living. Surrounding and flowing from this insight is an emotional ecstasy, a sense of intense relief, freedom, and lightness, and often of almost unbearable love for the world, which is, however, secondary. Often, the pleasure of the experience is confused with the experience and the insight lost in the ecstasy, so that in trying to retain the secondary effects of the experience the individual misses its point - that the immediate now is complete even when it is not ecstatic. For ecstasy is a necessarily impermanent contrast in the constant fluctuation of our feelings. But insight, when clear enough, persists; having once understood a particular skill, the facility tends to remain."
(Alan Watts, This is it, 1958)

E1.7.B.2.2.c_REF2_LIT "THIS POWER SEEMED TO HAVE BEEN HIDDEN UNDER THE MASK OF THINGS, and now it burst forth, exploded. A single light: things had been the particular events of this light, the object-events in which it was particularized. [...] I had had the revelation of the essential; the rest was inessential". 
(Eugene Ionesco, Fragments of a Journal, 1967)

E1.7.B.2.2.c_REF3_PH "THERE ARE MOMENTS IN LIFE WHEN SOMETHING BREAKS OPEN, something breaks free, something dissolves and resurfaces as large as the universe. Moments when we access what G.K. Chesterton called “the submerged sunrise of wonder.” Moments when we part what Virginia Woolf called “the cotton wool” gauzing our view of raw reality. Moments when the boundaries of the self fall away and we find ourselves in oneness with what Margaret Fuller called “the All.”

These are moments marked by William James’s four characteristics of transcendent consciousness, most acutely by their ineffability. But once or twice a century, if we are lucky, a person emerges to articulate the inner pulse-beat of such an experience and, in articulating it, broadens the portal of possibility for the rest of us.

No one has captured the ineffable transcendence of such a moment more vividly and passionately than the great British nature writer Richard Jefferies (November 6, 1848–August 14, 1887) — a man of uncommon sensitivity to beauty, who died at the age I am now, having lived a life electric with wonder.

Like his American contemporary John Burroughs, who wrote so movingly about the spirituality of nature, Jefferies believed that communion with the natural world is a portal to the highest reaches of our own humanity. “To be beautiful and to be calm without mental fear is the ideal of Nature,” he wrote, insisting again and again that we can attain this ideal by relinquishing our sense of separateness from the rest of nature and unselfing into the elemental totality of life."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.7.B.2.2.c_REF3.1_PH RICHARD JEFFERIES, IN "THE STORY OF MY HEART," DESCRIBES AN INTENSE SPIRITUAL COMMUNION WITH NATURE. "I was utterly alone with the sun and the earth. Lying down on the grass, I spoke in my soul to the earth, the sun, the air, and the distant sea far beyond sight. I thought of the earth’s firmness — I felt it bear me up: through the grassy couch there came an influence as if I could feel the great earth speaking to me. I thought of the wandering air — its pureness, which is its beauty; the air touched me and gave me something of itself. I spoke to the sea: though so far, in my mind I saw it, green at the rim of the earth and blue in deeper ocean; I desired to have its strength, its mystery and glory. Then I addressed the sun, desiring the soul equivalent of his light and brilliance, his endurance and unwearied race. I turned to the blue heaven over, gazing into its depth, inhaling its exquisite colour and sweetness. The rich blue of the unattainable flower of the sky drew my soul towards it, and there it rested, for pure colour is rest of heart. By all these I prayed; I felt an emotion of the soul beyond all definition; prayer is a puny thing to it, and the word is a rude sign to the feeling, but I know no other. […]

I prayed by the sweet thyme, whose little flowers I touched with my hand; by the slender grass; by the crumble of dry chalky earth I took up and let fall through my fingers. Touching the crumble of earth, the blade of grass, the thyme flower, breathing the earth-encircling air, thinking of the sea and the sky, holding out my hand for the sunbeams to touch it, prone on the sward in token of deep reverence, thus I prayed that I might touch to the unutterable existence infinitely higher than deity. […]

With the earth, the sun and sky, the stars hidden by the light, with the ocean — in no manner can the thrilling depth of these feelings be written — with these I prayed, as if they were the keys of an instrument, of an organ, with which I swelled forth the note of my soul, redoubling my own voice by their power. [...]

I returned to myself and thought, reclining in rapt thought, full of aspiration, steeped to the lips of my soul in desire. I did not then define, or analyse, or understand this. I see now that what I laboured for was soul-life, more soul-nature, to be exalted, to be full of soul-learning. […]

Having drunk deeply of the heaven above and felt the most glorious beauty of the day, and remembering the old, old, sea, which (as it seemed to me) was but just yonder at the edge, I now became lost, and absorbed into the being or existence of the universe… and losing thus my separateness of being came to seem like a part of the whole. [...]

I was breathing full of existence; I was aware of the grass blades, the flowers, the leaves on hawthorn and tree. I seemed to live more largely through them, as if each were a pore through which I drank. The grasshoppers called and leaped, the greenfinches sang, the blackbirds happily fluted, all the air hummed with life. I was plunged deep in existence, and with all that existence, I prayed… I prayed that I might have a soul more than equal to, far beyond my conception of, these things of the past, the present, and the fullness of all life. Not only equal to these, but beyond, higher, and more powerful than I could imagine. That I might take from all their energy, grandeur, and beauty, and gather it into me. That my soul might be more than the cosmos of life."
(Richard Jefferies, The Story of My Heart, 1883)

E1.7.B.2.2.c_REF3.1.a_PH WILLIAM JAMES CAUTIONS AGAINST DEVALUING  TRANSCENDENT HOURS AS SEEMINGLY IMPRACTICAL EXPERIENCES, URGING US INSTEAD TO RECOGNIZE THEM AS VITAL REVELATIONS OF WHAT MAKES LIFE WORTH LIVING "William James himself was deeply moved by Jefferies’s account of this transcendent hour. In his talks to teachers and students, a century before our golden age of compulsive productivity at the expense of presence, he cautions against devaluing such seemingly impractical experiences, urging us instead to recognize them as vital revelations of what makes life worth living"
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.7.B.2.2.c_REF3.1.b_PH WILLIAM JAMES ARGUES THAT THE TRUE VALUE OF LIFE LIES IN MOMENTS OF EMOTIONAL SIGNIFICANCE "Surely, a worthless hour of life, when measured by the usual standards of commercial value. Yet in what other kind of value can the preciousness of any hour, made precious by any standard, consist, if it consist not in feelings of excited significance like these, engendered in some one, by what the hour contains?

Yet so blind and dead does the clamor of our own practical interests make us to all other things, that it seems almost as if it were necessary to become worthless as a practical being, if one is to hope to attain to any breadth of insight into the impersonal world of worths as such, to have any perception of life’s meaning on a large objective scale. Only your mystic, your dreamer, or your insolvent tramp or loafer, can afford so sympathetic an occupation, an occupation which will change the usual standards of human value in the twinkling of an eye, giving to foolishness a place ahead of power, and laying low in a minute the distinctions which it takes a hard-working conventional man a lifetime to build up. You may be a prophet, at this rate; but you cannot be a worldly success. […]

Life is always worth living, if one have such responsive sensibilities. But we of the highly educated classes (so called) have most of us got far, far away from Nature. We are trained to seek the choice, the rare, the exquisite exclusively, and to overlook the common. We are stuffed with abstract conceptions, and glib with verbalities and verbosities; and in the culture of these higher functions the peculiar sources of joy connected with our simpler functions often dry up, and we grow stone-blind and insensible to life’s more elementary and general goods and joys."
(William James, Talks to Teachers on Psychology: And to Students on Some of Life’s Ideals, 1911)

E1.7.B.2.2.c_REF3.1.c_PO “A HANDFUL OF TIMES A LIFETIME, IF YOU ARE LUCKY, AN EXPERIENCE OPENS A TRAPDOOR IN YOUR PSYCHE with its almost unbearable beauty and strangeness, its discomposing unlikeness to anything you have known before. Down, down you go into the depths of the unconscious, dark and fertile with the terror and longing that make for suffering, the surrender that makes for the end of suffering, not in resignation but in faith. It is then that the still, small voice of the soul begins to sing; it is then that the trapdoor becomes a portal into a life larger, truer, and more possible — a kind of rebirth.

Nobel laureate Louise Glück (April 22, 1943–October 13, 2023) captures the essence of such experiences, the way they sober us to being mortal and to being alive, with an image of piercing originality in the title poem of her 1992 collection [***The Wild Iris](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=c7f808ecef&e=0b6483decb)”
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

“THE WILD IRIS
At the end of my suffering there was a door.
Hear me out: that which you call death
I remember.

Overhead, noises, branches of the pine shifting.
Then nothing. The weak sun
flickered over the dry surface.

It is terrible to survive
as consciousness
buried in the dark earth.

Then it was over: that which you fear, being
a soul and unable
to speak, ending abruptly, the stiff earth
bending a little. And what I took to be
birds darting in low shrubs.

You who do not remember
passage from the other world
I tell you I could speak again: whatever
returns from oblivion returns
to find a voice:

from the center of my life came
a great fountain, deep blue
shadows on azure seawater.”
(Louise Glück, The wild iris, 1992)

Listen to the poem: https://youtu.be/8waoQWf9aL8

E1.7.B.2.2.d. "THE TERMS IN WHICH A MAN INTERPRETS [THE EXPERIENCE OF COSMIC CONSCIOUSNESS] ARE NATURALLY DRAWN FROM THE RELIGIOUS AND PHILOSOPHICAL IDEAS OF HIS CULTURE and their differences often conceal its basic identity. As water seeks the course of least resistance, so the emotions clothe themselves in the symbols that lie most readily to hand, and the association is so swift and automatic that the symbol may appear to be the very heart of the experience."

E1.7.B.2.2.d_REF1_PH CERTAINTY, JOY, CERTAINTY, FEELING, JOY, PEACE "The terms in which a man interprets this experience are naturally drawn from the religious and philosophical ideas of his culture, and their differences often conceal its basic identity. As water seeks the course of least resistance, so the emotions clothe themselves in the symbols that lie most readily to hand, and the association is so swift and automatic that the symbol may appear to be the very heart of the experience. Clarity - the disappearance of problems - suggests light, and in moments of such acute clarity there may be the physical sensation of light penetrating everything. To a theist this will naturally seem to be a glimpse of the presence of God, as in the celebrated testimony of Pascal:

        The year of grace 1654,
        Monday the 23rd of November, St. Clement's day...
        From about half past ten in the evening until about half past twelve, midnight,

        FIRE

        God of Abraham. God of Isaac. God of Jacob 
        not of the philosophers and the wise. Certainty, joy, certainty, feeling, Joy, peace.

Or in a case quoted by William James:

        The very heavens seemed to open and pour down rays of light and glory. Not for a moment only, but all day and night, floods of light and glory seemed to pour through my soul, and    oh, how I was changed, and everything became new. My horses and hogs and everybody seemed changed.

But clarity may also suggest transparency, or the sense that the world confronting us is no longer an obstacle and the body no longer a burden, and to a Buddhist this will just as naturally call to mind the doctrine of reality as the ungraspable, indefinable Void (sunyata).

        I came back into the hall and was about to go to my seat when the whole outlook changed. A broad expanse opened, and the ground appeared as if all caved in.... As I looked around and up and down, the whole universe with its multitudinous sense-objects now appeared quite different; what was loathsome before, together with ignorance and passions, was now seen to be nothing else but the outflow of my own inmost nature which in itself remained bright, true, and transparent.

As one and the same pain may be described either as a hot pang or as a cold sting, so the descriptions of this experience may take forms that seem to be completely opposed. One person may say that he has found the answer to the whole mystery of life, but somehow can not put it into words. Another will say that there never was a mystery and thus no answer to it, for what the experience made clear to him was the irrelevance and artificiality of all our questions. One declares himself convinced that there is no death, his true self being as eternal as the universe. Another states that death has simply ceased to matter, because the present moment is so complete that it requires no future. One feels himself taken up and united with a life infinitely other than his own. But as the beating of the heart may be regarded as something that happens to you or something that you do, depending on the point of view, so another will feel that he has experienced, not a transcendent God, but his own inmost nature. One will get the sense that his ego or self has expanded to become the entire universe, whereas another will feel that he has lost himself altogether and that what he called his ego was never anything but an abstraction. One will describe himself as infinitely enriched, while another will speak of being brought to such absolute poverty that he owns not even his mind and body, and has not a care in the world.

Rarely is the experience described without metaphors that might be misleading if taken literally. But in reading Bernard Berenson's Sketch for a Self-Portrait I came across a passage which is one of the simplest and "cleanest" accounts of it I have ever seen.

        It was a morning in early summer. A silver haze shimmered and trembled over the lime trees. The air was laden with their fragrance. The temperature was like a caress. I remember - I need not recall - that I climbed up a tree stump and felt suddenly immersed in Itness. I did not call it by that name, I had no need for words. It and I were one.

Just "It" - as when we use the word to denote the superlative, or the exact point, or intense reality, or what we were always looking for. Not the neuter sense of the mere object, but something still more alive and far wider than the personal, and for which we use this simplest of words because we have no word for it."
(Alan Watts, This is it, 1958)

E1.7.B.2.2.d_REF2_CUR  A NEW PHILOSOPHY OF LIFE "During a séance, af Klint heard a voice telling her to paint "on an astral plane" so as to "proclaim a new philosophy of life." Guided, she believed, by a "higher power," she began to paint abstractions in 1906, very early in modern art history. "I had no idea," she said, "what the paintings were supposed to depict; nevertheless I worked swiftly and surely, without changing a single brushstroke." Part of a group titled The Large Figure Paintings, this work exemplifies af Klint's use of cosmic and biomorphic forms in pursuit of her spiritual visions."
(Curatorship, MomA, NYC)

E1.7.B.2.2.e. "IT IS ESPECIALLY DIFFICULT TO FIND THE RIGHT MEANS OF EXPRESSION FOR THE EXPERIENCE IN THE CULTURAL CONTEXT OF CHRISTIANITY. For while this enlightenment comes just as much to Christians as to anyone else, the Christian mystic has always been in danger of conflict with the defenders of orthodoxy. Christian dogmatics insist firmly upon the radical difference between God and his created universe, as between God and the human soul. The Christian sense of the reality of evil and of time and history as the process of overcoming evil remains with us so strongly even in the post-Christian intellectual climate of today that we have difficulty in accepting the "cosmic consciousness" as more than an inspiring hallucination. "

E1.7.B.2.2.e_REF1_PH THE DIFFICULTY OF EXPRESSING MYSTICAL EXPERIENCES WITHIN THE CHRISTIAN CULTURAL CONTEXT "It is especially difficult to find the right means of expression for the experience in the cultural context of Christianity. For while this enlightenment comes just as much to Christians as to anyone else, the Christian mystic has always been in danger of conflict with the defenders of orthodoxy. Christian dogmatics insist firmly upon the radical difference between God and his created universe, as between God and the human soul. They insist upon God's eternal opposition to and abhorrence of evil and sin, and, since these are very present realities, upon the effective salvation of the world only at the end of time. Even then, hell will remain forever as the state of permanent imprisonment and torment for the forces of evil. Nevertheless, the doctrine of omnipotence - that nothing, not even sin, can happen without the permission of God's will - makes it possible even in this difficult framework for the Christian mystic to express the unspeakable doctrine that "sin is behovable, but all shall be well, and all shall be well, and all manner of thing shall be well."

The Christian sense of the reality of evil and of time and history as the process of overcoming evil remains with us so strongly even in the post-Christian intellectual climate of today that we have difficulty in accepting the "cosmic consciousness" as more than an inspiring hallucination. Admissible it may be as the vision of some "far-off divine event" in the future, but with our progressive view of the world it seems impossible to accept it as a vision of the way things are. Even in the description which Bucke gives of his own experience there is a significant use of the future tense:

        All at once, without warning of any kind, I found myself wrapped in a flame-colored cloud. For an instant I thought of fire, an immense conflagration somewhere close by in that great city; the next, I knew that the fire was within myself. Directly afterward there came upon me a sense of exultation, of immense joyousness accompanied or immediately followed by an intellectual illumination impossible to describe. Among other things, I did not merely come to believe, but I saw that the universe is not composed of dead matter, but is, on the contrary, a living Presence; I became conscious in myself of eternal life. It was not a conviction that I would have eternal life, but a consciousness that I possessed eternal life then; I saw that all men are immortal; that the cosmic order is such that without any peradventure all things work together for the good of each and all; that the foundation principle of the world, of all the worlds, is what we call love, and that the happiness of each and all is in the long run absolutely certain. The vision lasted a few seconds and was gone; but the memory of it and the sense of the reality of what it taught has remained during the quarter of a century which has since elapsed.

Nevertheless, the "consciousness that I possessed eternal life then” corresponds to the Buddhist realization that "all things are in Nirvana from the very beginning, and that the enlightenment or awakening is not the creation of a new state of affairs but the recognition of what always is."
(Alan Watts, This is it, 1958)

E1.7.B.2.2.f. "WE ARE TAUGHT TO SCREEN OUT ASPECTS AND RELATIONS WITHIN NATURE WHICH DO NOT ACCORD WITH THE RULES OF THE GAME OF CIVILIZED LIFE
Such experiences imply that our ordinary sense of practical reality - of the world as seen on Monday morning is a construct of socialized conditioning and repression, a system of selective inattention."

E1.7.B.2.2.f_REF1_PH THE REALIZATION OF THE WORLD'S INHERENT PERFECTION TRANSCENDS CULTURAL AND ECONOMIC BACKGROUNDS "Such experiences imply, then, that our normal perception and valuation of the world is a subjective but collective nightmare. They suggest that our ordinary sense of practical reality - of the world as seen on Monday morning is a construct of socialized conditioning and repression, a system of selective inattention whereby we are taught to screen out aspects and relations within nature which do not accord with the rules of the game of civilized life. Yet the vision almost invariably includes the realization that this very restriction of consciousness is also part of the eternal fitness of things. In the words of the Zen master Gensha:

        If you understand, things are such as they are; If you do not understand, things are such as they are - 

this "such as they are” being the utterly unproblematic and self-sufficient character of this eternal now [...]

The experience itself is in no sense a philosophy designed to justify or to desensitize oneself to the inequalities of life. Like falling in love, it has a minimal connection with any particular cultural background or economic position. It descends upon the rich and the poor, the moral and the immoral, the happy and the miserable without distinction. It carries with it the overwhelming conviction that the world is in every respect a miracle of glory, and though this might logically exclude the necessity to share the vision with others and awaken them from their nightmare the usual reaction is a sense, not of duty, but of sheer delight in communicating the experience by word or deed.

From this new perspective the crimes and follies of man's ordinary nightmare life seem neither evil nor stupid but simply pitiable. One has the extraordinarily odd sensation of seeing people in their mean or malicious pursuits looking, at the same time, like gods - as if they were supremely happy without knowing it. As Kirillov puts it in Dostoyevsky's The Possessed, 

        "Man is unhappy because he doesn't know he's happy. It's only that. That's all, that's all! If anyone finds out he'll become happy at once, that minute. It's all good. I ... discovered it all of a sudden."
"And if anyone dies of hunger," [asks Stavrogin], "and if anyone insults and outrages the little girl, is that good?"
"Yes! And if anyone blows his brains out for the baby, that's good too. And if anyone doesn't, that's good too. It's all good, all. It's good for all those who know that it's all good. If they knew that it was good for them, it would be good for them, but as long as they don't know it's good for them, it will be bad for them. That's the whole idea, the whole of it!... They're bad because they don't know they're good. When they find out, they won't outrage a little girl. They'll find out that they're good and they'll all become good, every one of them." [...]"
(Alan Watts, This is it, 1958)

E1.7.B.2.2.g. "THE PROBLEM OF COMMUNICATING SUCH AN EXPERIENCE IS THAT IT SEEMS TO HAVE SOME AFFINITY WITH RELIGION. 
With this point of departure a philosopher is faced with a strange problem of communication, especially to the degree that his philosophy seems to have some affinity with religion."

E1.7.B.2.2.g_REF1_PH PEOPLE OFTEN EXPECT PHILOSOPHERS TO ACT AS MORAL AUTHORITIES AND TO EMBODY THE IDEALS THEY DISCUSS, WHICH CAN LEAD TO UNREALISTIC EXPECTATIONS ABOUT THEIR PERSONAL BEHAVIOR AND CHARACTER. "These experiences, reinforced by others that have followed, have been the enlivening force of all my work in writing and in philosophy - since that time, though I have come to realize that how I feel, whether the actual sensation of freedom and clarity is present or not, is not the point - for, again, to feel heavy or restricted is also IT. But with this point of departure a philosopher is faced with a strange problem of communication, especially to the degree that his philosophy seems to have some affinity with religion. People appear to be under the fixed impression that one speaks or writes of these things in order to improve them or do them some good, assuming, too, that the speaker has himself been improved and is able to speak with authority. In other words, the philosopher is forced into the role of preacher, and is in turn expected to practice what he preaches. Thereupon the truth of what he says is tested by his character and his morals - whether he shows anxiety or not, whether he depends upon "material crutches” such as wine or tobacco, whether he has stomach ulcers or likes money, whether he loses his temper, or gets depressed, or falls in love when he shouldn't, or sometimes looks a bit tired and frayed at the edges. All these criteria might be valid if the philosopher were preaching freedom from being human, or if he were trying to make himself and others radically better. [...]"
(Alan Watts, This is it, 1958)

E1.7.B.2.2.h. "THE MYSTIC DOES NOT CLAIM TO BE LOGICAL. HIS SPHERE OF EXPERIENCE IS THE UNSPEAKABLE.
The work of the philosopher as artist is to reveal and celebrate the eternal and purposeless background of human life. Out of simple exuberance or wonder he wants to tell others of the point of view from which the world is unimaginably good as it is, with people just as they are. No matter how difficult it may be to express this point of view without sounding smug or appearing to be a wishful dreamer."

E1.7.B.2.2.h_REF1_PH WATTS CRITIQUES THE WESTERN, ARISTOTELIAN VIEW THAT ALL ACTIONS ARE GOAL-ORIENTED, PROPOSING INSTEAD THAT TRUE WISDOM LIES IN APPRECIATING LIFE AS IT IS, BEYOND LOGICAL ANALYSIS.
 "Human purposes are pursued within an immense circling universe which does not seem to me to have purpose, in our sense, at all. Nature is much more playful than purposeful, and the probability that it has no special goals for the future need not strike one as a defect. On the contrary, the processes of nature as we see them both in the surrounding world and in the involuntary aspects of our own organisms are much more like art than like business, politics, or religion. They are especially like the arts of music and dancing, which unfold themselves without aiming at future destinations. No one imagines that a symphony is supposed to improve in quality as it goes along, or that the whole object of playing it is to reach the finale. The point of music is discovered in every moment of playing and listening to it. It is the same, I feel, with the greater part of our lives, and if we are unduly absorbed in improving them we may forget altogether to live them. The musician whose chief concern is to make every performance better than the last may so fail to participate and delight in his own music that he will impress his audience only with the anxious rigor of his technique.

Thus it is by no means the main work of a philosopher to be classed with the moralists and reformers. There is such a thing as philosophy, the love of wisdom, in the spirit of the artist. Such philosophy will not preach or advocate practices leading to improvement. As I understand it, the work of the philosopher as artist is to reveal and celebrate the eternal and purposeless background of human life. Out of simple exuberance or wonder he wants to tell others of the point of view from which the world is unimaginably good as it is, with people just as they are. No matter how difficult it may be to express this point of view without sounding smug or appearing to be a wishful dreamer, some hint of it may be suggested if the philosopher has had the good fortune to have experienced it himself.

This may sound like a purpose, like a desire to improve, to those who insist upon seeing all human activity in terms of goal-seeking. The trouble is that our Western common sense is firmly Artistotelian, and we therefore believe that the will never acts except for some good or pleasure. But upon analysis this turns out to say no more than that we do what we do, for if we always do what pleases us - even in committing suicide - there is no means of showing what pleases us apart from what we do. In using such logic I am only throwing a stone back to the glass house from which it came, for I am well aware that expressions of mystical experience will not stand the test of logic. But, unlike the Aristotelian, the mystic does not claim to be logical. His sphere of experience is the unspeakable. Yet this need mean no more than that it is the sphere of physical nature, of all that is not simply conceptions, numbers, or words."
(Alan Watts, This is it, 1958)

E1.7.B.2.2.h_REF2_PO “INTENTION
To wonder. To wonder with no plan
for where it might lead. No strategy
for arrival. No finish line. No pot
of gold. No perfect score. No striving for.
To wonder. To wonder the way a small child
might wonder when seeing a roly poly for the first time —
oh, look at all those legs. Look at how
it curls! Look how it moves again. Feel
how light it is in the palm. Feel how
it tickles as it moves. Imagine
an awareness that new meeting a life form that old.
Can I be that new as I meet this infinite world?
To wonder not just with my mind
but with my belly. To let every neuron
spark. To notice where there is a channel
and imagine the great wing of life
is scraping it clean so the stream might flow
in new ways. To wonder beyond the edge
of the known, and in that spaciousness, play.”
(Rosemerry Wahtola Trommer)

Listen to the poem read by Maria Popova: https://youtu.be/8YVoTTBq94A

E1.7.B.2.2.i. "THE SPEECH EXPRESSING SUCH AN EXPERIENCE IS MORE LIKE AN EXCLAMATION. Or better, it is the speech of poetry rather than logic. We know only that it is. It is concretely physical, yet for this very reason ineffable (or unspeakable) and indefinable. "Cosmic consciousness" is a release from self-consciousness, that is to say from the fixed belief and feeling that one's organism is an absolute and separate thing, as distinct from a convenient unit of perception."

E1.7.B.2.2.i_REF1_PH "IF THE EXPERIENCE OF "COSMIC CONSCIOUSNESS" IS UNSPEAKABLE, it is true that in trying to utter it in words one is not "saying” anything in the sense of conveying information or making a proposition. The speech expressing such an experience is more like an exclamation. Or better, it is the speech of poetry rather than logic, though not poetry in the impoverished sense of the logical positivist, the sense of decorative and beautiful nonsense. For there is a kind of speech that may be able to convey something without actually being able to say it. Korzybski ran into this difficulty in trying to express the apparently simple point that things are not what we say they are, that, for example, the word "water" is not itself drinkable. He formulated it in his "law of nonidentity," that "whatever you say a thing is, it isn't." But from this it will follow that it isn't a thing either, for if I say that a thing is a thing, it isn't. 
What, then, are we talking about? He was trying to show that we are talking about the unspeakable world of the physical universe, the world that is other than words. Words represent it, but if we want to know it directly we must do so by immediate sensory contact. What we call things, facts, or events are after all no more than convenient units of perception, recognizable pegs for names, selected from the infinite multitude of lines and surfaces, colors and textures, spaces and densities which surround us. There is no more a fixed and final way of dividing these variations into things than of grouping the stars in constellations.

From this example, however, it is certainly clear that we can point out the unspeakable world, and even convey the idea of its existence, without being able to say exactly what it is. We do not know what it is. We know only that it is. To be able to say what it is we must be able to classify it, but obviously the "all" in which the whole multiplicity of things is delineated cannot be classified.

The sphere of "cosmic consciousness" is, I believe, the same as the unspeakable world of Korzybski and the semanticists. It is nothing "spiritual" in the usual sense of abstract or ideational. It is concretely physical, yet for this very reason ineffable (or unspeakable) and indefinable. "Cosmic consciousness" is a release from self-consciousness, that is to say from the fixed belief and feeling that one's organism is an absolute and separate thing, as distinct from a convenient unit of perception. For if it becomes clear that our use of the lines and surfaces of nature to divide the world into units is only a matter of convenience, then all that I have called myself is actually inseparable from everything. This is exactly what one experiences in these extraordinary moments. It is not that the outlines and shapes which we call things and use to delineate things disappear into some sort of luminous void. It simply becomes obvious that though they may be used as divisions they do not really divide. However much I may be impressed by the difference between a star and the dark space around it, I must not forget that I can see the two only in relation to each other, and that this relation is inseparable."
(Alan Watts, This is it, 1958)

E1.7.B.2.2.j. "THE MOST ASTONISHING FEATURE OF THIS EXPERIENCE IS, HOWEVER, THE CONVICTION THAT THIS ENTIRE UNSPEAKABLE WORLD IS "RIGHT," so right that our normal anxieties become ludicrous, that if only men could see it they would go wild with joy.
Quite apart from the difficulty of relating this sensation to the problem of evil and pain,  I can say only that the meaning of the assertion is the experience itself. Outside that state of consciousness it has no meaning, so much so that it would be difficult even to believe in it as a revelation without the actual experience."

E1.7.B.2.2.j_REF1_PH THE PROFOUND EXPERIENCE OF PERCEIVING THE WORLD AS INHERENTLY "RIGHT""The most astonishing feature of this experience is, however, the conviction that this entire unspeakable world is "right," so right that our normal anxieties become ludicrous, that if only men could see it they would go wild with joy,

        And the king be cutting capers, 
                And the priest be picking flowers.

Quite apart from the difficulty of relating this sensation to the problem of evil and pain, there is the question of the very meaning of the assertion "All shall be well, and all shall be well, and all manner of thing shall be well." I can say only that the meaning of the assertion is the experience itself. Outside that state of consciousness it has no meaning, so much so that it would be difficult even to believe in it as a revelation without the actual experience. For the experience makes it perfectly clear that the whole universe is through and through the playing of love in every shade of the word's use, from animal lust to divine charity. Somehow this includes even the holocaust of the biological world, where every creature lives by feeding on others. Our usual picture of this world is reversed so that every victim is seen as offering itself in sacrifice. [...]

Toward the vast and all-encompassing background of human life, with which the philosopher as artist is concerned, there must be total affirmation and acceptance. Otherwise there is no basis at all for caution and control with respect to details in the foreground. But it is all too easy to become so absorbed in these details that all sense of proportion is lost, and for man to make himself mad by trying to bring everything under his control. We become insane, unsound, and without foundation when we lose consciousness of and faith in the uncontrolled and ungraspable background world which is ultimately what we ourselves are. And there is a very slight distinction, if any, between complete, conscious faith and love."
(Alan Watts, This is it, 1958)

E1.7.B.2.2.k. "THE TYPE OF INTELLIGENCE THAT WE HAVE CULTIVATED BRINGS ANXIETY FOR AT LEAST THREE PRINCIPAL REASONS."

E1.7.B.2.2.k.i. "THE FIRST IS THAT INTELLIGENT THINKING WORKS BY DIVIDING THE WORLD OF EXPERIENCE INTO SEPARATE FACTS AND EVENTS, simple enough for conscious attention to focus upon them one at a time.  There is therefore no complete assurance that an important decision is right. Thus the ever frustrated effort to gain complete assurance by reviewing the data becomes the special anxiety which we call a sense of responsibility."


E1.7.B.2.2.k.ii. "THE SECOND IS THAT THE SENSE OF RESPONSIBILITY GOES HAND IN HAND WITH A HEIGHTENED SENSE OF BEING AN INDEPENDENT INDIVIDUAL. The intelligent man therefore feels independent of or cut off from the rest of nature, and in trying, ever frustratedly, to figure nature out with sufficient accuracy he acquires a feeling of fear and hostility toward everything outside his own will and its full control."

E1.7.B.2.2.k.iii. "THE THIRD IS THAT CONSCIOUS ATTENTION REVIEWS FACTS AND EVENTS IN SERIES, even though they may be happening all together at once. Knowledge of the future brings about emotional reactions to future events before they happen, and thus anxiety."

E1.7.B.2.2.k.iv. "INSTINCT, INTELLIGENCE, AND ANXIETY

The type of intelligence that we have cultivated brings anxiety for at least three principal reasons. The first is that intelligent thinking works by dividing the world of experience into separate facts and events, simple enough for conscious attention to focus upon them one at a time. But there are innumerable ways of dividing and selecting for attention the facts and events, the data, required for any prediction or decision, and thus when the moment comes for a choice there is always the rankling doubt that important data may have been overlooked. There is therefore no complete assurance that an important decision is right. Thus the ever frustrated effort to gain complete assurance by reviewing the data becomes the special anxiety which we call a sense of responsibility. The second is that the sense of responsibility goes hand in hand with a heightened sense of being an independent individual - a source of action which cannot depend upon simple instinct or spontaneity for doing the appropriate thing. The intelligent man therefore feels independent of or cut off from the rest of nature, and in trying, ever frustratedly, to figure nature out with sufficient accuracy he acquires a feeling of fear and hostility toward everything outside his own will and its full control. The third is that conscious attention reviews facts and events in series, even though they may be happening all together at once. Thinking about them in series and making predictions and decisions about the future course of the series gives the intelligent man a vivid awareness of time. It appears to him as a basic life process which he must work against. He knows that he must calculate rapidly to forestall it, though reviewing nature analytically, piece by piece, is not conducive to speed. Furthermore, knowledge of the future brings about emotional reactions to future events before they happen, and thus anxiety because, for example, one may get sick or will eventually die. And apparently this does not trouble the creatures who act by instinct."
(Alan Watts, This is it, 1958)

E1.7.B.2.2.k.v." IT LOOKS AS IF THERE IS CONFLICT, CONTRADICTION, AND THUS ANXIETY IN THE VERY NATURE OF INTELLIGENCE. As an efficient though slow and laborious means of conscious control, it builds up a body of information too complex to be grasped by its own method of reviewing events and facts one after another in series. Machines or other people must be trusted to assist: but how much must one know, how many facts must one review, before deciding to accept a collaborator?"

E1.7.B.2.2.k.v_REF1_PH THE COMPLEXITY OF MODERN KNOWLEDGE AND THE NEED FOR COLLABORATION CREATE INHERENT ANXIETY AND CONFLICT WITHIN INTELLIGENCE "Yet this appears to have intensified rather than abated our anxiety. For to the extent that we have analyzed the natural world and the human world more thoroughly, to that extent it appears to us to be more complicated. The scope of our detailed information about the world is so vast that every individual, every responsible source of action, finds it too great to master - without depending upon the collaboration of others who are, however, beyond his control. Collaboration requires faith, but faith is an instinctual attitude; speaking quite strictly, it is not intelligent to trust what you have not analyzed.

It looks, then, as if there is conflict, contradiction, and thus anxiety in the very nature of intelligence. As an efficient though slow and laborious means of conscious control, it builds up a body of information too complex to be grasped by its own method of reviewing events and facts one after another in series. Machines or other people must be trusted to assist: but how much must one know, how many facts must one review, before deciding to accept a collaborator? Intelligence, which is in some sense systematic doubt, cannot proceed very far without also having to embrace its polar opposite - instinctual faith. So long as intelligence and faith seem mutually exclusive this is an impossible contradiction, for to the degree that intelligence is systematic doubt it cannot trust itself. This is why lack of self confidence is the peculiar neurosis of civilized man, and why he elaborates ever more complex arrangements for legal safeguarding, foolproofing, and checking, double checking, and triple-checking every decisive action. All of which leads to the kind of bureaucratic stalemate with which we are so familiar. [...]"
(Alan Watts, This is it, 1958)

E1.7.B.2.2.k.v_REF1.1_PH "IT IS THROUGH IMPATIENCE AND EXASPERATION WITH SUCH SNARLS THAT DEMOCRACIES VOTE THEMSELVES INTO DICTATORSHIPS. [...] It is also in despair of being able to understand or make any productive contribution to the highly organized chaos of our politico-economic system that large numbers of people simply abandon political and social commitments. They just let society be taken over by a pattern of organization which is as self-proliferative as a weed, and whose ends and values are neither human nor instinctual but mechanical. [...]"
(Alan Watts, This is it, 1958)

E1.7.B.2.2.k.v_REF2_PH DONALD WINNICOTT'S CONCEPT OF DEMOCRACY EMPHASIZES THE IMPORTANCE OF EMOTIONAL MATURITY IN A SOCIETY, SUGGESTING THAT A TRUE DEMOCRACY REQUIRES A SUFFICIENT PROPORTION OF EMOTIONALLY MATURE INDIVIDUALS TO MAINTAIN ITS MACHINERY.
“A democracy is an achievement, at a point of time, of a limited society, i.e. of a society that has some natural boundary. Of a true democracy (as the term is used today) one can say: In this society at this time there is sufficient maturity in the emotional development of a sufficient proportion of the individuals that comprise it for there to exist an innate tendency towards the creation and re-creation and maintenance of the democratic machinery. […]
It would be important to know what proportion of mature individuals is necessary if there is to be an innate democratic tendency. In another way of expressing this, what proportion of antisocial individuals can a society contain without submergence of innate democratic tendency? […]”
(Donald Winnicott, Home Is Where We Start from, 1958)

“The antisocial, Winnicott observes, come in three main psychological varieties: the overt kind, who “show their lack of sense of society by developing an antisocial tendency”; those “reacting to inner insecurity by the alternative tendency — identification with authority,” whom he calls “hidden antisocials”; and “indeterminates who would be drawn by weakness or fear into association with [the antisocials].” Of these, he highlights the hidden antisocials as the most dangerous, for their motives are most unconscious. (In every region of life, down to our most intimate relationships, the most unsafe people are those most lacking in self-awareness, most governed by unconscious complexes.)

He considers the psychological peril of the hidden antisocials:
’This is unhealthy, immature, because it is not an identification with authority that arises out of self-discovery. It is a sense of frame without sense of picture, a sense of form without retention of spontaneity… Hidden antisocials are not “whole persons” any more than are manifest antisocials, since each needs to find and to control the conflicting force in the external world outside the self. By contrast, the healthy person, who is capable of becoming depressed, is able to find the whole conflict within the self as well as being able to see the whole conflict outside the self, in external (shared) reality. When healthy persons come together, they each contribute a whole world, because each brings a whole person. […]
Hidden antisocials provide material for a type of leadership which is sociologically immature. Moreover, this element in a society greatly strengthens the danger that derives from its frank antisocial elements, especially since ordinary people so easily let those with an urge to lead get into key positions. Once in such positions, these immature leaders immediately gather to themselves the obvious antisocials, who welcome them (the immature anti-individual leaders) as their natural masters.’ […]”
(Maria Popova’s review of Donald Winnicott’s Home Is Where We Start from, 1958 in The Marginalian)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2024/09/22/winnicott-democracy/?mc_cid=f71367ada9&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E1.7.B.2.2.l. "THE SENSATION I AM TRYING TO DESCRIBE IS THE EXPERIENCE OF THINGS AND EVENTS IN A RELATIONSHIP, AS DISTINCT FROM THE PARTIAL EXPERIENCE OF THINGS AND EVENTS IN SEPARATION. There seem to be relatively few people, even in the civilizations of Asia, for whom relationship is an actual sensation, over and above a mere idea. The anxiety which comes about through the conflict of intelligence with instinct, of man as the conscious will with nature both in and around him, does not seem to me to have any solution unless we can actually feel relationship, unless it is a matter of clear sensation that as determined beings we are free, and that as free beings we are determined."

E1.7.B.2.2.l_REF1_PH THE NONDUALISTIC WORLDVIEW "To some extent it is certainly a manifestation of this anti-intellectualism that there has recently been a marked increase of Western interest in the philosophies and religions of Asia. Unlike Christianity-for reasons which we shall explain these are ways of life which seem, above all, to offer release from conflict and anxiety. Their goal is a state of inner feeling in which oppositions have become mutually co-operative instead of mutually exclusive, in which there is no longer any conflict between the individual man and nature, or between intelligence and instinct. Their view of the world is unitary (or, to be quite technical, "nondualistic"), and in such a world there is no absolute overwhelming urgency to be right rather than wrong, or to live rather than die. It is, however, quite difficult for us to understand this point of view, for the very reason that we habitually regard opposites as mutually exclusive, like God and the Devil. Because of this, our idea of unity and our way of solving conflicts is simply to eliminate one of the two parties. In other words, we have difficulty in seeing the relativity or mutual interdependence of contraries. For this reason our revolts against the excesses of intelligence are always in danger of selling out to instinct.

But this is the habitual dualist's solution to the problem of dualism: to solve the dilemma by chopping off one of the horns. [...]

In the same way it is only apparently contradictory to describe a sensation in which it seems that whatever I do freely and intelligently is at the same time completely determined, and vice versa. It seems that absolutely everything both inside and outside me is happening by itself, yet at the same time that I myself am doing all of it, that my separate individuality is simply a function, something being done by everything which is not me, yet at the same time everything which is not me is a function of my separate individuality. Ordinarily we can see the truth of these seemingly paradoxical feelings if we take them separately, if we look at one without looking simultaneously at the other. This is why, for example, the arguments for free will and determinism are equally cogent though seemingly contradictory. The same goes for almost all the great debates of Western philosophy - the realists against the nominalists, the idealists against the materialists, and so on. We get into conflicts and debates about these problems because our language and our way of thinking are somewhat clumsy in their grasp of relationships. In other words, because it is much easier for us to see opposites as mutually exclusive than as mutually interdependent.

The sensation I am trying to describe is the experience of things and events in a relationship, as distinct from the partial experience of things and events in separation. I have sometimes said that if we could translate the modern Western theory of relativity into experience, we should have what the Chinese and the Indians call the Absolute - as when they say that everything which happens is the Tao, or that all things are of one "suchness." What they mean is that all things are in relation, and thus that - considered simply by itself - no thing, no event, has any reality. There seem to be relatively few people, even in the civilizations of Asia, for whom relationship is an actual sensation, over and above a mere idea. The anxiety which comes about through the conflict of intelligence with instinct, of man as the conscious will with nature both in and around him, does not seem to me to have any solution unless we can actually feel relationship, unless it is a matter of clear sensation that as determined beings we are free, and that as free beings we are determined. For if we can feel this way, it will not appear that the use of will and intelligence is a conflict with our natural environment and endowment."
(Alan Watts, This is it, 1958)

E1.7.B.2.2.m. "THE EXPERIENCE OF RELATIONSHIP IS CONNECTED WITH GIVING UP THE OWNERSHIP OF EVERYTHING, INCLUDING ONESELF OR ONE'S CONSCIOUSNESS.
Now if we examine the records of mystical experience, or of what I am now calling the experience of relationship, we shall find that, time and time again, it is connected with giving up the ownership of everything, including oneself or one's consciousness. [...] This does not come about through the virtue of the will, through one's own strength, which in any case is not one's own. It comes about from the insight that there is no proprietor, no inner controller."

E1.7.B.2.2.m_REF1_PH MYSTICAL EXPERIENCES OFTEN INVOLVE RELINQUISHING OWNERSHIP OF BOTH THE EXTERNAL WORLD AND ONE'S CONSCIOUSNESS, REVEALING THAT THERE IS NO INNER CONTROLLER "Why, then, do we not feel relationship? Why is the mutual interdependence between ourselves and the external world not the most obvious and dominant fact of consciousness? Why do we not see that the world we try to control, our whole inner and outer natural environment, is precisely that which gives us the power to control anything? It is because we look at things separately instead of simultaneously. When we are busy trying to control or change our circumstances, we ignore and are unconscious of the dependence of our consciousness and energy upon the outer world. When, on the other hand, we are oppressed by circumstances and feel controlled by the outer world, we forget that our very own consciousness is bringing that world into being. [...]

"What is troubling us," said Wittgenstein, "is the tendency to believe that the mind is like a little man within."

Now if we examine the records of mystical experience, or of what I am now calling the experience of relationship, we shall find that, time and time again, it is connected with "spiritual poverty” - that is to say, with giving up the ownership of everything, including oneself or one's consciousness. It is the total abandonment of proprietorship on the external world of nature and the internal world of the human organism. This does not come about through the virtue of the will, through one's own strength, which in any case is not one's own. It comes about from the insight that there is no proprietor, no inner controller. This becomes evident as soon as the consciousness which has felt itself to be the inner controller starts to examine itself, and finds out that it does not give itself the power of control. Its push is nature's pull; it is a loop in an endless knot, where a pull from the right is a push from the left.

When it thus becomes clear that I own nothing, not even what I have called myself, it is as if, to use St. Paul's words, I had nothing but possessed all things. When I can no more identify myself with that little man inside, there is nothing left to identify with - except everything! There is no longer the slightest contradiction between feeling like a leaf on a stream and throwing one's whole energy into responsible action [...].

All that I have been describing is a subjective feeling. It gives no specific direction as to what is or is not a proper use of intelligence in varying the course of nature - which must always be a matter of opinion and of trial and error. What it does give is what I feel to be a correct apprehension of the continuum, of the context, in which we are working, and this seems to me to be prior to, basic to, the problem of what exactly is to be done. Much as we discuss the latter question, is it really sensible to do so until we are more aware of the context in which action is to be taken? That context is our relationship to the whole so-called objective world of nature - and relationship as something concrete, as more than an abstract and theoretical positioning of billiard balls, is practically screened out of consciousness by our present use of intelligence. [...]"
(Alan Watts, This is it, 1958)

E1.7.B.2.2.m_REF1.1_PH ZEN TEACHES THAT UNDERSTANDING THE INTERCONNECTEDNESS OF ALL THINGS REVEALS A REALITY BEYOND CONVENTIONAL JUDGMENTS.
"As Hsiang-yen put it,

        There's no use for artificial discipline, 
        For, move as I will, I manifest the ancient Tao.

[...] It is indeed the basic intuition of Zen that there is an ultimate standpoint from which "anything goes." In the celebrated words of the master Yun-men, "Every day is a good day." Or as is said in the Hsin-hsin Ming:

        If you want to get the plain truth, 
        Be not concerned with right and wrong. 
        The conflict between right and wrong 
        Is the sickness of the mind.

But this standpoint does not exclude and is not hostile toward the distinction between right and wrong at other levels and in more limited frames of reference. The world is seen to be beyond right and wrong when it is not framed: that is to say, when we are not looking at a particular situation by itself - out of relation to the rest of the universe. Within this room there is a clear difference between up and down; out in interstellar space there is not. Within the conventional limits of a human community there are clear distinctions between good and evil. But these disappear when human affairs are seen as part and parcel of the whole realm of nature. Every framework sets up a restricted field of relationships, and restriction is law or rule. [...]"
(Alan Watts, This is it, 1958)

E1.7.B.2.3. "SILENCE CAN ONLY OCCUR WHEN OUR MIND REGISTERS ABSOLUTELY NOTHING. Then the mind, the brain, is devoid of all movement. At the heart of this silence, which is neither induced nor cultivated, nor is it the result of practice, may come that extraordinary sensation of presence, of something immeasurable and unnameable."

E1.7.B.2.3.a. "SPACE IS ABSOLUTELY NECESSARY AND WHEN THERE IS TRUE ATTENTION, THERE IS NO MORE DIRECTION OR WAY TO BE FOLLOWED, but there is space - and when this attention is there, there is no more "you" or "me", no more duality, no more observer and observed. But this is not possible if the mind is already oriented in a certain direction."

E1.7.B.2.3.a_REF1_PH “THE SILENT GAZE [...]
The nature of silence deserves to be studied in detail. There is an interval of silence between two thoughts, or between two musical notes. There is the silence that follows a sound. There is the artificial silence imposed by thought when we say, "I must be silent," believing that we are creating true silence. There is the silence of the meditator who sits motionless and forces his mind into silence. Either way, it is an artificial silence, not a real, deep silence that is neither cultivated nor premeditated. Psychologically speaking, silence can only occur when our mind registers absolutely nothing. Then the mind, the brain, is without any movement. At the heart of this silence, which is neither induced nor cultivated, and which is not the result of any practice, can arise this extraordinary feeling of presence, of something immeasurable and nameless."
(Krishnamurti, This Light Within Us, 1999)

E1.7.B.2.3.a_REF2_PH "PURE ATTENTION WITHOUT DIRECTION, WHERE THERE IS NEITHER DUALITY NOR OBSERVATION "Please pay full attention to what I have told you here, so that the very act of listening is a miracle of attention. An attention in which there are no more boundaries, no more defined limits, and therefore no more direction, no more orientation - attention and nothing else: and when this attention is there, there is no more "you" or "I", no more duality, no more observer and observed. But this is not possible if the mind is already oriented in a certain direction.
We are trained and conditioned to follow certain directions - to move from one point to another. We have adopted the idea of ultimate happiness, the belief in something that transcends thought - we cling to this belief, this concept, this theory. And we make it a goal, an ideal, a direction, a path to which we aspire. But when you set a course, there is no more space. When you concentrate, when you walk, or when you think while you are concentrating in a certain direction, there is no more space in your mind. The same is true when attachments, fears, the pursuit of pleasure, the thirst for power and social success clutter the mind: it suffocates, it lacks space. Space is absolutely necessary for us, and when there is true attention, there is no direction or path to follow, but there is space.
(Krishnamurti, The Flame of Attention, 1983)

E1.7.B.2.3.a_REF2.1_PH "V. ON BEING AWARE
The Question "WHAT SHALL WE DO ABOUT IT?" is only asked by those who do not understand the problem. If a problem can be solved at all, to understand it and to know what to do about it are the same thing. On the other hand, doing something about a problem which you do not understand is like trying to clear away darkness by thrusting it aside with your hands. When light is brought, the darkness vanishes at once. [...]

Light, here, means awareness-to be aware of life, of experience as it is at this moment, without any judgments or ideas about it. In other words, you have to see and feel what you are experiencing as it is, and not as it is named. This very simple "opening of the eyes" brings about the most extraordinary transformation of understanding and living, and shows that many of our most baffling problems are pure illusion. This may sound like an oversimplification because most people imagine themselves to be fully enough aware of the present already, but we shall see that this is far from true.¹ "

Note 1: The word "awareness" is used in the sense given to it by J. Krishnamurti, whose writings discuss this theme with extraordinary perception.
(Alan Watts, The wisdom of insecurity, 1951)

E1.7.B.2.3.a_REF3_PO "I WANTED TO WRITE A POEM THAT YOU COULD UNDERSTAND; what good would it do if I wrote you something that was not intelligible.
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                   Here it is
can you see how are the little girls who linger playing on the sidewalk in the shadow
                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                    of dusk 
when they should be home 
                                                                                                                    for dinner?

I'm like that too."
(William Carlos Williams)

E1.7.B.2.3.a_REF4_PH “SEE: AS SOON AS YOU NOTICE THE SILENCE AROUND YOU, YOU ARE NOT THINKING. You are aware, without thinking.”
(Eckhart Tolle)

E1.7.B.2.3.a_REF5_PH "YOU TALK WHEN YOU CEASE TO BE AT PEACE WITH YOUR THOUGHTS;
And when you can no longer dwell in the solitude of your heart you live in your lips, and sound is a diversion and a pastime.
And in much of your talking, thinking is half murdered.
For thought is a bird of space, that in a cage of words may indeed unfold its wings but cannot fly. [...]

There are those among you who seek the talkative through fear of being alone.
The silence of aloneness reveals to their eyes their naked selves and they would escape.
And there are those who talk, and without knowledge or forethought reveal a truth which they themselves do not understand.
And there are those who have the truth within them, but they tell it not in words.
In the bosom of such as these the spirit dwells in rhythmic silence."
(Kahlil Gibran, The Prophet, 1923)

E1.7.B.2.3.a_REF6_CUR  STILL "In Zubaran’s paintings, amongst the saints in their agonies and ecstasies, revelations and miraculous cures, there is this white handled cup, resting in a silver dish with a single flower. The cup is filled with water. The silver glints. The flower is pink.

The cup is still.

The water is still.

It is an annunciation. It says something has happened and something is about to occur. It slows the world. It pauses time. It is a paused breath".
(Edmund Arthur Lowndes de Waal, The Hare with amber eyes)

E1.7.B.2.3.a_REF7_PO “HOW HAVE I PEACE
Except by subjugating
Consciousness?

And since We’re mutual Monarch
How this be
Except by Abdication —
Me — of Me?”
(Emily Dickinson)

”That's a powerful little nugget of thought from Dickinson! Let's unpack it.

At its heart, the poem grapples with the paradox of finding inner peace. She's asking: "How can I find peace unless I quiet my own awareness, my own thoughts and feelings?"

Then comes the really interesting twist with "mutual Monarch." Think of it like this: her consciousness, that inner "Me," and her sense of self are both rulers in the kingdom of her mind. They're co-sovereigns.

So, how can she achieve that sought-after peace? Her answer is stark: it requires an abdication – a giving up of the throne – of her own self by her own self. It's as if one part of her has to step down for the other to find stillness.

Here's what makes this so insightful and vibrant:

- The Internal Struggle: It beautifully captures that internal battle we all face sometimes – the noisy thoughts, the self-awareness that can actually prevent peace.
- The Unexpected Metaphor: "Mutual Monarch" is brilliant. It personifies the different facets of the self as equal rulers, highlighting the complexity of inner conflict. It's not about an external force disrupting peace, but an internal power struggle.
- The Radical Solution: Abdication is a dramatic act, usually reserved for monarchs giving up their power. Dickinson suggests that true peace might require a similarly radical act of the self letting go of its own dominance.
- The Lingering Question: The poem doesn't offer a neat solution, but rather poses a profound question. Is peace only attainable by silencing a part of ourselves? What does that even mean for who "Me" is?”
(Gemini advanced 2.0 on 04/07/2025)

E1.7.B.2.3.a_REF8_PH EMPTINESS SEEMS TO BE A PERSPECTIVE, A SENSIBILITY, A WAY OF BEING IN THIS POIGNANT, CONTINGENT WORLD. The “great person” would be one who has cultivated such a sensibility until it has become entirely natural.

“The Shorter Discourse on Emptiness, begins with the Buddha’s attendant Ananda posing a question:

“You were once living in Sakiya, sir, among your kinsfolk in the town of Nagaraka. It was there that I heard you say from your own lips: ‘Now I mainly dwell by dwelling in emptiness.’
Did I hear that correctly?”
“Yes,” replies Gotama. “Then, as now, do I mainly dwell by dwelling in emptiness.”

The word that jumps off the page here is “dwell,” which translates the Pali viharati. The noun form is vihara, “dwelling” or “abode,” which has come to mean “monastery”—that is, a dwelling for monks. Yet to “dwell” or “abide” describes a primordial relation to this earth on which we live. Emptiness is first and foremost a condition in which we dwell, abide, and live. Another Pali discourse describes this emptiness as the “abode of a great person.” Emptiness thus seems to be a perspective, a sensibility, a way of being in this poignant, contingent world. The “great person” would be one who has cultivated such a sensibility until it has become entirely natural. Rather than being the negation of “self,” emptiness discloses the dignity of a person who has realized what it means to be fully human. Such emptiness is far from being an ultimate truth that needs to be understood through logical inference and then directly realized in a state of non conceptual meditation. It is a sensibility in which one dwells, not a privileged epistemological object that, through knowing, one gains a cognitive enlightenment. […]

The Shorter Discourse on Emptiness concludes with this insight: to dwell in emptiness means to inhabit fully the embodied space of one’s sensory experience, but in a way that is no longer determined by one’s habitual reactivity. To dwell in such emptiness does not mean that one will no longer suffer. As long as one has a body and senses, one will be “prone to the anxiety” that comes with being a conscious, feeling creature made of flesh, bones, and blood. And this would have been just as true for Gotama as it is for us today.

Here, emptiness is not a truth—let alone an ultimate truth—that is to be understood correctly as a means to dispel ignorance and thereby attain enlightenment. For Gotama, the point is not to understand emptiness but to dwell in it. To dwell in emptiness brings us firmly down to earth and back to our bodies. It is a way of enabling us to open our eyes and see ordinary things as though for the first time. As the Buddha instructed his student Bahiya, to live in such a way means that “in the seen, there will be only the seen; in the heard, only the heard; in the sensed, only the sensed; in that of which I am conscious, only that of which I am conscious.

How, in the course of Buddhist history, did the concept of emptiness evolve from a way of dwelling on earth unconditioned by reactivity  into an ultimate truth to be directly cognized in a nonconceptual state of meditation? This is one of the key questions that I will seek to answer in the rest of this book.”
(Stephen Batchelor, After Buddhism, rethinking the dharma for a secular age, 2016)

E1.7.B.2.3.a_REF8.1_PH "AS SOON AS MAN GIVES THOUGHT TO HIS HOMELESSNESS, IT IS A MISERY NO LONGER." THE PATH FORWARD IS TO "BRING DWELLING TO THE FULLNESS OF ITS NATURE" BY LEARNING TO "THINK FOR THE SAKE OF DWELLING."

“Only if we are capable of dwelling, only then can we build. Our reference to the Black Forest farm in no way means that we should or could go back to building such houses; rather, it illustrates by a dwelling that has been how it was able to build.

Dwelling, however, is the basic character of Being in keeping with which mortals exist. Perhaps this attempt to think about dwelling and building will bring out somewhat more clearly that building belongs to dwelling and how it receives its nature from dwelling. Enough will have been gained if dwelling and building have become worthy of questioning and thus have remained worthy of thought.

But that thinking itself belongs to dwelling in the same sense as building, although in a different way, may perhaps be attested to by the course of thought here attempted.

Building and thinking are, each in its own way, inescapable for dwelling. The two, however, are also insufficient for dwelling so long as each busies itself with its own affairs in separation instead of listening to one another. They are able to listen if both—building and thinking—belong to dwelling, if they remain within their limits and realize that the one as much as the other comes from the workshop of long experience and incessant practice.

We are attempting to trace in thought the nature of dwelling. The next step on this path would be the question: what is the state of dwelling in our precarious age? On all sides we hear talk about the housing shortage, and with good reason. Nor is there just talk; there is action too. We try to fill the need by providing houses, by promoting the building of houses, planning the whole architectural enterprise. However hard and bitter, however hampering and threatening the lack of houses remains, the real plight of dwelling does not lie merely in a lack of houses. The real plight of dwelling is indeed older than the world wars with their destruction, older also than the increase of the earth's population and the condition of the industrial workers. The real dwelling plight lies in this, that mortals ever search anew for the nature of dwelling, that they *must ever learn to dwell What if man's homelessness consisted in this, that man still does not even think of the reed plight of dwelling as *the* plight? Yet as soon as he gives thought to his homelessness, it is a misery no longer. Righdy considered and kept well in mind, it is the sole summons that calls mortals into their dwelling.

But how else can mortals answer this summons than by trying on their part, on their own, to bring dwelling to the fullness of its nature? This they accomplish when they build out of dwelling, and think for the sake of dwelling.”
(Martin Heidegger, Poetry, Language, Thought, 1971)

E1.7.B.2.3.a_REF8.2_PH “AWARENESS GROUNDED IN THE BREATH IS THE FOUNDATION OF ALL THE CONTEMPLATIVE TASKS TAUGHT BY GOTAMA AND HIS FOLLOWERS. At its core, meditation is an existential “dwelling” within the primary rhythms of the body that link one seamlessly to the biosphere. As a discipline, it involves constant vigilance against getting “eaten up” by the rush of thoughts in one’s head and to instead keep returning to the felt embodiment of experience that is so easily forgotten. By calling it a “noble dwelling” Gotama suggests that it is more than just a psychological skill in controlling one’s thoughts. It encourages a moral stance of dignity. Settling into the rhythm of breathing leads to a balanced and upright physical posture as well as a dignified and sensitized relation to others and the world. […]

To practice such meditative dwelling, you need to find a quiet place, such as a woodland or an empty chapel, sit down with a straight back beneath a tree or on a pew, and turn your attention to what it feels like to be breathing in and out. You should let the breath arise and be released without any conscious interference. You will learn to anchor your attention in its natural rhythm, without drifting off into trains of thought or succumbing to drowsiness.
Yet as soon as you become conscious of your breathing, the breath tends to feel forced and deliberate. You start to think of it as “mine” rather than an impersonal process. Instead of the body just breathing in and out unprompted, which it does as long as you are not attending to it, you assume control of the process. Now you have to relax your attention but without losing your heightened awareness of the breath. Pretend that you are waiting, as a disinterested observer, to catch the body in the act of inhaling and exhaling of its own accord. Then suddenly, perhaps with a shock, you will notice the breath just happening. […]

As you settle into this practice, not only does your mind gradually become more focused and calm, but you notice how the experience of breathing is not limited to the nostrils, windpipe, lungs, and diaphragm. The breath rises and falls as a tidal rhythm throughout the entire body. […]
Nor is such meditation confined to what you do in a formal seated posture. “When walking, one understands: ‘I am walking’; when standing, one understands: ‘I am standing’; when lying down, one understands: ‘I am lying down.’” The practice extends to everything you do. To associate mindfulness primarily with sitting on a cushion for a prescribed length of time is to limit its effectiveness. The aim is to integrate mindful attention into the totality of your conscious life. […]

Such meditation is also not restricted to awareness of your own body but includes awareness of others’ bodies, too. You attend to their poignant physical presence, the way they inhabit and move their bodies, the way their bodies interact with yours, the way their eyes and mouths sig-nal emotion, pleasure, pain, fear, longing, love, hate, the way their hand squeezes yours, the way you press against each other as you  embrace.”
(Stephen Batchelor, After Buddhism, rethinking the dharma for a secular age, 2016)

E1.7.B.2.3.a_REF8.3_PO “SOME ARE PICKED FOR PLEASURE, SOME FOR PAIN - YET ONE MAY DWELL IN GLORY IF ONE WOULD.
Some are picked for pleasure, some for pain;
Some for pity, others for perfection.
Some are unfortunate, and so remain,
While some seem chosen for the gods' affection.

Some lose limbs or sanity or joy,
Stranded on the road from birth to death;
Some find all the world in their employ,
Riding through rich fields, the lords of breath.

But all are souls, and therefore lost at sea,
Lost, lost, and drowning in eternal grace;
And all must suffer the same agony
And vanish into time without a trace.

And all are loved, and lavished well with love,
And live within a love serene and good.
Fate may cruel or expeditious prove,
Yet one may dwell in glory if one would.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E1.7.B.2.3.a_REF8.4_PO “THE ASTONISHING REALITY OF THINGS
IS MY DISCOVERY EVERY DAY.
Each thing is what it is,
And it’s hard to explain to someone how happy this
    makes me,
And how much this sufﬁces me.

All it takes to be complete is to exist.

I’ve written quite a few poems,
I’ll no doubt write many more,
And this is what every poem of mine says,
And all my poems are different,
Because each thing that exists is a different way of saying this.

Sometimes I start looking at a stone.
I don’t start thinking about whether it exists.
I don’t get sidetracked, calling it my sister.
I like it for being a stone,
I like it because it feels nothing,
I like it because it’s not related to me in any way.

At other times I hear the wind blow,
And I feel that it was worth being born just to hear the wind
     blow.

I don’t know what people will think when they read this, 
But I feel it must be right since I think it without any effort
Or any idea of what people who hear me will think, 
Because I think it without thoughts,
Because I say it the way my words say it.

I was once called a materialist poet,
And it surprised me, for I didn’t think
I could be called anything.
I’m not even a poet: I see.
If what I write has any value, the value isn’t mine, 
It belongs to my poems.
All this is absolutely independent of my will.”
(Fernando Pessoa, 7 November 1915 - signed as Albert Caeiro)

E1.7.B.2.3.a_REF8.5_PO “MY GAZE IS CLEAR LIKE A SUNFLOWER.
It is my custom to walk the roads
Looking right and left
And sometimes looking behind me,
And what I see at each moment
Is what I never saw before,
And I’m very good at noticing things.
I’m capable of feeling the same wonder
A newborn child would feel
If he noticed that he’d really and truly been born.
I feel at each moment that I’ve just been born
Into a completely new world...

I believe in the world as in a daisy,
Because I see it. But I don’t think about it,
Because to think is to not understand.
The world wasn’t made for us to think about it
(To think is to have eyes that aren’t well)
But to look at it and to be in agreement.

I have no philosophy, I have senses...
If I speak of Nature it’s not because I know what it is 
But because I love it, and for that very reason, 
Because those who love never know what they love 
Or why they love, or what love is.

To love is eternal innocence,
And the only innocence is not to think…”
(Fernando Pessoa, 8 March 1914 - signed as Albert Caeiro)

E1.7.B.2.3.a_REF8.6_PO “SOME ARE PICKED FOR PLEASURE, SOME FOR PAIN - YET ONE MAY DWELL IN GLORY IF ONE WOULD.
Some are picked for pleasure, some for pain;
Some for pity, others for perfection.
Some are unfortunate, and so remain,
While some seem chosen for the gods' affection.

Some lose limbs or sanity or joy,
Stranded on the road from birth to death;
Some find all the world in their employ,
Riding through rich fields, the lords of breath.

But all are souls, and therefore lost at sea,
Lost, lost, and drowning in eternal grace;
And all must suffer the same agony
And vanish into time without a trace.

And all are loved, and lavished well with love,
And live within a love serene and good.
Fate may cruel or expeditious prove,
Yet one may dwell in glory if one would.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E1.7.B.2.3.a_REF9_PO ”IF I COULD SINK MY TEETH INTO THE WHOLE EARTH
And actually taste it,
I’d be happier for a moment...
But I don’t always want to be happy.
To be unhappy now and then
Is part of being natural.
Not all days are sunny,
And when rain is scarce, we pray for it.
And so I take unhappiness with happiness
Naturally, just as I don’t marvel
That there are mountains and plains
And that there are rocks and grass...

What matters is to be natural and calm
In happiness and in unhappiness,
To feel as if feeling were seeing,
To think as if thinking were walking,
And to remember, when death comes, that each day dies, And the sunset is beautiful, and so is the night that
remains...
That’s how it is and how I want it to be...”
(Fernando Pessoa, 7 March 1914 - signed as Albert Caeiro)

E1.7.B.2.3.a_REF10_PH EMPTINESS IS A PATH. IT IS THAT OPEN AND UNFETTERED SPACE THAT FREES US TO RESPOND FROM A LIBERATING PERSPECTIVE RATHER THAN REACT FROM A FIXED POSITION.
“An Empty Space […]

One tends to think of space in terms of physical extension and location. A body “occupies” or “fills” a space. For there to be “no more space” means that nothing more can be fitted into a room or a vehicle or a document. Outer space is that virtually infinite expanse speckled with galaxies and stars separated by inconceivable distances. “Inner space” suggests a formless expanse of mind in which thoughts, mental images, memories, and fantasies rise and pass away. Space seems to be the relatively permanent place where temporal events happen.
Buddhist philosophers see space differently. They define it as the “absence of resistance.” The space in a room is understood as the absence of anything that would prevent one moving around in it. To cross from one side of the room to the other is possible because nothing gets in your way. Rather than being the place where things happen, space is the absence of what prevents things from happening. The space in the room is nothing in itself; it is just the absence of chairs or tables, glass walls or hidden tripwires that would obstruct movement within it. In encountering no such resistance, we are able to move about freely.
This dynamic concept of space also applies to a path. A footpath is a space because it offers no resistance to placing one foot in front of the other. Its space allows one to move without hindrance. Space is thus a metaphor of freedom. Instead of seeing a path as a thing on which one walks, imagine it as the space between things that allows one the freedom to walk. If the English language did not condemn us to separate the path from the act of walking, we could speak of such free movement as “pathing” (as in French one can talk of un cheminement). But we don’t say “he paths”; we say “he walks on a path,” thereby giving the impression that a path is just a place where acts occur. By contrast, in Sanskrit the noun pratipad (path) comes from the same root as the verb pratipadyate, which means “he or she paths.”
One moment we are “pathing,” only in the next to find ourselves “stuck” and “blocked.” We may not have lost our sense of purpose and direction, but feel incapable of making any headway. It is as though a barrier has been placed across our path and we can find no way to surmount it. We feel hindered, trapped, frustrated. The more we struggle to be free of the obstacle, the more we seem to bang our head against a wall. It is as though Mara deliberately puts immovable objects in our way to frustrate our aspirations. We find ourselves paralyzed by an obsession or fear, we meet with accidents and calamities, we are debilitated by diseases and the ravages of ageing.
Progress along the Buddhist path to awakening is said to be “obstructed” by the devil of compulsions. A compulsion is any mental or emotional state that, on breaking into consciousness, disturbs and captivates us. Whether inflamed by anger or inflated by pride, we feel ill at ease and hemmed in. A compulsion encloses us within its boundaries. When overwhelmed by depression, not only are we inwardly sunk in despair but whatever we see, hear, and touch is abhorrent.

Shantideva compares compulsions to “bands of thieves” who lie in wait for an opportunity to invade us and “steal the treasures” of our minds. As soon as there is a lapse in self-awareness, a compulsive thought or image is liable to erupt, triggering a torrent of longing or despair that leaves us rattled and bewildered. As creatures of Mara, compulsions act as if they were autonomous forces. We suffer anxiety or panic “attacks” and feel overwhelmed by unwelcome thoughts. We are seized by feelings and images that we cannot seem to shake off.
The depiction of Mara as an autonomous being who argues with Buddha illustrates how such drives feel as though they happen to one. I do not choose to be lustful, lethargic, conceited, or deluded; I find myself feeling that way. I do not decide in advance to think a thought; it comes to me as a ready-made phrase. I talk of “my” desires, “my” fears, and “my” doubts as though I somehow owned and controlled them. But when I try to let go of them, I find that it is not so much I who have them, but they who have me.
Compulsions obstruct the path by monopolizing consciousness. The hypnotic fascination they exert prevents us from attending to anything else. We behave like a rabbit dazzled by the headlights of a car. Not only do compulsions make us lose sight of our goal, they inwardly paralyze us. To escape their grip does not entail suppressing them but creating a space in which we are freed to let them go and they are freed to disappear. “As soon as I know the mind is distorted,” says Shantideva, “I should remain as steady as a log.” Without condoning or condemning what is breaking into consciousness, calmly note that an emotionally charged complex of phrases and images has erupted. You do not have to think of it as “me” or “mine.” Having arisen of its own accord, it will pass away of its own accord. Given the space to do so, a compulsion frees itself.
Compulsions not only disturb and enclose, they distort. The emotion of hatred is not possible without a perception of the other as hateful. Everything about the person is repellent: the slant of his mouth, the shrug of his shoulders, the tone of his voice, the cut of his suit. Although he has a wife, children, and friends, it is inconceivable that they could love such a man. A compulsive feeling about someone encloses him or her inside a frozen image.

Such compelling perceptions are rooted in the innate conviction that reality is composed of discrete, fixed units designed to attract, repel, or bore us, while the self who is attracted, repelled, or bored is a separate entity standing aloof and independent. This conviction is so embedded in human consciousness that it is hard to imagine how it could ever be completely uprooted. It is where Mara holds us most tightly in his grip. By paying careful, sustained attention to the fluid and contingent nature of things, we can begin to ease ourselves free of his mesmerizing gaze. The emptiness in which Buddha abides is the space wherein that conviction has lost its potency and thereby its ability to obstruct us.
Once revealed for what it is, the world is opened up as tentative and contingent, impossible to pin down as “this” or “that,” “me” or “mine.” A thing is what it is not because of an irreducible essence that marks it off from other things but because of the complex and singular relationships that enable it to emerge with its own unique character from the matrices of a contingent world. To emerge contingently like this is what it means for a thing or a person to be “empty.”
For the second-century-CE Indian philosopher Nagarjuna, such contingency is emptiness. And that emptiness is the middle way. Thus emptiness is a path. It is that open and unfettered space that frees us to respond from a liberating perspective rather than react from a fixed position. It is the absence of resistance in the heart of life itself that allows the boundless diversity of phenomena to pour forth in creative profusion and abundance.”
(Stephen Batchelor, Living with the Devil, 2004)

E1.7.B.2.3.b. QUESTION: IS THERE AN EXPERIENCER OR THINKER SEPARATE FROM THE EXPERIENCE?
Approach experiences, sensations, feelings, and thoughts with an open mind, free from prejudice. Observe what is happening in the present moment. Ask yourself: is there an experiencer or thinker separate from the experience? When we become aware of our thoughts, feelings, sensations, and desires, it becomes clear that there isn't an experiencer or thinker separate from the experience. The feeling that there is one is merely an illusion.

E1.7.B.2.3.b.i. "UNDERSTANDING COMES THROUGH AWARENESS. Can we, then, approach our experience - our sensations, feelings, and thoughts-quite simply, as if we had never known them before, and, without prejudice, look at what is going on?"

E1.7.B.2.3.b.i_REF1_PH AWARENESS IS ALWAYS OF THE CURRENT EXPERIENCE AND NOT OF AN INDEPENDENT SELF OBSERVING IT "Understanding comes through awareness. Can we, then, approach our experience - our sensations, feelings, and thoughts-quite simply, as if we had never known them before, and, without prejudice, look at what is going on? You may ask, "Which experiences, which sensations and feelings, shall we look at?" I will answer, "Which ones can you look at?" The answer is that you must look at the ones you have now.

That is surely rather obvious. But very obvious things are often overlooked. If a feeling is not present, you are not aware of it. There is no experience but present experience. What you know, what you are actually aware of, is just what is happening at this moment, and no more. [...]

While you are watching this present experience, are you aware of someone watching it? Can you find, in addition to experience itself, an experiencer? Can you, at the same time, read this sentence and think about yourself reading it? You will find that, to think about yourself reading it, you must for a brief second stop reading. The first experience is reading. The second experience is the thought, "I am reading." Can you find any thinker, who is thinking the thought, "I am reading?" In other words, when present experience is the thought, "I am reading," can you think about yourself thinking this thought?

Once again, you must stop thinking just, "I am reading." You pass to a third experience, which is the thought, "I am thinking that I am reading." Do not let the rapidity with which these thoughts can change deceive you into the feeling that you think them all at once. [...]

To be aware, then, is to be aware of thoughts, feelings, sensations, desires, and all other forms of experience. Never at any time are you aware of anything which is not experience, not a thought or feeling, but instead an experiencer, thinker, or feeler. If this is so, what makes us think that any such thing exists? [...]"
(Alan Watts, The wisdom of insecurity, 1951)

E1.7.B.2.3.b.i_REF2_PH “NOT TO SEE TOO SOON.—As long as we undergo some experience, we must give ourselves up to the experience and shut our eyes—in other words, not become observers of what we are undergoing. For to observe would disturb good digestion of the experience, and instead of wisdom we should gain nothing but dyspepsia.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human III, Aphorism 297, 1878)

E1.7.B.2.3.b.ii. THE NOTION OF A SEPARATE THINKER OR "I" THAT IS DISTINCT FROM EXPERIENCE IS AN ILLUSION CREATED BY MEMORY AND THE RAPIDITY OF THOUGHT CHANGES. Likewise, the idea of memory as direct knowledge of the past, rather than a present experience, is imaginary. Attempting to detach oneself from experience is impossible as there is no "I" separate from any present experience. Recognizing this leads to the realization that life is entirely momentary, there is no permanence or security, and the notion of preserving an "I" is an illusion.

E1.7.B.2.3.b.ii_REF1_PH THERE IS NO SEPARATE "I" EXPERIENCING FEELINGS OR THOUGHTS; RATHER, THE EXPERIENCE ITSELF IS THE "I." "The notion of a separate thinker, of an "I" distinct from the experience, comes from memory and from the rapidity with which thought changes. It is like whirling a burning stick to give the illusion of a continuous circle of fire. If you imagine that memory is a direct knowledge of the past rather than a present experience, you get the illusion of knowing the past and the present at the same time. This suggests that there is something in you distinct from both the past and the present experiences. You reason, "I know this present experience, and it is different from that past experience. If I can compare the two, and notice that experience has changed, I must be something constant and apart."

But, as a matter of fact, you cannot compare this present experience with a past experience. You can only compare it with a memory of the past, which is a part of the present experience. When you see clearly that memory is a form of present experience, it will be obvious that trying to separate yourself from this experience is as impossible as trying to make your teeth bite themselves. There is simply experience. There is not something or someone experiencing experience! You do not feel feelings, think thoughts, or sense sensations any more than you hear hearing, see sight, or smell smelling. “I feel fine" means that a fine feeling is present. It does not mean that there is one thing called an "I" and another separate thing called a feeling, so that when you bring them together this "I" feels the fine feeling. There are no feelings but present feelings, and whatever feeling is present is "I." No one ever found an "I" apart from some present experience, or some experience apart from an "I" - which is only to say that the two are the same thing.

As a mere philosophical argument this is a waste of time. We are not trying to have an "intellectual discussion." We are being aware of the fact that any separate "I" who thinks thoughts and experiences experience is an illusion. To understand this is to realize that life is entirely momentary, that there is neither permanence nor security, and that there is no "I" which can be protected. [...]"
(Alan Watts, The wisdom of insecurity, 1951)

E1.7.B.2.3.b.ii_REF1.1_CUR THE ROOM IN CHAM "Swiss artists Peter Fischli (*1952) and David Weiss (1946-2012) collaborated from 1979 to 2012. Their work invariably focused on the unspectacular, quotidian and seemingly banal. They began exploring the world of objects early on, fashioning hand-modelled, carved and cast sculptures from materials including clay, plaster or black rubber.

In the installation Untitled (The Room in Cham), we peer through the glazed door at a meticulously simulated clutter of everyday objects-the kind typically found in a studio or workshop. Dating from 1991, the work was first exhibited as Room without title that same year in a garage in the Cham municipality. All of its objects are carved from polyurethane, a polymer that is routinely used as insulation material or filler. The suggestion, the artists once explained, was that the objects were no longer 'slaves'; the only thing we can do is look at them. As such, Fischli/Weiss deployed crafts- manship to create mass-produced items newly, and in so doing liberated them from their original purpose- rather like 'readymades' in reverse."

E1.7.B.2.3.b.iii. THE TRANSFORMATION OF ONE'S UNDERSTANDING THAT COMES WITH FULL AWARENESS IS THE FEELING THAT THE WORLD IS AN ORGANIC UNITY, rather than a collection of separate entities. While people may intellectually grasp this concept, without awareness, they often don't genuinely feel its truth, resulting in a sense of separateness from their surroundings.

This feeling of disconnection arises from an internal division within individuals. However, recognizing the illusory nature of this division can make the universe feel less alien.

People are not just defined by what they know, but also by what they don't know. The sensation of a house across the street or a star in outer space is as much a part of "I" as an itch on the sole of the foot or an idea in the brain.

The world is an intricately intertwined process, known as the real world. Conscious or unconscious of it, everything is part of "I". The sun, air, and human society are as crucial to a person as their brain or their lungs.

E1.7.B.2.3.b.iii_REF1_PH "VII.THE TRANSFORMATION OF LIFE
[...] Something must therefore be said about the healed vision of life which comes with full awareness, for it involves a deep transformation of our view of the world. As well as words can describe it, this transformation consists in knowing and feeling that the world is an organic unity.

In the ordinary way, we "know" this as a matter of information but do not feel it to be true. Certainly most people feel separate from Everything that surrounds them. On the one hand there is myself, and on the other the rest of the universe. I am not rooted in the earth like a tree. I rattle around independently. I seem to be the center of everything, and yet cut off and alone. I can feel what is going on inside my own body, but I can only guess what is going on in others. My conscious mind must have its roots and origins in the most unfathomable depths of being, yet it feels as if it lived all by itself in this tight little skull.

Nevertheless, the physical reality is that my body exists only in relation to this universe, and in fact I am as attached to it and dependent on it as a leaf on a tree. I feel cut off only because I am split within myself, because I try to be divided from my own feelings and sensations. What I feel and sense therefore seems foreign to me. And on being aware of the unreality of this division, the universe does not seem foreign any more.

For I am what I know; what I know is I. The sensation of a house across the street or of a star in outer space is no less I than an itch on the sole of my foot or an idea in my brain. In another sense, I am also what I do not know. I am not aware of my own brain as a brain. In just the same way, I am not aware of the house across the street as a thing apart from my sensation of it. I know my brain as thoughts and feelings, and I know the house as sensations. In the same way and sense that I do not know my own brain, or the house as a thing-in-itself, I do not know the private thoughts in your brain.

But my brain, which is also I, your brain and the thoughts within it, as well as the house across the street, are all forms of an inextricably interwoven process called the real world. Conscious or unconscious of it as I may be, it is all I in the sense that the sun, the air, and human society are just as vital to me as my brain or my lungs. If, then, this brain is my brain-unaware of it as I am - the sun is my sun, the air my air, and society my society. [...]"
(Alan Watts, The wisdom of insecurity, 1951)

E1.7.B.2.3.b.iv. PEOPLE CAN THEORIZE THAT THE UNIVERSE IS A UNITY WITHOUT FEELING IT TO BE SO, LEAVING THEM FEELING ISOLATED AND LONELY. Even with theoretical knowledge of the universe's unity, these feelings of separation persist. They will only cease to feel isolated when they develop an understanding that they are not separate from the world.

E1.7.B.2.3.b.iv_REF1_PH "NOW THERE HAVE BEEN MANY THEORIES ABOUT THE UNITY OF THE UNIVERSE. But they have not delivered human beings from the isolation of egotism, from conflict, and from the fear of life, because there is a world of difference between an inference and a feeling. You can reason that the universe is a unity without feeling it to be so. You can establish the theory that your body is a movement in an unbroken process which includes all suns and stars, and yet continue to feel separate and lonely. For the feeling will not correspond to the theory until you have also discovered the unity of inner experience. Despite all theories, you will feel that you are isolated from life so long as you are divided within.

But you will cease to feel isolated when you recognize, for example, that you do not have a sensation of the sky: you are that sensation. [...]

Plucking chrysanthemums along the East fence; 
Gazing in silence at the southern hills; 
The birds flying home in pairs
Through the soft mountain air of dusk 
In these things there is a deep meaning, 
But when we are about to express it, 
We suddenly forget the words.

The meaning is not the contemplative, twilight, and, perhaps, superficially idyllic atmosphere beloved of Chinese poets. This is already expressed, and the poet does not gild the lily. He will not, like so many Western poets, turn philosopher and say that he is "one with" the flowers, the fence, the hills, and the birds. This, too, is gilding the lily, or, in his own Oriental idiom, "putting legs on a snake." For when you really understand that you are what you see and know, you do not run around the countryside thinking, "I am all this." There is simply "all this."
(Alan Watts, The wisdom of insecurity, 1951)

E1.7.B.2.3.b.iv_REF1.1_PH "THE FEELING THAT WE STAND FACE-TO-FACE WITH THE WORLD, CUT OFF AND SET APART, has the greatest influence on thought and action. Philosophers, for example, often fail to recognize that their remarks about the universe apply also to themselves and their remarks. If the universe is meaningless, so is the statement that it is so. If this world is a vicious trap, so is its accuser, and the pot is calling the kettle black.

In the strictest sense, we cannot actually think about life and reality at all, because this would have to include thinking about thinking, thinking about thinking about thinking, and so ad infinitum. One can only attempt a rational, descriptive philosophy of the universe on the assumption that one is totally separate from it. But if you and your thoughts are part of this universe, you cannot stand outside them to describe them. This is why all philosophical and theological systems must ultimately fall apart. To "know" reality you cannot stand outside it and define it; you must enter into it, be it, and feel it.

Speculative philosophy, as we know it in the West, is almost entirely a symptom of the divided mind, of man trying to stand outside himself and his experience in order to verbalize and define it. It is a vicious circle, like everything else which the divided mind attempts."
(Alan Watts, The wisdom of insecurity, 1951)

E1.7.B.2.3.c. "IF WE CONSIDER THAT IT'S NECESSARY TO REACH OR CONTACT THE UNLIMITED, THEN THERE MUST BE A SILENCE — A LACK OF OCCUPATION.
It may be that one of the brain's functions could be to be sensitive to more and more subtle levels of being; the brain could then function more as an antenna to pick up such levels, rather than as something that would be only the "initiator" of action. As long as the brain is following only its own internal goals, then it will be occupied; and that's necessary in certain contexts. But if we consider that it's also necessary to reach or contact the unlimited, then there must be a silence — a lack of occupation."

E1.7.B.2.3.c_REF1_PH "THERE SEEMS TO BE SOMETHING IN THE STRUCTURE OF THOUGHT in civilization which tends to claim that we are going to get to know everything, and control it all. But we should ask: is it in the nature of thought to be able to know everything —  since thought is abstraction, which inherently implies limitation? Or put differently: is the whole field of thought, experience, knowledge, tacit thought — is that field limited? A great deal of our culture would say that it is not limited. The assumption is that no matter what happens, by approaching it through thought, knowledge, and skill of application, we can deal with it. Now, I say that this assumption will go into implicit, tacit thought — and then it means that no matter what happens, you're going to think. That assumption is very dynamically active — it's a universal assumption, an assumption about "all." It is extremely powerful, with extremely great value, and it will "work." It will tend to take precedence over almost anything. You will find, therefore, that you are automatically thinking about everything, because the assumption is at work that thinking is not only possible, and at least potentially relevant, but that it's the only way.

I am proposing, however, that the field of thought is limited. I am also suggesting that there is the "unlimited," which contains the limited. This "unlimited" is not just in the direction of going to greater and greater distances out to the end of the universe; but much more importantly, it is also going into more and more subtlety. As we've seen, however, our attention tends to be limited by the tacit thoughts as to what has value, what's worth being attended to. If you don't attend to something, then you don't perceive it — it doesn't exist as far as you're concerned. But attention is not intrinsically restricted — it could widen out and go into any form. [...]

It may be that one of the brain's functions could be to be sensitive to more and more subtle levels of being; the brain could then function more as an antenna to pick up such levels, rather than as something that would be only the "initiator" of action. As long as the brain is following only its own internal goals, then it will be occupied; and that's necessary in certain contexts. But if we consider that it's also necessary to reach or contact the unlimited, then there must be a silence — a lack of occupation."
(David Bohm, On dialogue, 1996)

E1.7.B.2.3.c_REF2_PO "TO OWN THE ART WITHIN THE SOUL
The Soul to entertain 
With Silence as a Company 
And Festival maintain 

In an unfurnished Circumstance 
Possession is to One 
As an Estate perpetual 
Or a reduceless Mine. "
(Emily Dickinson, 1865)

E1.7.B.2.3.c_REF3_PO “LISTENING TO THE BLUE

through the open window

no a sound 
other than the birds singing

and the vibration of a conch shell 
expanding indefinitely in the heart of silence

will the man of noise ever cease 
so that his Day may begin?
(Patrice Repusseau, Ébleui [Abalaze], pages of Houat in mid-summer, 2013)


“À L'ÉCOUTE DU BLEU

par la fenêtre ouverte

nul bruit 
sinon les chants d'oiseaux

et la vibration d'une conque 
en expansion indéfinie dans le cœur du silence

l'homme du bruit cessera-t-il un jour 
pour que son Jour commence ?”
(Patrice Repusseau, Ébleui, pages de Houat en plein été, 2013)

E1.7.B.2.3.c_REF4_PO “RARE IS THE THING
THAT MAKES A POINT
Rare is the thing that makes a point
Of its integrity.
Most lie swaddled in our words,
Indifferent to ideas.
But every once in a while one
Insists on our surprise,
Penetrates our cinema,
Reveals to us its silence.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E1.7.B.2.3.d. "LISTEN CAREFULLY, AND NOTICE HOW LISTENING IS NOT JUST AN OPENING OF THE MIND BUT AN OPENING OF THE HEART, a vital concern or care for the world, the source of what we call compassion or love."

E1.7.B.2.3.d_REF1_PH "WORD-LANGUAGES ARE A TRAP… They created chaos and made us sink in incoherence… Our words don’t suit prophecies anymore. That power is left to other species: to oak trees, for example, to the tides, which through their restlessness carry a phosphorescence we’re not equipped to hear. [...]
I need to simplify my thinking: to come to the roots of the olive trees I have planted on my island, sit close to them, look at every leaf. Start early in the morning. Then close my eyes and let the morning sun touch my face. Go to the Mediterranean at the street corner, go into its water, its salt, its acid colors, its heat… stop thinking… just be, and for many hours in a row, merge with this vegetal and metallic kind of consciousness which is so overpowering. [...]
The universe makes a sound — is a sound. In the core of this sound there’s a silence, a silence that creates that sound, which is not its opposite, but its inseparable soul. And this silence can also be heard.
This silence is the preparation of things to come, but is not free standing. It’s rather the shadow of whatever is, which precedes or follows at will any element that presents itself to this world. Its favorite time is the night. [...]
Thinking is dimmed when familiar forms of reality disappear. This is not a loss. Long periods of inner silence favor clearings, they let the light in, the flooding, the blinding, the bedazzlement. We need spaces for the reshuffling of new cards, need to be nowhere. Thinking doesn’t always come from preceding thoughts: I suspect it’s always being born, even when it seems related to the past. [...]
My hands are getting cold, a musician is playing Bach on a lute on television, and it fits: Bach’s music is the needle of the cosmic balance.
This has taken me into the core of a silence that underlines the universe: underneath the mesh of sounds that never cease there’s a strange phenomena, a counter-reality, the rolling of silent matter. Silence is a flower, it opens up, dilates, extends its texture, can grow, mutate, return on its steps. It can watch other flowers grow and become what they are… Silence is the creation of space… Silence demands the nature of night, even in full day, it demands shadows."
(Etel Adnan, Shifting the Silence, 2020)

E1.7.B.2.3.d.i_REF1_CUR "DAYS OF INERTIA is a sculpture made up of several fragments of ceramic tile, randomly broken and scattered on the floor. Each tile is coated with a layer of hydrophobic varnish: a limpid water emerges, transforming the slabs into an archipelago of fractioned surfaces with shimmering reflections. The artist exploits the plasticity of water, which interests her as much for its essential link with human life as for its chemical characteristics. Supported by ordinary elements, both irregular and transitory, the slow, imperceptible evaporation that occurs invites the viewer to admit states of instability. Here, Nina Canell reveals the invisible energies that animate matter."
(Curatorship Pinault Collection)

E1.7.B.2.3.d_REF2_PH "I HAD ALSO LEARNT HOW TO KNOW WHAT I WANTED; to know that this is not a simple matter of momentary decision, but that it needs a rigorous watching and fierce discipline, if the clamouring conflict of likes is to be welded into a single desire. It had taught me that my day-to-day personal « wants »  were really the expression of deep underlying needs, though often the distorted expression because of the confusions of blind thinking. I had learnt that if I kept my thoughts still enough and looked beneath them, then I might sometimes know what was the real need, feel it like a child leaping in the womb, though so remotely that I might easily miss it when over-busy with purposes. Really, then, I had found that there was an intuitive sense of how to live. For I had been forced to the conclusion that there was more in the mind than just reason and blind thinking, if only you knew how to look for it; the unconscious part of my mind seemed to be definitely something more than a storehouse for the confusions and shames I dared not face. […]
It was only when I was actively passive, and content to wait and watch, that I really knew what I wanted."
(Marion Milner,  A Life of One’s Own, 1934)

E1.7.B.2.3.d_REF3_PH "DON’T EXPECT ANYTHING TO HAPPEN. JUST WAIT. This waiting is a deep acceptance of the moment as such. Nietzsche called it amor fati — unquestioning love of whatever has fated you to be here. You reach a point where you’re just sitting there, asking, “What is this?” — but with no interest in an answer. The longing for an answer compromises the potency of the question. Can you be satisfied to rest in this puzzlement, this perplexity, in a deeply focused and embodied way? Just waiting without any expectations?
Ask “What is this?,” then open yourself completely to what you “hear” in the silence that follows. Be open to this question in the same way as you would listen to a piece of music. Pay total attention to the polyphony of the birds and wind outside, the occasional plane that flies overhead, the patter of rain on a window. Listen carefully, and notice how listening is not just an opening of the mind but an opening of the heart, a vital concern or care for the world, the source of what we call compassion or love."
(Stephen Batchelor, The Art of Solitude, 2020)

E1.7.B.2.3.d_REF4_PO "VOICES IN MY HEAD,
Chanting, « Kisses. Bread.
Prove yourself. Fight. Shove.
Learn. Earn. Look for love »,

Drown a lesser voice,
Silent now of choice:
« Breathe in peace, and be
Still, for once, like me »."
(Vikram Seth)

Look at the royal ease of the hand of Guanyin! Can we shape our lives with such a serene pose?

E1.7.B.2.3.d_REF5_PH LYING FALLOW: A STATE OF ALERT QUIETUDE AND RECEPTIVE CONSCIOUSNESS "I suspect our ability to ask the unanswerable questions that Hannah Arendt knew are the heartbeat of civilization is intimately related to our capacity for dwelling in a particular state of being beyond the realm of our compulsive doing. Bertrand Russell called it “fruitful monotony.” Adam Phillips called it “fertile solitude.” Walt Whitman called it “loafing.” The Buddhist tradition describes it simply as presence. Whatever we may call it, amid a culture of filling the existential void with cultish productivity and an endless stream of dopamine-laced distractions, it is nothing less than a countercultural act of courage and resistance to enact such states of being — states in which our inner voice becomes audible, the voice with which we sing the song of our lives.
The Pakistani-British psychoanalyst Masud Khan (July 21, 1924–June 7, 1989) calls this mode of being “lying fallow” and unfurls its psychological tendrils in a short, brightly penetrating essay included in his 1983 collection Hidden Selves.
With an eye to the dictionary definition of fallow as “ground that is well-ploughed and harrowed, but left uncropped for a whole year or more,” Khan considers his choice of compound phrasing:
"Through the metaphor of an active verb, I wish to indicate that the mood I am trying to discuss is not one of inertia, listless vacancy or idle quietism of the soul; nor is it a flight from harassed purposiveness and pragmatic action. Lying fallow is a transitional state of experience, a mode of being that is alerted quietude and receptive wakeful lambent consciousness."
Noting the extreme cult of the individual in Western society, with its militant focus on self-help and self-improvement, Khan adds:
"In this excessive zeal to rescue and comfort the individual, we have perhaps overlooked some of the basic needs of the person to be private, unintegrated and to lie fallow.""
(Maria Popova's review of  Masud Khan's Hidden Selves, 1983 - in The Marginalian)

E1.7.B.2.3.d_REF5.1_PH "WE ARE INFINITELY COMPLEX TOTALITIES forged by a process of slow incubation and incremental becoming, and that how we govern our interiority — how we tend to those processes as they shape us — shapes every outward expression of our lives. 
"The capacity for lying fallow is a function of the process of personalization in the individual. This process of personalization achieves its sentient wholeness over a slow period of growth, development and acculturation, and its true matrix is a hierarchy of relationships… This is a long process and it is waylaid by many a traumata — personal, familial and social. But if all goes well — and it does, more often than not — what crystallizes and differentiates into the separate status of adult selfhood is a personalized individual with his own privacy, inner reality and sense of relatedness to his social environment.""
(Maria Popova's review of Masud Khan's Hidden Selves, 1983 - in The Marginalian)

E1.7.B.2.3.d_REF5.2_PH "WHAT DOES THE FALLOW MOOD ACHIEVE FOR US? The answer is a paradox: a great deal and nothing. It is a nutrient of the ego and a preparatory state. It supplies the energic substratum for most of our creative efforts, and through it unintegrated, psychic suspended animation… allows for that larval inner experience which distinguishes true psychic creativity from obsessional productiveness. [...]
[Lying fallow is, in other words, the antidote to the deadly trap of efficiency. Khan outlines the five features of the fallow state]
1. A transitional and transient mood
2. A nonconflictual, noninstinctual, and intellectually uncritical state
3. A capacity of the ego
4. An alert wakeful mood — unintegrated, receptive and labile
5. A largely nonverbal and imagistic state, kinaesthetic in expression [...]
Lying fallow is, above all, the proof that a person can be with himself unpurposefully."
(Masud Khan, Hidden Selves, 1983)

E1.7.B.2.3.d_REF5.3_PH MODERN URBAN CIVILIZATION AND TECHNOLOGY HAVE TURNED LEISURE INTO AN INDUSTRY AND A SOCIAL NECESSITY, LEADING TO A PARADOX WHERE PEOPLE CRAVE LEISURE BUT LACK THE CAPACITY TO UTILIZE IT MEANINGFULLY "It is a strange and uncanny result of urban civilization and the impact of technology on human experience that leisure has become a pursuit and an end in itself. It has gradually become an industry, a profession and an imperative social need of the individuals in modern societies. Everyone strives for more and more leisure and knows less and less what to do with it. Hence the emergence of a colossal trade in organizing people’s leisure. This need is perhaps one of the real absurdities of our existence today, and it reflects the decay of some crucial value-systems… in all types and kinds of human beings. The pursuit of frantic leisure… is perhaps one of the most dissipating qualities of the technical cultures. The individual on whom leisure has been imposed in massive doses, and who has little capacity to deal with it, then searches for distractions that will fill this vacuum… A great deal of the distress and psychic conflict that we see clinically… is the result of a warped and erroneous expectancy of human nature and existence. It is the omnipresent fallacy of our age that all life should be fun and that all time should be made available to enjoy this fun. The result is apathy, discontent and pseudo-neurosis. […]
A craving for leisure, and the concomitant yearning for distractions to fill the void of given-leisure, is the result of our failure to understand the role and function of the need to lie fallow in the human psyche and personality… We have industriously misinformed ourselves about the essentials of human nature. We have confused the necessity to relieve human poverty and misery with the demand that all life should be fun and kicks. The entertainment media of modern cultures have further exploited this leisure void for commercial gain and flooded citizens with ready-made switchable distractions, so that no awareness of the need to develop personal resources to cope with fallow states can actualize as private experience."
(Masud Khan, Hidden Selves, 1983)

E1.7.B.2.3.d_REF5.3.a_PH WE HAVE DEVELOPED A NARCISSISTIC PERSONALITY STYLE "The consequence, Khan cautions, is that we have developed a narcissistic personality style — one that makes myriad outward demands on the world with “little comprehension of the necessity of the responsibility for an inner relation to its own self.” Under this warping of the soul, we have come to our core existential problems — loneliness, misery, grief, alienation — “with no inkling of insight into the person’s primary human responsibility for a commitment to sustain and nourish himself.” Lying fallow is how we begin to nourish ourselves, how we begin to take responsibility for ourselves as transient miracles of aliveness and creative agents of destiny."
(Maria Popova's review of Masud Khan's Hidden Selves, 1983 - in The Marginalian)

E1.7.B.2.3.d_REF6_PO "MEDITATION IN SUNLIGHT

In space in time I sit
Thousands of feet above
The sea and meditate
On solitude on love

Near all is brown and poor
Houses are made of earth
Sun opens every door
The city is a hearth

Far all is blue and strange
The sky looks down on snow
And meets the mountain-range
Where time is light not shadow

Time in the heart held still
Space as the household god
And joy instead of will
Knows love as solitude

Knows solitude as love
Knows time as light not shadow
Thousands of feet above
The sea where I am now"
(May Sarton)

E1.7.B.2.3.d_REF7_PO "I THOUGHT OF HAPPINESS, HOW IT IS WOVEN 
OUT OF THE SILENCE IN THE EMPTY HOUSE EACH DAY 
And how it is not sudden and it is not given 
But is creation itself like the growth of a tree. 
No one has seen it happen, but inside the bark 
Another circle is growing in the expanding ring. 
No one has heard the root go deeper in the dark, 
But the tree is lifted by this inward work 
And its plumes shine, and its leaves are glittering.

So happiness is woven out of the peace of hours 
And strikes its roots deep in the house alone: 
The old chest in the corner, cool waxed floors, 
White curtains softly and continually blown 
As the free air moves quietly about the room; 
A shelf of books, a table, and the white-washed wall- 
These are the dear familiar gods of home, 
And here the work of faith can best be done, 
The growing tree is green and musical.

For what is happiness but growth in peace,
The timeless sense of time when furniture
Has stood a life's span in a single place,
And as the air moves, so the old dreams stir
The shining leaves of present happiness?
No one has heard thought or listened to a mind,
But where people have lived in inwardness
The air is charged with blessing and does bless;
Windows look out on mountains and the walls are kind."
(May Sarton, The work of happiness, Collected Poems, 1930-1993)

Listen to the poem read by Maria Popova on YouTube:
https://youtu.be/baVymEBKDzw?feature=shared

“While with an eye made quiet by the power of harmony, and the deep power of joy, we see into the life of things.”
(Wordsworth)

E1.7.B.2.3.d_REF8_PO "DAISIES

It is possible, I suppose, that sometime
    we will learn everything 
there is to learn: what the world is, for example, 
    and what it means. I think this as I am crossing 
from one field to another, in summer, and the
    mockingbird is mocking me, as one who either 
knows enough already or knows enough to be 
    perfectly content not knowing. Song being born 
of quest he knows this: he must turn silent 
    were he suddenly assaulted with answers. Instead

oh hear his wild, caustic, tender warbling ceaselessly
    unanswered. At my feet the white-petaled daisies display 
the small suns of their center-piece-their, if you don't 
    mind my saying so-their hearts. Of course 
I could be wrong, perhaps their hearts are pale and 
    narrow and hidden in the roots. What do I know. 
But this: it is heaven itself to take what is given, 
    to see what is plain; what the sun 
lights up willingly; for example - I think this 
    as I reach down, not to pick but merely to touch 
the suitability of the field for the daisies, and the 
    daisies for the field."
(Mary Oliver, Why I wake early, 2004)

E1.7.B.2.3.d_REF9_PH “MEDITATIVE AWARENESS IS MORE AKIN TO HEARING WELL THAN SEEING CLEARLY. When looking intently at a visual object, we tend to aim a narrow beam of attention onto something outside of ourselves. But when we listen mindfully, we open our awareness in all directions in order to receive the sounds that pour in. Just as one develops a meditative ability to discern ever subtler tones and harmonies in this polyphony, so one can refine an empathetic ability to detect ever finer nuances in the other’s plea. As the deafening chatter of self-centeredness subsides, one recovers that silence wherein one hears more sharply the cries of the world.
In the Chinese Surangama Sutra, Gotama asks his assembled disciples about the most effective way to awaken. Avalokiteshvara, the bodhisattva who personifies Buddha’s compassion, replies that using “the organ of hearing to quiet the mind for its entry into the stream of meditation” is the best method.”
(Stephen Batchelor, Living with the Devil, 2004)

E1.7.B.2.3.e. "GIVING, EMBRACING, OVERCOMING APPEARANCES BY DWELLING IN THE FULL PRESENCE OF THE OTHER, OPENING UP TO UNIVERSAL RESONANCE."

E1.7.B.2.3._REF1_PH "THIS BEAUTY, AS AN ABSOLUTE VALUE, [...] INVOLVES TAKING ON THE PAIN OF THE WORLD, the extreme demand for dignity, compassion and a sense of justice, as well as total openness to universal resonance. This demand and this openness imply, on the part of the person who seeks to deepen his capacity for receptivity and acceptance to the point of becoming the "canyon of the world," that he allows himself to be burned by an intense light. A light capable of removing the tinsel that clutters his body and mind, a necessary condition for the emergence of an authentic opening.
The approach I have just described is, in fact, none other than the path of Chan (Zen) itself. This path affirms the value of our existence here and now, and therefore the value of a lucid gaze, and at the same time it demands of the subject the constant renewal of a resolute dismantling, to the point of a state of non-seeing, even of non-being. It requires facing the objective world, not its appearance, but its root, so that the object is truly born and grows in the subject's innermost being, and so that the subject's self participates in universal becoming through a reversal. We find the three stages of the Song master Qingdeng: seeing the mountain, no longer seeing the mountain, seeing the mountain again. Or the four stages of Tang Master Linji: seeing the object, no longer seeing the object, self-forgetfulness, co-creating object and self.
This idea of co-birth - which Claudel formulated in her own way - corresponds to the experience of a Western thinker, Henri Maldiney: "Sometimes, when I wake up in the indecisive clarity of a space where all signs of recognition disappear, I perceive neither things nor images. I am not the subject of pure impressions, nor the indifferent spectator of the objects in front of me. I'm co-knowing with the world, which rises within itself and dawns on my own day, which rises only with it" (L'Avènement de I'œuvre).
This path of awakening, which has inspired the most beautiful poems of China, is a fundamental disposition to face the challenge of beauty as we understand it, and the elements that make up this path are: gift, welcome, going beyond appearance by inhabiting the full presence of the other, opening to universal resonance."
(François Cheng, Five meditations on beauty – Fourth meditation, 2006)

E1.7.B.2.3._REF2_CUR MADELEINE GROSS & GERHARD RICHTER HAVE IN COMMON they have painted series over pictures they take during their various escapades around the world. Painting over the pictures gives them depth and makes them go from one reality to a half dream, imparting them with motion and emotion.

E1.7.B.2.3.f. "DAILY MEDITATION IS NOTHING ELSE THAN A TRANSFORMATION OF THE MIND, it's a psychological revolution that makes daily existence as we live it full of compassion, love and the energy needed to transcend all forms of mediocrity, pettiness and superficiality."

E1.7.B.2.3.f.i. "MEDITATION IS NECESSARY FOR THE VERY UNDERSTANDING OF OUR DAILY EXISTENCE."

E1.7.B.2.3.f.i_REF1_PH "MOST PEOPLE LEAD SHALLOW AND MEDIOCRE LIVES. Even if they have immense knowledge, their lives are no less mediocre, full of contradictions, unhappy, and completely incoherent. All this and great poverty, and these people waste their existence trying to acquire inner wealth, cultivating various forms of virtue - and other nonsense. Not that virtue is not necessary; but virtue is order, and order can only be understood when the disorder that reigns within oneself has been fully explored. [...] Meditation in daily life is nothing less than the transformation of the mind; it is a psychological revolution that makes daily existence, as we live it - and this is not a question of theory or ideal, but of the experience of every moment of our lives - full of compassion, love and the energy necessary to transcend all forms of mediocrity, small-mindedness and superficiality. When the mind is silent - truly silent, but not in a forced way, under the constraint of a desire, a will - a movement of a completely different kind is born, not of the order of time. [...] Meditation is necessary for the very understanding of our daily existence. This means that you have to be totally attentive to what you are doing, to the way you address others, to the way you walk, to the way you think, to what is the object of your thoughts: paying attention to all this is an integral part of meditation. [...]"
(Krishnamurti, This light within us, 1999)

E1.7.B.2.3.f.ii. BEAUTY IS WHERE YOU ARE NOT. THE ESSENCE OF BEAUTY IS THE ABSENCE OF "ME". 
"When we see a marvelous mountain, crowned with snow against a blue sky and the deep valleys that lie in shadow, their great splendor and majesty absorb us completely; for a moment, we are completely silent as their majesty overwhelms us, we forget ourselves. Beauty is where you are not. The essence of beauty is the absence of " self ". The essence of meditation is to explore the renunciation of self."

E1.7.B.2.3.f.ii_REF1_PH "BEAUTY IS WHERE YOU ARE NOT." If you give a toy to a child who has been talkative, who has been mischievous, who has been playing and shouting, if you give a complicated toy to that child, he becomes totally absorbed in that toy, he becomes very calm, he finds pleasure in the mechanism of that toy. The child becomes completely concentrated, completely absorbed in that toy. All the agitation is absorbed. And we also have toys, the toys of the ideal and the beliefs that absorb us. When you worship a picture - of all the pictures on earth, none is sacred, they are all made by the human mind, by its thought - then we are absorbed, like a child is absorbed by a toy, and we become extraordinarily calm and gentle. When we see a beautiful mountain, snow-capped against a blue sky, and the deep valleys lying in shadow, we are completely absorbed by its great splendor and majesty; for a moment we are completely silent because its majesty overwhelms us, we forget ourselves. Beauty is where you are not. The essence of beauty is the absence of the 'I'. The essence of meditation is to explore the renunciation of the self. [...]"
(Krishnamurti, The flame of attention, 1983)

E1.7.B.2.3.f.iii. CAN THOUGHT EVER CEASE?
"Thought is born of the known. Knowledge is nothing other than the known, i.e. the past. Can this thinking cease? Can we free ourselves from the known? We still function on the basis of the known, and we've become formidably adept at imitating and comparing. We constantly want to become. Can thought ever cease?"

E1.7.B.2.3.f.iii_REF1_PH CAN WE FREE OURSELVES FROM THE KNOWN? "Suppose you have a certain psychological trait; for example, you never stray from a certain train of thought. It is part of your consciousness. Can the mind get out of that rut, break free from it? Of course it can. You can completely evacuate the content of your thoughts. But if we take things one by one - attachments, then wounds, then fears, and so on - it will take an infinite amount of time - and again we are prisoners of time. Is it possible to let go of everything all at once, not bit by bit - and to do it immediately - without time coming into play? If we act only step by step, we always remain involved in time. [...]

In our opinion, it is possible to grasp the entire consciousness at a glance, not in bits and pieces - to see its nature, its structure, its process, as well as all its content. Consciousness is made up of this content, and it is possible to perceive it in its entirety. And when we see it in its entirety, it dissolves! But in order to have this acuity of vision that pierces the very nature of consciousness, one must have neither motive nor memory - nothing but this instantaneous perception of what the nature of consciousness is. And the problem evaporates by the very effect of this dazzling lucidity. [...]

Thought is born of the known. Knowledge is nothing but the known, that is, the past. Can this kind of thinking cease? Can we get rid of the known? We still operate on the basis of the known, and we have become extremely good at imitating and comparing. We always want to become. Can thought cease or not? [...]"
(Krishnamurti, The flame of attention, 1983)

E1.7.B.2.3.f.iv. HARMONY BETWEEN THE KNOWN AND THE UNKNOWN
Thought is confined by memory and past experiences. Genuine meditation excludes past experiences and memory, serving as a method to predispose ourselves to the recognition of reality. This is because "the incommensurable is not a matter for consciousness."

E1.7.B.2.3.f.iv_REF1_PH "THE HARMONY BETWEEN THE KNOWN AND THE UNKNOWN [...] 
In authentic meditation, life is a total movement that is not divided into different fragments like "I" and "you". You can no longer have the experience of the ego, because there is no ego. Do you realize that the mind can only experience what it already knows? The mind is completely incapable of experiencing the immeasurable. We can give this word a specific meaning and say: "I want to experience this state of the immeasurable. You want to experience the highest consciousness and all that follows, but who lives the experiences? It is the past, so the one who lives the experience can only know it in terms of the past. He has to know it already in order to identify it. Therefore, authentic meditation excludes experience [...] 

The mind and the brain become completely silent and are thus endowed with this absolute order. Where there is order, an immense space opens up.
But no one can tell you what this space contains, because it defies description. And anyone who describes it, or tries to reach it by repeating words, among other foolish practices, is only desecrating something holy, something sacred.
Meditation is all this. It is part of your daily existence; far from being an occasional practice, it is constantly present, and order accompanies each of its gestures. And there is great beauty in this. This beauty is not that of hills and trees, nor that of paintings in museums, nor that of music - for what we are talking about is beauty itself, and therefore also love.
(Krishnamurti, This light within us, 1999)

E1.7.B.2.3.g. THE NATURAL ATTITUDE NEEDS TO BE COMPLEMENTED BY A "LIFE WORLD" OF MEANING, VALUE, AND SIGNIFICANCE.
Husserl's methodology encourages the use of the epoquê or bracketing technique. This technique helps us distance ourselves from the "natural attitude" of daily life. It allows us to understand how things are perceived as a subjective experience. Husserl recognized that science is a part of the natural attitude and should be complemented by a "life world" filled with meaning, value, and significance.

E1.7.B.2.3.g_REF1_PH PHENOMENOLOGY
Concerned with the experience of how the world presents and manifests itself to us. Since the advent of modern philosophy with Descartes, the relationship between appearance and reality has tended to generate a certain kind of skeptical anxiety because philosophers worried about how appearances might mislead us in thinking things are different form reality or mislead us in thinking there is an independent real world outside our conscience, when there isn't.
For phenomenologists we can account for what makes appearances the things they are by a careful descriptive elucidation of those phenomena: you don't need to invoke entities and objects that lie behind the appearances in order to account for their ability to convey reality to us.
Brentano developed the concept of intentionality as the mark of the mental, a defining feature of conscious states: states of consciousness have a state of "aboutness" to them, they are directed - you have a thought, a perception "of" something, an emotion "about" something. Phenomenologists are interested about what they call the intentional object of the experience of the conscious state. 
Husserl sets to distinguish strongly between the philosophical and the psychological concerns, arguing that each one gives us a different access to meaningfulness. In order to investigate intentional objects, Husserl's methodology starts by encouraging us to take a distance from normality, from what he calls the "natural attitude" that we have developed when immersed in our daily lives. With this method he calls epoquê (from the greek term used by the skeptics for "a suspension of judgement" when you have as much reasons to adopt a view or to reject it) or bracketing we abandon the presumption of existence that the natural attitude attributes to all things. Epoquê will not raise a double about the existence of these things but it will put them out of play to brings us back to the stream of experience of the subject, enabling us to understand how things are constituted as we perceive them as a subjective experience. Subjectivity routs all the structure of the objectivity of our everyday experience.
He wants to distance us from a scientific and objective conception of the world. Science belongs inside the natural attitude. Husserl recognizes the power of science to describe an objective world, however it needs to be complemented by a "life world" because in our lives as subjects we do not inhabit an objective world of science; we inhabit a world of meaning, value, significance to us. The life world is as much cultural and historical as it is informed by science. He sets the stage for a natural scientific investigation of the world - unless we were able to grasp reality as a meaningful field, we couldn't go on to study them with the productive resources of natural science.
Heidegger endorsed most of Husserl's ideas with one central point of disagreement: that of the conception of the subject Husserl claimed to have disclosed through the process of epoquê. Heidegger believed there is a transcendental subjectivity, an aspect of consciousness involved in the meaning-constitution-process and responsible for constituting the intentional field of meaningful objects. Heidegger thinks Husserl does not reflect sufficiently on the king of being of consciousness: there is a cartesian aspect to Husserl's thinking taking for granted the "I am". Heidegger criticizes Husserl in that the later addressed the question of meaning but not the question of meaning of being. For the entity that we are he uses "Dasein" (existence in German). He wants to disentangle the misunderstanding we have of ourselves he traces back to 2 sources: a) the rational animal and b) christianity which both characterize us as "Man" with attributes (thinking, speaking, etc.). The Dasein is a sort o bracketing or suspension of the anthropological conception to enable us to perceive what we are as being "what has an understanding of being". Dasein is "being in the world", he accepts from Husserl the idea of intentionality and builds on Husserl's idea of the "life world", but thinks it expands from an originally anonymous mode in a social, historical and cultural environment and only through the phenomenological practice we can build our sense of identity. Dasein starts by "being in the world" anonymously, then evolves  through "being with others" who transform my understanding via refraction, and finally we evolve to "being towards" - an intentionality that evokes the future and enables us to make things other than what they now are.
He proposes o phenomenology of anxiety, distinguishing from fear of a given object or situation from a state of all connectedness with the state of affairs in the world as gone missing. 
Sartre´s contribution is to introduce a gap in the conscious subject. In Descarte's understanding of subjectivity, consciousness and self-consciousness come together: If you are perceiving an object, you are simultaneously aware of perceiving that object. For Sartre we have 2 intentional objects: 1) the intentional object of the perception of a glass of water is the glass of water [consciousness], 2) the intentional object of the awareness of perceiving the glass of water is the perception of the glass of water [self-consciousness]. Since there are 2 different intentional objects there must be two distinct states of consciousness. There is a gap between the perceptive state of consciousness ans the reflective state of consciousness. Negativity or negation ("Le néant") becomes part of what it is to be a subject. Negativity is what makes freedom a constitutive aspect of human subjectivity, because it is the basis of freewill to realize a possibility of what we are not yet.
(In our time, Phenomenology, broadcasted on BBC4 radio on Thu 22 Jan 2015)

Listen to the podcast :
https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b04ykk4m

E1.7.B.2.3.h. WHAT IS THE SCIENCE OF ATTENTION? How does Nature's  "soft fascination" activates the brain? Does it also explain the phenomenon of awe and epiphany?

E1.7.B.2.3.h_REF1_PH EFFORTLESS ATTENTION FOSTERS CREATIVITY AND COUNTERS DEPRESSION "William James pioneered the study of attention with his then-radical (at least to the Western mind) declamation: “My experience is what I agree to attend to.”

James distinguished between two kinds of attention: “voluntary,” in which we willfully aim our focus at a particular object or activity with concerted effort, and “passive,” which approximates the Eastern notion of mindfulness — an effortless noticing of sensations and phenomena as they naturally arise within and around us, our focus drifting by its own accord from one stimulus to another as they emerge. James listed this “passivity” as one of the four qualities of mystical experiences. But it is also the most direct valve between the mystical and the mundane — the type of attention that places us in our most creative states.

In the epochs since James, scientists have termed this effortless attention “soft fascination.” It is at the root of our mightiest antidote to depression and our most generative mindsets, and it comes to us — or we to it — most readily in nature.

Whitman knew this as he was recovering from a paralytic stroke and observing how infallibly nature can “bring out from their torpid recesses, the affinities of a man or woman with the open air, the trees, fields, the changes of seasons — the sun by day and the stars of heaven by night.” He intuited what science has since measurably demonstrated — that these affinities hold the key to what is brightest and most creative in us, for they are at bottom affinities with the freest parts of ourselves.

In nature, we go unfettered from the world’s illusory urgencies that so easily hijack the everyday mind and syphon our attention away from its best creative contribution to that very world and its needs. When we surrender to “soft fascination,” we are not running from the world but ambling back to ourselves and our untrammeled multitudes, free to encounter parts of the mind we rarely access, free to acquaint different parts with one another so that entirely novel connections emerge.

Annie Murphy Paul devotes a portion of The Extended Mind: The Power of Thinking Outside the Brain (public library) — her wonderful inquiry into the art-science of thinking with the whole world — to the science of this peculiar and singularly fertile state of mind, into which communion with the non-human world deposits us"
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.7.B.2.3.h_REF1.1_PH THE BRAIN’S “DEFAULT MODE NETWORK” "Scientists theorize that the “soft fascination” evoked by natural scenes engages what’s known as the brain’s “default mode network.” When this network is activated, we enter a loose associative state in which we’re not focused on any one particular task but are receptive to unexpected connections and insights. In nature, few decisions and choices are demanded of us, granting our minds the freedom to follow our thoughts wherever they lead. At the same time, nature is pleasantly diverting, in a fashion that lifts our mood without occupying all our mental powers; such positive emotion in turn leads us to think more expansively and open-mindedly. In the space that is thus made available, currently active thoughts can mingle with the deep stores of memories, emotions, and ideas already present in the brain, generating inspired collisions."
(Annie Murphy Paul, The Extended Mind: The Power of Thinking Outside the Brain, 2021)

Watch the 8-minute video on What Your Brain Is Really Doing When Doing 'Nothing': https://youtu.be/yESSv7OgCv0?feature=shared


E1.7.B.2.3.h_REF1.2_PH “SOFT FASCINATION” has an active counterpart in another state we experience most readily in nature: awe — that ultimate instrument of unselfing. The Berkeley psychologist Dacher Keltner] calls it an emotion “in the upper reaches of pleasure and on the boundary of fear.”
One of the pleasurably fearsome things about awe is the radically new perspective it introduces. Our everyday experience does not prepare us to assimilate the gaping hugeness of the Grand Canyon or the crashing grandeur of Niagara Falls. We have no response at the ready; our usual frames of reference don’t fit, and we must work to accommodate the new information that is streaming in from the environment. [...]
The experience of awe, Keltner and other researchers have found, prompts a predictable series of psychological changes. We become less reliant on preconceived notions and stereotypes. We become more curious and open-minded. And we become more willing to revise and update our mental “schemas”: the templates we use to understand ourselves and the world. The experience of awe has been called “a reset button” for the human brain. But we can’t generate a feeling of awe, and its associated processes, all on our own; we have to venture out into the world, and find something bigger than ourselves, in order to experience this kind of internal change."
(Annie Murphy Paul, The Extended Mind: The Power of Thinking Outside the Brain, 2021)

E1.7.B.2.3.i. "“GO TO THE LIMITS OF YOUR LONGING… LET EVERYTHING HAPPEN TO YOU: BEAUTY AND TERROR,” Rilke urged in his Book of Hours, his poetic cadence assuring us to “just keep going,” for “nearby is the country they call life.” Rilke sensed that, as the great naturalist John Muir observed a generation earlier, “when we try to pick out anything by itself, we find it hitched to everything else in the universe.” In such a universe, beauty is not so easily unhitched from terror — they coexist in one of those essential batteries whose two poles, like fear and hope, charge life with meaning, with aliveness.

We see this everywhere in nature: Virginia Woolf captured it in her arresting account of a total solar eclipse, and Coleridge captured it in contemplating the interplay of terror and transcendence in a storm. And like all that is true of nature, this duality of beauty and terror is also true of the subset of nature comprising our experience — the subset we call human nature: When happiness comes at us unbidden and elemental, there is almost a terror to its coming — to the totality of it, to the way it submerges and saturates and supinates us with something vast and uncontrollable and sublime, thrusting us past the limits of our longing."
(Maria Popova)


E1.7.B.2.3.i_REF1_PO "IN THE NIGHT, WHEN THE OWL IS LESS THAN EXQUISITELY SWIFT AND PERFECT, THE SCREAM OF THE RABBIT IS TERRIBLE. But the scream of the owl, which is not of pain and hopelessness and the fear of being plucked out of the world, but of the sheer rollicking glory of the death-bringer, is more terrible still. When I hear it resounding through the woods, and then the five black pellets of its song dropping like stones into the air, I know I am standing at the edge of the mystery, in which terror is naturally and abundantly part of life, part of even the most becalmed, intelligent, sunny life — as, for example, my own. The world where the owl is endlessly hungry and endlessly on the hunt is the world in which I live too. There is only one world. [...]

Sometimes, while I have stood listening to the owl’s song drifting through the trees, when it is ten degrees above nothing and life for any small creature is hard enough without that, I have found myself thinking of summer fields. Fields full of flowers — poppies or lupines. Or, here, fields where the roses hook into the dunes, and their increase is manyfold. All summer they are red and pink and white tents of softness and nectar, which wafts and hangs everywhere — a sweetness so palpable and excessive that, before it, I’m struck, I’m taken, I’m conquered; I’m washed into it, as though it was a river, full of dreaming and idleness — I drop to the sand, I can’t move; I am restless no more; I am replete, supine, finished, filled to the last edges with an immobilizing happiness. And is this not also terrible? Is this not also frightening?

Are the roses not also — even as the owl is — excessive? Each flower is small and lovely, but in their sheer and silent abundance the roses become an immutable force, as though the work of the wild roses was to make sure that all of us, who come wandering over the sand, may be, for a while, struck to the heart and saturated with a simple joy. Let the mind be teased by such stretches of the imagination, by such balance. Now I am cringing at the very sound of the owl’s dark wings opening over my head — not long ago I could do nothing but lounge on the sand and stare into the cities of the roses."
(Mary Oliver, Owls and Other Fantasies: Poems and Essays)

E1.7.B.2.4. THE POWER OF ATTENTION CAN LEAD TO UNIFICATION WITH REALITY, EXPANDING WHAT CAN BE KNOWN, FELT AND ACCOMPLISHED. However, this requires letting go of intentional effort and merging with the object of attention or the attention itself.
“EVERYDAY SUNS ARE
RARELY WONDERS
Everyday suns are rarely wonders.
In sight the secret is humility.
Gifts tend to lose connection with their sources;
Having lived can generate divorces
That isolate our selves from what we see.
Yet nothing is more native than what sunders
The action from the act. Or plunders
What is for what is not. Or forces
Our eyes to solve what remains a mystery.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E1.7.B.2.4.a. "THE EXPERIENCE OF CONCENTRATION MAY BE QUIETLY PHYSICAL — A SIMPLE, UNEXPECTED SENSE OF DEEP ACCORD BETWEEN YOURSELF AND EVERYTHING. Within action, it is felt as a grace state: time slows and extends, and a person’s every movement and decision seem to partake of perfection. Concentration can also be placed into things — it radiates undimmed from Vermeer’s paintings — and into musical notes, words, ideas. In the wholeheartedness of concentration, world and self begin to cohere. With that state comes an enlarging: of what may be known, what may be felt, what may be done.
True concentration appears — paradoxically — at the moment willed effort drops away… At such moments, there may be some strong emotion present — a feeling of joy, or even grief — but as often, in deep concentration, the self disappears. We seem to fall utterly into the object of our attention, or else vanish into attentiveness itself."

E1.7.B.2.4.a_REF1_PO CONCENTRATION CREATES A DEEP SENSE OF CONNECTION BETWEEN ONESELF AND THE WORLD, OFTEN EXPERIENCED AS A STATE OF GRACE WHERE TIME SLOWS AND ACTIONS FEEL PERFECT. "The experience of concentration may be quietly physical — a simple, unexpected sense of deep accord between yourself and everything. It may come as the harvest of long looking and leave us, as it did Wordsworth, a mind thought “too deep for tears.” Within action, it is felt as a grace state: time slows and extends, and a person’s every movement and decision seem to partake of perfection. Concentration can also be placed into things — it radiates undimmed from Vermeer’s paintings, from the small marble figure of a lyre-player from ancient Greece, from a Chinese three-footed bowl — and into musical notes, words, ideas. In the wholeheartedness of concentration, world and self begin to cohere. With that state comes an enlarging: of what may be known, what may be felt, what may be done. [...]
Immersion in art itself can be the place of entry… Yet however it is brought into being, true concentration appears — paradoxically — at the moment willed effort drops away… At such moments, there may be some strong emotion present — a feeling of joy, or even grief — but as often, in deep concentration, the self disappears. We seem to fall utterly into the object of our attention, or else vanish into attentiveness itself.
This may explain why the creative is so often described as impersonal and beyond self, as if inspiration were literally what its etymology implies, something “breathed in.” We refer, however metaphorically, to the Muse, and speak of profound artistic discovery and revelation."
(Jane Hirshfield, Poetry and the Mind of Concentration, Entering the Mind of Poetry, 1997)

E1.7.B.2.4.a_REF1.1_PO “LISTEN…

With faint dry sound,

Like steps of passing ghosts,

The leaves, frost-crisp'd, break from the trees

And fall.”

(Adelaide Crapsey)

E1.7.B.2.4.a_REF2_PH "MOST OF US CAN OBSERVE AT LEAST MOMENTS OF OUR OWN SPONTANEITY which are at the same time moments of genuine happiness. Whether it be the fresh and spontaneous perception of a landscape, or the dawning of some truth as the result of our thinking, or a sensuous pleasure that is not stereotyped, or the welling up of love for another person — in these moments we all know what a spontaneous act is and may have some vision of what human life could be if these experiences were not such rare and uncultivated occurrences. [...]
Spontaneous activity is the one way in which man can overcome the terror of aloneness without sacrificing the integrity of his self; for in the spontaneous realization of the self man unites himself anew with the world — with man, nature, and himself."
(Erich Fromm, Escape from Freedom)

E1.7.B.2.4.a_REF3_LIT THE DESIRE TO BE EVERYWHERE IN NATURE SIMULTANEOUSLY "The image of spring is formed by superimposing many memories. [...]
Yes, it is from all these juxtaposed memories that I construct an abstract image of spring. And this is also what makes for my worry in the first fine days: I would like to be able to contemplate rebirth everywhere at the same time, which means that I am not perfectly comfortable anywhere, be it in the most beautiful garden in the world, or even in my little garden in Cuverville where I personally know each flower.
As soon as the air is warm enough and the sky is blue, I want to evaporate into the whole of nature, carried away by the passing breeze, floating here and there, belonging to nowhere. Oh! to be condemend to always be somewhere! to always be someone ...
Spring is a becoming; it is the season of preparation, of hope."
(André Gide, Spring, The garland of years, 1942)

E1.7.B.2.4.a_REF4_PH ANCIENT CHINESE RITUALS WERE DESIGNED TO DISRUPT AUTOMATIC THINKING AND FOSTER GENUINE ENGAGEMENT WITH OTHERS "Ritual plays a large part in the work of some of the ancient Chinese philosophers. Here Michael Puett, co-author of The Path, explains the significance of some  apparently trivial rituals. The rituals that structure the teachings of Confucius are not socializing practices. Their purpose is to make us pause and jolt us from our automatic and complacent way of thinking into engaging truly with others. Example: straitening the mat for the other to seat on it. Rituals also allows you to develop better dispositions. Rituals are not practices that will tell you what to do, but to enable you to sense the complexity of situations. For example the role playing ritual of the father playing the son's role and vice versa as a decentering technic.
In our modern society that preaches we look into ourselves, understand ourselves and be authentic to who we are - rituals seem at the antipode of mainstream popular philosophy. But if we are messy creatures as Confucius advocates, the last thing we would want is embracing ourselves because we would fall back in the automatic patterns that we have become blind to: Submit to rituals to conquer the self. Performing the rituals you should develop a sensibility of humaneness, realizing how small things we are doing affect others."
(Michael Puett on Ritual in Chinese Philosophy)

Listen to the podcast :
https://philosophybites.com/2017/06/michael-puett-on-ritual-in-chinese-philosophy.html

E1.7.B.2.4.a_REF5_PH "NOTHING, NOT ONE THING, HURTS US MORE — OR CAUSES US TO HURT OTHERS MORE — THAN OUR CERTAINTIES. The stories we tell ourselves about the world and the foregone conclusions with which we cork the fount of possibility are the supreme downfall of our consciousness. They are also the inevitable cost of survival, of navigating a vast and complex reality most of which remains forever beyond our control and comprehension. And yet in our effort to parse the world, we sever ourselves from the full range of its beauty, tensing against the tenderness of life."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.7.B.2.4.a_REF5.1_PH "THE INSTANT WE WAKE THE STORY BEGINS: “Here I am. In my bed. Hard worker, good dad, decent husband, a guy who always tries his best. Jeez, my back hurts. Probably from the stupid gym.”

And just like that, with our thoughts, the world gets made.

Or, anyway, a world gets made.

This world-making via thinking is natural, sane, Darwinian: we do it to survive. Is there harm in it? Well, yes, because we think in the same way that we hear or see: within a narrow, survival-enhancing range. We don’t see or hear all that might be seen or heard but only that which is helpful for us to see and hear. Our thoughts are similarly restricted and have a similarly narrow purpose: to help the thinker thrive.

All of this limited thinking has an unfortunate by-product: ego. Who is trying to survive? “I” am. The mind takes a vast unitary wholeness (the universe), selects one tiny segment of it (me), and starts narrating from that point of view. Just like that, that entity (George!) becomes real, and he is (surprise, surprise) located at the exact center of the universe, and everything is happening in his movie, so to speak; it is all, somehow, both for and about him. In this way, moral judgment arises: what is good for George is… good. What is bad for him is bad. (The bear is neither good nor bad until, looking hungry, it starts walking toward George.)

So, in every instant, a delusional gulf gets created between things as we think they are and things as they actually are. Off we go, mistaking the world we’ve made with our thoughts for the real world. Evil and dysfunction (or at least obnoxiousness) occur in proportion to how solidly a person believes that his projections are correct and energetically acts upon them."
(George Saunders, A Swim in a Pond in the Rain: In Which Four Russians Give a Master Class on Writing, Reading, and Life, 2021)

E1.7.B.2.4.a_REF5.1.a_PH "OVER TIME, OUR STORIES HARDEN INTO CERTAINTIES that collide with each other every time we engage with another person, who is another story"
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.7.B.2.4.a_REF5.1.b_PH "I THINK, THEREFORE I AM WRONG, AFTER WHICH I SPEAK, and my wrongness falls on someone also thinking wrongly, and then there are two of us thinking wrongly, and, being human, we can’t bear to think without taking action, which, having been taken, makes things worse. […]

The entire drama of life on earth is: Skaz-Headed Person #1 [embodiment of the unreliable first-person narration known as skaz that permeates classic Russian literature] steps outside, where he encounters Skaz-Headed Person #2. Both, seeing themselves as the center of the universe, thinking highly of themselves, immediately slightly misunderstand everything. [...]

In a world full of people who seem to know everything, passionately, based on little (often slanted) information, where certainty is often mistaken for power, what a relief it is to be in the company of someone confident enough to stay unsure (that is, perpetually curious)."
(George Saunders, A Swim in a Pond in the Rain: In Which Four Russians Give a Master Class on Writing, Reading, and Life, 2021)

E1.7.B.2.4.a_REF5.1.c_PH "IN A WORLD FULL OF PEOPLE WHO SEEM TO KNOW EVERYTHING, passionately, based on little (often slanted) information, where certainty is often mistaken for power, what a relief it is to be in the company of someone confident enough to stay unsure (that is, perpetually curious). [...]

It’s hard to be alive. The anxiety of living makes us want to judge, be sure, have a stance, definitively decide. Having a fixed, rigid system of belief can be a great relief. […]

As long as we don’t decide, we allow further information to keep coming in. Reading a story like “Gooseberries” [from Chekhov] might be seen as a way of practicing this. It reminds us that any question in the form “Is X right or wrong?” could benefit from another round of clarifying questions. Question: “Is X good or bad?” Story: “For whom? On what day, under what conditions? Might there be some unintended consequences associated with X? Some good hidden in the bad that is X? Some bad hidden in the good that is X? Tell me more.”"
(George Saunders, A Swim in a Pond in the Rain: In Which Four Russians Give a Master Class on Writing, Reading, and Life, 2021)

E1.7.B.2.4.a_REF5.1.d_PH "OPENNESS TO MORE — TO TRUTH BEYOND STORY, TO BEAUTY BEYOND CERTAINTY — IS PRECISELY WHAT TEACHES US HOW TO LOVE THE WORLD MORE."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.7.B.2.4.a_REF5.1.e_PH "THIS FEELING OF FONDNESS FOR THE WORLD takes the form, in his [Chekhov's] stories, of a constant state of reexamination. (“Am I sure? Is it really so? Is my preexisting opinion causing me to omit anything?”) He has a gift for reconsideration. Reconsideration is hard; it takes courage. We have to deny ourselves the comfort of always being the same person, one who arrived at an answer some time ago and has never had any reason to doubt it. In other words, we have to stay open (easy to say, in that confident, New Age way, but so hard to actually do, in the face of actual, grinding, terrifying life). As we watch Chekhov continually, ritually doubt all conclusions, we’re comforted. It’s all right to reconsider. It’s noble — holy, even. It can be done. We can do it. We know this because of the example he leaves in his stories, which are, we might say, splendid, brief reconsideration machines."
(George Saunders, A Swim in a Pond in the Rain: In Which Four Russians Give a Master Class on Writing, Reading, and Life, 2021)

E1.7.B.2.4.a_REF6_PO "[...] LIFE IS THE SUM OF TRIFLING MOTIONS. The silver
twilight of sedge’s sheathed blades, the quiver
of many a shepherd’s purse, the ever-
shifting tableau of horse sorrel, gentle
alfafa’s ditherings—these engender
our grasp of the rules of a stage whose center
cannot be found. [...]
Give ear to the swishing murmurs
Of cock-and-hen brushes! To what a daisy’s
odd-or-even whispers! To how a drowsy
coltsfoot dubs these findings crazy.
To how a soft, wild-mint Leda, flattened
by a powerful swanweed, goes raving mad and
mumbles. Small grassplots of summer, flooded

with sunlight! Their homeless moths! Their nettle
pyramids! Their heat! Their total
stupor! Their fern pagoda’s gentle
sway, or their ruined column
of anise, or a bent minaret of wild sage’s solemn
bow—that’s a copy, in grass and pollen,
of Babylon! [...]
The surplus
of the green and the blue—of that threadbare surface
of existence. And a kind of solstice
of the luminary, stopped and splatter-
ing, like Attila before the battered
shield, fills one’s orbs. The aforementioned outer

blue fiaxlike stuff after all can’t spin it
indefinitely. Light simply learns its limit
by means of a body because, within it,
light gets refracted, as at the finish
of too long a road whose beginning few wish
to consider. The finish, though, tends to furnish [...]
Three cheers for all things you notice.
For both the closest and the remotest
things. For everything that still matters,
for your shirt’s drying tatters, for sunflowers’ bent lanterns,
for the faint, distant waltz tune—“Manchurian Mountains.” [...]"
(Joseph Brodsky, Collected poems in English, Eclogue V: Summer, 1981)

E1.7.B.2.4.a_REF7_PH THE WAY WE ATTEND TO THE WORLD AFFECTS OUR EXPERIENCE AND HAS MORAL CONSEQUENCES, AS ATTENTION CAN ALTER AND CREATE REALITY" The world we know cannot be wholly mind-independent, and it cannot be wholly mind-dependent… What is required is an attentive response to something real and other than ourselves, of which we have only inklings at first, but which comes more and more into being through our response to it — if we are truly responsive to it. We nurture it into being; or not. In this it has something of the structure of love. [...]

The whole illuminates the parts as much as the parts can illuminate the whole… The world we experience — which is the only one we can know — is affected by the kind of attention we pay to it. [...]

The choice we make of how we dispose our consciousness is the ultimate creative act: it renders the world what it is. It is, therefore, a moral act: it has consequences. [...]

Attention changes the world. How you attend to it changes what it is you find there. What you find then governs the kind of attention you will think it appropriate to pay in the future. And so it is that the world you recognise (which will not be exactly the same as my world) is “firmed up” — and brought into being. […]

Attention is not just another “cognitive function”: it is… the disposition adopted by one’s consciousness towards the world. Absent, present, detached, engaged, alienated, empathic, broad or narrow, sustained or piecemeal, it therefore has the power to alter whatever it meets. Since our consciousness plays some part in what comes into being, the play of attention can both create and destroy, but it never leaves its object unchanged. So how you attend to something — or don’t attend to it — matters a very great deal."
(Iain McGilchrist, The Matter With Things, 2021)

E1.7.B.2.4.a_REF8_PH IT IS EXTREMELY DIFFICULT TO STAY ALERT AND ATTENTIVE "As I’m sure you guys know by now, it is extremely difficult to stay alert and attentive, instead of getting hypnotised by the constant monologue inside your own head (may be happening right now). Twenty years after my own graduation, I have come gradually to understand that the liberal arts cliché about teaching you how to think is actually shorthand for a much deeper, more serious idea: learning how to think really means learning how to exercise some control over how and what you think. It means being conscious and aware enough to choose what you pay attention to and to choose how you construct meaning from experience. Because if you cannot exercise this kind of choice in adult life, you will be totally hosed. Think of the old cliché about “the mind being an excellent servant but a terrible master.""
(David Foster Wallace, This is water)

E1.7.B.2.4.a_REF8.1_PH DAVID FOSTER WALLACE, THIS IS WATER PART 1

Listen to the podcast: https://soundcloud.com/brainpicker/david-foster-wallace-this-is-water-1?utm_source=clipboard&utm_campaign=wtshare&utm_medium=widget&utm_content=https%253A%252F%252Fsoundcloud.com%252Fbrainpicker%252Fdavid-foster-wallace-this-is-water-1

E1.7.B.2.4.a_REF8.2_PH DAVID FOSTER WALLACE, THIS IS WATER PART 2

Listen to the podcast: https://soundcloud.com/brainpicker/david-foster-wallace-this-is-water-2?utm_source=clipboard&utm_campaign=wtshare&utm_medium=widget&utm_content=https%253A%252F%252Fsoundcloud.com%252Fbrainpicker%252Fdavid-foster-wallace-this-is-water-2

E1.7.B.2.4.a_REF8.3_PH DAVID FOSTER WALLACE, THIS IS WATER - transcript

Read the full transcript:https://fs.blog/david-foster-wallace-this-is-water/

E1.7.B.2.4.a_REF9_PH "TRUE SOLITUDE IS A WAY OF BEING THAT NEEDS TO BE CULTIVATED. You cannot switch it on or off at will. Solitude is an art. Mental training is needed to refine and stabilize it. When you practice solitude, you dedicate yourself to the care of the soul. [...]

Don’t expect anything to happen. Just wait. This waiting is a deep acceptance of the moment as such. Nietzsche called it amor fati — unquestioning love of whatever has fated you to be here. You reach a point where you’re just sitting there, asking, “What is this?” — but with no interest in an answer. The longing for an answer compromises the potency of the question. Can you be satisfied to rest in this puzzlement, this perplexity, in a deeply focused and embodied way? Just waiting without any expectations?

Ask “What is this?,” then open yourself completely to what you “hear” in the silence that follows. Be open to this question in the same way as you would listen to a piece of music. Pay total attention to the polyphony of the birds and wind outside, the occasional plane that flies overhead, the patter of rain on a window. Listen carefully, and notice how listening is not just an opening of the mind but an opening of the heart, a vital concern or care for the world, the source of what we call compassion or love."
(Stephen Batchelor, The Art of Solitude, 2020)

E1.7.B.2.4.a_REF9.1_PH CREATING ART REQUIRES SOLITUDE AND THE ABILITY TO SILENCE INNER CRITICS AND EXTERNAL INFLUENCES. "To be alone at your desk or in your studio is not enough. You have to free yourself from the phantoms and inner critics who pursue you wherever you go. “When you start working,” said the composer John Cage, “everybody is in your studio — the past, your friends, enemies, the art world, and above all, your own ideas — all are there. But as you continue painting, they start leaving, one by one, and you are left completely alone. Then, if you are lucky, even you leave.” […]

Having shut the door, you find yourself alone before a canvas, a sheet of paper, a lump of clay, a computer screen. Other tools and materials lie around, close at hand, waiting to be used. You resume your silent conversation with the work. This is a two-way process: you create the work and then you respond to it. The work can inspire, surprise, and shock you… The solitary act of making art involves intense, wordless dialogue."
(Stephen Batchelor, The Art of Solitude, 2020)

E1.7.B.2.4.a_REF9.2_PH "TO INTEGRATE CONTEMPLATIVE PRACTICE INTO LIFE requires more than becoming proficient in techniques of meditation. It entails the cultivation and refinement of a sensibility about the totality of your existence—from intimate moments of personal anguish to the endless suffering of the world. This sensibility encompasses a range of skills: mindfulness, curiosity, understanding, collectedness, compassion, equanimity, care. Each of these can be cultivated and refined in solitude but has little value if it cannot survive the fraught encounter with others. Never be complacent about contemplative practice; it is always a work in progress. The world is here to surprise us. My most lasting insights have occurred off the cushion, not on it."
(Stephen Batchelor, The Art of Solitude, 2020)

E1.7.B.2.4.a_REF9.3_PH "BY WITHDRAWING FROM THE WORLD INTO SOLITUDE, you separate yourself from others. By isolating yourself, you can see more clearly what distinguishes you from other people. Standing out in this way serves to affirm your existence (ex-[out] + sistere [stand]). Liberated from social pressures and constraints, solitude can help you understand better what kind of person you are and what your life is for. In this way you become independent of others. You find your own path, your own voice. […]

Here lies the paradox of solitude. Look long and hard enough at yourself in isolation and suddenly you will see the rest of humanity staring back. Sustained aloneness brings you to a tipping point where the pendulum of life returns you to others."
(Stephen Batchelor, The Art of Solitude, 2020)

E1.7.B.2.4.a_REF10_PH TRUE CONTENTMENT AND STRENGTH COME FROM LIVING IN THE PRESENT MOMENT "These roses under my window make no reference to former roses or to better ones; they are for what they are; they exist with God today. There is no time to them. There is simply the rose; it is perfect in every moment of its existence. Before a leaf-bud has burst, its whole life acts; in the full-blown flower there is no more; in the leafless root there is no less. Its nature is satisfied and it satisfies nature in all moments alike. But man postpones or remembers; he does not live in the present, but with reverted eye laments the past, or, heedless of the riches that surround him, stands on tiptoe to foresee the future. He cannot be happy and strong until he too lives with nature in the present, above time."
(Ralph Waldo emerson, Self-reliance, 1841)

E1.7.B.2.4.a_REF11_PO COMME CE BEAU POÈME SONNE ÉTRANGE pour celui qui, au sein de la nature, entre en communion avec le monde! Ce promeneur aux "mains nues" étaient sorti pour cueillir et non pas pour contempler avec amour et avec joie.

E1.7.B.2.4.a_REF11.1_PO  “BARE-HANDED

The blue of the sky cannot hold the gaze; the whiteness of the chalk, the fullness of the foliage, the depth of the grass absorb the walker like blotting paper absorbs ink. His step alone strengthens him, brings him together, reminds him that he exists outside the landscape, a tightrope walker suspended on the thread of his walk, tempted to merge with the space that threatens and enchants him.
*
Around the walker, the human quest projects like a void. He advances and reality becomes scarce. He reaches out and pushes the world away. What he thought was abundant dissipates, the thickness is lost. He is at the center of a circle where chaos takes shape and time stands still. There, beings have a name that limits them. 
*
His walk becomes a wandering. An impossible space like this whiteness of snow that exhausts words and sight, submerges him. This beauty suddenly excludes him from a day he thought was his, from a peace conquered by words. On the way, his voice is choked by dizziness. His poem, sterile, petrified. The moment robs him. 

His stick prolongs his disappointments. Searching through the undergrowth, it still indicates a disappointed desire, and all the phrases he searched for, without finding them. 
He is frustrated by what the light promised him, fascinated by the fire of what he has not grasped. He returns in the evening with heavy legs, and even heavier heart, from words that have not been used.
*
Unless he becomes a walker and lengthens his stride, all that remains to be said of this exile is: life felt and never embraced. A landscape of distances, this regret that the walker contemplates when his gaze embraces too much, far beyond his path.”
(Michel Baglin, Of flesh and words, 2012)


"LES MAINS NUES

Le bleu du ciel ne sait pas arrêter le regard ; la blancheur de la craie, la plénitude des feuillages, la profondeur de l’herbe absorbent le promeneur comme le buvard l’encre. Son pas seul le fortifie, le rassemble, lui répète qu’il existe hors du paysage, équilibriste suspendu au fil de la marche, tenté de se fondre dans l’espace qui le menace et l’envoûte.
*
Autour du promeneur, la quête humaine projette comme un vide. Il avance et le réel se raréfie. Il tend la main et repousse le monde. Ce qu’il croyait profus se disperse, l’épaisseur se dérobe. Il est au centre d’un cercle où le chaos prend formes et où le temps se fige. Les êtres y ont un nom qui les limite. 
*
Sa promenade devient errance. Un impossible espace pareil à cette blancheur de neige qui épuise paroles et regard le submerge. Cette beauté l’exclut soudain d’une journée qu’il croyait à lui, d’une paix conquise par des mots. Chemin faisant sa voix s’étrangle à force de vertige. Son poème, stérile, se pétrifie. L’instant le dévalise. 

Sa canne prolonge ses déconvenues. Fouillant les fourrés, elle indique encore une convoitise déçue, et toutes les phrases qu’il a cherchées, sans les trouver. 
Il est frustré de ce que la lumière lui a promis, fasciné par le feu de ce qu’il n’a pas saisi. Il rentre au soir les jambes lourdes, et plus encore le cœur, des mots qui n’ont pas servi.
*
À moins qu’il ne devienne marcheur et qu’il n’allonge le pas, seul reste à dire cet exil : la vie pressentie et jamais étreinte. Un paysage de lointains, ce regret que le promeneur contemple quand son regard trop embrasse, bien au-delà de son chemin."
(Michel Baglin, De chair et de mots, 2012)

E1.7.B.2.4.b. "THERE ARE NO THINGS ON THIS EARTH TO WHICH ONE CAN LOOK DOWN WITH A CONDESCENDING EYE."

E1.7.B.2.4.b_REF1_PH "OLGA SEDAKOVA: 'THERE ARE NO THINGS ON THIS EARTH THAT CAN BE LOOKED AT WITH CONDESCENDENCE.'
Even the most insignificant thing should be looked at with consideration. Let's take the example of an apple; let's not look at it in passing, a little quickly, with a look from above. I choose this fruit because there is a precious guide, a painter, who taught me to look at it. This painter is Paul Cézanne; he painted apples all his life, like no one before him. Not only did he really put himself on their level, but even more profoundly, he looked at them as if he did not know them beforehand. I think modern art was born when Cézanne discovered that an apple is not just a fruit, but the possibility of an experience of profound humanity. The art critic Meyer Schapiro was so struck by this that he claimed that the apple in Cézanne's work played the role of the great nudes of classical painting. For centuries, we thought that what was interesting was not an apple, but a perfect body or the great questions of existence; perhaps we were wrong. In an apple you can touch the truth of what life is, or death, or justice. This is the great lesson of modernity: to look at everything without hierarchy. And it's true, if I look at an apple with compassion, I will learn to look at people, those who are marginalized, those who are oppressed, those who are not usually seen, because everything becomes important.
Let's learn to meditate like Cézanne, let's just try to say hello to everything we meet and then let us be affected by their presence, let us enter into an intimate relationship with them."
(Fabrice Midal, 3 minutes of philosophy to become human again, broadcast on France Culture on 07/16/2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: 
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/3-minutes-de-philosophie-pour-redevenir-humain/olga-sedakova-il-nexiste-pas-sur-cette-terre-de-choses-vers-lesquelles-puisse-se-pencher-avec

E1.7.B.2.4.b_REF2_PH THERE IS NOTHING TOO LITTLE FOR SO LITTLE A CREATURE AS MAN "I mentioned that I was afraid I put into my journal too many little incidents. Johnson. ‘ There is nothing. Sir, too little for so little a creature as man. It is by studying little things that we attain the great art of having as little misery and as much happiness as possible. ‘ "
(Boswell’s Life of Johnson, revised third edition 1799, first published in 1791)

E1.7.B.2.4.b_REF3_PO "I HAVE SAID THAT THE SOUL IS NOT MORE THAN THE BODY,
And I have said that the body is not more than the soul,
And nothing, not God, is greater to one than one’s self is,
And whoever walks a furlong without sympathy walks to his own funeral drest in his shroud,
And I or you pocketless of a dime may purchase the pick of the earth,
And to glance with an eye or show a bean in its pod confounds the learning of all times,
And there is no trade or employment but the young man following it may become a hero,
And there is no object so soft but it makes a hub for the wheel’d universe,
And I say to any man or woman,
Let your soul stand cool and com posed before a million universes"
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.7.B.2.4.b_REF4_LIT NOTHING IS COMMONPLACE: EVERYTHING DESERVES TO BE CONTEMPLATED WITH UNNATURAL EXCITEMENT!
"What is forever escaping me as I look back on these days [my childhood] is what might be called my normal mood. I cannot recall any average, ordinary, commonplace, humdrum mood, whether cheerful or the reverse, to which I awaked every day and upon which I relapsed from my moments of unnatural excitement. What I feel now is that all my moments were moments of unnatural excitement! In fact I feel almost tempted to go a step further and to maintain that the whole conception of the normal, the average, the commonplace, is due to a specific mental disease. To call a thing “commonplace” becomes therefore just the same as if you confided to your friend the fact that you felt sick or insane. I believe the most unphilosophical, irreligious and immoral word in the English language is the word “commonplace.” 
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber, p. 60)

E1.7.B.2.4.b_REF5_CUR "TRAPPING THE ESSENCE OF THE PLACE and framing an ever changing imprint of it"
(Curatorship: Jupiter Artland)

E1.7.B.2.4.c. "ATTENTION, A MIRACLE WITHIN EVERYONE'S REACH ALL THE TIME.
To listen to what the other person has to say, I have to agree not to know in advance what they're going to say. Because it's uncomfortable, we tend to run away from this situation; the more I listen to the other person, accepting that I don't know in advance what they're going to say to me, and paradoxically, the more I enter into a deep and true relationship and the more I find myself."

E1.7.B.2.4.c_REF1_PH “SIMONE WEIL : 'ATTENTION, A MIRACLE WITHIN EVERYONE'S REACH AT ALL TIMES' 
This phrase takes on a very special meaning at a time when an entire mass industry is robbing us of our ability to pay attention. We believe that in order to "pay attention" it is necessary to make ourselves available, which means accepting a certain form of uncertainty. In order to listen to what the other person has to say, I have to agree not to know in advance what they are going to say. Because this is uncomfortable, we tend to try to escape this situation; the new technologies are well aware of this. Relying on what neuroscience tells us about our brains, they demand too much of our attention so that we no longer feel this uncertainty. But this is a poisoned relief, because we are gradually being cut off from our own existence, from what we feel and what we want. We are dispossessed of ourselves. Conversely, the more I listen to the other person, accepting that I do not know in advance what they are going to say to me, and paradoxically, the more I enter into a deep and true relationship, the more I find myself.
Let's learn to cultivate our attention by doing some micro-meditations like the one about the tree. Start by looking at a tree, marveling at its presence, and then explore the uniqueness of its being. What is special about it? A unique shape, a way of being in the light, colors... Now notice how the center of attention gradually shifts from you to the tree. It is a comforting experience to be able to simply welcome this tree, just as you can welcome someone, listen to them, and engage with them. Attention is truly a miracle that is within everyone's reach, all the time.
(Fabrice Midal, 3 minutes of philosophy to become human again, broadcast on France Culture on 08/05/2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: 
https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/3-minutes-de-philosophie-pour-redevenir-humain/simone-weil-l-attention-miracle-a-la-portee-de-tous-a-tout-instant-1684262

E1.7.B.2.4.c_REF2_LIT TRUE ATTENTION REQUIRES OPENNESS AND EMPATHY, TRANSFORMING MERE OBSERVATION INTO MEANINGFUL ENGAGEMENT."It has frequently been remarked, about my own writings, that I emphasize the notion of attention. This began simply enough: to see that the way the flicker flies is greatly different from the way the swallow plays in the golden air of summer. It was my pleasure to notice such things, it was a good first step. But later, watching M. [Molly Malone Cook] when she was taking photographs, and watching her in the darkroom, and no less watching the intensity and openness with which she dealt with friends, and strangers too, taught me what real attention is about. Attention without feeling, I began to learn, is only a report. An openness — an empathy — was necessary if the attention was to matter. Such openness and empathy M. had in abundance, and gave away freely… I was in my late twenties and early thirties, and well filled with a sense of my own thoughts, my own presence. I was eager to address the world of words — to address the world with words. Then M. instilled in me this deeper level of looking and working, of seeing through the heavenly visibles to the heavenly invisibles. I think of this always when I look at her photographs, the images of vitality, hopefulness, endurance, kindness, vulnerability… "
(Mary Oliver, Our World)

E1.7.B.2.4.c_REF3_LIT “WHENEVER WE THINK IN ABSOLUTES, WE OSSIFY. Our freedom always lies in our flexibility, and because concepts like meaning and identity are not fixed, because, as Anderson observes, they “require our intentional participation,” they are “mercifully flexible.” They take the shape of our beliefs about who we are and what we deserve, they abide by the messages we send ourselves through the omens we make of reality.”
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

“The heron is exactly what the heron is to you in the moment you choose to give it meaning. It will be that meaning until you decide it means something else. That’s how meaning works. It’s a subjective act of interpretation.

You might get the impression that I’m saying herons are meaningless, but that’s not what I’m saying at all. When I see a heron and interpret its behavior as a reminder for me to slow down and think about what actually matters in my life, that is what that heron means. Meaning, like many crafts, happens in collaboration between maker and materials. […]

The heron allows me to build the meaning I need for the moment I need it. Making meaning in this way is like creating harmony with two voices… The trouble starts when we forget about our participation in the creation of harmony, of meaning. When we remove our agency in meaning-making, we start to think in absolutes. […]

The heron only represents self-determination when I need her to. That doesn’t diminish the heron’s power. It simply highlights my own.

There are objective facts in the world. Of course there are. But our concept of self, our significance, our sense of whether or not we deserve to take up space in the universe or experience joy and contentment — these are not questions of fact, they are questions of meaning. […]

There are two paths to magic: Imagination and paying attention. Imagination is the fiction we love, the truths built of falsehoods, glowing dust on the water’s surface. Paying attention is about intentional noticing, participating in making meaning to lend new weight to our world. An acorn. The geometry of a beehive. The complexity of whale song. The perfect slowness of a heron.

Real magic requires your intention, your choice to harmonize. Of course it does. The heron cannot cast starlight onto the dark shallows to entrance the bluegills. Not unless you do your part. You must choose to meet her halfway. And when you do, you may find that magic isn’t a dismissal of what is real. It’s a synthesis of it, the nectar of fact becoming the honey of meaning.”

(Jarod Anderson, Something in the Woods Loves You, 2024)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2024/09/11/great-blue-heron/?mc_cid=456d75dad9&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E1.7.B.2.4.c_REF4_PO “SOMETIMES, ON DAYS OF PERFECT AND EXACT LIGHT,
When things are as real as they can possibly be,
I slowly ask myself
Why I even bother to attribute
Beauty to things.

Does a ﬂower really have beauty?
Does a fruit really have beauty?
No: they have only color and form
And existence.
Beauty is the name of something that doesn’t exist
But that I give to things in exchange for the pleasure they
give me.
It means nothing.
So why do I say about things: they’re beautiful?

Yes, even I, who live only off living,
Am unwittingly visited by the lies of men
Concerning things,
Concerning things that simply exist.

How hard to be just what we are and see nothing but the
visible!”
(Fernando Pessoa, 11 March 1914 - signed as Albert Caeiro)

E1.7.B.2.4.c_REF4.1_PO “WHAT’S MY LIFE WORTH? IN THE END (I don’t know what end) 
One man says: “I earned three hundred thousand dollars.” 
Another man says: “I enjoyed three thousand days of glory.” 
Yet another says: “I had a clear conscience and that’s enough.” 
And I, should somebody ask what I did,
Will say: “Nothing except look at things,
Which is why I have the whole Universe in my pocket.”
And if God should ask: “And what did you see in things?” 
I’ll answer: “Just the things themselves. That’s all you put
     there.”
And God, who after all is savvy, will make me into a new kind
     of saint.”
(Fernando Pessoa, 17 September 1914 - signed as Albert Caeiro)

E1.7.B.2.4.c_REF4.2_PO “THE ASTONISHING REALITY OF THINGS
IS MY DISCOVERY EVERY DAY.
Each thing is what it is,
And it’s hard to explain to someone how happy this
    makes me,
And how much this sufﬁces me.

All it takes to be complete is to exist.

I’ve written quite a few poems,
I’ll no doubt write many more,
And this is what every poem of mine says,
And all my poems are different,
Because each thing that exists is a different way of saying this.

Sometimes I start looking at a stone.
I don’t start thinking about whether it exists.
I don’t get sidetracked, calling it my sister.
I like it for being a stone,
I like it because it feels nothing,
I like it because it’s not related to me in any way.

At other times I hear the wind blow,
And I feel that it was worth being born just to hear the wind
     blow.

I don’t know what people will think when they read this, 
But I feel it must be right since I think it without any effort
Or any idea of what people who hear me will think, 
Because I think it without thoughts,
Because I say it the way my words say it.

I was once called a materialist poet,
And it surprised me, for I didn’t think
I could be called anything.
I’m not even a poet: I see.
If what I write has any value, the value isn’t mine, 
It belongs to my poems.
All this is absolutely independent of my will.”
(Fernando Pessoa, 7 November 1915 - signed as Albert Caeiro)

E1.7.B.2.4.d. "SUBTRACT ALL THINGS", SAYS PLOTINUS
With his "simplicity of gaze", Plotinus guides our vision. "Subtract all things", he instructs us, to achieve unification. In his case, it's with "The One" whom he considers divine. However, can't we follow Plotinus' gaze, and refer to what he focuses on as "Reality"?

E1.7.B.2.4.d.i. SCULPT YOUR SOUL TO REVEAL ITS ORIGINAL BEAUTIFUL FORM
Plotinus asserts that the soul can only perceive God when illuminated by Him. To achieve this, we must strip away all excess and return to our innate simplicity. The soul must then contemplate its principle under the overabundant light of the Uncreated One. Plotinus encourages us to sculpt our soul by removing excess until its inherent beauty is unveiled. In doing so, the soul reaches a pure, unified state, transforming into a vision.

E1.7.B.2.4.d.i_REF1_PH SCULPTING THE SOUL, REMOVING THE EXCESS TO REVEAL THE INNER BEAUTY "One is forced to admit that the soul sees Him when it is suddenly filled with light. For this light comes from Him and is Himself. And so we are compelled to believe that He is present when, like another god called into one's house, He comes and enlightens us. If He had not come, He would not have enlightened us. If the soul is not enlightened by Him, it is deprived of God. But if it is enlightened, it has what it was seeking. And that is the true goal for the soul: to touch that Light, to see that Light through that Light, not through the Light of another, but through the Light through which it sees. What the soul must see is the light by which it is enlightened. For the sun is not seen in the light of another. How is this accomplished? Cut away everything (aphele panta) (V, 3, 17, l. 28sq).
"Cut away all things": it is therefore through negative theology, through stripping, through the extreme exposure of the soul in search of what is most original in it (one must have lost everything to know what cannot be lost), through a kind of return to the first poverty, which is also the greatest wealth, the proof of the pure and simple, that the created soul can contemplate its principle in the superabundant light of the uncreated. This return would not be possible if a spark - Plotinus speaks of a "trace" or "remnant" - of the divine conflagration from which we came, and thanks to which the creature can unite "sympathetically" with its Creator, were not left in us.
[...]
And it is in this sense that Plotinus again exhorts us to sculpt our soul ourselves, not like the sculptor of clay who adds material to obtain the desired form, but like the marble cutter who removes material until the beautiful form that lay dormant in the unconscious is revealed: "Return to yourself and look: if you do not yet see the beauty within you, act like the sculptor of a statue that is to become beautiful: he removes, he scratches, he polishes until he brings out a beautiful line in the marble [...] Do not stop sculpting your own statue until the divine radiance of virtue is manifested, until you see Temperance enthroned on a sacred throne. Do you see that? Do you have a pure trade with yourself, without any obstacle to your union, without anything else being mixed within you? [Do you see yourself in that state? Then have you become a vision?" (I, 6, 9, l. 7sq)"
(Jacques Darriulat, Plotinus, Master of Wisdom, I- The One, or the First Principle, 2013)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Plotin/Sagesse/Sagesse1.html

E1.7.B.2.4.d.i_REF2_CUR "SEVERAL HOURS PER WEEK, a person standing in Display Case 3 scrubs methodically the inward surface of the panels with an eraser. This gesture can suggest an attempt to rub off images, an endless assay, or an exercise in mindfulness confronting both eraser and visitor with the present moment. This performance reiterates a gesture carried out for the first time by the artist herself in a display case in Vancouver, in 1996."
(Curatorship: Bourse de Commerce - Pinault Collection, Paris)

E1.7.A.1.2.wE1.7.B.2.4.d.i. "MOST OF WHAT FOLLOWS WILL HAVE TO HAVE A RATHER NEGATIVE QUALITY. The truth is revealed by removing things that stand in its light, an art not unlike sculpture, in which the artist creates, not by building, but by hacking away."

E1.7.B.2.4.d.ii. DOES THE PRINCIPLE, WHICH UNITES US WITH REALITY, TAKES REFUGE IN THE INEXPRESSIBLE (which is not, however, unknowable), since it is beyond the Logos (beyond reason and language)?

E1.7.B.2.4.d.ii_REF1_PH FOR PLOTINUS, CREATION IS A PERPETUAL PROCESS OF GIVING "Plotinus can say that this all-spiritual Light is the 'emanation' of the One who is at the very beginning of Being. Creator of itself, it gives birth to everything that participates in being, to the true ideas perceived by intelligence as well as to the phenomena apprehended by sensation. In love, it is effusion and radiance, the abundance of a perpetual giving. In this way Plotinus again opposes Aristotle. In the same famous passage of the Book Lambda of the Metaphysics, the Stagirite says of the life of God that it is "pure action". In fact, Aristotle distinguishes in Physics between being in potential (dunamis), which tends toward what it is not yet, therefore unfinished, but which aspires to the full form in which its maturation will blossom, the work of its formation will complete the work of its formation; and being in action (energeia), having reached the perfection of its form, immobilized by its own perfection, at an optimal point from which it cannot deviate without falling, from which nothing can be taken away or added, what the Greeks called akmê, that is, "strength" or "prime of life". Since the life of God is, by definition, the life of a perfect being, it can only be conceived in this sense as a supreme or "pure" immovable act, so that its perfection paralyzes it, indifferent to all that is not itself. Conversely, it is the beings of nature (phusis) that are born, suffer, and die in the sublunary sphere that alone can be said to be "in potentiality. Plotinus could not accept this distinction within Being, which imprisons the divinity in the purely intellectual circle of its self-contemplation. If the life of God is the outpouring of love rather than the end of self-sufficiency, then it must also be said that life in God is in a certain sense the power of all things, that all that is, in the intelligible as well as in the sensible, is an emanation of the eternal superabundance that springs from this primary source, as the many springs from the one and the thousand and one splashes from a single jet. The motionless perfection of Aristotle's God is sterile in its isolation; it condemns itself to impotence by petrifying itself in the act that completes it: "If there is a being after the first, it is no longer a simple being, but a multiple unity. Where does it come from? From the First [...] How, then, does it come from the First? If the First is a perfect being and the most perfect of all, if the same is true of the First Power, then it must be the most powerful of all beings (pantôn tôn ontôn dunatôtaton), and the other powers must imitate it as much as they can. Now, as soon as a being reaches its point of perfection, we see that it produces; it cannot bear to remain in itself, but it produces another being [...] How then could the most perfect being and the first good remain motionless in itself? Could it be because of envy (ôsper phthonêsan: jealousy of its perfection, which it does not want to share with anyone else)? Could it be out of impotence (adunatêsan) of the one who is the power of all things (pantôn dunamis)? Then how could he be the principle? Something must therefore come from him, since beings derive from him the power to bring others into existence" (V, 4, 1, l. 20-40). And since the whole of creation is an emanation of the One, the movement of a perpetual gift or generation, it is possible to trace the course of this creative process and thus to direct our gaze towards the blind spot from which divine power radiates: "The One is a power, and an immense power. The proof must be drawn from all other things. There is none, even among the latter, that does not have the power to generate. It must be added that generated beings cannot ascend, but always descend by one degree and increase in multiplicity; therefore the principle of a thing is always simpler than it is. The being that produced the sensible world is not itself a sensible world, but an intelligence or an intelligible world; and what came before it and produced it is neither an intelligence nor an intelligible world, but something simpler than either. The multiple does not come from the multiple: the multiple comes from the non-multiple; and if this non-multiple is still a multiple, it is not it that is the principle, but something else before it. It is therefore necessary to contract one's thought to the true One, who is alien to all multiplicity, who has all simplicity and who is truly simple" (V, 3, 16, l. 2-16). Thus the Principle takes refuge in the ineffable (which is not the unknowable) because, as the rest of the text explains, it is "on this side of the Logos".
(Jacques Darriulat, Plotinus, Master of Wisdom, I- The One, or the First Principle, 2013)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Plotin/Sagesse/Sagesse1.html

E1.7.B.2.5. "EFFORTS TO ESCAPE FROM NEGATIVE EMOTIONS SUCH AS FEAR ONLY PERPETUATE THEM. Instead, the undivided mind experiences life freely, leading to a state of love that becomes manifest in action when the mind is whole."

E1.7.B.2.5.a. TRUE FREEDOM LIES IN RECOGNIZING AND ACCEPTING THE LIMITATIONS OF NATURE AND AVOIDING CONTRADICTIONS IN OUR ACTIONS BY BEING PRESENT AND AWARE.
"The meaning of freedom can never be grasped by the divided mind. If I feel separate from my experience, and from the world, freedom will seem to be the extent to which I can push the world around, and fate the extent to which the world pushes me around. But to the whole mind there is no contrast of « I » and the world."

E1.7.B.2.5.a_REF1_PH IN A UNIFIED MIND, THERE IS NO DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE SELF AND THE WORLD "The meaning of freedom can never be grasped by the divided mind. If I feel separate from my experience, and from the world, freedom will seem to be the extent to which I can push the world around, and fate the extent to which the world pushes me around. But to the whole mind there is no contrast of « I » and the world. There is just one process acting, and it does everything that happens. It raises my little finger and it creates earthquakes. Or, if you want to put it that way, I raise my little finger and also make earthquakes. No one fates and no one is being fated."
(Alan Watts, The Wisdom of Insecurity: A Message for an Age of Anxiety, 1951)


E1.7.B.2.5.a_REF2_PH TRUE FREEDOM LIES IN THE ACCEPTANCE OF THE PRESENT MOMENT AND THE CONDITIONS OF EXISTENCE "Of course this is a strange view of freedom. We are accustomed to think that, if there is any freedom at all, it resides, not in nature, but in the separate human will and its power of choice.

But what we ordinarily mean by choice is not freedom. Choices are usually decisions motivated by pleasure and pain, and the divided mind acts with the sole purpose of getting "I" into pleasure and out of pain. But the best pleasures are those for which we do not plan, and the worst part of pain is expecting it and trying to get away from it when it has come. You cannot plan to be happy. You can plan to exist, but in themselves existence and non-existence are neither pleasurable nor painful. I am even assured by doctors that there are circumstances under which death can be a highly pleasant experience.

The sense of not being free comes from trying to do things which are impossible and even meaningless. You are not "free" to draw a square circle, to live without a head, or to stop certain reflex actions. These are not obstacles to freedom; they are the conditions of freedom. I am not free to draw a circle if perchance it should turn out to be a square circle. I am not, thank heaven, free to walk out of doors and leave my head at home. Likewise I am not free to live in any moment but this one, or to separate myself from my feelings. In short I am not free when I am trying to do something contradictory, such as to move without changing position, or to burn my finger without feeling pain. 

On the other hand, I am free, the world process is free, to do anything which is not a contradiction. The question then arises: is it a contradiction, is it impossible, to act or to decide without pleasure as the ultimate aim? The theory that we must inevitably do what gives us the greater pleasure or the lesser pain, is a meaningless assertion based on verbal confusion. To say that I decide to do something because it pleases me says only that I decide to do it because I decide to do it. If "pleasure" is defined in the beginning as "what I prefer," then what I prefer will always be pleasure. If I prefer pain, like a masochist, then pain will be pleasure. In short, the theory begs the question at the start by saying that pleasure means what we desire: therefore anything that we desire is pleasure.

But I fall straight into contradiction when I try to act and decide in order to be happy, when I make "being pleased" my future goal. For the more my actions are directed towards future pleasures, the more I am incapable of enjoying any pleasures at all. For all pleasures are present, and nothing save complete awareness of the present can even begin to guarantee future happiness. I can act in order to eat tomorrow, or take a trip to the mountains next week, but there is really no way of being certain that this will make me happy. On the contrary, it is common experience that nothing ruins a "pleasure" so much as watching yourself in the midst of it to see whether it pleases you. You can only live in one moment at a time, and you cannot think simultaneously about listening to the waves and whether you are enjoying listening to the waves. Contradictions of this kind are the only real types of action without freedom."
(Alan Watts, The Wisdom of Insecurity: A Message for an Age of Anxiety, 1951)

E1.7.B.2.5.a_REF2.1_PH IS THERE A DISTINCT UNCONSCIOUS MIND SEPARATE FROM THE CONSCIOUS MIND? "There is another theory of determinism which states that all our actions are motivated by "unconscious mental mechanisms," and that for this reason even the most spontaneous decisions are not free. This is but another example of split-mindedness, for what is the difference between "me" and "mental mechanisms" whether conscious or unconscious? Who is being moved by these processes? The notion that anyone is being motivated comes from the persisting illusion of "I." The real man, the organism in-relation-to-the-universe, is this unconscious motivation. And because he is it, he is not being moved by it. In other words, it is not motivation; it is simply operation. Moreover, there is no "unconscious" mind distinct from the conscious, for the "unconscious" mind is conscious, though not of itself, just as the eyes see but do not see themselves. [...]"
(Alan Watts, The Wisdom of Insecurity: A Message for an Age of Anxiety, 1951)

E1.7.B.2.5.b. THE UNDIVIDED MIND ACCOMMODATES NEGATIVE EMOTIONS WITHIN A LOVING, UNIFYING PERSPECTIVE, RATHER THAN TRYING TO ESCAPE THEM. Efforts to escape from negative emotions, such as fear, only perpetuate them. The undivided mind, aware of experience as a unity, does not resort to these negative escapes, but instead experiences life freely. The undivided mind suggests a type of love that extends beyond emotion, serving as the organizing and unifying principle that forms a community. Love is the essence and character of the mind, becoming evident in action when the mind is whole.

E1.7.B.2.5._REF1_PO OUR TRUE NAME "I am sure that the moon, or that this word: the moon, 
Is a sign, a letter imagined on purpose 
For the complex writing of this very 
Strange thing: us - innumerable but one. 

It is a symbol among others, it is a gift 
Of illegible chance or of ample harmony 
So that in his day of high glory or agony 
Man can sign his true name."
(Jorge Luis Borges, Poetic Work 1925-1965)

E1.7.B.2.5._REF2_PH EFFORTS TO OVERCOME FEARS OFTEN REINFORCE THEM "If I am afraid, my efforts to feel and act bravely are moved by the fear, for I am afraid of fear, which is simply to say that my efforts to escape from what I am are moving in a circle. Beside the examples of saints and heroes I feel ashamed that I amount to nothing, and so I begin to practice humility because of my wounded pride, and charity because of my self love. The urge is ever to make "I" amount to something. I must be right, good, a real person, heroic, loving, self-effacing. I efface myself in order to assert myself, and give myself away in order to keep myself. The whole thing is a contradiction. [...]

Of course it sounds as if it were the most abject fatalism to have to admit that I am what I am, and that no escape or division is possible. It seems that if I am afraid, then I am "stuck" with fear. But in fact I am chained to the fear only so long as I am trying to get away from it. On the other hand, when I do not try to get away I discover that there is nothing "stuck" or fixed about the reality of the moment. When I am aware of this feeling without naming it, without calling it "fear," "bad," "negative," etc., it changes instantly into something else, and life moves freely ahead. The feeling no longer perpetuates itself by creating the feeler behind it.

We can perhaps see now why the undivided mind is not moved into those escapes from the present which are usually called "evil." The further truth that the undivided mind is aware of experience as a unity, of the world as itself, and that the whole nature of mind and awareness is to be one with what it knows, suggests a state that would usually be called love. For the love that expresses itself in creative action is something much more than an emotion. It is not something which you can "feel" and "know," remember and define. Love is the organizing and unifying principle which makes the world a universe and the disintegrated mass a community. It is the very essence and character of mind, and becomes manifest in action when the mind is whole."
(Alan Watts, The Wisdom of Insecurity: A Message for an Age of Anxiety, 1951)

E1.7.B.2.5.c. A SINCERE MIND IS INTERESTED IN PEOPLE AND PROBLEMS, AND RESPONDS BASED ON CURRENT CIRCUMSTANCES, NOT PREDEFINED RULES. Its goal is freedom, not security. Rule-based morality cannot yield freedom.

E1.7.B.2.5.c_REF1_PO "TRIPPERS AND ASKERS SURROUND ME,
People I meet, the effect upon me of my early life or the ward and city I live in, or the nation,
The latest dates, discoveries, inventions, societies, authors old and new, 
My dinner, dress, associates, looks, compliments, dues,
The real or fancied indifference of some man or woman I love,
The sickness of one of my folks or of myself, or ill-doing or loss or lack of money, or depressions or exaltations, I
Battles, the horrors of fratricidal war, the fever of doubtful news, the fitful events;
These come to me days and nights and go from me again,
But they are not the Me myself.

Apart from the pulling and hauling stands what I am,
Stands amused, complacent, compassionating, idle, unitary, 
Looks down, is erect, or bends an arm on an impalpable certain rest, 
Looking with side-curved head curious what will come next, 
Both in and out of the game and watching and wondering at it.

Backward I see in my own days where I sweated through fog with linguists and contenders,
I have no mockings or arguments, I witness and wait."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

Watch an excerpt of Francis Alÿs' Tornado (2010) on YouTube: https://youtu.be/XV8sruuydNI?feature=shared

E1.7.B.2.5.c_REF2_PH TRUE LOVE AND CREATIVE MORALITY ARISE WHEN THE MIND IS ABSORBED IN THE WORLD AND OTHERS "For the mind must be interested or absorbed in something, just as a mirror must always be reflecting something. When it is not trying to be interested in itself - as if a mirror would reflect itself - it must be interested, or absorbed, in other people and things. There is no problem of how to love. We love. We are love, and the only problem is the direction of love, whether it is to go straight out like sunlight, or to try to turn back on itself like a "candle under a bushel."

Released from the circle of attempted self-love, the mind of man draws the whole universe into its own unity as a single dewdrop seems to contain the entire sky. This, rather than any mere emotion, is the power and principle of free action and creative morality. On the other hand, the morality of rules and regulations based on rewards and punishments, even when these are as intangible as the pain of guilt and the pleasure of self-respect, has no relation to free action. It is a way of ruling slaves by "benevolent exploitation" of their illusions, and, however far pursued, can never lead to freedom.

Where there is to be creative action, it is quite beside the point to discuss what we should or should not do in order to be right or good. A mind that is single and sincere is not interested in being good, in conducting relations with other people so as to live up to a rule. Nor, on the other hand, is it interested in being free, in acting perversely just to prove its independence. Its interest is not in itself, but in the people and problems of which it is aware; these are "itself." It acts, not according to the rules, but according to the circumstances of the moment, and the "well" it wishes to others is not security but liberty."
(Alan Watts, The Wisdom of Insecurity: A Message for an Age of Anxiety, 1951)

E1.7.B.2.5.c_REF3_PH “WISDOM IS INTUITIVE KNOWLEDGE OF THE MIND OF LOVE AND CLARITY that lies beneath one’s ego-driven anxieties and aggressions… Morality is bringing it back out in the way you live, through personal example and responsible action, ultimately toward the true community (sangha) of “all beings.”
(Gary Snyder, Distant Neighbors, 2014)

E1.7.B.2.6. ATTENTION AND TIME: IT'S CRUCIAL TO ADDRESS THE DEMANDS OF THE PRESENT WHILE SIMULTANEOUSLY ALLOWING EMERGING IMMANENCE TO OPERATE. THIS APPROACH ENABLES US TO LIVE FULLY AND HARNESS THE POTENTIAL OF THE PRESENT MOMENT.

“ABOVE THE MOUNTAINS 
THE GEESE TURN INTO 
THE LIGHT AGAIN
the geese turn into
the light again
painting their
black silhouettes
on an open sky.

Sometimes everything
has to be
inscribed across
the heavens
so you can find
the one line
already written
inside you.

Sometimes it takes
a great sky
to find that
first, bright
and indescribable
wedge of freedom
in your own heart.

Sometimes with
the bones of the black
sticks left when the fire
has gone out
someone has written
something new
in the ashes of your life.

You are not leaving.
Even as the light
fades quickly now,
you are arriving.”
(David Whyte)

E1.7.B.2.6.a. "PLEASURES ARE PRESENT, AND NOTHING SAVE COMPLETE AWARENESS OF THE PRESENT CAN EVEN BEGIN TO GUARANTEE FUTURE HAPPINESS"

E1.7.B.2.6.a_REF1_PH "I FALL STRAIGHT INTO CONTRADICTION when I try to act and decide in order to be happy, when I make “being pleased” my future goal. For the more my actions are directed towards future pleasures, the more I am incapable of enjoying any pleasures at all. For all pleasures are present, and nothing save complete awareness of the present can even begin to guarantee future happiness. […]
You can only live in one moment at a time, and you cannot think simultaneously about listening to the waves and whether you are enjoying listening to the waves. Contradictions of this kind are the only real types of action without freedom."
(Alan Watts, The Wisdom of Insecurity: A Message for an Age of Anxiety, 1951)

E1.7.B.2.6.b. FRANÇOIS JULLIEN EXPLORES THE TENSION BETWEEN DELIBERATE RESOLUTION AND OPEN RECEPTIVITY TO LIFE'S UNFOLDING OUTCOMES. He refuses to postpone and seeks to live fully in the present moment, but he also accepts the deferred, i.e. the ability to wait for an outcome beyond his control. To Live strategically we should harness the operational capacity that comes from both refusal to postpone with the acceptance of deferral. In essence, one must both engage with the demands of the present and allow for natural progression to fully exploit the potential of each moment.

E1.7.B.2.6.b_REF1_PH "NON-POSTPONING (VS. KNOWING HOW TO DEFER) [...]
Doesn't the praise of voluntary determination, intransigent as it is, provoke in return a call for its opposite, the one called availability? [...]
On the one hand, I refuse to postpone, in which I do not claim to "suspend" time in its "flight", according to the poet's pompous wish, but aim to make the present appear: this refusal to postpone blurs by anticipation and relies on what comes next  in order to size the "occurrence", or the moment, to invest it instead of letting it continually slip away. But, on the other hand, in contradiction, counterbalancing this, opening a gap necessary for life, I accept the "deferred". In fact, I do more than accept: counting on the deferred means that I don't limit myself to my goal, that I give "time to time", that I know how to expect an outcome, itself the fruit of an unfolding that no longer belongs to me. The resolute refusal to postpone is coupled with a willingness to let it come to fruition. [...]
So when I said that refusal of the one (postponement) and acquiescence to the other (deferment) opened up a space in which to manoeuvre; that deferment and postponement, far from being entirely synonymous, rather created a gap between them from which we could think about how to live, I meant first of all to make the following point: that living is "strategic" in the sense that it unleashes an operational capacity which, by thinking in terms of the situation we face, can exploit both - not distorting the present as we encounter it, while at the same time allowing it to bear fruit. This will lead to both: to respond to the instance of the present, this passing "instant" understood as a demand that rejects repetition-conservation; but also to let the immanence involved and its capacity to give birth operate. Living unfolds jointly - contradictorily - between the two. Hence the question that arises as an alternative, each time requiring a decision: am I dodging or letting go? Am I running away from the confrontation of the encounter, thereby missing the emergence of the present and the capacity it offers? Or am I not postponing, but not forcing either: not avoiding, but letting it rest, so that a deposit silently accumulates, from which the "vivacious" present - "the virgin, the vivacious and the beautiful today..." - can unexpectedly result? [...]"
(François Jullien, Chinese thought in relation to philosophy, 2015)

E1.7.B.2.6.b_REF2_PH "WHEREVER YOU ARE IS CALLED HERE AND YOU NEED TO TREAT IT AS A POWERFUL STRANGER"
(Lost, David Wagner)

E1.7.B.2.6.b_REF3_PO "I WALK IN A CIRCLE
AROUND EVERYTHING WHICH IS.
And within this circle
is your world.
My shadow fell for a moment
on the window’s glass.
I walk in a circle
around everything which is.
And outside this circle
is my world"
(Steinn Steinarr)

E1.7.B.2.6.b_REF4_PO "I WRITE TO REMAIN IN FRONT OF THE OPEN DOOR
and be reborn a nomad, knowing how to discern 
in every fire a stopover, in every place a path 
and in every moved being a word offered."
(Michel Baglin, Of Flesh and Words, 2012)

E1.7.B.2.6.b_REF5_PH "PASSIVE 
"[...] We are said to be passive, writes Spinoza, when something happens to us of which we are only partly the cause, our nature. We therefore suffer because we are a part of nature which cannot be conceived without the other parts" (Ethics, IV, prop. 2, dem.). Therefore, for any finite being, there can be no action without some degree of passivity. This is perhaps the secret of Taoist non-action (wuwei): not a glorification of inaction, but an acceptance of the passive element in all natural and successful action."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.7.B.2.6.c. WE DREAM OF A DIVINE HOUR THAT WOULD ENCOMPASS EVERYTHING. AN HOUR IN WHICH ALL MOMENTS OF LIFE WOULD BE FELT, LOVED, AND REFLECTED UPON.
Not just an occupied hour, but a replete one. The hour when all the moments of time would be used by matter. An hour in which all moments realized in matter would be used by life. An hour when all living moments would be felt, loved, and reflected upon. The hour, therefore, when the relativity of consciousness would be erased because consciousness would be the exact measure of total time.

E1.7.B.2.6.c_REF1_PH "WHAT MAKES FOR THE AFFECTIVE CHARACTER OF DURATION, the joy or the pain of being, is the proportion or the disproportion of our life used as hours of thought vs. hours of sympathy. Matter neglects to be, life neglects to live, the heart neglects to love. It is by sleeping that we lose Paradise. [...] Then we feel a dull pain when we go in search of lost moments. We remember those rich hours that are marked by the thousand sounds of the Easter bells, those bells of the resurrection whose blows cannot be counted because they all count, because they each have an echo in our awakened soul. And this memory of joy is already remorse when we compare to these hours of total life the intellectually slow hours because they are relatively poor, the dead hours because they are empty - empty of purpose, as Carlyle said from the depths of his sadness - the interminable hostile hours because they give nothing. 
And we dream of a divine hour that would give everything. Not the fully occupied hour, but the replete one. The hour when all the moments of time would be used by matter, the hour when all the moments realized in matter would be used by life, the hour when all the living moments would be felt, loved, reflected upon. The hour, therefore, when the relativity of consciousness would be erased because consciousness would be the exact measure of total time. 
In the end, objective time is our maximum time; it is the one that contains all the moments."
(Gaston Bachelard, Intuition of the Instant, 1931)

Nina Dodd Knits: When we are oblivious to our surroundings and to the instant...

E1.7.B.2.6.c_REF2_PH "ATTENTION AND WILL 
[...] As soon as we have a point of eternity in the soul, we have nothing more to do but to take care of it, for it will grow of itself like a seed. It is necessary to surround it with an armed guard, waiting in stillness, and to nourish it with the contemplation of numbers, of fixed and exact relationships.

[...] The capacity to drive a thought away once and for all is the gateway to eternity. The infinite in an instant. [...]

RENUNCIATION OF TIME

[...] The past and the future hinder the wholesome effect of affliction by providing an unlimited field for imaginary elevation. That is why the renunciation of past and future is the first of all renunciations.

The present does not attain finality. Nor does the future, for it is only what will be present. We do not know this, however. If we apply to the present the point of that desire within us which corresponds to finality, it pierces right through to the eternal.

[...] When we are disappointed by a pleasure which we have been expecting and which comes, the disappointment is because we were expecting the future, and as soon as it is there it is present. We want the future to be there without ceasing to be future. This is an absurdity of which eternity alone is the cure. [...]"
(Simone Weil, Gravity nad Grace, 1947)

E1.7.B.2.6.d. "STICK TO WHAT YOU SEE
AND BE HAPPY:
 finally understand
 that the past
 is pure disease."

E1.7.B.2.6.d_REF1_PO "HERE AND NOW

 1
What happened to the defunct morning
in the new one?

What are you today
joys of yesterday
extinguished laughters and words of love?

what are you
but ghosts
but miasmas

infecting
with death
what is alive?

 2
If there is sun in the courtyard
and a car enters
and parks
and the driver gets out
slams the door
and walks away
 if this is it
 and nothing more
 than this,
then stick to what you see
and be happy:
 finally understand
 that the past
 is pure disease."
(Ferreira Gullar, Noises, 1980-1987)

E1.7.B.2.6.d_REF2_PH TRUE HUMANNESS AND MEANING IN LIFE ARE FOUND THROUGH CONSCIOUS ATTENTION AND PRESENCE "We began to realize, dimly at first, that we were no longer living our lives. We began to see that our lives were living us. And we began to suspect that our relationship to time had become so toxic precisely because we had forgotten how to bring to our day-to-day lives the essential question of who and what a human being is and is meant to be. [...]

The pathology of our relationship to time can be healed only as we allow ourselves to be penetrated by the mystery of what we are beneath the surface of ourselves — by striving, that is, to remember our Selves. […]

The ego, the false self, [is] the root of all the evil that enters the earth and destroys human life, and with it, of course, the reality of time, the reality of lived presence. The ego lives only in the future and the past; it has no present moment; it is always hurrying or dreaming. […]

The essential element to recognize is how much of what we call “progress” is accompanied by and measured by the fact that human beings need less and less conscious attention to perform their activities and lead their lives. The real power of the faculty of attention… is one of the indispensable and most central measures of humanness. […]

In the world as in oneself, everything depends of the presence of humanness — in oneself it depends on the presence, even if only to a relative degree, of the Self, the real I am — and in the life of the world it depends on the presence of people who have and can manifest this capacity to be, or even only who wish for it and who come together to learn from each other and to help each other for that purpose. [...]

The real significance of our problem with time… is a crisis of meaning… The root of our modern problem with time is neither technological, sociological, economic nor psychological. It is metaphysical. It is a question of the meaning of human life itself. [...]

Such great questions cannot be answered with the part of the mind that solves problems. They need to be deeply felt and experienced long, long before they can begin to be answered. We need to feel the question of time much more deeply and simply than we do. We agitate about the problem of time, but we seldom feel what it means.”
(Jacob Needleman, Time and the Soul, 1998)

E1.7.B.2.7. AT TIMES, WE MAY BE OVERWHELMED BY A FEELING OF MEANINGLESSNESS. This feeling, separate but related to depression, can drain our energy and enthusiasm for life. It leaves us feeling disconnected from the beauty and magic of the world, yearning to experience it anew. So, how do we re-enchant the world?

E1.7.B.2.7_REF1_PH "THERE ARE SEASONS OF BEING WHEN A CLOAK OF MEANINGLESSNESS SEEMS TO SLIP OVER YOU, OVER EVERYTHING, MUFFLING THE SONG OF LIFE. It is not depression exactly, though the two conditions make eager bedfellows. Rather, it is a great hollowing that empties you of that vital force necessary for moving through the world wonder-smitten by reality, that glint of gladness at the mundane miracle of existence. A disenchantment we may call by many names — burnout, apathy, alienation — but one that visits upon every life in one form or another, at one time or another, pulsating with the unmet longing for something elemental and ancient, with the yearning to see the world as beautiful again and feel its magic, to find sanctuary in it, to contact that “submerged sunrise of wonder.”
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)
Tags: Droit

E1.7.B.2.7_REF1.1_PH THIS LIFE I HAVE MADE IS TOO SMALL "This life I have made is too small. It doesn’t allow enough in: enough ideas, enough beliefs, enough encounters with the exuberant magic of existence. I have been so keen to deny it, to veer deliberately towards the rational, to cling solely to the experiences that are directly observable by others. Only now, when everything is taken away, can I see what a folly this is. I don’t want that life anymore. I want what [the] ancients had: to be able to talk to god. Not in a personal sense, to a distant figure who is unfathomably wise, but to have a direct encounter with the flow of things, a communication without words. I want to let something break in me, some dam that has been shoring up this shamefully atavistic sense of the magic behind all things, the tingle of intelligence that was always waiting for me when I came to tap in. I want to feel that raw, elemental awe that my ancestors felt, rather than my tame, explained modern version. I want to prise open the confines of my skull and let in a flood of light and air and mystery… I want to retain what the quiet reveals, the small voices whose whispers can be heard only when everything falls silent."
(Katherine May, Enchantment: Awakening Wonder in an Anxious Age, 2023)

E1.7.B.2.7_REF1.1.a_PH "TO LODGE HERSELF OUT OF THIS EXISTENTIAL STUPOR, she turns to various fulcrums of wonder — meteor-watching and ocean-swimming, gardening and beekeeping — returning again and again to what has been my own most steadfast remedy in those seasons of inner withering. A century and a half after Thoreau made his ardent case for walking as a spiritual endeavor and a generation after Thomas Clark’s marvelous manifesto for walking as a portal to self-transcendence."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.7.B.2.7_REF1.1.b_PH A TRANSFORMATIVE WALKING EXPERIENCE "When I walk, I fall through three layers of experience. The first is all about the surface of my skin, the immediate feedback of my senses. It is often twitchy and uncomfortable: my boots are too tight; there’s a twig in my sock. My backpack won’t sit square on my shoulders. My walking is stop-start in that phase, curtailed by an endless series of adjustments. I am never sure if I really want to go the distance. But if I walk on through that, those sensations eventually fade and they’re replaced by bubbling thought, a burgeoning of ideas and insights, a sense of joyous chatter in the mind. This is the point in a walk when the interior of my mind feels luxuriant, a place so pleasurable to inhabit that I never want my legs to stop. It’s a creative space, a place where problems are solved in unfathomable ways, the answers arriving like truths known all along.
If I carry on walking, eventually that fades, too. Perhaps it is low blood sugar, or perhaps the popcorn brain burns itself out eventually, but at some point I reach a very different state of mind, a place beyond words in which I feel quiet and empty. This is my favourite phase of all, an open space in which I am nothing for a while, just an existence with moving parts and a map in my hand, whose feet know the route and do not need my interference. Nothing happens here, or so it seems. But in its aftermath, I find my most profound insights, whole shifts in the meanings and understandings that underpin who I am. In this state, I am an open door."
(Katherine May, Enchantment: Awakening Wonder in an Anxious Age, 2023)

This also works for other endurance sports such as rawing, swimming, running, etc.

E1.7.B.2.7_REF1.1.c_PH AGAIN AND AGAIN, SHE FACES THE TENSION BETWEEN OUR RELIANCE ON RATIONALITY AND OUR LONGING FOR MAGIC
"Both are just ways of conceptualising a foundational fact of living. The alchemy comes in understanding the truth that seems so easily hidden: that everything is interconnected. That there is only one whole. That we exist within a system that includes every degraded human act and every beautiful one, every blade of grass and every mountain; that shines and snaps and varies like the surface of the sea. We as individuals contain it all. We hold within us the potential for the greatest good and the most dreadful evil. We know, intuitively, how each feels, because there are lines traced between us and everything else. I don’t have to believe in God as a person. I can believe in this instead: the entire mesh of existence binding us together in ways we perceive only if we listen. Each of us is a particle of this greater entity. Each one of us contains it all. [...]
We find this absolute connectedness hard to grasp. We often prefer to forget it. We often push back against it. But it is there, real as sunlight, behind everything we do. Since it is too big for us to swallow whole, we approach it through metaphor. We tell stories about monsters and magic and elemental gods, but really we are finding a way to understand. Really we are talking about us, all of us together. Some of the old stories don’t work anymore. We are finding them harder and harder to understand. But that doesn’t mean we abandon them. Instead, we need to double down on the storytelling, and find new ways to tell out our meanings. Perhaps that is what we’re meant to do: remake our stories until we finally find the one that fits. [...]
Our sense of enchantment is not triggered only by grand things; the sublime is not hiding in distant landscapes. The awe-inspiring, the numinous, is all around us, all the time. It is transformed by our deliberate attention. It becomes valuable when we value it. It becomes meaningful when we invest it with meaning. The magic is of our own conjuring."
(Katherine May, Enchantment: Awakening Wonder in an Anxious Age, 2023)

E1.7.A.3.1_REF4.1_PO.wE1.7.B.2.7

E1.7.B.2.7_REF3_PO "YOUR LIFE IS YOUR LIFE
don’t let it be clubbed into dank submission.
be on the watch.
there are ways out.
there is light somewhere.
it may not be much light but
it beats the darkness.
be on the watch.
the gods will offer you chances.
know them.
take them.
you can’t beat death but
you can beat death in life, sometimes.
and the more often you learn to do it,
the more light there will be.
your life is your life.
know it while you have it.
you are marvelous
the gods wait to delight
in you."
(Charles Bukowski)

E1.7.B.3. ... LET GO OF YOUR WILL. While willpower is necessary for human life, it is only so at select times. Can we engage in joyful meditation, focusing on the action rather than its outcome? Can we persist in action and creation while in a meditative state, guided by a broader love?

E1.7.B.3.1. ACCORDING TO SIMONE WEIL, THE WILL ONLY HAS CONTROL OVER CERTAIN BODILY MOVEMENTS, BUT CANNOT INFLUENCE INNER PURITY OR TRUTH IN THOUGHT.
Attention, linked to faith and love, is a far more critical quality. At its highest level, attention equates to prayer.
Being attached to a problem and obsessed with its reward is an ineffective way to seek. Instead, effort without desire, free from attachment to the result, proves more effective. Attention is linked to desire,  not to willpower.

E1.7.B.3.1_REF1_PH "ATTENTION AND WILL
[...] The will only controls a few movements of a few muscles, and these movements are associated with the idea of the change of position of near-by objects. I can will to put my hand flat on the table. If inner purity, inspiration or truth of thought were necessarily associated with attitudes of this kind, they might be the object of will. As this is not the case, we can only beg for them. To beg for them is to believe that we have a Father in heaven. Or should we cease to desire them? What could be worse? Inner supplication is the only reasonable way, for it avoids stiffening muscles which have nothing to do with the matter. What could be more stupid than to tighten up our muscles and set our jaws about virtue, or poetry, or the solution of a problem. Attention is something quite different.

[...] Attention, taken to its highest degree, is the same thing as prayer. It presupposes faith and love.

[...] The wrong way of seeking. The attention fixed on a problem. Another phenomenon due to horror of the void. We do not want to have lost our labour. The heat of the chase. We must not want to find: as in the case of an excessive devotion, we become dependent on the object of our efforts. We need an outward reward which chance sometimes provides and which we are ready to accept at the price of a deformation of the truth.

It is only effort without desire (not attached to an object) which infallibly contains a reward.

To draw back before the object we are pursuing. Only an indirect method is effective. We do nothing if we have not first drawn back.

[...] There are some kinds of effort which defeat their own object (example: the soured disposition of certain pious females, false asceticism, certain sorts of self-devotion, etc.). Others are always useful, even if they do not meet with success.

How are we to distinguish between them?

Perhaps in this way: some efforts are always accompanied by the (false) negation of our inner wretchedness; with others the attention is continually concentrated on the distance there is between what we are and what we love.

[...] Attention is bound up with desire. Not with the will but with desire—or more exactly, consent. We liberate energy in ourselves, but it constantly reattaches
itself. How are we to liberate it entirely? We have to desire that it should be done in us—to desire it truly—simply to desire it, not to try to accomplish it. For every attempt in that direction is vain and has to be dearly paid for. In such a work all that I call ‘I’ has to be passive. Attention alone—that attention which is so full
that the ‘I’ disappears—is required of me. I have to deprive all that I call ‘I’ of the light of my attention and turn it on to that which cannot be conceived.

[...] Solitude. Where does its value lie? For in solitude we are in the presence of mere matter (even the sky, the stars, the moon, trees in blossom), things of less value (perhaps) than a human spirit. Its value lies in the greater possibility of attention. If we could be attentive to the same degree in the presence of a human being..."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.7.B.3.1_REF1.1_PH "ATTENTION, TAKEN TO ITS HIGHEST DEGREE, is the same thing as prayer. It presupposes faith and love.
Absolutely unmixed attention is prayer."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace)

E1.7.B.3.1_REF2_PO "THE WAY YOU CAN GO
isn’t the real way.
The name you can say
isn’t the real name.

Heaven and earth
begin in the unnamed:
name’s the mother
of the ten thousand things.

So the unwanting soul
sees what’s hidden,
and the ever-wanting soul
sees only what it wants."
(Lao Tzu: Tao Te Ching, a "rendition, not a translation" of the Tao Te Ching by Ursula Le Guin)

E1.7.B.3.2. AS HUMAN BEINGS, WE CAN LIVE A LIFE MARKED BY VIGILANCE AND CONSTANT ATTENTION, where our minds remain alert, observing the ego in motion. Authentic religion involves the cessation of the "I", and any action born from this silence carries a sacred, meaningful life.

E1.7.B.3.2_REF1_PH "A SACRED LIFE [...] 
You only have to see the falseness of all this movement of thought, this whole process of analysis, acceptance of time, etc., to trigger an immediate action of thought, which in turn triggers the extinction of the "self".
An authentically religious life is therefore a life of meditation from which all activity of the ego is excluded. And it is possible to live such an existence on a daily basis, in this world of ours. This means that as a human being one can live a life of constant vigilance and attention, where the mind is on alert, observing the ego in motion. This observation is nourished by silence and not by prejudice. Having observed the actions of the ego and seen its falseness, the mind has become extraordinarily sensitive and still. And it acts on the basis of this silence. In everyday life. [Religion is the cessation of the "self" and the action born of this silence. This life is a sacred life, full of meaning. [...]"
(Krishnamurti, This light within us, 1999)

E1.7.B.3.2_REF2_PH "AN INSPIRATION IS A HAPPY MOMENT THAT TAKES US BY SURPRISE.
Many people are so startled by an inspiration or a condition of inspiration, which is so different from daily care, that they think that they are unique in having had it. Nothing could be further from the truth. Inspiration is there all the time for anyone whose mind is not covered over with thoughts and concerns, and [it is] used by everyone whether they realize it or not. […]
It is an untroubled state of mind. Of course, we know that an untroubled state of mind cannot last, so we say that inspiration comes and goes, but it is there all the time waiting for us to be untroubled again. We can therefore say that it is pervasive. [...]
“The light was extraordinary, the feeling was extraordinary” is the way in which many adults describe moments of inspiration. Although they have had them all their lives they never really recall them and are always taken by surprise. Adults are very busy, taught to run all the time. You cannot run and be very aware of your inspirations."
(Agnes Martin, Paintings, Writings, Remembrances - edited by Arne Glimcher)

E1.7.B.3.2_REF3_SCI "WHAT YOUR BRAIN IS DOING WHEN YOU’RE NOT DOING ANYTHING
When your mind is wandering, your brain’s “default mode” network is active. [...]
[Lucina Uddin, a neuroscientist at the University of California, Los Angeles] is particularly interested in how the default mode network interacts with the salience network, which seems to help us identify the most relevant piece of information at any given time. Her work suggests that the salience network detects when something is important to pay attention to and then acts as an off switch for the default mode network."
(Nora Bradford, Quanta Magazine, February 5, 2024)

Read the full article:
https://www.quantamagazine.org/what-your-brain-is-doing-when-youre-not-doing-anything-20240205/?mc_cid=0f25eb2815&mc_eid=de38e9b771

E1.7.B.3.2_REF3.1_SCI "INSIDE A BRAIN CIRCUIT, THE WILL TO PRESS ON
A rare brain stimulation study suggests that a brain circuit known as the “salience network” contributes to differences in our ability to overcome challenges and cope with stress. [...]
In a rare study involving direct brain stimulation, Michael Greicius, a neurologist at Stanford University, and collaborators say they have uncovered direct evidence that a brain region known as the anterior midcingulate cortex and its surrounding network play a central role in motivation and a readiness to act. The theory had been based on indirect data — until now. “It was a fortuitous opportunity, providing a rare piece of data that we can’t get from any other setting,” Greicius said. “It’s nice to have a human lend this first-person insight into what it feels like to have your salience network stimulated.”

The new findings, published today in the journal Neuron, raise tantalizing questions about how differences in the network from one individual to the next contribute to differences in our ability to overcome challenges and cope with stress. [...]

When a mouse’s food reward is moved around a maze, some mice persevere for hours, while others quickly resign themselves to hunger. The same is true for people — some, like Aron Ralston, who in 2003 cut off part of his arm after being pinned by a boulder, can overcome seemingly insurmountable obstacles.

Scientists don’t yet know the exact role the salience network plays in perseverance, but they do know that disrupting the network can have a profound effect. Rodents with damage to their version of the anterior cingulate give up more easily than others when trying to find food. And deterioration in the salience networks in frontotemporal dementia has been linked to lack of drive."
(Emily Singer, Quanta Magazine, December 5, 2013)

Read the full article:
https://www.quantamagazine.org/inside-the-brains-salience-network-the-will-to-press-on-20131205/

E1.7.B.3.3. FOR ANY FINITE BEING, THERE CAN BE NO ACTION WITHOUT SOME DEGREE OF PASSIVITY. The challenge lies in finding a balance between an excessively stretched will and total laissez-faire.

E1.7.B.3.3_REF1_PH "PASSIF 
[...] Nous sommes dits passifs, écrit Spinoza, quand quelque chose se produit en nous de quoi nous ne sommes cause que partiellement, notre nature. Nous pâtissons donc en tant que nous sommes une partie de la Nature qui ne peut se concevoir sans les autres parties » (Éth., IV, prop. 2, dém.). Point donc d’action, pour tout être fini, sans une part de passivité. C’est peut-être le secret du non-agir (wuwei) des taoïstes : non un éloge de l'inaction, mais l'acceptation de ce qu'il y a de passif en toute action  naturelle et réussie."
(André Comte-Sponville, Dictionnaire philosophique, 2013)

E1.7.B.3.3_REF2_PH ON THE IMPORTANCE OF PRACTICING VIRTUE WITHOUT EXCESSIVE EFFORT "In the Cherubinic Pilgrim, Angelus Silesius says: 'Man, if you obtain virtue only through effort and labor, you have not yet obtained it, you are still striving for it.
I find in this a radiant invitation to practice virtue without effort. Too often detachment and letting go become additional demands that, far from rooting us in joy, leave us perpetually dissatisfied. And Aristotle explains it so well: the virtuous person practices virtue for pleasure.
Once again, it is a matter of finding the middle ground between an overly tense will and total nonchalance. In the end, the question remains: what action can I take here and now to move gently in the right direction?
(Alexandre Jollien, La Pharmacopée n°31)

Read it in French on la Pharmacopée: https://www.alexandre-jollien.ch/pharmacopee-n31/

E1.7.B.3.3_REF3_PH "“LETTING ART IS THE PARADOX OF ACTIVE SURRENDER. I HAVE TO WORK FOR ART IF I WANT ART TO WORK ON ME,” Jeanette Winterson wrote in her superb meditation on how art transforms us. “I have to work for art if I want art to work on me.” But letting life is also a paradox of active surrender — we have to work for life too if we want life to work for us. (That is what Maya Angelou meant when she observed that “life loves the liver of it.”)
The paradox is that much of what we think is work at life — all the ways in which we try to bend reality to our will, all the ways in which we clutch at control (which only ever means the illusion of control) as an organizing principle — is in fact an escape from the true work, which is the work of letting go: letting go of the illusion, of the systems of belief and magical thinking by which we fancy ourselves in control.

The subtlety — sometimes devastating, sometimes deeply rewarding — lies in learning the difference between the false work and the true work of life: that elusive art of active surrender."
(Maria Popova's review on A Literate Passion: Letters of Anaïs Nin & Henry Miller in The Marginalian)

E1.7.B.3.3_REF3.1_PH "WHEN YOU SURRENDER, THE PROBLEM CEASES TO EXIST. Try to solve it, or conquer it, and you only set up more resistance. I am very certain now that… if I truly become what I wish to be, the burden will fall away. The most difficult thing to admit, and to realize with one’s whole being, is that you alone control nothing. To be able to put yourself in tune or rhythm with the forces beyond, which are the truly operative ones, that is the task — and the solution, if we can speak of “solutions.”"
(Henry Miller, A Literate Passion: Letters of Anaïs Nin & Henry Miller, 1946)

E1.7.B.3.3_REF3.1.a_PH  "WHEN WE DON’T FULLY SURRENDER TO THOSE CURRENTS OF LIFE LARGER THAN US, some part of, however suppressed, knows it. Out of that quiet, gnawing knowledge arise the feelings of guilt that often haunts our days without an easily identifiable source — for the source lurks in those secret strata of being, half-opaque even to us. It is a wholly interior knowledge and a wholly interior guilt, impervious to outside judgment, independent of the external world. And yet, in our desperation to locate a source, we often project it outward and place it in others."
(Maria Popova's review on A Literate Passion: Letters of Anaïs Nin & Henry Miller in The Marginalian)

E1.7.B.3.3_REF4_PO “THE RIGHT THING
Let others probe the mystery if they can.
Time-harried prisoners of Shall and Will-
The right thing happens to the happy man.
The bird flies out, the bird flies back again;
The hill becomes the valley, and is still;
Let others delve that mystery if they can.
God bless the roots!-Body and soul are one!
The small become the great, the great the small;
The right thing happens to the happy man.
Child of the dark, he can out leap the sun,
His being single, and that being all
The right thing happens to the happy man.
Or he sits still, a solid figure when
The self-destructive shake the common wall;
Takes to himself what mystery he can,
And, praising change as the slow night comes on,
Wills what he would, surrendering his will
Till mystery is no more: No more he can.
The right thing happens to the happy man.”
(Theodore Roethke)

E1.7.B.3.3_REF5_PH THE PUREST INTENTION IS ALWAYS THE FIRST AND LAST MOVEMENT."
"Take comfort in knowing that your search itself is a discovery, as the quest is already a solution. After all, if a creature must search to find, then it must have already found in order to search. [...]
However, this dilemma may be a sophism. Here are four different ways of expressing the same paradox of nostalgia. One can seek what one has already found; one can desire what one already possesses; one can learn what one already knows—and one only truly learns this way, not by "learning" but by "realizing"; and one can become what one is. The fifth form of this circular argument is that in order to remember, one must already have memories. Mnemonics assist recall without replacing memory; that is, they remedy quidditative forgetting, but not ontic or quoditative forgetting.
In fact, the "vicious" circle is a virtuous circle—a circulus sanus. This circle in no way excludes progress. [...]
The classic circle of ethology is finally broken by action. If the will were an immanent element of character, one could never transform one's character because one would first have to transform one's will; in other words, one would have to already have a transformed character. The will is both immanent and transcendent. It is the totality of a character's will that is transformed, at first imperceptibly, by spontaneous clinamen. Then, it becomes easier and quicker with each successive mutation. The purest intention is always the first and last movement."
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, Les Vertus et l’amour I, 1970)

E1.7.B.3.3_REF6_PH THE HERO'S FREEDOM IS THE CAPACITY TO ACT AS A "PEACEMAKER" BETWEEN OUR INTERNAL WARRING STRATEGIES AND AS A "REVOLUTIONARY" WHO CAN DISSOLVE AND RECONSTRUCT KNOWLEDGE, THEREBY LIBERATING BOTH THE INDIVIDUAL AND THEIR CULTURE FROM STAGNATION AND TYRANNY. 
“Every unmapped territory—that is, every place where what to do has not been specified—also constitutes the battleground for ancestral kings. The learned patterns of action and interpretation that vie for application when a new situation arises can be usefully regarded, metaphorically, as the current embodiments of adaptive strategies formulated as a consequence of past exploratory behavior—as adaptive strategies invented and constructed by the heroes of the past, “unconsciously” mimicked and  duplicated by those currently alive.   Adaptation to new territory—that is, to the unexpected—therefore also means  successful mediation of archaic or habitual strategies competing, in the new situation, for  dominance over behavioral output. Rank-ordering of these “warring” strategies— construction of a context-specific behavioral “dominance hierarchy” (which corresponds  to the nested narrative model proposed earlier)—therefore constitutes adaptation, just as  much as creation of new situation-specific behaviors or modes of interpretation (which  are inevitably composed, anyway, of bits and pieces of the past). The process of  exploration, including its assimilative and accommodative aspects, is therefore inevitably  entangled with the process of peacemaking. Exploration, in a given situation, can hardly  be regarded as complete until the tendencies and theories that struggle for predominance  in that situation have been organized to make internal (or externalized) conflict and  emotional upheaval cease.   
The exploratory hero, mankind’s savior, cuts the primordial chaos into pieces and  makes the world; rescues his dead father from the underworld, and revivifies him; and  organizes the “nobles” occupying his kingdom into an effective, flexible and dynamic  hierarchy. There is no categorical difference between the individual who explores and the  individual who reconstructs “society,” as a consequence of that exploration.  Accommodation to new information is an integral part of the exploratory process: an  anomaly has not been processed until the preexistent interpretive schemas extant prior to  its emergence have been reconfigured to take its presence into account. Every explorer is  therefore, by necessity, a revolutionary—and every successful revolutionary is a  peacemaker.   
We act appropriately before we understand how we act—just as children learn to  behave before they can describe the reasons for their behavior. It is only through the  observation of our actions, accumulated and distilled over centuries, that we come to  understand our own motivations, and the patterns of behavior that characterize our  cultures (and these are changing as we model them). Active adaptation precedes  abstracted comprehension of the basis for such adaptation. This is necessarily the case,  because we are more complex than we can understand, as is the world to which we must  adjust ourselves.   First we act. Afterward, we envision the pattern that constitutes our actions. Then we  use that pattern to guide our actions. It is establishment of conscious (declarative)  connection between behavior and consequences of that behavior (which means  establishment of a new feedback process) that enables us to abstractly posit a desired  future, to act in such a way as to bring that future about, and to judge the relevance of  emergent phenomena themselves on the basis of their apparent relevance to that future.  This ability appears to be predicated on some developmental leap—at least insofar as the  “guiding story” has become conscious (or represented in episodic or semantic memory,  as opposed to remaining implicitly embedded in behavior)—and appears unlikely to  characterize very young children (or animals, for that matter). Jean Piaget solved the  problem of the “goal-like” behavior in creatures not yet capable of abstract  conceptualization by presuming that “goals” are initially embedded in sensori-motor  reflex operations, which are instinctive. This essentially means that what is later story is  at first pattern—the pattern of socially modified behavior that constitutes human being. It "is only later, as “higher-order” (episodic or semantic) cognitive systems become  activated, that goals become explicitly imagined (and that they can be considered,  abstractly, before their enaction). So this means that it is possible to act in a manner that  looks as if it were goal-directed, before goals as such have manifested themselves. Rychlak describes Piaget’s observation: “Children do not appear to be logicians at birth,  conceptually interacting by constructing schema from the outset. The initial constructions  are being done biologically, and only at some time later does the child schematize the  reflexive patterns already underway….” 
(Jordan Peterson, Maps of Meaning The Architecture of Belief, 1999)

E1.7.B.3.3_REF6.1_PH THE HERO'S FREEDOM IS THE CAPACITY TO ACT AS A "PEACEMAKER" BETWEEN OUR INTERNAL WARRING STRATEGIES AND AS A "REVOLUTIONARY" WHO CAN DISSOLVE AND RECONSTRUCT KNOWLEDGE, THEREBY LIBERATING BOTH THE INDIVIDUAL AND THEIR CULTURE FROM STAGNATION AND TYRANNY (Continued). 
“First comes the action pattern, guided by instinct, shaped without conscious realization  by the consequences of socially mediated “rewards” and “punishments” (determined in  their “structure and locale” by the current social mores, products of historical forces).  Then comes the capacity to imagine the end toward which behavior “should” be directed.  Information generated from the observation of behavior provides the basis for  constructing fantasies about such ends. Actions that satisfy emotions have a pattern;  abstraction allows us to represent and duplicate that pattern, as an end. The highest-level  abstractions therefore allow us to represent the most universally applicable behavioral  pattern: that characterizing the hero, who eternally turns the unknown into something  secure and beneficial; who eternally reconstructs the secure and beneficial, when it has  degenerated into tyranny.   
The myth of the hero has come to represent the essential nature of human possibility,  as manifested in adaptive behavior, as a consequence of observation and rerepresentation  of such behavior, conducted cumulatively over the course of thousands of years. The hero  myth provides the structure that governs, but does not determine, the general course of  history; expresses one fundamental preconception in a thousand different ways. This idea  (analogous in structure to the modern hypothesis, although not explicitly formulated, nor  rationally constructed in the same manner) renders individual creativity socially  acceptable and provides the precondition for change. The most fundamental presumption  of the myth of the hero is that the nature of human experience can be (should be)  improved by voluntary alteration in individual human attitude and action. This  statement—the historical hypothesis—is an expression of faith in human possibility itself  and constitutes the truly revolutionary idea of historical man.   All specific adaptive behaviors (which are acts that restrict the destructive or enhance  the beneficial potential of the unknown) follow a general pattern. This “pattern”—which  at least produces the results intended (and therefore desired)—inevitably attracts social  interest. “Interesting” or “admirable” behaviors engender imitation and description. Such  imitation and description might first be of an interesting or admirable behavior, but is  later of the class of interesting and admirable behaviors. The class is then imitated as a  general guide to specific actions; is redescribed, redistilled and imitated once again. The  image of the hero, step by step, becomes ever clearer, and ever more broadly applicable.  The pattern of behavior characteristic of the hero—that is, voluntary advance in the face  of the dangerous and promising unknown, generation of something of value as a  consequence and, simultaneously, dissolution and reconstruction of current knowledge,  of current morality—comes to form the kernel for the good story, cross-culturally. That  story—which is what to do, when you no longer know what to do—defines the central  pattern of behavior embedded in all genuinely religious systems (furthermore, provides  the basis for the “respect due the individual” undergirding our conception of "rights). Representations of the uroboros, the dragon of chaos, and his daughter, the Great  Mother, are symbolic portrayals of the unknown. Mythological representation of the hero  and his cultural construction are, by contrast, examination and portrayal of who or what it  is that knows, and of what it is that is known. The creative and destructive feminine is the  personality manifested in mythology by everything unknown, threatening and promising,  about and within existence. Myth tends to portray the generative individual consciousness  eternally willing to face this unknown power as masculine, in essence—in  contradistinction to unconscious, impersonal, and unpredictable femininity, and in light  of its “seminal,” active, “fructifying” nature.” 
(Jordan Peterson, Maps of Meaning The Architecture of Belief, 1999)

E1.7.B.3.3_REF6.2_PH THE HERO'S FREEDOM IS THE CAPACITY TO ACT AS A "PEACEMAKER" BETWEEN OUR INTERNAL WARRING STRATEGIES AND AS A "REVOLUTIONARY" WHO CAN DISSOLVE AND RECONSTRUCT KNOWLEDGE, THEREBY LIBERATING BOTH THE INDIVIDUAL AND THEIR CULTURE FROM STAGNATION AND TYRANNY (Continued).
"The earliest “stages” of the development of the figure of the hero take the form of  mythic representations of the infant or adolescent, fully or partially dominated by potent  maternal force. This infant or adolescent is the specific individual, under the sway of  the particular mother—and Homo sapiens, the species, subject to nature. In his more mature form,  the hero—formerly “son of the heavenly mother”—can be portrayed as “lover of the  Great Mother” [the mother whose body he “enters” into, in creative (sexual) union, to die  and reincarnate (to fertilize and impregnate)]. The Great Mother is the holy prostitute, the  whore of Babylon, as well as the Virgin Mother, a maiden forever renewed, forever  young, belonging to all men, but to no one man. Myth commonly utilizes the  (symbolically sexual) motif of heavenly incest—the image of devouring or engulfing  encounter, rife with creative potential—to represent union with the primordial feminine,  to portray act of creative (or destructive) encounter between the hero and the possibilities  of life itself. This is “knowledge” as sexual, creative act: the “voluntary generative union”  of consciousness and chaos produces—or revives—order and cosmos.   
The mythology of the hero, in toto, depicts the development and establishment of a  personality capable effacing the most extreme conditions of existence. The hero’s quest  or journey has been represented in mythology and ritual in numerous ways, but the  manifold representations appear in accordance with the myth of the way, as previously  described: a harmonious community or way of life, predictable and stable in structure and  function, is unexpectedly threatened by the emergence of (previously harnessed)  unknown and dangerous forces. An individual of humble and princely origins rises, by  free choice, to counter this threat. This individual is exposed to great personal trials and  risks or experiences physical and psychological dissolution. Nonetheless, he overcomes  the threat, is magically restored (frequently improved) and receives a great reward, in  consequence. He returns to his community with the reward, and (re)establishes social  order (sometimes after a crisis engendered by his return).”
(Jordan Peterson, Maps of Meaning The Architecture of Belief, 1999)

E1.7.B.3.4. THERE ARE INDIVIDUALS FOR WHOM A CONSTANT INTERNAL PEACE AND A HARMONIOUS ARRANGEMENT OF ALL THEIR FACULTIES ARE SO HABITUAL THAT THEY FIND ANY ACTIVITY AIMED AT A GOAL REPUGNANT.

E1.7.B.3.4_REF1_PH  "WITHOUT MELODY. There are people for whom a constant inner repose and a harmonious ordering of all their capabilities is so characteristic that any
goal-directed activity goes against their grain. They are like a piece of music consisting entirely of sustained harmonious chords, with no evidence of even the beginning of a structured, moving melody. At any movement from the outside, their boat at once gains a new equilibrium on the sea of harmonic euphony. Modern people are usually extremely impatient on meeting such natures, who do not become anything—though it may not be said that they are not anything. In certain moods, however, their presence
evokes that rare question: why have melody at all? Why are we not satisfied when life mirrors itself peacefully in a deep lake?
The Middle Ages was richer in such natures than we are. How seldom do we now meet a person who can keep living so peacefully and cheerfully with himself even amidst the turmoil, saying to himself like Goethe: “The best is the deep quiet in which I live and grow against the world, and harvest what they cannot take from me by fire or sword.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human, Aphorism 626, 1878)

E1.7.B.3.4_REF2_LIT "DO I SPEND TOO MUCH TIME AT THIS EPHEMERAL TASK [GARDENING]? In spring, summer, and autumn I work harder at it than at writing, and I expect that looks crazy, but what it does is balance all the anxieties and tensions and keep me sane. Sanity (plus flowers) does make sense. [...]
Gardening is like poetry in that it is gratuitous, and also that it cannot be done on will alone. What will can do, and the only thing it can do, is make time in which to do it. Young poets, enraged because they don’t get published right away, confuse what will can do and what it can’t. It can’t make a tree peony grow to twelve feet in a year or two, and it can’t force the attention of editors and publishers. What it can do is create the space necessary for achievement, little by little."
(May Sarton, The House by the Sea, 1977)

E1.7.B.3.5. "YOU SHY AWAY FROM THE FRUITS OF YOUR LABOR, WISHING THEY WERE DIFFERENT, AND STRAY FROM YOUR TRUE LIFE PATH BECAUSE IT DOESN'T LEAD TO THESE ALTERNATE OUTCOMES. However, this perception of labor and its results - the desire for certain outcomes as a motivator for action, and work as a means to satisfy this desire - is the servitude of the ignorants. They do not understand the true nature of labor, its real source, its true purpose, or its profound value.

Once you embark on the path of Yoga, you'll realize that no step is wasted. Each tiny movement will become an advantage, and no obstacle will hinder your progress. This is a bold and absolute promise, one that a hesitant and fearful mind, besieged and stumbling at every turn, may find difficult to trust."
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, commented by Aurobindo)

E1.7.B.3.5.a. "THE WILL, ENGAGED IN MULTIPLE ACTIVITIES ON VARIOUS PATHS, CONCERNS ITSELF WITH MANY THINGS WHILE NEGLECTING THE ONLY ONE NECESSARY. It is subject to the restless, scattered action of the mind, distributing itself among external life, labor, and its fruits."
(Bhagavad Gitâ, Commented by Aurobindo)

E1.7.B.3.5.a_REF1_PH "THE YOGA OF INTELLIGENT WILL

[...] what [the philosophy of the Gitâ] teaches is above all a practical system of Yoga, and it introduces metaphysical ideas only to explain this practical system.

You shrink from the results of your works, you desire others and you turn away from your true path in life because it does not lead you there. But this conception of works and their result – desire for the result as the motive for action, work as the means of satisfying desire – is the bondage of the ignorant who knows neither what works are, nor their true source, nor their true purpose, nor their high utility. My yoga, the divine Instructor said to Arjuna, will free you from all bondage of the soul to its works.

40 . – On this path effort never goes to waste, and there is no failure. Even a little effort toward spiritual awareness will protect you from the greatest fear.

My yoga, the Divine Teacher told him, will free you from great fear, and even a little of this yoga will bring you liberation. Once you set out on this path, you will see that no step is lost; each of your smallest movements will be an advantage gained; you will find no obstacle that can frustrate your progress. A bold and absolute promise, a promise that the hesitant and fearful mind, besieged and stumbling on every path, cannot easily place its complete trust in."
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, Commented by Aurobindo)

E1.7.B.3.5.a_REF2_PH THE WILL IS DISPERSED AMONG EXTERNAL LIFE, WORKS AND THEIR FRUITS
"Buddhi - this is the term used here - strictly speaking means the mental power of understanding, but this term is obviously used by the Gîtâ in a broad philosophical sense to designate the whole action of the discriminating and deciding mind which determines both the direction and use of our thoughts and the direction and use of our actions; Thought, intelligence, judgment, choice of perception and purpose are all included in the activity of buddhi; for what characterizes unified intelligence is not only the concentration of the knowing mind, but above all the concentration of the deciding mind and its persistence in its decision, vgavasâya; while the sign of dissipated intelligence is not so much a scattering of ideas and perceptions as a scattering of goals and desires, and consequently of will. Will and knowledge are therefore the two functions of buddhi. Unified intelligent will is fixed in the enlightened soul, concentrated in the inner knowledge of the Self; will, on the contrary, whose multiple activities engage in many ways, deals with many things, neglecting the only necessary one; it is subject to the agitated, scattered action of the mind, and disperses in outer life, works, and their fruits."
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, Commented by Aurobindo)


E1.7.B.3.5.b. "YOU ARE ENTITLED TO ACTION, BUT ONLY TO ACTION, AND NEVER TO ITS FRUITS; let not the fruits of your actions be your motive; and yet do not allow in you any attachment to inaction." This illustrates the originality and strength of the Gitâ - it advocates for ongoing work of the soul while avoiding the major flaw of quietist and ascetic philosophies.
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, Commented by Aurobindo)

E1.7.B.3.5.b_REF1_PH "WHAT CAN BE THE ACQUISITIONS AND POSSESSIONS OF THE FREE SOUL? Possessing the Self, we possess all things. And yet the free soul never ceases work and action. After affirming that, for the liberated soul, what exists is this static condition, this superiority over Nature, this emptiness of all that usually constitutes the action of Nature, the Gita can still—and this is its originality and power—claim for this soul the continuation of work, and even command it, thus avoiding the great flaw of purely quietist and ascetic philosophies, a flaw from which we see them striving to escape today.

47 . – You have the right to work, but never to the fruit of work. You should never engage in action for the sake of reward, nor should you long for inaction.

It is because he acts in ignorance, with a distorted intelligence, and consequently with a distorted will, that man is enslaved, or appears to be enslaved, by his works; otherwise works are not bondage to the free soul. It is because of this distorted intelligence that man experiences hope and fear, anger and sorrow, and transient joy; otherwise he can perform the works in perfect serenity and freedom. Therefore, what is first ordained to Arjuna is the yoga of buddhi, intelligence. To act with true intelligence and consequently true will, firmly established in the One, conscious of the unique Self in all and acting from its serene equality, without running in all directions under the thousand impulses of the superficial mental self, is the yoga of intelligent will. Is action not perplexed when faced with the choice between relative good and relative evil, between the fear of sin and the difficult effort of virtue? This is true of the action of ordinary people, but not of the action of the yogi.

49 . – Seek refuge in the attitude of detachment and you will amass the wealth of spiritual awareness. Those who are motivated only by desire for the fruits of action are miserable, for they are constantly anxious about the results of what they do."
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, Commented by Aurobindo)

E1.7.B.3.5.c. “EVEN THE MIND OF THE WISE MAN WHO STRIVES FOR PERFECTION IS DRIVEN BY THE VEHEMENT INSISTENCE OF THE SENSES.” Peace of mind cannot be accomplished perfectly by an act of the intellect alone or by mental discipline alone; it can only be achieved through yoga, which is something higher than oneself and inherently involves calm and self-control.

“He attains peace, whom all desires penetrate like waters into the ocean (an ocean of being and consciousness fills, yet remains still) - not he who (like muddy, troubled waters ) is troubled by the slightest influx of desire.
He who abandons all desires and lives and acts devoid of longing, who has neither "I" nor "mine" (who has dissolved his individual ego into the One, living in that unity), he attains pprofound peace."
Nirvana is not a negative state; it is not the Buddhist annihilation of self, but rather the profound immersion of the distinct personal self into the vast reality of infinite Existence, unified and impersonal.
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, Commented by Aurobindo)

E1.7.B.3.5.c_REF1_PH "EVEN THE MIND OF THE WISE MAN WHO STRIVES FOR PERFECTION is driven, O son of Kunti, by the vehement insistence of the senses.

Certainly, self-discipline and self-control are never easy. Every intelligent man knows that he must exercise some control over himself, and nothing is more common than the advice to control the senses; but in general it is imperfectly given and imperfectly put into practice, in the most limited, most inadequate way. And even the wise man, the man whose soul is clear, full of wisdom and discernment, who truly strives to acquire complete self-control, even he finds himself pushed, hurried, dragged along by the senses.

61 . – They live in wisdom who subdue their senses and keep their minds ever absorbed in me.

It cannot be achieved perfectly by an act of the mind alone, by mental discipline alone; it can only be achieved through yoga with something higher than oneself and with inherent calm and self-control.

62 . - When you keep thinking about sense objects, attachment comes. Attachment breeds desire, the lust of possession that burns to anger. 63 . -  Anger clouds the judgment; you can no longer learn from past mistakes. Lost is the power to choose between what is wise and what is unwise, and your life is utter waste. 64 . -  But when you move amidst the world of sense, free from attachment and aversion alike, 65 . -  there comes the peace in which all sorrows end, and you live in the wisdom of the Self.

It is to this unchangeability of buddhi in equilibrium and self-knowledge - calm unchangeability, without desire, without sorrow - that the Gîtâ gives the name of samâdhi.

70 . – As rivers flow into the ocean but cannot make the vast ocean overflow, so flow the streams of the sense-world into the sea of peace that is the sage. But this is not so with the desirer of desires. 71 . - They are forever free who renounce all selfish desires and break away from the ego-cage of “I,” “me,” and “mine” to be united with
the Lord.

Nirvana is not negative; it is not the self-annihilation of Buddhists, but the great immersion of the distinct personal self in the vast reality of infinite, one, impersonal existence."
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, Commented by Aurobindo)


E1.7.B.3.5.d. “THE POSITIVE AND IMPERATIVE DOCTRINE OF LABOR: ACTION IS NOT JUST PREPARATION, IT IS THE MEANS OF LIBERATION.
The Gîtâ has emphasized withdrawing the will from the ordinary motive of human activity. Yet, labor is insistently presented as part of Yoga, so that there seems to be a radical inconsistency in this teaching. To address this perceived contradiction, the Gîtâ elaborates its positive and imperative doctrine of labor.

"In this world, the soul's effort upon itself (by which it enters the Brahmic condition) is twofold: that of knowledge, and that of labor."

According to the Yoga of the Gîtâ, action is not just preparation; it is the means of liberation. The Gîtâ continually emphasizes and validates this theory. Regrettably, this emphasis couldn't withstand Buddhism's powerful influence in India and was later lost amidst the ascetic delusion popularized by Shankara and the fervor of devotees and saints who renounced the world.

Renunciation is crucial, but true renunciation involves the inner rejection of desire and egoism. Without it, the external abandonment of labor is substanceless and ineffective. With it, such abandonment becomes unnecessary, though not forbidden. Knowledge is vital as the highest force of liberation, but labor, paired with knowledge, is just as crucial. Through the union of knowledge and labor, the soul remains in the Brahmic condition, not only in rest and tranquility but also in the heart of action, its intensity, and violence.”
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, Commented by Aurobindo)

E1.7.B.3.5.d_REF1_PH "SELFLESS SERVICE
ARJUNA
1 . - O Krishna, you have said that knowledge is greater than action; why then do you ask me to wage this terrible war? 

Hitherto the Gîtâ has mainly emphasized the withdrawal of the will from the ordinary motive of human activity (desire), from the normal human temperament (thought and will directed towards the senses, accompanied by their passions and their ignorance), and from its inveterate habit of agitated ideas and desires scattered along various paths - in order to direct it towards the calm and desireless unity and passionless serenity of Brahmanic equilibrium.
And yet, works are persistently presented as part of yoga, so that there seems to be a radical inconsistency in this teaching. In response to this objection, the Gîtâ immediately begins to develop more clearly its positive and imperative doctrine of works.

2 . - Your advice seems inconsistent. Give me one path to follow to the supreme good.

For the yoga of the Gîtâ, as for the Vedic yoga of the works, action is not only a preparation, it is itself the means of liberation; and it is the correctness of this theory that the Gîtâ seeks to emphasize with incessant force and insistence. Unfortunately, this insistence could not prevail in India against the powerful wave of Buddhism; it was subsequently lost in the intensity of the ascetic illusionism popularized by Shankara, in the fervor of the devotees and saints fleeing the world.

Renunciation is essential, but true renunciation is the inner renunciation of desire and selfishness; without it, the material, external renunciation of works is without reality and without effect; with it, this renunciation is not even necessary, though it is not forbidden. Knowledge is essential; there is no higher power of liberation, but works combined with knowledge are also necessary. Through the union of knowledge and works, the soul remains entirely in the Brahmanic state, not only in the rest and tranquility of inactivity, but in the very heart of action, in its intensity and violence. Devotion is of the utmost importance, but so are the works associated with devotion. This is the synthesis of Gîtâ.

KRISHNA

3 . - At the beginning of time I declared two paths for the pure heart: jnana yoga, the contemplative path of spiritual wisdom, and karma yoga, the active path of selfless service.

4 . - One who shirks action does not attain freedom; no one can gain perfection by abstaining from work.

If the works of prakriti continue, how can the soul not be involved? How can I fight and yet not think in my soul, not feel that I, the individual, am fighting, not desire victory, nor be inwardly affected by defeat? It is the teaching of the Samkhians that the intelligence of the man engaged in the activities of nature is caught in the nets of egoism, ignorance, and desire, and is consequently drawn to action; on the contrary, when the intelligence withdraws, action necessarily ceases with the cessation of desire and ignorance. Consequently, the renunciation of life and works is a necessary part, an inevitable circumstance, and an ultimate indispensable means of the movement toward liberation. The Teacher immediately foresees this objection of current logic. No, he says, such renunciation, far from being indispensable, is not even possible.

5 . – Indeed, there is no one who rests for even an instant; all creatures are driven to action by their own nature."
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, Commented by Aurobindo)

E1.7.B.3.5.d_REF2_PH "PEACE IS HAPPINESS AT REST AND HAPPINESS IS PEACE IN MOTION. You can convert peace to happiness anytime you want."
(Naval Ravikant)

E1.7.B.3.5.e. “BUT IS IT POSSIBLE TO ENGAGE IN ACTION WITHOUT DESIRE?
There is an essential difficulty that needs resolving. Given our nature, and since desire is a common principle of action, can we truly initiate action without desire? What we often refer to as disinterested action isn't truly action without desire; it's merely substituting small personal desires for broader ones that seem impersonal, such as virtue, patriotism, or humanity. So, how can we achieve a true absence of desire? We can do this by dedicating all our efforts solely to the divine.

Just as those who are ignorant act with attachment to their actions, those who are knowledgeable must act without attachment, with the intention of uniting nations. They should not unsettle the ignorant who are attached to their labor. Instead, they should engage them in all actions, which they themselves perform with knowledge and yoga.”
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, Commented by Aurobindo)

E1.7.B.3.5.e_REF1_PH IS IT POSSIBLE TO INITIATE AN ACTION THAT IS TRULY DESIRELESS? 
"But one essential difficulty remains to be resolved. Our nature being what it is, and desire being the common principle of its action, is it possible to initiate an action that is truly desireless? For what we ordinarily call disinterested action is not really action without desire; it is only the substitution of certain small personal desires for other larger desires which only have the appearance of being impersonal, virtue, country, humanity. How can we achieve the real absence of desire? By doing all works with sacrifice as the sole object - this is the answer of the Divine Teacher.

9 . – Selfish action imprisons the world. Act selflessly, without any thought of personal profit.

It is obvious that in this spirit all works can be performed, and not only sacrifices and social duties; all actions can be dictated either by the sense of the ego, narrow or broad, or by the love of the Divine. All existence and all action of Prakriti [nature, creative energy (almost synonymous with Shakti)] exist only for the love of the Divine; that is where they come from, that is where they last, that is where they are led.

25 . – The ignorant work for their own profit, Arjuna; the wise work for the welfare of the world, without thought for themselves. 26 . - By abstaining from work you will confuse the ignorant, who are engrossed in their"
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, Commented by Aurobindo)

E1.7.B.3.5.f. "HE WHO IN ACTION CAN SEE INACTION, AND WHO CAN SEE ACTION CONTINUING STILL IN THE CESSATION OF LABOR, IS AMONG MEN THE ONE WITH TRUE REASON AND JUDGEMENT": There's no need for external distinctions, to avoid any necessary labor in this world, or to set limits or barriers around human activities. Instead, all actions should be performed by a soul in yoga with the Divine. Complete inaction is not the solution; a person who has achieved the inner vision of supreme reason understands that such inaction is in itself a constant action, a state subject to nature and its modes.

Outwardly, the liberated man appears to engage in all kinds of actions like other men, perhaps on a larger scale or with greater force and impetus, given the divine will acting in his active nature. However, his efforts completely lack desire. He has renounced any attachment to the outcomes of his actions. When one acts not for the result, but purely as an impersonal instrument of nature, the outcome of this knowledge, this absence of desire, and this impersonality, is perfect equality in soul and nature.
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, Commented by Aurobindo)

E1.7.B.3.5.f_REF1_PH "THE DETERMINISM OF NATURE

In fact, there are several planes of our conscious existence, and what is a practical truth on one of these planes takes on a completely different appearance and consequently ceases to be true as soon as we rise to a higher level from where we can have a more general view.

27 . – All actions are performed by the gunas of prakriti. Deluded by identification with the ego, a person thinks, “I am the doer.” 
28 . - But the illumined man or woman understands the domain of the gunas and is not attached. Such people know that the gunas interact with each other; they do not claim to be the doer.
29 . - Those who are deluded by the operation of the gunas become attached to the results of their action. Those who understand these truths should not unsettle the ignorant."
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, Commented by Aurobindo)

E1.7.B.3.5.f_REF2_PH "If a man loves life, and feels the sacredness and mystery of life, then he knows that life is full of strange and subtle and even conflicting imperatives. And a wise man learns to recognize the imperatives as they arise — or nearly so — and to obey. But most men bruise themselves to death trying to fight and overcome their own, new, life-born needs, life’s ever strange imperatives. The secret of all life is obedience: obedience to the urge that arises in the soul, the urge that is life itself, urging us to new gestures, new embraces, new emotions, new combinations, new creations. [...]
I offer no creed. I offer myself, my heart of wisdom, strange warm cavern where the voice of the oracle steams in from the unknown; I offer my consciousness, which hears the voice; and I offer my mind and my will, for the battle against every obstacle to respond to the voice of life."
(D.H. Lawrence, Kangaroo, 1923)

"Outwardly, the liberated man seems to undertake works of all kinds like other men, on a larger scale perhaps and with more force and impetus, for the power of the divine will acts in his active nature; but his works are all devoid of desire. He has given up all attachment to the fruits of his actions; and when one acts, not for the fruit, but solely as an impersonal instrument of the Master of the works, desire cannot find a place, not even the desire to serve successfully - for the fruit is the Lord's, is determined by Him and not by personal will and effort - nor the desire to serve meritoriously and to the satisfaction of the Master, for the real author is the Lord Himself, [...] on a mission in nature, and not to the limited human personality. The result of this knowledge, absence of desire and impersonality is perfect equality in soul and nature. Equality is the fourth sign of the divine worker. [...]
Once revealed, this knowledge must be accepted with the assent of the mind, the consent of the will, the joy and submission of the heart - the three elements of complete mental faith."
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, Commented by Aurobindo)

E1.7.B.3.5.g. “FOR A SAGE WHO IS CLIMBING THE SLOPE OF YOGA, ACTION IS THE CAUSE; FOR THE SAME SAGE, WHEN HE HAS REACHED THE SUMMIT OF YOGA, SELF-CONTROL IS THE CAUSE.
Labor is the cause of self-perfection, liberation, and nirvana in Brahman. When one engages in labor with persistent inner renunciation, this perfection, this liberation, this conquest of the desire-mind, ego in yoga, and the lower nature is easily achieved. And when you've reached the summit? Then labor is no longer the cause; the tranquility obtained from self-mastery and self-possession through labor becomes the cause. What does it cause? It causes stability in the self, in Brahman consciousness, and perfect equanimity, which enables the divine labor of a liberated man.”
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, Commented by Aurobindo)

E1.7.B.3.5.g_REF1_PH "THE SUPREME WORD OF GITA 

Understanding and knowledge and liberation from the confusion of ignorance, forgiveness and truth and self-control and the tranquility of inner mastery, sorrow and joy, creation and destruction, fear and fearlessness, glory and shame, non-violence and equanimity, contentment and austerity and charity, all these things in their separate diversity are subjective becomings of existences, and all emanate from Me.

This knowledge, transferred to the affective and emotional level, to the level of temperament, becomes a serene love and an intense worship of the original and transcendent Divine, above us, ever-present Master of all things here below, God in man, God in nature. It is primarily a wisdom of the intellect, buddhi [reason, intelligence, mental power of understanding], but it is accompanied by a state of spiritualized emotion of the affective nature, bhâva [subjective state or feeling; becoming]. This change of heart and mind is the beginning of a total change in one's entire nature. New inner birth and becoming prepare us for union with the ultimate object of our love and worship, madbhâvâya. There is an intense joy of love in the grandeur, beauty, and perfection of the Divine Being, which is henceforth seen everywhere in the world and above it, prîti [joy, joy of love]. This deeper ecstasy takes the place of the outward and scattered joy of the mind in existence; or rather, it draws all other joy into itself and transforms, by a marvelous alchemy, the feelings of the mind and heart and all the movements of the senses.

9 . – Their thoughts are all absorbed in me, and all their vitality flows to me. Teaching one another, talking about me always, they are happy and fulfilled."
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, Commented by Aurobindo)

E1.7.B.3.5.h." HE WHO PRACTICES EXCLUSIVELY THE YOGA OF KNOWLEDGE IMPOSES UPON HIMSELF A PAINFUL STRUGGLE AGAINST THE MULTIPLE DEMANDS OF HIS NATURE; he refuses even to satisfy its noblest demands, and repudiates even the highest impulses of his spirit, whenever they imply relationships, and do not rise to an absolute negation. The living path of the Gîtâ, on the other hand, uncovers the most intense exalting tendency of our entire being, and, directing it towards God, employs knowledge, will, feelings and the instinct for perfection as powerful wings for the liberating ascent.

- "Better in truth is knowledge than effort; better than knowledge is meditation; better than meditation is renunciation of the fruit of action; from renunciation comes peace."
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, Commented by Aurobindo)

E1.7.B.3.5.h_REF1_PH DON'T THINK THAT THE MORE DIFFICULT THE PROCESS, THE MORE EFFECTIVE IT IS.
"The Way of Love

KRISHNA

2 . - Those who set their hearts on me and worship me with unfailing devotion and faith are more established in yoga.

The highest faith is that which sees God in everything, and for it manifestation and non-manifestation are one and the same Divine. Perfect union is that in which one touches the Divine in every moment, in every action, with the whole of nature.

3 . - As for those who seek the transcendental Reality, without name, without form, contemplating the Unmanifested, beyond the reach of thought and of feeling, 4 . - with their senses subdued and mind serene and striving for the good of all beings, they too will verily come unto me.

For they are not mistaken in their aspiration, but they follow a more difficult, less complete and less perfect path. The Immutable offers no hold to the mind; it can only be conquered by a spiritual impersonality that is motionless and silent, and those who seek this alone must completely restrain and even completely withdraw the activity of the mind and the senses within.

5 . – Yet hazardous and slow is the path to the Unrevealed, difficult for physical creatures to tread.

And it should not be thought that the more difficult the effort, the higher and more effective the process. The easier path of Gîtâ leads more quickly, more naturally, and more normally to the same absolute liberation. Those who practice only the yoga of knowledge impose upon themselves a painful struggle against the multiple demands of their nature; they refuse to satisfy even its noblest demands and reject even the highest impulses of their spirit whenever they involve relations that do not rise to an absolute of negation. The living path of Gîtâ, on the other hand, discovers the most intense exalting tendency of our entire being and, directing it towards God, uses knowledge, will, feeling, the instinct for perfection as so many powerful wings for the liberating ascent.

12 . – Better indeed is knowledge than mechanical practice. Better than knowledge is meditation. But better still is surrender of attachment to results, because there follows immediate peace.

Abhyâsa, the practice of a method, the repetition of an effort and an experience, is a great and powerful thing; but superior is knowledge, thought directed successfully and in the light to the Truth that is behind things. This knowledge of thought, in turn, is surpassed by a complete silent concentration on the Truth, so that the consciousness can finally live in the Truth, always be one with it. But even more powerful is the renunciation of the fruits of action, because this immediately destroys any cause for disturbance, automatically creating and maintaining inner peace and tranquility. And peace and tranquility are the basis upon which everything becomes perfect, in the sure possession of a tranquil mind."
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, Commented by Aurobindo)

E1.7.B.3.5.h_REF1.1_PH HUMAN BEINGS ARE MIXED "FORCES OF EVOLUTION

KRISHNA

1 . - Let me tell you more about the wisdom that transcends all knowledge, through which the saints and sages attained perfection. 2 . - Those who rely on this wisdom will be united with me. For them there is neither rebirth nor fear of death.

3 . - My womb is prakriti; in that I place the seed. Thus all created things are born. 4 . - Everything born, Arjuna, comes from the womb of prakriti, and I am the seed-giving father.

5 . - It is the three gunas born of prakriti – sattva, rajas, and tamas – that bind the immortal Self to the body. 6 . - Sattva – pure, luminous, and free from sorrow – binds us with attachment to happiness and wisdom. 7 . - Rajas is passion, arising from selfish desire and attachment. These bind the Self with compulsive action. 8 . - Tamas, born of ignorance, deludes all creatures through heedlessness, indolence, and sleep.

9 . - Sattva binds us to happiness; rajas binds us to action. Tamas, distorting our understanding, binds us to delusion.

These three qualities of nature are certainly present and active in all human beings, and no one can be considered wholly devoid of one or the other, or free from any of the three; but they are not constant in every man in the quantitative action of their force, or in the combination of their elements: for they are variable and in a constant state of displacement, mutual shock, and interaction. It is only by the general and habitual predominance of one or other of these qualities that a man can be said to be sattvic or rajasic or tamasic in nature; but this can only be a general qualification, not an absolute or exclusive one."
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, Commented by Aurobindo)

E1.7.B.3.5.h_REF1.1.a_PH "THE MIND IS ALERT AND ENLIGHTENED, THE SENSES SHARPENED, THE WHOLE MIND SATISFIED AND FULL OF BRILLIANCE, AND THE NERVOUS SYSTEM CALMED, FILLED WITH CLARITY AND LUMINOUS EASE, prasâda [clarity and blissful tranquillity]. Knowledge, harmonious ease, pleasure and happiness, these are the characteristic results of sallva. Can sallva, the power of knowledge and happiness, become a chain? Yes, because it is a principle of mental nature, a principle of limited and limiting knowledge, a principle of happiness dependent on this or that object duly pursued or attained, or even on certain states of mind, on a mental light that can be more or less clear for only half a day. Its pleasure can only be an ephemeral intensity or a muted satisfaction. Infinite spiritual knowledge and the free, intrinsic joy of our spiritual being are quite different.

10 . – Sattva predominates when rajas and tamas are transformed. Rajas prevails when sattva is weak and tamas overcome. Tamas prevails
when rajas and sattva are dormant.

11 . - When sattva predominates, the light of wisdom shines through every gate of the body."
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, Commented by Aurobindo)

E1.7.B.3.5.h_REF1.1.b_PH EVEN WHEN THE PLEASURE OF POSSESSION IS REALISED, WE REMAIN UNSTABLE AND RESTLESS IN THE ABSENCE OF CLEAR KNOWLEDGE AND TRUE ENJOYMENT. "Appetite, impulse of lust, initiative of action, fear, desire - this is what increases in us when rajas increases.

It is the force of desire which is the motive for all ordinary personal initiative of action, for all that movement in our nature - agitation, seeking, impulse - which drives us to action and works, pravritti [impulse to action]. Rajas, then, is obviously the kinetic force in the modes of nature. Its fruit is the thirst for action, but it is also sorrow, pain, suffering of all kinds; for it does not have the right possession of its object - desire actually implies non-possession; and even when its pleasure of possession is realised, it is unstable and realised, it is unstable and disturbed because it has no clear knowledge, does not know how to possess, cannot find the secret of harmony and true enjoyment. All ignorant and passionate pursuit of life belongs to the rajasic mode of nature.
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, Commented by Aurobindo)

E1.7.B.3.5.h_REF1.1.c_PH IGNORANCE AND INACTION "Ignorance, indolence, negligence and aberration - this is what happens when tamas predominates, O Joy of the Kurus.

It is the darkness of tamas that obscures knowledge and causes all confusion and aberration. That is why tamas is the opposite of sallva, for the essence of sallva is illumination, prakâsha, and the essence of tamas is the absence of light and knowledge, aprakâsha. But as well as incapacity and carelessness in error, inattention, misunderstanding or non-understanding, tamas produces incapacity and carelessness in action; indolence, sluggishness and sleep belong to this guna. This is why tamas is also the opposite of rajas; for the essence of rajas is movement, impulse and kinetic force, pravritti, while the essence of tamas is inertia, apravritti. Tamas, doubly negative, is the inertia of ignorance and the inertia of inactivity".
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, Commented by Aurobindo)

E1.7.B.3.5.h_REF1.1.d_PH THE Gîtâ INSISTS ON THE NECESSITY OF ACTION "The Gîtâ, while demanding that the soul be freed from fashions, insists on the necessity of action. This is why the Gîtâ's insistence on the renunciation of fruits is so important; for it is the desire for fruits that is the most powerful cause of the soul's bondage; abandoning this desire, it can be free in action.

Ignorance is the result of tamasic action; pain, the result of rajasic work - pain in its many forms, reaction, disappointment, dissatisfaction, the feeling of impermanence - and therefore there is nothing to be gained by clinging to the fruits of this kind of activity, for they are followed by these undesirable consequences. But the fruit of rightly performed works is pure and sattvic, the inner result is knowledge and happiness. And yet attachment, even to these sources of pleasure, must be completely abandoned; first, because they are limited and limiting forms in the mind; and second, because, since sallva is constantly mixed with rajas and tamas, which besiege it and can dominate it at any moment, there is a perpetual insecurity in the possession of these pleasures.

But even if one is free from all attachment to the fruit, one may be attached to the work itself, either for its own sake - and this is the essence of the rajasic hindrance - or through weak submission to the impulses of nature - and this is the tamasic hindrance - or because the thing done is right and therefore attractive - and this is the cause of the sattvic attachment which is strong in the man of virtue or the man of knowledge. It is then, without doubt, necessary to have recourse to this other injunction of the Gîtâ: "to surrender the action itself to the Lord of the works, and to be nothing more than an instrument, equal and without desire, of His will" (XIV, 19).
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, Commented by Aurobindo)

E1.7.B.3.5.h_REF1.1.e_PH UNE ACTION IMPERSONNELLE ET UNIVERSELLE POUR LE BIEN DU MONDE "THE POWER OF FAITH

3 . – Our faith conforms to our nature, Arjuna. Human nature is made of faith. A person is what his shraddha is.

If we look closely at this fruitful idea, we find that this single line, with its few powerful words, implies almost the entire theory of the modern pragmatic gospel. For if a man, or the soul in a man, consists in the faith that is in him - understood in this profound sense - it follows that the truth which he sees and wants to live is for him the truth of his being, his own truth, which he has created or is creating, and for him there can be no other real truth. This truth belongs to his inner and outer action, to his future, to the dynamism of his soul, and not to that which never changes within him. He is what he is today because of a past will of his nature, sustained and continued by a present will to know, to believe, and to be in his intelligence and vital force; and whatever new direction this will and faith, acting in the very substance of his being, take, that is what he will tend to become in the future. We create our own truth of existence through our own actions of mind and life, that is, we create our own being, we make ourselves. But this is, of course, only one aspect of the truth.

The sattvic sacrifice is very close to the ideal and leads directly to the quality of action required by the Gîtâ; but it is not the ultimate and highest ideal, it is not yet the action of the man who has become perfect and lives in the divine nature. For it is accomplished as a specific dharma and offered as a sacrifice or service to the gods, to some power or partial aspect of the Divine manifested in ourselves or in the universe. Work done in selfless religious faith, or even without selfishness, for humanity, or even impersonally, out of devotion to right or truth, is sattvic in nature, and such action is necessary for our perfection; for it purifies our thought, our will, and the substance of our nature. The culmination of sattvic action to which we must aspire is of an even broader and freer quality; it is the ultimate high sacrifice offered by us to the Supreme Divine in His Integral Being, with the aspiration of Purushottama, with the vision of Vâsudéva in all that is; it is action done impersonally, universally, for the good of the world, for the fulfilment of the divine will in the universe. This culmination leads sattvic action to transcend itself, leading to the immortal Dharma. For then comes a freedom in which there is no personal action, no sattvic rule of dharma, no limitation by shastra; lower reason and will are themselves transcended; it is not they but a higher wisdom that dictates and guides action and assigns its object. There is no question of personal fruit, for it is not our will that is at work, but a Supreme Will of which our soul is the instrument. There is neither self-consciousness nor self-forgetfulness, for the Jiva, the eternal portion of the Divine, is united with the supreme Self of His existence, and He and all are one in that Self, in that Spirit. There is no personal action, for we offer all actions to the Master of our works, and it is He who does the action through the divinised Prakriti. There is no sacrifice - unless we say that the Master of Sacrifice, in His cosmic form, offers to Himself the works of His own energy in the Jiva. It is the supreme state of surpassing oneself that we attain through action, which is sacrifice; it is the perfection of the soul that has attained full consciousness in the divine nature".
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, Commented by Aurobindo)

E1.7.B.3.5.h_REF1.1.f_PH TRUE RENUNCIATION CONSISTS IN ABANDONING ATTACHMENT TO THE RESULTS OF ONE'S ACTIONS AND ACTING SELFLESSLY.
"FREEDOM & RENUNCIATION

KRISHNA

2 . – To refrain from selfish acts is one kind of renunciation, called sannyasa; to renounce the fruit of action is another, called tyaga.

Sannyâsa, in the terminology used by the sages, refers to the renunciation of desirous actions. In this sense, it is not Sannyâsa but Tyâga that is the best path. For what is to be rejected is not actions tainted with desire, but the desire that attaches to them. The fruit of action may come by the dispensation of the Master of Works, but our selfishness must not demand it as a reward, nor make it a condition of the work. It may also be that this fruit will never come, and yet the work must be done as an action to be done, kartavyam karma, an action required of us by the Master within us. Success or failure is in His hands and He will order it according to His omniscient will and His unfathomable plans. In truth, action, any action, must in the end be surrendered, not materially by abstention, immobility, inertia, but spiritually to the Master of our being, whose power alone can bring about the accomplishment of any action. We must abandon the misconception that we are the author of action, for in reality it is the Universal Shakti that works through our personality and ego. The spiritual transfer of all our works to the Master and His Shakti is, in the teaching of the Gîtâ, true Sannyâsa.

The sattvic principle of renunciation is to renounce not the action but the personal demand, the ego factor behind the action. It is to perform works dictated not by desire but by the law of righteous living, or by the essential nature, its knowledge, its ideal, its faith in itself and the truth it sees, its shraddhâ. Or, on a higher spiritual level, one lets the will of the Master dictate these actions and accomplishes them, the mind in yoga, without personal attachment to the action or the fruit of the action. One must completely renounce all desire, all choice, all selfish impulses where one thinks only of oneself, and finally that much more subtle selfishness of the will which says: "The work is mine, I am its author", or even "The work is God's, but I am its author". One should not be attached to work that is pleasant, desirable, lucrative or successful, and one should not do it because of that nature; but even this work must be done, totally, in self-denial, with the consent of the spirit, if it is the action required from above and within us, kartavyam karma. There must be no aversion to unpleasant, undesirable or futile actions that bring or are likely to bring suffering, danger, harshness or disastrous consequences; for this too must be accepted, totally, in self-denial, with a deep understanding of its necessity and its meaning, if it is the work that must be done, kartavyam karma.

26 . – Sattvic workers are free from egotism and selfish attachments, full of enthusiasm and fortitude in success and failure alike.

He who acts in sattva is filled with a high enthusiasm, pure and without selfishness, for the action to be done. At the summit of Sattva and beyond, this determination, this zeal, this enthusiasm, becomes the spontaneous play of spiritual tapas, and ultimately the supreme power of the soul, the direct power of God, the powerful and firm movement of a divine energy in the human instrument, the sure steps of the seer's will, the Gnostic intelligence, and with it the abundant joy of the free spirit in the works of liberated nature.

30 . – To know when to act and when to refrain from action, what is right action and what is wrong, what brings security and what insecurity, what brings freedom and what bondage: these are the signs of a sattvic intellect."
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, Commented by Aurobindo)

E1.7.B.3.5.h_REF1.1.g_PH THE THREE KINDS OF HAPPINESS
"36 . - Now listen, Arjuna: there are also three kinds of happiness. By sustained effort, one comes to the end of sorrow. 37 . - That which seems like poison at first, but tastes like nectar in the end – this is the joy of sattva, born of a mind at peace with itself. 38 . - Pleasure from the senses seems like nectar at first, but it is bitter as poison in the end. This is the kind of happiness that comes to the rajasic. 39. - Those who are tamasic draw their pleasures from sleep, indolence, and intoxication. Both in the beginning and in the end, this happiness is a delusion.

What the sattvic nature seeks is the satisfaction of the higher mind and spirit; and when this great object of its quest is attained, then comes a clear and pure happiness of the soul, a state of fulfilment, a lasting ease and peace. This happiness does not depend on external things, but only on ourselves, on the flowering of the best, of the most intimate in us. But it is not, at first, our normal possession; it must be conquered by self-discipline, by work on the soul, by a powerful and arduous effort. And this means, first of all, much lost habitual pleasure, much suffering and struggle, a poison born of the agitation of our nature, a painful conflict of forces, and, against this change, much revolt and resistance due to the ill will of the elements of being or the obstinacy of the vital movements; but in the end the Nectar of Immortality replaces all this bitterness, and as we ascend to the higher spiritual nature we reach the end of pain, the euthanasia of sorrow and suffering. This is the incomparable happiness that descends upon us at the point or summit where sattvic discipline culminates. This surpassing of oneself in sattvic nature comes to us when we go beyond sattvic pleasures, which are noble but still inferior, beyond the pleasures of knowledge, virtue and mental peace, and when we attain the eternal tranquillity of the Self and the spiritual ecstasy of divine unity. This spiritual joy is no longer sattvic happiness, sukham, but absolute ananda - ananda [spiritual delight, the bliss of the mind], the secret delight from which all things are born, by which all things are sustained, and to which all things can rise in spiritual culmination. Man can possess it only when, free, liberated from the ego, he lives one with his supreme self, one with all beings, one with God, in the absolute bliss of the Spirit.
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, Commented by Aurobindo)

E1.7.B.3.6. WHY IS IT SO DIFFICULT TO ESCAPE THE MODE OF THE WILL and find peace in contemplation or in action detached from its fruits, as described by ante-predictive philosophies? It's because we are the heirs of over two thousand years of rationalist philosophy - we are conditioned to will.

E1.7.B.3.6.b. THE WESTERN VOLUNTARIST DOCTRINE...

E1.7.B.3.6.b_REF1_PH "A LOT OF PEOPLE SAY, “IF YOU WANT TO BE HAPPY, DON’T HAVE EXPECTATIONS.” And I think that’s a really good way to be unhappy for the rest of your life because … if you don’t have expectations, you will just put up with everything. I mean, you don’t expect anything for yourself. With high expectations, with [a] kind of enforceability around that, you’re not going to put up with a bad relationship, a bad work environment, a bad employee, all of these types of things."

"If you are looking for a partner to build with, you’re going to look for different traits and qualities than somebody who just clocks in and clocks out."

"You have to care deeply to be able to challenge directly, and … somebody has to know that you care deeply about who they are in their role, that you care about their performance, that this is coming from a place that’s meant to make them better. And if it’s not coming from that place, and it’s coming from a place of punishing or shaming or humiliating or dominating, it’s not a really effective thing to do. But people can take hard feedback from people that they know are in their corner."

"We all have bad moments, bad minutes, bad hours, but we don’t have to have bad days."
(Dr. Julie Gurner cited in FS | BRAIN FOOD)

E1.7.B.3.6.b_REF2_PO "HURRY

We stop at the dry cleaners and the grocery store   
and the gas station and the green market and   
Hurry up honey, I say, hurry,   
as she runs along two or three steps behind me   
her blue jacket unzipped and her socks rolled down.   

Where do I want her to hurry to? To her grave?   
To mine? Where one day she might stand all grown?   
Today, when all the errands are finally done, I say to her,   
Honey I'm sorry I keep saying Hurry—   
you walk ahead of me. You be the mother.   

And, Hurry up, she says, over her shoulder, looking   
back at me, laughing. Hurry up now darling, she says,   
hurry, hurry, taking the house keys from my hands."
(Marie Howe, 2008)

Listen to the poem read by Marie Howe:
https://onbeing.org/poetry/hurry/

E1.7.B.3.6.b_REF3_PO ”I’M NOT IN A HURRY. IN A HURRY FOR WHAT?
The sun and moon aren’t in a hurry; they’re right.
To hurry is to suppose we can overtake our legs
Or leap over our shadow.
No, I’m not in a hurry.
If I stretch out my arm, I’ll reach exactly as far as my arm
     reaches
And not half an inch farther.
I touch where my ﬁnger touches, not where I think.
I can only sit down where I am.
This sounds ridiculous, like all absolutely true truths,
But what’s really ridiculous is how we’re always thinking of
     something else,
And we’re always outside it, because we’re here.”
(Fernando Pessoa, 20 June 1919 - signed as Albert Caeiro) 

E1.7.B.3.6.b_REF4_PH IN THE CHAPTER “APPRENTICESHIP AND ENCULTURATION” OF MAPS OF MEANING (1999), JORDAN PETERSON PROVIDES A COMPLEX DEVELOPMENTAL THEORY OF FREEDOM, WHICH HE CALLS THE "PHILOSOPHY OF APPRENTICESHIP." 
1. It Outlines a Complete "Path": The text describes a clear developmental path toward "true freedom." This path is not immediate but proceeds through necessary stages: from childhood dependency, to "apprenticeship" and "subjugation to lawful authority" (identification with the group/tradition), and finally to the potential for mature, creative self-mastery.
2. It Defines the "Technique of the Self": The core technique described is discipline through submission. Drawing heavily on Nietzsche, the text argues that a "long compulsion" and obedience "over a long period of time and in a single direction" is the "indispensable means of spiritual discipline and cultivation." This "tyranny," whether from a church, a philosophy, or a craft, is what "trains the spirit to strength, ruthless curiosity, and subtle mobility."
3. It Is Aimed at "Inner Transformation": The entire purpose of this "apprenticeship" is to instigate a profound inner transformation. It is designed to turn the "undisciplined" individual, who is paralyzed by the "too much unknown" of childhood, into a mature individual capable of "self-mastery" and heroic, creative action.
4. The Goal Is a Higher "Liberation": The text makes it clear that submission to tradition is not the end goal, but a necessary phase. The ultimate liberation is the ability to "transcend tradition and dogma" after one has mastered the discipline it teaches. This is a sophisticated model where a period of "long unfreedom of the spirit" becomes the paradoxical precondition for a higher, more potent form of freedom.
5. It Critiques "Incomplete" Paths: By contrasting genuine myth with ideologies ("incomplete myths—as partial stories"), the text also explains the pitfalls on this path. It critiques simplistic worldviews (like the romantic idea that "man is by nature good, and that only our institutions have made him bad") as inadequate guides, reinforcing the need for a more complete and difficult engagement with the totality of experience.
(Pierre Schindler)

E1.7.B.3.6.c.  ... VERSUS THE LETTING-GO OF EASTERN PHILOSOPHIES.
Wu-wei refers to a state of mind where an individual feels as if they are doing nothing, yet they are optimally active and effective. It represents dynamic, effortless, and unselfconscious action that encompasses the integration of body, emotions, and mind. Many desirable states are best pursued indirectly, as conscious thought and strenuous effort can hinder their achievement.

E1.7.B.3.6.c_REF1_PH TRYING TOO HARD CAN HINDER SUCCESS "Slingerland frames the paradoxical premise at the heart of his book with an illustrative example: a game called Mindball at his local science museum in Vancouver, in which two players sit opposite one another, each wearing an electrode-equipped headband that registers general activity in the brain, and try to mentally push a metal ball from the center of the table to the other player; whoever does this first wins. There is, of course, a rub:
"The motive force — measured by each player’s electrodes, and conveyed to the ball by a magnet hidden underneath the table—is the combination of alpha and theta waves produced by the brain when it’s relaxed: the more alpha and theta waves you produce, the more force you mentally exert on the ball. Essentially, Mindball is a contest of who can be the most calm. It’s fun to watch. The players visibly struggle to relax, closing their eyes, breathing deeply, adopting vaguely yogic postures. The panic they begin to feel as the ball approaches their end of the table is usually balanced out by the overeagerness of their opponent, both players alternately losing their cool as the big metal ball rolls back and forth. You couldn’t wish for a better, more condensed illustration of how difficult it is to try not to try." [...]

Some of the most elusive objects of our incessant pursuits are happiness and spontaneity, both of which are strikingly resistant to conscious pursuit. Two ancient Chinese concepts might be our most powerful tools for resolving this paradox — wu-wei (pronounced oooo-way) and de (pronounced duh). Slingerland explains:
"Wu-wei literally translates as “no trying” or “no doing,” but it’s not at all about dull inaction. In fact, it refers to the dynamic, effortless, and unselfconscious state of mind of a person who is optimally active and effective. People in wu-wei feel as if they are doing nothing, while at the same time they might be creating a brilliant work of art, smoothly negotiating a complex social situation, or even bringing the entire world into harmonious order. For a person in wu-wei, proper and effective conduct follows as automatically as the body gives in to the seductive rhythm of a song. This state of harmony is both complex and holistic, involving as it does the integration of the body, the emotions, and the mind. If we have to translate it, wu-wei is probably best rendered as something like “effortless action” or “spontaneous action.” Being in wu-wei is relaxing and enjoyable, but in a deeply rewarding way that distinguishes it from cruder or more mundane pleasures.  [...]
We have been taught to believe that the best way to achieve our goals is to reason about them carefully and strive consciously to reach them. Unfortunately, in many areas of life this is terrible advice. Many desirable states — happiness, attractiveness, spontaneity — are best pursued indirectly, and conscious thought and effortful striving can actually interfere with their attainment. [...]
Our modern conception of human excellence is too often impoverished, cold, and bloodless. Success does not always come from thinking more rigorously or striving harder."
(Marina Popova, Brain Pickings, on Edward Slingerland's Trying Not to Try: The Art and Science of Spontaneity)

E1.7.B.3.6.c_REF2_PH "WUWEI 
Non-action. A major concept in Chinese thought, especially in Taoism and Confucianism. It is not inertia, inaction or passivity in the usual sense of the word, but rather the consideration of that which is passive (see this word) in all natural and successful action: it is the right action, therefore also the minimal action, the one that changes only what needs to be changed and does so with the least effort, because it is in harmony with nature or reality. Accompanying the movement, rather than trying to create or reverse it (this is also the logic of judo), letting nature take its course, which can only be commanded by obeying it (Bacon, Taoist master!).), to swim with the current, as the Buddha said, instead of being carried by it or exhausting oneself trying to fight against it, to avoid pointless fights, anger and haste, to act calmly and with "flexibility", as Epictetus also said, to fight peacefully, to let nature or history take its course, if you can, instead of letting your ego or your mind do it... "Lao Tzu said: 'By not doing, there is nothing that is not done. It is the opposite not of will but of voluntarism, not of courage but of pride, not of action but of stupidity. The humility of the wise, the clarity of the man of action. The two are one in wuwei".
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.7.B.3.6.c_REF2.1_PH ONE CAN SAY A "HIGH-QUALITY 'NO'" WITHOUT REACTIVITY, AND ONE'S ACTIONS BECOME INFUSED WITH THE "SOURCE-ENERGY OF BEING," TRANSFORMING THEM INTO A "JOYFUL CELEBRATION."
" Let me illustrate how surrender can work in relationships.  When you become involved in an argument or some conflict situation, perhaps with a partner or someone close to you, start by observing how defensive you become as your own position is attacked, or feel the force of your own aggression as you attack the other person's position.  Observe the attachment to your views and opinions. Feel the mental-emotional energy behind your need to be right and make the other person wrong.  That's the energy of the egoic mind.  You make it conscious by acknowledging it, by feeling it as fully as possible.  Then one day, in the middle of an argument, you will suddenly realize that you have a choice, and you may decide to drop your own reaction -- just to see what happens.  You surrender.  I don't mean dropping the reaction just verbally by saying "Okay, you are right," with a look on your face that says, "I am above all this childish unconsciousness." That's just displacing the resistance to another level, with the egoic mind still in charge, claiming superiority.  I am speaking of letting go of the entire mental-emotional energy field inside you that was fighting for power.
The ego is cunning, so you have to be very alert, very present, and totally honest with yourself to see whether you have truly relinquished your identification with a mental position and so freed yourself from your mind.  If you suddenly feel very light, clear and deeply at peace, that is an unmistakable sign that you have truly surrendered.  Then observe what happens to the other person's mental position as you no longer energize it through resistance.  When identification with mental positions is out of the way, true communication begins.
What about nonresistance in the face of violence, aggression, and the like?
Nonresistance doesn't necessarily mean doing nothing.  All it means is that any "doing" becomes nonreactive.  Remember the deep wisdom underlying the practice of Eastern martial arts: don't resist the opponent's force.  Yield to overcome.
Having said that, "doing nothing" when you are in a state of intense presence is a very powerful transformer and healer of situations and people.  In Taoism, there is a term called wu wei, which is usually translated as "actionless activity" or "sitting quietly doing nothing." In ancient China, this was regarded as one of the highest achievements or virtues.  It is radically different from inactivity in the ordinary state of consciousness, or rather unconsciousness, which stems from fear, inertia, or indecision.  The real "doing nothing" implies inner nonresistance and intense alertness.
On the other hand, if action is required, you will no longer react from your conditioned mind, but you will respond to the situation out of your conscious presence.  In that state, your mind is free of concepts, including the concept of nonviolence.  So who can predict what you will do?
The ego believes that in your resistance lies your strength, whereas in truth resistance cuts you off from Being, the only place of true power.  Resistance is weakness and fear masquerading as strength.  What the ego sees as weakness is your Being in its purity, innocence, and power.  What it sees as strength is weakness.  So the ego exists in a continuous resistance-mode and plays counterfeit roles to cover up your "weakness," which in truth is your power.
Until there is surrender, unconscious role-playing constitutes a large part of human interaction.  In surrender, you no longer need ego defenses and false masks.  You become very simple, very real.  "That's dangerous," says the ego. "You'll get hurt.  You'll become vulnerable." What the ego doesn't know, of course, is that only through the letting go of resistance, through becoming "vulnerable," can you discover your true and essential invulnerability.”
(Eckhart Tolle, The Power Of Now, 1997)

E1.7.B.3.6.c_REF3_PH "WUWEI

From there we come to the fundamental concept of the Tao: non-action, wuei. Wuwei is obviously not the opposite of the will to live: it is not a will to die: it is what thwarts, evades, disorients the will to live. It is therefore structurally neutral: that which thwarts the paradigm.

In the Tao, Wuwei: sometimes said to mean: favouring the "spontaneous" over the "voluntary". It is true: freedom from will. But "spontaneous" is not good: for us it has a wild, instinctive, anti-intellectual connotation. Wou-wei: not directing, not finalising one's power, leaving it in place. For example: the source of the breath (Lien Ki) is superior to the conduct of the breath (Hing K'i). Or again, not using one's strength: for example, not using one's wisdom or knowledge, or using it to a minimum, purely for protection and prudence. Cf. Pyrrho: "He philosophised according to the reasoning of doubt, without acting recklessly".

The profound attitude of Wuwei Tao = not to choose. Now there are two kinds of "not choosing": a "not choosing" that is thrown around, panicked, shameful, frowned upon, as opposed to a "not choosing" that is accepted, calm, I would say. The latter: extremely difficult because it goes against public opinion, damages the imago → it must therefore be accepted → Tao was very aware of this difficulty: a poem (Tao + Zen) says: "The perfect Tao offers no difficulty, / Except that it avoids choosing". This non-choice is not a sublimating abstinence, an asceticism, a spirituality: "Do not oppose the sensual world". One can clearly see the paradox of Wou-wei (for us Westerners): a powerful subversion of all our moral values, and especially "progressive" values, in this word: "The wise man does not fight" (remember that this is a pagan thought: the absence of fighting is not seen as a gain in heaven), or another form of paradox, a socialised form. For Leang Li (Grenier): "He was ready to follow everything [...] For him, everything was in a state of destruction, everything was under construction. This is called tranquillity in disorder. Calm in disorder means perfection".

3) FIGURES OF THE WEST

Our entire Western world: moral ideology of the will, of wanting (to seize, to dominate, to live, to impose one's truth, etc.). The West: land of proselytism → therefore, obviously, Western figures of Wou-wei are rare and above all partial (if there were a Taoist sage, by definition we would not know him): only moments, tendencies, aspects of a few individuals. [...]

4) THE SACRED

[...] Grenier, Tao, p. 103: “By producing forests, the mountain attracts those who will strip it bare. By letting its fat drip, the roast activates the fire that grills it. The cinnamon tree is cut because its bark is a sought-after condiment. The varnish tree is felled to rob it of its precious sap. Almost all human beings imagine  that it is a good thing to be considered capable of something. In reality, it is an advantage to be considered incapable of anything.

Wonderful! The basic status of the sacred: to be good for nothing! The only danger is that the sacred is not eternal: there may be societies where it is considered immoral to do nothing and where useless and sacred oaks are cut down. The Taoist ideal would be to be sacred without it being seen: a contradiction in terms: an invisible Wuwei, in other words cheating from the moment it is said.”
(Roland Barthes, The Neutral, Course at the Collège de France, 1977-1978)

E1.7.B.3.6.c_REF3.1_PH “TAO: IMAGE OF THE MIRROR
It is not the same theme as in our culture, where the mirror is above all a symbol of the ego, of Narcissus. Chuang-Tzu: “The Perfect One uses his mind as a mirror; he neither follows things up nor goes to meet them (as politeness requires); he responds to them without holding them back. This is what enables him to take charge of all things without them harming him [...] To him who is in himself without things remaining in him, things show themselves as they are; his movement is apathetic as is that of water, his immobility like that of the mirror, his response like that of the echo...”. 

Note: 
a) The Tao mirror does not have the passive and mechanical aspect of the Western mirror (a mirror that speaks: only in fairy magic): it responds (without holding back), it has the beauty, the mysterious activity of “still and clear water”;
b) There is action (responding) but no appropriation (wanting to grasp): “It responds to them without holding them back.”
(Roland Barthes, The Neutral, Course at the Collège de France, 1977-1978)

E1.7.B.3.6.c_REF3.1.a_PH “SITTING DOWN

[...] In Zen
Sitting down is associated with the idea of non-profit: Mushotoku: no profit, no desire to take (mu = no + shotoku = profit) Shikantaza sitting down without aim, without profit. Despite its strong negativity, do not flatten the gesture (the posture): should not be flattened: sitting is active = acting, the antonym of falling on the spot: Beckett (All those who fall): “Ah, to spread oneself on the ground like dung and not move anymore”. For the seated person thinks, watches (viget animus → corpus sentit), enjoys in laziness. → Dream of a whole day, just once, completely seated: without any demands, tasks or responsibilities. A word that I have always wanted to use as an epigraph for texts and books: Zenrin poem: “Sitting peacefully, doing nothing, / spring comes and the grass grows of its own accord. [...] 

"To sit peacefully and do nothing" = in reality means to remove oneself completely from the realm of guilt: perhaps impossible for a Westerner: to do nothing, without guilt, without debt: the persistent idea that one owes time to something, to someone. Christian posture: on your knees. Fascist posture: standing. Asian posture: sitting → therefore: a posture, as I said, that is completely symbolic and completely efficient, therefore one that goes beyond and exhausts the symbolic, without resorting to any empiricism (so to speak).
We can further clarify and update "sitting". Here I am sitting, and this is how I see it: if I don't like what is masterful, if it makes me angry and hurt (although it is regularly thrown in my face as if I were responsible for it), it is not because of the "monologue" (I am convinced that I am actually in dialogue with those who are there, especially if they are willing to come back regularly), it is because of a deviation from "sitting": the "front-sitting"; it is the pulpit-room arrangement that makes the masterful (school: better). In Zen, one does not sit in front of anything; in fact, this is what defines Zen. Sitting in front of nothing: squaring the circle: in restaurants, on trains, in life, there is always someone who comes and sits in front of you."
(Roland Barthes, The Neutral, Course at the Collège de France, 1977-1978)

E1.7.B.3.6.c_REF4_TH A LIFE OF ONE’S OWN: A PENETRATING CENTURY-OLD FIELD GUIDE TO SELF-POSSESSION, MINDFUL PERCEPTION, AND THE ART OF KNOWING WHAT YOU REALLY WANT.
“One must know what one wants to be,” the eighteenth-century French mathematician Émilie du Châtelet wrote in weighing the nature of genius. “In the latter endeavors irresolution produces false steps, and in the life of the mind confused ideas.” And yet that inner knowing is the work of a lifetime, for our confusions are ample and our missteps constant amid a world that is constantly telling us who we are and who we ought to be — a world which, in the sobering words of E.E. Cummings, “is doing its best, night and day, to make you everybody else.” Try as we might not to be blinded by society’s prescriptions for happiness, we are still social creatures porous to the values of our peers — creatures surprisingly and often maddeningly myopic about the things we believe furnish our completeness as human beings, habitually aspiring to the wrong things for the wrong reasons.

In 1926, more than a decade before a team of Harvard psychologists commenced history’s longest and most revelatory study of human happiness and half a century before the humanistic philosopher Erich Fromm penned his classic on the art of living, the British psychoanalyst and writer Marion Milner (February 1, 1900–May 29, 1998) undertook a seven-year experiment in living, aimed at unpeeling the existential rind of all we chronically mistake for fulfillment — prestige, pleasure, popularity — to reveal the succulent, pulsating core of what makes for genuine happiness. Along her journey of “doubts, delays, and expeditions on false trails,” which she chronicled in a diary with a field scientist’s rigor of observation, Milner ultimately discovered that we are beings profoundly different from what we imagine ourselves to be — that the things we pursue most frantically are the least likely to give us lasting joy and contentment, but there are other, truer things that we can train ourselves to attend to in the elusive pursuit of happiness.”
(Maria Popova’s review of Marion Milner’s A Life of One’s Own, 1934 - in The Marginalian)

”Let no one think it is an easy way because it is concerned with moments of happiness rather than with stern duty or high moral endeavour. For what is really easy, as I found, is to blind one’s eyes to what one really likes, to drift into accepting one’s wants ready-made from other people, and to evade the continual day to day sifting of values. And finally, let no one undertake such an experiment who is not prepared to find himself more of a fool than he thought. […]

As soon as I began to study my perception, to look at my own experience, I found that there were different ways of perceiving and that the different ways provided me with different facts. There was a narrow focus which meant seeing life as if from blinkers and with the centre of awareness in my head; and there was a wide focus which meant knowing with the whole of my body, a way of looking which quite altered my perception of whatever I saw. And I found that the narrow focus way was the way of reason. If one was in the habit of arguing about life it was very difficult not to approach sensation with the same concentrated attention and so shut out its width and depth and height. But it was the wide focus way that made me happy. […]

I want to feel myself part of things, of the great drift and swirl: not cut off, missing things, like being sent to bed early as a child, the blinds being drawn while the sun and cheerful voices came through the chink from the garden. […]

I want… the patterns and colourings on the vase on my table took on a new and intense vitality — I want to be so harmonious in myself that I can think of others and share their experiences. […]

I had felt my life to be of a dull dead-level mediocrity, with the sense of real and vital things going on round the corner, out in the streets, in other people’s lives. For I had taken the surface ripples for all there was, when actually happenings of vital importance to me had been going on, not somewhere away from me, but just underneath the calm surface of my own mind. Though some of these discoveries were not entirely pleasant, bringing with them echoes of terror and despair, at least they gave me a sense of being alive. […]

If just looking could be so satisfying, why was I always striving to have things or to get things done? Certainly I had never suspected that the key to my private reality might lie in so apparently simple a skill as the ability to let the senses roam unfettered by purposes. I began to wonder whether eyes and ears might not have a wisdom of their own. […]

I had been continually exhorted to define my purpose in life, but I was now beginning to doubt whether life might not be too complex a thing to be kept within the bounds of a single formulated purpose, whether it would not burst its way out, or if the purpose were too strong, perhaps grow distorted like an oak whose trunk has been encircled with an iron band. I began to guess that my self’s need was for an equilibrium, for sun, but not too much, for rain, but not always… So I began to have an idea of my life, *not as the slow shaping of achievement to fit my preconceived purposes, but as the gradual discovery and growth of a purpose which I did not know.* I wrote: “It will mean walking in a fog for a bit, but it’s the only way which is not a presumption, forcing the self into a theory.” […]

I did not know that I could only get the most out of life by giving myself up to it. […]

Here then was a deadlock. I wanted to get the most out of life, but the more I tried to grasp, the more I felt that I was ever outside, missing things. At that time I could not understand at all that my real purpose might be to learn to have no purposes. […]

I had at least begun to guess that my greatest need might be to let go and be free from the drive after achievement — if only I dared. I had also guessed that perhaps when I had let these go, then I might be free to become aware of some other purpose that was more fundamental, not self-imposed private ambitions but some thing which grew out of the essence of one’s own nature. People said: ‘Oh, be yourself at all costs’. But I had found that it was not so easy to know just what one’s self was. It was far easier to want what other people seemed to want and then imagine that the choice was one’s own. […]

It struck me as odd that it had taken me so long to reach a feeling of sureness that there was something in me that would get on with the job of living without my continual tampering. I suppose I did not really reach it until I had discovered how to sink down beneath the level of chattering thoughts and simply feel what it meant to be alive. […]

I came to the conclusion then that “continual mindfulness” could certainly not mean that my little conscious self should be entirely responsible for marshalling and arranging all my thoughts, for it simply did not know enough. It must mean, not a sergeant-major-like drilling of thoughts, but a continual readiness to look and readiness to accept whatever came…. Whenever I did so manage to win its services I began to suspect that thought, which I had always before looked on as a cart-horse, to be driven, whipped and plodding between shafts, might be really a Pegasus, so suddenly did it alight beside me from places I had no knowledge of. […]

I had just begun to ponder over the fact that all the things which I had found to be sources of happiness seemed to depend upon the capacity to relax all straining, to widen my attention beyond the circle of personal interest, and to look detachedly at my own experience. I had just realized that this relaxing and detachment must depend on a fundamental sense of security, and yet that I could apparently never feel safe enough to do it, because there was an urge in me which I had dimly perceived but had never yet been able to face. It was then that the idea occurred to me that until you have, once at least, faced everything you know — the whole universe — with utter giving in, and let all that is “not you” flow over and engulf you, there can be no lasting sense of security. […]

By continual watching and expression I must learn to observe my thought and maintain a vigilance, not against “wrong” thoughts, but against refusal to recognize any thought. Further, this introspection meant continual expression, not continual analysis; it meant that I must bring my thoughts and feelings up in their wholeness, not argue about them and try to pretend they were something different from what they were.

I had also learnt how to know what I wanted; to know that this is not a simple matter of momentary decision, but that it needs a rigorous watching and fierce discipline, if the clamouring conflict of likes is to be welded into a single desire. It had taught me that my day-to-day personal “wants” were really the expression of deep underlying needs, though often the distorted expression because of the confusions of blind thinking. I had learnt that if I kept my thoughts still enough and looked beneath them, then I might sometimes know what was the real need, feel it like a child leaping in the womb, though so remotely that I might easily miss it when over-busy with purposes. Really, then, I had found that there was an intuitive sense of how to live. For I had been forced to the conclusion that there was more in the mind than just reason and blind thinking, if only you knew how to look for it; the unconscious part of my mind seemed to be definitely something more than a storehouse for the confusions and shames I dared not face. […]

It was only when I was actively passive, and content to wait and watch, that I really knew what I wanted. […]

Blind thinking… could make me pretend I was being true to myself when really I was only being true to an infantile fear and confusion of situations; and the more confused it was the more it would call to its aid a sense of conviction. Yet for all its parade there was as much in common between its certainties and the fundamental sense of my own happiness as between the windy flappings of a newspaper in the gutter and the poise of a hovering kestrel. And only by experience of both, by digging down deep enough and watching sincerely enough, could I be sure of recognizing the difference.

By keeping a diary of what made me happy I had discovered that happiness came when I was most widely aware. So I had finally come to the conclusion that my task was to become more and more aware, more and more understanding with an understanding that was not at all the same thing as intellectual comprehension…. Without understanding, I was at the mercy of blind habit; with understanding, I could develop my own rules for living and find out which of the conflicting exhortations of a changing civilization was appropriate to my needs. And, by finding that in order to be more and more aware I had to be more and more still, I had not only come to see through my own eyes instead of at second hand, but I had also finally come to discover what was the way of escape from the imprisoning island of my own self-consciousness.”
(Marion Milner, under the pen name Joanna Field, A Life of One’s Own, 1934)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2017/10/11/a-life-of-ones-own-joanna-field-marion-milner/?mc_cid=4b45b3c24c&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E1.7.B.3.6.c_REF5_LIT “THROUGH THE ROUTELESS CONVOLUTIONS OF FAIRY TALES, WE MAP THE TERRA INCOGNITA OF OUR OWN INTERIOR WORLD” LEADING US TO MATURITY. “Maturity is not the result of persuasion, much less an intellectual epiphany. It is a sudden, I would almost like to say biological, collapse. It is a point that must be reached by all the senses at once if truth is going to be turned into nature.”

“In a fairy tale, there are no roads. You start out walking, as if in a straight line, and eventually that line reveals itself to be a labyrinth, a perfect circle, a spiral, or even a star — or a motionless point the soul never leaves, even as body and mind take what appears to be an arduous journey. You seldom know where you are traveling, or even what you are traveling toward, for you cannot know, in reality, what the water ballerina, or the singing apple, or the fortune-telling bird may be. Or the word to conjure with: the abstract, culminating word that is stronger than any certainty. […]

Since the thing you start out looking for cannot and must not have a face, how can you recognize the means to reach it until you’ve reached it? How can the destination ever be anything but an apparent destination? […]

No one arrives at the enlightenment [he](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=4c1e2e5fbc&e=0b6483decb) sets out to seek. It will come to him in its own sweet time. Thus the destination walks side by side with the traveler… Or it hovers behind him… In truth, the traveler has always had it within him and is only moving toward the motionless center of his life: the antrum near the spring, the cave — where childhood and death, in one another’s arms, confide the secret they share. The idea of travel, effort, and patience is paradoxical, yes, but it is also exact. For in this paradox, we stumble on the intersection of eternity and time. […]

The geometry of time and space is abolished as if by magic. You walk for hours in a circle, or conversely, you reach the edge of the infinite in a few quick steps. It isn’t our state of heightened vigilance that casts a spell on the world around us; it is a much more recondite correspondence between discovering and letting ourselves be discovered — between giving shape and taking shape. Everything already was, but today it truly is. Today any peasant, pointing in any direction, will sound like a gnome or a fairy, will gesture at the path you nearly took a thousand times without suspecting it. The path that leads to four indescribably white springs suspended on the hillside, protected, for a hundred paces or a thousand miles, by fields of tall fragrant grasses; or to the royal tomb hidden by the Etruscans in a cave now covered with brambles, out of which white hounds and a man the size of an ifrit, carrying a shotgun, emerge; or down below the ridge secretly lighted by the sun, at a bend in the riverbank so deep it casts the whole hanging tangle of pink roots into shadow. Velvet water that looks motionless and yet moves. Water that runs off into the beyond without flowing, so that it would be enough just to follow it, for that beyond which is always forbidden, always intimated in our dreams, is transpiring here and now. […]

Quick glances direct our steps, hands point beyond the thresholds. Behind windowpanes so clear they blind us move the figures of the ones we loved, the ones we’ve lost, who, behold, stand up from the piano bench or arrange fruit on a table. It all unfolds like a scroll from a mouth known yet unknown, a dark and luminous sentence, an irrefutable commentary set down between past and future. […]

Maturity is not the result of persuasion, much less an intellectual epiphany. It is a sudden, I would almost like to say biological, collapse. It is a point that must be reached by all the senses at once if truth is going to be turned into nature.”
(Cristina Campo, The unforgivable and other writings)

E1.6.B.2.7.wE1.7.B.3. DIFFERENCES AND SIMILARITIES BETWEEN SPIRITUAL PRACTICE AND OTHER FORMS OF EXERCISE
In conventional learning, such as that of a musical instrument, the student can, or believes he can, imagine the end, and so the path appears to him as a series of listed stages that he will pass through one after the other before reaching his goal. But nothing of the sort is possible when we engage in spiritual practice.

E1.7.B.4. THE CHALLENGE IS THAT THE WORLD OF TRUE LIFE SEEMS INFINITELY SMALL WITHIN THE MATERIAL WORLD, and those who discuss it may come across as foolish.

E1.7.B.4.1 "ANY ORDER THAT TRANSCENS ANOTHER CAN ONLY INSERT ITSELF IN THE FORM OF THE INFINITELY SMALL" [...] The world of life does indeed appear as an infinitesimal smallness within the material world.
(Gustave Thibon, quoting Simone Weil in the preface to Gravity and Grace, February 1947)

E1.7.B.4.1_REF1_PH "SIMONE WEIL CAN ONLY BE UNDERSTOOD AT THE LEVEL AT WHICH SHE SPOKE. Her work is addressed, if not to souls as unadorned as her own, then at least to those who carry deep within themselves a yearning for the pure good to which she dedicated her life and death. The dangers of such a spirituality are not lost on me: the highest peaks give rise to the worst vertigo".
(Gustave Thibon, préface to Gravity and Grace, February 1947)

E1.7.B.4.1_REF2_PH "ONE THING I DON’T WORRY ABOUT… IS WHAT PEOPLE THINK, how they misinterpret things. There’s nothing you can do about that… What amazes me more and more is how much people do understand when you give them the full dose, when you hold back nothing."
(Henry Miller, A Literate Passion: Letters of Anaïs Nin & Henry Miller, 1946)

E1.7.B.4.2. "NOW, IF THE PATH I HAVE SHOWN THAT LEADS TO THIS, SEEMS VERY ARDUOUS, IT CAN NEVERTHELESS BE FOUND. And that certainly must be arduous, which is so rarely found. For how could it be, if salvation was easy and could be found without much trouble, that it is neglected by almost everyone? For everything that is excellent is as difficult as it is rare."
(Baruch Spinoza)

E1.7.B.4.2_REF1_PH ALL THINGS EXCELLENT ARE AS DIFFICULT AS THEY ARE RARE "I have thus completed all I wished to set forth touching the mind's power over the emotions and the mind's freedom. Whence it appears, how potent is the wise man, and how much he surpasses the ignorant man, who is driven only by his lusts. For the ignorant man is not only distracted in various ways by external causes without ever gaining, the true acquiescence of his spirit, but moreover lives, as it were unwitting of himself, and of God, and of things, and as soon as he ceases to suffer, ceases also to be. Whereas the wise man, in so far as he is regarded as such, is scarcely at all disturbed in spirit, but, being conscious of himself, and of God, and of things, by a certain eternal necessity, never ceases to be, but always possesses true acquiescence of his spirit. If the way which I have pointed out as leading to this result seems exceedingly hard, it may nevertheless be discovered. Needs must it be hard, since it is so seldom found. How would it be possible, if salvation were ready to our hand, and could without great labour be found, that it should be by almost all men neglected? But all things excellent are as difficult as they are rare.
THE END."
(Baruch Spinoza, Last paragraph of the Ethics)

Read the Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.7.B.4.2_REF2_PH IF SPINOZA CONCLUDES THE ETHICS WITH THE RECOGNITION THAT THE PATH IS ARDUOUS, we can find encouragement in the fact that there is an acceleration that takes place as soon as we set out on the path.

E1.7.B.4.2_REF2.1_PH IN PROPORTION AS THE MIND IS MORE CAPABLE "In proportion as the mind is more capable of understanding things by the third kind of knowledge, it desires more to understand things by that kind." 
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics part 5, Proposition 26)

"PROPOSITION 42
Blessedness is not the reward of virtue, but virtue itself ; neither do we rejoice therein, because we control our lusts, but, contrariwise, because we rejoice therein, we are able to control our lusts.

PROOF
Blessedness consists in love towards God [...], which love springs from the third kind of knowledge [...] ; therefore this love [...] must be referred to the mind, in so far as the latter is active ; therefore [...] it is virtue itself. This was our first point. Again, in proportion as the mind rejoices more in this divine love or blessedness, so does it the more understand [...] ; that is [...], so much the more power has it over the emotions, and [...] so much the less is it subject to those emotions which are evil ; therefore, in proportion as the mind rejoices in this divine love or blessedness, so has it the power of controlling lusts. And, since human power in controlling the emotions consists solely in the understanding, it follows that no one rejoices in blessedness, because he has controlled his lusts, but, contrariwise, his power of controlling his lusts arises from this blessedness itself."
(Baruch Spinoza, Ethics part 5)

E1.7.B.4.3. "THINK THAT ONE MUST 
LIVE UP TO 
THAT"

E1.7.B.4.3_REF1_PO "REMINDER

Remember that 
as we walk 
through these banal streets 
under a starless sky 
temples white as bones 
rest among olive trees 
almost as old

a woman undresses
under the evening's nakedness
her heavy braid

a little mud 
nods off in sleep

and there are lions and oranges 
hawks and hangars 
anemones and zinc

a flock of antelopes 
crosses a piece of land 
like this one
leaving it as they depart
empty of signs

in silence a man prepares 
less food than yesterday

one by one
the leisure boats 
leave

it rains heavily 
on cable cars

a woman sees 
the city light up 
as night falls 
and to calm herself 
counts the illuminated
windows

closets are put in order
dead people's clothes 
young bodies grow old

cars age 
too
and agricultural machines

with a fast net 
are gathered from the sea 
luminous fish 
that will then be left 
drowning 
in the sand

someone discovers
for the first time 
the eel, sex, writing

think that one must 
live up to 
that"
(Ana Martins Marques, Scratch this Word, 2021)

E1.7.B.4.4. "TO A WESTERN BOY
Many things to absorb I teach to help you become eleve of mine;
Yet if blood like mine circle not in your veins,
If you be not silently selected by lovers and do not silently select lovers,
Of what use is it that you seek to become eleve of mine?"
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.7.B.4.4_REF1_PO "SONG OF THE OPEN ROAD

[...] 11
Listen! I will be honest with you,
I do not offer the old smooth prizes, but offer rough new prizes,
These are the days that must happen to you:
You shall not heap up what is call’d riches,
You shall scatter with lavish hand all that you earn or achieve,
You but arrive at the city to which you were destin’d, you hardly settle
yourself to satisfaction before you are call’d by an irresistible call to depart,
You shall be treated to the ironical smiles and mockings of those who remain behind you,
What beckonings of love you receive you shall only answer with passionate kisses of parting,
You shall not allow the hold of those who spread their reach’d hands toward you."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.7.B.4.4_REF1.1_PO" SONG OF THE OPEN ROAD

[...] 15
Allons! the road is before us!
It is safe—I have tried it—my own feet have tried it well—be not detain’d!
Let the paper remain on the desk unwritten, and the book on the shelf unopen’d!
Let the tools remain in the workshop! let the money remain unearn’d!
Let the school stand! mind not the cry of the teacher!
Let the preacher preach in his pulpit! let the lawyer plead in the court, and the judge expound the law.
Camerado, I give you my hand!
I give you my love more precious than money,
I give you myself before preaching or law;
Will you give me yourself. will you come travel with me?
Shall we stick by each other as long as we live?"
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.7.B.4.5. MOMENTS OF COMMUNION AND GRACE ARE OFTEN FLEETING EPISODES
"Did Our Best Moment last -
‘Twould supersede the Heaven -
A few - and they by Risk - procure -
So this Sort - are not given -

Except as stimulants - in 
Cases of Despair -
Or Stupor - The Reserve -
These Heavenly moments are -

A Grant of the Divine -
That Certain as it Comes -
Withdraws - and leaves the dazzled Soul 
In her unfurnished Rooms -"
(Emily Dickinson, 1863)

E1.7.C. IN THIS STATE OF RELATIONSHIP WITH THE WORLD, WHICH EXPANDS THE EGO, DISSATISFACTION OF THE CONSCIOUS STATE IS NO LONGER PERCEIVED AS SUFFERING. Suffering is absorbed into a wider perspective where a sense of wonder for the universe prevails, accompanied by an impersonal love: this is the state of grace.

E1.7.C.1. A SENSE OF WONDER AND CONNECTION TO THE NATURAL WORLD IS VITAL TO HUMAN DISTINCTIVENESS. The world is a system of interdependent events, and the feeling of separateness is an illusion. Staying in touch with non-human entities is necessary to preserve our humanity, as our perceptions are shaped by the perceptions of other bodily entities.

E1.7.C.1.1. ONE SHOULD DEVELOP A BROAD CONCEPTION OF MAN'S LIFE AND PLACE IN THE UNIVERSE. Once this understanding is achieved, it becomes clear that "he whose mind reflects the world becomes in a sense as great as the world." By liberating oneself from the fears that plague those enslaved by circumstances, one experiences profound joy. Regardless of the ups and downs of social life, they remain, at their core, a happy person.

E1.7.C.1.1_REF1_PH "THEN AGAIN A SENSE OF PROPORTION IS VERY VALUABLE AND AT TIMES VERY CONSOLING. We are all inclined to get unduly excited, unduly strained, unduly
impressed with the importance of the little corner of the world in which we live, and of the little moment of time comprised between our birth and death. In this excitement and overestimation of our own importance there is nothing desirable. True, it may make us work harder, but it will not make us work better. A little work directed to a good end is better than a great deal of work directed to a bad end, though the apostles of the strenuous life seem to think otherwise. Those who care much for their work are always in danger of falling into fanaticism, which consists essentially in remembering one or two desirable things while forgetting all the rest, and in supposing that in the pursuit of these one or two any incidental harm of other sorts is of little account. Against this fanatical temper there is no better prophylactic than a large conception of the life of man and his place in the universe. [...]

If
you have attained to this outlook, a certain deep happiness will never leave you, whatever your personal fate may be."
(Bertrand Russell, Teh Conquest of happiness, 1962)

E1.7.C.1.1_REF1.1_PH CITIZEN OF THE UNIVERSE "What is needed is not self-denial, but that kind of direction of interest outward which will lead spontaneously and naturally to the same acts that a person absorbed in the pursuit of his own virtue could only perform by means of conscious self-denial. [...] In fact the whole antithesis between self and the rest of the world, which is implied in the doctrine of self-denial, disappears as soon as we have any genuine interest in persons or things outside ourselves. Through such interests a man comes to feel himself part of the stream of life, not a hard separate entity like a billiard-ball, which can have no relation with other such entities except that of collision. All unhappiness depends upon some kind of disintegration or lack of integration; there is disintegration within the self through lack of coordination between the conscious and the unconscious mind; there is lack of integration between the self and society where the two are not knit together by the force of objective interests and affections. The happy man is the man who does not suffer from either of these failures of unity, whose personality is neither divided against itself nor pitted against the world. Such a man feels himself a citizen of the universe, enjoying freely the spectacle that it offers and the joys that it affords, untroubled by the thought of death because he feels himself not really separate from those who will come after him. It is in such profound instinctive union with the stream of life that the greatest joy is to be found.
(Bertrand Russell, The conquest of happiness, 1962)

E1.7.C.1.1_REF2_PH THE MAN CAPABLE OF GREATNESS OF SOUL WILL OPEN WIDE THE WINDOWS OF HIS MIND "A man who has once perceived, however temporarily and however briefly, what makes greatness of soul, can no longer be happy if he allows himself to be petty, self-seeking, troubled by trivial misfortunes, dreading what fate may have in store for him. The man capable of greatness of soul will open wide the windows of his mind, letting the winds blow freely upon it from every portion of the universe. He will see himself and life and the world as truly as our human limitations will permit; realising the brevity and minuteness of human life, he will realise also that in individual minds is concentrated whatever of value the known universe contains. And he will see that the man whose mind mirrors the world becomes in a sense as great as the world. In emancipation from the fears that beset the slave of circumstance he will experience a profound joy, and through all the vicissitudes of his outward life he will remain in the depths of his being a happy man."
(Bertrand Russell, The conquest of happiness, 1962)

E1.7.C.1.1_REF2.1_PH "THE WISE MAN THINKS ABOUT HIS TROUBLES ONLY WHEN THERE IS SOME PURPOSE IN DOING SO; at other times he thinks about other things, or, if it is night, about nothing at all. I do not mean to suggest that at a great crisis, for example, when ruin is imminent, or when a man has reason to suspect that his wife is deceiving him, it is possible, except to a few exceptionally disciplined minds, to shut out the trouble at moments when nothing can be done about it. But it is quite possible to shut out the ordinary troubles of ordinary days, except while they have to be dealt with. It is amazing how much both happiness and efficiency can be increased by the cultivation of an orderly mind, which thinks about a matter adequately at the right time rather than inadequately at all times. When a difficult or worrying decision has to be reached, as soon as all the data are available, give the matter your best thought and make your decision; having made the decision, do not revise it unless some new fact
comes to your knowledge. Nothing is so exhausting as indecision, and nothing is so futile.

A great many worries can be diminished by realising the unimportance of the matter which is causing the anxiety. [...]"
(Bertrand Russell, The conquest of happiness, 1962)

E1.7.C.1.1_REF3_PH DID YOU EVER EXPERIENCE SUCH A LEVEL OF CONSCIOUSNESS? WILLIAM BLAKE DID AT AGE 31.
"Along with the consciousness of the cosmos there occurs an intellectual enlightenment or illumination which alone would place the individual on a new plane of existence — would make him almost a member of a new species. To this is added a state of moral exaltation, an indescribable feeling of elevation, elation, and joyousness, and a quickening of the moral sense, which is fully as striking and more important both to the individual and to the race than is the enhanced intellectual power. With these come, what may be called a sense of immortality, a consciousness of eternal life, not a conviction that he shall have this, but the consciousness that he has it already. [...]
The person who passes through this experience will learn in the few minutes, or even moments, of its continuance more than in months or years of study, and he will learn much that no study ever taught or can teach. Especially does he obtain such a conception of THE WHOLE, or at least of an immense WHOLE, as dwarfs all conception, imagination or speculation, springing from and belonging to ordinary self consciousness, such a conception as makes the old attempts to mentally grasp the universe and its meaning petty and even ridiculous."
(Maurice Bucke, Cosmic Consciousness: A Study in the Evolution of the Human Mind)

E1.7.C.1.1_REF4_PH "TO GO INTO SOLITUDE, A MAN NEEDS TO RETIRE AS MUCH FROM HIS CHAMBER AS FROM SOCIETY. I am not solitary whilst I read and write, though nobody is with me. [...] If a man would be alone, let him look at the stars. […]

In the woods, we return to reason and faith. There I feel that nothing can befall me in life, — no disgrace, no calamity, (leaving me my eyes,) which nature cannot repair. Standing on the bare ground, — my head bathed by the blithe air, and uplifted into infinite space, — all mean egotism vanishes. I become a transparent eye-ball; I am nothing; I see all; the currents of the Universal Being circulate through me; I am part or particle of God."
(Ralph Waldo Emerson, Nature)

E1.7.C.1.1_REF5_LIT THE NARRATOR MOVES FROM A LIMITED WORLDVIEW, DEFINED BY FEAR AND THE WHITE SUBURBAN "DREAM," TO A NEW UNDERSTANDING OF HIMSELF AND HIS IDENTITY. A crucial part of this is redefining his "black world" not as a biological trap, but as a rich and beautiful culture "fashioned like diamonds under the weight of the Dream." 
“If my life ended today, I would tell you it was a happy life—that I drew great joy from the study, from the struggle toward which I now urge you. You have seen in this conversation that the struggle has ruptured and remade me several times over—in Baltimore, at The Mecca, in fatherhood, in New York. The changes have awarded me a rapture that comes only when you can no longer be lied to, when you have rejected the Dream. But even more, the changes have taught me how to best exploit that singular gift of study, to question what I see, then to question what I see after that, because the questions matter as much, perhaps more than, the answers.
But oh, my eyes. When I was a boy, no portion of my body suffered more than my eyes. If I have done well by the measures of childhood, it must be added that those measures themselves are hampered by how little a boy of my captive class had seen. The Dream seemed to be the pinnacle, then—to grow rich and live in one of those disconnected houses out in the country, in one of those small communities, one of those cul-de-sacs with its gently curving ways, where they staged teen movies and children built treehouses, and in that last lost year before college, teenagers made love in cars parked at the lake. The Dream seemed to be the end of the world for me, the height of American ambition. What more could possibly exist beyond the dispatches, beyond the suburbs?
Your mother knew. Perhaps it was because she was raised within the physical borders of such a place, because she lived in proximity with the Dreamers. Perhaps it was because the people who thought they were white told her she was smart and followed this up by telling her she was not really black, meaning it as a compliment. Perhaps it was the boys out there, who were in fact black, telling her she was “pretty for a dark-skin girl.” Your mother never felt quite at home, and this made the possibility of some other place essential to her, propelling her to The Mecca, propelling her to New York and then beyond. On her thirtieth birthday she took a trip to Paris. I am not sure you remember. You were only six. We spent that week eating fried fish for breakfast and cake for dinner, leaving underwear on the counter, and blasting Ghostface Killah. It had never occurred to me to leave America—not even temporarily. My eyes. My friend Jelani, who came up the same as me, once said that he used to think of traveling as a pointless luxury, like blowing the rent check on a pink suit. And I felt much the same, then. I was bemused at your mother’s dreams of Paris. I could not understand them—and I did not think I needed to. Some part of me was still back in that seventh-grade French class, thinking only of the immediate security of my body, regarding France as one might regard Jupiter.
But now your mother had gone and done it, and when she returned her eyes were dancing with all the possibilities out there, not just for her but for you and for me. It is quite ridiculous how the feeling spread. It was like falling in love—the things that get you are so small, the things that keep you up at night are so particular to you that when you try to explain, the only reward anyone can give you is a dumb polite nod. Your mother had taken many pictures, all through Paris, of doors, giant doors—deep blue, ebony, orange, turquoise, and burning red doors. I examined the pictures of these giant doors in our small Harlem apartment. I had never seen anything like them. It had never even occurred to me that such giant doors could exist, could be so common in one part of the world and totally absent in another. And it occurred to me, listening to your mother, that France was not a thought experiment but an actual place filled with actual people whose traditions were different, whose lives really were different, whose sense of beauty was different.
When I look back, I know that I was then getting the message from all over. By that time my friends included a great number of people with ties to different worlds. “Make the race proud,” the elders used to say. But by then I knew that I wasn’t so much bound to a biological “race” as to a group of people, and these people were not black because of any uniform color or any uniform physical feature. They were bound because they suffered under the weight of the Dream, and they were bound by all the beautiful things, all the language and mannerisms, all the food and music, all the literature and philosophy, all the common language that they fashioned like diamonds under the weight of the Dream. Not long ago I was standing in an airport retrieving a bag from a conveyor belt. I bumped into a young black man and said, “My bad.” Without even looking up he said, “You straight.” And in that exchange there was so much of the private rapport that can only exist between two particular strangers of this tribe that we call black. In other words, I was part of a world. And looking out, I had friends who too were part of other worlds—the world of Jews or New Yorkers, the world of Southerners or gay men, of immigrants, of Californians, of Native Americans, or a combination of any of these, worlds stitched into worlds like tapestry. And though I could never, myself, be a native of any of these worlds, I knew that nothing so essentialist as race stood between us. I had read too much by then. And my eyes—my beautiful, precious eyes—were growing stronger each day. And I saw that what divided me from the world was not anything intrinsic to us but the actual injury done by people intent on naming us, intent on believing that what they have named us matters more than anything we could ever actually do. In America, the injury is not in being born with darker skin, with fuller lips, with a broader nose, but in everything that happens after. In that single exchange with that young man, I was speaking the personal language of my people. It was the briefest intimacy, but it captured much of the beauty of my black world—the ease between your mother and me, the miracle at The Mecca, the way I feel myself disappear on the streets of Harlem. To call that feeling racial is to hand over all those diamonds, fashioned by our ancestors, to the plunderer. We made that feeling, though it was forged in the shadow of the murdered, the raped, the disembodied, we made it all the same. This is the beautiful thing that I have seen with my own eyes, and I think I needed this vantage point before I could journey out. I think I needed to know that I was from somewhere, that my home was as beautiful as any other.
Seven years after I saw the pictures of those doors, I received my first adult passport. I wish I had come to it sooner. I wish, when I was back in that French class, that I had connected the conjugations, verbs, and gendered nouns to something grander. I wish someone had told me what that class really was—a gate to some other blue world. I wanted to see that world myself, to see the doors and everything behind them. The day of my departure, I sat in a restaurant with your mother, who’d shown me so much. I told her, “I am afraid.” I didn’t really speak the language. I did not know the customs. I would be alone. She just listened and held my hand. And that night, I boarded a starship. The starship punched out into the dark, punched through the sky, punched out past West Baltimore, punched out past The Mecca, past New York, past any language and every spectrum known to me.”
(Ta Nehisi Coates, Between the World and Me, 2015)

E1.7.C.1.2. ALAN WATTS, ELLA FRANCES SANDERS AND MARY OLIVER ARGUE THAT A SENSE OF WONDER IS VITAL TO HUMAN DISTINCTIVENESS. They believe that individuals are expressions of the universe, and the feeling of being separate is merely an illusion. The world is an interconnected system of dependent events, and the only real "I" is the entire ongoing process. It's crucial to live fully in the present and acquire knowledge through self-awareness. The sensation of separateness, like any other sensation, should be acknowledged and accepted. Attempting to forcefully eliminate it only strengthens its hold.

E1.7.C.1.2.a. CONSCIOUSNESS IGNORES INTERVALS, AND ATTENTION NARROWS OUR PERCEPTION, DIVIDING THE WORLD INTO SEPARATE BITS. This leads us to believe that things, events, and effects are separate. However, the only true atom is the universe, which is a comprehensive system of interdependent events that cannot be separated from the other.

E1.7.C.1.2.a.i. "WE SUFFER FROM A HALLUCINATION, FROM A FALSE AND DISTORTED SENSATION OF OUR OWN EXISTENCE AS LIVING ORGANISMS. [...] Attention is narrowed perception. It is a way of looking at life bit by bit, using memory to string the bits together"

E1.7.C.1.2.a.i_REF1_PH "MOST PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS ARE TO BE SOLVED BY GETTING RID OF THEM, by coming to the point where you see that such questions as “Why this universe?” are a kind of intellectual neurosis, a misuse of words in that the question sounds sensible but is actually as meaningless as asking “Where is this universe?” when the only things that are anywhere must be somewhere inside the universe. The task of philosophy is to cure people of such nonsense. . . . Nevertheless, wonder is not a disease. Wonder, and its expression in poetry and the arts, are among the most important things which seem to distinguish men from other animals, and intelligent and sensitive people from morons. [...]
We suffer from a hallucination, from a false and distorted sensation of our own existence as living organisms. Most of us have the sensation that “I myself” is a separate center of feeling and action, living inside and bounded by the physical body — a center which “confronts” an “external” world of people and things, making contact through the senses with a universe both alien and strange. Everyday figures of speech reflect this illusion. “I came into this world.” “You must face reality.” “The conquest of nature.”
This feeling of being lonely and very temporary visitors in the universe is in flat contradiction to everything known about man (and all other living organisms) in the sciences. We do not “come into” this world; we come out of it, as leaves from a tree. As the ocean “waves,” the universe “peoples.” Every individual is an expression of the whole realm of nature, a unique action of the total universe. This fact is rarely, if ever, experienced by most individuals. Even those who know it to be true in theory do not sense or feel it, but continue to be aware of themselves as isolated “egos” inside bags of skin. [...]
Our normal sensation of self is a hoax, or, at best, a temporary role that we are playing, or have been conned into playing — with our own tacit consent, just as every hypnotized person is basically willing to be hypnotized. The most strongly enforced of all known taboos is the taboo against knowing who or what you really are behind the mask of your apparently separate, independent, and isolated ego. [...]
The self-conscious feedback mechanism of the cortex allows us the hallucination that we are two souls in one body — a rational soul and an animal soul, a rider and a horse, a good guy with better instincts and finer feelings and a rascal with rapacious lusts and unruly passions. Hence the marvelously involved hypocrisies of guilt and penitence, and the frightful cruelties of punishment, warfare, and even self-torment in the name of taking the side of the good soul against the evil. The more it sides with itself, the more the good soul reveals its inseparable shadow, and the more it disowns its shadow, the more it becomes it.
Thus for thousands of years human history has been a magnificently futile conflict, a wonderfully staged panorama of triumphs and tragedies based on the resolute taboo against admitting that black goes with white. [...]
While eyes and ears actually register and respond to both the up-beat and the down-beat of these vibrations, the mind, that is to say our conscious attention, notices only the up-beat. The dark, silent, or “off” interval is ignored. It is almost a general principle that consciousness ignores intervals, and yet cannot notice any pulse of energy without them. If you put your hand on an attractive girl’s knee and just leave it there, she may cease to notice it. But if you keep patting her knee, she will know you are very much there and interested. But she notices and, you hope, values the on more than the off. Nevertheless, the very things that we believe to exist are always on/offs. Ons alone and offs alone do not exist. [...]
Attention is narrowed perception. It is a way of looking at life bit by bit, using memory to string the bits together — as when examining a dark room with a flashlight having a very narrow beam. Perception thus narrowed has the advantage of being sharp and bright, but it has to focus on one area of the world after another, and one feature after another. And where there are no features, only space or uniform surfaces, it somehow gets bored and searches about for more features. Attention is therefore something like a scanning mechanism in radar or television. . . . But a scanning process that observes the world bit by bit soon persuades its user that the world is a great collection of bits, and these he calls separate things or events. We often say that you can only think of one thing at a time. The truth is that in looking at the world bit by bit we convince ourselves that it consists of separate things, and so give ourselves the problem of how these things are connected and how they cause and effect each other. The problem would never have arisen if we had been aware that it was just our way of looking at the world which had chopped it up into separate bits, things, events, causes, and effects. [...]
“Individual” is the Latin form of the Greek “atom” — that which cannot be cut or divided any further into separate parts. We cannot chop off a person’s head or remove his heart without killing him. But we can kill him just as effectively by separating him from his proper environment. This implies that the only true atom is the universe — that total system of interdependent “thing-events” which can be separated from each other only in name. For the human individual is not built as a car is built. He does not come into being by assembling parts, by screwing a head onto a neck, by wiring a brain to a set of lungs, or by welding veins to a heart. Head, neck, heart, lungs, brain, veins, muscles, and glands are separate names but not separate events, and these events grow into being simultaneously and interdependently. In precisely the same way, the individual is separate from his universal environment only in name. When this is not recognized, you have been fooled by your name. Confusing names with nature, you come to believe that having a separate name makes you a separate being. This is — rather literally — to be spellbound. [...]
The hallucination of separateness prevents one from seeing that to cherish the ego is to cherish misery. We do not realize that our so-called love and concern for the individual is simply the other face of our own fear of death or rejection. In his exaggerated valuation of separate identity, the personal ego is sawing off the branch on which he is sitting, and then getting more and more anxious about the coming crash! [...]
(Alan Watts, The Book: On the Taboo Against Knowing Who You Are, 1966)

E1.7.C.1.2.a.ii. THERE ARE THREE RESPONSES TO LIFE: A PHONY RESPONSE DRIVEN BY PERSONAL EGO, WITHDRAWAL OR STEWARDSHIP FOR FUTURE REWARD, AND COLLABORATION WITH THE WORLD AS AN HARMONIOUS SYSTEM OF CONTAINED CONFLICTS. The only real "I" is the whole endless process since things exist in relation to one another, as glimpses of a unified process. We should live fully in the present and acquire knowledge through self-awareness, not out of duty or guilt. When the boundary between oneself and what occurs dissolves, one merges with the world, experiencing a sense of harmony and interconnectedness.

E1.7.C.1.2.a.ii_REF1_PH "JUST BECAUSE IT IS A HOAX FROM THE BEGINNING, THE PERSONAL EGO CAN MAKE ONLY A PHONY RESPONSE TO LIFE. For the world is an ever-elusive and ever-disappointing mirage only from the standpoint of someone standing aside from it — as if it were quite other than himself — and then trying to grasp it. Without birth and death, and without the perpetual transmutation of all the forms of life, the world would be static, rhythm-less, undancing, mummified.
But a third response is possible. Not withdrawal, not stewardship on the hypothesis of a future reward, but the fullest collaboration with the world as a harmonious system of contained conflicts — based on the realization that the only real “I” is the whole endless process. This realization is already in us in the sense that our bodies know it, our bones and nerves and sense-organs. We do not know it only in the sense that the thin ray of conscious attention has been taught to ignore it, and taught so thoroughly that we are very genuine fakes indeed. [...]
Our practical projects have run into confusion again and again through failure to see that individual people, nations, animals, insects, and plants do not exist in or by themselves. This is not to say only that things exist in relation to one another, but that what we call “things” are no more than glimpses of a unified process. Certainly, this process has distinct features which catch our attention, but we must remember that distinction is not separation. Sharp and clear as the crest of the wave may be, it necessarily “goes with” the smooth and less featured curve of the trough. … In the Gestalt theory of perception this is known as the figure/ground relationship. [...]
The universe implies the organism, and each single organism implies the universe — only the “single glance” of our spotlight, narrowed attention, which has been taught to confuse its glimpses with separate “things,” must somehow be opened to the full vision [...]
There is no fate unless there is someone or something to be fated. There is no trap without someone to be caught. There is, indeed, no compulsion unless there is also freedom of choice, for the sensation of behaving involuntarily is known only by contrast with that of behaving voluntarily. Thus when the line between myself and what happens to me is dissolved and there is no stronghold left for an ego even as a passive witness, I find myself not in a world but as a world which is neither compulsive nor capricious. What happens is neither automatic nor arbitrary: it just happens, and all happenings are mutually interdependent in a way that seems unbelievably harmonious. Every this goes with every that. Without others there is no self, and without somewhere else there is no here, so that — in this sense — self is other and here is there. [...] [Note from Maria Popova:" (Perhaps this is what Gertrude Stein really meant when she wrote “there is no there there.”)"]
In immediate contrast to the old feeling, there is indeed a certain passivity to the sensation, as if you were a leaf blown along by the wind, until you realize that you are both the leaf and the wind. The world outside your skin is just as much you as the world inside: they move together inseparably, and at first you feel a little out of control because the world outside is so much vaster than the world inside. Yet you soon discover that you are able to go ahead with ordinary activities—to work and make decisions as ever, though somehow this is less of a drag. Your body is no longer a corpse which the ego has to animate and lug around. There is a feeling of the ground holding you up, and of hills lifting you when you climb them. Air breathes itself in and out of your lungs, and instead of looking and listening, light and sound come to you on their own. Eyes see and ears hear as wind blows and water flows. All space becomes your mind. Time carries you along like a river, but never flows out of the present: the more it goes, the more it stays, and you no longer have to fight or kill it. [...]

Unless one is able to live fully in the present, the future is a hoax. There is no point whatever in making plans for a future which you will never be able to enjoy. When your plans mature, you will still be living for some other future beyond. You will never, never be able to sit back with full contentment and say, “Now, I’ve arrived! [...]

Genuine love comes from knowledge, not from a sense of duty or guilt. […]
Our whole knowledge of the world is, in one sense, self-knowledge. For knowing is a translation of external events into bodily processes, and especially into states of the nervous system and the brain: we know the world in terms of the body, and in accordance with its structure. [...]"
(Alan Watts, The Book: On the Taboo Against Knowing Who You Are, 1966)

E1.7.C.1.2.a.ii_REF2_PH WE SUFFER BECAUSE WE DO NOT SEE THE WORLD CLEARLY "A central argument of the philosophical and practical part of Buddhism (ignoring the metaphysical part), which can be evaluated in light of modern psychology, is that we suffer because we do not see the world clearly."
(Robert Wright on Why Buddhism is True in Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the full episode: https://nigelwarburton.typepad.com/philosophy_bites//2018/05/robert-wright-on-why-buddhism-is-true.html

E1.7.C.1.2.a.ii_REF2.1_PH "ON N’EST PAS MISÉRABLE SANS SENTIMENT : UNE MAISON RUINÉE NE L’EST PAS. IL N’Y A QUE L’HOMME DE MISÉRABLE."
(Blaise Pascal, Les Pensées)

E1.7.C.1.2.a.iii. THE CURE FOR THE ILLUSION OF THE SEPARATE EGO CANNOT BE WILLED INTO EXISTENCE, AS THE WILL ITSELF IS PART OF THE EGO. Moralistic preaching fails to eliminate the feeling of separateness, which can only be overcome through intensified self-consciousness. Alan Watts expresses skepticism towards practices like yoga and meditation, which do not lead to total acceptance when driven by striving. The feeling of separateness should be approached and accepted like any other sensation, not forcefully eliminated. Trying to get rid of the ego-sensation only strengthens the reality of the feeling. When accepted, the sensation dissipates like a mirage.

E1.7.C.1.2.a.iii_REF1_PH THE ILLUSION OF THE SEPARATE EGO CANNOT BE OVERCOME BY AN ACT OF WILL, AS THE WILL ITSELF IS PART OF THE EGO "In recognizing this lies the cure for the illusion of the separate ego — but this recognition can’t be willed into existence, since the will itself is part of the ego:
Just as science overcame its purely atomistic and mechanical view of the world through more science, the ego-trick must be overcome through intensified self-consciousness. For there is no way of getting rid of the feeling of separateness by a so-called “act of will,” by trying to forget yourself, or by getting absorbed in some other interest. This is why moralistic preaching is such a failure: it breeds only cunning hypocrites — people sermonized into shame, guilt, or fear, who thereupon force themselves to behave as if they actually loved others, so that their “virtues” are often more destructive, and arouse more resentment, than their “vices.”
In considering how an organism might realize this sense of implying the universe and how we might shake the ego-illusion in favor of a deeper sense of belonging, Watts expresses a certain skepticism for practices like yoga and meditation when driven by striving rather than total acceptance — a skepticism all the more poignant amidst our age of ubiquitous yoga studios and meditation retreats, brimming with competitive yogis and meditators:

"An experience of this kind cannot be forced or made to happen by any act of your fictitious “will,” except insofar as repeated efforts to be one-up on the universe may eventually reveal their futility. Don’t try to get rid of the ego-sensation. Take it, so long as it lasts, as a feature or play of the total process — like a cloud or wave, or like feeling warm or cold, or anything else that happens of itself. Getting rid of one’s ego is the last resort of invincible egoism! It simply confirms and strengthens the reality of the feeling. But when this feeling of separateness is approached and accepted like any other sensation, it evaporates like the mirage that it is.
This is why I am not overly enthusiastic about the various “spiritual exercises” in meditation or yoga which some consider essential for release from the ego. For when practiced in order to “get” some kind of spiritual illumination or awakening, they strengthen the fallacy that the ego can toss itself away by a tug at its own bootstraps."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings, review on Alan Watts´s The Book: On the Taboo Against Knowing Who You Are, 1966)

E1.7.C.1.2.a.iii_REF2_SCI “THE SCIENCE OF SPIRITUAL NARCISSISM
Self-enhancement through spiritual practices can fool some of us into thinking we’re evolving and growing when all we’re growing is our ego

“Ego is able to convert anything to its own use, even spirituality.”—Chögyam Trungpa

A purported benefit of mind-body spiritual practices such as yoga, meditation and energy healing is that they will help “quiet the ego,” providing an effective antidote to the exalted self. Indeed, such practices do have the potential for such an awakening, allowing us to get more in touch with reality as it is right here and now, including the qualities we don’t like about ourselves. Spiritual practices also have the potential to help us cultivate compassion, concern and unconditional positive regard toward others—things that can truly evolve our consciousness as a species.

However, this is all much easier said than done. As has been observed by many spiritual leaders, spiritual practitioners and psychologists over the years, the ego has an incessant need to be seen in a positive light, and will eagerly hijack whatever flow of consciousness it can use for its own enhancement. As the Indian philosopher Sri Aurobindo noted:

“At every moment [the seeker] must proceed with a vigilant eye upon the deceits of the ego and the ambushes of the misleading Powers of Darkness who ever represent themselves as the one source of Light and Truth and take on them a simulacrum of divine forms in order to capture the soul of the seeker.”

Likewise, in his classic book Cutting Through Spiritual Materialism, the Tibetan Buddhist spiritual leader Chögyam Trungpa wrote:

“Walking the spiritual path properly is a very subtle process: it is not something to jump into naively. There are numerous sidetracks which lead to a distorted, ego-centered version of spirituality; we can deceive ourselves into thinking we are developing spirituality when instead we are strengthening our egocentricity through spiritual techniques.”

Psychologists have also pointed out the potential for spirituality to serve as a tool of self-enhancement. According to William James, the “father of American psychology,” any skill that increases its centrality in the self-system is likely to breed a bias toward self-enhancement. As it turns out, no domain of human skill has been found to be exempt from this “self-centrality principle.” It seems to be an inextricable part of human nature.

This includes the domain of spirituality. Self-enhancement through spiritual practices can fool us into thinking we are evolving and growing, when in fact all we are growing is our ego. Some psychologists have pointed out that the self-enhancement that occurs through spiritual practices can lead to the “I'm enlightened and you're not” syndrome and spiritual bypass, by which people seek to use their spiritual beliefs, practices and experiences to avoid genuine contact with their psychological “unfinished business.” In my recent book Transcend, I call it "pseudo-transcendence"— transcendence built on a very shaky foundation.

Just how much of a problem is all this, really? Perhaps on the whole, spiritual practices really do help quiet the ego, and spiritual narcissism isn’t that widespread. What do the empirical data actually have to say on one of the greatest paradoxes of our time, which is: If a major point of yoga is quieting the ego and reducing focus on self, why are there so many yoga pose pictures on Instagram?

SELF-CENTRALITY AND SPIRITUALITY

In the past few years, a number of high-quality studies have started to unearth the existence of spiritual narcissism and self-enhancement among spiritual practices that purport to quiet the ego. In one set of high-powered studies, Jochen Gebauer and colleagues looked at both yoga and meditation practices.

In their first experiment, they followed 93 yoga students for up to 15 weeks. They repeatedly assessed self-enhancement levels among people directly after participating in yoga and among people who had not practiced yoga within the past 24 hours. Self-centrality was measured by items such as "Focusing mindfully on the exercises across the whole yoga class is...,” measured on a scale of 1 (not at all central to me) to 5 (central to me).

They measured self-enhancement though a standard measure of self-esteem, as well as by asking people the degree to which they perceived themselves as better than the average yoga student in their yoga class. They also included a measure of “communal narcissism,” an often underdiscussed form of narcissism in which one thinks that they alone will save the world and that they are the most helpful person of them all (e.g., “I will be well known for the good deeds I will have done”). Research shows that communal narcissism is correlated with grandiose narcissism and all of the entitlement, arrogance and overconfidence that goes along with it (just applied to a helping domain).

The researchers found higher levels of self-centrality as well as self-enhancement (higher self-esteem, better than average judgments, and communal narcissism) among those who had just completed a yoga class compared to those who hadn’t engaged in any yoga class in the past 24 hours. They also found suggestive evidence that the augmented self-enhancement of the yoga practice played a key role in the well-being benefits of yoga through increases in self-esteem. This finding hinted at the idea that the well-being benefits of this spiritual practice may actually come through boosting self-esteem, not through ego quieting.

In their second experiment, they followed 162 meditation practitioners for up to four weeks. They repeatedly assessed meditation’s self-centrality and self-enhancement directly after meditation and in the absence of prior meditation. This time, they directly measured well-being, including a comprehensive battery of measures of hedonic well-being (happiness and high life satisfaction) as well as eudaemonic well-being (higher levels of autonomy, environmental mastery, personal growth, positive relations with others, purpose in life and self-acceptance). Their self-centrality questions included items such as “How central is it for you to be free from envy?”; and their self-enhancement scale included items such as “In comparison to the average participant of this study, I am free from envy.” Again, they included a measure of communal narcissism.

The researchers found that, after meditation, self-centrality in meditation-relevant domains was exacerbated, not diminished, and self-enhancement in meditation-relevant domains was augmented, not curtailed. Additionally, increased levels of self-enhancement explained the effect of meditation on higher well-being (both hedonic and eudaemonic).

It's important to point out that they sampled Western participants, and the yoga and meditation practices the participants engaged in—which included engagement in hatha yoga and loving-kindness meditation—don’t necessarily generalize to all yoga and meditation programs and practices. Nevertheless, the researchers did find greater self-enhancement in the yoga and meditation conditions even among very advanced mind-body practitioners. These findings suggest that, contrary to the purported benefits of mind-body practices as “quieting the ego” and reducing focus on self, they may actually boost self-centrality and self-enhancement. Furthermore, and intriguingly, it seems as though it is precisely those self-related boosts that contributed to the well-being benefits of the spiritual practices.

SPIRITUAL SUPERIORITY AND SPIRITUAL PRACTICES

In a more recent set of studies, Roos Vonk and Anouk Visser conducted an exploration of “spiritual superiority.” They interviewed several psychologists, spiritual trainers and lay people, and asked them to describe people who use spirituality as a self-enhancement tool. They then translated these qualities to six items:

    •       I am aware of things that others are not aware of.

    •       I am more in touch with my senses than most others.

    •       I am more aware of what is between heaven and earth than most people.

    •       Because of my education and experience, I am observant and see things that others overlook.

    •       Because of my background and experiences, I am more in touch with my body than other people.

    •       The world would be a better place if others too had the insights that I have now.

In three studies, they assessed the relationship between their scale of spiritual superiority and other variables. In study 1, they focused on people who engaged in some form of spiritual training. Participants were recruited via mindfulness schools and energetic training centers, which aim to train skills that classify as paranormal, such as reading auras and regressing to previous lives. In studies 2 and 3, participants were recruited via a popular psychology magazine with a broad audience interested in psychological and spiritual development. The comparison was with people without any spiritual training.

Overall, the researchers found that the correlation of spiritual superiority with self-esteem was lower among the no-training group than those participating in any of the spiritual training groups. Their measure of spiritual superiority was related to “spiritual contingency of self-worth,” the degree to which people derive higher self-esteem from their spiritual practices (e.g., “I feel better about myself when I notice I develop myself spiritually”). According to the researchers, this illustrates that the self-enhancement function of spirituality is similar to other contingency domains of self-esteem.

Interestingly, their scale of spiritual superiority was more strongly correlated with communal narcissism than self-esteem, providing evidence for the notion of “spiritual narcissism.” Indeed, it’s important to distinguish between healthy self-esteem and narcissism. The problem isn’t with self-esteem but with the pursuit of self-esteem. Healthy self-esteem—comprising a positive evaluation of one’s self-worth and mastery—emerges naturally and organically through the engagement of authentic mastery and positive relationships, rather than by pursuing self-esteem as the goal. Increases in healthy self-esteem as a result of spiritual practices may be a good thing, and are not necessarily indicative of spiritual narcissism, which is why it’s good that the researchers were able to tie their measure of spiritual superiority to a specific form of narcissism: communal narcissism.

The researchers found differences depending on the form of spiritual practice, however. Spiritual superiority scores were consistently higher among those who came from energetic-training centers than the mindfulness trainees. In fact, those who underwent energy training were more likely to claim special knowledge of mindfulness, more so than those who were actually in the mindfulness condition! The energetic healers were also especially likely to score high in “supernatural overconfidence,” scoring high in items such as “When I randomly open a book on a page number that is meaningful to me, this is no coincidence,” “I can send positive energy to others from a distance” and “I can influence the world around me with my thoughts.”

While their study is correlational, it's likely that there is a bidirectional relationship among these factors. It’s likely that spiritual practices can be used as a tool to bolster the narcissistic self, enhancing one’s feeling that one is special and entitled to special privileges. But it’s also likely that some spiritual training programs attract people with strong personal development goals that are related to Western narcissistic culture. As the researchers note, the idea of exploring one's own personal thoughts and feelings and becoming an “enlightened being” may be particularly attractive to people with high levels of both overt and covert narcissism.

Taken together, the researchers concluded:

“Our results illustrate that the self-enhancement motive is powerful and deeply ingrained so that it can hijack methods intended to transcend the ego and instead, adopt them to its own service.... The road to spiritual enlightenment may yield the exact same mundane distortions that are all too familiar in social psychology, such as self-enhancement, illusory superiority, closed-mindedness, and hedonism (clinging to positive experiences) under the guise of alleged ‘higher’ values.”

HEALTHY TRANSCENDENCE

Is there any way around the allure of spiritual narcissism? It’s all well and good that gurus espouse the importance of quieting the ego (often while driving in their Rolls-Royces), but in practice can we ever really override the universal self-centrality principle and transcend spiritual narcissism?

I think we can, but I believe the first step is simply awareness that it’s incredibly difficult to do so. One serious obstacle to healthy transcendence, as I see it, is how spiritual practices are “sold” to the masses. Yoga and mindfulness are big businesses in America. The purported benefits of mindfulness meditation have generated a billion-dollar industry (see here, here and here). Yoga is the most popular mind-body practice in Western societies. Many of these programs offer a long list of promises, including the reduction of stress and anxiety, along with greater confidence, creativity, focus, achievement, success, eating habits, sleep and even happiness.

But here’s the thing: Healthy transcendence doesn’t stem from an attempt at distracting oneself from displeasure with reality. Healthy transcendence involves confronting reality as it truly is, head on, with equanimity and loving kindness. As I put it in Transcend, healthy transcendence “is not about leaving any parts of ourselves or anyone else behind or singularly rising above the rest of humanity. Healthy transcendence is not about being outside of the whole, or feeling superior to the whole, but being a harmonious part of the whole of human existence…. Healthy transcendence involves harnessing all that you are in the service of realizing the best version of yourself so you can help raise the bar for the whole of humanity.”

This involves seeing reality as clearly as possible. As Nancy Colier, author of The Power of Off: The Mindful Way to Stay Sane in a Virtual World, notes, the point of mindfulness “is to be able to see what is happening inside ourselves, without ownership, judgment or action. And simultaneously, to lose our great belief in and reverence for the productions of our mind.... The dangerous habit is this: The mindful witness itself is becoming yet another form of ego, a new identity, a new somebody that we wear with pride.”

Don't get me wrong: I genuinely enjoy looking at all the varied and intricate yoga poses on Instagram. But from my reading of the yoga literature, it doesn't seem as though the theoretical intent of yoga is primarily for physically attractive people to display with pride their ability to twist themselves into a pretzel. Rather, it seems that the most growth-oriented benefits of mind-body spiritual practices occur when we aren’t using them as a tool for satisfying any of our basic needs—such as our needs for security, belonging and self-esteem. Instead, such practices seem to lead to greater maturity, wisdom, compassion, acceptance and unconditional positive regard toward others when we repeatedly attempt to cultivate the ability to be witness to our mind and behaviors so that we can catch when our crafty ego has hijacked the system in a way that is detrimental to our own self-actualization and self-transcendence.

Which has me thinking: Perhaps it's time for all of these yoga and mindfulness centers to chill on all of the extrinsic purported benefits they are claiming (“Better heath!” “Better sex!” “Amazing concentration!” “Great success at work!”), and just focus on the benefits of such spiritual practices for allowing us to realize that such concerns of the ego are just the ego doing its thing. That awareness, in and of itself, is enough of a benefit to last an enlightened lifetime."
(Scott Barry Kaufman , Scientific American, January 11, 2021)

Read it in Scientific American:
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/the-science-of-spiritual-narcissism/?ref=refind

E1.7.C.1.2.b. "THAT PARTICULAR ATOM RESIDING SOMEWHERE ABOVE YOUR LEFT EYEBROW? IT COULD WELL HAVE BEEN A SMOOTH, RIVERBED PEBBLE BEFORE DECIDING TO CALL YOU HOME.
You see, you are not so soft after all; you are rock and wave and the peeling bark of trees, you are ladybirds and the smell of a garden after the rain. When you put your best foot forward, you are taking the north side of a mountain with you."

E1.7.C.1.2.b_REF1_LIT A SENSE OF WONDER CAN FIND YOU IN MANY FORMS "A sense of wonder can find you in many forms, sometimes loudly, sometimes as a whispering, sometimes even hiding inside other feelings — being in love, or unbalanced, or blue.
For me, it is looking at the night for so long that my eyes ache and I’m stuck seeing stars for hours afterwards, watching the way the ocean sways itself to sleep, or as the sky washes itself in colors for which I know I will never have the words — a world made from layers of rock and fossil and glittered imaginings that keeps tripping me up, demanding I pay attention to one leaf at a time, ensuring I can never pick up quite where I left off. [...]
When one is considering the universe, unseen matter, our small backyard of the stuff, I think it is important, sensible even, to try and find some balance between laughter and uncontrollable weeping.
Cry because we cannot even begin to understand how beautiful it is, cry because we are terribly flawed as a species, cry because it all seems so shockingly improbable that maybe our existence could be nothing but a dreamscape — celestial elephants in rooms without walls. But then? Surely, we can laugh.
Laugh because being riddled head-to-toe with human emotions while trying to come to terms with just how indisputably tiny we are in the grand scheme of things, makes absolutely everything and everyone seem quite ridiculous, entirely farcical. We have heads? Ridiculous! There are arguments about who is in charge here? Ridiculous! The universe is expanding? Ridiculous! We feel it necessary to keep secrets? Ridiculous. [...]
Depending on where you look, what you touch, you are changing all the time. The carbon inside you, accounting for about 18 percent of your being, could have existed in any number of creatures or natural disasters before finding you. That particular atom residing somewhere above your left eyebrow? It could well have been a smooth, riverbed pebble before deciding to call you home.
You see, you are not so soft after all; you are rock and wave and the peeling bark of trees, you are ladybirds and the smell of a garden after the rain. When you put your best foot forward, you are taking the north side of a mountain with you. [...]
The idea of an unchanging “you” or “self” is inherently fraught with confusion and conflict, and if you consider the topic for too long it can begin to feel clammy, almost suspect. An apparent string running through all the previous versions of you — the one five minutes ago, a few hours ago, several years — the idea of “self” inevitably gets tangled up in things like the physical body and appearance, like memory. It’s clear that you cannot pin yourself down as any one particular “thing” but rather that you resemble a story line, an endless progression, variations on a theme, something that enables you to relate your present “self” to the past and future ones. [...]
We do seem to make sense of ourselves and the world as a part of a narrative — we think in terms of main characters, those we speak and interact with, and where the beginnings, the middles, and the endings are. [...]
A lot of our time is spent trying to tie up loose ends, trying to shape disorder into something recognizably smooth, trying to escape the very limits that hold us close, happily ignoring rough edges and the inevitable. We separate ourselves out into past, present, and future, if only to show that we have changed, that we know better, that we have understood something inherent; if only to draw neat lines from start to finish without looking back.
The problem is that chaos is always only ever sitting just across the table, frequently glancing up from its newspaper, from its coffee cup filled with discolored and imploding stars. Because chaos too waits. Waits for you to notice it, for you to realize it’s the most dazzling thing you’ve ever seen, for all of your atoms to collectively shriek in belated recognition and stare, mouth open, at how exquisitely embedded it is in everything. Because we are not designed to be more orderly than anything else; seams have a tendency to come apart with time — you and the universe are the same in this way, which makes for a delicately overwhelming struggle.
So, then, if you can’t ever end things neatly, can’t ever put them back quite the way you found them, surely the alternative is to remain stubbornly carbonated with possibility, to never rest from your rotation. To keep assembling stories between us, stories about how everything was everything, about how much we loved."
(Ella Frances Sanders,  Eating the Sun: Small Musings on a Vast Universe)

E1.7.C.1.2.b_REF1.1_LIT THAT WE CAN WONDER IS WHAT SAVES US. “Here we are, matter yearning for meaning, each of us a fragile constellation of chemistry and chance hurtling through a cold cosmos that has no accord for our wishes, takes no interest in our dreams. “I can’t but believe that all that majesty and all that beauty, those fated and unfailing appearances and exits, are something more than mathematics and horrible temperatures,” Willa Cather wrote to the love of her life while watching the transcendent spectacle of Jupiter and Venus rising in the summer sky. “If they are not, then we are the only wonderful things — because we can wonder.”
That we can wonder is what saves us. The price evolution had us pay for our exquisite consciousness is an awareness of our mortality — an awareness unbearable without the capacity for wonder at the miracle of existing at all, improbable as we each are against the staggering odds of never having been born, alive on an improbable world unlike any other known. Wonder is the religion nature invented long before we told our first myths of prophets and messiahs, the great benediction of our fate as borrowed stardust on short-term loan from an entropic universe.”
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.7.C.1.2.b_REF1.2_LIT P_Dragonfly “THE HUMAN SPIRIT HAS A PRIMAL ALLEGIANCE TO WILDNESS, TO REALLY LIVE, TO SNATCH THE FRUIT AND SUCK IT, TO SPILL THE JUICE. We may think we are domesticated but we are not. […]

What is wild cannot be bought or sold, borrowed or copied. It *is*. Unmistakable, unforgettable, unshamable, elemental as earth and ice, water, fire and air, a quintessence, pure spirit, resolving into no constituents. Don’t waste your wildness: it is precious and necessary. In wildness, truth. Wildness is the universal songline, sung in green gold, which we recognize the moment we hear it. What is wild is what drives the honeysuckle, what wills the dragonfly, shoves the wind and compels the poem. Wildness is insatiable for life; neither truly knows itself without the other. Wildness… sucks up the now, it blazes in your eyes and it glories in everyone who willfully goes their own way.”
(Jay Griffiths, Wild: An Elemental Journey, 2006)

E1.7.C.1.2.c. "AT THE RIVER CLARION

1.

I don't know who God is exactly.
But I'll tell you this.
I was sitting in the river named Clarion, on a 
    water splashed stone
and all afternoon I listened to the voices
    of the river talking.
Whenever the water struck the stone it had 
    something to say, 
and the water itself, and even the mosses trailing
    under the water.
And slowly, very slowly, it became clear to me 
    what they were saying.
Said the river: I am part of holiness. 
And I too, said the stone. And I too, whispered
    the moss beneath the water.

I'd been to the river before, a few times. 
Don't blame the river that nothing happened quickly. 
You don't hear such voices in an hour or a day. 
You don't hear them at all if selfhood has stuffed your ears.
And it's difficult to hear anything anyway, through 
    all the traffic, and ambition. 

2. [...]

Yes, it could be that I am a tiny piece of God, and 
    each of you too, or at least 
        of his intention and his hope. 
Which is a delight beyond measure.
I don't know how you get to suspect such an idea. 
    I only know that the river kept singing.
It wasn't a persuasion, it was all the river's own 
    constant joy
which was better by far than a lecture, which was 
    comfortable, exciting, unforgettable.

3.

Of course for each of us, there is the daily life. 
Let us live it, gesture by gesture. 
When we cut the ripe melon, should we not give it thanks? And should we not thank the knife also? 
We do not live in a simple world. [...]"
(Mary Oliver, At the river Clarion, Evidence, 2009)

E1.7.C.1.3. DAVID ABRAM DESCRIBES MAGIC AS THE EXPERIENCE OF EXISTING IN A WORLD MADE UP OF MULTIPLE INTELLIGENCES. We've become overly focused on human-made technologies, losing our connection to the natural world. Our bodies have evolved in interaction with the animate earth, and maintaining contact with non-human entities is crucial for preserving our humanity. The phenomenal world is sustained by ongoing encounters with others. Our perceptions are informed by the perceptions of other bodily entities, making direct perception inherently synaesthetic, participatory, and animistic. It reveals the things around us as expressive subjects, entities, and powers.

E1.7.C.1.3_REF1_PH "MAGIC… IN ITS PERHAPS MOST PRIMORDIAL SENSE, IS THE EXPERIENCE OF EXISTING IN A WORLD MADE UP OF MULTIPLE INTELLIGENCES, the intuition that every form one perceives — from the swallow swooping overhead to the fly on a blade of grass, and indeed the blade of grass itself — is an experiencing form, an entity with its own predilections and sensations, albeit sensations that are very different from our own. […]
Caught up in a mass of abstractions, our attention hypnotized by a host of human-made technologies that only reflect us back to ourselves, it is all too easy for us to forget our carnal inherence in a more-than-human matrix of sensations and sensibilities. Our bodies have formed themselves in delicate reciprocity with the manifold textures, sounds, and shapes of an animate earth — our eyes have evolved in subtle interaction with other eyes, as our ears are attuned by their very structure to the howling of wolves and the honking of geese. To shut ourselves off from these other voices, to continue by our lifestyles to condemn these other sensibilities to the oblivion of extinction, is to rob our own senses of their integrity, and to rob our minds of their coherence. We are human only in contact, and conviviality, with what is not human."
(David Abram, The Spell of the Sensuous: Perception and Language in a More-Than-Human World, 1996)

E1.7.C.1.3_REF1.2_PH "THAT WHICH WE CALL IMAGINATION IS FROM THE FIRST AN ATTRIBUTE OF THE SENSES THEMSELVES; imagination is not a separate mental faculty (as we so often assume) but is rather the way the senses themselves have of throwing themselves beyond what is immediately given, in order to make tentative contact with the other sides of things that we do not sense directly, with the hidden or invisible aspects of the sensible. [...]
The “real world” in which we find ourselves, then — the very world our sciences strive to fathom — is not a sheer “object,” not a fixed and finished “datum” from which all subjects and subjective qualities could be pared away, but is rather an intertwined matrix of sensations and perceptions, a collective field of experience lived through from many different angles. The mutual inscription of others in my experience, and (as I must assume) of myself in their experiences, effects the interweaving of our individual phenomenal fields into a single, ever-shifting fabric, a single phenomenal world or “reality.”
And yet, as we know from our everyday experience, the phenomenal world is remarkably stable and solid; we are able to count on it in so many ways, and we take for granted much of its structure and character. This experienced solidity is precisely sustained by the continual encounter with others, with other embodied subjects, other centers of experience. The encounter with other perceivers continually assures me that there is more to any thing, or to the world, than I myself can perceive at any moment. Besides that which I directly see of a particular oak tree or building, I know or intuit that there are also those facets of the oak or building that are visible to the other perceivers that I see. I sense that that tree is much more than what I directly see of it, since it is also what the others whom I see perceive of it; I sense that as a perceivable presence it already existed before I came to look at it, and indeed that it will not dissipate when I turn away from it, since it remains an experience for others — not just for other persons, but… for other sentient organisms, for the birds that nest in its branches and for the insects that move along its bark, and even, finally, for the sensitive cells and tissues of the oak itself, quietly drinking sunlight through its leaves. It is this informing of my perceptions by the evident perceptions and sensations of other bodily entities that establishes, for me, the relative solidity and stability of the world. [...]
Direct, prereflective perception is inherently synaesthetic, participatory, and animistic, disclosing the things and elements that surround us not as inert objects but as expressive subjects, entities, powers, potencies. And yet most of us seem, today, very far from such experience. Trees rarely, if ever, speak to us; animals no longer approach us as emissaries from alien zones of intelligence; the sun and the moon no longer draw prayers from us but seem to arc blindly across the sky. […]
We may acknowledge, intellectually, our body’s reliance upon those plants and animals that we consume as nourishment, yet the civilized mind still feels itself somehow separate, autonomous, independent of the body and of bodily nature in general. Only as we begin to notice and to experience, once again, our immersion in the invisible air do we start to recall what it is to be fully a part of this world… This breathing landscape is no longer just a passive backdrop against which human history unfolds, but a potentized field of intelligence in which our actions participate."
(David Abram, The Spell of the Sensuous: Perception and Language in a More-Than-Human World, 1996)

E1.7.C.1.3_REF1.2.a_PH WHILE WE INTELLECTUALLY RECOGNIZE OUR DEPENDENCE ON NATURE, WE OFTEN FEEL SEPARATE FROM IT "Trees rarely, if ever, speak to us; animals no longer approach us as emissaries from alien zones of intelligence; the sun and the moon no longer draw prayers from us but seem to arc blindly across the sky. […]
We may acknowledge, intellectually, our body’s reliance upon those plants and animals that we consume as nourishment, yet the civilized mind still feels itself somehow separate, autonomous, independent of the body and of bodily nature in general. Only as we begin to notice and to experience, once again, our immersion in the invisible air do we start to recall what it is to be fully a part of this world… This breathing landscape is no longer just a passive backdrop against which human history unfolds, but a potentized field of intelligence in which our actions participate."
(David Abram, The Spell of the Sensuous: Perception and Language in a More-Than-Human World, 1996)

E1.7.C.1.3_REF1.2_CUR “I AM INTERESTED IN THE IDEA OF SHARED HUMAN EXPERIENCE, creating environments and resurrecting mythical archetypes. I make works with the intention to evoke nostalgia or cathartic experiences that can be shared. I incorporate reflective surfaces, video, and wet bodily elements such as oil paints or plasters into my works to implicate the viewer, summon shared memories which tickle different senses and reactions. I am curious in telling an overarching story of the underdog with themes of hope and optimism in the face of mundanity and adversity. The appeal of making these works is to create a shared experience, to illuminate memories that bring people together in solidarity - creating new myth.”

E1.7.C.1.3_REF2_PO "WE LIVE OUR LIVES OF HUMAN PASSIONS,
cruelties, dreams, concepts,
crimes and the exercise of virtue
in and beside a world devoid
of our preoccupations, free
from apprehension—though affected,
certainly, by our actions. A world
parallel to our own though overlapping.
We call it “Nature”; only reluctantly
admitting ourselves to be “Nature” too.
Whenever we lose track of our own obsessions,
our self-concerns, because we drift for a minute,
an hour even, of pure (almost pure)
response to that insouciant life:
cloud, bird, fox, the flow of light, the dancing
pilgrimage of water, vast stillness
of spellbound ephemerae on a lit windowpane,
animal voices, mineral hum, wind
conversing with rain, ocean with rock, stuttering
of fire to coal—then something tethered
in us, hobbled like a donkey on its patch
of gnawed grass and thistles, breaks free.
No one discovers
just where we’ve been, when we’re caught up again
into our own sphere (where we must
return, indeed, to evolve our destinies)
—but we have changed, a little."
(Denise Levertov, Sojourns in parallel world)

E1.7.C.1.3_REF3_PO "BEGINNING MY STUDIES

Beginning my studies the first step pleas'd me so much, 
The mere fact consciousness, these forms, the power of motion, 
The least insect or animal, the senses, eyesight, love, 
The first step I say awed me and pleas'd me so much, 
I have hardly gone and hardly wish'd to go any farther, 
But stop and loiter all the time to sing it in ecstatic songs."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.7.C.2. WE CAN OVERCOME THE ILLUSION OF THE SEPARATE EGO THROUGH RECOGNIZING OUR INTERCONNECTEDNESS WITH THE WORLD AROUND US.
Dissolving the ego leads to a feeling of being one with everything and it requires intensified self-consciousness and awareness of the world, not a simple act of will.

E1.7.C.2.1. EVERYTHING THAT HAPPENS REQUIRES SOMEONE OR SOMETHING TO HAPPEN TO, AND THERE IS NO FATE WITHOUT SOMETHING OR SOMEONE IT ACTS UPON.  With the dissolution of the ego, we feel a sense of passivity at first but realize that we are both the leaf and the wind, and the world outside of our skin is as much a part of us as our inner world. We feel lighter and more in tune with our surroundings, and time no longer feels like a force to fight against.

E1.7.C.2.1_REF1_PH "THERE IS NO FATE UNLESS THERE IS SOMEONE OR SOMETHING TO BE FATED. There is no trap without someone to be caught. [...] Thus when the line between myself and what happens to me is dissolved and there is no stronghold left for an ego even as a passive witness, I find myself not in a world but as a world which is neither compulsive nor capricious. What happens is neither automatic nor arbitrary: it just happens [...]
In immediate contrast to the old feeling, there is indeed a certain passivity to the sensation, as if you were a leaf blown along by the wind, until you realize that you are both the leaf and the wind. The world outside your skin is just as much you as the world inside: they move together inseparably, and at first you feel a little out of control because the world outside is so much vaster than the world inside. Yet you soon discover that you are able to go ahead with ordinary activities—to work and make decisions as ever, though somehow this is less of a drag. Your body is no longer a corpse which the ego has to animate and lug around. There is a feeling of the ground holding you up, and of hills lifting you when you climb them. Air breathes itself in and out of your lungs, and instead of looking and listening, light and sound come to you on their own. Eyes see and ears hear as wind blows and water flows. All space becomes your mind. Time carries you along like a river, but never flows out of the present: the more it goes, the more it stays, and you no longer have to fight or kill it."
(Alan Watts, The Book: On the Taboo Against Knowing Who You Are, 1966)

E1.7.C.2.1_REF2_PH "SO LONG AS THE MIND BELIEVES IN THE POSSIBILITY OF ESCAPE FROM WHAT IT IS AT THIS MOMENT, THERE CAN BE NO FREEDOM. […]
It sounds as if it were the most abject fatalism to have to admit that I am what I am, and that no escape or division is possible. It seems that if I am afraid, then I am 'stuck' with fear. But in fact I am chained to the fear only so long as I am trying to get away from it. On the other hand, when I do not try to get away I discover that there is nothing 'stuck' or fixed about the reality of the moment. When I am aware of this feeling without naming it, without calling it 'fear', 'bad', 'negative', etc., it changes instantly into something else, and life moves freely ahead. The feeling no longer perpetuates itself by creating the feeler behind it."
(Alan Watts, The Wisdom of Insecurity: A Message for an Age of Anxiety, 1951)

E1.7.C.2.1_REF3_PH JIM CARREY, WHAT REALLY EXISTS UNDER THE SURFACE

Watch the interview on YouTube :
https://youtu.be/TucyzpHDNlE

E1.7.C.2.1_REF3.1_PH JIM CARREY, THE REAL YOU

Watch the interview on YouTube :
https://youtu.be/s4uajFzgXSY

E1.7.C.2.1_REF4_PH "WE WERE NEVER REALLY BORN, WE WILL NEVER REALLY DIE. It has nothing to do with the imaginary idea of a personal self, other selves, many selves everywhere: Self is only an idea, a mortal idea. That which passes into everything is one thing. It’s a dream already ended. There’s nothing to be afraid of and nothing to be glad about. I know this from staring at mountains months on end. They never show any expression, they are like empty space. Do you think the emptiness of space will ever crumble away? Mountains will crumble, but the emptiness of space, which is the one universal essence of mind, the vast awakenerhood, empty and awake, will never crumble away because it was never born."
(Jack Kerouac in a letter sentto his first wife, Edie Kerouac Parker, in late January of 1957, a decade after their marriage had been annulled. Found in The Portable Jack Kerouac)

E1.7.C.2.1_REF5_PH TRUE FREEDOM AND SELF-MASTERY "The man of virtue, of knowledge, has his ego of the virtuous man, his ego of knowledge, and it is this sattvic ego that he seeks to satisfy; it is for himself that he seeks virtue and knowledge. But it is only when we cease to satisfy the ego, to think and want from the ego, from the limited 'I' within us, that there is real freedom. In other words, freedom, the supreme mastery of the self, begins when we see and hold above the natural self the supreme self for which the ego is an obstructive veil, an impenetrable shadow. And this can only be when we see the unique Self within us sitting above nature, when we make our individual being one with it in being and in consciousness, and when it is no longer in its individual nature of action that it is the instrument of a supreme will, the only will that is truly free".
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, commented by Aurobindo)

E1.7.C.2.1_REF6_PO “THE WORLD HAS NEED OF YOU

everything here 
seems to need us

Rainer Maria Rilke

I can hardly imagine it
as I walk to the lighthouse, feeling the ancient 
prayer of my arms swinging
in counterpoint to my feet.
Here I am, suspended
between the sidewalk and twilight,
the sky dimming so fast it seems alive.
What if you felt the invisible
tug between you and everything?
A boy on a bicycle rides by,
his white shirt open, flaring
behind him like wings.
It’s a hard time to be human. We know too much 
and too little. Does the breeze need us?
The cliffs? The gulls?
If you’ve managed to do one good thing,
the ocean doesn’t care.
But when Newton’s apple fell toward the earth, 
the earth, ever so slightly, fell
toward the apple.”
(Ellen Bass, Like a beggar, 2014)

E1.7.C.2.1_REF7_PH NICOLAS GRIMALDI ARGUES THAT TRUE FREEDOM REQUIRES LIBERATING OURSELVES FROM THE "TENACIOUS ILLUSION" OF THE SUBSTANTIAL EGO—which traps us in the anguish of time and desire—by humbly recognizing that we are merely transient mediators through whom the anonymous life of humanity flows.

"Because we represent everything in time, we can only conceive of a relationship between the present and the future as that between cause and effect. Thus, in the present, we perceive only the means by which we can accomplish our goals. Here, pure immediacy is transformed into mediation for us. Unable to recognize reality in the present, we can no longer see anything in the real world except the material of the possible. Our desire, the relationship we project onto the present, is at the center of our representations, just as our self is at the center of the world. The contradictions of our desires make us experience the world as contradictory and torn, and the anguish of our selves darkens the world.
We understand that we can never be free of anything unless we are free of time. However, it is equally clear that we cannot be freed from time without first being freed from desire. Furthermore, we will never be freed from desire unless we are freed from our ego. In this regard, Schopenhauer's thinking aligns with that of Ashtâvakra and the Bhagavad Gita. As the most original representation, the ego is also the most spontaneous and tenacious illusion. Since our consciousness is the origin of all possible representations, it is only natural that we experience it as the foundation of what it represents. The world ceases to exist for me when I close my eyes. I am equally free to look at the Louvre on my right or the hill of Chaillot on my left. The sensations and feelings they arouse are not qualities or properties of what I see. No representation would be possible if the evanescent diversity of all intuitions did not relate to the permanence and identity of a self. All consciousness is therefore transcendent and irreducible to its object. It is only natural that I move from the reflexive certainty of being the subject of my representations to the metaphysical belief of being their substance. As consciousness, I am a logical and psychological subject. But as an individual, I am merely a transition, a passage, a mediation. I am not a substance in any way.
What is truly mine that I did not receive? My life, my language, my culture, its models, its myths, its prejudices, and its most ordinary representations; its technology; and all of those objects, each of which shapes one of my gestures—everything was tradition to me. No matter how freely or how I appropriated them, my use of them spread imperceptibly around me until it vanished and became indistinguishable in the anonymous life of humanity. Whether we like it or not, life wears itself out and destroys itself within each individual while simultaneously being transmitted, diffused, and spread through them. History, life, and time are fulfilled through us. If a first freedom consists of wanting to exercise one's reign, then a second freedom, humble and lucid, consists of not presuming or claiming anything and serving life while knowing that life uses us. While the first freedom, that of egotism, claims to transform one's life into destiny, the second freedom, freed from this naïveté, fulfills a destiny that is not its own and has no more importance than responsibility.
 Recognizing ourselves as mere mediators and knowing that we have no reality or destiny of our own, like a wave on the sea, grants our ego only the identity of a tenacious appearance. It frees us from it. Of course, an appearance of reality has the reality of an appearance. We are not saying that the self is nothing; we are saying that it is nothing worth obsessing over. Once this illusion is lifted, everything will be freedom."
(Nicolas Grimaldi, Ambiguities of Freedom, 1999)

E1.7.C.2.2. THERE IS NO WAY OF GETTING RID OF THE FEELING OF SEPARATENESS BY A SO-CALLED “ACT OF WILL,” BY TRYING TO FORGET YOURSELF, OR BY GETTING ABSORBED IN SOME OTHER INTEREST.
"In recognizing this lies the cure for the illusion of the separate ego — but this recognition can’t be willed into existence, since the will itself is part of the ego: Just as science overcame its purely atomistic and mechanical view of the world through more science, the ego-trick must be overcome through intensified self-consciousness."

E1.7.C.2.2_REF1_PH "OUR WHOLE KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORLD IS, IN ONE SENSE, SELF-KNOWLEDGE. For knowing is a translation of external events into bodily processes, and especially into states of the nervous system and the brain: we know the world in terms of the body, and in accordance with its structure."
(Alan Watts, The Book: On the Taboo Against Knowing Who You Are, 1966)
"In recognizing this lies the cure for the illusion of the separate ego — but this recognition can’t be willed into existence, since the will itself is part of the ego: Just as science overcame its purely atomistic and mechanical view of the world through more science, the ego-trick must be overcome through intensified self-consciousness. For there is no way of getting rid of the feeling of separateness by a so-called “act of will,” by trying to forget yourself, or by getting absorbed in some other interest."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings)

E1.7.C.2.2_REF1.1_PH "DECREATION 
[...]  Creation is an act of love and it is perpetual. At each moment our existence is God’s love for us. But God can only love himself. His love for us is love for himself through us. Thus, he who gives us our being loves in us the acceptance of not being.

[...]  Renunciation. Imitation of God’s renunciation in creation. In a sense God renounces being everything. We should renounce being something. That is our only good.

[...]  We participate in the creation of the world by decreating ourselves.

[...]  We only possess what we renounce; what we do not renounce escapes from us. In this sense, we cannot possess anything whatever unless it passes through God.

[...]  We have to be nothing in order to be in our right place in the whole."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.7.C.2.2_REF1.2_PH "PROPOSITION 36
The intellectual love of the mind towards God is that very love of God whereby God loves himself, not in so far as he is infinite, but in so far as he can be explained through the essence of the human mind regarded under the form of eternity ; in other words, the intellectual love of the mind towards God is part of the infinite love wherewith God loves himself.
Proof.
This love of the mind must be referred to the activities of the mind [...] ; it is itself, indeed, an activity whereby the mind regards itself accompanied by the idea of God as cause [...] ; that is [...], an activity whereby God, in so far as he can be explained through the human mind, regards himself accompanied by the idea of himself ; therefore [...], this love of the mind is part of the infinite love wherewith God loves himself."
(Baruch Spinosa, Ethics part five)

Read the Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E1.7.C.2.2_REF2_PH "THE PROCESS OF 'DECREATION,' WHICH IS THE ONLY PATH TO SALVATION, IS THE WORK OF GRACE AND NOT OF WILL. Man does not rise to heaven by pulling himself up by his bootstraps. The will is only good for menial tasks: it ensures the correct exercise of the natural virtues, which are prerequisites for the work of grace, like the plowman's effort in sowing. But the divine seed comes from somewhere else... Like Plato and Malebranche, Simone Weil attaches much more importance to attention than to will in this area. "One must be indifferent to good and evil, but one must be truly indifferent, that is, one must shine the light of attention on both equally."
(Gustave Thibon, preface to Gravity and Grace, Février 1947)

E1.7.C.2.2_REF2.1_PH "GRAVITY AND GRACE
[...] Attitude of supplication: I must necessarily turn to something other than myself since it is a question of being delivered from self.
Any attempt to gain this deliverance by means of my own energy would be like the efforts of a cow which pulls at its hobble and so falls onto its knees."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.7.C.2.2_REF2.2_PH "ILLUSIONS
[...] Why is the determination to fight against a prejudice a sure sign that one is full of it? Such a determination necessarily arises from an obsession. It constitutes an utterly sterile effort to get rid of it. In such a case the light of attention is the only thing which is effective, and it is not compatible with a polemical intention."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.7.C.2.2_REF3_PH "CONSENT FOR A MOMENT TO NOT KNOWING ANYTHING, to not deciding anything, to consent to staying where you are. To consent is something that is somewhat neglected, it is to allow life to act fully, to come to us as if we have cut ourselves and all we have to do is wait for the wound to heal - that is what trust is. At first this gesture may seem absurd, but it is necessary to go through it in order to discover the advantage of trusting something of which one cannot be absolutely sure. If I trust what you tell me, it is precisely because I am not absolutely sure, and that is the beauty of life: "It is time for the stone to finally decide to blossom".
(Fabrice Midal, 3 minutes of philosophy to become human again, program broadcast on France Culture on 07/03/2019)

E1.7.C.2.2_REF3.1_PH "PAUL CELAN WROTE: 'IT IS TIME FOR THE STONE TO FINALLY DECIDE TO BLOSSOM' How can what is closed open itself? How can the seemingly dead become alive? Paul Celan invites us to find out. This seems extraordinary, but unrealistically promising. Paul Celan invites us to an experiment so profound that it requires a little attention. To understand it, let's think about sleep. Have you ever suffered from insomnia? If this has happened to you, you know that it is not enough to want to fall asleep; in fact, the more you want to sleep, the less it happens. You feel like a stone that nothing can make blossom. For sleep to take you, it is important, for example, to trust your body. It only wants to sleep, it is your will that holds it back - that is the key - but we mistakenly believe that an increase in will is necessary here. If we are anxious, we should do something to stop being so; if we have some kind of addiction, a little willpower would enable us to overcome it; if we suffer from procrastination, we also believe that it is because we lack willpower - which is completely wrong. And it is because he knows this that Paul Celan invites us to put our trust in the life that is there in the stone of our sorrows, but which remains latent, invisible. This takes patience and trust. Do you want to do it? It's very easy, consent for a moment to not knowing anything, to not deciding anything, to consent to staying where you are. To consent is something that is somewhat neglected, it is to allow life to act fully, to come to us as if we have cut ourselves and all we have to do is wait for the wound to heal - that is what trust is. At first this gesture may seem absurd, but it is necessary to go through it in order to discover the advantage of trusting something of which one cannot be absolutely sure. If I trust what you tell me, it is precisely because I am not absolutely sure, and that is the beauty of life: "It is time for the stone to finally decide to blossom".
(Fabrice Midal, 3 minutes of philosophy to become human again, program broadcast on France Culture on 07/03/2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/3-minutes-de-philosophie-pour-redevenir-humain/paul-celan-ecrivait-il-est-temps-que-la-pierre-se-resolve-enfin-a-fleurir-8011896

E1.7.C.2.2_REF4_PH REMBRANDT'S SELF-PORTRAITS SEEK PRESENCE RATHER THAN SUBJECTIVE EXPLORATION OF THE SELF Rembrandt's portraits of Narcissus are a search for presence. For Rembrandt, it is not about vanity but about self-love, a deep sense of peace that allows us to recognise our own humanity and make peace with our own weaknesses, inadequacies and even clumsiness. Historians have discovered that Rembrandt's self-portraits were not self-portraits, but portraits of Rembrandt himself, because at that time self-portraiture was not a subjective exploration of our states of mind, but rather a search for presence. In short, the myth of Narcissus is important for understanding the search for presence in painting and in our relationship with ourselves. Being narcissistic is not a problem in itself, but rather a way of turning inwards in order to love oneself and others better.


E1.7.C.2.2_REF4.1_PH "NARCISSUS, NOT GUILTY. NARCISSUS TO CELEBRATE BEAUTY AND REDISCOVER CULTURE When I set out to study the various ways in which Narcissus has nourished our history, I was most surprised to discover the great role he played in the Renaissance. At that time, Narcissus became the myth that allowed us to understand the meaning of painting. Alberti wrote: "I used to tell my friends that the inventor of painting, according to the formula of the poets, was that Narcissus who saw himself transformed into a flower. What is painting if not the art of embracing the surface of a fountain? In the Renaissance, therefore, Narcissus is not only innocent but also the bard of the forgotten truth of painting. This invocation of Narcissus is unprecedented; Alberti invents a new theme and links it to what led the Renaissance to give painting a new role. The dignity of painting, he tells us, is represented by Narcissus. And why? Because Narcissus marvels at a face he believes to be real, before realising that it is only his own image. Like the mirror, painting shows us the world, but unlike the mirror, which only reproduces and duplicates reality, painting imitates and brings to life. The meaning of this word, imitation, has played an important role in the history of the West - and especially at this moment. To imitate is not to copy slavishly, mechanically, but to render true. Narcissus reminds us that painting should not be content with merely reflecting what it shows. In this sense, the philosopher and historian Louis Marin explains that "painting is the transformation of the flesh of things into the fragile surface of colours and the fiction of their presence", there like Narcissus at the water's edge. The most astonishing thing for me was to see these lines written by Alberti, whom I had identified as the thinker of the art of representation. You know the criticism of modern artists in the face of this Renaissance illusionism, whether it be Pablo Picasso, Gicometti, Fernand Léger - it is that the Renaissance illusionist project was a limited project, and it was the adventure of poetic modernism that opened up our horizons. But when I thought about the link that Alberti makes between painting and Narcissus, I realised that I had not paid enough attention to the fact that the Renaissance project is certainly a certain objectification of reality, linked to a mathematisation of the world - but in the name of a search for presence. Basically, the logic of representation that the Renaissance promotes is in the name of this presence, it is what is being sought... It is with this understanding of the Renaissance that we must begin to understand the portraits that Rembrandt painted of himself (around a hundred in 40 years). Why did he paint so many portraits of himself? Rembrandt shows no vanity in these portraits. But what does it mean in the everyday sense to be narcissistic? Is there a danger of loving oneself too much? To think so is to misunderstand the meaning of love. You can never love too much. You can love in a jealous, perverse, possessive way, which are distortions, even counterfeits of love. The problem with being narcissistic is that you don't turn to others? But is that true? The opposite is also true: how can you love someone if you don't love yourself? The problem with being narcissistic is that you are obsessed with yourself? But loving yourself means that you are no longer obsessed with yourself; it is a deep sense of peace. Being obsessed with one's image, identity and social status is more a sign of difficulty in being oneself than of overconfidence. What would be the problem with being narcissistic? None. On the other hand, the benefits are obvious: to know and make peace with the humanity within, which means making peace with our own weaknesses, inadequacies and, sometimes, our own mistakes.

Historians have discovered that in Rembrandt's time it was not so much a self-portrait as a portrait of Rembrandt himself. What difference does that make? The self-portrait appeared in the Romantic period and implied a subjective exploration of our states of mind, which was a completely new approach at the time. Portraiture at that time was the representation of an individual in his or her social function; Rembrandt inherited this concept from his illustrious predecessors. But one only has to look at Rembrandt's portraits to see that, although he was familiar with this tradition and sometimes alluded to it, in his self-portraits, even those directly inspired by these models, he departed fundamentally from it; he made any social distance between them disappear completely. We are not confronted with a social type, but with a human being; he shows us a man without a history. What is striking about these portraits is their existential intensity, their gravity, their depth, which goes beyond any particular expression. He devotes himself to exploring the enigma of our own existence, in a movement of well-understood narcissism - as did Montaigne, who simply painted himself in order to see the man in himself. The works of Rembrandt and Montaigne are thus our mirrors, showing us how we are, not how they were. They narcissise us by revealing the adventure of the depth of the encounter with oneself, which opens up unprecedented paths of truth, authenticity and tolerance.

How does Rembrandt manage to show us the human condition? He renounces what had hitherto constituted the art of painting in the West: he renounces the exuberance of colour (from now on there is no red or blue), he renounces the precision of the line that defines great art, he even renounces the representation of material, which he had mastered like no other in his youth. It was the simplification of the means that allowed him to accentuate the tension he wanted to achieve. He now used thin layers of very smooth paint, superimposed on each other, but also reliefs that left very visible marks. Then we see the brushstroke - this juxtaposition in the same work of finished and seemingly improvised parts that create an imbalance, a tension. Because life is tension, conflict, trial, Rembrandt is here the antithesis of the cult of cuteness so prevalent today. It is the negation of all tension, the sweet illusion that all would be well, that all should be well... It may not seem like a big deal, but cuteness is the Trojan horse of nihilism, because by denying the tension at the heart of existence, the difficulties that every human being has to go through, we are lying. To say that life is free of conflict is to deceive us, to lead us astray, to prevent us from finding the impetus to move forward. In this sense, the aesthetics of the cute, or rather the ideology of the cute, invites us to helplessness, to an irresponsible infantilism. In this sense, we should ask ourselves what it means to place a sculpture by Jeff Koons, whose work is precisely the epitome of the cute, in the centre of Paris? [Jeff Koons, Tulip Bouquet in Paris: Is this kitsch bouquet the best way to pay tribute to the victims of the attacks? Does it pay tribute to the tragedy and hardship that ended their lives?"
(Fabrice Midal, Narcisse accused but not guilty, series of programs broadcast on France Culture in July and August 2018)

Listen to the podcat in French: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/narcisse-accuse-non-coupable

E1.7.C.2.2_REF4.1.a_PH "DELIGHT IN ONESELF. “Delight in an enterprise,” they say; but in truth it is delight in oneself, by means of an enterprise."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human, Aphorism 501, 1878)

E1.7.C.2.2_REF4.1.b_CUR REMBRANDT'S SELF-PORTRAITS SEEK PRESENCE RATHER THAN SUBJECTIVE EXPLORATION OF THE SELF
47 paintings, 31 engravings & 6 drawings 
Rembrandt's self-portraits

Access the gallery: https://www.wikiwand.com/fr/Autoportraits_de_Rembrandt

E1.7.C.2.2_REF5_PH NARCISSISM CAN BE SEEN AS A HUMANISTIC APPROACH THAT CAN LEAD TO THE LOSS OF OUR CERTAINTIES AND OUR BLOCKAGES. Encountering oneself can mean losing oneself, no longer knowing who we are, letting go of habits and restrictions. The artist Henri Michaux explored this reality by showing that entering into oneself is not self-knowledge, but rather an exploration of the unknown. Gaston Bachelard and Roland Barthes also explored the idea that encountering ourselves is essential to changing our relationship with others and with the world. Generalised narcissism can make all people aware of their beauty and the beauty of the world.
(Fabrice Midal, Narcisse accused but not guilty, series of programs broadcast on France Culture in July and August 2018)

E1.7.C.2.2_REF5.1_PH "NARCISSISM AS A HUMANISTIC APPROACH ALSO MEANS SOMETIMES LOSS OF OUR CERTIFICATIONS, OUR BENCHMARKS - everything we think we know about ourselves. In fact, encountering ourselves also means losing this. Sometimes Narcissus invites us not to know ourselves, but to forget ourselves. Henri Michaux is one of the artists who has explored this reality most scrupulously. He has constantly undermined everything that could fix meaning, that could define us as "someone somewhere".
That somebody is us; and we are all those somebodies. Michaux shows that to enter into oneself is not to know oneself, but, on the contrary, to enter into the unknown, to no longer know who one is, to free oneself from rules, traps, habits of thought and behaviour, from all confinement. Michaux thus approaches the enigma of being, not to solve it, but to explore it, to celebrate it, the exact opposite of what we are told by the sloppy psychology that always wants to define us, to profile us, to put us in boxes. When I meet myself, I am seized by an immense vertigo, I am so huge!
Narcisse, who sees himself in the fountain, feels that his beauty is not complete; so he looks at himself and discovers the profound sense of imagination that is at the heart of the poetic and creative experience. As Gaston Bachelard says: "Narcisse does not say I love myself as I am, he says I am as I love myself". I am exuberant because I love myself passionately, I want to appear, so I must increase my adornment. In this way life illustrates itself, life covers itself with images, life grows, it transforms being. The imagination opens to the most distant metaphors, it participates in the life of all flowers. Is this not the meaning of culture? Culture today is so damaged, reduced to a kind of general, vague culture - references and intellectual games, peripheral problems. But culture is the space in which we encounter ourselves, in which we discover what we did not know, or did not know very well, about ourselves. No one can live without such an encounter, no one can live without being spoken to about oneself in one way or another. To believe, as we do, that this movement is a mistake, an evil, is suicidal - we need it to be able to meet ourselves, to meet the other that is in us: more courageous than we are, and sometimes more fragile. This was understood so well by Roland Barthes, who spent his life trying to understand how the relationship with oneself could be not a mistake but a virtue. He helps us to understand the deeper meaning of art. "A kind of flattering complicity is established between the writer and myself," he writes. "I feel chosen: the artist discovers me, he sings to me, he sings my sorrow, my joy, my curiosity, and he sings it well. He has seen and felt everything and other things that I have neither seen nor felt. Like a Narcissus who cannot speak, he is my inspired double; his confidence enlightens me, but these revelations are so decent, he sings this individual song with such aptitude, with such a full yet modest beauty, that I have no reason to be ashamed of it, and to the pleasure of having been guessed, I add that of not having been betrayed". In this respect, I wonder if the rejection of Narcissus, so typical of our time, is not the rejection of this demand: the demand to always find oneself in someone else, always in someone else. It's a pity, because a beautiful encounter with oneself profoundly changes our relationship with others and with the world, as Gaston Bachelard discovered: "Generalised narcissism transforms all beings into flowers and gives all flowers an awareness of their beauty."
(Fabrice Midal, Narcisse accused but not guilty, series of programs broadcast on France Culture in July and August 2018)

Listen to the podcat in French: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/narcisse-accuse-non-coupable

E1.7.C.2.2_REF5.1.a_PO "SOMEWHERE SOMEONE IS A DOG AND BARKS AT THE MOON
Someone was born Chinese and is now seventeen
Someone is a blonde and her sister is lively, truly vivacious
Someone his father is a Highlander
Someone. . .and then it hit him in the kidneys and now he's finished, he says he might as well die in hospital
Someone has big beams at home
Someone wants some more cream. But the other someone is quibbling about the existence of God
Someone has just had a moment of pride that he will atone for harshly
Someone, it's raining
Someone, this time it's raining hard
Someone the people next door are just coming in
Someone there was no breeze today, and the swell is still strong
Someone, it's still raining; bad for the roof [...]"
(Henri Michaux, somewhere someone, 1938)


"QUELQUE PART QUELQU’UN EST CHIEN ET ABOIE À LA LUNE
Quelqu’un est né chinoise et maintenant elle a dix-sept ans
Quelqu’un c’est une blonde et sa soeur est vive, véritablement pétulante
Quelqu’un son père est highlander
Quelqu’un. ..et puis ça lui a retenti sur les reins et maintenant fini, il dit qu’il aime autant mourir à l’hôpital
Quelqu’un il a de grosses solives à la maison
Quelqu’un, il veut encore un peu de crème. Mais l’autre quelqu’un, c’est l’existence de Dieu qui le chipote
Quelqu’un vient d’ avoir un moment de fierté qu’il expiera durement
Quelqu’un, il pleut
Quelqu’un, cette fois il pleut fort
Quelqu’un les gens d’à côté rentrent à l’instant
Quelqu’un il n ‘y a pas eu de brise aujourd’hui, et la houle de fond est encore forte
Quelqu’un, il pleut toujours ; mauvais pour le toit [...]"
(Henri Michaux, quelque part quelqu'un, 1938)

E1.7.C.2.2_REF6_PO WALT WHITMAN UNDERSTAND LOVING ONESELF AS A GATEWAY TO LOVING OTHERS AND THE WHOLE UNIVERSE since "for every atom belonging to me as good belongs to you".

E1.7.C.2.2_REF6.1_PO "I CELEBRATE MYSELF, AND SING MYSELF, 
And what I assume you shall assume,
For every atom belonging to me as good belongs to you.

I loafe and invite my soul,
I lean and loafe at my ease observing a spear of summer grass. 

My tongue, every atom of my blood, form'd from this soil, this air,
Born here of parents born here from parents the same, and their parents the same"
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.7.C.2.2_REF6.2_PO "I AM OF OLD AND YOUNG, OF THE FOOLISH AS MUCH AS THE WISE,
Regardless of others, ever regardful of others,
Maternal as well as paternal, a child as well as a man,
Stuff’d with the stuff that is coarse and stuff’d with the stuff that is fine,
One of the Nation of many nations, the smallest the same and the largest the same, [...]
A learner with the simplest, a teacher of the thoughtfullest,
A novice beginning yet experient of myriads of seasons,
Of every hue and caste am I, of every rank and religion,
A farmer, mechanic, artist, gentleman, sailor, quaker,
Prisoner, fancy-man, rowdy, lawyer, physician, priest.

I resist any thing better than my own diversity,
Breathe the air but leave plenty after me,
And am not stuck up, and am in my place.

(The moth and the fish-eggs are in their place,
The bright suns I see and the dark suns I cannot see are in their place,
The palpable is in its place and the impalpable is in its place.) "
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.7.C.2.2_REF6.3_PO "THIS IS THE MEAL EQUALLY SET, this the meat for natural hunger,
It is for the wicked just same as the righteous, I make appointments with all,
I will not have a single person slighted or left away,
The kept-woman, sponger, thief, are hereby invited,
The heavy-lipp’d slave is invited, the venerealee is invited;
There shall be no difference between them and the rest.
This is the press of a bashful hand, this the float and odor of hair,
This the touch of my lips to yours, this the murmur of yearning,
This the far-off depth and height reflecting my own face,
This the thoughtful merge of myself, and the outlet again.
Do you guess I have some intricate purpose?
Well I have, for the Fourth-month showers have, and the mica on the side of a rock has.
Do you take it I would astonish?
Does the daylight astonish? does the early redstart twittering through the woods?
Do I astonish more than they?
This hour I tell things in confidence,
I might not tell everybody, but I will tell you. "
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.7.C.2.2_REF7_PH "KNOWING ANOTHER IS ENDLESS. And I have discovered that man’s experience of them enlarges rock, flower and bird. The thing to be known grows with the knowing. I believe that I now understand in some small measure why the Buddhist goes on pilgrimage to a mountain. The journey is itself part of the technique by which the god is sought. It is a journey into Being; for as I penetrate more deeply into the mountain’s life, I penetrate also into my own. For an hour I am beyond desire. It is not ecstasy, that leap out of the self that makes man like a god. I am not out of myself, but in myself. I am. To know Being, this is the final grace accorded from the mountain."
(Nan Shepherd, The Living Mountain)

E1.7.C.2.2_REF8_PH “WHAT CONSTITUTES THE FREEDOM, THE SOUL OF AN INDIVIDUAL LIFE, IS ITS UNIQUENESS. The reflection of the universe in someone’s consciousness is the foundation of his or her power, but life only becomes happiness, is only endowed with freedom and meaning when someone exists as a whole world that has never been repeated in all eternity. Only then can they experience the joy of freedom and kindness, finding in others what they have already found in themselves.”

[Responding to William James Sidis’ daring definition of life:

“There is a boundary limiting the infinity of the universe — life itself. This boundary’s nothing to do with Einstein’s curvature of space; it lies in the opposition between life and inanimate matter… Life can be defined as freedom. Life is freedom. Freedom is the fundamental principle of life. That is the boundary — between freedom and slavery, between inanimate matter and life.”]

“On this very day the Germans are slaughtering Jewish children and old women… And we ourselves have endured 1937 and the horrors of collectivization — famine, cannibalism and the deportation of millions of unfortunate peasants… You say life is freedom. Is that what people in the camps think? What if the life expanding through the universe should use its power to create a slavery still more terrible than your slavery of inanimate matter? Do you think this man of the future will surpass Christ in his goodness? That’s the real question. How will the power of this omnipresent and omniscient being benefit the world if he is still endowed with our own fatuous self-assurance and animal egotism? Our class egotism, our race egotism, our State egotism and our personal egotism? What if he transforms the whole world into a galactic concentration camp? What I want to know is — do you believe in the evolution of kindness, morality, mercy? [...]

When a person dies, they cross over from the realm of freedom to the realm of slavery. Life is freedom, and dying is a gradual denial of freedom. Consciousness first weakens and then disappears. The life-processes — respiration, the metabolism, the circulation — continue for some time, but an irrevocable move has been made towards slavery; consciousness, the flame of freedom, has died out.

The stars have disappeared from the night sky; the Milky Way has vanished; the sun has gone out; Venus, Mars and Jupiter have been extinguished; millions of leaves have died; the wind and the oceans have faded away; flowers have lost their colour and fragrance; bread has vanished; water has vanished; even the air itself, the sometimes cool, sometimes sultry air, has vanished. The universe inside a person has ceased to exist. This universe is astonishingly similar to the universe that exists outside people. It is astonishingly similar to the universes still reflected within the skulls of millions of living people. But still more astonishing is the fact that this universe had something in it that distinguished the sound of its ocean, the smell of its flowers, the rustle of its leaves, the hues of its granite and the sadness of its autumn fields both from those of every other universe that exists and ever has existed within people, and from those of the universe that exists eternally outside people. What constitutes the freedom, the soul of an individual life, is its uniqueness. The reflection of the universe in someone’s consciousness is the foundation of his or her power, but life only becomes happiness, is only endowed with freedom and meaning when someone exists as a whole world that has never been repeated in all eternity. Only then can they experience the joy of freedom and kindness, finding in others what they have already found in themselves.”
(Vasily Grossman, Life and Fate, 1959)

E1.7.C.2.3. "L’OUBLI DE SOI EST LE CRITÈRE DU RÉEL": SELF-OBLIVION IS THE CRITERION OF REALITY: The extent to which you align with reality can be gauged by your ability to recede into the background.

E1.7.C.2.3_REF1_PH "FICHTE: "FORGETTING ONESELF IS THE CRITERION OF REALITY."
How do we avoid a formidable pitfall that threatens philosophy: to forget that man is first of all a being in relation, that is to say in relation with the world, things, other men? It is with this in mind that Fichte writes this dialogue with himself: "as you read this book, when you contemplate this object, when you speak with your friend, do you think about what you are doing, what you are reading, what you contemplate, what you hear or see? Not at all! I do not think of myself, I completely forget myself in the book, in the object, in the conversation - the formulation is correct when we say that we are absorbed in what we do or we are immersed in it". Fichte's remarks are decisive: the criterion for checking that you are in relation to reality is that you have gone to the background.
Thsi explains my astonishment with the school of meditation we call in France "full consciousness". Mindful walking, mindful eating - in a strict sense, is torture and a confinement. I am all the more surprised that the experience of meditation that I discovered about thirty years ago precisely taught me to free myself from full consciousness; my consciousness goes to the background: it is the world, it is things, beings which suddenly appear more fully and it is this movement which makes one happy - to forget oneself. We've all experienced it, there are times when you don't really know why or how, things just happen on their own, you just feel like you're serving the situation"
(Fabrice Midal, 3 minutes of philosophy to become human again, broadcast on France Culture on 08/19/2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: Écouter le podcast: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/3-minutes-de-philosophie-pour-redevenir-humain/fichte-loubli-de-soi-est-le-critere-du-reel

E1.7.C.2.3_REF2_PH "YOU HAVE TO PLAY WITH THE "I". WHEN IT IS ARROGANT, WHICH IS ALMOST ALWAYS, GENTLY RESIST IT. What if putting ourselves last, far from making us suffer and humiliate ourselves, allowed us to access a broader state of mind? A state of mind that welcomes everything, without focusing on the small self, without dwelling on the state of mind of the moment".
(Alexandre Jollien, La Pharmacopée n°22)

E1.7.C.2.3_REF2.1_PH "GANDHI SAID: 'UNTIL A MAN PUTS HIMSELF AT THE LAST PLACE OF HIS OWN FREE WILL, THERE IS NO SALVATION FOR HIM.'Far from any reward, perhaps daring to put oneself at the last place is a way out of the stupidest tyranny of all, that of the ego. What if we learned to disobey that capricious self that always wants to be at the centre of the world, judging it, commenting on it, taking everything for itself? To put oneself in the last place may be to let the other person exist as he is, to see that the world is bigger than my opinions, to see that the universe is bigger than my desires. Asceticism here, as always, can be joyful. Playing with the self. Seeing when it is pretentious, which is almost always the case, gently resisting it. What if putting ourselves last, far from making us suffer and humiliate ourselves, allowed us to access a broader state of mind? A state of mind that welcomes everything, without focusing on the small self, without dwelling on the state of mind of the moment".
(Alexandre Jollien, La Pharmacopée n°22)

E1.7.C.2.3_REF3_PH "THE CRITIC OF THE EGO IN THE KINGDOM OF THE WAY [...] 

The same is true of spiritual experience. In ecstasy, as in any extreme state in which the framework explodes and bearings disappear, the ego as such is abolished; then it is reborn, but its reappearance is not prohibited if its place is no longer central. But it is no longer central because the path, which establishes a new inner geometry, takes it over and the self becomes for the seeker one of the elements of the terrain with which he is dealing. From then on it can be observed and one can relate to it while maintaining a distance.

Seen in this way, the ego is not so bad. It is almost touching, because it is childlike. An archaic entity, it comes from far back, from early childhood, whose features it retains. Of course, it is stupid, I would even say silly - which among other things means that I am too; but above all it is pathetic: always on its guard, constantly on the lookout, it constitutes an inexhaustible reservoir of potential suffering. Insecure because he is by nature subject to the approval of others, he tries, in the harshness of adult life, to maintain the privileged position of the child-king, the center of a world that unfolds around him and from him. When the spiritual anthropologist is no longer the plaything of the aberrations that this geometry entails, he can study the self and observe it without condemning it. What is its function? What are the defects of its point of view? What is the nature of its blindness? “Criticism” in the Kantian sense of the term, that is to say the examination without value judgment of its limits and possibilities, seems to be the appropriate attitude here.”
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond Wisdom, How to Live?, 2023)

E1.7.C.2.3_REF4_PH "TO SPEAK TRULY, FEW ADULT PERSONS CAN SEE NATURE. Most persons do not see the sun. At least they have a very superficial seeing. The sun illuminates only the eye of the man, but shines into the eye and the heart of the child. The lover of nature is he whose inward and outward senses are still truly adjusted to each other; who has retained the spirit of infancy even into the era of man- hood. His intercourse with heaven and earth becomes part of his daily food. In the presence of nature a wild delight runs through the man, in spite of real sorrows. Nature says he is my creature, and maugre all his impertinent griefs, he shall be glad with me. Not the sun or the summer alone, but every hour and season yields its tribute of delight; for every hour and change corre- sponds to and authorizes a different state of the mind, from breathless noon to grimmest midnight. Nature is a setting that fits equally well a comic or a mourning piece. In good health, the air is a cordial of incredible virtue. Crossing a bare common, in snow puddles, at twilight, under a clouded sky, without having in my thoughts any occurrence of special good fortune, I have en- joyed a perfect exhilaration. I am glad to the brink of fear. In the woods, too, a man casts off his years, as the snake his slough, and at what period soever of life is always a child. In the woods is perpetual youth. Within these plantations of God, a decorum and sanctity reign, a perennial festival is dressed, and the guest sees not how he should tire of them in a thousand years. In the woods, we return to reason and faith. There I feel that nothing can be- fall me in life-no disgrace, no calamity (leaving me my eyes), which nature cannot repair. Standing on the bare ground-my bead bathed by the blithe air and uplifted into infinite space-all mean egotism vanishes. I become a transparent eyeball; I am nothing; I see all; the currents of the Universal Being circulate through me; I am part or parcel of God. The name of the nearest friend sounds then foreign and accidental: to be brothers, to be acquaintances, master or servant, is then a trifle and a disturb- ance. I am the lover of uncontained and immortal beauty. In the wilderness I find something more dear and connate than in streets or villages. In the tranquil landscape, and especially in the distant line of the horizon, man beholds somewhat as beautiful as his own nature.

The greatest delight which the fields and woods minister is the suggestion of an occult relation between man and the vegetable. I am not alone and unacknowledged. They nod to me, and I to them. The waving of the boughs in the storm is new to me and old. It takes me by surprise, and yet is not unknown. Its effect is like that of a higher thought or a better emotion coming over me, when I deemed I was thinking justly or doing right.
Yet it is certain that the power to produce this delight does not reside in nature, but in man, or in a harmony of both. It is necessary to use these pleasures with great temperance. For nature is not always tricked in holiday attire, but the same scene which yesterday breathed perfume and glittered as for the frolic of the nymphs is overspread with melancholy to-day. Nature always wears the colors of the spirit. To a man laboring under calamity, the heat of his own fire hath sadness in it. Then there is a kind of contempt of the landscape felt by him who has just lost by death a dear friend. The sky is less grand as it shuts down over less worth in the population.
(Ralph Waldo emerson, Nature, 1836)

E1.7.C.2.3_REF5_PH "CE QUI NE ME TUE PAS ME REND PLUS FORT"
Il y a une joie tragique du Dionysiaque chez Nietzsche qui appelle à affirmer l’éternité de la vie par delà les limites de son individualité, par l'individu se dépossédant de lui-même. Cela implique de changer d'échelle temporelle, au delà du destin de l'individu. La pleine libération pour Nietzsche passe par la remise en question de la notion même d'identité qui est une fiction en grande partie grammaticale quand on est plongé dans une société stable qui maintient cette fiction - il n'y a en fait qu'un flux qui se cristallise par moment."
(Emmanuel Salanskis au micro de l'émission Les Chemins de la Philosophie, Quatre malentendus nietzschéens (3/4), diffusée sur France Culture le 11/09/2019)

Écouter le podcast: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/quatre-malentendus-nietzscheens-34-ce-qui-ne-me-tue-pas-me-rend-plus-fort

E1.7.C.2.3_REF6_PH IT IS IMPERATIVE THAT THE INDIVIDUAL ENLARGE HIS OR HER VISION "This axis [the recognition of the Self as a microcosm of the universe] is framed by the cosmic mystery which transcends the mystery of individual incarnation. Without some relationship to the cosmic drama, we are constrained to lives of transience, superficiality and aridity. Since the culture most of us have inherited offers little mythic mediation for the placement of self in a larger context, it is all the more imperative that the individual enlarge his or her vision."
(James Hollis, The Middle Passage: From Misery to Meaning in Midlife, 1993) 

E1.7.C.2.3_REF6.1_PH WHEN THE TRUE SELF CLASHES WITH THE ACQUIRED PERSONA "“In the middle of the journey of our life I found myself within a dark woods where the straight way was lost,” Dante wrote in the Inferno. “The perilous time for the most highly gifted is not youth,” the visionary Elizabeth Peabody cautioned half a millennium later as she considered the art of self-renewal, “the perilous season is middle age.”

In The Middle Passage: From Misery to Meaning in Midlife (public library), Jungian analyst James Hollis offers a torch for turning the perilous darkness of the middle into a pyre of profound transformation — an opportunity, both beautiful and terrifying, to reimagine the patterns of thought, feeling, and behavior acquired in the course of adapting to life’s traumas and demands, and finally inhabit the authentic self beneath the costume of this provisional personality.

One has entered the Middle Passage when the demands of the true self press restive and uprising against the acquired persona, eventually colliding to produce untenable psychic ache — a “fearsome clash,” Hollis writes, leaving one “radically stunned into consciousness.” A generation after James Baldwin contemplated how myriad chance events infuse our lives with the illusion of choice, Hollis considers our unexamined conditioning as a root cause of this clash."
(Maria Popova's review on James Hollis's The Middle Passage: From Misery to Meaning in Midlife, in The Marginalian)

E1.7.C.2.3_REF6.1.a_PH MIDLIFE CRISES OFTEN STEM FROM THE CONFLICT BETWEEN OUR INNER SELF AND OUR ACQUIRED PERSONALITY "Perhaps the first step in making the Middle Passage meaningful is to acknowledge the partiality of the lens we were given by family and culture, and through which we have made our choices and suffered their consequences. If we had been born of another time and place, to different parents who held different values, we would have had an entirely different lens. The lens we received generated a conditional life, which represents not who we are but how we were conditioned to see life and make choices… We succumb to the belief that the way we have grown to see the world is the only way to see it, the right way to see it, and we seldom suspect the conditioned nature of our perception. ...]

We all live out, unconsciously, reflexes assembled from the past. [...]

Most of the sense of crisis in midlife is occasioned by the pain of that split. The disparity between the inner sense of self and the acquired personality becomes so great that the suffering can no longer be suppressed or compensated… The person continues to operate out of the old attitudes and strategies, but they are no longer effective. Symptoms of midlife distress are in fact to be welcomed, for they represent not only an instinctually grounded self underneath the acquired personality but a powerful imperative for renewal… In effect, the person one has been is to be replaced by the person to be. The first must die… Such death and rebirth is not an end in itself; it is a passage. It is necessary to go through the Middle Passage to more clearly achieve one’s potential and to earn the vitality and wisdom of mature aging. Thus, the Middle Passage represents a summons from within to move from the provisional life to true adulthood, from the false self to authenticity. [...]

The second adulthood… is only attainable when the provisional identities have been discarded and the false self has died. The pain of such loss may be compensated by the rewards of the new life which follows, but the person in the midst of the Middle Passage may only feel the dying… The good news which follows the death of the first adulthood is that one may reclaim one’s life. There is a second shot at what was left behind in the pristine moments of childhood."
(James Hollis, The Middle Passage: From Misery to Meaning in Midlife, 1993) 

E1.7.C.2.3_REF6.2_PH JAMES HOLLIS'S CONCEPT OF SHIFTING IDENTITIES "Hollis envisions [our] shifting identities as a change of axes, moving from the parent-child axis of early life to the ego-world axis of young adulthood to the ego-Self axis of the Middle Passage — a time when “the humbled ego begins the dialogue with the Self.” On the other side of it lies the final axis: “Self-God” or “Self-Cosmos,” embodying philosopher Martin Buber’s recognition that “we live our lives inscrutably included within the streaming mutual life of the universe” — the kind of orientation that led Whitman, who lived with uncommon authenticity and made of it an art, to call himself a “kosmos,” using the spelling Alexander von Humboldt used to denote the interconnectedness of the universe reflected in his pioneering insistence that “in this great chain of causes and effects, no single fact can be considered in isolation.” The fourth axis is precisely this recognition of the Self as a microcosm of the universe — an antidote to the sense of insignificance, alienation, and temporality that void life of meaning."
(Maria Popova's review on James Hollis's The Middle Passage: From Misery to Meaning in Midlife, in The Marginalian)

E1.7.C.2.3_REF6.2.a_PH IT IS IMPERATIVE THAT THE INDIVIDUAL ENLARGE HIS OR HER VISION "This axis [the recognition of the Self as a microcosm of the universe] is framed by the cosmic mystery which transcends the mystery of individual incarnation. Without some relationship to the cosmic drama, we are constrained to lives of transience, superficiality and aridity. Since the culture most of us have inherited offers little mythic mediation for the placement of self in a larger context, it is all the more imperative that the individual enlarge his or her vision. [...]

It takes courage to face one’s emotional states directly and to dialogue with them. But therein lies the key to personal integrity. In the swamplands of the soul there is meaning and the call to enlarge consciousness. To take this on is the greatest responsibility in life… And when we do, the terror is compensated by meaning, by dignity, by purpose. […]

Our task at midlife is to be strong enough to relinquish the ego-urgencies of the first half and open ourselves to a greater wonder."
(James Hollis, The Middle Passage: From Misery to Meaning in Midlife, 1993) 

E1.7.C.2.3_REF6.2.b_PH JAMES HOLLIS'S CONCEPT OF SHIFTING IDENTITIES "Hollis envisions [our] shifting identities as a change of axes, moving from the parent-child axis of early life to the ego-world axis of young adulthood to the ego-Self axis of the Middle Passage — a time when “the humbled ego begins the dialogue with the Self.” [...]

These shifting axes are marked by several “sea-changes of the soul,” the most important of which is the withdrawal of projections — those mental figments that “embody what is unclaimed or unknown within ourselves,” born of the tendency to superimpose the unconscious on external objects, nowhere more pronounced than in love: What is so often mistaken for love of another is a projection of the unloved parts of oneself.

Drawing on the work of Jungian psychologist Marie-Louise von Franz, Hollis describes the five stages of projection — a framework strikingly similar to the seven stages of falling in and out of love that Stendhal outlined two centuries ago. "
(Maria Popova's review on James Hollis's The Middle Passage: From Misery to Meaning in Midlife, in The Marginalian)

E1.7.C.2.3_REF6.2.c_PH BY LETTING GO OF PROJECTIONS AND FOCUSING ON INNER DEVELOPMENT, INDIVIDUALS CAN EXPERIENCE A TRANSCENDENT RELATIONSHIP WHERE BOTH PARTNERS GROW BEYOND THEIR LIMITATIONS, FORMING A DYNAMIC AND ENRICHING UNION. "First, the person is convinced that the inner (that is, unconscious) experience is truly outer. Second, there is a gradual recognition of the discrepancy between the reality and the projected image… Third, one is required to acknowledge this discrepancy. Fourth, one is driven to conclude one was somehow in error originally. And, fifth, one must search for the origin of the projection energy within oneself. This last stage, the search for the meaning of the projection, always involves a search for a greater knowledge of oneself. [...]

The loss of hope that the outer will save us occasions the possibility that we shall have to save ourselves… Life has a way of dissolving projections and one must, amid the disappointment and desolation, begin to take on the responsibility for one’s own life… Only when one has acknowledged the deflation of the hopes and expectations of childhood and accepted direct responsibility for finding meaning for oneself, can the second adulthood begin. [...]

We learn through the deflation of the persona world that we have lived provisionally; the integration of inner truths, joyful or unpleasant, is necessary to bring new life and the restoration of purpose. […]

The truth about intimate relationships is that they can never be any better than our relationship with ourselves. How we are related to ourselves determines not only the choice of the Other but the quality of the relationship… All relationships… are symptomatic of the state of our inner life, and no relationship can be any better than our relationship to our own unconscious. [...]

When one has let go of the projections and the great hidden agenda, then one can be enlarged by the otherness of the partner. One plus one does not equal One, as in the fusion model; it equals three — the two as separate beings whose relationship forms a third which obliges them to stretch beyond their individual limitations. Moreover, by relinquishing projections and placing the emphasis on inner growth, one begins to encounter the immensity of one’s own soul. The Other helps us expand the possibilities of the psyche. […]

Loving the otherness of the partner is a transcendent event, for one enters the true mystery of relationship in which one is taken to the third place — not you plus me, but we who are more than ourselves with each other."
(James Hollis, The Middle Passage: From Misery to Meaning in Midlife, 1993) 

E1.7.C.2.3_REF7_CUR
“EVERY MORNING WHEN I WAKE UP, I EXPERIENCE AN EXQUISITE JOY — the joy of being Salvador Dalí— and I ask myself in rapture: What wonderful things is this Salvador Dalí going to accomplish today?”
(Salvador Dalí)

E1.7.C.2.3_REF8_PO “JOURNEY INTO THE INTERIOR
In the long journey out of the self,
There are many detours, washed-out interrupted raw places
Where the shale slides dangerously
And the back wheels hang almost over the edge
At the sudden veering, the moment of turning.
Better to hug close, wary of rubble and falling stones.
The arroyo cracking the road, the wind-bitten buttes, the canyons,
Creeks swollen in midsummer from the flash-flood roaring into the 
narrow valley. Reeds beaten flat by wind and rain,
Grey from the long winter, burnt at the base in late summer.
-- Or the path narrowing,
Winding upward toward the stream with its sharp stones,
The upland of alder and birchtrees,
Through the swamp alive with quicksand,
The way blocked at last by a fallen fir-tree,
The thickets darkening,
The ravines ugly.”
(Theodore Roethke)

E1.7.C.2.4. SPIRITUALITY INVOLVES A QUEST FOR THE "SELF," A CRITICAL CONCEPT IN INDIAN PHILOSOPHY. THIS CONCEPT CONTRASTS WITH THE "I," which is often the focus of personal development and certain psychoanalytic discourses. "If a man knows the "Self" by understanding "I am the Self'', what plan or desire will enable him to free himself from the miseries of the body? The one who has awoken to the 'Self,' having found it within the body's intricate labyrinth, becomes the universe's creator, the author of all things. It's on Earth that we must have this experience, otherwise, there will only be ignorance and profound misery.

E1.7.C.2.4.a. "PARADOXICALLY, THE TERM "INDIVIDUAL" ALIGNS WELL WITH INDIAN PHILOSOPHY. THE INDIVIDUAL IS BORN WITH THE PERSON WHO SEEKS LIBERATION, the one who breaks from societal norms and chooses to be a renouncer - an individual defined by their "Self". Those who define themselves by their "I" live in conflict - in opposition to society, to others - and thus, live in suffering. Only the "Self" can originate the desire for liberation. The "Self", a reflexive pronoun, refers back to the subject without conflict. It's crucial to continuously return to the distinction between the "Self" and the "I", as the "I" often overshadows the "Self". The "I" is the mirror in which we see ourselves. Conversely, there's no mirror for the "Self", as it requires us to decentralize."

E1.7.C.2.4.a_REF1_PH "SPIRITUALITY IS THE QUEST FOR THE 'SELF' [âtman]- an essential concept in Indian philosophy - the very opposite of the 'ego' [ahamkara] which is the focus of personal development and a certain kind of psychoanalysis.
"If a man knows the 'Self' by understanding 'I am it', under what plan, under what desire will he be able to remain in the bondage of the body and its miseries? He who has awakened to the 'Self', who has found it in the dark labyrinth of the body, becomes the creator of the universe, the author of all things. It is here on earth that we have to learn this, otherwise there would only be ignorance and great misery. When one has encountered the evidence of the 'Self' [âtman], of this God who rules the future as well as the past, one is less tempted to turn away from it, for it is under its aegis that the year unfolds the course of its days. May the discerning Brahmin, having discerned it, practise wisdom without exhausting himself in long speeches. This vast beginningless 'Self' [âtman], which resides in the form of consciousness between the breaths, rests in the space within the heart, commanding and presiding over all things. It is to this that the Brahmins seek to approach through the study of the Vedas, through sacrifice, offering and asceticism. Precisely because they knew this, the sages of old did not wish to have descendants. "What would we do with posterity, they said, we who have already found the place of salvation in the 'Self' [âtman]?" And they accepted the condition of religious beggars. To desire children is in fact the same as to desire riches; and to desire riches is to desire a place of salvation. As for the 'self', it can only be said that it is not like that... not like that; elusive, because it cannot be perceived anywhere; invulnerable, because nothing can harm it; unattached, because it is not attached to anything - immune to suffering, unattainable".
(Extrait de Brihadaranyaka Upanishad IV, VIe siècle BC)
The word "individual," paradoxical at first glance, is perfectly suited to Indian philosophy, for it is with the one who wishes to liberate himself that the individual begins - the one who breaks with the social order and decides to become a renunciate. - An individual who defines himself by "Self" [âtman]. The person who defines himself by "I" [ahamkara] lives in conflict - I am against society, against others - therefore I will spend my life in suffering. Only the "Self" [âtman] can be at the origin of the desire for liberation - Self, a reflexive pronoun that returns to the subject. It arises without resistance. We will always have to return to the source of the distinction between the "Self" and the "Ego" because the "Self" is always covered by the "Ego". The ego is the mirror in which we see ourselves, whereas there is no mirror of the self, because it forces us to decentralize.
(Marc Ballanfat in the program Les chemins de la philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 10/29/2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/spiritualite-es-tu-la-24-philosophie-de-linde-une-pensee-venue-du-ciel

E1.7.C.2.4.a_REF2_PH PROPRIOCEPTION OF THOUGHT [...]
If we can see what all of our opinions mean, then we are sharing a common content, even if we don't agree entirely. It may turn out that the opinions are not really very important — 
they are all assumptions. And if we can see them all, we may then move more creatively in a different direction. We can just simply share the appreciation of the meanings; and out of
this whole thing, truth emerges unannounced not that we have chosen it.
If each of us in this room is suspending, then we are all doing the same thing. We are all looking at everything together. The content of our consciousness is essentially the same. Accordingly, a different kind of consciousness is possible among us, a participatory consciousness - as indeed consciousness always is, but one that is frankly acknowledged to be participatory and can go that way freely. Everything can move between us. Each person is participating, is partaking of the whole meaning of the group and also taking part in it. We can call that a true dialogue."
(David Bohm, On dialogue, 1996)

E1.7.C.2.4.b. "ZEN INVOLVES EMPTYING ONESELF OF THE SELF, so that there is nothing left but everything."

E1.7.A.4.4_REF4_PH.wE1.7.C.2.4.b.

E1.7.C.2.4.c. "AS HUMAN BEINGS, WE CAN LIVE LIVES OF CONSTANT VIGILANCE AND ATTENTION, WHERE OUR MINDS REMAIN ALERT, OBSERVING THE EGO IN MOTION. Authentic religion involves the cessation of the "I", and actions born from this silence. Such a life is sacred and full of meaning."

E1.7.B.3.2_REF1_PH.wE1.7.C.2.4.c.

E1.7.C.2.5. "I’VE COME TO THINK THIS IS A VERY SATISFYING VIEW OF SELF, THAT ALL THESE DIFFERENT ELEMENTS OF WHAT IT IS TO BE ME OR TO BE YOU CAN BE UNDERSTOOD AS FORMS OF PERCEPTION  that play some role in guiding the behavior of the organism. And it can also help us understand what happens when these processes go wrong. There’s so many conditions in psychiatry and neurology, and that we can induce in the lab using virtual reality, where we can tease apart these elements of self so that some remain and some are altered. The more you do this, the less sense it makes to presume that there is such a thing as a unified, stable, unchanging essence of anyone."

E1.7.C.2.5_REF1_SCI THE EXPERIENCE OF SELF IS A FORM OF CONTROLLED HALLUCINATION, SIMILAR TO HOW THE BRAIN PREDICTS AND INTERPRETS SENSORY SIGNALS FROM THE EXTERNAL WORLD 
"Strogatz (32:37): Well, alright, so as we move toward the end of our discussion here, I think we should start talking about the self. I’m  reminded of expressions that you have been using earlier in this conversation where you say things like, “the brain’s best guess,” or “the brain is trying to make sense of…” It almost makes me picture what people used to call the omunculus. Like, there’s a little person inside your head who’s looking out through your eyes, trying to make sense of the world. It’s sort of: the self, what is it? I mean, who’s in  there? Who is it that’s trying to make sense?

Seth (33:09): Yeah, I mean, so this is why when I say the brain believes this, or the brain predicts this, I tried to be careful to say the brain rather than you. Because I think the experience of being you, the experience of self, is another kind of controlled hallucination. It’s another kind of brain-based best guess, OK? And this is another challenge to this sort of naive how-things-seem view of perception.

(33:32) Now, just as it seems as though there’s a real world out there that just pours itself into our minds, it might also seem to us that the self is the thing that does the perceiving. This quiddity, this essence of you or me, maybe the soul that resides somewhere homunculus-like inside the skull, doing all the perceiving and then deciding what to do and then pulling various meat strings in the body to make actions happen.

(34:00) And I think this is fundamentally mistaken. And again, this is not a new thing to say. Here, the philosopher David Hume, Scottish philosopher, had what he called “the bundle theory of self,” which is the idea that the nature of self is just an ongoing collection of perceptions. It’s not the thing that does the perceiving. It’s another kind of perception, but this time based at least in part on the body. So just as the brain, in trying to make sense of what’s out there in the world, is making predictions about the causes of signals that come into
the eyes and the ears and so on, it’s also trying to figure out what’s happening inside the body and trying to also control the body too. And this also happens, in my view anyway, through a process of the brain creating predictions and using them to update sensory signals, but in this case from the body. Or when making actions to use predictions to actually, you know, overwhelm sensory data so they become selffulfilling predictions, so that if I move my arm to pick up the cup again, now that’s a kind of self-fulfilling prediction about where my arm will be.

(35:10) But the key point is that there’s a common principle here underlying experiences of the world, and experiences of the self. They’re both forms of perceptual prediction. Neither of them reflect things as they really are. And both can be subject to illusions — they can both go awry in various ways.

(35:32) So lots of the book is kind of taking this idea that we build up about how our perception of the world works, and then turning the lens inward to understand how the same core principle can explain experiences of selfhood. And these include not just the sort of highlevel aspects of self that “I’m Anil Seth, and I live in Brighton” and so on and so on, and “I remember this funny story about getting a ticket in San Diego.” But much more basic elements of self too, like the fact that this object that I call my body is part of myself — emotions and moods are part of self, experiences of free will. Now, they are not the consequences of some almost supernatural causal power that sweeps in and changes the course of physical events in the world. No, that’s another kind of perception of what my body is doing.

(36:23) I’ve come to think this is a very satisfying view of self, that all these diferent elements of what it is to be me or to be you can be understood as forms of perception that play some role in guiding the behavior of the organism. And it can also help us understand what happens when these processes go wrong. There’s so many conditions in psychiatry and neurology, and that we can induce in the lab using virtual reality, where we can tease apart these elements of self so that some remain and some are altered. The more you do this, the less sense it makes to presume that there is such a thing as a unified, stable, unchanging essence of anyone."
(From the transcript of the podcast: What is the nature of consciousness, The joy of why, Quanta Magazine, May31, 2023)

Listen to the podcast: https://www.quantamagazine.org/what-is-the-nature-of-consciousness-20230531/

E1.7.C.2.5_REF2_SCI THE BIRD BRAIN MAY BE WHERE DREAMS EVOLVED - A SPACE WHERE WE CONTINUE PROCESSING DAYTIME PROBLEMS. REM SLEEP, BRIDGING CONSCIOUSNESS AND UNCONSCIOUSNESS, MAY BE WHERE WE REHEARSE POSSIBILITIES INTO REALITY.

“There are two primary groups of living birds: the flightless Palaeognathae, including the ostrich and the kiwi, which have retained certain ancestral reptilian traits, and Neognathae, comprising all other birds. EEG studies of sleeping ostriches have found REM-like activity in the brainstem — a more ancient part of the brain — while in modern birds, as in mammals, this REM-like activity takes place primarily in the more recently developed forebrain.

Several studies of sleeping monotremes — egg-laying mammals like the platypus and the echidna, the evolutionary link between us and birds — also reveal REM-like activity in the brainstem, suggesting that this was the ancestral crucible of REM before it slowly migrated toward the forebrain.

If so, the bird brain might be where evolution designed dreams — that secret chamber adjacent to our waking consciousness where we continue to work on the problems that occupy our days. Dmitri Mendeleev, after puzzling long and hard over the arrangement of atomic weights in his waking state, arrived at his periodic table in a dream. “All the elements fell into place as required,” he recounted in his diary. “Awakening, I immediately wrote it down on a piece of paper.” Cosmologist Stephon Alexander dreamed his way to a groundbreaking insight about the role of symmetry in cosmic inflation that earned him a national award from the American Physics Society. For Einstein, the central revelation of relativity took shape in a dream of cows simultaneously jumping up and moving in wavelike motion.

As with the mind, so with the body. Studies have shown that people learning new motor tasks “practice” them in sleep, then perform better while awake. This line of research has also shown how mental visualization helps athletes improve performance. Renata Adler touches on this in her novel *Speedboat*: “That was a dream,” she writes, “but many of the most important things, I find, are the ones learned in your sleep. Speech, tennis, music, skiing, manners, love — you try them waking and perhaps balk at the jump, and then you’re over. You’ve caught the rhythm of them once and for all, in your sleep at night.”

It may be that in REM, this gloaming between waking consciousness and the unconscious, we practice the possible into the real. It may be that we evolved to dream ourselves into reality — a laboratory of consciousness that began in the bird brain.”
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.7.C.2.6. BEFORE WE CAME TO BELIEVE HUMANS WERE SO IMPORTANT... ALL   EVERYTHING   HOME
"SINGULARITY
(after Stephen Hawking)

Do you sometimes want to wake up to the singularity
we once were?

so compact nobody
needed a bed, or food or money —

nobody hiding in the school bathroom
or home alone

pulling open the drawer
where the pills are kept.

For every atom belonging to me as good
Belongs to you.   Remember?

There was no   Nature.    No
 them.   No tests

to determine if the elephant
grieves her calf    or if

the coral reef feels pain.    Trashed
oceans don’t speak English or Farsi or French;

would that we could wake up   to what we were
— when we were ocean    and before that

to when sky was earth, and animal was energy, and rock was
liquid and stars were space and space was not

at all — nothing

before we came to believe humans were so important
before this awful loneliness.

Can molecules recall it?
what once was?    before anything happened?

No I, no We, no one. No was
No verb      no noun
only a tiny tiny dot brimming with

is is is is is

All   everything   home"
(Marie Howe)

Watch the wonderfull animation on the poem said by the author on Vimeo:
https://vimeo.com/411239105  

E1.7.C.2.7. FOR WESTERN THOUGHT, ACTION REFERS TO A SUBJECT AS ITS AUTHOR because it is local, momentary (even if this moment can last), it intervenes here and now, unlike Chinese thought, for which transformation is global, progressive and over time.

E1.7.C.2.7_REF1_PH ACTION IS LOCAL AND TEMPORARY, WHILE TRANSFORMATION IS GLOBAL AND PROGRESSIVE "From a different perspective than the subject-action/transformation [...] 
By advocating 'non-action' and the withdrawal of a [...] subject that arises in principle, another tradition of thought, such as the Chinese, on the other hand, makes us sensitive to this intelligibility that suddenly seems lacking. In any case, it provides us with a first orientation to help us find our way in this confusion. This shift can be useful to us. Because, far from advocating withdrawal or passivity on this issue, it values transformation over action, and this in the name of what is effective. Aren't the two diametrically opposed? Action is local, momentary (even if this moment can last), it takes place here and now, hic et nunc, and refers to a subject as well as to its author (who can be plural). It therefore stands out from the course of things, is salient, so we notice it: we see the subject acting, we can make a story out of it - the epic. On the other hand, as Chinese thought points out, transformation is global, progressive and long-lasting, resulting from a correlation of factors. And because it is "everything" in it that is transformed, it never stands out enough to be perceived. We do not see the wheat ripen, but we see the result: when it is ripe and must be cut."
(François Jullien, The Silent Transformations, 2009)

E1.7.C.2.7_REF1.1_PH "OF FIRST AND LAST THINGS

CHEMISTRY OF CONCEPTS AND FEELINGS. In almost all respects, philosophical problems today are again formulated as they were two thousand years ago: how can something arise from its opposite—for example, reason from unreason, sensation from the lifeless, logic from the illogical, disinterested contemplation from covetous desire, altruism from egoism, truth from error? Until now, metaphysical philosophy has overcome this difficulty by denying the origin of the one from the other, and by assuming for the more
highly valued things some miraculous origin, directly from out of the heart and essence of the “thing in itself.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human, Aphorism 1, 1878)

E1.7.C.2.7_REF2_PH IN ORDER TO ESTABLISH A DIALOGUE BETWEEN THE LANGUAGES AND THOUGHTS OF CHINA AND EUROPE, WITHOUT FALLING INTO A PROJECTED IDEOLOGICAL CONSTRUCTION, François Jullien proposes to create "nets" that allow the in-between to pass through, without trying to construct an overly rigid internal organization. This "network" does not come from either logic, but grows indefinitely from mesh to mesh. Conceptual differences can thus communicate with each other without creating an architecture and without trying to represent worlds. The aim is to promote dialogue between different cultures without trying to confine them in overly rigid frameworks.

E1.7.C.2.7_REF2.1_PH "A NETWORK OF DIFFERENCES: FROM THE QUESTION OF BEING TO THE THOUGHT OF LIVING But what form can this project that has been initiated between the languages of thought of China and Europe take, if we are wary of any overall presentation that, as we can see, would immediately fit one into the framework of the other and would immediately miss the point of their divergence, where common ground is promoted? Or what method of development - dare I say progress? - that would not immediately collapse back into a projected ideological construct? Every confrontation organized here, every conceptual gap arranged by crossing one thread with another, is only a stitch. A stitch, however, is a loop that holds the space in-between while letting things pass through; it is only a point of intersection, whose logic is then strictly additive: one stitch requires another in its wake, and consistency results only from this sequence. So it takes a certain number of stitches to make a web; or let's say that in my work, my successive attempts are each just one chapter. I say network and not system. A system presupposes a boundary, imposes an internal organization made up of parts whose assembly, according to its Stoic concept, is so well ordered that no element can be moved. In our modernity, since German Romanticism and Nietzsche, we have preferred the archipelago and the fragment, that is, a dispersion of the impossible totality. But a web is not subject to either logic, it grows indefinitely, mesh by mesh, only through the crossings it makes and makes again by going beyond and extending itself. A network exists only through its weft, and the network it gradually reveals does not constitute a structure. Here, conceptual differences follow one another, link up, react to one another, communicate with one another, but do not create an architecture, and even less can they represent worlds".
(François Jullien, Chineese Thought vs. Philosophy, 2015)

E1.7.C.2.7_REF3_PH GETTING OUT OF THE ONTOLOGY OF BEING AND THE SUBJECT “This net would make it possible to capture the unthought of these two thought-languages and to gradually configure a way out of the ontology of Being and the subject. This way out can only be organized by weaving this net step by step, because it cannot be projected or deconstructed. The net thus makes it possible to hold elements together without enclosing them.”

E1.7.C.2.7_REF3.1_PH A NET THAT CAPTURES AND CONFIGURES CONCEPTUAL DIFFERENCES WITHOUT RIGIDLY STRUCTURING THEM "But what form can this project that has been initiated between the languages of thought of China and Europe take if we reject any overall presentation that we can see would immediately make one fit into the framework of the other and would immediately miss the gap between them where the common is promoted? Or what kind of development - dare I say progress? - that would not immediately lead to a folding back into a projected ideological construction? Every personal relationship organized here on a case-by-case basis, every conceptual gap arranged by crossing one thread with another, is only a stitch. A stitch is a loop that holds the space in-between and allows things to pass through; it is only a point of intersection whose logic is then strictly additive: one stitch calls for another in its wake, and only this sequence results in consistency. It also takes a number of stitches to make a network; or let's say that in my work, my successive attempts are each only one chapter. I say network, not system. A system presupposes a boundary, imposes an internal organization made up of parts whose assembly, according to its Stoic concept, is so well ordered that no element can be moved in the slightest. In our modernity, since German Romanticism and Nietzsche, we have preferred the archipelago and the fragment, that is, a dispersion of the impossible totality. A net, however, is neither one thing nor the other; it grows indefinitely, stitch by stitch, only from the intersections it makes and makes again by overlapping and extending. A net exists only through its weft, and the network it gradually reveals does not constitute a structure. Here, conceptual differences follow one another, link up, react to one another, communicate with one another, but do not create an architecture, and even less can they represent worlds.
But what is the purpose of a network? Like a fisherman's net, it is used to catch something: what I want to catch by weaving this problematic net between the thought-languages of China and Europe is, as I have suggested, their unthought. But a net also has another use, which is to take shape by catching and containing what it collects, to hold together by configuring itself. In a flexible way, left in motion, because it is spaced, meshed, open-worked, it does not enclose, but envelops, remaining light, as a net holds hair. And what this net, woven out of conceptual gaps, configures here gradually, and what it holds, from mesh to mesh, in a reticulated way - with what this holding, without reinforcement, keeps flexible and available - turns out, in retrospect, to be a way out of the "question of being," a liberation or rather a disengagement from "ontology," both the ontology of being and the ontology of the subject. An exit that can only be achieved along the way, step by step, as this weaving and its progress unfolds. For can one organize an effective exit from ontology only by projecting it, by constructing it - or even by "deconstructing" it?
(François Jullien, Chineese Thought vs. Philosophy, 2015)

E1.7.C.2.7_REF4_PH FRANÇOIS JULLIEN EXPLORES THE DIFFICULTY OF EXITING FROM ONTOLOGY, that is, from the philosophy of being dominant in Europe, while remaining in the language of being. He proposes a gradual and modest exit by entering into a way of thinking about life that allows access to the common. This departure is not a liberation, but an opening to new possibilities of scientific, ethical and political development. For Jullien, it is not a question of abandoning one way of thinking in favor of the other, but of considering their respective fruitfulness. He explores the possibility of an encounter between Chinese and European ontological thought that could allow for mutual liberation.

E1.7.C.2.7_REF4.1_PH TOWARDS A THOUGHT OF "LIVING" "Because of this departure from ontology, which has been one of the great vocations of twentieth-century philosophy, from Heidegger to Levinas and Derrida, we know the contradiction that is always threatening, that we do everything to get out of the question of being, but by remaining in the language of "being". That is to say, we continue to speak the language of ontology at the very moment when we most firmly reject it; or we continue to speak the language of "being" at the very moment when one claims to irretrievably deconstruct it (remember Derrida in Levinas in "Violence and Metaphysics", Levinas in Derrida, in turn, in "Tout autrement"). For in what other language could one actually remain in Europe? Or how can one "get out" if one cannot get in? - To enter somewhere else that is neither preconceived nor premeditated? Is not the Jewish elsewhere itself too much a part of Europe, which also makes Europe so disturbing, so disorienting? But then again, can this exit from ontology, in the encounter with the Chinese language of thought, not only be achieved through small shifts, as I have warned, at first in a very local way, through successive departures, stitch by stitch, through translation, de-translation and retranslation, de- and re-categorization, in other words, through gradual, patient and modest accommodation, through "weaving" and without any announced revelation?
But if we leave the question of being, what have we already entered? This emergence from ontology, which is thus discovered not all at once, but stitch by stitch, from one gap to the next, through successive attempts, is, when considered globally, retrospectively, in retrospect, an emergence from the "question of being" or the question of being, which is at the same time an entry into the thought of living. The question of "being" or the thought of "living" is the main articulation or generic alternative that this web will allow us to perceive, implicitly, stitch by stitch. [...] The question is to access life, as I said before, to access the common. Or, as everyone in Europe has remembered in their own way, but in the form of an injunction or a pious wish, not fully but hollowly, obliquely, in passing, and without being able to make it the actual object of thought: "Remember to live!" (Goethe, Remember to Live); or "Try to live" (the last verse of "Cimetière marin"); or "Learn to live at last" (Derrida's last interview). But what does it mean to "live"? And why is it always saved for the end?
However, entering one way of thinking does not mean abandoning the other. Or what does "exit" mean? Because to exit is not to flee, to exit is not to give up. Contrary to a certain messianic conception, according to which the exit from ontology would be the object of an expectation and a hope, I do not understand, going to China, such an exit from the "question of being" as a liberation: because this question of being, from its determination of truth as well as from its consequent erection of an ideality, has opened up the possibility of an unprecedented development of science as well as of a construction of ethics and politics. Above all, with regard to the question of being, can we renounce its power of enigma and invention? Or let us consider things reciprocally: Chinese thought, which emerges from its "Taoist" thought by meeting the ontological thought of Europe, also experiences its liberation (and first of all a liberation from its "royal road", that is to say, from its autocratic regulation). It is therefore not a question of renouncing one way of thinking in favor of the other, or of placing one way of thinking below the other, and no longer European below Chinese, by reversing past alienation, that is, by converting to one side or the other, but of considering these ways of thinking in their respective resources, or what I call their fruitfulness. [...]"
(François Jullien, Chineese Thought vs. Philosophy, 2015)

E1.7.C.3. "TRY TO EXCLUDE THE POSSIBILITY OF SUFFERING WHICH THE ORDER OF NATURE AND THE EXISTENCE OF FREE WILLS INVOLVE, AND YOU FIND THAT YOU HAVE EXCLUDED LIFE ITSELF."
Humans should strive for justice, while deeply appreciating the profound beauty of reality. This sense of awe and reverence is what ancient texts like the Gita or Simone Weil's writings inspire in us.

E1.7.C.3.1. TO FULLY APPRECIATE LIFE, WE MUST ACCEPT AND BE PRESENT IN ALL EXPERIENCES WITHOUT ATTEMPTING TO ESCAPE FROM THEM. Comparing current experiences to past memories results in a superficial understanding. In contrast, being aware of the present moment helps us adapt to inescapable situations. This approach requires a shift in mindset and a willingness to embrace experience.

E1.7.C.3.1.a. WHEN WE EXPERIENCE PLEASURE, WE FORGET OURSELVES AND BECOME FULLY ABSORBED IN THE MOMENT. Conversely, when we experience pain, we tend to distance ourselves from it, causing tension and hindering our ability to fully experience and adapt to it. To fully live and appreciate life, we need to remain present and accept all experiences without attempting to escape or detach ourselves from them.

E1.7.C.3.1.a_REF1_PH "VI. THE MARVELOUS MOMENT

YOU ARE LISTENING TO A SONG. SUDDENLY I ASK, "At this moment, who are you?" How will you answer this question immediately and spontaneously, without stopping to find words? If the question does not shock you out of listening, you will answer by humming the song. If the question surprised you, you will answer, "At this moment, who are you?" But if you stop to think, you will try to tell me, not about this moment, but about the past. I shall get information about your name and address, your business and personal history. But I asked who you are, not who you were. [...]

In times of happiness and pleasure, we are usually ready enough to be aware of the moment, and to the experience be all. In such moments we "forget ourselves," and the mind makes no attempt to divide itself from itself, to be separate from experience. But with the arrival of pain, whether physical or emotional, whether actual or anticipated, the split begins and the circle goes round and round.

As soon as it becomes clear that "I" cannot possibly escape from the reality of the present, since "I" is nothing other than what I know now, this inner turmoil must stop. No possibility remains but to be aware of pain, fear, boredom, or grief in the same complete way that one is aware of pleasure. The human organism has the most wonderful powers of adaptation to both physical and psychological pain. But these can only come into full play when the pain is not being constantly restimulated by this inner effort to get away from it, to separate the "I" from the feeling. The effort creates a state of tension in which the pain thrives. But when the tension ceases, mind and body begin to absorb the pain as water reacts to a blow or cut. [...]

We cannot compare joy with sorrow. Comparison is possible only by the very rapid alternation of two states of mind, and you cannot switch back and forth between the genuine feelings of joy and sorrow as you can shift your eyes between a cat and a dog. Sorrow can only be compared with the memory of joy, which is not at all the same thing as joy itself. [...]"
(Alan Watts, The wisdom of insecurity, 1951)

E1.7.C.3.1.a_REF2_PO “TITYRE
Listen now. This is what comes to me:
LOVE is nothing that does not grow to the extreme:
Growith is its law; it dies of being the same, 
And dies in those who do not die of love. 
Living with ever unsatisfied thirst, 
A tree in the soul with roots in the flesh 
That lives by living at the most acute of life 
It feeds of everything, the sweet and the bitter 
And the cruel as well as the tender. 
Great Tree of Love, that never ceases to grow
In my weakness a strange vigor,
A thousand moments that stamp the heart 
Are for you like leaves and arrows of light! 
But while in the sunshine of happiness 
In the gold of the day your joy blossoms,
Your same thirst, deepening,
Draws in the shadow at the source of tears...”
(Paul Valéry, Dialogue of the tree, 1943)


"TITYRE 
Écoute donc. Voici ce qui me vient:
AMOUR n'est rien qu'il ne croisse à l'extrême:
Croître est sa loi ; il meurt d'être le même, 
Et meurt en qui ne meure point d'amour. 
Vivant de soif toujours inassouvie, 
Arbre dans l'âme aux racines de chair 
Qui vit de vivre au plus vif de la vie 
Il vit de tout, du doux et de l'amer 
Et du cruel tout autant que du tendre. 
Grand Arbre Amour, qui ne cesse d'étendre 
Dans ma faiblesse une étrange vigueur,
Mille moments que se garde le cœur 
Te sont feuillages et flèches de lumière! 
Mais cependant qu'au soleil du bonheur 
Dans l'or du jour s'épanouit ta joie,
Ta même soif qui gagne en profondeur,
Puise dans l'ombre à la source des pleurs..."
(Paul Valéry, Dialogue de l'arbre, 1943)

E1.7.C.3.1.b. THEY ARE TWO WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING AN EXPERIENCE: ONE IS THROUGH COMPARISON WITH PAST MEMORIES, AND THE OTHER IS BY BEING AWARE OF IT IN THE PRESENT MOMENT.
The first approach can lead to a superficial understanding, while the second can help manage unavoidable circumstances. When faced with unpleasant experiences, people often resort to memories, attempting to adapt to the present. However, this method falls short. The more we try to understand the present through the lens of memory, the more joyless and frustrating life can become. Ultimately, this approach can lead to uncontrolled fear when reality surfaces.

E1.7.C.3.1.b_REF1_PH "THERE ARE, THEN, TWO WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING AN EXPERIENCE. The first is to compare it with the memories of other experiences, and so to name and define it. This is to interpret it in accordance with the dead and the past. The second is to be aware of it as it is, as when, in the intensity of joy, we forget past and future, let the present be all, and thus do not even stop to think, "I am happy."

Both ways of understanding have their uses. But they correspond to the difference between knowing a thing by words and knowing it immediately. [...]
The point, then, is that when we try to understand the present by comparing it with memories, we do not understand it as deeply as when we are aware of it without comparison. This, however, is usually the way in which we approach unpleasant experiences. Instead of being aware of them as they are, we try to deal with them in terms of the past. The frightened or lonely person begins at once to think, "I'm afraid," or, "I'm so lonely."

This is, of course, an attempt to avoid the experience. We don't want to be aware of this present. But as we cannot get out of the present, our only escape is into memories. Here we feel on safe ground, for the past is the fixed and the known-but also, of course, the dead. Thus to try to get out of, say, fear we endeavor at once to be separate from it and to "fix" it by interpreting it in terms of memory, in terms of what is already fixed and known. In other words, we try to adapt ourselves to the mysterious present by comparing it with the (remembered) past, by naming and "identifying" it.

This would be all very well if you were trying to get away from something from which you can get away. It is a useful process for knowing when to come in out of the rain. But it does not tell you how to live with things from which you cannot get away, which are already part of yourself. Your body does not eliminate poisons by knowing their names. To try to control fear or depression or boredom by calling them names is to resort to superstition of trust in curses and invocations.

It is so easy to see why this does not work. Obviously, we try to know, name, and define fear in order to make it "objective," that is, separate from "I." But why are we trying to be separate from fear? Because we are afraid. In other words, fear is trying to separate itself from fear, as if one could fight fire with fire.

And this is not all. The more we accustom ourselves to understanding the present in terms of memory, the unknown by the known, the living by the dead, the more desiccated and embalmed, the more joyless and frustrated life becomes. So protected from life, man becomes a sort of mollusc encrusted in a hard shell of "tradition," so that when at last reality breaks through, as it must, the tide of pent-up fear runs wild."
(Alan Watts, The wisdom of insecurity, 1951)

E1.7.C.3.1.b_REF2_SONG ANOTHER LESSON OF PHILOSOPHY BY DAVID BOWIE.
"Fill your heart with love today
Don't play the game of time
Things that happened in the past
Only happened in your mind
Only in your mind
Oh, forget your mind

And you'll be free yeah
The writing's on the wall
Free yeah
And you can know it all
If you choose
Just remember lovers never lose
'Cause they are free of thoughts unpure

And of thoughts unkind
Gentleness clears the soul
Love cleans the mind
And makes it free

Oh, happiness is happening
The dragons have been bled
Gentleness is everywhere
Fear's just in your head
Only in your head
Fear is in your head
Only in your head
So forget your head

And you'll be free yeah [...]"
(David Bowie, Fill your heart, 1968)

Listen to Fill Your Heart: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uD1M6XAQELg

E1.7.C.3.1.b_REF3_SCI "CONCEPT CELLS HELP YOUR BRAIN ABSTRACT INFORMATION AND BUILD MEMORIES
Individual cells in the brain light up for specific ideas. These concept neurons, once known as “Jennifer Aniston cells,” help us think, imagine and remember episodes from our lives.

Imagine you’re on a first date, sipping a martini at a bar. You eat an olive and patiently listen to your date tell you about his job at a bank. Your brain is processing this scene, in part, by breaking it down into concepts. Bar. Date. Martini. Olive. Bank. Deep in your brain, neurons known as concept cells are firing.

You might have concept cells that fire for martinis but not for olives. Or ones that fire for bars — perhaps even that specific bar, if you’ve been there before. The idea of a “bank” also has its own set of concept cells, maybe millions of them. And there, in that dimly lit bar, you’re starting to form concept cells for your date, whether you like him or not. Those cells will fire when something reminds you of him.

Concept neurons fire for their concept no matter how it is presented: in real life or a photo, in text or speech, on television or in a podcast. […]

Concept cells could code for anything and everything, but they are not used for object recognition. They’re too slow for that: These cells fire after a delay of about 300 milliseconds. “It’s unclear why it takes so long,” said Ueli Rutishauser, a neuroscientist at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles. Rather, these cells seem to dip into a more internal process, forming an abstract representation informed by past experiences and memory.

Everyone has a different set of concepts and cells that encode them. Not everyone has seen *Friends* or follows celebrity culture. Instead, concept cells develop for people or objects that we care about or have some history with. […]
To many scientists, the idea that concept cells link up and interweave to form memories intuitively makes sense. Because memories are so important for our survival, it is “the best explanation for why our brain can afford the luxury of having such high specialization to independent semantic concepts,” said Sina Mackay, a graduate student at the University of Bonn who works with Mormann.

Indeed, in a recent study in *Nature Communications*, their team found the strongest experimental hints yet that concept cells may link specific objects to locations in our long-term memory. For decades, researchers have studied cells that store location information in our brains. The study found that the firing patterns of concept cells and location cells correlated with patients’ ability to remember an object’s location. Concept cells are the “what” to our memories, while location cells are the “where,” the authors wrote. […]
Concept cells are also linked to working memory, which is activated temporarily when you’re grocery shopping or remembering a phone number. This type of memory is “low capacity, and it has high demands,” Rutishauser said. “If you get slightly distracted, it’s gone.” In 2017, his team found that concept cells remain active for several seconds as you try to hold items in working memory. And in a study published in *Neuron* at the end of 2024, his team found that working memories are more likely to migrate into long-term memory when patients’ concept cells are active.

Working memory also turns on when you imagine a scenario or tell a story. “Shrek and Jennifer Aniston walk into a bar. … Maybe Shrek orders a beer,” suggested Pieter Roelfsema, who studies vision, perception and memory at the Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience. As you read this sentence, the concepts of Aniston, Shrek and a bar stitch together, one by one. It’s likely that concept cells play a role in this imagining. “You are building something in your working memory that is incrementally becoming richer and maybe more realistic,” he said, “and then the story unfolds.”
(Yasmin Saplakoglu, Quanta Magazine, January 21, 2025)

Read the full article on Quanta Magazine: https://www.quantamagazine.org/concept-cells-help-your-brain-abstract-information-and-build-memories-20250121/?mc_cid=340b2907d5&mc_eid=de38e9b771


E1.7.C.3.1.b_REF4_SCI “HOW ‘EVENT SCRIPTS’ STRUCTURE OUR PERSONAL MEMORIES
YOU HAVE SOME VOLITIONAL CONTROL OVER HOW YOU CHOOSE TO CATEGORIZE THE INFORMATION THAT’S COMING IN. That is, your preconceptions and goals shape your experiences and what you remember about them. It may be possible to adopt a mindset that predisposes you to remember particular details of an event.

By screening films in a brain scanner, neuroscientists discovered a rich library of neural scripts — from a trip through an airport to a marriage proposal — that form scaffolds for memories of our experiences.

After shuffling the cards in a standard 52-card deck, Alex Mullen, a three-time world memory champion, can memorize their order in under 20 seconds. As he flips though the cards, he takes a mental walk through a house. At each point in his journey — the mailbox, front door, staircase and so on — he attaches a card. To recall the cards, he relives the trip.

This technique, called “method of loci” or “memory palace,” is effective because it mirrors the way the brain naturally constructs narrative memories: Mullen’s memory for the card order is built on the scaffold of a familiar journey. We all do something similar every day, as we use familiar sequences of events, such as the repeated steps that unfold during a meal at a restaurant or a trip through the airport, as a home for specific details — an exceptional appetizer or an object flagged at security. The general narrative makes the noteworthy features easier to recall later.

“You are taking these details and connecting them to this prior knowledge,” said Christopher Baldassano, a cognitive neuroscientist at Columbia University. “We think this is how you create your autobiographical memories.”

Psychologists empirically introduced this theory some 50 years ago, but proof of such scaffolds in the brain was missing. Then, in 2018, Baldassano found it: neural fingerprints of narrative experience, derived from brain scans, that replay sequentially during standard life events. He believes that the brain builds a rich library of scripts for expected scenarios — restaurant or airport, business deal or marriage proposal — over a person’s lifetime.

These standardized scripts, and departures from them, influence how and how well we remember specific instances of these event types, his lab has found. And recently, in a paper published in Current Biology in fall 2024, they showed that individuals can select a dominant script for a complex, real-world event — for example, while watching a marriage proposal in a restaurant, we might opt, subconsciously, for either a proposal or a restaurant script — which determines what details we remember.

Baldassano’s research builds upon two key innovations. Over the past decade, a group of cognitive neuroscientists has honed a clever method that uses movies to study the brain’s record of realistic experience, and Baldassano has pioneered advances in decoding the complex data recorded during these cinematic sessions using machine learning.

His approach brought “a lot of sophistication” to these kinds of studies, said Brice Kuhl, a University of Oregon neuroscientist who was not involved in the research. “It’s had a huge impact on the field.”

The analyses have generated a new understanding of how the human brain constructs narrative memories. Nearly the entire brain is involved, contradicting earlier ideas that placed memory in specific brain regions. And memories are built in temporal pieces, each of which ranges from a second to a minute in length.

The brain places those pieces onto the scaffolds of event scripts. “It’s all a construction,” said the neuroscientist Zachariah Reagh of Washington University in St. Louis, who is not involved in the research. “It’s not like you have this video camera of exactly what happened, exactly as it happened. You have to reconstruct, based on pieces of the experience, what you think happened. […]

A Whole-Brain Affair

When Baldassano first learned about Chen’s *Sherlock* experiments, “I thought that was the coolest project I’d ever seen,” he said. He was at Princeton to interview for a postdoctoral position after nearly finishing his doctorate in computer science. As a graduate student at Stanford University, he had developed machine learning techniques to analyze multi-voxel fMRI patterns recorded from people looking at photographs.

Baldassano had not been interested in memory research; he imagined the field revolved around word lists, which seemed dull. But around that time, he had read the book Moonwalking With Einstein: The Art and Science of Remembering Everything, in which the journalist Joshua Foer recounts his efforts to train for a memory championship by using the method of loci. Baldassano had also observed his then-3-year-old son readily learn information conveyed in the form of a story. He saw then that human memory builds upon the narrative of life experiences. […]

“Memory is not one thing. It’s not a monolith,” Reagh said. “Your memory has a recipe for different pieces of the experience.”

However, Baldassano did not believe that these pieces are assembled anew with each life (or television) episode. “When an event starts, you already have some kind of scaffold,” he said. “It’s like a coloring book page that’s not colored in yet, but a lot of the lines are already there. When an event is happening, you are filling in the particular details.” […]

Psychologists had formally proposed that such scaffolds existed in the 1970s. But the line of research had fallen out of favor, largely because no one had good tools for studying them in the brain. Baldassano now had those tools. And he had a clever idea for how to use movies and television to study the scripts on which we build our memories.

Following a Script

Just like life, movies tend to repeat common themes. We have romantic comedies and disaster flicks, superheroes and alien encounters, and across all of these genres there are commonalities, such as a meal in a restaurant or a race through an airport. Baldassano set out to take advantage of this redundancy to locate some pages of the brain’s coloring book.
While each of 33 study participants lay in an fMRI machine, he screened clips from eight movies […] When Baldassano plugged the data into his fMRI-optimized hidden Markov model, it revealed a definitive sequence of brain activation patterns that was shared across people and across movies for a given type of event. Across all restaurant clips, one pattern showed up when actors entered, which shifted to another when they were seated, yet again when they ordered food, and once more when the food arrived. All restaurant stories shared these four event patterns on average, with some story-unique differences added on top. The airport movies were similarly represented in the brain, with each step of the sequence characterized by a predictable cross-brain fingerprint centralized in the prefrontal cortex.

The results revealed that the brain doesn’t simply record what it perceives. Instead, much if not most of the brain’s reaction to an event or story originates in memories of how that type of event usually plays out. In other words, we process the present through the past.

Baldassano’s work, published in The Journal of Neuroscience in 2018, showed that there are two critical steps to constructing memories. As we go about our day, we record the new experiences in pieces of varying size and complexity, from simple perceptions to stunning plot twists. Meanwhile, our brains access templates for these new events based on knowledge of similar ones, and place the pieces of the evolving memory in that context.

Memories, it turns out, are more like paint-by-number than rendered from scratch on a blank canvas.

Frame Shift

Expert chess players need only glance at the board to remember the positions of pieces, though for most people the arrangement would be vexing to reconstruct. Because they’ve played many games, chess masters recognize patterns where others are overwhelmed by detail. Similarly, when you meet friends at a restaurant, you know the server will come to take your food order; because you are not baffled by the basic sequence of events, you’re better able to remember flavors, details of your conversations, the person at the next table.

In other words, having scripts bolsters memory. “It’s so much easier to remember things if they slot into what you already know about the world,” said Chris Bird(opens a new tab), who studies memory for everyday experiences at the University of Sussex. By extension, if you don’t have a working narrative template, your memory should, in theory, be worse.

Baldassano could test this phenomenon using his fMRI data. Mirroring Chen’s approach to her Sherlock studies, he had his study participants describe the airport and restaurant scenes to him while they were still in the scanner. Those who better booted up all the key parts of a script while they watched the movies, as indicated by their brain activation patterns, had a better memory for details(opens a new tab) than those who only weakly revived their scripts.

“If we saw them do a good job bringing this airport sequence of patterns online,” Baldassano said, “that predicted they were going to be able to remember more details of this particular airport story.”

Sometimes, more than one script runs at once in a story, or in life — and which script is activated can impact your memory of an event. […]
The work underscores that the way we experience and remember events arises largely from our mental state, as opposed to properties of the events themselves. “You can change how the brain segments experience based on what you prime subjects with — what kind of information is relevant, whether it’s the social information or the location information,” Kuhl said. “That’s a novel contribution.” […]
And it suggests that people have some power over what they remember. “It’s not purely the stimulus activating these things,” Baldassano said. “You have some volitional control over how you choose to categorize the information that’s coming in.” That is, your preconceptions and goals shape your experiences and what you remember about them. It may be possible to adopt a mindset that predisposes you to remember particular details of an event. […]

This script-writing process takes place throughout our lives: Experiences, routines and adventures comprise most of the raw material, but media such as books and movies also set up scaffolds for memories.

Baldassano has been fascinated to watch this play out with his sons. As toddlers, his children particularly liked books about Maisy Mouse. In the series, Maisy goes to the library, visits the dentist, learns to swim — and, yes, goes to the airport. There is little in the way of plot or incident: The mouse checks her suitcase, goes through security and boards the plane. Baldassano found the books “brutally boring” — but his children were riveted.

“It’s 100% just schema instruction,” he said. The world can be bewildering to children because they lack the mental scaffolds to make sense of what is happening. Books and other media help write the scripts, at the neurobiological level, that will help his kids navigate the rest of their lives. Baldassano knows better than most: “It’s a really important kind of knowledge to build.”
(Ingrid Wickelgren, Quanta Magazine, February 21, 2025)

Read the full article in Quanta Magazine:
https://www.quantamagazine.org/how-event-scripts-structure-our-personal-memories-20250221/?mc_cid=2171f9d1e0&mc_eid=de38e9b771

E1.7.C.3.1.b_REF5_PO ”NO BETTER TIME THAN
NOW CAN BE IMAGINED
No better time than now can be imagined.
In fact, there is no time that is not now.
Nothing was or will be, only is,
Each memory or dream no more than this:
The thought of bloom upon a winter bough.
Yet all of life is full of such phantasms.
For you the moment's much too good to miss.
Open it as far as thoughts allow.
Unhinge its doors, and hear its sunlit passion
Reverberate across the fields of bliss.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E1.7.C.3.1.c. WE OFTEN TRY TO RESIST THE UNKNOWN AND CLING TO THE PAST, LEADING TO A CONSTANT SENSE OF CONFLICT AND UNEASE. Instead, we should be fully present and open to each moment, seeing it as new and unique. Developing this ability requires a change in mindset and a willingness to experience, which helps us adapt and manage pain and insecurity. This approach can be likened to the principle of judo, where mastering opposing forces is achieved by yielding to them.

E1.7.C.3.1.c_REF1_PH BY FULLY EXPERIENCING EACH MOMENT AS NEW AND UNIQUE WITHOUT RESISTANCE, ONE CAN DIMINISH THE STRUGGLE ASSOCIATED WITH FEAR AND PAIN "If, on the other hand, you are aware of fear, you realize that, because this feeling is now yourself, escape is impossible. You see that calling it "fear" tells you little or nothing about it, for the comparison and the naming is based, not on past experience, but on memory. You have then no choice but to be aware of it with your whole being as an entirely new experience. Indeed, every experience is in this sense new, and at every moment of our lives we are in the midst of the new and the unknown. At this point you receive the experience without resisting it or naming it, and the whole sense of conflict between "I" and the present reality vanishes.
For most of us this conflict is ever gnawing within us because our lives are one long effort to resist the unknown, the real present in which we live, which is the unknown in the midst of coming into being. Living thus, we never really learn to live with it. At every moment we are cautious, hesitant, and on the defensive. And all to no avail, for life thrusts us into the unknown willy-nilly, and resistance is as futile and exasperating as trying to swim against a roaring torrent.
The art of living in this "predicament" is neither careless drifting on the one hand nor fearful clinging to the past and the known on the other. It consists in being completely sensitive to each moment, in regarding it as utterly new and unique, in having the mind open and wholly receptive. [...]
Seeing that there is no escape from the pain, the mind yields to it, absorbs it, and becomes conscious of just pain without any "I" feeling it or resisting it. It experiences pain in the same complete, unselfconscious way in which it experiences pleasure. Pain is the nature of this present moment, and I can only live in this moment.
Sometimes, when resistance ceases, the pain simply goes away or dwindles to an easily tolerable ache. At other times it remains, but the absence of any resistance brings about a way of feeling pain so unfamiliar as to be hard to describe. The pain is no longer problematic. I feel it, but there is no urge to get rid of it, for I have discovered that pain and the effort to be separate from it are the same thing. Wanting to get out of pain is the pain; it is not the "reaction" of an "I" distinct from the pain. When you discover this, the desire to escape "merges" into the pain itself and vanishes."
(Alan Watts, The wisdom of insecurity, 1951)

E1.7.C.3.1.c_REF2_PO “THE COURSE OF LIFE
You too wanted better things, but love
forces all of us down. Sorrow bends us more
forcefully, but the arc doesn't return to its
point of origin without a reason.

Upwards or downwards! In holy Night,
where mute Nature plans the coming days,
doesn't there reign in the most twisted Orcus
something straight and direct?

This I have learned. Never to my knowledge
did you, all-preserving gods, like mortal
masters, lead me providentially
along a straight path.

The gods say that man should test
everything, and that strongly nourished
he be thankful for everything, and understand
the freedom to set forth wherever he will.”
(Friedrich Holderlin)

E1.7.C.3.1.d. WHEN IT COMES TO SUFFERING, RESISTANCE AND ESCAPE ONLY AMPLIFY THE PAIN.
Instead, the mind should remain stable and absorb the pain without attempting to dissociate from it. This implies being aware and receptive to the present moment at all times, without trying to define it or separate oneself from it. The only guideline is to "look" and be conscious of the present experience.

E1.7.C.3.1.d_REF1_PH BY YIELDING TO PAIN AND EXPERIENCING IT WITHOUT THE "I" FEELING, THE MIND CAN TRANSFORM ITS RELATIONSHIP WITH PAIN, MAKING IT LESS PROBLEMATIC "This weight is likewise a function of the mind, and appears in the much-misunderstood phenomenon of laziness. Significantly enough, nervous and frustrated people are always busy, even in being idle, such idleness being the "laziness" of fear, not of rest. But the mind-body is a system which conserves and accumulates energy. While doing this it is properly lazy. When the energy is stored, it is just as happy to move, and yet to move skillfully-along the line of least resistance. Thus it is not only necessity, but also laziness, which is the mother of invention. One may observe the unhurried, "heavy" movements of a skillful laborer at some hard task, and even in going against gravity the good mountaineer uses gravity, taking slow, heavy strides. He seems to tack up the slope, like a sailboat against the wind.

In the light of these principles, how does the mind absorb suffering? It discovers that resistance and escape - the "I" process - is a false move. The pain is inescapable, and resistance as a defense only makes it worse; the whole system is jarred by the shock. Seeing the impossibility of this course, it must act according to its nature-remain stable and absorb.

To remain stable is to refrain from trying to separate yourself from a pain because you know that you cannot. Running away from fear is fear, fighting pain is pain, trying to be brave is being scared. If the mind is in pain, the mind is pain. The thinker has no other form than his thought. There is no escape. But so long as you are not aware of the inseparability of thinker and thought, you will try to escape.

From this follows, quite naturally, absorption. It is no effort; the mind does it by itself. Seeing that there is no escape from the pain, the mind yields to it, absorbs it, and becomes conscious of just pain without any "I" feeling it or resisting it. It experiences pain in the same complete, unselfconscious way in which it experiences pleasure. Pain is the nature of this present moment, and I can only live in this moment.

Sometimes, when resistance ceases, the pain simply goes away or dwindles to an easily tolerable ache. At other times it remains, but the absence of any resistance brings about a way of feeling pain so unfamiliar as to be hard to describe. The pain is no longer problematic. I feel it, but there is no urge to get rid of it, for I have discovered that pain and the effort to be separate from it are the same thing. Wanting to get out of pain is the pain; it is not the "reaction" of an "I" distinct from the pain. When you discover this, the desire to escape "merges" into the pain itself and vanishes. [...]"
(Alan Watts, The wisdom of insecurity, 1951)

E1.7.C.3.1.d_REF1.1_PH BEING AWARE, ALERT, AND SENSITIVE TO THE PRESENT MOMENT IS NOT A TECHNIQUE OR METHOD BUT A WAY OF LIFE "This, however, is not an experiment to be held in reserve, as a trick, for moments of crisis. It is a way of life. It means being aware, alert, and sensitive to the present moment always, in all actions and relations whatsoever, beginning at this instant. This, in turn, depends upon seeing that you have really no choice but to be aware-because you cannot separate yourself from the present and you cannot define it. You can, indeed, refuse to admit this, but only at the cost of the immense and futile effort of spending your whole life resisting the inevitable.

Once this is understood, it is really absurd to say that there is a choice or an alternative between these two ways of life, between resisting the stream in fruitless panic, and having one's eyes opened to a new world, transformed, and ever new with wonder. The key is understanding. To ask how to do this, what is the technique or method, what are the steps and rules, is to miss the point utterly. Methods are for creating things which do not yet exist. We are concerned here with understanding something which is - the present moment. This is not a psychological or spiritual discipline for self-improvement. It is simply being aware of this present experience, and realizing that you can neither define it nor divide yourself from it. There is no rule but "Look!" [...]"
(Alan Watts, The wisdom of insecurity, 1951)

E1.7.C.3.1.d_REF2_PO "ME IMPERTURBE

Me imperturbe, standing at ease in Nature,
Master of all or mistress of all, aplomb in the midst of irrational things, 
Imbued as they, passive, receptive, silent as they,
Finding my occupation, poverty, notoriety, foibles, crimes, less important than I thought,
Me toward the Mexican sea, or in the Mannahatta or the Tennessee, or far north or inland,
A river man, or a man of the woods or of any farm-life of these States or of the coast, or the lakes or Kanada,
Me wherever my life is lived, O to be self-balanced for contingencies, 
To confront night, storms, hunger, ridicule, accidents, rebuffs, as the trees and animals do."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

A reading of this poem out of context might conclude that it develops a stoic stance. But when resituated in the collection "Leaves of Grass", brimming with "oceanic consciousness", the poem is understood differently: It's because the poet is at one with the world that he thinks he should experience suffering indifferently. It would not be an intellectual effort, as with the stoics. It would not be an "acceptance", but an "affirmation" of the world. (Pierre Schindler)

E1.7.C.3.1.d_REF2.1_PO " SONG OF THE OPEN ROAD
 1
Afoot and light-hearted I take to the open road,
Healthy, free, the world before me,
The long brown path before me leading wherever I choose.

Henceforth I ask not good-fortune, I myself am good-fortune,
Henceforth I whimper no more, postpone no more, need nothing,
Done with indoor complaints, libraries, querulous criticisms,
Strong and content I travel the open road.

The earth, that is sufficient,
I do not want the constellations any nearer,
I know they are very well where they are,
I know they suffice for those who belong to them.

(Still here I carry my old delicious burdens,
I carry them, men and women, I carry them with me wherever I go,
I swear it is impossible for me to get rid of them,
I am fill’d with them, and I will fill them in return.)

 2
You road I enter upon and look around, I believe you are not all that is here,
I believe that much unseen is also here.

Here the profound lesson of reception, nor preference nor denial,
The black with his woolly head, the felon, the diseas’d, the illiterate
    person, are not denied;
The birth, the hasting after the physician, the beggar’s tramp, the
     drunkard’s stagger, the laughing party of mechanics,
The escaped youth, the rich person’s carriage, the fop, the eloping couple,
The early market-man, the hearse, the moving of furniture into the
     town, the return back from the town,
They pass, I also pass, any thing passes, none can be interdicted,
None but are accepted, none but shall be dear to me. [...]

4 [...]
O public road, I say back I am not afraid to leave you, yet I love you,
You express me better than I can express myself,
You shall be more to me than my poem.

I think heroic deeds were all conceiv’d in the open air, and all free
poems also,
I think I could stop here myself and do miracles,
I think whatever I shall meet on the road I shall like, and whoever
beholds me shall like me,
I think whoever I see must be happy."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.7.C.3.1.d_REF3_PO “EACH DAY YOU DIDN’T ENJOY WASN’T YOURS:
You just got through it. Whatever you live
     Without enjoying, you don’t live. 
You don’t have to love or drink or smile. 
The sun’s reﬂection in a puddle of water
     Is enough, if it pleases you. 
Happy those who, placing their delight 
In slight things, are never deprived
     Of each day’s natural fortune!”
(Fernando Pessoa, 14 March 1933 - signed as Ricardo Reis)

E1.7.C.3.1.d_REF4_PH CREATE NO MORE PAIN IN THE PRESENT
“The pain that you create now is always some form of nonacceptance, some form of unconscious resistance to what is.  On the level of thought, the resistance is some form of judgment.  On the emotional level, it is some form of negativity. The intensity of the pain depends on the degree of resistance to the present moment, and this in turn depends on how strongly you are identified with your mind.  The mind always seeks to deny the Now and to escape from it.  In other words, the more you are identified with your mind, the more you suffer.  Or you may put it like this: the more you are able to honor and accept the Now, the more you are free of pain, of suffering -- and free of the egoic mind.
Why does the mind habitually deny or resist the Now?  Because it cannot function and remain in control without time, which is past and future, so it perceives the timeless Now as threatening.  Time and mind are in fact inseparable.
Imagine the Earth devoid of human life, inhabited only by plants and animals. Would it still have a past and a future?  Could we still speak of time in any meaningful way?  The question "What time is it?" or "What's the date today?" --if anybody were there to ask it -- would be quite meaningless.  The oak tree or the eagle would be bemused by such a question.  "What time?" they would ask. "Well, of course, it's now.  The time is now.  What else is there?"
Yes, we need the mind as well as time to function in this world, but there comes a point where they take over our lives, and this is where dysfunction, pain, and sorrow set in.
The mind, to ensure that it remains in control, seeks continuously to cover up the present moment with past and future, and so, as the vitality and infinite creative potential of Being, which is inseparable from the Now, becomes covered up by time, your true nature becomes obscured by the mind.  An increasingly heavy burden of time has been accumulating in the human mind.  All individuals are suffering under this burden, but they also keep adding to it every moment whenever they ignore or deny that precious moment or reduce it to a means of getting to some future moment, which only exists in the mind, never in actuality. The accumulation of time in the collective and individual human mind also holds a vast amount of residual pain from the past.
If you no longer want to create pain for yourself and others, if you no longer want to add to the residue of past pain that still lives on in you, then don't create any more time, or at least no more than is necessary to deal with the practical aspects of your life.  How to stop creating time?  Realize deeply that the present moment is all you ever have.  Make the Now the primary focus of your life. Whereas before you dwelt in time and paid brief visits to the Now, have your dwelling place in the Now and pay brief visits to past and future when required to deal with the practical aspects of your life situation.  Always say "yes" to the present moment.  What could be more futile, more insane, than to create inner resistance to something that already is?  What could be more insane than to oppose life itself, which is now and always now?  Surrender to what is.  Say "yes" to life -- and see how life suddenly starts working for you rather than against you. [...]
You may find it hard to recognize that time is the cause of your suffering or your problems.  You believe that they are caused by specific situations in your life, and seen from a conventional viewpoint, this is true.  But until you have dealt with the basic problem-making dysfunction of the mind -- its attachment to past and future and denial of the Now -- problems are actually interchangeable.  If all your problems or perceived causes of suffering or unhappiness were miraculously removed for you today, but you had not become more present, more conscious, you would soon find yourself with a similar set of problems or causes of suffering, like a shadow that follows you wherever you go.  Ultimately, there is only one problem: the time- bound mind itself. [...]
To be free of time is to be free of the psychological need of past for your identity and future for your fulfillment.  It represents the most profound transformation of consciousness that you can imagine.  In some rare cases, this shift in consciousness happens dramatically and radically, once and for all.  When it does, it usually comes about through total surrender in the midst of intense suffering.  Most people, however, have to work at it.
When you have had your first few glimpses of the timeless state of consciousness, you begin to move back and forth between the dimensions of time and presence.  First you become aware of just how rarely your attention is truly in the Now.  But to know that you are not present is a great success: that knowing is presence -- even if initially it only lasts for a couple of seconds of clock time before it is lost again.  Then, with increasing frequency, you choose to have the focus of your consciousness in the present moment rather than in the past or future, and whenever you realize that you had lost the Now, you are able to stay in it not just for a couple of seconds, but for longer periods as perceived from the external perspective of clock time.  So before you are firmly established in the state of presence, which is to say before you are fully conscious, you shift back and forth for a while between consciousness and unconsciousness, between the state of presence and the state of mind identification.  You lose the Now, and you return to it, again and again.  Eventually, presence becomes your predominant state.
For most people, presence is experienced either never at all or only accidentally and briefly on rare occasions without being recognized for what it is.  Most humans alternate not between consciousness and unconsciousness but only between different levels of unconsciousness. [...]

The present moment is sometimes unacceptable, unpleasant, or awful.

It is as it is.  Observe how the mind labels it and how this labeling process, this continuous sitting in judgment, creates pain and unhappiness.  By watching the mechanics of the mind, you step out of its resistance patterns, and you can then allow the present moment to be.  This will give you a taste of the state of inner freedom from external conditions, the state of true inner peace.  Then see what happens, and take action if necessary or possible.
Accept -- then act.  Whatever the present moment contains, accept it as if you had chosen it.  Always work with it, not against it.  Make it your friend and ally, not your enemy.  This will miraculously transform your whole life.
(Eckhart Tolle, The Power Of Now, 1997)

E1.7.C.3.1.d_REF4.1_PH SHIFTING FROM A LIFE OF STRUGGLE TO A "JOYFUL CELEBRATION OF LIFE ENERGY": "ACCEPTANCE OF WHAT IS IMMEDIATELY FREES YOU FROM MIND IDENTIFICATION."
" THE MEANING OF SURRENDER 
Acceptance of the Now You mentioned \"surrender\" a few times.  I don't like that idea.  It sounds somewhat fatalistic.  If we always accept the way things are, we are not going to make any effort to improve them.  It seems to me what progress is all about, both in our personal lives and collectively, is not to accept the limitations of the present but to strive to go beyond them and create something better.  If we hadn't done this, we would still be living in caves.  How do you reconcile surrender with changing things and getting things done ? 
To some people, surrender may have negative connotations, implying defeat, giving up, failing to rise to the challenges of life, becoming lethargic, and so on.  True surrender, however, is something entirely different.  It does not mean to passively put up with whatever situation you find yourself in and to do nothing about it.  Nor does it mean to cease making plans or initiating positive action. 
Surrender is the simple but profound wisdom of yielding to rather than opposing the flow of life.  The only place where you can experience the flow of life is the Now, so to surrender is to accept the present moment unconditionally and without reservation.  It is to relinquish inner resistance to what is.  Inner "resistance is to say \"no\" to what is, through mental judgment and emotional negativity.  It becomes particularly pronounced when things \"go wrong,\" which means that there is a gap between the demands or rigid expectations mind and what is.  is the have lived Ion enough, you will know that things \"go wrong\" quite often.  It is precisely at those times that surrender needs to be practiced if you want to eliminate pain and sorrow from your life.  Acceptance of what is immediately frees you from mind identification and thus reconnects you with Being.  Resistance is the mind. 
Surrender is a purely inner phenomenon.  It does riot mean that on the outer level you cannot take action and change the situation.  In fact, it is not the overall situation that you need to accept when you surrender, but just the tiny segment called the Now. 
For example, if you were stuck in the mud somewhere, you wouldn't say: \"Okay, I resign myself to being stuck in the mud.\" Resignation is not surrender.  You don't need to accept an undesirable or unpleasant life situation.  Nor do you need to deceive yourself and say that there is nothing wrong with being stuck in the mud.  No.  You recognize fully that you want to get out of it.  You then narrow your attention down to the present moment without mentally labeling it in any way.  This means that there is no judgment of the Now.  Therefore, there is no resistance, no emotional negativity.  You accept the \"isness\" of this moment.  Then you take action and do all that you can to get out of the mud.  Such action I call positive action.  It is far more effective than negative action, which arises out of anger, despair, or frustration.  Until you achieve the desired result, you continue to practice surrender by refraining from labeling the Now. 
Let me give you a visual analogy to illustrate the point I am making.  You "walking along a path at night, surrounded by a thick fog.  But you have a powerful flashlight that cuts through the fog and creates a narrow, clear space in front of you.  The fog is your life situation, which includes past and future; the flashlight is your conscious presence; the clear space is the Now. 
Non-surrender hardens your psychological form, the shell of the ego, and so creates a strong sense of separateness.  The world around you and people in particular come to be perceived as threatening.  The unconscious compulsion to destroy others through judgment arises, as does the need to compete and dominate.  Even nature becomes your enemy and your perceptions and interpretations are governed by fear.  The mental disease that we call paranoia is only a slightly more acute form of this normal but dysfunctional state of consciousness. 
Not only your psychological form but also your physical form -- your body -- becomes hard and rigid through resistance.  Tension arises in different parts of the body, and the body as a whole contracts.  The free flow of life energy through the body, which is essential for its healthy functioning, is greatly restricted.  Bodywork and certain forms of physical therapy can be helpful in restoring this flow, but unless you practice surrender in your everyday life, those things can only give temporary symptom relief since the cause -- the resistance pattern -- has not been dissolved. 
There is something within you that remains unaffected by the transient circumstances that make up your life situation, and only through surrender do you have access to it.  It is your life, your very Being -- which exists eternally in the timeless realm of the present.  Finding this life is \"the one thing that is needed\" that Jesus talked about
    "If you find your life situation unsatisfactory or even intolerable, it is only by surrendering first that you can break the unconscious resistance pattern that perpetuates that situation. Surrender is perfectly compatible with taking action, initiating change or achieving goals.  But in the surrendered state a totally different energy, a different quality, flows into your doing.  Surrender reconnects you with the source-energy of Being, and if your doing is infused with Being, it becomes a joyful celebration of life energy that takes you more deeply into the Now.  Through nonresistance, the quality of your consciousness and, therefore, the quality of whatever you are doing or creating is enhanced immeasurably.  The results will then look after themselves and reflect that quality.  We could call this \"surrendered action.\" It is not work as we have known it for thousands of years.  As more humans awaken, the word work is going to disappear from our vocabulary, and perhaps a new word will be created to replace it. 
It is the quality of your consciousness at this moment that is the main determinant of what kind of future you will experience, so to surrender is the most important thing you can do to bring about positive change.  Any action you take is secondary.  No truly positive action can arise out of an unsurrendered state of consciousness. I can see that if I am in a situation that is unpleasant or unsatisfactory and I completely accept the moment as it is, there will be no suffering or unhappiness.  I will have risen above it.”
(Eckhart Tolle, The Power Of Now, 1997)

E1.7.C.3.2. "TRY TO EXCLUDE THE POSSIBILITY OF SUFFERING WHICH THE ORDER OF NATURE AND THE EXISTENCE OF FREE WILLS INVOLVE, AND YOU FIND THAT YOU HAVE EXCLUDED LIFE ITSELF."

E1.7.C.3.2.a. "SUFFERING IS A MISUNDERSTANDING. […] — this grasping after happiness, this fear of pain… If instead of fearing it and running from it, one could… get through it, go beyond it. There is something beyond it. It’s the self that suffers, and there’s a place where the self—ceases. I don’t know how to say it. But I believe that the reality — the truth that I recognize in suffering as I don’t in comfort and happiness — that the reality of pain is not pain. If you can get through it. If you can endure it all the way."

E1.7.C.3.2.a-REF1_PH "Simone Weil considered it the highest existential discipline to “make use of the sufferings that chance inflicts upon us.” George Bernard Shaw saw suffering as our supreme conduit to empathy. “We suffer more in imagination than in reality,” Seneca observed before offering his millennia-old, timeless antidote to anxiety. And yet we do suffer and the pain incurred, whatever the suffering is grounded in, is real. How we orient ourselves to our suffering — or to the suffering, as Buddhist might correct the ego-illusion and reaffirm our shared reality — may be the single most significant predictor of our happiness, wellbeing, and capacity for joy. “Try to exclude the possibility of suffering which the order of nature and the existence of free wills involve,” C.S. Lewis wrote in contemplating how suffering confers agency upon life, “and you find that you have excluded life itself.”
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings)

E1.7.C.3.2.a-REF2_LIT "Suffering is a misunderstanding. […]
It exists… It’s real. I can call it a misunderstanding, but I can’t pretend that it doesn’t exist, or will ever cease to exist. Suffering is the condition on which we live. And when it comes, you know it. You know it as the truth. Of course it’s right to cure diseases, to prevent hunger and injustice, as the social organism does. But no society can change the nature of existence. We can’t prevent suffering. This pain and that pain, yes, but not Pain. A society can only relieve social suffering, unnecessary suffering. The rest remains. The root, the reality. All of us here are going to know grief; if we live fifty years, we’ll have known pain for fifty years… And yet, I wonder if it isn’t all a misunderstanding — this grasping after happiness, this fear of pain… If instead of fearing it and running from it, one could… get through it, go beyond it. There is something beyond it. It’s the self that suffers, and there’s a place where the self—ceases. I don’t know how to say it. But I believe that the reality — the truth that I recognize in suffering as I don’t in comfort and happiness — that the reality of pain is not pain. If you can get through it. If you can endure it all the way. [...]
It is our suffering that brings us together. It is not love. Love does not obey the mind, and turns to hate when forced. The bond that binds us is beyond choice. We are brothers. We are brothers in what we share. In pain, which each of us must suffer alone, in hunger, in poverty, in hope, we know our brotherhood. We know it, because we have had to learn it. We know that there is no help for us but from one another, that no hand will save us if we do not reach out our hand. And the hand that you reach out is empty, as mine is. You have nothing. You possess nothing. You own nothing. You are free. All you have is what you are, and what you give. [...]
If you evade suffering you also evade the chance of joy. Pleasure you may get, or pleasures, but you will not be fulfilled. You will not know what it is to come home… Fulfillment… is a function of time. The search for pleasure is circular, repetitive, atemporal… It has an end. It comes to the end and has to start over. It is not a journey and return, but a closed cycle, a locked room, a cell… The thing about working with time, instead of against it, …is that it is not wasted. Even pain counts."
(Ursula K. Le Guin , The Dispossessed: An Ambiguous Utopia, 1974)

E1.5.E.1.2_REF4_PO.wE1.7.C.3.2.a.

E1.7.C.3.2.b. NICK CAVE DISCUSSES HOW TRAUMA CAN ROB PEOPLE OF A SENSE OF WONDER, and how work and community helped him return to his life and reclaim a sense of reverence. He found a way to write beyond the trauma while not turning his back on the death of his child.

E1.7.C.3.2.b_REF1_PH THROUGH WRITING AND COMMUNAL EXPERIENCES, NICK CAVE REDISCOVERED A SENSE OF WONDER "I would love to know how you feel about your writing now. Did it get easier after what seemed to be quite a challenge around “Skeleton Tree”? (I think I remember you saying in “One More Time with Feeling” that you kind of lost your grip on lyric writing for a while). Do you feel like you are changing now as a songwriter, perhaps in the light of the strong communion with fans? How is the process now?
JAKUB, ŁÓDŹ, POLAND

AT EMILY DICKINSON'S HOUSE
ON 30 APRIL 2018

Dear Jakub,

The good news is that in the last year I have felt intensely connected to my writing. Something has definitely shifted and I have written a lot of new stuff. I can’t tell you what a relief this is. I am writing much more and it is strong and focused, in my opinion. But, you are right, for a year it had been difficult to work out how to write, because the centre had collapsed and Susie and I had been flung to the outer reaches of our lives. We were kind of outlanders floating in deep space.

But what had collapsed? What is at the centre of our lives? In an artist’s case (and perhaps it is the same for everybody) I would say it is a sense of wonder. Creative people in general have an acute propensity for wonder. Great trauma can rob us of this, the ability to be awed by things. Everything loses its sheen and appears beyond our reach. We were surviving, but we were surviving in exile on the perimeter of our lives, way beyond anything that mattered.

So how do we return to our lives – to the awe of existence – and reclaim a sense of wonder? Well, for me, it had something to do with work but it also had something to do with community. Work and community. I kind of realised that work was the key to get back to my life, but I also realised that I was not alone in my grief and that many of you were, in one way or another, suffering your own sorrows, your own griefs. I felt this in our live performances. I felt very acutely that a sense of suffering was the connective tissue that held us all together. It was these two things – community and work – that showed Susie and me a way forward. Work became the lifelines thrown out to us as we floated lost in narcissism and self-absorption. It also became very clear to both of us that we were not alone! We could see there were many others out there, floating around in the dark, outside of their lives. It seemed to be everywhere we looked – people in search of meaning and wonder.

We all needed to draw ourselves back to a state of wonder. My way was to write myself there. I sat and wrote and wrote, and in doing so I found a way back, or at least a way through the veil of grief, to the other side. I felt very strongly that the communal suffering, and our ability to transcend it, was the thing that held us together. This was not some pessimistic worldview, quite the opposite really. It became clear that as human beings we have enormous capabilities that allow us to rise above our suffering – that we are hardwired for transcendence. This was an acute realisation that changed the nature of our relationship to everything.

To answer your question as to whether the lyric writing has changed, I would say that it has shifted fundamentally. I have found a way to write beyond the trauma, authentically, that deals with all manner of issues but does not turn its back on the issue of the death of my child. I found with some practise the imagination could propel itself beyond the personal into a state of wonder. In doing so the colour came back to things with a renewed intensity and the world seemed clear and bright and new. So I am very happy about this. It feels good to have a notebook full of words again. [...]

Much love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #1 / SEPTEMBER 2018)

E1.7.C.3.2.c. "I SIT AND LOOK OUT
I sit and look out upon all the sorrows of the world, and upon all oppression and shame,
I hear secret convulsive sobs from young men at anguish with themselves, remorseful after deeds done,
I see in low life the mother misused by her children, dying, neglected, gaunt, desperate,
I see the wife misused by her husband, I see the treacherous seducer of young women,
I mark the ranklings of jealousy and unrequited love attempted to be hid, I see these sights on the earth,
I see the workings of battle, pestilence, tyranny, I see martyrs and prisoners,
I observe a famine at sea, I observe the sailors casting lots who shall be kill’d to preserve the lives of the rest,
I observe the slights and degradations cast by arrogant persons upon laborers, the poor, and upon negroes, and the like;
All these—all the meanness and agony without end I sitting look out upon,
See, hear, and am silent."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.7.C.3.3. “IN THE PRE-SCIENTIFIC WORLD, IN THE BLIND OLD WORLD WITH ITS OLD LANGUAGE, WE HAD A WORD FOR THOSE PEOPLE MOST AWAKE TO THE SACRED WONDER OF REALITY, most capable of awakening the native kindness of human beings — the kindness that flows naturally between us when we are stripped of our biases and liberated from our small, constricting frames of reference. That word was “saint.” Saints still walk our world, though now we might simply call them heroes, if we recognize them at all — heroes whose superpower is love.”
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.7.C.3.3.a.  THEY WILL BIND YOU WITH LOVE THAT IS GRACEFUL AND GREEN AS A STEM.
Cohen contemplated what Saints, these “balancing monsters of love”, do for us in his 1997 song “Sisters of Mercy”: “If your life is a leaf that the seasons tear off and condemn, They will bind you with love that is graceful and green as a stem.”

E1.7.C.3.3.a_REF1_SONG ”WHAT IS A SAINT? A saint is someone who has achieved a remote human possibility. It is impossible to say what that possibility is. I think it has something to do with the energy of love. Contact with this energy results in the exercise of a kind of balance in the chaos of existence. A saint does not dissolve the chaos; if he did the world would have changed long ago. I do not think that a saint dissolves the chaos even for himself, for there is something arrogant and warlike in the notion of a man setting the universe in order. It is a kind of balance that is his glory. He rides the drifts like an escaped ski. His course is the caress of the hill. His track is a drawing of the snow in a moment of its particular arrangement with wind and rock. Something in him so loves the world that he gives himself to the laws of gravity and chance. Far from flying with the angels, he traces with the fidelity of a seismograph needle the state of the solid bloody landscape. His house is dangerous and finite, but he is at home in the world. He can love the shape of human beings, the fine and twisted shapes of the heart. It is good to have among us such men, such balancing monsters of love.”
(Leonard Cohen, Beautiful Losers, 1996)

E1.7.C.3.3.a_REF2_SONG "SISTERS OF MERCY

Oh, the sisters of mercy, they are not departed or gone
They were waiting for me when I thought that I just can't go on
And they brought me their comfort and later they brought me this song
Oh, I hope you run into them, you who've been travelling so long
Yes you who must leave everything that you cannot control
It begins with your family, but soon it comes around to your soul
Well I've been where you're hanging, I think I can see how you're pinned
When you're not feeling holy, your loneliness says that you've sinned

Well, they lay down beside me, I made my confession to them
They touched both my eyes and I touched the dew on their hem
If your life is a leaf that the seasons tear off and condemn
They will bind you with love that is graceful and green as a stem

When I left they were sleeping, I hope you run into them soon
Don't turn on the lights, you can read their address by the moon
And you won't make me jealous if I hear that they sweetened your night
We weren't lovers like that and besides it would still be all right
We weren't lovers like that and besides it would still be all right"
(Leonard Cohen, 1997)

Watch Leonard Cohen sing Sisters of Mercy on YouTube: https://youtu.be/XzuxpucEmZw?feature=shared

E1.7.C.3.3.b. WE SHOULD GO OUT AND SAVE THE WORLD BY SPREADING UNSOLICITED KINDNESS.
Nick Cave believes that the emptiness that we occasionally feel is an indicator of our own self-absorption, indicating a need for love and meaning. He views us as facilitators on a shared journey towards meaning, which brings us closer to love and beauty. Even the smallest acts of kindness and tolerance can contribute to this collective effort to enhance our lives.

E1.7.C.3.3.b_REF1_PH THE EMPTINESS PEOPLE FEEL IS A CALL TO MEANING AND LOVE "So, the next Red Hand File is #200! What are The Red Hand Files? I mean what are you trying to do with them? By the way, I love them. They help.
JOHN, LANCASHIRE, UK

I just feel so fucking empty. So hollow. What can I do?
MARINA, MADRID, SPAIN

Dear John and Marina,

It might be worth bearing in mind, Marina, that this emptiness that you feel, that we all feel to a greater or lesser degree, is not a condition in itself, rather it is an indicator of our own self-absorption, and signals a need. It asks something of us, this emptiness, this hollowness. It is a call. It is a call to meaning, and a call to love. It requires of us that we reach beyond our own dejection and attend to the condition of the world.

For me, personally, this is the gift of The Red Hand Files. By their very nature your questions draw me out of my own self-absorption, by demanding an engagement with you all. This is not always easy, but a call to meaning rarely is – how happy we can feel in our own misery! How cosy! How safe! – and so I read the hundreds of questions that come in each week and do my best to reply, regardless of my state of mind, truthfully and in good faith.

You ask me, John, what I want from The Red Hand Files. Well, the answer is this – I want to facilitate, in some small way, a mutual journey toward meaning; to decrease the dimensions of our emptiness and draw us closer to love and to beauty. I understand that these sound like grandiose claims, but they are not. This common project – to improve matters – is available to all of us, at every moment, and in a multitude of ways, and exists in the smallest kindness, the most rudimentary act of tolerance, or in the simplest generosity.

Today, John and Marina, my advice is to go out and save the world. Smile and say ‘hello’ to the mean old bastard who lives next door, or the cranky cow at the corner shop, for they suffer too, and watch this small act of unsolicited kindness gather momentum and begin its journey around the world – watch it thunder and roar through the ages and change the nature of the cosmos itself.

More grandiose claims? Hey, it’s my 200th post! Today, I can say what I like. Thank you everyone for improving the general condition of my life! I hope The Red Hand Files go some small way to improving yours. It is impossible to exaggerate just how unbelievably grateful I am to you all.

With endless love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #200 / JULY 2022)

E1.7.C.3.3.b_REF2_PH "NOBLE SANS LE VOULOIR. —  L’homme se comporte noblement sans le vouloir, quand il s’est accoutumé à ne vouloir rien des hommes et à leur donner toujours. [...]"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Humain, trop humain, Aphorisme 497, 1878)

E1.7.C.3.4. THE GITA ADDRESSES THE VISION OF DIVINE YOGA, WHICH LIBERATES US FROM ALL DOUBTS AND CONFUSION. It encourages us to acknowledge reality as it exists, and to advance through discord to achieve the ultimate harmony of Spirit with the Whole.

E1.7.C.3.4.a. HUMANS MUST FIGHT FOR WHAT IS RIGHT AND EXPERIENCE THE BLISS OF THE COSMIC AND TRANSCENDENT SPIRIT. The text poses the question of life's meaning and the creative, all-consuming flame of mortal existence. The Divine responds that everything occurs according to His will, and time must demolish old structures to build a new kingdom.

E1.7.C.3.4.a_REF1_PH "THE COSMIC VISION

So this is the central meaning, the keynote. It is the vision of the one in the many, the many in the one-and all are the one. It is this vision that, in the eyes of divine yoga, liberates, justifies, and explains all that is, all that has been, and all that will be. Once perceived and held, it strikes with the glittering axe of God at the root of all doubt and perplexity, and annihilates all denial and opposition. If the soul can achieve unity with the Divine in this vision - Arjuna has not yet done so, which is why he is terrified when he sees it - everything in the world, even the terrible, loses its terror.

KRISHNA
5 . - Behold, Arjuna, a million divine forms, with an infinite variety of color and shape. 6 . - Behold the gods of the natural world, and many more wonders never revealed before. 7 . - Behold the entire cosmos turning within my body, and the other things you desire to see. 8 . - But these things cannot be seen with your physical eyes; therefore I give you spiritual vision to perceive my majestic power.

ARJUNA
30 . - You lap the worlds into your burning mouths and swallow them. Filled with your terrible radiance, O Vishnu, the whole of creation bursts into flames.
31 . - Tell me who you are, O Lord of terrible form. I bow before you; have mercy! I want to know who you are, you who existed before all creation. Your nature and workings confound me.

The weakness of the human heart wants only pleasant and comforting truths, or, failing that, nice fables; it does not want the whole truth, where so many things are neither clear nor pleasant nor comfortable, but hard to understand and harder to bear. To place the responsibility for everything that seems bad or terrible on the shoulders of a semi-omnipotent demon, or to see it as only a part of nature, thus creating an irreducible opposition between the nature of the world and that of God, as if nature were independent of God, or even to place the responsibility on man and his sins, as if he played a dominant role in the construction of this world or could create anything against the will of God-these are comfortable but clumsy solutions, in which the religious thought of India has never sought refuge. We must boldly face reality and see that it is God and no one else who has created this world in His being and made it as it is. The agony of the bed of suffering and evil on which we are tortured is His touch as well as happiness and sweetness and joy. The discords of the worlds are the discords of God, and it is only by accepting them and passing through them that we can reach the greatest harmonies of His supreme harmony, the summits, the vibrant immensities of His cosmic and transcendental ananda [spiritual delight, the bliss of the mind].

The problem raised by the Gîtâ and the solution it offers require this character of the vision of the Spirit of the World. Why does the Spirit - All - manifest itself in nature in this way? What is the meaning of this creative and all-consuming flame that is mortal existence, of this struggle for the whole world, of these constant, disastrous revolutions, of this effort and agony, of this painful birth and death of creatures? Here Arjuna asks the ancient question and utters the eternal prayer.

I have a far-sighted plan, says the Divine in substance, a plan that is infallibly accomplished, and neither the participation nor the abstention of any man can prevent, change or modify it; everything is already accomplished by Me in the eternal eye of My Will before man on earth can even undertake it. I, as Time, must destroy the old structures and build a new, powerful and glorious kingdom. You, as a human instrument of divine power and wisdom, must fight for the law in this battle that you cannot prevent, and kill and defeat your adversaries. And also, as a human soul in nature, you must enjoy in nature the fruits given by Me, the kingdom of law and justice. Let this be enough for you - to be one with God in your soul, to receive His commandments, to do His will, to calmly see a supreme plan fulfilled in the world.
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, Commented by Aurobindo)

E1.7.C.3.4.b. FOR FREE SPIRITS, DIVINITY IS A SOURCE OF POWER AND SUBLIME VISION, BUT FOR ORDINARY HUMANS, IT IS TERRIFYING AND INCOMMUNICABLE. However, the mediator form of divinity, Nârâyana, is accessible to humans and provides support. This concept can be compared with Nietzsche's ideas of Dionysianism and Apollonianism.

E1.7.C.3.4.b_REF1_PH "THE DOUBLE ASPECT

ARJUNA
45 . - I rejoice in seeing you as you have never been seen before, yet I am filled with fear by this vision of you as the abode of the universe. Please let me see you again as the shining God of gods. 46 . - Though you are the embodiment of all creation, let me see you again not with a thousand arms but with four, carrying the mace and
discus and wearing a crown.

The form of the universal and transcendental Being is, to the strength of the liberated mind, a powerful thing, encouraging and empowering, a source of strength, a vision that sublimes, that equates, that justifies everything; but to the ordinary man it is overwhelming, terrifying, incommunicable. But there is also the mediating form, the form of grace of the divine Nârâyana [epithet applied to Krishna, meaning "he who has made water his home"], the God so close to man and in man, the charioteer in battle and on the road, with his four arms of protective power, a humanized symbol of the divine and no longer a universality with millions of arms. It is this mediating aspect that man must always have before him to sustain him. For it is this face of Nârâyana that symbolizes reassuring truth. It makes close, visible, alive, graspable, the vast spiritual joy in which, supremely, universal achievements culminate for the inner life and spirit of man - beyond their formidable cyclical movement of retrogression and progression - in their marvelous and hopeful flight.

KRISHNA
49 . -  Do not be troubled; do not fear my terrible form. Let your heart be satisfied and your fears dispelled in looking at me as I was before.

But since the lower nature in you is not yet ready to contemplate this terrible vision with strength and tranquility, I will once again assume for you my form of Nârâyana, in which the human mind, isolated and adapted to its humanity, sees the tranquility, help, and joy of a friendly divinity.

ARJUNA
51 . - O Krishna, now that I have seen your gentle human form my mind is again composed and returned to normal.

KRISHNA
52 . - It is extremely difficult to obtain the vision you have had; even the gods long always to see me in this aspect. 53 . - Neither knowledge of the Vedas, nor austerity, nor charity, nor sacrifice can bring the vision you have seen. 54 . - But through unfailing devotion, Arjuna, you can know me, see me, and attain union with me. 55 . - Those who make me the supreme goal of all their work and act without selfish attachment, who devote themselves to me completely and are free from ill will for any creature, enter into me."
(The Bhagavad Gitâ, Commented by Aurobindo)

E1.7.C.3.5. ATTENTION CAN DEFEAT EVIL
Simone Weil suggests that by being indifferent to good and evil, we can project the light of attention on both, and good will always prevail. This is because attention turned toward God or something authentically beautiful can render certain behaviors impossible.

E1.7.C.3.5.a. "AUTHENTIC VALUES OF TRUTH, BEAUTY AND GOODNESS ARE PRODUCED BY ONE AND THE SAME ACT, A CERTAIN APPLICATION TO THE OBJECT OF ATTENTION."

E1.7.C.3.5.a_REF1_PH "ATTENTION AND WILL

[...] We should be indifferent to good and evil but, when we are indifferent, that is to say when we project the light of our attention equally on both, the good gains the day. This phenomenon comes about automatically. There lies the essential grace. And it is the definition, the criterion of good.

A divine inspiration operates infallibly, irresistibly, if we do not turn away our attention, if we do not refuse it. There is not a choice to be made in its favour, it is enough not to refuse to recognize that it exists.

The attention turned with love towards God (or in a lesser degree, towards anything which is truly beautiful) makes certain things impossible for us. 

[...] The poet produces the beautiful by fixing his attention on something real. It is the same with the act of love. To know that this man who is hungry and thirsty really exists as much as I do — that is enough, the rest follows of itself.

The authentic and pure values — truth, beauty and goodness — in the activity of a human being are the result of one and the same act, a certain application of the full attention to the object.

[...] Purity is the power to contemplate defilement [Disfigurement]."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.7.C.3.5.a_REF2_PO " SONG OF THE OPEN ROAD

[...] 5

From this hour I ordain myself loos’d of limits and imaginary lines,
Going where I list, my own master total and absolute,
Listening to others, considering well what they say,
Pausing, searching, receiving, contemplating,
Gently, but with undeniable will, divesting myself of the holds that would hold me.

I inhale great draughts of space,
The east and the west are mine, and the north and the south are mine.

I am larger, better than I thought,
I did not know I held so much goodness.

All seems beautiful to me,
Can repeat over to men and women You have done such good to me I would do the same to you,
I will recruit for myself and you as I go,
I will scatter myself among men and women as I go,
I will toss a new gladness and roughness among them,
Whoever denies me it shall not trouble me,
Whoever accepts me he or she shall be blessed and shall bless me."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.7.C.3.5.b. EDUCATION MUST FOCUS ON CULTIVATING ATTENTION, AS ALL OTHER BENEFITS OF INSTRUCTION BECOME IRRELEVANT WITHOUT IT. Studying should serve as an exercise for attention, with the technique involving examining images, symbols, etc. until their meaning becomes clear without any deliberate interpretation. This approach aids in distinguishing reality from illusion. The vital premise is that attention should be an observational act, not an attachment.

E1.7.C.3.5.b_REF1_PH "ATTENTION AND WILL
[...] Teaching should have no aim but to prepare, by training the attention, for the possibility of such an act. All the other advantages of instruction are without interest.

Studies and faith. Prayer being only attention in its pure form and studies being a form of gymnastics of the attention, each school exercise should be a refraction of spiritual life. There must be method in it. A certain way of doing a Latin prose, a certain way of tackling a problem in geometry (and not just any way) make up a system of gymnastics of the attention calculated to give it a greater aptitude for prayer.

Method for understanding images, symbols, etc. Not to try to interpret them, but to look at them till the light suddenly
dawns.

Generally speaking, a method for the exercise of the intelligence, which consists of looking.

Application of this rule for the discrimination between the real and the illusory. In our sense perceptions, if we are not sure of what we see we change our position while looking, and what is real becomes evident. In the inner life, time takes the place of space. With time we are altered, and, if as we change we keep our gaze directed towards the same thing, in the end illusions are scattered and the real becomes visible. This is on condition that the attention be a looking and not an attachment."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.7.C.3.5.b_REF2_PO " SONG OF THE OPEN ROAD

[...] 6 [...]

Now I see the secret of the making of the best persons,
It is to grow in the open air and to eat and sleep with the earth.

Here a great personal deed has room,
(Such a deed seizes upon the hearts of the whole race of men,
Its effusion of strength and will overwhelms law and mocks all authority and all argument against it.)

Here is the test of wisdom,
Wisdom is not finally tested in schools,
Wisdom cannot be pass’d from one having it to another not having it,
Wisdom is of the soul, is not susceptible of proof, is its own proof,
Applies to all stages and objects and qualities and is content,
Is the certainty of the reality and immortality of things, and the excellence of things;
Something there is in the float of the sight of things that provokes it out of the soul.

Now I re-examine philosophies and religions,
They may prove well in lecture-rooms, yet not prove at all under the 
     spacious clouds and along the landscape and flowing currents.

Here is realization,
Here is a man tallied—he realizes here what he has in him,
The past, the future, majesty, love—if they are vacant of you, you are vacant of them.

Only the kernel of every object nourishes;
Where is he who tears off the husks for you and me?
Where is he that undoes stratagems and envelopes for you and me?

Here is adhesiveness, it is not previously fashion’d, it is apropos;
Do you know what it is as you pass to be loved by strangers?
Do you know the talk of those turning eye-balls?"
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.7.C.3.5.c. "IN THE REALM OF INTELLIGENCE, THE VIRTUE OF HUMILITY IS NOTHING OTHER THAN THE POWER OF ATTENTION."

E1.7.C.3.5.c_REF1_PH "INTELLIGENCE AND GRACE

[...] In the intellectual order, the virtue of humility is nothing more nor less than the power of attention.

The wrong humility leads us to believe that we are nothing in so far as we are ourselves—in so far as we are certain particular human beings.

True humility is the knowledge that we are nothing in so far as we are human beings as such, and, more generally, in so far as we are creatures.
The intelligence plays a great part in this. We have to form a conception of the universal.

[...] There is nothing nearer to true humility than the intelligence. It is impossible to be proud of our intelligence at the moment when we are really exercising it."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.7.C.3.5.c_REF2_PH “THE OPPONENT OF GRACE.—The impatient and arrogant man does not care for grace, feeling it to be a corporeal, visible reproach against himself. For grace is heartfelt toleration in movement and gesture.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 258, 1878)

E1.7.C.3.6. THE ONLY FREE ACTION WE ARE ALLOWED IS THE DESTRUCTION OF OUR EGO.
According to Simone Weil, God withdrew so that we could exist, he relinquished being everything to let us be something. We are a part that should mirror the whole. God's grace is the sole escape from the gravity within us. To delve into the depths of reality, one must be vulnerable, without defense. The only free action we are granted is the annihilation of our ego.

E1.7.C.3.6.a. GOD WITHDREW SO THAT WE COULD EXIST, HE RELINQUISHED BEING EVERYTHING SO THAT WE COULD BE SOMETHING. Simone Weil suggests that while human beings bear the imprint of God, they are also separated from Him. The central law of this world is gravity, compelling every creature to seek anything that can preserve or reinforce it. Psychologically, this translates into motives for affirmation or restitution of the self, which keeps us external and in opposition to God.

E1.7.C.3.6.a_REF1_PH CREATION REFLECTS BOTH THE BEAUTY AND THE ABSENCE OF GOD "Creation reflects God through its beauty and harmony, but through the evil and death that inhabit it and the insensitive necessity that governs it, it also reveals the absence of God. We have departed from God: this means that we bear His mark, and it also means that we are separated from Him. The etymology of the word "exist" (to be outside) is very illuminating in this regard: we exist, we are not. God, who is Being, has, in a certain sense, erased himself so that we may exist; he has renounced being everything so that we may be something; he has, for our sake, renounced his necessity, which is indistinguishable from the good, in order to allow another necessity, which is alien and indifferent to the good, to reign. The central law of this world, from which God withdrew by his very act of creation, is the law of gravity, which is analogously found at all levels of existence. Gravity is the "divine" force par excellence. It urges every creature to seek everything that can preserve or increase it and, in the words of Thucydides, to exercise all the power of which it is capable. Psychologically, it translates into all the motives of affirmation or restitution of the self, in all the deceptions (internal lies, escape into dreams and false ideals, imaginary incursions into the past and the future, etc.) that we use to consolidate our shaken existence from within, that is, to remain external and opposed to God. ) that we use to consolidate our shaken existence from within, that is, to remain external and opposed to God."
(Gustave Thibon, preface to Gravity and Grace, Février 1947)

E1.7.C.3.6.a_REF2_CUR FILM: DAN KWAN, DANIEL SCHEINERT, EVERYTHING EVERYWHERE ALL AT ONCE, 2022
A reflection on choosing kindness as a result of gaining a "cosmic conscciousness" and choosing teh here and now over all other possibilities.

Watch the trailer on YouTube: https://youtu.be/wxN1T1uxQ2g

E1.7.C.3.6.b. "WE ARE A PART THAT SHOULD MIRROR THE WHOLE. 
Identify with the universe itself. Anything less than the universe is subject to suffering. 
Through every sensation, feel the universe. What does it matter whether it's pleasure or pain?"

E1.7.C.3.6.b_REF1_PH "MEANING OF THE UNIVERSE

We are a part which has to imitate the whole.

The atman. Let the soul of a man take the whole universe for its body. Let its relation to the whole universe be like that of a collector to his collection

[...] We should identify ourselves with the universe itself. Everything that is less than the universe is subject to suffering.

Even though I die, the universe continues. That does not console me if I am anything other than the universe. If, however, the universe is, as it were, another body to my soul, my death ceases to have any more importance for me than that of a stranger. The same is true of my sufferings.

Let the whole universe be for me, in relation to my body, what the stick of a blind man is in relation to his hand. His sensibility is really no longer in his hand but at the end of the stick. An apprenticeship is necessary.

[...] To change the relationship between ourselves and the world in the same way as, through apprenticeship, the workman changes the relationship between himself and the tool. Getting hurt: this is the trade entering into the body. May all suffering make the universe enter into the body.\

Habit, skill: a transference of the consciousness into an object other than the body itself.

[...] We do not become detached, we change our attachment. We must attach ourselves to the all.

We have to feel the universe through each sensation. What does it matter then whether it be pleasure or pain? If our hand is shaken by a beloved friend when we meet again after a long separation, what does it matter that he squeezes it hard and hurts us?

[...] We have to associate the rhythm of the life of the body with that of the world, to feel this association constantly and to feel also the perpetual exchange of matter by which the human being bathes in the world.

Things which nothing can take from a human being as long as he lives: in the way of movement over which his will has a hold, respiration; in the way of perception, space (even in a dungeon, even with our eyes blinded and our ear-drums pierced, as long as we live we are aware of space).

We have to attach to these things the thoughts which we desire that no circumstances should be able to deprive us of."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.7.C.3.6.b_REF2_PH "PRETENDING TO BE MORAL. You never want to be dissatisfied with yourself, never to suffer because of yourself, - and you call this your moral inclination! But one thing is certain, you will never make the trip around the world (that you are yourself) and you will remain, in yourself, a chance, a clod of earth on a clod of earth. Do you believe, then, that we who are of another persuasion expose ourselves by sheer folly to the journey through our own nothingness, our swamps and our ice peaks, that we have voluntarily chosen pain and disgust like the stylistic anchorites?"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Aurora, Aphorism 343, 1881)

E1.7.C.3.6.c. GOD'S GRACE IS THE ONLY WAY TO OVERCOME THE INHERENT GRAVITY WITHIN US. For Simone Weil, this grace does not alter the law of necessity and chance that governs the world, but it permeates our souls to aid us in becoming divine again. To accomplish this, we must eradicate our egos and embrace life's emptiness and imbalance, without desiring recompense. We need also to let go of the past and future to stay true to the present moment. All sins are attempts to evade emptiness, and the imagination impedes the acceptance of grace. By choosing to be nothing, one can open oneself to the gates of eternity.

E1.7.C.3.6.c_REF1_PH "SIMONE WEIL PRESENTS THE PROBLEM OF SALVATION IN THESE TERMS: 'How can we escape what is like gravity within us? Only through grace. God passes through the infinite thickness of time and space to come to us; his grace does not change anything in the blind games of necessity and chance that govern this world: it penetrates our souls like a drop of water that penetrates geological strata without altering their structure, and there it waits in silence for our consent to become God again. Gravity was the law of creation, the work of grace is to "uncreate" us. God, out of love, consented to cease to be everything so that we could be something; we, out of love, must consent to cease to be nothing so that God can become everything again. It is therefore a matter of abolishing the ego in us, "this shadow cast by sin and error, which blocks the light of God and which we take to be a being". Outside of this total humility, this unconditional acceptance of being nothing, all forms of heroism and self-sacrifice remain subject to gravity and lies. "One can only offer the self. Otherwise, everything that is called a sacrifice is nothing more than a label on the revenge of the self. To kill the ego, one must expose oneself naked and defenseless to all the bites of life, accepting the emptiness, the imbalance, never seeking compensation for misfortune, and above all, suspending in oneself the work of the imagination, "which constantly tends to close the cracks through which grace would pass. All sins are attempts to escape emptiness. It is also necessary to renounce the past and the future, because the self is nothing more than a concretion of the past and the future around an always failing present. Memory and hope cancel out the beneficial effect of misfortune by opening up an unlimited field for imaginary exaltations (I was, I will be...), but fidelity to the present moment truly reduces man to nothing and thus opens the doors to eternity".
(Gustave Thibon, preface to Gravity and Grace, Février 1947)

E1.7.C.3.6.c_REF1.1_PH "THE SELF MUST BE KILLED FROM WITHIN BY LOVE. But it can also be killed from without by extreme suffering and humiliation. There are tramps and prostitutes who have no more self-respect than saints, and whose whole life is limited to the present moment. This is the tragedy of abjection: what makes it irreparable is not that the self it destroys is precious, for it is made to be destroyed; it is that it prevents God from destroying it himself, that it deprives the love that makes things eternal of its prey".
(Gustave Thibon, preface to Gravity and Grace, Février 1947)

E1.7.C.3.6.c_REF2_PH "TO ACCEPT THE VOID
[...] 'experience shows us as regards men that, by a necessity of nature, every being invariably exercises all the power of which it is capable’ (Thucydides).

[...] Not to exercise all the power at one’s disposal is to endure the void. This is contrary to all the laws of nature. Grace alone can do it.

[...] To accept a void in ourselves is supernatural. Where is the energy to be found for an act which has nothing to counterbalance it? The energy has to come from elsewhere. Yet first there must be a tearing out, something desperate has to take place, the void must be created. Void: the dark night."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.7.C.3.6.d. TO TRULY UNDERSTAND THE DEPTHS OF REALITY, ONE MUST BE VULNERABLE, WITHOUT DEFENSES. The hero's armor may shield from harm, but it also obstructs direct interaction with reality and the realm of supernatural love. Consolations and illusions merely occupy the gaps left by the sting of reality.

E1.7.C.3.6.d.i. "IF YOU ONLY DESIRE THE GOOD, YOU ARE IN OPPOSITION TO THE LAW WHICH BINDS GOOD TO EVIL like the lighted object to the shadow, and, being in opposition to the universal law of the world, it is inevitable that you will fall into unhappiness". As long as the soul is not completely emptied of itself, this thirst for pure goodness leads to expiatory suffering.

E1.7.C.3.6.d.i_REF1_PH "HE WHO REFUSES CONFUSION IS CONDEMNED TO SUFFER. From Antigone, whom the guardian of the temporal city invites to go and love among the dead, to Simone Weil herself, whom human injustice crucified to the grave, misfortune is the lot of all lovers of the absolute lost in the relative: "If one desires only the good, one is in opposition to the law that binds good to evil, like the enlightened object to the shadow, and since one is in opposition to the universal law of the world, it is inevitable that one falls into misfortune. As long as the soul is not completely emptied of itself, this thirst for pure goodness produces expiatory suffering.

[Purity does not abolish suffering; on the contrary, it deepens it infinitely, but gives it eternal meaning".
(Gustave Thibon, preface to Gravity and Grace, Février 1947)

E1.7.C.3.6.d.i_REF2_PH IN ORDER FOR THINGS TO REALLY EXIST FOR US, THEY MUST PENETRATE US, WHICH REQUIRES BEING VULNERABLE 
"Supernatural love has no contact with force, but neither does it protect the soul from the cold of force, the cold of iron. Only an earthly attachment, if it contains enough energy, can protect against the cold of iron. Armor, like a sword, is made of metal. If you want a love that protects the soul from wounds, you have to love something other than God. The hero wears armor, the saint is naked. Well, armor protects against blows, but it prevents direct contact with reality and, above all, access to the third dimension, which is that of supernatural love. For things to really exist for us, they must penetrate us. Hence the need to be naked: nothing can penetrate us if the armor protects us both from wounds and from the depths they bring. Every sin is an attack on the third dimension, an attempt to return to the plane of the unreal, of the painless, a feeling that wants to penetrate the depths. This is a strict law: the more one exhausts one's intimate and direct communion with reality, the less one suffers. At the limit, life is spread out on the surface: one suffers no more than in a dream, because existence, reduced to two dimensions, becomes as flat as a dream. The same goes for consolations, illusions, boasting, and all the compensatory reactions with which we try to fill the voids that the bite of reality digs into us".
(Gustave Thibon, preface to Gravity and Grace, Février 1947)

E1.7.C.3.6.d.i_REF3_PH THE DEVIL IS THE CONTRADICTORINESS OF OUR NATURE.
“Satan—The Adversary […]
We can understand the devil as those intimidating fiscal, social, political, and religious powers, which we reify into such entities as the Economy, Society, the Government, or the Church, and then treat as though they possessed a personal agency that has the power to condemn or destroy us.
“For the demonic,” reflects the theologian Paul Tillich, “is the elevation of something conditional to unconditional significance.” Each time something contingent and impermanent is raised to the status of something necessary and permanent, a devil is created. Whether it be an ego, a nation-state, or a religious belief, the result is the same. This distortion severs such things from their embeddedness in the complexities, fluidities, and ambiguities of the world and makes them appear as simple, fixed, and unambiguous entities with the power to condemn or save us. Far from being consciously chosen by individuals, such perceptions seem wired into the structure of our psychological, social, religious, and biological makeup. […]

The devil is the contradictoriness of our nature. As soon as we make a foolhardy commitment to “enlightenment” or “salvation,” we start being torn apart by diabolic forces we only dimly understand and can scarcely control. For when we choose to follow a path that Buddha described as “going against the stream,” we choose to confront those fears and desires that hitherto we had either repressed or acted out. Like someone who has been swimming downstream with minimal effort only to discover how exhausting, uncomfortable, and unrewarding it is to swim against the current, so one who embarks on such a path will invariably encounter a legion of obstacles.
The devil extends from that inner enemy who voices our most private doubts, conceits, and loathings to that outer enemy who afflicts us with disease, terrorizes us with real and imagined dangers, and ultimately kills us. […]

Rather than face the contingency of my existence, I flee it. This existential flight is the diabolic undercurrent of human life. It is that bewildered and fearful recoil against having been born and having to die, that brooding anxiety that is not anxious about anything in particular. Its quivering unease is like the lazy collision of two rings of ripples on water: one a reverberation from the shock of birth, the other an intimation of the shock of death. […]

Fear is the longing not to be hurt; the craving not to suffer misfortune; the yearning not to be contingent. It is the fundamental aversive reaction to the threats with which life confronts us. As well as being an emotion in its own right, fear pervades all self-centered emotion. Whether I am consumed by hatred or riddled with doubts, in both cases I am afraid—I want to avoid the pain inflicted by an enemy’s barbed remarks as much as I do the anguish of my own uncertainty.”
(Stephen Batchelor, Living with the Devil, 2004)

E1.7.C.3.6.d.ii. “OUR ATTACHMENT CONSTRUCTS THE REALITY OF THE WORLD. IT IS THE REALITY OF THE SELF THAT WE PROJECT ONTO THINGS. It is not an external reality. This can only be perceived through total detachment. Even if only a thread remains, attachment still exists. Attachment creates illusions, so anyone seeking reality must be detached.”

E1.7.C.3.6.d.ii_REF1_PH "DETACHMENT
Affliction in itself is not enough for the attainment of total detachment. Unconsoled affliction is necessary. There must be no consolation—no apparent consolation. Ineffable consolation then comes down.

[...] The reality of the world is the result of our attachment. It is the reality of the self which we transfer into things. It has nothing to do with independent reality. That is only perceptible through total detachment. Should only one thread remain, there is still attachment.

Affliction which forces us to attach ourselves to the most wretched objects exposes in all its misery the true character of attachment. In this way the necessity for detachment is made more obvious.

Attachment is a manufacturer of illusions and whoever wants reality ought to be detached.

[...] Attachment is no more nor less than an insufficiency in our sense of reality. We are attached to the possession of a thing because we think that if we cease to possess it, it will cease to exist. A great many people do not feel with their whole soul that there is all the difference in the world between the destruction of
a town and their own irremediable exile from that town.

[...] All suffering which does not detach us is wasted suffering. Nothing is more frightful, a desolate coldness, a warped soul"
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.7.C.3.6.d.ii_REF1.1_PH "DÉSIRER SANS OBJET 

La purification est la séparation du bien et de la convoitise .

Descendre à la source des désirs pour arracher l’énergie à son objet . C’est là que les désirs sont vrais en tant qu’énergie . C’est l’objet qui est faux . Mais arrachement indicible dans l’âme à la séparation d’un désir et de son objet .

Si l’on descend en soi - même , on trouve qu’on possède exactement ce qu’on désire ."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.7.C.3.6.d.ii_REF1.2_PH "TO DESIRE WITHOUT AN OBJECT

[...] To lose someone: we suffer because the departed, the absent, has become something imaginary and unreal. But our desire for him is not imaginary. We have to go down into ourselves to the abode of the desire which is not imaginary. Hunger: we imagine kinds of food, but the hunger itself is real: we have to fasten on to the hunger. The presence of the dead person is imaginary, but his absence is very real: henceforward it is his way of appearing.

[...] The handshake of a friend on meeting again after a long absence. I do not even notice whether it gives pleasure or pain to my sense of touch: like the blind man who feels the objects directly at the end of his stick, I feel the presence of my friend directly. It is the same with life’s circumstances, whatever they may be, and God.

This implies that we should never seek consolation for pain. Because felicity is beyond the realm of consolation and pain. We become aware of it through a sense which is different, just as the perception of objects at the end of a stick or an instrument is different from touch in the strict sense of the word. This other sense is formed by a shifting of the attention through an apprenticeship in which the whole soul and body participate. [...] "
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.7.C.3.6.d.ii_REF1.3_PH "THE SELF
[...] Everything without exception which is of value in me comes from somewhere other than myself, not as a gift but as a loan which must be ceaselessly renewed. Everything without exception which is in me is absolutely valueless; and, among the gifts which have come to me from elsewhere, everything which I appropriate becomes valueless immediately I do so.

Perfect joy excludes even the very feeling of joy, for in the soul filled by the object no corner is left for saying ‘I’. We cannot imagine such joys when they are absent, thus the incentive for seeking them is lacking."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.7.C.3.6.d.ii_REF2_LIT WHAT IT’S LIKE TO BE A FALCON: THE PEREGRINE AS A PORTAL TO A WAY OF SEEING, A STATE OF BEING, EXEPRIMENTING DETACHMENT
"Standing in the fields near the north orchard, I shut my eyes and tried to crystallise my will into the light-drenched prism of the hawk’s mind. Warm and firm-footed in long grass smelling of the sun, I sank into the skin and blood and bones of the hawk. The ground became a branch to my feet, the sun on my eyelids was heavy and warm. Like the hawk, I heard and hated the sound of man, that faceless horror of the stony places. I stifled in the same filthy sack of fear. I shared the same hunter’s longing for the wild home none can know, alone with the sight and smell of the quarry, under the indifferent sky. I felt the pull of the north, the mystery and fascination of the migrating gulls. I shared the same strange yearning to be gone. I sank down and slept into the feather-light sleep of the hawk."
(J.A. Baker, The Peregrine, 1967)

E1.7.C.3.6.d.ii_REF2.1_LIT A TIMELESS REMINDER OF THE BEAUTY AND WONDER FOUND IN CLOSE, ATTENTIVE OBSERVATION 
"In the mid-1950s, a near-sighted English office worker set out to do for the sky what Rachel Carson had done for the sea thirty years earlier — invite our human imagination, grounded yet boundless, into the world of another creature dwelling in another sphere. J.A. Baker (August 6, 1926–December 26, 1987) spent a decade following earth’s fastest flying bird on bicycle and on foot, possessed by its “restless brilliance.” When he unloosed The Peregrine (public library) into the atmosphere of culture in 1967 — an atmosphere shaped by the new ecological conscience awakened by Carson’s Silent Spring five years earlier — it was a clarion call and a consecration, entirely original, yet emanating Thoreau’s meticulous observation, Whitman’s ecstatic language, and Carson’s soulful reverence for the realities of nature in all their brutal beauty. An epoch later, it remains an ode to wonder, a field guide to observation as devotional practice, a passionate and poetic reminder that by attending closely and tenderly to any one thing, we recover our natural reverence for everything, our love of the world in all its strangeness and splendor."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.7.C.3.6.d.ii_REF2.2_LIT "YOU CANNOT KNOW WHAT FREEDOM MEANS till you have seen a peregrine loosed into the warm spring sky to roam at will through all the far provinces of light. [...]

The eyes of a falcon peregrine weigh approximately one ounce each; they are larger and heavier than human eyes. If our eyes were in the same proportion to our bodies as the peregrine’s are to his, a twelve-stone man would have eyes three inches across, weighing four pounds. The whole retina of a hawk’s eye records a resolution of distant objects that is twice as acute as that of the human retina. Where the lateral and binocular visions focus, there are deep-pitted foveal areas; their numerous cells record a resolution eight times as great as ours. This means that a hawk, endlessly scanning the landscape with small abrupt turns of his head, will pick up any point of movement; by focusing upon it he can immediately make it flare up into larger, clearer view.

The peregrine’s view of the land is like the yachtsman’s view of the shore as he sails into the long estuaries. A wake of water recedes behind him, the wake of the pierced horizon glides back on either side. Like the seafarer, the peregrine lives in a pouring-away world of no attachment, a world of wakes and tilting, of sinking planes of land and water. We who are anchored and earthbound cannot envisage this freedom of the eye. The peregrine sees and remembers patterns we do not know exist: the neat squares of orchard and woodland, the endlessly varying quadrilateral shapes of fields. He finds his way across the land by a succession of remembered symmetries. [...]

Slowly he drifted above the orchard skyline and circled down wind, curving upward and round in long steep glides. He passed from the cold white sky of the south, up to the warm blue zenith, ascending the wind-bent thermal with wonderful ease and skill. His long-winged, blunt-headed shape contracted, dwindled, and darkened to the flinty point of a diamond as he circled high and far over; hanging and drifting above; indolent, watchful, supreme. Looking down, the hawk saw the big orchard beneath him shrink into dark twiggy lines and green strips; saw the dark woods closing together and reaching out across the hills; saw the green and white fields turning to brown; saw the silver line of the brook, and the coiled river slowly uncoiling; saw the whole valley flattening and widening; saw the horizon staining with distant towns; saw the estuary lifting up its blue and silver mouth, tongued with green islands. And beyond, beyond all, he saw the straight-ruled shine of the sea floating like a rim of mercury on the surface of the brown and white land. The sea, rising as he rose, lifted its blazing storm of light, and thundered to freedom to the land-locked hawk… I watched him with longing, as though he were reflecting down to me his brilliant unregarded vision of the land beyond the hill… He sank forward into the wind, and passed slowly down across the sun. I had to let him go. When I looked back, through green and violet nebulae of whirling light, I could just see a tiny speck of dusk falling to earth from the sun, flashing and turning and falling through an immense silence that crashed open in a tumult of shrilling, wing-beating birds."
(J.A. Baker, The Peregrine, 1967)

E1.7.C.3.6.d.iii. "THE SELF
[...] Once we have begun the process of destroying the I, we can prevent any misfortune from doing harm. For the I is not destroyed by external pressure without extreme revolt. If we refuse this revolt out of love for God, then the destruction of the I does not come from without, but from within."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.7.C.3.6.d.iv. WE MUST RENOUNCE BEING SOMETHING. THIS IS THE ONLY GOOD FOR US. “[Suffering] is God withdrawing from us out of love so we can love Him. If we were exposed to the direct radiation of His love, without the protection of space, time, and matter, we would evaporate like water in the sun. There wouldn't be enough 'I' in us to abandon the 'I' out of love. Necessity is the screen put between God and us, allowing us to exist. It's up to us to pierce this screen and cease to exist. This is renunciation. It is imitating God's renunciation in creation. God, in a sense, relinquished being everything. We must relinquish being something. This is the only good for us. We must be nothing in order to be in our true place in the whole."
(Simone Weil)

E1.7.C.3.6.d.iv_REF1_PH "DECREATION

[...]  Creation is an act of love and it is perpetual. At each moment our existence is God’s love for us. But God can only love himself. His love for us is love for himself through us. Thus, he who gives us our being loves in us the acceptance of not being.

[...]  Relentless necessity, wretchedness, distress, the crushing burden of poverty and of labour which wears us out, cruelty, torture, violent death, constraint, disease—all these constitute divine love. It is God who in love withdraws from us so that we can love him. For if we were exposed to the direct radiance of his love, without
the protection of space, of time and of matter, we should be evaporated like water in the sun; there would not be enough ‘I’ in us to make it possible to surrender the ‘I’ for love’s sake. Necessity is the screen set between God and us so that we can be. It is for us to pierce through the screen so that we cease to be.

[...]  Renunciation. Imitation of God’s renunciation in creation. In a sense God renounces being everything. We should renounce being something. That is our only good.

Everything which is grasped by our natural faculties is hypothetical. It is only supernatural love that establishes anything. Thus we are co-creators.

We participate in the creation of the world by decreating ourselves.

[...]  We only possess what we renounce; what we do not renounce escapes from us. In this sense, we cannot possess anything whatever unless it passes through God.

[...]  For men of courage physical sufferings (and privations) are often a test of endurance and of strength of soul. But there is a better use to be made of them. For me then, may they not be that. May they rather be a testimony, lived and felt, of human misery. May I endure them in a completely passive manner. Whatever happens, how could I ever think an affliction too great, since the wound of an affliction and the abasement to which those whom it strikes are condemned opens to them the knowledge of human misery, knowledge which is the door of all wisdom?

But pleasure, happiness, prosperity, if we know how to recognize in them all that comes from outside (chance, circumstances, etc.), likewise bear testimony to human misery. They should be used in the same way. This applies even to grace, in so far as it is a sensible phenomenon.

We have to be nothing in order to be in our right place in the whole."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.7.C.3.6.d.iv_REF1.1_PH "HE WHOM WE MUST LOVE IS ABSENT

[...] The irreducible character of suffering which makes it impossible  for us not to have a horror of it at the moment when we are undergoing it is destined to bring the will to a standstill, just as absurdity brings the intelligence to a standstill, and absence love, so that man, having come to the end of his human faculties, may stretch out his arms, stop, look up and wait."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.7.C.3.6.d.iv_REF2_PH NICOLAS GRIMALDI ARGUES THAT TRUE FREEDOM IS FOUND NOT IN NIHILISM OR SELF-INTEREST, BUT IN AN ACTIVE "ABNEGATION" THAT SHEDS THE ISOLATING OBSESSION WITH OUR PRECARIOUS "SINGULARITY," allowing us to escape the prison of desire and participate in a "vaster life" of universal truth and eternal communion.
"Beyond desire and time, amazed to exist, active and carefree—such is the freedom of which various wisdoms speak. However, this freedom is opposed to the most spontaneous tendencies of each individual, the domineering and predatory attitude that technology prolongs, and the mirror games without which society could no longer exist. Thus, is this freedom not a subtle form of nihilism, shielding us from both the demands of life and those of society? However, self-denial is not nihilism. It is not even renunciation. On the contrary, it is the simple negation within us of all the negations that tend to destroy us. If it refuses to take the side of the individual, it is because it has taken the side of a broader life.
Yet, such an experience is less exceptional than it seems. Although contemplation is required, withdrawal is not. Almost everyone has sensed it, recognized it, felt called to it, and promised to devote their lives to it at one time or another.
Sometimes, an earthquake of history strips us of all the appearances we believed to be inseparable from our identity. By turning us into former beings, it reveals a truth we spent our time hiding from ourselves: we die as we are born—in essential destitution and poverty—and everything not devoted to the service of life is lost in the meantime.
[...] For the life of the spirit is freedom itself. Spinoza believed that knowledge of the truth gives us access to freedom by allowing us to participate in the eternal understanding of the infinite. However, more than temporality, it is solitude from which the experience of truth frees us. In it, we experience ourselves as more deeply and indissolubly united with others through the universality of what possesses us than with ourselves through the particularity of what we possess. Thus, an unbreakable community can be founded on the universality of truth and the joy of eternal communion based on this community's principles.
However, as with Spinoza, this joy would merely be intellectual if we did not feel ourselves participating in a greater life that grounds and justifies our own. Spinoza invites us to recognize infinite understanding as the original reflexivity through which the eternal simplicity of God becomes life. Each of us feels this principle of life's universal prodigality within ourselves, and we are free to make ourselves mediators of it. 
Only our ordinary concern for our individuality prevents us from abandoning ourselves to it. This concern imprisons us in desire and its contradictions. This concern also turns our irremediable incompleteness into loneliness. However, when an excess of ingenuity or lucidity renders our precarious and transitory singularity indifferent or almost insubstantial, nothing that matters to others matters to us anymore. Only this spiritual life, to which every act of self-denial bears witness, manifests a freedom in time that is free from the ambiguities of temporality.
Note:
(1) Ashtâvakra, op. cit., XIII, 3, p. 47: "Nothing can be accomplished. When one has deeply understood this, whatever one has to accomplish, one is always serene." "
(Nicolas Grimaldi, The Ambiguities of Freedom, 1999)

E1.7.C.3.6.d.v.« WHEN MY HEART CAME TO RULE
in the world of love,
it was freed
from both belief
and from disbelief.

On this journey,
I found the problem
to be myself.

When I went beyond myself,
the pathway finally opened ».
(Mahsati Ganjavi)

E1.7.C.3.6.d.  THE ONLY FREE ACTION WE ARE PERMITTED IS THE DESTRUCTION OF OUR EGO.
For Simone Weil, in this world, the only thing we truly possess is the ability to say "I". This ability must be surrendered to God, meaning it needs to be destroyed. However, severe misfortune can strip us of this ability, leaving us devoid of free will and solely focused on survival.

E1.7.C.3.6.d_REF1_PH "THE SELF

We possess nothing in the world—a mere chance can strip us of everything—except the power to say ‘I’. That is what we have to give to God—in other words, to destroy. There is absolutely no other free act which it is given us to accomplish—only the destruction of the ‘I’.

[...] Nothing in the world can rob us of the power to say ‘I’. Nothing except extreme affliction. Nothing is worse than extreme affliction which destroys the ‘I’ from utside, because after that we can no longer destroy it ourselves.

[...] In affliction the vital instinct survives all the attachments which have been torn away, and blindly fastens itself to everything which can provide it with support, like a plant fastens its tendrils. Gratitude (except in a base form) and justice are not conceivable in this state. Slavery. There is no longer the extra amount of energy required to support free-will by which man takes the measure of things. Affliction, from this point of view, is hideous as life in its nakedness always is, like an amputated stump, like the swarming of insects. Life without form. Survival is then the only attachment. That is where extreme affliction begins—when all other attachments are replaced by that of survival. Attachment appears then in its nakedness without any other object but
itself—Hell.

It is by this mechanism that to those in affliction life appears as the one thing desirable, at the very time when their life is in no way preferable to death.

In this state, to accept death is total detachment."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.7.C.4. “DOES THE AESTHETIC PERSPECTIVE ESSENTIALLY INVOLVE VIEWING THE WORLD WITH A JOYFUL GAZE? [...] I have a clear conscience; nothing can harm me, no matter what [...]. These two feelings, astonishment and security, are deeply connected. They are affective experiences that are hard to adequately express because both require a disinterested and indifferent attitude towards specific objects in the world.”

E1.7.C.4.1. WITTGENSTEIN ASSIGNS A DUAL ETHICAL AND AESTHETIC DIMENSION TO THE DISINTERESTED CONTEMPLATION OF THE WORLD. The aesthetic perspective involves viewing the world from the outside, completely disinterested in its practical utility.

E1.7.C.4.1_REF1_PH WITTGENSTEIN COMBINES THE NOTION OF DISINTERESTED KNOWLEDGE AND CONSCIOUSNESS OF THE WORLD IN THE PERSPECTIVE OF ETERNITY WITH AN AESTHETIC AND ETHICAL VISION OF THE WORLD, IN WHICH TIMELINESS AND DISINTERESTED CONSCIOUSNESS PROVIDE SALVATION. This approach emphasizes that science does not satisfy all our desires and leaves fundamental questions unresolved.
"Wittgenstein's account of the mystical, as well as of the aesthetic and, in a sense, the ethical, is located in Schopenhauer's problematic. What Wittgenstein says about the mystical corresponds, in fact, to what Schopenhauer says about knowledge that frees itself from the service of will (1) and individuality. Wittgenstein is certainly thinking about this theme when he writes in Proposition 6.45: "The intuition of the world sub specie aeterni is the intuition of the world as totality - but limited totality. The feeling of the world as limited totality is the mystical feeling."
Let us note in parentheses the rapid shift that takes place here from the notion of intuition to that of feeling. First of all, the use of the term "limited totality" is reminiscent of the author of The World as Will and Representation, who writes that the subject and the object, like two halves, constitute the totality of the world, but are limited by each other. The world appears as a limited totality when it is considered from the point of view of a transcendental subject, which, according to Wittgenstein, is neither man, nor the human body, nor the human soul, but the metaphysical subject, which is the limit of the world and not a part of it, an object that would be in the world (5.632, 5. 633 and 5.641, Notebooks, August 7, 1916). This situation is realized precisely in the disinterested intuition of the world, freed from the principle of sufficient reason, of which Schopenhauer speaks (2). We no longer consider, says Schopenhauer, "neither the place, nor the time, nor the why, nor the what-good of things, but purely and simply their nature"; one is no longer oneself, but a "pure subject" (is this not the metaphysical subject of which Wittgenstein speaks? ), lost in the object. On this point, Schopenhauer quotes Spinoza: "The mind is eternal insofar as it conceives of things in the perspective of eternity (sub specie aeternitatis)," which for Schopenhauer means that those who see things in this perspective transcend their individuality and identify with the eternal subject of knowledge. Wittgenstein's Notebooks (October 7, 1916) shed some light on what this formula of Schopenhauer and Spinoza means to him. First, it corresponds to an aesthetic and ethical vision of the world:

The work of art is the object seen sub specie aeternitatis, and the good life is the world seen sub specie aeternitatis. This is the connection between art and ethics. In the ordinary way of seeing, one looks at objects, so to speak, by placing oneself among them; in the way of seeing sub specie aeternitatis, one looks at them from the outside. In such a way that they have the whole world as a background. 
Does the aesthetic view of the world consist essentially in looking at the world with a happy gaze? (October 20, 1916). 

One could say that to see from the perspective of eternity, that is, "from the outside," is in a sense to see from above, with a total disinterest in practical utility, or even to see from the perspective of an eternal present. For, as Wittgenstein (6.4311) tells us, following Schopenhauer, eternity should not be understood as an infinite period of time, but as timelessness: "He lives eternally who lives in the present". For Wittgenstein, as for Schopenhauer, the disinterested contemplation of the world that brings salvation therefore has a dual ethical and aesthetic dimension.
From this perspective, we can better understand the profound intentions of the Tractatus, as we are invited to do by a note in the Notebooks dated May 25, 1915: "The tendency to the mystical comes from the fact that science leaves our desires unsatisfied. We feel that even if all scientific questions were solved, our problem would still not be solved."

Note: 
(1) Schopenhauer, The World as Will and Representation.
(2) Idem
(Pierre Hadot, Wittgenstein and the Limits of Language, 2004, extract from the 2014 preface)

E1.7.C.4.2. WITTGENSTEIN EMPHASIZES THE LIMITATIONS OF LANGUAGE AND THE CONCEPT THAT SILENT WISDOM IS ATTAINED BY TRANSCENDING THE PROPOSITIONS OF PHILOSOPHY. Conversely, Pierre Hadot expresses skepticism about the feasibility of leading a life of silent wisdom. He underscores that philosophy should be both a critical discourse and a practice of self-transformation.

E1.7.C.4.2_REF1_PH IS WITTGENSTEIN'S IDEAL OF SILENT WISDOM ATTAINABLE?" It is also interesting to note that in the Conference on Ethics, in addition to the feeling of astonishment at the existence of the world, which he says is his experience par excellence, he also alludes to another experience, the feeling of absolute security, which is also familiar to him; it can be expressed as follows (though he notes that this expression is logically nonsense): "I have a clear conscience, nothing can happen to me, no matter what", a phrase with a stoic tone, because the person who admits that there is no evil other than moral evil also knows that, if he wants, nothing bad can happen to him. These two feelings, these two experiences of astonishment and security, which cannot be adequately expressed because they are affective experiences, are deeply related in that they both imply a disposition of disinterest and indifference toward the determined objects of the world. If Wittgenstein insists so much on the limits of language, it is because he ultimately wants to offer a glimpse of a state of silent wisdom that would be attained by those who have gone beyond the propositions of the Tractatus. All the discourse of the book will have been rejected, like a ladder that has become useless and destroys itself after fulfilling its therapeutic function (like the philosophical discourse of the skeptics of antiquity, which they considered a simple laxative to be eliminated with bad moods), to give way to the silence of a life of wisdom, in which the problem of life will be solved by its own disappearance. He must overcome these propositions," says Wittgenstein (6.54), "then he sees the world correctly" (would this not be a return to the contemplation of the world, freed from the principle of sufficient reason, of which Schopenhauer spoke?)
Personally, I doubt that this ideal of a life of quiet wisdom is attainable. Wittgenstein's own life shows that he could not adhere to it. I would be more inclined to think, as I have said elsewhere, that one should not oppose a philosophy conceived as pure discourse to a wisdom that would be a silent way of life. For wisdom is not a state that would put an end to philosophy, but an unattainable ideal that motivates the philosopher's endless search. Philosophy, therefore, since it is an aspiration to wisdom, must be at once and indissolubly a critical discourse and the exercise of self-transformation."
(Pierre Hadot, Wittgenstein and the Limits of Language, 2004, extract from the 2014 preface)

E1.7.C.4.3. "I ADMIT THAT I EXIST. 
IT'S AMAZING AND NATURAL. 
TO BE HERE."

E1.7.C.4.3_REF1_PO I AM A « CONDUCTOR » IN THE ELECTRICAL SENSE OF THE WORD.

"A trip into the obvious

I admit that I exist. 
It's amazing and natural. 
To be here. 
I meet myself every day.
Time is a sham if it governs this. 
With discretion and tenacity, I explore the full flavor of the world. 
I am a « conductor » in the electrical sense of the word. 
Joy is a conquest over waiting. 
It is presence to oneself in the open day of possibilities. 
One must dare to be tender, ignorant, sensual. 
Truth is that I am able to rejoice from what makes me. 
This is knowledge, and a laziness of knowledge, a lasciviousness of being. 
Since the factual hive of the world and the tempestuous space of the mind do the rest."
(Christophe Béguin, War of Beauty, 2011)

"Une virée dans l’évidence 

J’avoue que j’existe. 
C’est stupéfiant et naturel. 
D’être là. 
Je me rencontre tous les jours.
Le Temps est une imposture s’il gouverne cela. 
Avec discrétion et ténacité, j’explore la pleine saveur du monde. 
Je suis « conducteur » au sens électrique du terme. 
La joie est une conquête sur l’attente. 
Elle est présence à soi dans le jour ouvert du possible. 
Il faut oser être tendre, ignorant, sensuel. 
La vérité, c’est ce que je suis capable de jouir de ce qui me fait. 
C’est cela la connaissance, et une paresse du savoir, une lascivité d’être. 
Puisque la ruche factuelle du monde et l’espace tempétueux du mental font le reste."
(Christophe Béguin, Guerre de beauté, Impeccables, 2011)

E1.7.C.5. “THE ENERGY THAT IS THE TOTAL AWARENESS OF ONE’S OWN EXISTENCE CAN BECOME  THE STRONGEST ENERGY IN HUMAN LIFE. It comes together with the need to obey that energy. You are objectively obliged to give, to serve, to manifest that energy in action and understanding.”

E1.7.C.5_REF1_PH "Because you are struggling, your question begins to deepen… What you will discover, always for the first time, always new, in the fleeting moment of wonder — before that moment is captured by the ambitions of personality. You, I, in that moment, will discover the need to serve the energy, uniquely human and also sacred, that starts as the pure awareness of one’s own existence. And even as this idea — this beginning idea — of what is human, even as this idea of what is man, begins to appear — even in that fleeting moment of the pure awareness of my existence given now by a great idea — in that moment in front of a living idea, an awakening idea, a glimpse appears of the uniquely human yearning to serve; the need appears, the need to obey that energy, the need to attend to it, to be nourished by it, to receive the help that comes then and only then, when you are objectively obliged to give, to serve, to manifest that energy in action and understanding. It is only that energy of conscious existence that gives you, a human being, real strength. The energy that is the total awareness of one’s own existence is — or can become, can be — the strongest energy in human life."
(Jacob Needleman, I Am Not I, 2016)

E1.7.C.5_REF1.1_PH "ACKNOWLEDGING THE ILLUSORINESS OF FREE will liberates us rather than tak[e] away our freedom. Pointing out how impossible it is to understand freedom without understanding the influences acting upon us, the laws of the universe, and the nature of reality, [Needleman] considers the source of real freedom"
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.7.C.5_REF1.2_PH "ASK YOURSELF WHAT IS YOUR UNDERSTANDING OF THE INFLUENCES ACTING UPON US — of the universal laws in nature? What are your thoughts about that? And the teachings of religion — the idea of faith, obedience to the higher, responsibility for others and oneself, the deceptions and revelations of sleep and dreaming, the very idea of man’s place in the living, breathing, sentient cosmos, our place on our planet, the demand for morality, the nature of animal instinct and intuition within us and around us, the function and the meaning of pain and pleasure, the idea and the experience of consciousness and conscience, the subtle nourishment in the air we breathe, the food we eat, the genuine and the fabricated needs and desires of the body, the powerful influences of symbols, the cosmic and intimate force of sex, the inevitability of death, the illusion and the reality of time. […]

Working like this, and maintaining the fundamental attitude of sincerity about yourself and your discoveries, you will become disillusioned not only with your certainties, but with the structure of your mind itself. You will realize that what you need is not new beliefs, new information, new theories, but an entirely new mind. [...]

Real ideas open the mind to the heart, to the heart of the mind, to another level of reality within ourselves… This is the taste, the beginning, of inner freedom. Only fools imagine that freedom means getting what one happens to desire. Real freedom begins with obedience to a higher influence — a higher, finer energy within oneself. […]

What is higher in yourself? That way of thinking about the question is the beginning of the answer — because it involves a real idea which has been handed down to humanity over thousands of years… At such a point you yourself will find the answer — not as a thought, but as an experience.

You will for a moment become the answer! You will not only have a taste of real freedom; you will for a moment be freedom."
(Jacob Needleman, I Am Not I, 2016)

E1.7.C.5_REF2_LIT TO LOOK ON ANYTHING, SUCH AS A MOUNTAIN, WITH THE LOVE THAT PENETRATES TO ITS ESSENCE, IS TO WIDEN THE DOMAIN OF BEING IN THE VASTNESS OF NON-BEING. MAN HAS NO OTHER REASON FOR HIS EXISTENCE.
"A scatter of white flowers in grass, looked at through half-closed eyes, blaze out with a sharp clarity as though they had actually risen up out of their background. Such illusions, depending on how the eye is placed and used, drive home the truth that our habitual vision of things is not necessarily right: it is only one of an infinite number, and to glimpse an unfamiliar one, even for a moment, unmakes us, but steadies us again. [...] 
How can I number the worlds to which the eye gives me entry? — the world of light, of colour, of shape, of shadow: of mathematical precision in the snowflake, the ice formation, the quartz crystal, the patterns of stamen and petal: of rhythm in the fluid curve and plunging line of the mountain faces. Why some blocks of stone, hacked into violent and tortured shapes, should so profoundly tranquillise the mind I do not know. Perhaps the eye imposes its own rhythm on what is only a confusion: one has to look creatively to see this mass of rock as more than jag and pinnacle — as beauty… A certain kind of consciousness interacts with the mountain-forms to create this sense of beauty. Yet the forms must be there for the eye to see. And forms of a certain distinction: mere dollops won’t do it. It is, as with all creation, matter impregnated with mind: but the resultant issue is a living spirit, a glow in the consciousness, that perishes when the glow is dead. It is something snatched from non-being, that shadow which creeps in on us continuously and can be held off by continuous creative act. So, simply to look on anything, such as a mountain, with the love that penetrates to its essence, is to widen the domain of being in the vastness of non-being. Man has no other reason for his existence."
(Nan Shepherd,  The Living Mountain, 1977)

E1.7.C.5_REF2.1_LIT "THERE IS NO PURE PERCEPTION — of a flower, of a mountain, of a person. In everything we look at, we see partly a reflection of ourselves — a projection of an internal model seeking to approximate the actuality. If we are conscious enough and unafraid enough of being surprised, we will keep testing the model against reality, incrementally ceding the imagined to the actual. One measure of love — perhaps the deepest measure — is the willingness to remove the projection in order to perceive what is truly there. There is both sorrow and consolation in knowing that although we can only ever glimpse parts of the totality beyond us, we can keep trying to see more clearly in order to love more deeply."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.7.D. THE CONVERGENT INTUITIONS OF THOUGHT BETWEEN THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHIES OF ASIA AND THE WEST WERE FORGOTTEN AFTER PLATONIC METAPHYSICS AND CHRISTIANITY. They resurfaced, very peripherally, in the 19th century, and the convergence of thought was reinforced in the 20th century. However, this thinking remains marginal today, as it is difficult to understand and its apparent detachment is often perceived as a threat to the productivity and result-oriented mindset that dominates our times.

E1.7.D.1 THE PRESOCRATICS AND ASIAN PHILOSOPHIES BEFORE OUR ERA: Similar intuitions emerged almost concurrently in the 5th century B.C. This occurred among the Presocratics, particularly Heraclitus, in the West, as well as among the early philosophies of Asia.

E1.7.D.1.1. HERACLITUS (around 500 B.C.)
The West favored Plato over Heraclitus and overlooked the East for two millennia.

E1.7.D.1.3.a. THE GREEK PHILOSOPHER HERACLITUS PROMOTED THE IMPORTANCE OF ATTENTION AND MINDFULNESS, the relativity of rationality, and the concept of the world as a constant flux underscored by a principle of unity. He perceived identity as a result of flux rather than a static essence. Considered a monist, Heraclitus saw a fundamental unity in the world's diversity and change. His influence is evident in later philosophers such as the Stoics, Hegel, Nietzsche, and Heidegger. Plato's world of forms can be viewed as a response to Heraclitus' ongoing process of becoming.

E1.7.D.1.3.a_REF1_PH "HERACLITUS
Analyzing Heractlus' fragments, it is remarkable how his parallel those of Buddhist philosophy: 
- The importance of attention and mindfulness conscience
- The relativism of rationality
- The world as a perpetual flux underlined by a principle of unity
- Identity as the produce of a flux and not as a still essence

"The bow, its name is life, its work is death" (a pun on words since in Greek bow = biòs and life = bios), the idea that opposite things are coinciding.
"The bow turns back on itself", the idea that a bow consists of being pulled in two directions at the same time.
"It is wise to agree that all things are one", Heraclitus is thought of as a monist, seeing an underlying unity to diversity and change that we see in the world.
"This account (logos) being always the case, always men fail to understand it, both before they hear it and when first they have heard. For  although all things come to be according to this account, men seem to be without experience of it even when they try out all the words and deeds of the kind I set out when I distinguish each thing according to its nature and say how it is. Other men do not pay attention to what they do when they are awake, just as they do not pay attention to what they do when they are asleep." This is the Introduction of his book. Logos has several meanings and we can consider Heraclitus is not talking about his book but also about the universe, that is reality. He seems to believe there is an ordering principle of the world under what appears to us only flux and opposing principles.
"You never bathe twice in the same river" (grammatically in Greek, it is not clear if the change applies to the change in You or the passing of the water). As all is flux, on the one hand we have identities created through flux - as in the barley drink H. makes reference to and that need to be stirred continuously as you drink it - "The barley drink stands still when it moves" - or the river that would be a lake and not a river if it was not flowing; on the other hand, to what extend does something changes so that it is not itself anymore? To what extend flux destroys identity? Cratylus, one of H. 'disciple push the reasoning further and said that because of flux you cannot have an identity in the first place, and so you cannot even bathe in the river ounce, you cannot even name a river!
If we reduce H. to the idea of flux without mitigating with the idea of unifying opposites, we are drown to Cratylus' position - however this is probably an inadequate reduction of his thought. H. gives us many occurrences of relativism, where contraries are unified in the same thing:
"We value gold. Donkeys don't, but they value trash that we do not value", "the road up and down, one and the same". H. might answer Cratylus that identity is actually secured by the unity of opposites. These differences of opposites and flux in one and the same thing should not alarm us, because these characteristics are part and parcel of reality. We should recognize that our human perspective is just one possible perspective available on the world (he contrasts human perspective with that of animal - donkey, fish).
At the same period, Parmenides - an extreme monist - promotes a conflicting view that there is only being and nothing besides that.
"Eternity is a child at play playing drafts, the kingdom is a child's" would mean you need a child's fresh attitude to gain understanding of unity.
"Eyesight is a better witness than hearing", might mean look for yourself, don't just listen to what other people think.
"If lots of learning made people wise then it would have made these people wise" and he proceeds to cite Pythagorus, Xenophonus and others.
Some of Heraclitus' influence on latter philosophers:
- Plato's world of the forms in reaction to Heraclitus' continuous process of becoming
- The stoics picked up from Heraclitus the unifying rational divine principle guiding the world, 
- Hegel incorporated as a central principle to his philosophy the resolution of opposites into a syntheses, 
- In Ecce Homo Nietzsche says that the doctrine of becoming of Zarathustra was anticipated by Heraclitus,
- Heidegger loves the pre-Socratics since for him, western philosophy goes wrong with Plato's metaphysics"
(Heraclitus, Program brodcast in In Our Time on BBC4 on 8 Dec 2011)

Listen to the program: https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b017x3p4

E1.7.D.1.3.b. PLATO INTERRUPTS THE GREAT PHILOSOPHICAL ADVENTURE BEGUN BY THE PRESOCRATICS.

E1.7.D.1.3.b_REF1_PH "WE CAN FIND AN INAUGURAL MOMENT OF THE BIFURCATION OF WESTERN PHILOSOPHY IN PLATO'S PHILEBUS. Protarchus and Socrates are walking in the countryside and Socrates asks if what he sees in the distance is a stone or a man. Instead of sticking to this presence where something has opened up, he declares that as long as we don't know what it is, then it is nothing. The problem is the status we give to identity, the way the mind freezes and believes in the labels placed on things - creating informational causality: It is the identities I have identified that identify and enclose me. The proposition of Aristotelian metaphysics that to be is to be something - that is to have a meaning - is challenged head-on by Buddhism, which works against assigning meaning."
(Alexis Lavis in the porgram Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 08/06/2018)

E1.7.D.1.3.b_REF2_PH NIETZSCHE LAMENTS THE LOSS OF A SUPERIOR FORM OF PHILOSOPHICAL LIFE AND SUGGESTS THAT A GREAT CATASTROPHE INTERRUPTED THIS EVOLUTION WITH PLATO, LEAVING A VOID AND AN UNREVEALED MYSTERY.
"TYRANTS OF THE SPIRIT. [...]

With the Greeks, things go forward swiftly, but also as swiftly downwards; the movement of the whole mechanism is so intensified that a single stone, thrown into its wheels, makes it burst. Such a stone was Socrates, for example; in one night, the development of philosophical science, until then so wonderfully regular but, of course, all too swift, was destroyed. It is no idle question to wonder whether Plato, if he had stayed free of the Socratic spell, might not have found an even higher type of the
philosophical man, now lost to us forever. We look into the ages before him as into a sculptor’s workshop, full of such types. The sixth and fifth centuries, however, seem to promise even more and greater things than they produced; but it remained at promises and declarations. And yet there is hardly a heavier loss than the loss of a type, the loss of a new, previously undiscovered, supreme possibility of philosophical life. Even of the older types, most have been handed down to us inadequately; it seems to me extraordinarily difficult to see any philosopher from Thales to Democritus clearly; but the man who is successful in recreating these figures strolls among creatures of the mightiest and purest type. Of course, this ability is rare; even the later Greeks who studied the older philosophers did not have it. Aristotle, particularly, seems not to have his eyes in his head when he is faced with them. And so it seems as if these marvelous philosophers had lived in vain, or even as if they had only been meant to prepare the way for the combative and garrulous hordes of the Socratic schools. As we said, there is a gap here, a break in development; some great misfortune must
have occurred, and the sole statue in which we might have recognized the sense and purpose of that great creative preparatory exercise must have broken or been nsuccessful. What actually happened has remained forever a secret of the workshop. [...]"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human, Aphorism 261, 1878)

E1.7.D.1.3.b_REF3.1_PH "ZETETIC [...] 
Words are only a moment of pure and universal appearance, as Marcel Conche says again, a moment of becoming, as I would prefer to say, which they can neither contain in their entirety nor transform - except illusorily - into fixed or immutable essences. Thus, for Pyrrhon, ataraxia (wisdom, peace of mind) was not without aphasia (non-speech, silence). Not because one cannot speak (aphasia is not aphasia), nor because one should not speak, but because "words can never erase silence" (M. Conche, Pyrrhon ou l'apparence, X, 1).
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E1.7.D.1.2. CLAUDE LÉVI-STRAUSS LAMENTS THAT THE WEST OVERLOOKED THE WISDOMS OF THE EAST FOR TWO MILLENNIA. He believed these wisdoms offered insights superior to those of the religions that succeeded them.

E1.7.D.1.2_REF1_PH "MAN REALLY CREATES GREAT THINGS ONLY IN THE BEGINNING; in every field, only the first step is fully valid. [...] I pay tribute to the decisive reflection that a thinker or the society that created his legend did twenty-five centuries ago, and to which my civilization could only contribute by confirming it. What else have I learned from the masters I have listened to, the philosophers I have read, the societies I have visited, and from this very science of which the West is so proud, if not scraps of lessons which, put together, reconstruct the meditation of the sage at the foot of the tree? Every effort to understand destroys the object to which we have become attached, in favor of an effort that abolishes it in favor of a third, and so on, until we reach the only permanent presence, that is, the one in which the distinction between meaning and meaninglessness disappears: the same one from which we had departed. It is two thousand five hundred years since humans discovered and formulated these truths. Since then, we have found nothing but - by trying every exit door after another - so many additional demonstrations of the conclusion from which we would have liked to "escape".
(Claude Lévi-Strauss, Tristes Tropiques, 1955)

E1.7.D.1.2.a_REF1_PH BUDDHISM REDUCES THE METAPHYSICAL PROBLEM TO THAT OF HUMAN CONDUCT "This great religion of non-knowledge [Buddhism] is not based on our inability to understand. It testifies to our capacity and elevates us to the point where we discover the truth in the form of a mutual exclusion of being and knowing. With additional audacity, it has - alone with Marxism - reduced the metaphysical problem to that of human behavior".
(Claude Lévi-Strauss, Tristes Tropiques, 1955)

E1.7.D.1.3. BUDHISM

E1.7.D.1.3.a_REF1_PH "AWARENESS TESTED BY AWAKENING 
Buddhism is a wholly contemplative tradition, at odds with the rational tradition of philosophy. However, we may be at a special moment of communication between these traditions.
Buddhism is divided into the small vehicle, that of the solitary practitioner seeking nirvana, and the great vehicle, in which one no longer seeks an end but enlightenment, represented by the ocean. Being in the oceanic dimension is the discovery of Maaiana, which explores the common, the impersonal "there is," the rustle of the scene of opening to being, one of the main texts of which is the Bodhicaryavatara written by Santideva.
Awakening is the totally sober being who contemplates the "there is" or "what is". Contemplation, called teoria in Greek, has the same root as Diana in Sanskrit, which means meditation. In antiquity, the same space was found between the two traditions, which then diverged. The content of the original intuition was preserved on the path of Buddhism, while the West took the path of rationalism.

For most Western philosophers, the ante-predicative experience (before the "I", before the "it", before consciousness) cannot constitute the path of ethics: it is only possible from the separation of self and other. In Buddhism, all ethics consists in always returning to the open ante-predicative space. The world of consciousness is that of the subject-object duality, where the mode of apprehension is that of something facing me, that of the transcendence of the object: there is something outside of me that allows me to grasp myself as an interiority. It is a rupture that allows one to situate oneself, to position oneself in the world, to divide it. The world of consciousness is the world of identification. To think that experience or mind can be summed up as conscious experience is Cartesian madness. However, there is a form of alertness that is not consciousness. Awakening is not achieved, we are born awake, it is a form of alertness that is not a path. It is an original situation that is already there.

When knowledge comes from the experience of "there is," it is enriching and deepening. But when the search for information is primary, there is a tearing apart of the state of wakefulness. There is something forgotten in the way of being conscious in the world that creates a sense of discomfort. Consciousness is a useful approach, but not the only one. The mind is more expansive in the dimension of shared presence.

Meditation is the practice of "there is" that shakes us to our metaphysical foundations."
(Alexis Lavis in the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 06/08/2018)

Listen to the podcast in French:
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/la-conscience-a-lepreuve-de-leveil

E1.7.D.1.3.a_REF1.1_PH "THE FUTURE BELONGS TO THOSE WHO AWAKE EARLY
Being Buddha in Sanskrit is not a quality or an adjective; the one who is Buddha is nothing but awakening, nothing but that. It is a radical break, the most radical experience of non-dualism. There is neither an in-itself nor an out-of-itself. Awakening is also called the non-artificial, the non-manufactured.
To be "aware" already establishes a dualism; in Buddhism this state of mind is broken, and from there one can create ethics and politics.

The question of whether nirvana (the cessation of all reactivity) is enlightenment divides the two streams of Buddhism: the Lesser Vehicle, or Ancient Buddhism, and the Greater Vehicle, or Mahayana.
In the Lesser Vehicle, nirvana is a cessation: one progresses to put an end to a way of being. What does one awaken to in ancient Buddhism? There are two possibilities:
1. the non-self 2. the concatenation of reality - there is no identity, everything is related.
In the Great Vehicle, enlightenment is the space from which a new adventure begins. The two vehicles, which are two interpretations of the Buddha's words, have probably coexisted since the beginning of Buddhism, although the first testimonies of the Great Vehicle appear only in the 1st century BC. 
In the Lesser Vehicle, enlightenment is a state of being, whereas in the Greater Vehicle it is a reality that one discovers to a greater or lesser degree. The Greater Vehicle practitioner develops all aspects of enlightenment over a long period of time. There is no salvation in Buddhism; it is a non-theistic practice."
(Alexis Lavis in the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 03/14/2018)

Listen to the podcast in French:
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/bouddhisme-44-lavenir-appartient-a-ceux-qui-seveillent-tot

E1.7.D.1.3.a_REF1.2_PO “PROVERBS OF THE SOUL
1. The sun sings.
The heart answers.
The soul listens.
2. The heart sings.
The sun answers.
The soul listens.
3. Although some say the word "soul" is obsolete, there
is no substitute.
4. The soul is the foundation of nothingness upon
which the person is built.
5. There is no dualism of body and soul. They are two
views of one person.
6. In time the person dies, body and soul, except as a
bell reverberates long after it is struck.
7. Outside of time, however, the soul is that part of a
person that is eternal and unchanging, the same in
every being that ever was and ever will be.
8. We experience the soul in the same way that we
experience our thoughts and feelings. But unlike these
other experiences, our experience of the soul is our
window onto eternity, through which we see the
essential truth, beauty, goodness, and oneness of all
things.
9. Nothingness is the soul of Being.
10. That is why when we look for the soul we cannot
find it. But when we eliminate all else, we find
ourselves immersed in its sea.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

“SOME PEOPLE ARE A SHIP,
AND SOME A HEARTH
Some people are a ship, and some a hearth;
Some are wind, and some are summer sun;
Some are many, some are only one;
Some seek the whole while others seek the part.
But those who travel also stay at home,
While those at home are also much abroad,
For all of life must be an open road
That leads us to the place from whence we roam.
There is no difference what we do or are
That makes a difference to the naked soul
That stands before the mirror of the whole
While sailing, sailing bright beyond the bar.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

“THE OCEAN THAT WE
LIVE ON HAS NO SHORE
The ocean that we live on has no shore.
However far we sail, we reach no end.
Infinity is simply what we see,
Restoring the first meaning of "to be,"
There being only ocean, nothing more.
Yet that is what we cannot comprehend.
None long can bear that god-like ecstasy,
Imagining oneself at Being's core,
Nor long remove the multiplicity
Each mind within itself must apprehend.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E1.7.D.1.3.b_REF2_PH "WHAT IS TRANSLATED BY 'REINCARNATION' IS RIGHTLY TRANSLATED BY 'RENAISSANCE', and one may wonder to what extent reincarnation is not something of a myth; a metaphor for the continuous rebirth of the illusion that defines life before awakening (cf. The crisis analysed by the school of Paulo Alto: the more one looks for a solution in illusion, the deeper one sinks).
The egological perspective (the "I" as the basis of experience) is suspended in awakening. How can Buddhism be charitable in this case? How can I help alleviate the suffering of others when the 'I' is suspended? In Mahayana, enlightenment gives us access to the common, to the community of being of the real. We are all Buddhas, and those who have attained enlightenment can help others to 'see' the real in turn, to see the opening of the awakened dimension. The challenge is not one of capacity to be developed, it is one of relationship. In the letting go that allowed the Buddha to finally achieve enlightenment after 6 years of stubborn willpower, we sometimes see "renunciation". A more accurate translation would be the Old French "shame", the withdrawal, the humility that allows enlightenment to occur (renunciation etymologically in Sanskrit is to go back on one's word).
Awakening is the beginning of a journey to deepen existence without wanting to reach a goal. Awakening determines a regime of true humanity".
(Alexis Lavis in the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 03/14/2018)

Listen to the podcast in French:
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/bouddhisme-44-lavenir-appartient-a-ceux-qui-seveillent-tot

E1.7.D.1.3.b_REF2.1_PH A SECULAR READING TREATS REBIRTH AS A METAPHOR FOR A REPETITIVE EXISTENCE IN WHICH WE REMAIN LOCKED INTO CYCLES OF REACTIVE BEHAVIOR. In this case, the goal of the practice is to stop thinking, speaking, and acting reactively.
“Gotama came to understand how the law of karma plays out in the lives of sentient beings. But even this insight is not equivalent to the experience of awakening; it, too, according to the discourses, is a spiritual power available to those who have mastered the fourth  absorption.
On Fear and Dread demonstrated to an Indian audience of believers that Gotama gained direct insight into rebirth and karma, thereby confirming the twin pillars of Indian cosmology, before he achieved his own distinctive awakening. As Johannes Bronkhorst points out, these insights “have no obvious and intrinsic connection with liberation.” […] 
The real problem with rebirth is not suffering periodic hellish torments or other forms of acute pain in different realms of existence but undergoing the same cycle of birth and death again and again for eternity (unless one does something about it). Rebirth is a metaphor for hell. If we remove the metaphysical carapace and strip the concept down to its psychological-existential core, we arrive at repetition. This is explicit in the Pali term punabbhava, usually translated as “rebirth,” which literally means “again-becoming.” A modern translation might be “repetitive existence,” which highlights how a life conditioned by reactivity is one that goes round and round in circles. You may expend a great deal of energy and time on many different things, but at the end of the day, you find yourself back in the same state of bored rest-lessness whence you set out. You realize, with a sinking feeling, that existentially you have achieved nothing. It is as though you have been running on the spot, like a hamster on its wheel, a dog chasing its tail, without getting anywhere.
If we take the idea of rebirth literally, then the only way out of its eternal cycle is to overcome the forces of reactivity that drive the process of samsara, so that after death we will not be born again. From this orthodox perspective, the goal of our practice is the attainment of a final, transcendent nirvana. A secular reading, however, treats rebirth as a metaphor for a repetitive existence in which we remain locked into cycles of reactive behavior. In this case, the goal of the practice is to stop thinking, speaking, and acting reactively, thereby liberating ourselves to respond to life unconditioned by such impulses. Instead of lying beyond the transient, suffering world, nirvana is revealed to lie in the very heart of our own sentient experience here and now.”
(Stephen Batchelor, After Buddhism, rethinking the dharma for a secular age, 2016)

E1.7.D.1.3.b_REF2.2_PH GOTAMA HAD TO SHAPE SOMETHING THAT WAS PRIVATE, INTUITIVE, AND INCHOATE INTO A FORM THAT WAS ACCESSIBLE TO OTHERS, CAREFULLY REASONED AND PRAGMATICALLY STRUCTURED.
“On the basis of what we know about the awakening from The Noble Quest, Gotama’s primary challenge as a teacher would have been to translate his vision of the dharma as a twofold ground into the practice of the dharma as a way of life. He had to convert an insight about conditioned arising and nirvana into an ethical, contemplative, and philosophical discipline. He had to shape something that was private, intuitive, and inchoate into a form that was accessible to others, carefully reasoned and pragmatically structured. My hypothesis is that at some point he came to conceive of the twofold ground as a fourfold task.
In classical terminology, the fourfold task is this:

Suffering (dukkha) is to be comprehended (pariñña).
The arising (samudaya) is to be let go of (pahana).
The ceasing (nirodha) is to be beheld (sacchikata).
The path (magga) is to be cultivated (bhavana).

In more colloquial language, the task can be summarized as a set of
injunctions:
Embrace life.
Let go of what arises.
See its ceasing.
Act!”
(Stephen Batchelor, After Buddhism, rethinking the dharma for a secular age, 2016)

E1.7.D.1.3.b_REF3_MU RAMONES, I WANNA BE SEDATED, THE OPPOSITE OF AWAKENING!

Watch the music video on YouTube: https://youtu.be/bm51ihfi1p4

E1.7.D.1.4. HINDUHISM

E1.7.D.1.4.a. HINDUISM VS. BUDDHISM.
In what way is the concept of the self different in Hinduism and in Buddhism?
In Hinduism, the concept of the self, also known as the "Atman," refers to an individual's permanent, unchanging essence or soul that exists beyond the physical body and mind. The Atman is seen as part of the larger universal consciousness or "Brahman" and is eternal and unchanging.
In Buddhism, the concept of the self, or "Anatta," is quite different. According to Buddhist teachings, there is no permanent, unchanging self or soul. Instead, the self is seen as a collection of constantly changing physical and mental components, such as thoughts, feelings, and sensations, that arise and cease in response to conditions.
In other words, Buddhism teaches that the self is an impermanent, conditioned phenomenon that is constantly changing and lacks a fixed essence. This view is closely tied to the Buddhist doctrine of dependent origination, which holds that all things arise in dependence upon causes and conditions, and there is no permanent, independent self that exists apart from these causes and conditions.
Overall, while Hinduism and Buddhism share some common philosophical roots, their views on the self differ significantly. Hinduism posits the existence of a permanent, unchanging self or soul, while Buddhism teaches that the self is an impermanent, conditioned phenomenon that lacks a fixed essence.

E1.7.D.1.4.b. FOR DAVID LYNCH, HINDU TRANSCENDENTAL MEDITATION WAS THE GATEWAY TO AN EXPERIENCE OF HEIGHTENED IDENTITY, A SENSE OF WONDER, AND COMMUNION WITH THE WORLD. This kind of testimony is very positive to share, to show that it is possible, even if it runs the risk of making people believe that there is only one way to achieve it. There are many valid spiritual practices, religious or otherwise. Any practice aimed at excellence brings the same result. The artist, the athlete, the entrepreneur, the cook, the hiker can all achieve it equally well. But it is always through real work, which is a joy but also an effort, a long-term investment with its failures, its false starts, its discouragements and its wonders.

Watch David Lynch testemony on Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/reel/DFEnYQwTZQj/?igsh=MWR1dm5peW5jazdtdQ%3D%3D

E1.7.B.3.5.wE1.7.D.1.4.

E1.7.C.3.4.wE1.7.D.1.4.

E1.7.D.2 PLOTINUS.  In the West, presocratic philosophies were soon forgotten after their inception, with Plato's metaphysics and Christianity prevailing. This was despite the influence of Plotinism in the 3rd century, whose insights were not retained by the Church.
"Plotinus is the one who makes it possible to think of the beauty of unicity - accessible within us without need for a mirror. He enables us to conceive of immanence through a breach in Platonism. He is the father of the unspeakable, of the appreciation of the infinitely simple, which cannot be explained, but which we must embace. He is the thinker of self-forgetfulness - of that which is relinquished in favor of that which is experienced - in favor of ecstasy."

E1.7.D.2.1. PLOTINUS' CONCEPT OF UNITY REPRESENTS THE CREATIVE OUTPOURING OF BEING, TRANSCENDING CONSCIOUSNESS AND CONCEPTS. His interpretation of God is as love, with creation being free and perpetual, thus continuously rejuvenating the world. This experience is mystical, inviting the soul to partake in divine life. It facilitates the transfiguration of the individual into the universal origin from which they emerge.

E1.7.D.2.1.a. "THIS EXPERIENCE IS NOTABLY MYSTICAL RATHER THAN PHILOSOPHICAL. IT INVITES US TO PARTICIPATE, AS CREATED BEINGS, IN THE LIFE THAT RESIDES IN GOD. IT'S A TRANSFIGURATION OF THE INDIVIDUAL INTO THE UNIVERSAL, FROM WHICH HE IS A SINGULAR EMANATION.
Plotinus' god is characterized by love, superabundant grace, and overflowing fullness. This god generates space and time for the multiple existences that emanate from the One, akin to the rays of fire, the trickle of a spring, or the branches of the tree of life. Existence has no reason—it's a gratuitous gift. "The rose is without why." It's a perpetual creation of a world that would instantly collapse into nothingness if not for the divine gift that eternally revitalizes it. This is an unconscious generation, a generative fruiting that gives birth to all that exists, while always remaining in the infinite enjoyment of its fulfillment and in the infinite activity of its power."

E1.7.D.2.1.a_REF1_PH PLOTINUS DESCRIBED A DIVINE PRINCIPLE, THE ONE, WHICH DIFFERED FROM TRADITIONAL CONCEPTS OF GOD. 
Unlike the personal God, Plotinus' One is an eternal source of existence, indifferent to individuals and unaware of itself. This divine entity is an outpouring of being, creating all that exists without asking love in return. Knowledge of the One transcends philosophical rationality and requires intuitive and mystical understanding, involving the participation of the soul in divine life.
"Neither the God of the philosophers and scholars: the First Principle, the One from which, according to Plotinus, everything emanates, is a harmonious form, a perfect and self-sufficient substance, imprisoned by its own divinity and forever separated from the world, like Aristotle's God; nor the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: The God of Plotinus, the eternal source of the gift of being (of being itself and not of "beings", that is, of things as they are), is a principle but not a person: he does not call the chosen one, he does not make an alliance with the one he chooses, whom he calls by name, he and all his descendants, he does not ask for love and does not want to be loved in return, he, exclusively, out of jealousy. Indifferent to all that is merely individual, participating only in the life of the Whole without ever becoming particularised in a material body, a singular soul, a determined idea, the One of Plotinus is the effusion that gives being, eternally fruitful and unconscious of itself, "beyond being" as well as beyond consciousness and concept. Unlike the divine for the Greeks, who could not love, who suffered no lack in himself and was self-sufficient and self-contained, Plotinus' God is love, not in the sense that he demands love, like the God of the Old Testament, from the creature he calls by name, but in the sense that he is superabundant grace, overflowing fullness, thus giving rise and time to the multiple existence that emanates from the One, like the rays of fire, the trickling of the spring or the branches of the trunk of the tree of life. The gratuitousness of the gift - we cannot account for existence, and "the rose is without a reason"; the perpetual creation of a world - that of ideas or intelligible forms, as well as that of sensitive or material forms - that would immediately fall back into nothingness if the divine gift did not eternally come to revive it; unconscious generation, generative fruition that gives birth to all that is, while always remaining in the infinite enjoyment of its fulfilment, in the infinite activity of its power.
Such a language necessarily takes us beyond the limits of philosophy as rational knowledge - reason being the mind left to itself, relying only on its own principles - as Plato, then Aristotle, but also the Epicurean and Stoic systems that followed them, had defined it. Plotinus' meditation, which revolves around the One, like the field of vision that expands from the blind spot, cannot demonstrate by concept the principle on which it is based. All knowledge is, in fact, knowledge of a specific object, and therefore requires that the subject be distinguished from the object, introducing a distance, a withdrawal, between the two concepts, without which the act of designating, and then defining, would be impossible. Reason can only recognise what it places before it (this is the literal meaning of the word "object") in order to impose its own categories on it and thus constitute it as an object of knowledge. The mind cannot act in this way towards the One, of which it is in a sense the creature and emanation, since it is in the One like an effusion of primary substance, traversed from side to side by the generative flow that brings it into existence. Rational knowledge, which assumes the distance necessary for objectification, must therefore be opposed here to intuitive knowledge, that is to say, immediate and non-demonstrative, the intimate and even very intimate experience of a divine and nourishing, almost maternal effusion that keeps us in the warmth of existence, and this without reason or purpose, through the perpetual and unreasonable flow of a grace without which nothing would be. Such an experience must be said to be mystical (the word comes from the initiation into the ancient mysteries to which Plotinus himself often refers), but by no means philosophical, in the sense that it is an invitation to a kind of participation of the created soul in the uncreated life that is in God, a transfiguration of the individual in the universal of which it is a part."
(Jacques Darriulat, Plotinus, Master of Wisdom, II - From the One to the Many, 2013)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Plotin/Sagesse/Sagesse2.html

E1.7.D.2.1.b. THE CONCEPT OF AN ETERNALLY CREATIVE DIVINE POWER IS FUNDAMENTALLY AN ACT OF ABSOLUTE GIVING, ENTIRELY FREE AND SELF-SUFFICIENT, AND CANNOT ACCOMMODATE THE PRECEDENCE OF A PLAN.
"The One does not act in a way that resembles work. Rather, it is more about an effusion of enjoyment, a surplus of plenitude. It does not consciously imitate a model that it observes and follows. Instead, the activity of divine power is unconsciously exerted, manifesting as an overflow emanating from this eternal source, similar to how love radiates from the soul and body of a giver.
Creation is an absolute act of giving, entirely free and self-sufficient, and cannot accommodate the precedence of a plan. This concept of an eternally creative divine power, alien to the Greek mindset which perceives divinity only in terms of order mastery and harmony correctness, likely originates from the East, which clearly fascinated the minds of late antiquity."

E1.7.D.2.1.b_REF1_PH IN CONTRAST TO PLATO AND THE BIBLICAL GENESIS, IN WHICH CREATION IS A CONSCIOUS AND FINITE ACT, PLOTINUS BELIEVES THAT THE ONE CONTINUALLY CREATES THROUGH AN OUTBURST OF FULLNESS, WITHOUT PRECEDENT OR FINITE MODEL. 
"The going beyond the One into the multiple, which places the activity of power above the impotent perfection of the pure act, leads one to think of the life of God in terms of a perpetual creation. This is so new that it needs to be emphasised. The idea of creation is in fact foreign to Greek thought. [We have seen that Plotinus is looking for a principle that is "beyond being" and therefore truly creative, since it is posited as the principle of being itself: it is the activity of the infinite power that gives rise to existence. And although Plotinus often refers to the Timaeus, the creative activity of the One is in no way comparable to the work of the divine Demiurge, who, Plato tells us, has his eyes fixed on an intelligible model and, as a simple craftsman, is in a sense only an inferior deity. For Plotinus, nothing of the sort: the One is absolutely first, so it cannot imitate a model that would be prior to it. The One does not work, if one can put it that way (it is less a question of work than of the outpouring of a joy, of the overflowing of a fullness), consciously, by imitating a model that it has before its eyes and that it makes the rule; the activity of the divine power is, on the contrary, unconscious, it is the effect of the overflow that radiates from this eternal source, just as love radiates from the soul and body of the person who gives of himself. Creation is an act of giving that is absolute, totally free and self-sufficient: it does not allow for the existence of a plan. [...]
This idea of an eternally creative divine power, alien to the Greek mind, which recognises the divine only as the master of order and the rightness of harmony, undoubtedly came from the East and exercised an obvious fascination on the minds of late antiquity. Was Plotinus not himself born in Egypt, and did he not receive his philosophical training from Ammonios Saccas in the city of Alexandria, where all the influences of the East and the West came together? [As for the idea of divine creation, according to which being proceeds from a principle "beyond" it, if it is indeed a fundamental intuition in Plotinus' thought, it is in a completely different sense from that which inspires the biblical account. The God of Genesis created the world in six days. Then he rested, not in the sense of doing nothing, but in the sense of no longer creating: he only watched over the free development of his creation, intervening only to punish it when it strayed from its Creator, or even to destroy it when the evil was incurable, but not without giving it the possibility of rebirth. He is like a conscious artist who sees to it that his work, once abandoned to the world, is neither betrayed nor disfigured. In Plotinus, nothing of the sort: in the living hearth of the One, creation is not the first act of a long story, that of fall and redemption, but the continuing act of divine power. Plotinian creation is continuous, and without this inexhaustible outpouring of the One, all that has been given existence, incapable of maintaining itself in being by its own forces, would immediately return to non-being, like a dream that suddenly dissolves. In order for the world to be and to continue to be, it must be recreated every moment, instituted into being by the infinite power emanating from the One. Creation, according to Plotinus, is a perpetual genesis, without beginning or end. If Plotinus is not entirely alien to the wisdom of the East, if it is not impossible to find in him traces of the Christianity that was then beginning to spread in the ancient world, if the transmission of Jewish wisdom in the Latin world could not have been entirely indifferent to the Roman philosopher, the fact remains that the Enneads are first and foremost a reading and interpretation of Platonic philosophy, which is in fact a comprehensive, surpassing and uncompromising criticism of Aristotelian philosophy, which is incapable of rising to the true knowledge of the activity that is in the life of the divine."
(Jacques Darriulat, Plotinus, Master of Wisdom, II - From the One to the Many, 2013)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Plotin/Sagesse/Sagesse2.html

E1.7.D.2.2. WE CANNOT IGNORE OUR MATERIAL OR PSYCHOLOGICAL CONDITIONING, BUT NEITHER CAN WE REDUCE OUR LIVES TO ANALYZABLE, MATHEMATICAL AND QUANTIFIABLE ASPECTS.
The unspeakable disrupts the familiar, confronting us with a mystery that we cannot incorporate into our daily lives. Consequently, our inner life will always embody conflict: it is neither pure ecstasy, pure reason, nor pure animality.

E1.7.D.2.2.a. "IGNORING OUR MATERIAL OR PSYCHOLOGICAL CONDITIONING LEADS TO SELF-MYSTIFICATION. There's a subtle yet equally tragic mystification in believing human life can be simplified to its analyzable, quantifiable, or expressible aspects.
This puts humans in a nearly untenable position. The unspeakable disrupts our comfortable, everyday life. We cannot fully immerse ourselves in it or find satisfaction in it. However, confronting this mystery is not a permanent solution. We'll soon have to revert to the comforting reality of everyday life. Our internal lives will never be completely harmonized; they will never be solely ecstasy, reason, or animality."

E1.7.D.2.2.a_REF1_PH PLOTINUS' MYSTICISM IS NOT AN ESCAPE FROM REALITY, BUT A RECOGNITION OF ALL DIMENSIONS OF HUMAN EXPERIENCE, INCLUDING ITS MYSTERIOUS AND TRANSCENDENT ASPECTS. "Seventeen centuries now separate us from Plotinus. And modern history is accelerating, taking us inexorably away from the sage who died alone in a villa in Campania. A great gulf has opened up between us and him. And yet, when we read certain pages of the Enneads, something awakens in us, an echo resonates deep within us. Bergson was right when he spoke of the call of the mystics: "They ask for nothing and yet they receive. They do not need to exhort, they only need to exist, their existence is a call". 
But modern man is wary of Plotinus' call. Seductive as a siren's song, is it not deceptive and dangerous? Modern man is afraid of being deceived. Whether he is a Marxist, a positivist, a Nietzschean or a Christian, he rejects the mirage of the "pure spiritual". He has discovered the power of matter, the power of that whole inferior world which Plotinus considered weak, powerless, close to nothingness. [...]

That Plotinus refuses, if he wishes, to identify himself with the "composite", with the "human animal". Modern man knows that Plotinus draws from this very composite the energy that sustains his spiritual activity. He discovered the power of social, psychological, biological and material infrastructures. Marxism and psychoanalysis have taught him the mechanism of mystification: the man who believes that he is detached from the human condition is merely the plaything of inferior motivations and wants to escape the demands of work and action. 
There is something healthy in this criticism of the "purely spiritual". For too long the disguises used to protect against class prejudice or psychological deficiencies have been mistaken for authentic values. But I think I have shown in this book that, despite certain formulations of Plotinus, his mysticism as he experienced it does not seem to be a "flight reaction". He is as intensely present to others as he is to the Spirit. [...]
No doubt we are deluding ourselves if we ignore our material, psychological or spiritual conditioning. But there is an equally tragic, if more subtle, delusion in thinking that human life can be reduced to its analysable, mathematical, quantifiable or expressible aspects. [...]
Man is thus in an almost untenable position. The unspeakable breaks through the familiar and comfortable fabric of everyday life. Man cannot, therefore, shut himself up in it, live in it completely, be satisfied with it. But if he dares to face the mystery, he will not be able to maintain this attitude: he will have to return quickly to the reassuring evidence of everyday life. The inner life of man will never be completely unified; it will never be pure ecstasy, pure reason, or pure animality. [...]

Modern man is even more divided within himself than the man of Plotinus. But he can still hear the call of Plotinus. It will not be a matter of slavishly repeating, in the middle of the 20th century, the spiritual journey described in the Enneads. That would be impossible and illusory. But it will be to embrace, with the same courage as Plotinus, all the dimensions of human experience and all that is mysterious, inexpressible and transcendent".
(Pierre Hadot, Plotinus or the simplicity of vision, 1997)

E1.7.D.2.2.b. "WE ARE UNCONSCIOUS OF THAT HIGHER LEVEL OF OURSELVES, WHICH IS OUR EGO IN DIVINE THOUGHT. Or better yet, this is the divine thought of our ego, even though it's a part - the higher part - of our soul."

E1.7.D.2.2.b_REF1_PH "HERE WE FIND PLOTINUS' CENTRAL INTUITION: THE HUMAN SELF IS NOT IRREMEDIABLY SEPARATE FROM THE ETERNAL MODEL OF THE SELF AS IT EXISTS IN DIVINE THOUGHT. This true self, this self in God, is within us. In certain special experiences, which raise the level of our inner tension, we identify with Him, we become this Eternal Self; we are moved by His ineffable beauty and, identifying with Him, we identify with the divine thought itself in which He is contained. 
These special experiences therefore reveal to us that we do not cease, that we have never ceased to be in contact with our true Self. We are always in God: 

"And if we must have the audacity to say with greater clarity what seems right to me, contrary to the opinion of others, then our soul has not sunk completely into the sensible, but there is something of it that always remains in the spiritual world (IV 8, 8, 1.)".

If this is the case, then everything is in us and we are in everything. Our self extends from God to matter because we are up there at the same time as we are down here. 
As Plotinus says, using a Homeric expression, "our head remains fixed above the heavens". But immediately a doubt arises:

"If we have such great things within us, why are we not aware of them, why do we mostly remain without exercising these higher activities? Why do some people never exercise them? (V 1, 12.1.)"

Plotinus answers immediately: 

"It is not that everything in the soul is conscious, but that it reaches 'us' by reaching consciousness. If an activity of the soul is carried out without communicating anything to the consciousness, this activity does not reach the whole soul. It follows that "we" do not know anything about this activity, because "we" are connected with the consciousness, and "we" are not a part of the soul, but the whole soul (V 1, 12, 5.)".

We are therefore unaware of this higher level of ourselves which is our self in divine thought, or rather which is the divine thought of our self, even though it is a part - the higher part - of our soul".
(Pierre Hadot, Plotinus or the simplicity of vision, 1997)

E1.7.D.2.2.b_REF1.1_PH PLOTIN DESCRIBES CONSCIOUSNESS AS AN INTERMEDIARY BETWEEN TWO SHADOW ZONES: THE UNCONSCIOUS LIFE IN GOD AND THE UNCONSCIOUS LIFE OF THE BODY. He argues that in order to truly be who we are, we must become aware of these higher and lower levels of our existence.
"Can we really say that we are things of which we are unconscious? And how can we account for this unconsciousness? [Consciousness is a point of view, a center of perspective. For us, our self coincides with this point, from which a perspective on the world or on our soul opens up: in other words, for a psychic activity to be ours, it must be conscious. Consciousness - and our self - is therefore located, like an intermediate environment or center, between two shadows that unfold above and below it: the silent and unconscious life of our self in God, the silent and unconscious life of the body. We can discover the existence of these upper and lower levels through reason. But we will not truly be what we are until we become aware of them. If we could become aware of the life of the spirit, perceive the pulsations of this eternal life that is within us, just as we can perceive the pulsations of our heart of flesh by paying attention, then the life of the spirit would enter the field of our consciousness, it would truly become ourselves, it would truly be our life. [...]

"If there is to be an awareness of the transcendent things so present [at the summit of the soul], then the consciousness must turn inward and direct its attention to the transcendent. It is like a man waiting for a voice he wants to hear: he would dismiss all other voices, he would strain his ear toward the sound he prefers above all others to find out if it is approaching; in the same way, we must exclude the perceptible sounds unless it is necessary to keep the soul's power of consciousness pure and ready to hear the sounds that come from above. (V 1, 12,12.)" [...]"
(Pierre Hadot, Plotinus or the simplicity of vision, 1997)

E1.7.D.2.2.c. “PLOTINUS DOES NOT ADVOCATE FOR THE ABOLITION OF INDIVIDUALITY IN AWAKENING. Rather, the Plotinian experience reveals that our personal identity presupposes a profound absolute. This absolute serves as both the source and the manifestation of our identity.
This identity, the unity of the observer and the observed, is akin to a self-realization and self-awareness. Yet, it should be cautious not to stray from its essence due to an excessive desire to be self-aware. (V 8, 11, 23.)”
“The Plotinian inner experience uncovers distinct levels of our spiritual life. However, these levels do not negate each other. Instead, their totality and interplay constitute the inner life.”

E1.7.D.2.2.c._REF1_PH WE ARE, IRREMEDIABLY, CONSCIOUS AND SPLIT BEINGS "But these states [of communion with the One] cannot last: we are, irremediably, conscious and double beings. We want to seize these moments of unity, to fix them, to preserve them, but they escape us at the very moment when we think we are holding on to them: we fall back from presence to memory. 
Therefore, we can only ascend to the spiritual life through a kind of continual to and fro between the discontinuous levels of our inner tension. Turning our attention inward, we must prepare ourselves to experience the unity of the Spirit, then fall back to the level of consciousness to recognize that it is "we" who are "out there," and lose consciousness again to find our true self in God. More precisely, at the moment of ecstasy, we will have to resign ourselves to retaining only a confused awareness of ourselves: 

"This identity [of the one who sees and what he sees] is, in a sense, an understanding and awareness of the self, which must be careful not to stray from itself through an excessive desire for self-knowledge. (V 8, 11, 23.)" [Plotinus' inner experience thus reveals to us the discontinuous levels of our spiritual life. Dispersed in the worries and concerns of everyday life, we can first concentrate inwardly, directing our attention to things above, regaining awareness of ourselves. We will then discover that we can sometimes rise to a more perfect inner unity in which we reach our true living and real self in divine thought. Having reached this level, we may touch a state of indescribable oneness in which we mysteriously coincide with the absolute simplicity from which all life, all thought, and all consciousness emanates. 
But these levels do not cancel each other out: it is their totality, their interaction, that constitutes the inner life. Plotinus does not invite us to abolish personality in nirvana. On the contrary, Plotinus' experience shows us that our personal identity presupposes an inexpressible Absolute, of which it is both an emanation and an expression."
(Pierre Hadot, Plotinus or the simplicity of vision, 1997)

E1.7.D.2.2.d. LIVING IN A STATE OF DUPLICATION, CALCULATION, AND PLANNING, HUMAN CONSCIOUSNESS BELIEVES THAT DISCOVERY ONLY FOLLOWS EFFORT.
“Plotinus, as Goethe said, dared to "believe in simplicity". He viewed life as a simple and immediate formative activity, beyond our analyses, a totality present all at once, inwardly focused, a Form shaping itself, knowledge that effortlessly achieves perfection.
This Plotinian approach exposes a critique of reflection and human reason. Living in a state of duplication, calculation, and project planning, human consciousness believes that discovery only follows search, that construction only results from assembling parts, that achieving a goal necessitates taking the means. It introduces mediation everywhere. Life, which finds without searching, invents the whole before the parts, and simultaneously serves as the end and means, in a word, is immediate and simple, therefore, eludes reflection. To reach it, or our pure self, we must transition from reflection to contemplation.”

E1.7.D.2.2.d_REF1_PH "PRESENCE [...] What then is the relationship between the world of forms and the sensible world? If the former can be seen through the latter, if the vision of the mind can extend the vision of the eye, it is because there is continuity between the two worlds, because they are the same thing, but on two different levels. Plotinus strongly emphasizes this continuity: "How could this world exist if it were separate from the spiritual world?"
Plotinus strongly opposes the anthropomorphism of Plato's Timaeus, which is also taken up by the Gnostic sects. For him, the material world is not the work of a Creator who made it by reasoning and reflection:

"If we admit that our universe takes its being and its being as it is from another, are we then to believe that its Creator first reflected upon the earth in himself and thought that it should be in the center, then the water and the water on the earth, and all the other things in their respective order up to the sky, then all the animals and for them such and such forms specific to each, as many as there are now, and for each of them the inner parts and the outer parts, and then, after he had put all these things in order in himself, did he set to work? Such a "reflection" is not possible: where would it have come from, since he had not yet seen the things that would be the object of his reflection? And even if he had received the vision of these things from another, it would not have been possible for him to set to work with his hands and tools, as craftsmen do now. For the hands and feet come long after. The fact remains that all this was in an Other [the spiritual world]; and since, by virtue of the proximity that exists in being between realities, one in relation to the other, there is no intermediary, it is as if a trace and an image of that Other appeared instantly... 
You can give the reason why the earth is in the center of the universe and why it is spherical and why the ecliptic is as it is; but in the divine mind it was not because things had to be that way that it was decided, after deliberation, to make them that way, but because things are as they are, these things are also good. (V 8,7, 1-40.)" [...]

He dared, as Goethe said, to "believe in simplicity". For him, life is a formative activity, simple and immediate, irreducible to all our analyses, a totality that is there all at once, internal to itself, a form that forms itself, an immediate knowledge that effortlessly attains perfection. [In this Plotinian approach we find a critique of human reflection and reason analogous to the critique of reflection and consciousness provoked by the discovery of the levels of the Self. In both cases, the simplicity of life escapes the grasp of reflection. Human consciousness, which lives in duplication, calculation, and planning, believes that one can only find after one has searched, that one can only build by assembling parts, and that one can only achieve an end by taking the means to it. Everywhere it introduces mediation. The life that finds without seeking, that invents the whole before the parts, that is at once end and means, in a word, that is immediate and simple, is therefore ungraspable by reflection. To reach it, as to reach our pure self, we must leave reflection for contemplation."
(Pierre Hadot, Plotinus or the simplicity of vision, 1997)

E1.7.D.2.2.e. REMOVE THE ADDITION OF NON-BEING TO RECOVER THE WHOLE.

“By rejecting determination, you've achieved wholeness. Even before this, you were whole. However, because something extra was added to your wholeness, you became less than whole due to this addition. This addition wasn't an enhancement of your wholeness (after all, what could be added to that which is already whole?), but rather, it was an addition of non-being.”

E1.7.D.2.2.e_REF1_PH ACCORDING TO PLOTINUS, LIFE AT ALL ITS LEVELS IS CONTEMPLATION. NATURE IS THE PRODUCT OF SILENT CONTEMPLATION, AND THE SOUL, THOUGH OFTEN DIVERTED TO ACTION, ALWAYS ASPIRES TO CONTEMPLATION. Spirit is an inner vision in which there is no longer any distinction between external and internal perception. 
"It is that life itself, on all its levels, is contemplation. A violent paradox - but how Plotinian! 
Nature itself, the principle of the life of bodies, is already contemplation: 

"And if someone asked it why it produces, and it consented to pay attention to the one who questioned it and was willing to answer, it would say: 'You should not have asked me, but rather intuitively grasped by remaining silent yourself, as I myself am silent and am not in the habit of speaking. "But what was there to understand?" "That what I produce while remaining silent is what I contemplate, an object of contemplation produced by my nature, and that it is fitting for me, who myself was produced by contemplation, that my nature should be in love with contemplation. And it is that which contemplates in me that produces what I contemplate, just as surveyors draw by contemplating. But I do not draw, I only contemplate, and the lines of the bodies are formed as if they came from me". (III 8, 4, 1.) [...]

Undoubtedly, the soul often abandons contemplation for reasoning, research, and action, but it is ultimately out of love for contemplation: 

"When their power of contemplation weakens, men come to produce action, which is a shadow of contemplation and reason. Because contemplation is no longer enough for them, because of the weakness of their souls, they can no longer sufficiently grasp the object of their contemplation, and therefore they are dissatisfied; then, because they still desire to see this object, they turn to action in order to see with their eyes what they can no longer see with their minds. What is certain is that when they produce, they also want to see, contemplate and perceive this object (III 8.4, 31.)". [...]

"If we were to compare the Spirit [with which the world of forms is identified] to a sphere that lives a multiple and varied life, or to a reality made up only of faces and radiant with all these living faces... by representing it in this way, we would be looking at it from the outside, like one person looking at another. But in fact, having become spirit itself, one must become vision itself. (VI 7, 15, 24.)"

There is no longer any distinction between external perception and internal perception. The level of reflection and perception has been transcended to reach that of intuition and contemplation. One then experiences that life is direct contemplation of oneself. [...]

"He liked to make offerings and would go around the temples on new moons and holidays. One day he asked Plotinus to go with him. Plotinus replied, "It is for the gods to come to me, not for me to go to them. In what sense he spoke these words so haughtily, we could not understand, and we did not dare to ask him. (V. P. 10, 33.)"

The small group of disciples seems appalled by these words, which show contempt for traditional forms of worship. But how can we not recognize in them Plotinus' sense of the divine presence? To find God, it is not necessary to go to the temples where he is said to dwell. It is not necessary to travel to reach his presence. But one must become a living temple in which the divine presence can manifest itself. [Or, having become able to walk with it, better still, having attained the Whole itself, you will no longer seek anything; or, having renounced it, you will turn away from it towards something else and you will fall back, no longer seeing what is present to you because you are looking towards something else. But if you are in the case of "you will no longer seek," how will you experience it? Should it not be said that you have entered the All and have not remained in any of its parts, and that you no longer say of yourself: "So far it is I (1)". Rejecting determination, you became Everything. And yet, even before that, you were everything, but because something was added to you in addition to everything, you became less than everything by that very addition. For this addition was not an addition belonging to the order of Everything (what would you add to that which is Everything?), but an addition that was an addition of non-being (2). Having become someone, and precisely by adding non-being, you are no longer the Whole, unless you reject non-being. So you expand yourself by rejecting everything that is other than the Whole, and if you reject that, the Whole will be present to you. But if it is present to you when you reject it, and if it does not appear to you when you remain with particular things, it is because the Whole does not need to come to be present: if it is not present, it is because you have distanced yourself. And if you have distanced yourself, it is not that you have distanced yourself from it - for it is always present - but that, while it is present, you have turned in the opposite direction".

Life is a presence that always warns us. It is pre-existence; it is always already there. How could this be better expressed than by repeating Pascal's famous thought: "You would not be looking for me if you had not already found me." 

Notes:
(1) Literally, "I am of such and such a determined magnitude,. 
(2) Spinoza's axiom (Letter to J. Jelles, in Spinoza, Œuvres complètes, Paris, Gallimard, Bibliothèque de la Pléiade, 1954, p. 1287), "Omnis determinatio negatio est" [To determine everything is to reduce it], is fully valid in the Plotinian universe.
(Pierre Hadot, Plotinus or the simplicity of vision, 1997)

E1.7.D.2.2.f. "THERE ARE ETERNALLY, TWO LEVELS AND TWO MODES OF THE MIND, THAT OF THE LOVING MIND, THAT OF THE THINKING MIND."

E1.7.D.2.2.f_REF1_PH FOR PLOTIN, THE MIND IN ITS BIRTH STATE IS IN DIRECT CONTACT WITH THE GOOD, CHARACTERIZED BY AN INNOCENCE OF LOVE AND PLEASURE. In its final state, the mind becomes determined and systematic, losing direct experience of the good to intellectual knowledge.
"Thus, the mind, in its nascent state, is in direct contact with the good, through a kind of 'touch'. Plotinus says of this mind, which is not yet mind, that it is "the mind filled with love, senseless because it is drunk with nectar, blossoming in enjoyment because of the state of intoxication in which it finds itself. This is probably an allusion to the myth of the birth of love in Plato's Symposium, where the father of love, Poros, sleeps in the garden of Zeus, drunk with nectar. If the nascent spirit is drunk with love and joy, it is because it is in direct contact with the Good, "living close to it," without the mediation of thought and forms. In its final state, on the contrary, the spirit will be fully determined and deployed: it will have produced, in its movement of self-consciousness, the multiplicity and systematic totality of forms. But then the thinking mind will no longer have the experience of loving contact with the Good: it will know it only intellectually, that is, in the duality of object and subject, in the multiplicity of forms. Thus, there are eternally two levels and two modes of mind, that of loving mind and that of thinking mind. [...]

The Platonic experience is constantly expressed in terms of light, radiance, transparency, clarity, and illumination. Should we conclude from this that it ignores the darkness and the nights of the spirit that characterize Christian mysticism? Insofar as the inner emptiness and austerity ("cut off all things") can appear to the soul as a kind of night, because it has the impression of losing the light to which it is accustomed, we must say that there is also a mystical night in Plotinus. But in so far as the night of the Christian mystics corresponds to the exercise of faith, even more, to the suffering of the crucified Christ who feels abandoned by the Father, it is all too obvious that all this is missing from Plotinus. Plotinus' spirituality is essentially luminous and serene. It is in peace and gentleness that the Plotinian soul "cuts off all things" and thus becomes a pure receptive capacity, waiting to be invaded by the presence of the good that is always already present."
(Pierre Hadot, Plotinus or the simplicity of vision, 1997)

E1.7.D.2.2.g. A METAMORPHOSIS OF VISION.
”Plotinian virtue embodies a straightforward spiritual stance—it involves a constant focus on the divine and an ongoing acknowledgment of God's presence. This might be described as a metamorphosis of vision. Plotinian virtue pursues the divine presence in and around itself, and through all things. Due to this practice, union with God becomes continuous.”

E1.7.D.2.2.g_REF1_PH FOR PLOTIN, VIRTUE IS BORN FROM THE VISION OF THE BEAUTY OF INTELLIGENCE AND THE JOY OF DIVINE UNION, AND IT PURIFIES THE SOUL TO CONTINUALLY SUPPORT THAT UNION. "Such is the journey of the soul. Lifted up to the One by the free and gracious movement of the One, it could not remain on the summit of itself. It fell back. But having returned to practical life, to reflection, to consciousness, it finds in itself, here below, that trace of God, virtue, which makes it similar to God. Through the practice of virtue, the soul can once again ascend to the spirit, that is, to a purely spiritual life. Having reached this perfection, virtue becomes wisdom, it becomes a stable state from which the soul can once again be disposed to divine union. [...]

Virtue can only be born in the soul when it has glimpsed, even for a moment, the beauty of the intellect, when it has tasted, even for a flash, the joy of divine union. No doubt, because the soul is not sufficiently purified, it cannot endure these states. But the main task of virtue will be to purify the soul so that it can endure divine union continuously. [...]

The Plotinian virtue, then, consists in an extremely simple spiritual attitude [...] it is simply a constant attention to the divine, a constant practice of the presence of God. One can speak, if one wishes, of a metamorphosis of the gaze. In itself and around itself, through all things, the Plotinian virtue wants to see only the divine presence. Thanks to this practice, union with God becomes continuous. [...]"
(Pierre Hadot, Plotinus or the simplicity of vision, 1997)

E1.7.D.2.3. THE INITIATE'S SOUL IS TAKEN OVER BY THE INFINITE AND ABANDONS THOUGHT.
Plotinian initiation seeks to transcend intelligence by intuitively merging with the divine life within. In this fusion, consciousness is nearly lost, reduced to intuitive knowledge.

E1.7.D.2.3.a. “FAR FROM ACKNOWLEDGING ITS OWN POWER TO CONCEIVE, THE INITIATE'S SOUL YIELDS ITSELF TO THE INFINITE THAT SURROUNDS IT, FORSAKING THOUGHT IN ITS TRANSFIGURED INTUITION. Plotinian initiation aspires to transcend intelligence through an intuitive fusion that extinguishes self-consciousness.
This allows the soul, occasionally, to partake in the divine life, for this life also resides within the soul. The soul receives being by emanation from the primary source and can merge with it in a fusion where consciousness is nearly lost. This reduces consciousness to an immediate sense of intuitive knowledge, unable to mediate what it experiences through conceptual linking.
To elevate this experience to the level of consciousness, it must be temporarily left. However, not to abandon it, but to subsequently return in a rhythmic back-and-forth movement that mystically drives Plotinian ecstasy.”

E1.7.D.2.3.a_REF1_PH FOR PLOTINUS, THE SOUL CAN, ON RARE OCCASIONS, PARTICIPATE IN THE DIVINE LIFE THROUGH AN INTUITIVE AND FUSIONAL KNOWLEDGE, WITHOUT IMAGE OR REPRESENTATION, which requires a mystical to and fro between union and self-knowledge.
"In his Master's Life, which he has left us, Porphyry tells us that Plotinus was given to know such perfect bliss on several occasions: Following the path prescribed by Plato in the Symposium, he saw the God who has neither form nor essence, being beyond intelligence and the intelligible. It is this God that I myself have approached and with whom I have united only once, in my sixty-eighth year. Plotinus, for his part, "had the vision of the goal very close. For him, the end and the goal was intimate union with the God who is above all things. While I was with him [Porphyry remained with Plotinus for six years, from 263 to 268], he attained this goal four times, thanks to an ineffable act and not by force" (Life of Plotinus, § 23). Such ecstasy, in which the intellect is lost, goes beyond the limits of philosophy as defined by Plato and Aristotle. Far from recalling the power of conception within it, the soul of the initiate surrenders to the infinite that invades it and to the intuition that transfigures it, renouncing thought. The Socratic aporia aimed to provoke the concept, to shake the mind out of its torpor by adhering to the prevailing opinion or by naively believing in the sensible appearance. The Plotinian initiation, on the other hand, claims to transcend intelligence through a kind of intuitive fusion in which self-consciousness is abolished. Just as the One is beyond being, so the soul's communion with life, whose first principle is the Source, is beyond the "know thyself" that Plato had nevertheless placed at the foundation of all philosophical knowledge. [...]

The self-awareness of the mind, which Plato had made the very foundation of rationality, is annihilated in the soul that rises to the first principle. And while Aristotle defined the life of God as “thought of thought”, Plotinus, on the contrary, thinks of it as generative unconsciousness, a source devoid of thought as of consciousness from which Being eternally springs, that is to say, not created and determined things (in the manner of the god of Genesis), but Being itself, which means that all things that are, whatever their own being, also participate in what we call - rather enigmatically - “existence”. This is why ecstasy, which merges with the power that is in god, must abandon consciousness as well as intelligence, unworthy of the life of the first principle, which is beyond reason. [...]
It is thus possible for the soul to participate, on rare occasions, in the life that is in god, precisely because this life is also in it, which receives Being by emanation from the first source, and to unite with it in a fusion where consciousness is almost lost, reduced then to the immediate feeling of intuitive knowledge and incapable of mediating what it experiences through the sequence of concepts: “This identity [of the one who sees and what he sees] is, in a way, a grasping and a consciousness of the self, which must be careful not to stray from itself through an excessive desire for self-awareness” (V, 8, 11). All consciousness is in fact a doubling – like the two mirrors that the Platonic dialogue reciprocally places in abysses (First Alcibiades) – and therefore also division and separation: I can only conceive of what I place before me, and thus define as the object of my knowledge. Such a division – which is the condition of consciousness and like the critical distance that allows thought to perceive itself, to know itself – cannot take place in the One, in which everything merges into an ultimate principle that is “beyond Being”, that is to say, at the source from which Being itself comes. The fusional knowledge of the first principle is thus without image or representation, without thought or concept. Pour élever cette expérience à la dimension de la conscience, il faut donc en sortir, non toutefois pour s’en détourner, mais pour y revenir ensuite par un mouvement de va-et-vient qui rythme mystiquement l’extase plotinienne : « S’il écarte, bien qu’elle soit belle, cette image de lui-même uni au dieu, et qu’il parvient à être un avec l’esprit, sans plus se dédoubler, il est en même temps Un et Tout, avec ce dieu qui est présent dans le silence. Il est avec lui autant qu’il le peut et qu’il le veut. Mais si ensuite il se retourne pour devenir deux, il reste près du dieu, dans la mesure où il demeure pur, de sorte qu’il peut lui être présent de nouveau, si à nouveau il se retourne vers le dieu. Dans ce retournement, il gagne ceci : au début, il a conscience de lui-même, tant qu’il demeure différent du dieu ; mais lorsqu’il revient en hâte vers l’intérieur, il est dans un état de totalité et, laissant la conscience en arrière de crainte de rester différent du dieu, il est un, dans cet état transcendant (V, 8, 11)."
(Jacques Darriulat, Plotinus, Master of Wisdom, II - From the One to the Many, 2013)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Plotin/Sagesse/Sagesse2.html

E1.7.D.2.3.a_REF2_PO "EXULTATION IS THE GOING 
Of an inland soul to sea -
Past the Houses -
Past the Headlands -
Into deep Eternity -

Bred as we, among the mountains, 
Can the sailor understand 
The divine intoxication 
Of the first league out from Land ?"
(Emily Dickinson, 1860)

E1.7.D.2.3.b. “WHEN EVERYTHING IS SIMPLE, HOW CAN ONE DEVELOP A DISCOURSE? All it requires is a touch of intelligence. When we are in the act of touching, we neither have the power nor the time to express anything. It's only afterwards that we will form logical arguments about what we have touched. Illuminated, the soul possesses what it was in search of. This is the true goal for the soul: to touch this light and to see that very thing by which it sees. For it must contemplate that by which it has been illuminated, just as the sun is not seen by any other light. So, how is this to be achieved? Remove all things”

E1.7.D.2.3.b_REF1_PH "WHICH IS TO SAY THAT THE GOD OF PLOTINUS IS NOT PURE INTELLIGENCE - LIKE THE GOD OF PLATO OR ARISTOTLE - BUT PURE PRESENCE, and that presence diminishes in intensity when consciousness, separating itself to become autonomous, sets up presence as its re-presentation (which means presence fallen and "bent" under the gaze of reflection). It is natural, then, that unlike the dialectical progression, which arrives gradually, that is to say, by following the articulations of reason, at the knowledge of its foundation, the knowledge of the divine, according to Plotinus, is achieved "suddenly" (exaiphnês), by the miracle of an encounter that cannot be explained by reason, in a kind of mystical marriage of the created with the uncreated: "If the soul has the good fortune to meet him, if he comes to her, even better: if he appears to her present, when she has turned away from present things [...] and suddenly sees him appear within her (for there is nothing between them and they are no longer two, but both are one: in fact, one can no longer distinguish him as long as he is there: the image of this is lovers and the beloved on earth who wish to merge together), at that moment the soul is no longer aware of her body or that she is in this body [...] Having sought him, when she has found him, the soul is no longer aware of her body or of her being in this body [...]....] Having sought it, when it is present, it goes to meet it, and it is He that it looks at instead of itself, and it does not have the leisure to see who it is that it looks at. As for the object of her vision, the seer, at that moment, neither sees it nor distinguishes it, and she does not realise that they are two, but has become in a different way and is no longer herself and to herself, but belongs entirely to what is above, and having become one, belongs to the One, as if she had made her centre coincide with the centre" (VI, 9, 10). The gaze of the seer is strangely confronted with the expansive power that emanates from the One: a gaze that does not see but, on the contrary, is lost in the infinity that absorbs it, a gaze that sees without seeing that it sees: "It is He whom the soul looks at instead of itself, and it does not have the leisure to see who it is". We can get an idea of this expanded view of transcendence by looking at the mosaics of Byzantium in the Justinian era, two centuries after Plotinus' text. [...The theory of vision has always been Plato's paradigm - if not the myth - of all knowledge: Just as the eyes of the body perceive material objects in the luminous environment, so the eyes of the soul perceive and define ideas (for example, geometric forms) in the mental light that bathes the interiority of the spirit, the spiritual cave in which the soul slumbers as long as it, fascinated by sensible objects, does not perceive this clarity that emanates from itself; And just as physical vision becomes aware of itself through the light of the sensible sun, so the mind perceives the Idea in the radiance of an "intelligible sun", the source of all spiritual life and the blind spot from which memory draws the Idea that comes to mind. Plotinus subjected this metaphysics of truth to a paradigm shift: according to the Neoplatonic thinker, it is not vision that is the visible image of the intelligible act of cognition, but touch. Indeed, vision presupposes this distance - we cannot see the end of our nose except through the mediation of a mirror placed in front of us - without which knowledge cannot be achieved, but through which, according to Plotinus, the unity of the first principle is also divided into the duality of subject and object, of seer and seen, of knower and known.

Touch, on the other hand, presupposes the abolition of distance, the establishment of contact between the concepts that speculative activity separates and opposes. All the more so since, in the perfect reciprocity of touch, it is not possible to determine who is object and who is subject, since each of the two is both touching and being touched. There is then no need for light as a mediator, which is necessary for the act of seeing: touch knows immediately, by contact, without having to go through the discursiveness of reason or the representation of the imagination. And if Plotinus still resorts to the metaphor of light, it is by attributing to it a kind of tactile sensitivity, so that the knowledge of the divine is analogous to the touch of light itself: "The soul runs around all truths, and yet here it flees from these truths, in which we have a part, as soon as it wants to speak and discourse, because to speak the discourse must go from term to term. Where everything is simple, how can one unfold a discourse? But all that is needed is a noetic touch [noerôs ephapsasthai: touch by intelligence]: when you touch, at the moment of touching you have neither the power nor the leisure to say anything; only afterwards will you make syllogisms about what you have touched [...]....] Enlightened, the soul possesses what it sought, and this is the true goal for the soul: the touch of this light [ephapsasthai phôtos] and the vision of this light by this light, not by another, the vision of that by which it sees. For that by which it has been illuminated is what it must contemplate, just as the sun is not seen by another light. So how can we achieve this? Cut away everything (aphele panta)" (V, III, 17)."
(Jacques Darriulat, Plotinus, Master of Wisdom, II - From the One to the Many, 2013)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Plotin/Sagesse/Sagesse2.html

E1.7.D.2.3.c. “WHILE IT'S TRUE THAT THIS STATE OF ETERNITY DOESN'T LAST LONG, SOULS BOUND TO MORTAL BODIES QUICKLY BECOME TAINTED BY FATIGUE. This fatigue is perhaps what best distinguishes the created from the Uncreated. These souls soon turn away from the One, becoming lost in the labyrinth of both the sensible and the intelligible. Consequently, they live in exile from themselves, or in other words, from their principle.”

E1.7.D.2.3.c_REF1_PH "AT THE POINT OF CONTACT WHERE THE I, IN ITS ASCENT, TOUCHES THE INFINITE THAT IS IN GOD, that is, the generative activity, the perpetual giving, whose first principle is the Source, it finds itself deified and as if drawn into a mystical dance, like the choreutes dancing in the circle of the orchestra around the coryphaeius who leads them: "He who has seen knows what I am saying, and how the soul lives another life, going towards the One and participating in it, so disposed now that it knows that it is there, like the choreletes dancing in a circle around the Coryphaeus of authentic life, and knowing that it needs nothing more, but that, on the contrary, it is necessary to divest oneself of everything and remain in Him alone, cutting off all that is superfluous around us, so that we can't wait to leave here and are irritated to be bound to anything else" (VI, 9, 8). The soul, liberated by ecstasy, becomes divine and, as if captured by the One, revolves around Him in a sacred dance: "When it knows that the centre is the origin of the circle, it will revolve around the centre from which it came; it will cling to it; it will gather towards that point towards which all souls should tend, but towards which only the souls of the gods tend eternally. In moving towards Him, souls are gods. For to be a god is to be united with the One" (VI, 9, 8). And if this perfect union or divinisation happens "suddenly" (exaiphnês), it is because it is accomplished outside of all time, outside of space as well as time, in the eternity of the superabundant life that emanates from the One. It is true that this eternity does not last long, the souls attached to the mortal body soon get tired (tiredness is perhaps what best distinguishes the created from the uncreated) (1), they soon turn away from the One and turn towards the many, they get lost in the labyrinth of the sensible as well as the intelligible, and once again live in exile from themselves, that is, from their principle".
(Jacques Darriulat, Plotinus, Master of Wisdom, II - From the One to the Many, 2013)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Plotin/Sagesse/Sagesse2.html

E1.5.D.1.3.d.iii.wE1.7.D.2.3.c. THE FAILURE OF THOSE WHO CANNOT FORGET THEMSELVES OUT OF PRIDE

E1.7.D.2.4. "THE TRUE PURPOSE OF DISCOURSE ACCORDING TO PLOTINUS IS TO ELEVATE US PARADOXICALLY TO AN AWARENESS OF THE UNSPEAKABLE".

E1.7.D.2.4_REF1_PH "STRANGE PHILOSOPHY THAT LEADS TO THE ABANDONMENT OF PHILOSOPHY! The discourse of Plotinian meditation develops only to lead us to the silence into which the intellect must abandon itself, since here nothing can be said or even conceived. The true purpose of discourse, according to Plotinus, is paradoxically to bring us to the awareness of the unspeakable, and we learn to speak only in order to know what we must keep silent, which is the very source of all authentic speech, but which we can never chain to the order of our reasons: "When you speak his name or think of him, leave everything else; disregard everything; let him alone remain (monon auton). Seek nothing to add; but ask yourselves whether, in the thought you have of him, there is anything left which you have not yet put aside from him. For you may arrive at a principle of which it is no longer possible to say or conceive anything else; situated on the highest plane, he alone is truly free, because he is not a slave to himself; and he alone is truly himself, while each of the other beings is at once himself and something else" (VI, 8, 21, in fine). And Plotinus wrote again a little further on, and along the same lines: “If we see him, we will no longer dare to say that he is by accident, we will not even dare to utter a word: mental stupor (ekplageiê) would follow such audacity. As soon as we rush towards him, we cannot say where he is; he appears everywhere before the eyes of our soul; wherever it turns its gaze, it sees him, unless it abandons the divine to look elsewhere, and no longer thinks of him” (VI, 8, 19, l. 6-12).”
(Jacques Darriulat, Plotinus, Master of Wisdom, II - From the One to the Many, 2013)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Plotin/Sagesse/Sagesse2.html

E1.7.D.2.5. THE INITIATED SOUL MUST TRANSITION FROM ECSTASY TO ATTAIN SELF-CONSCIOUS KNOWLEDGE. THIS REQUIRES PHILOSOPHICAL REFLECTION AND THE EXERCISE OF REASON. Unlike the Gnostics, Plotinus asserts that we cannot entirely shed our human condition to reach God. Moving towards the One is a challenging endeavor that demands philosophical wisdom and dialectical discipline. The soul ascends to the inconceivable through conceptual work, not mystical rapture. While philosophy may push its own boundaries, it does not abandon reasoning.

E1.7.D.2.5_REF1_PH ACCORDING TO PLOTINUS, THE HUMAN SOUL CANNOT REMAIN IN THE ABSOLUTE OF THE FIRST PRINCIPLE AND MUST TURN TOWARDS A CONSCIOUS KNOWLEDGE OF ITSELF THROUGH PHILOSOPHICAL REFLECTION AND PLATONIC DIALECTICS. Philosophy, even if it tends towards its limits, remains indispensable for the attainment of an intuitive and fusional knowledge of the divine life.
"The soul, having reached the summit of its initiation, cannot establish itself in the absolute of the first principle: it must emerge, not only because of its impotence [...] but also out of necessity, since the very movement of emanation forces the creature to tear itself away from the unconsciousness of ecstasy and to turn towards a self-aware science, the "know thyself" of discursive knowledge, the progressive development of Platonic dialectic. There is, according to Plotinus, a necessity specific to the human condition, which is also a necessity for philosophical reflection and the exercise of reason: "Against the Gnostics, who have the presumption to believe that the regenerated man can strip himself of all traces of this world, join God and become equal to him [...], Plotinus defends himself against the Gnostics, who have the presumption to believe that the regenerated man can strip himself of all traces of this world, join God and become equal to him [...]....] Plotinus maintains that we cannot completely escape our condition, and that the movement towards the One, which is a return to the principle, is always, apart from rare ecstasies, a difficult effort thwarted by the inertia inherent in all creatures. If we try too hard to be an angel, we would become a beast: philosophical wisdom and dialectical discipline are the necessary path that leads to that beyond discourse where the soul is lost in the One, in a non-reflective knowledge that is an amorous fusion and no longer a demonstration by concept. Plotinus, unlike the mystics, never asked us to economise on intelligence: According to him, the soul does not move towards God by renouncing reflection, but on the contrary by a very rigorous dialectical reasoning that leads to the point where discourse must give way to the ineffable, where discursive knowledge must be lost in an intuitive and fusional knowledge of the life that is in God. It is through the work of the concept that we ascend to the inconceivable, and not through a rapture that would be given to us as a grace and would distinguish us from the rest of humanity. Even if philosophy with Plotinus tends towards its own limit, it remains a philosophy and does not give up thinking".
(Jacques Darriulat, Plotinus, Master of Wisdom, II - From the One to the Many, 2013)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Plotin/Sagesse/Sagesse2.html


E1.7.D.2.5_REF1.1_PH PLOTINUS SUGGESTS THAT THE ASCENT TO THE ONE REQUIRES RIGOROUS DIALECTICAL REFLECTION, IN WHICH DISCURSIVE KNOWLEDGE GIVES WAY TO INTUITIVE AND FUSIONAL KNOWLEDGE, WITHOUT RENOUNCING INTELLIGENCE.
"But this dazzling richness is also, and necessarily, an increasing fall and decline: what emanates from the One cannot be the One itself, for then it would split and fall into multiplicity itself. The One cannot be confused with what it generates, and it can only generate lesser realities in which the intensity of existence progressively diminishes as they move away from the generating source. Thus, the expansion of divine energy eventually exhausts itself at the boundaries of creation and sinks into the nothingness of pure matter, like a light gradually dying in darkness. All beings that emanate from the One thus suffer from being separated from the principle that brought them into existence, and like Ulysses trying to return to Ithaca, they are tormented by nostalgia for their true home, striving to tear themselves away from the here and turn to the "there" from which they came. The descent, which emanates from the One and generates by emanation the totality of what is (by virtue of the nature of the One, which cannot be divided), thus corresponds to the loving ascent of the exiled souls, who, according to their degree of perfection, strive to rejoin the Father who begot them. Plotinus' universe is thus animated, like a great animal, by a dual movement of expansion and contraction, of diffusion (procession) and convergence (ascension), which gives it movement and life. Therefore, the soul that has reached the summit of its initiation cannot establish its abode in the Absolute of the First Principle: It must emerge from it, not only because of its impotence (fatigue distracts it from the divine, and the heaviness within it opposes the supreme grace that is in God), but also out of necessity, because the very movement of emanation compels the creature to tear itself away from the unconsciousness of ecstasy and turn to a self-aware science, the "know thyself" of discursive knowledge, the progressive development of Platonic dialectic. There is, according to Plotinus, a necessity specific to the human condition, which is also a necessity for philosophical reflection and the exercise of reason: against the Gnostics, who have the presumption to believe that the regenerated man can strip himself of all traces of this world, join God and become equal to him (they believe, writes Plotinus, that one escapes the human condition by flying close to God on the wings of dreams": II, 9, 9), Plotinus argues that we cannot completely escape our condition, and that the movement toward the One, which is a return to principle, is always, except in rare ecstasies, a difficult effort thwarted by the inertia inherent in all creatures. If we try too hard to be an angel, we would become a beast: philosophical wisdom and dialectical discipline are the necessary path that leads to that beyond discourse where the soul is lost in the One, in a non-reflective knowledge that is an amorous fusion and no longer a demonstration by concept. Plotinus, unlike the mystics, never asked us to economize on intelligence: in his view, the soul does not move toward God by renouncing reflection, but on the contrary through a very rigorous dialectical reasoning that leads to the point where discourse must give way to the ineffable, where discursive knowledge must be lost in an intuitive and fusional knowledge of the life that is in God. It is through the work of the concept that we rise to the unimaginable, and not through a rapture that would be given to us as a grace and would distinguish us from the rest of humanity. Even if philosophy, according to Plotinus, tends to its own limits, it remains philosophy and does not give up thinking: "To believe that one is already above intelligence is to fall below intelligence" (II, 9, 9, l. 51-52)".
(Jacques Darriulat, Plotinus, Master of Wisdom, II - From the One to the Many, 2013)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Plotin/Sagesse/Sagesse2.html

E1.7.D 3. PASCAL AND LEONARDO DA VINCI. It's not that the Western world will never again experience the "oceanic feeling of existence," but such experiences will be systematically translated into Christian vocabulary. This was the norm up until the Renaissance, during the 15th and early 16th centuries. Leonardo da Vinci's work, which embodied a deep spiritual connection with beings and things, was veiled with a Christian perspective, and Pascal's revelation was expressed in religious terms.

E1.7.D.3.1. BLAISE PASCAL (1623-1662)
"   The year of grace 1654,
        Monday the 23rd of November, St. Clement's day...
        From about half past ten in the evening until about half past twelve, midnight,

        FIRE

        God of Abraham. God of Isaac. God of Jacob 
        not of the philosophers and the wise. Certainty, joy, certainty, feeling, Joy, peace.""

E1.7.D.3.1_REF1_PH CERTAINTY, JOY, CERTAINTY, FEELING, JOY, PEACE "The terms in which a man interprets [the experience of cosmic consciousness] are naturally drawn from the religious and philosophical ideas of his culture, and their differences often conceal its basic identity. As water seeks the course of least resistance, so the emotions clothe themselves in the symbols that lie most readily to hand, and the association is so swift and automatic that the symbol may appear to be the very heart of the experience. Clarity - the disappearance of problems - suggests light, and in moments of such acute clarity there may be the physical sensation of light penetrating everything. To a theist this will naturally seem to be a glimpse of the presence of God, as in the celebrated testimony of Pascal:

        The year of grace 1654,
        Monday the 23rd of November, St. Clement's day...
        From about half past ten in the evening until about half past twelve, midnight,

        FIRE

        God of Abraham. God of Isaac. God of Jacob 
        not of the philosophers and the wise. Certainty, joy, certainty, feeling, Joy, peace."
(Alan Watts, This is it, 1958)

E1.7.D.3.1_REF2_PH "BLAISE PASCAL, TOWARD INFINITY AND BEYOND, PORTRAIT OF A JOYFUL MAN
The order in which Branschevick classified the thoughts does not respect the order of the bundles left by Pascal. The order proposed by Lafuma (the classified papers) gives it a less sinister height. For example, he had reserved a section on the greatness of man. The version that makes the wager a shaky solution to man's despair does not do justice to the complexity of Pascal's approach. There is no simple progression from despair to joy. For example, there are essays on amusement in all the sections. He presents himself as someone who says nothing new, but whose originality lies in the sequence of ideas (see the thought on real tennis).
There is no word joy in the thoughts, but there is laughter. All the texts on vanity are about the dysfunctions that make us laugh. The Vanity Bundle is a collection of funny stories. Vanity = absence of causes; followed by reason of effects = presence of a cause. If vanity could lead us to misery, the cause of the effects reveals to us a greatness: a celebration of man. It is the clash between the misanthrope and the philanthropist in Pascal that will nourish his thought.

In the Provincial Letters, Pascal justifies that nothing is due to vanity but laughter: a breast laughter. The laughter of despair of Nietzsche, Ionesco, Beckett? There is still room for joy in Pascal's thought; a serious Pascal who can be joyful without staying there for long. But the principle of joy remains central to Pascal. In the tradition of St. Augustine, he thinks of man as a being of pleasure, and will be harshly criticized for this by the Jansenists. There will be a prioritization of pleasures: he quotes St. Augustine, "One is always carried away by one's greatest pleasure. The debauched and the chaste in the same way. For Pascal, the greatest joy is the encounter with God. It is a joy that comes from elsewhere and can therefore fail, abandon us, hence the constant anxiety and gravity of this joy.
The text of the Memorial, the result of a revelation, recounts the experience of total joy. He wore this text sewn into his coat until his death. A text interwoven with jubilation and anguish. It gives way to feeling, which for Pascal is a form of knowledge: the certainty that feeling provides is true knowledge, something that reason struggles to provide in the Pensées. This certainty also guarantees him the "greatness of the human soul.

Why then the disproportion to the darkness of man in the Pensées? It is because Pascal wants to shake up the man who does not ask himself religious questions. He sets up a device to provoke a reaction. It is a rhetorical rather than an anthropological enterprise. He goes to the players to speak to them."
(Laurent Thirouin at the microphone of the program Les chemins de la philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 09/27/2018)

E1.7.D.4. MONTAIGNE, SPINOZA AND ROUSSEAU. Montaigne revived many intuitions of the pre-Socratic philosophers in the second half of the 16th century, without necessarily interpreting them religiously. Interestingly, Baruch Spinoza developed an ethics in the 17th century that resembled Asian philosophies, despite no contact with them. Yet both of them struggled to overcome the dissolution of the "self". Montaigne's free identity gave his Essays rhythm, cultivating his presence in the world through his "I". Spinoza's conatus sustained the ego. In the 18th century, Jean-Jacques Rousseau experimented with the "feeling of existence" late in life, while Goethe explored the "primal phenomenon".

E1.7.D.4.1. FOR MONTAIGNE (1533-1592), THERE IS NO COMMUNICATION WITH BEING. INSTEAD, THERE'S A RE-CONQUEST OF THE SELF BY MAINTAINING CLOSENESS TO ONESELF WHILE INTERACTING WITH OTHERS. Montaigne advises us to distance ourselves from harmful emotions by traveling and envisioning life beyond our daily routines. To him, wisdom isn't the pursuit of tranquility as it doesn’t bring peace. Rather, it's about accepting uncertainty and surrendering to situations. Montaigne doesn't strive to create a consistent image of himself. Instead, he relishes his inconsistency and cultivates his identity through relationships with others.

E1.7.D.4.1_REF1_PH "MONTAIGNE RECOGNISES THE IMPORTANCE OF SENSATIONS THAT HURT US. It is a matter of recomposing one's vision, of stepping back, of travelling, of distancing oneself from the familiar by looking at it from afar, by way of the imagination - and without condemning this as an escape from oneself. Montaigne does not maintain a relationship of knowledge to reality: his consoling thought is based on fantasy, on an aestheticization of existence.
More certainty does not bring more peace. Anxiety is caused by the absence of tranquillity, but tranquillity is an unattainable state of mind. To seek rest and tranquillity is to be "ingenious in mistreating oneself". Wisdom is to choose to be fickle. In making decisions, one relies not only on reason, but also on the resources of the body, on emotions, on fantasy, on dreams, on the unconscious. He agrees to be guided by the situation - a surprising form of wisdom in the West. Suffering often comes from trying to artificially construct a coherent image of ourselves. Montaigne delights in his inconsistency. He rejoices in transition, without disqualifying the present in favour of a future that would be better because it would be more complete. For Montaigne, the individual is constructed by exteriority, by fiction and imagination, by relations with others: it is a reconquest of oneself. We have no communication with others: we remain blind to ourselves when we are with others, without suffering from our inner emptiness".
(Sylvia Giocanti in the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 05/17/2018)

Listen to the podcast in French:
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/linquietude-44-lame-agitee-de-michel-de-montaigne

E1.7.D.4.1_REF1.1_PH "ANXIETY, THE AGITATED SOUL OF MICHEL DE MONTAIGNE Montaigne presents himself as having no nature. He writes essays in order to gain a foothold, not because he has a particularly anxious temperament, but because it is man's fate to live in the flow of becoming, in the "perpetual motion". Man must organise his existence while being exposed to anxiety, to the "thorns of domesticity", because "life is a delicate thing and easily disturbed, [...] the troubles of life are irreparable". What may seem trivial, such as the management of one's property, can cause us as much anxiety as more serious matters (Montaigne lived at the time of the wars of religion) - it is not insignificant that he takes everyday examples. When we look at things closely, they hurt us the most. His philosophy is in opposition to the Stoics, who try to conform to a voluntary model of renunciation by reason of what does not depend on us (according to a prior division of reality). M. recognises the importance of the affect that hurts us. The aim is to recompose one's vision, to step back, to travel, to break with the familiar by means of the detour of distancing through the imagination - without this being condemned as an escape from oneself (again in contrast to the Stoics). The Stoics believe that there are true and false opinions about the problems we must be able to ignore. The sceptic is modern in that he refers to a thought of the subject and does not maintain a relationship of knowledge to reality. His idea of consolation is based on fantasy, on an aestheticization of existence.

If there is any point in talking about good and evil, it is in terms of consequences, when they cause suffering, whereas stoicism never takes respect for sensibility as a criterion. For the sceptic, getting rid of doubt is not an end in itself; certainty is not a better state than uncertainty, since our state is one of permanence and instability. More certainties do not lead to more peace of mind. Anxiety is the absence of rest, and rest is an inaccessible state of mind. To seek rest is to be "ingenious in mistreating oneself". Wisdom is to resolve oneself to indecision. To be able to choose, one relies not only on reason, but also on the resources of the body, emotions, imagination, dreams and the unconscious. One acts in a state of mind that Lao Tzu would have, valuing a form of passivity that does not doubt (because it does not rely on the will that is "buffeted by flies"). One accepts to be led by the situation - a form of wisdom that is surprising in the West. Suffering often comes from trying to artificially construct a coherent image of oneself. M. enjoys his inconsistency. He enjoys the moment without disqualifying the present in favour of the future, which would be better because it would be more complete. For M., the individual is constructed through the exterior, in the fiction and imagination of relationships with others: there is a reclaiming of the self. We have no communication with the self. We remain with ourselves, with others, without suffering from our inner emptiness.

For St Augustine, if man is anxious, it is because he can only rest in God. Where Montaigne is subversive is that he does not believe that the rest to which we aspire is a lie and that it is not found in God, because for that to be the case, the origin would have to be like a destination. Monsieur replaces God with meaningless objects; Pascal will criticise him for this and try to put some fear back into the Pensées. For Monsieur, there is a certain exhilaration in enjoying life to the point of losing it: he revels in the precariousness of our existence. Things have a price because we know we will lose them. The mistake philosophers make is to put death in front of our eyes, when death is integrated into the future; there is no need to think about death, it is enough to think about life".
(Sylvia Giocanti in the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 05/17/2018)

Listen to the podcast in French:
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/linquietude-44-lame-agitee-de-michel-de-montaigne

E1.7.D.4.2. BARUCH SPINOZA (1632-1677)

In the fifth part of the Ethics, Spinoza introduces the "third kind of knowledge". This is a mental path that leads to conclusions similar to those found in Eastern philosophy before the concept of predication. This understanding of nature allows us to experience a certain kind of eternity, where rational thinking does not disrupt the contemplation of reality, leading to universal compassion. However, unlike some Eastern philosophies, Spinoza does not dissolve the self or the will.

We have previously discussed Spinoza's suggested transition from passive to active joys, a shift which is challenging to make, despite being grounded in rationality. In the fifth part of the Ethics, he encourages us to consider how this "third kind of knowledge" can align us with nature by downplaying consciousness, without eradicating our essence. This is a process that reconnects us with reality, as he states: "The more perfect each thing is, the more reality it has" (Ethics, Part Five, Demonstration of Proposition XL).

E1.7.D.4.3. JEAN-JACQUES ROUSSEAU (1712-1778)
"The feeling of existence stripped of all other affection is by itself a precious feeling of contentment and peace, which alone would suffice to make this existence dear and sweet."
In "Les Rêveries du promeneur solitaire", Jean-Jacques Rousseau seeks refuge from persecution for his free-thinking. On an island in Lake de Bienne, he enjoys several months of idleness. HHe seeks to rediscover a lost paradise and become one with nature. He lets the movement of water carry him, merging with the world to achieve a blissful existence that reaches the essence of being and transcends  temporary life into the taste of the fullness of eternity. This experience allows him to appreciate bare existence and find temporary inner peace.

E1.7.B.1.1_REF3.1_PH.wE1.7.D.4.3.

E1.7.B.1.1_REF3.2.a_PH.wE1.7.D.4.3.

E1.7.D.4.4. JOHANN WOLFGANG VON GOETHE (1749-1832)
"The supreme point to which man can reach is wonder; and when he stands in wonder before the primitive phenomenon (Urphänomen), he must be content; nothing higher can be granted him, and he must seek no further; this is his limit. But men are not usually content to contemplate the primitive phenomenon; they think they have to go even further, and they are like children who, after looking into a mirror, turn it upside down, to see what's on the other side".
(Goethe writing to Eckermann, :J.P. Eckermann, Gespräche mit Goethe, Wiesbaden, Insel-Verlag, 1955, p. 298)

E1.7.D.4.5_REF1_PO "I WANDERED
lonely as a cloud
That floats on high o’er vales and hills,

When all at once I saw a crowd,

A host, of golden daffodils;

Beside the lake, beneath the trees,

Fluttering and dancing in the breeze.

 

Continuous as the stars that shine

And twinkle on the milky way,

They stretched in never-ending line

Along the margin of a bay:

Ten thousand saw I at a glance,

Tossing their heads in sprightly dance.

 

The waves beside them danced; but they

Out-did the sparkling waves in glee:

A poet could not but be gay,

In such a jocund company:

I gazed—and gazed—but little thought

What wealth the show to me had brought:

 

For oft, when on my couch I lie

In vacant or in pensive mood,

They flash upon that inward eye

Which is the bliss of solitude;

And then my heart with pleasure fills,

And dances with the daffodils."

(William Wordsworth )

Listen to the poem: https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/45521/i-wandered-lonely-as-a-cloud

E1.7.D.5. THOREAU, WHITMAN, DICKINSON, NIETZSCHE AND RIMBAUD. The convergence of thought truly began in the 19th century, following the "death of God", with Nietzsche and poets like Thoreau, Whitman, Dickinson and Rimbaud. Nietzsche, in particular, grappled with the dissolution of the ego in his work, associating it with the Dionysian ideal.

E1.7.D.5.1. HENRY DAVID THOREAU (1817-1862)
"Perhaps the facts most astounding and most real are never communicated by man to man. The true harvest of my daily life is somewhat as intangible and indescribable as the tints of morning or evening."

E1.7.D.5.1_REF1_PH "IF THE DAY AND THE NIGHT ARE SUCH THAT YOU GREET THEM WITH JOY, and life emits a fragrance like flowers and sweet-scented herbs, is more elastic, more starry, more immortal, — that is your success. All nature is your congratulation, and you have cause momentarily to bless yourself. The greatest gains and values are farthest from being appreciated. We easily come to doubt if they exist. We soon forget them. They are the highest reality. Perhaps the facts most astounding and most real are never communicated by man to man. The true harvest of my daily life is somewhat as intangible and indescribable as the tints of morning or evening. It is a little Star-dust caught, a segment of the rainbow which I have clutched."
(Henry David Thoreau, Walden, 1854)

E1.7.D.5.1_REF2_PH "TIME IS BUT THE STREAM I GO A-FISHING IN. I drink at it; but while I drink I see the sandy bottom and detect how shallow it is. Its thin current slides away, but eternity remains. I would drink deeper; fish in the sky, whose bottom is pebbly with Stars. I cannot count one. I know not the first letter of the alphabet. I have always been regretting that I was not as wise as the day I was born. The intellect is a cleaver; it discerns and rifts its way into the secret of things. I do not wish to be any more busy with my hands than is necessary. My head is hands and feet. I feel all my best faculties concentrated in it."
(Henry David Thoreau, Walden, 1854)

E1.7.D.5.2. WALT WHITMAN (1819-1892)
"HAST NEVER COME TO THEE AN HOUR
Hast never come to thee an hour,
A sudden gleam divine, precipitating, bursting all these bubbles, fashions, wealth?
These eager business aims—books, politics, art, amours,
To utter nothingness?"
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

"[Walt Whitman's] verses continue to stir the hearts and minds of readers two centuries hence. Their sublimest, most enduring gift springs from Whitman’s resolute insistence on embracing our variegated, inconstant, polyphonous selves — on harmonizing the individualistic and the egalitarian, nature and culture, the body and the soul. “Do I contradict myself?” he asked unselfconsciously. “Very well then I contradict myself, (I am large, I contain multitudes.)” His poems bellow the bold, countercultural assurance that in acknowledging the contradictions within us, we collapse the contradictions between us; that only by exploring the myriad facets of selfhood, from its brightest summits to its darkest recesses, can we begin to dissolve the illusion of separateness and the antagonisms of otherness that divide us from one another."
(Maria Popova, on Walt Whitman, The Marginalian)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2019/05/31/helen-fagin-walt-whitman/?mc_cid=d201a1e393&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E1.7.D.5.2_REF1_PO "BEGINNING MY STUDIES

Beginning my studies the first step pleas'd me so much, 
The mere fact consciousness, these forms, the power of motion, 
The least insect or animal, the senses, eyesight, love, 
The first step I say awed me and pleas'd me so much, 
I have hardly gone and hardly wish'd to go any farther, 
But stop and loiter all the time to sing it in ecstatic songs."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.7.D.5.2_REF2_PO "SHUT NOT YOUR DOORS

Shut not your doors to me proud libraries, 
For that which was lacking on your well-fill'd shelves, yet needed on all most, I bring,
Forth from the war emerging, a book I have made, 
The words of my book nothing, the drift of it every thing, 
A book separate, not link'd with the rest nor felt by the intellect, 
But you ye untold latencies will thrill to every page."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.7.D.5.2_REF3_PO "TO BE IN ANY FORM, WHAT IS THAT?
(Round and round we go, all of us, and ever come back thither,)
If nothing lay more develop’d the quahaug in its callous shell were enough.

Mine is no callous shell,
I have instant conductors all over me whether I pass or stop,
They seize every object and lead it harmlessly through me.

I merely stir, press, feel with my fingers, and am happy,
To touch my person to some one else’s is about as much as I can stand.

Is this then a touch? quivering me to a new identity,
Flames and ether making a rush for my veins,
Treacherous tip of me reaching and crowding to help them,
My flesh and blood playing out lightning to strike what is hardly different from myself,
On all sides prurient provokers stiffening my limbs,
Straining the udder of my heart for its withheld drip,
Behaving licentious toward me, taking no denial,
Depriving me of my best as for a purpose,
Unbuttoning my clothes, holding me by the bare waist,
Deluding my confusion with the calm of the sunlight and pasture-fields,
Immodestly sliding the fellow-senses away,
They bribed to swap off with touch and go and graze at the edges of me,
No consideration, no regard for my draining strength or my anger,
Fetching the rest of the herd around to enjoy them a while,
Then all uniting to stand on a headland and worry me.

The sentries desert every other part of me,
They have left me helpless to a red marauder,
They all come to the headland to witness and assist against me.

I am given up by traitors,
I talk wildly, I have lost my wits, I and nobody else am the greatest traitor,
I went myself first to the headland, my own hands carried me there.

You villain touch! what are you doing? my breath is tight in its throat,
Unclench your floodgates, you are too much for me."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.7.D.5.2_REF4_PO "I KNOW I HAVE THE BEST OF TIME AND SPACE, AND WAS NEVER MEASURED AND NEVER WILL BE MEASURED.

I tramp a perpetual journey, (come listen all!)
My signs are a rain-proof coat, good shoes, and a staff cut from the woods,
No friend of mine takes his ease in my chair,
I have no chair, no church, no philosophy,
I lead no man to a dinner-table, library, exchange,
But each man and each woman of you I lead upon a knoll,
My left hand hooking you round the waist,
My right hand pointing to landscapes of continents and the public road.

Not I, not any one else can travel that road for you,
You must travel it for yourself.

It is not far, it is within reach,
Perhaps you have been on it since you were born and did not know,
Perhaps it is everywhere on water and on land.

[...] 

You are also asking me questions and I hear you,
I answer that I cannot answer, you must find out for yourself.

Sit a while dear son,
Here are biscuits to eat and here is milk to drink,
But as soon as you sleep and renew yourself in sweet clothes, I kiss you
with a good-by kiss and open the gate for your egress hence.

Long enough have you dream’d contemptible dreams,
Now I wash the gum from your eyes,
You must habit yourself to the dazzle of the light and of every moment of your life.

Long have you timidly waded holding a plank by the shore,
Now I will you to be a bold swimmer,
To jump off in the midst of the sea, rise again, nod to me, shout, and laughingly dash with your hair."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.7.D.5.2_REF5_PO "THERE IS THAT IN ME — I DO NOT KNOW WHAT IT IS — BUT I KNOW IT IS IN ME.

Wrench’d and sweaty — calm and cool then my body becomes,
I sleep—I sleep long.

I do not know it — it is without name — it is a word unsaid,
It is not in any dictionary, utterance, symbol.

Something it swings on more than the earth I swing on,
To it the creation is the friend whose embracing awakes me.

Perhaps I might tell more. Outlines! I plead for my brothers and sisters.

Do you see O my brothers and sisters?
It is not chaos or death—it is form, union, plan—it is eternal life — it is
Happiness."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.7.D.5.2_REF6_PO "SALUT AU MONDE!
 1
O take my hand Walt Whitman!
Such gliding wonders! such sights and sounds!
Such join’d unended links, each hook’d to the next,
Each answering all, each sharing the earth with all.
What widens within you Walt Whitman? [...]

11 [...]
Each of us inevitable,
Each of us limitless—each of us with his or her right upon the earth,
Each of us allow’d the eternal purports of the earth,
Each of us here as divinely as any is here. [...]

13
My spirit has pass’d in compassion and determination around the whole earth,
I have look’d for equals and lovers and found them ready for me in all lands,
I think some divine rapport has equalized me with them.
You vapors, I think I have risen with you, moved away to distant
     continents, and fallen down there, for reasons,
I think I have blown with you you winds;
You waters I have finger’d every shore with you,
I have run through what any river or strait of the globe has run through,
I have taken my stand on the bases of peninsulas and on the high
     embedded rocks, to cry thence:
What cities the light or warmth penetrates I penetrate those cities myself,
All islands to which birds wing their way I wing my way myself."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.7.D.5.2_REF7_PO "SONG OF THE OPEN ROAD

[...] 8
The efflux of the soul is happiness, here is happiness,
I think it pervades the open air, waiting at all times,
Now it flows unto us, we are rightly charged."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.7.D.5.2_REF8_PO "ON THE BEACH AT NIGHT ALONE
On the beach at night alone,
As the old mother sways her to and fro singing her husky song,
As I watch the bright stars shining, I think a thought of the clef of the universes and of the future.

A vast similitude interlocks all,
All spheres, grown, ungrown, small, large, suns, moons, planets,
All distances of place however wide,
All distances of time, all inanimate forms,
All souls, all living bodies though they be ever so different, or in different worlds,
All gaseous, watery, vegetable, mineral processes, the fishes, the brutes,
All nations, colors, barbarisms, civilizations, languages,
All identities that have existed or may exist on this globe, or any globe,
All lives and deaths, all of the past, present, future,
This vast similitude spans them, and always has spann’d,
And shall forever span them and compactly hold and enclose them."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.7.D.5.2_REF9_PO "THOUGHTS
Of ownership—as if one fit to own things could not at pleasure enter
     upon all, and incorporate them into himself or herself [...]"
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

This verse suggests that the concept of ownership is flawed because a person who believes they have the right to own things cannot fully comprehend that they have the ability to embrace and make a part of themselves anything they desire. In simpler terms, it implies that owning something does not necessarily mean that it belongs to us exclusively, as we can always assimilate it into our being.

E1.7.D.5.2_REF10_PO "HAST NEVER COME TO THEE AN HOUR
Hast never come to thee an hour,
A sudden gleam divine, precipitating, bursting all these bubbles, fashions, wealth?
These eager business aims—books, politics, art, amours,
To utter nothingness?"
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.7.D.5.2_REF11_PO "WHO LEARNS MY LESSON COMPLETE?
[...]
I lie abstracted and hear beautiful tales of things and the reasons of things,
They are so beautiful I nudge myself to listen.

I cannot say to any person what I hear—I cannot say it to myself—it is very wonderful.

It is no small matter, this round and delicious globe moving so exactly
    in its orbit for ever and ever, without one jolt or the untruth of a single second"
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.7.D.5.2_REF12_PO "SONG AT SUNSET
[...].
Open mouth of my soul uttering gladness,
Eyes of my soul seeing perfection,
Natural life of me faithfully praising things,
Corroborating forever the triumph of things.

Illustrious every one!
Illustrious what we name space, sphere of unnumber’d spirits,
Illustrious the mystery of motion in all beings, even the tiniest insect,
Illustrious the attribute of speech, the senses, the body,
Illustrious the passing light—illustrious the pale reflection on the new moon in the western sky,
Illustrious whatever I see or hear or touch, to the last.

Good in all,
In the satisfaction and aplomb of animals,
In the annual return of the seasons,
In the hilarity of youth,
In the strength and flush of manhood,
In the grandeur and exquisiteness of old age,
In the superb vistas of death.

Wonderful to depart!
Wonderful to be here!
The heart, to jet the all-alike and innocent blood!
To breathe the air, how delicious!
To speak—to walk—to seize something by the hand!
To prepare for sleep, for bed, to look on my rose-color’d flesh!
To be conscious of my body, so satisfied, so large!
To be this incredible God I am!
To have gone forth among other Gods, these men and women I love.

Wonderful how I celebrate you and myself
How my thoughts play subtly at the spectacles around!
How the clouds pass silently overhead!
How the earth darts on and on! and how the sun, moon, stars, dart on and on!
How the water sports and sings! (surely it is alive!)
How the trees rise and stand up, with strong trunks, with branches and leaves!
(Surely there is something more in each of the trees, some living soul.)
O amazement of things—even the least particle!
O spirituality of things! [...]"
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.7.D.6.28_REF3_PO.wE1.7.D.5.2.

E1.7.D.5.2_REF13_PO "KOSMOS
Who includes diversity and is Nature,
Who is the amplitude of the earth, and the coarseness and sexuality of the earth, and the great charity of the earth and the equilibrium also,
Who has not look’d forth from the windows the eyes for nothing, or whose brain held audience with messengers for nothing,
Who contains believers and disbelievers, who is the most majestic lover,
Who holds duly his or her triune proportion of realism, spiritualism, and of the aesthetic or intellectual,
Who having consider’d the body finds all its organs and parts good,
Who, out of the theory of the earth and of his or her body understands by subtle analogies all other theories,
The theory of a city, a poem, and of the large politics of these States;
Who believes not only in our globe with its sun and moon, but in other globes with their suns and moons,
Who, constructing the house of himself or herself, not for a day but for all time, sees races, eras, dates, generations,
The past, the future, dwelling there, like space, inseparable together."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.7.D.5.3. EMILY DICKINSON (1830-1886)
"The Earth has seemed to me a Drum, 
Pursued of little Boys "

E1.7.D.5.3_REF1_PO "WHEN I HAVE SEEN THE SUN EMERGE
FROM HIS AMAZING HOUSE -
And leave a Day at every Door 
A Deed, in every place -

Without the incident of Fame 
Or accident of Noise -
The Earth has seemed to me a Drum, 
Pursued of little Boys"
(Emily Dickinson, 1865)

E1.7.D.5.3_REF2_PO "THE BLUNDER IS IN ESTIMATE 
ETERNITY IS THERE 
We say as of a Station 
Meanwhile he is so near 
He joins me in my Ramble 
Divides abode with me 
No Friend have I that so persists 
As this Eternity"
(Emily Dickinson, undated)

E1.7.D.5.4. FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE (1844-1900)
"You must still have chaos in you to give birth to a dancing star"

E1.7.D.5.4.a. NIETZSCHE EXPLORES THE COMPLEXITY OF MORALITY AND TRUTH THROUGH THE PERSPECTIVE OF THE DIONYSIAN STATE. During Dionysian ecstasy, oblivion enables a separation between the world of everyday reality and that of radical truth, which is revealed by Dionysian art proclaiming excess as truth. The process produces a symbolic metamorphosis of the subject, leading to the disappearance of the empirical self in favor of a transcendent, cosmic reality reclaimed by man. Although noble and courageous, the solution proposed by Nietzsche may seem unrealistic, since it requires a confrontation with suffering.

E1.7.D.5.4.a.i. NIETZSCHE FEARS THAT EVERY MAN WILL NO LONGER TRY TO SURPASS HIMSELF, BUT RATHER IMITATE HIS NEIGHBOR
 Nietzsche associates Christian and Platonic values with the equalization promoted by the democratic model. He fears that, in these models, every man will no longer try to outdo himself, but rather imitate his neighbor - equalizing society from below.

E1.7.D.5.4.a.i_REF1_PH "CHRISTIANITY DYING AWAY IN MORALITY. - 'On n’est bon que par la pitie: il faut donc qu’il y ait quelque pitié dans tous nos sentiments'—so preaches morality in our days. And whence comes this? That sympathetic, disinterested, benevolent, social actions are now felt to be characteristics of the moral man—nay, perhaps be the most universal effect and change of tone which Christianity has brought about in Europe, though this has been neither its intention nor its doctrine. But it was the
residuum of Christian moods, when the very contrary, utterly selfish faith in the “ One thing is needful,” that is, the absolute importance of the eternal, personal
salvation, together with the dogmas on which it rested, had gradually receded, and the accompanying belief in “ love” and “ charity,” in accordance with the enormous
practice of the Church, was thereby pushed into the foreground. The further the dogmas were departed from, the more a justification for this departure was aimed at in a cult of philanthropy: not to fall short of the Christian ideal in this point, but, if possible, to excel it, was a secret stimulus to all French free-thinkers from Voltaire down to Auguste Comte; and the latter, with his famous moral formula of “ vivre pour autrui ” has indeed outchristianed Christianity! The doctrine of sympathetic affections and of the pity or utility of others, as the principle of action, has gained its greatest fame in Germany through Schopenhauer, in England through John Stuart Mill: hut they themselves were only echoes—from about the time of the French revolution, these doctrines have, with an enormous motor force, sprung up everywhere in the coarsest as well as the subtlest forms, and all socialistic principles involuntarily, as it were, took their stand on the common ground of this doctrine. Perhaps in our days no prejudice is more implicitly believed in than that we know what really constitutes morality. It seems that now everybody is pleased to hear that society is about to adapt the individual to the general requirements, and that the happiness and, at the same time, the sacrifice of the individual consists in feeling himself as a useful member and instrument of the whole: we have only our lingering doubts as to where to look for this whole; whether in an existing State or in one yet to he founded, or in the nation, or in an international brotherhood, or in small, new, economic communities. A great deal of meditation, doubt, fighting, much excitement and passion, are just now being exhibited on this head; hut wonderful and pleasant is the unanimity with which the “ ego” is requested to practise self denial, until, in form of adaptation to the whole, it again obtains its fixed sphere of rights and duties, until it has become something altogether new and different. Nothing less is aimed at—whether admitted or not—than
thorough transformation, nay, weakening and abrogation of the individual: there is an unceasing enumeration and accusing of all the wickedness and offensiveness, the lavishness, expense, and luxury of the traditional aspect of individual existence ; it is hoped that everything may he managed in a cheaper, less dangerous, more uniform, and harmonious way, provided only that there are nothing hut large bodies and their members. Everything which in any way corresponds to this all-productive craving and its subsidiary cravings, is considered as good—this is the moral ground-current of our age; sympathy and social feeling play into each other’s hands. [...]"
(Friedrich Nietzsche, The dawn of days, aphorism 132, 1881)

E1.7.D.5.4.a.ii. DOES NIETZSCHE FEEL CAPABLE OF PERFORMING THE DIONYSIAN METAMORPHOSIS HIMSELF?
The Apollonian-Dionysian process produces a symbolic metamorphosis of the subject, leading to the disappearance of the empirical self in favor of a transcendent, cosmic reality reclaimed by man. The subject then becomes the cosmic subject of excess, the only existing and eternal one. But does he feel capable of this himself?

E1.7.D.5.4.a.ii_REF1_PH DIONYSIAN ECSTASY ABOLISHES THE BARRIERS OF EVERYDAY EXISTENCE AND PLUNGES US INTO A FORGETFULNESS THAT IS EXPERIENCED AS TRUE KNOWLEDGE AND AWARENESS OF RADICAL TRUTH.
"The ecstasy of the Dionysian state, with its abolition of the usual barriers and limits of existence, contains during its duration a lethargic element into which everything personally experienced in the past is absorbed. This abyss of forgetting separates the world of everyday reality from the world of Dionysian reality (Kroner I, p. 55). Forgetting, however, is interpreted in the opposite sense to that in which psychoanalysis sees it today: not from the superficial reality of everyday life, but from the profound Dionysian reality or radical truth. [Dionysian ecstasy involves true knowledge and, above all, the consciousness of a truth".
(Angèle Kremer-Marietti, Introduction to The Birth of Tragedy by Nietzsche, 1994)

E1.7.D.5.4.a.ii_REF2_PH "DIONYSIAN ART ALONE PROCLAIMS RADICAL TRUTH, and what it reveals of truth is excess (Kroner I, p. 37). The true artist is the medium through which the only truly existing subject (not the cogito) celebrates salvation in appearance [...] what counts is artistic creation, because it brings man back to his most intimate and universal source".
(Angèle Kremer-Marietti, Introduction to The Birth of Tragedy by Nietzsche, 1994)

E1.7.D.5.4.a.ii_REF3_PH THE 'APOLLINIAN-DIONYSIAN' PROCESS PROCESS CAUSES A SYMBOLIC METAMORPHOSIS OF THE SUBJECT, LEADING TO THE DISSOLUTION OF THE EMPIRICAL SELF IN THE IMAGINARY COSMOS. This progressive negation of the individual self makes it possible to recover a transcendental and cosmic reality, thus reaching the primordial.
"The complex 'Apollonian-Dionysian' process does not, like the Apollonian process alone, produce a sublimation by substitution of appearance; it clearly produces a regression through a true symbolic metamorphosis of the subject itself; and once this metamorphosis begins, it tends immediately and irresistibly to complete itself in the complete disappearance of the subject, whose ego dissolves in the cosmos, reintegrated in the imagination. The ego has thus reached a certain centre of itself, which is none other than the negation of the empirical ego. But this progressive negation takes place in favour of a transcendental and cosmic reality that has been reconquered by man. This is where the Primordial One is located: at the centre of the self that denies itself as an individual subject to be anything other than the cosmic subject of excess, the only existing and eternal one".
(Angèle Kremer-Marietti, Introduction to The Birth of Tragedy by Nietzsche, 1994)

E1.7.D.5.4.a.iii. ZARATHUSTRA'S GREAT "YES" PRESUPPOSES THAT WE CONFRONT SUFFERING, THAT WE EVEN LOVE IT - AN IMPOSSIBLE CHALLENGE? Wishful thinking? "Couldn't we say that Nietzsche has diagnosed the limits of thought, but that the solution he proposes is unrealistic - albeit noble and courageous? He comes very close to the intuitions of Eastern ante-predictive philosophies, without considering the dissolution of the "self", reserved for the Dionysian.

E1.7.D.5.4.a.iii_REF1_PH 'THE GREAT FATIGUE' OF FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE
"For Nietzsche, the weariness or fatigue of his contemporaries is the result of Christian and Platonic values whose origins go back to Socrates, a key figure in the history of European thought. The general exhaustion of modern man can be seen in the dejection, but also in the hyperactivity of those who must lose themselves in entertainment in order to bear themselves. However, the choice to tire oneself (through exercise or walking, for example) can regenerate energy and enable the creation of something new; it is a very different kind of tiredness from the tiredness we are talking about - the tiredness condemned by Nietzsche is independent of physical activity. The values of the "exhausted" are those that deny life. "We have called God that which weakens, teaches and inoculates weakness". The dominant values set themselves the radical goal of eradicating from man all the feelings they consider bad, placing him in a situation of flight from reality in which he has even less control over these feelings. N. advocates instead a recognition of who we are and an aestheticization of the self through the prioritisation and control of our impulses.
The rest of existence is the Dionysian that we do not want to face and that escapes the rationalist and Socratic vision.
"Nothing is more opposed to the purely aesthetic interpretation and justification of the world than the Christian doctrine, which is and wants to be only moral, and which with its absolute standards, and already for example with its divine truth, sends art, all art, back into the realm of lies, and thereby denies it, curses it, condemns it. Under such a way of thinking and judging, I have always felt a hostility towards life, a raging and vengeful antipathy towards life itself, because all life is based on appearance, art, illusion, optics, the necessity of perspective and error. From the very beginning, Christianity was essentially and fundamentally a dislike and weariness of life in relation to life, which was simply disguised, hidden, invented, behind the belief in another life, in a better life". Nietzsche, Preface to The Origin of Tragedy. Values of the exhausted who, instead of confronting reality and its contradictions, project themselves towards an Other that is supposedly better. 
Nietzsche associates Christian and Platonic values with the equalisation promoted by the democratic model. In this model, he fears that each person will no longer seek to surpass himself, but rather to imitate his neighbour, thus equalising society at the lowest level.
A great deal of suffering and metamorphosis is necessary for creation to take place. Zarathustra's great "yes" requires that we face suffering, that we even love it - an impossible challenge? Wishful thinking? "Could it not be said that Nietzsche has diagnosed the limits of thought, but that the solution he proposes is unrealistic - albeit noble and courageous? He comes close to the intuitions of Eastern ante-predictive philosophies, without considering the dissolution of the 'self' reserved for the Dionysian."
(Céline Denat on the program Les chemins de la philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 12/18/2017)

Listen to the podcast in French:
https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/la-grande-fatigue-de-friedrich-nietzsche-5564489

E1.7.D.5.4.b. YOU MUST STILL HAVE CHAOS IN YOU TO GIVE BIRTH TO A DANCING STAR
"Shouldn't philosophy serve to make us better rather than to live better; that is, to work on one's interiority rather than focus on improving external conditions. Eastern ante-predictive philosophies encourage us to dare not to have an answer for everything, to dare to be aware by leaving our mental habits behind.
We spend our lives trying to improve ourselves, instead of understanding and accepting ourselves, so that we can surpass ourselves. This is where Zen helps us to bypass duality and the principle of non-contradiction so dear to rationalist philosophy: accepting ourselves in an amor fati while striving to live better - life is contradictory; as long as we accept our reality, progress may come in spite of ourselves. As Nietzsche says in Zarathustra, "You must still have chaos in you to give birth to a dancing star".

E1.7.D.5.4.b_REF1_PH IN FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE'S "THUS SPOKE ZARATHUSTRA," THE CHARACTER ZARATHUSTRA DESCRIBES THE DECLINE OF HUMANITY INTO THE "LAST MAN," A STATE WHERE PEOPLE SEEK COMFORT AND MEDIOCRITY OVER GREATNESS AND AMBITION.
"Alas! there cometh the time when man will no longer launch the arrow of his longing beyond man — and the string of his bow will have unlearned to whizz!
I tell you: one must still have chaos in one, to give birth to a dancing star. I tell you: ye have still chaos in you.
Alas! There cometh the time when man will no longer give birth to any star. Alas! There cometh the time of the most despicable man, who can no longer despise himself. Lo! I show you THE LAST MAN.
« What is love? What is creation? What is longing? What is a star? » — so asketh the last man and blinketh.
The earth hath then become small, and on it there hoppeth the last man who maketh everything small. His species is ineradicable like that of the ground–flea; the last man liveth longest.
« We have discovered happiness » — say the last men, and blink thereby.
They have left the regions where it is hard to live; for they need warmth. One still loveth one’s neighbour and rubbeth against him; for one needeth warmth.
Turning ill and being distrustful, they consider sinful: they walk warily. He is a fool who still stumbleth over stones or men!
A little poison now and then: that maketh pleasant dreams. And much poison at last for a pleasant death.
One still worketh, for work is a pastime. But one is careful lest the pastime should hurt one. One no longer becometh poor or rich; both are too burdensome. Who still wanteth to rule? Who still wanteth to obey? Both are too burdensome.
No shepherd, and one herd! Every one wanteth the same; every one is equal: he who hath other sentiments goeth voluntarily into the madhouse.
« Formerly all the world was insane, » — say the subtlest of them, and blink thereby. They are clever and know all that hath happened: so there is no end to their raillery. People still fall out, but are soon reconciled—otherwise it spoileth their stomachs.
They have their little pleasures for the day, and their little pleasures for the night, but they have a regard for health.
« We have discovered happiness, » — say the last men, and blink thereby. —
And here ended the first discourse of Zarathustra, which is also called « The Prologue »: for at this point the shouting and mirth of the multitude interrupted him. « Give us this last man, O Zarathustra, » — they called out — « make us into these last men! Then will we make thee a present of the Superman! »” 
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Thus Spoke Zarathustra, 1883)

E1.7.D.5.4.b_REF2_PH "ISN'T THE PURPOSE OF PHILOSOPHY TO BECOME A BETTER PERSON RATHER THAN TO LIVE BETTER; that is, to work on one's interiority rather than focusing on improving exterior conditions? Eastern ante-predicative philosophies encourage us to dare not to having an answer to everything, to dare to be present by departing from our mental habits. Happiness is partly a personal asceticism and yet there is no possession of happiness. We must renounce all security: « The bad news is that we are falling, the good news is that there is no ground ». Oscillation between bliss and despair is inevitable: « It's a mess, but there is no problem! ». Let's not dramatize the tragic! Bukowski helps us to think that even in a state of dependence, if we accept not to judge our determinism, we can be free and joyful. Becoming aware of our own inner patterns and not to resist them is a first step towards liberation. We spend our lives trying to improve instead of understanding and accepting oneself, in order to be able to surpass oneself. This is where Zen helps us get around the duality of the principle of non-contradiction that is so dear to rationalist philosophy: to accept oneself in an amor fati while seeking to live better - life is contradictory; as long as one accepts his reality, progress may come in spite of oneself. As Nietzsche says through Zarathustra, « One must still have chaos in oneself to give birth to a dancing star »."
(Alexandre Jollien at the microphone of the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on 11/16/2018 on France Culture)

E1.7.D.5.4.b_REF2.1_MU L’ALLIANCE DU CHAOS ET D'UNE ÉTOILE QUI DANSE, Chopin, Ballade no. 1 g-minor op. 23, 1831

Écouter sur YouTube: https://youtu.be/ecC7fjnFiuk

E1.7.D.5.4.b_REF3_PH "AT THE POINT OF REST OF THE WHIRLING WORLD, neither flesh, nor deprivation of flesh, neither « coming from »  nor « going to », at the point of rest : there is the dance. Neither stop, nor move. Do not call it fixity - it is where past and future meet. Not « movement from » or « to », not ascent or decline, only the point of rest. There would be no dancing at all, if not for this point, whereas there is nothing but dancing." 
(Krishna to Arjuna, Bhagavadgītā)

E1.7.D.5.5. ARTHUR RIMBAUD (1854-1891)
"I know the skies in thunderbolts, a whirlwind’s might,
And the surf, and the currents, to dusks I have been,
And dawns as sublime as exalted doves in flight,
And I saw at times that which man but thinks he’s seen!"
(Arthur Rimbaud, The Drunken Boat, 1871)

E1.6.G.2.5_REF2_PO.wE1.7.D.5.5.

E1.7.D.5.5_REF1.1_PO "MY BOHEMIAN (FANTASY)

I went away, fists in my torn pockets;
My coat was, as well, becoming ideal;
I went under the sky, Muse, and I was your servant;
Oh! of what splendid loves I dreamt

My unique breaches had a large hole.
A dreaming Little-Tom-Thumb, I spewed forth, in my run,
Rhymes. My tavern was under the Great Bear.
My stars in the sky had a gentle frill

And I listened to them, sitting at the edge of roads
Those soft September nights where I felt drops
Of dew on my forehead like a vigorous wine;

Where, rhyming amidst the fantastic shadows,
Like lyres, I pulled elastics
From my injured shoes, one foot near my heart!
(Arthur Rimbaud, Douai Notebook, 1870)

"MA BOHÈME (FANTAISIE)

Je m'en allais, les poings dans mes poches crevées ; 
Mon paletot aussi devenait idéal; 
J'allais sous le ciel, Muse! et j'étais ton féal; 
Oh! là là ! que d'amours splendides j'ai rêvées!

Mon unique culotte avait un large trou. 
- Petit-Poucet rêveur, j'égrenais dans ma course 
Des rimes. Mon auberge était à la Grande-Ourse.
Mes étoiles au ciel avaient un doux frou-frou

Et je les écoutais, assis au bord des routes, 
Ces bons soirs de septembre où je sentais des gouttes 
De rosée à mon front, comme un vin de vigueur;

Où, rimant au milieu des ombres fantastiques, 
Comme des lyres, je tirais les élastiques 
De mes souliers blessés, un pied près de mon cœur !"
(Arthur Rimbaud, Cahier de Douai, 1870)

E1.7.D.5.5_REF1.2_PO "I HAVE STRETCHED ROPES FROM STEEPLE TO STEEPLE;
garlands from window to window;
golden chains from star to star, 
and I dance."
(Arhtur Rimbaud, Illuminations, 1886)

"J'AI TENDU DES CORDES DE CLOCHER A CLOCHER;
des guirlandes de fenêtre à fenêtre;
des chaînes d'or d'étoile à étoile, 
et je danse."
(Arhtur Rimbaud, Les Illuminations, 1886)

E1.7.D.5.5_REF1.3_PO "THE DRUNKEN BOAT

As I further down the impassive Rivers came,
No longer felt I guided by the bargemen’s hauls:
Screaming Redskins had used them to practice their aim,
And they had nailed them, naked, onto colored poles.

I didn’t much care for any of the crewmen,
The Flemish wheat, the English cotton in their tow.
As all that clamor died along with my bargemen,
The River let me sail at will upon its flow.

Straight into the furious lashing of the tide,
I, that other winter more deaf than toddler mind,
Ran! The Peninsulas, unmoored and set aglide,
Never knew a cry of triumph so unconfined.

The tempest blessed me as I woke unto the sea.
More lightweight than a cork I danced on crest and trough,
(Eternal rollers of victims they’re said to be,)
Ten nights without the lantern and its banal glow!

Sweeter than to children a sour apple’s meat,
The green water penetrated my pinewood frame,
And the stains of blue wine and splashes of vomit
It washed; my anchor and rudder the sea would claim.

And from that moment onwards I bathed in the Verse
Of the Sea, infused with stars and lactescent ink,
Ravaging green azures, where, pallid and submersed,
A delighted, drowned dreamer sometimes may sink;

Where, suddenly dyeing the blue, deranged fires,
And slow rhythms under the daylight’s shining stare,
Stronger than alcohol, vaster than our lyres,
Ferment for me the bitter redness of love’s glare!

I know the skies in thunderbolts, a whirlwind’s might,
And the surf, and the currents, to dusks I have been,
And dawns as sublime as exalted doves in flight,
And I saw at times that which man but thinks he’s seen!

I saw the low sun speckled with mystic horrors,
Illuminating long and solid purple straps,
Which remind of ancient dramas and their actors,
The waves rolling far off their trembling shutter-flaps!

I have dreamt of a green night in glittering snows,
A kiss reaching into the sea’s eye, slow and long,
The flowing of a lifeblood which no human knows,
And blue and yellow surging of phosphoric song!

I followed for months, like herds adrift on prairies,
Frantic, the swell that battles reefs until the death,
Never dreaming that the lustrous feet of Marys,
Could force the muzzle onto Oceans out of breath!

I crashed, do you know, into rare, exotic lands,
Where flowers fuse with panther eyes in skins of men,
Iridiscent rainbows stretched tight as bridle bands,
Neath the seas’ horizon, and to glaucous herds again!

I saw the enormous marshes seething, and nets
Where a Leviathan rots in the weed, grasp this!
And a sinkhole amidst the placid seas which lets
The flow collapse into a cascading abyss!

Glaciers, silver suns, pearl waves, skies of ember!
Hideous wrecks along the bottoms of brown bays,
Where gigantic snakes whom the vermin dismember,
Fall from contorted trees in a black, pungent haze!

I would have liked to show to children the dolphin
On a blue rising wave, that golden fish that sings.
Foams colored by flowers gently rocked my drifting,
And ineffable winds at times lent me their wings.

And sometimes, martyrs sick of poles and zones, mellow,
Their sobs sweetening my rolling, the weeping seas
Raised for me dark blossoms, suction cups all yellow,
And I hung out there like a woman on her knees…

Akin to an island, watching my sides ravaged
By quarrels and droppings of pale-eyed, noisy birds,
I wandered along as across my frayed cordage
Drowned men sank backwards into slumber without words!

Hurled by the hurricane into the birdless ether,
Lost under the hair of coves on shallow ground,
I, a boat whose wreck, a carcass drunk with water,
Neither merchant ships nor Monitors would have found;

Free, smoking, arisen from violet vapour,
I pierced the blushing sky like a wall gives to drill,
A luscious reward for good verse put on paper:
Lichens of sunlight and an azure spill,

I ran, flecked with lunulas, electric bows,
A rabid plank, trailed by sea-horses black as night,
When Julys carved with crushing bludgeon blows
Ultramarine skies into funnels set alight;

I who trembled to sense, at fifty leagues of distance,
Groaning Behemots rut, and Maelstroms broad and thick,
Eternal spinner of a blue inert persistence,
I miss Europe’s ancient parapet walls of brick!

I’ve seen astral islands, and swarms of stars, on deep
Delirious skies to which sailors set their course:
- In those endless nights, are you exiled, do you sleep,
One million golden birds, O future Vital Force?

But, truly, I’ve wept much! Every Dawn but saddens,
Every sun is bitter, every moon is rotten.
Rancid love has bloated me with stupor that maddens,
O may my keel dissolve! May I sink to bottom!

I want one water in Europe — shallow lying,
Black and cold, where into the scented dying day
A crouching child full of sorrow sends off flying
A boat as fragile as a butterfly in May!

I cannot anymore, O waves, bathed in your langours,
Undo the wake which cotton freighters spread in rays,
Nor endure the pride of the flags and the banners,
Nor swim under the floating bridges’ dreadful gaze!"
(Arthur Rimbaud, 1871)


"LE BATEAU IVRE

Comme je descendais des Fleuves impassibles,
Je ne me sentis plus guidé par les haleurs :
Des Peaux-Rouges criards les avaient pris pour cibles,
Les ayant cloués nus aux poteaux de couleurs.

J’étais insoucieux de tous les équipages,
Porteur de blés flamands ou de cotons anglais.
Quand avec mes haleurs ont fini ces tapages,
Les Fleuves m’ont laissé descendre où je voulais.

Dans les clapotements furieux des marées,
Moi, l’autre hiver, plus sourd que les cerveaux d’enfants,
Je courus ! Et les Péninsules démarrées
N’ont pas subi tohu-bohus plus triomphants.

La tempête a béni mes éveils maritimes.
Plus léger qu’un bouchon j’ai dansé sur les flots
Qu’on appelle rouleurs éternels de victimes,
Dix nuits, sans regretter l’oeil niais des falots !

Plus douce qu’aux enfants la chair des pommes sûres,
L’eau verte pénétra ma coque de sapin
Et des taches de vins bleus et des vomissures
Me lava, dispersant gouvernail et grappin.

Et dès lors, je me suis baigné dans le Poème
De la Mer, infusé d’astres, et lactescent,
Dévorant les azurs verts ; où, flottaison blême
Et ravie, un noyé pensif parfois descend ;

Où, teignant tout à coup les bleuités, délires
Et rhythmes lents sous les rutilements du jour,
Plus fortes que l’alcool, plus vastes que nos lyres,
Fermentent les rousseurs amères de l’amour !

Je sais les cieux crevant en éclairs, et les trombes
Et les ressacs et les courants : je sais le soir,
L’Aube exaltée ainsi qu’un peuple de colombes,
Et j’ai vu quelquefois ce que l’homme a cru voir !

J’ai vu le soleil bas, taché d’horreurs mystiques,
Illuminant de longs figements violets,
Pareils à des acteurs de drames très antiques
Les flots roulant au loin leurs frissons de volets !

J’ai rêvé la nuit verte aux neiges éblouies,
Baisers montant aux yeux des mers avec lenteurs,
La circulation des sèves inouïes,
Et l’éveil jaune et bleu des phosphores chanteurs !

J’ai suivi, des mois pleins, pareille aux vacheries
Hystériques, la houle à l’assaut des récifs,
Sans songer que les pieds lumineux des Maries
Pussent forcer le mufle aux Océans poussifs !

J’ai heurté, savez-vous, d’incroyables Florides
Mêlant aux fleurs des yeux de panthères à peaux
D’hommes ! Des arcs-en-ciel tendus comme des brides
Sous l’horizon des mers, à de glauques troupeaux !

J’ai vu fermenter les marais énormes, nasses
Où pourrit dans les joncs tout un Léviathan !
Des écroulements d’eaux au milieu des bonaces,
Et les lointains vers les gouffres cataractant !

Glaciers, soleils d’argent, flots nacreux, cieux de braises !
Échouages hideux au fond des golfes bruns
Où les serpents géants dévorés des punaises
Choient, des arbres tordus, avec de noirs parfums !

J’aurais voulu montrer aux enfants ces dorades
Du flot bleu, ces poissons d’or, ces poissons chantants.
– Des écumes de fleurs ont bercé mes dérades
Et d’ineffables vents m’ont ailé par instants.

Parfois, martyr lassé des pôles et des zones,
La mer dont le sanglot faisait mon roulis doux
Montait vers moi ses fleurs d’ombre aux ventouses jaunes
Et je restais, ainsi qu’une femme à genoux…

Presque île, ballottant sur mes bords les querelles
Et les fientes d’oiseaux clabaudeurs aux yeux blonds.
Et je voguais, lorsqu’à travers mes liens frêles
Des noyés descendaient dormir, à reculons !

Or moi, bateau perdu sous les cheveux des anses,
Jeté par l’ouragan dans l’éther sans oiseau,
Moi dont les Monitors et les voiliers des Hanses
N’auraient pas repêché la carcasse ivre d’eau ;

Libre, fumant, monté de brumes violettes,
Moi qui trouais le ciel rougeoyant comme un mur
Qui porte, confiture exquise aux bons poètes,
Des lichens de soleil et des morves d’azur ;

Qui courais, taché de lunules électriques,
Planche folle, escorté des hippocampes noirs,
Quand les juillets faisaient crouler à coups de triques
Les cieux ultramarins aux ardents entonnoirs ;

Moi qui tremblais, sentant geindre à cinquante lieues
Le rut des Béhémots et les Maelstroms épais,
Fileur éternel des immobilités bleues,
Je regrette l’Europe aux anciens parapets !

J’ai vu des archipels sidéraux ! et des îles
Dont les cieux délirants sont ouverts au vogueur :
– Est-ce en ces nuits sans fonds que tu dors et t’exiles,
Million d’oiseaux d’or, ô future Vigueur ?

Mais, vrai, j’ai trop pleuré ! Les Aubes sont navrantes.
Toute lune est atroce et tout soleil amer :
L’âcre amour m’a gonflé de torpeurs enivrantes.
Ô que ma quille éclate ! Ô que j’aille à la mer !

Si je désire une eau d’Europe, c’est la flache
Noire et froide où vers le crépuscule embaumé
Un enfant accroupi plein de tristesse, lâche
Un bateau frêle comme un papillon de mai.

Je ne puis plus, baigné de vos langueurs, ô lames,
Enlever leur sillage aux porteurs de cotons,
Ni traverser l’orgueil des drapeaux et des flammes,
Ni nager sous les yeux horribles des pontons."
(Arthur Rimbaud, 1871)

E1.7.D.5.5_REF2_PO “I WANT TO BE A POET, AND I'M WORKING ON BECOMING CALIRVOYANT: you won't understand at all, and I could hardly explain it to you. It's about reaching the unknown by disrupting all the senses. The suffering is enormous, but you have to be strong, born a poet, and I recognized myself as a poet. It's not my fault at all. It's wrong to say: I think: it should say: I am being thought. - Pardon the play on words. - I is another.”
(Arthur Rimbaud, Letter to Georges Izambard - May 13, 1871)

"For I am another. If the copper wakes up as a trumpet, it is not his fault. It is obvious to me: I am witnessing the flowering of my thoughts: I watch them, I listen to them: I strike the bow: the symphony stirs in the depths or leaps onto the stage. [...]
I say that one must be a clairvoyant, become a clairvoyant.
The poet becomes a clairvoyant through a long, immense and thoughtful deregulation of all the senses, all the forms of love, suffering, madness; he searches himself, he exhausts all the poisons within him to keep only the quintessences. An unspeakable torture in which he needs all his faith, all his superhuman strength, in which he becomes above all the great invalid, the great criminal, the great accursed and the supreme scholar! Because he reaches the unknown! Because he has cultivated his soul, already rich, more than anyone else! He reaches the unknown, and if, in a state of panic, he finally loses the meaning of his visions, he has seen them! Let him die leaping through the unheard-of and unspeakable: other terrible workers will come; they will begin with the horizons where the other has collapsed."
(Arthur Rimbaud, Letter to Paul Demeny - May 15, 1871)

E1.7.D.6. IT IS TRULY IN THE 20th CENTURY THAT A PROFUSION OF THINKERS AND ARTISTS CONVERGE AGAIN WITH THE INTUITIONS OF THE ANTE-PREDICATIVE PERIOD IN THE WEST. Claude Levi-Strauss wrote in Tristes Tropiques: "It's been two and a half thousand years since men discovered and formulated these truths. Since then, we have not discovered anything". However, this philosophy remains marginal today. In part, this is because it is still difficult to understand, lying as it does on the very edge of language. Also, its apparent detachment, which in no way implies disengagement from the world - as we have seen - is often interpreted as being in conflict with, or even a threat to, the productivity and result-oriented mindset that dominates our times.

E1.7.D.6.1. VIRGINIA WOOLF (1882-1941)
“That is the whole”

E1.7.D.6.1_REF1_LIT VIRGINIA WOOLF’S VIVID CHILDHOOD MEMORY OF OBSERVING A FLOWER "In the spring of 1939, looking back on her life, Virginia Woolf recounted [...] her most vivid childhood memory, also of a flower, in the garden by the large white house on the Celtic Sea coast where she grew up:
« I was looking at the flower bed by the front door; “That is the whole”, I said. I was looking at a plant with a spread of leaves; and it seemed suddenly plain that the flower itself was a part of the earth; that a ring enclosed what was the flower; and that was the real flower; part earth; part flower. It was a thought I put away as being likely to be very useful to me later. »"
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

E1.7.D.6.2. PAUL VALERY (1871-1945)
"Tenderness, the moment when the ego strips itself of everything that clothed it, disguised it, distinguished it from the tiny child that is in each of us, essential and hidden, the germ or pure feeling of living."

E1.7.A.3.3_REF2_PO.wE1.7.D.6.2.

E1.7.D.6.3. JOHN COWPER POWYS (1872-1963)
" I feel that the deepest thing in life is the soul’s individual struggle to reach an exultant peace in relation to more cosmic forces than any social system, just or unjust, can cope with or compass"

E1.7.B.1.1_REF4.2_PH.wE1.7.D.6.3.

E1.7.D.6.3_REF2_LIT "GLEEFUL WONDER AT THE SIMPLE FACT OF BEING ALIVE is an omnipresent theme in Leonardo da Vinci’s work, masterfully embodied in Saint John the Baptist. John Cowper Powys places the painter in a line of thinkers who started roughly in the same period with the preSocratics in the West and Indian and Chinese philosophy in the East : " I feel that the deepest thing in life is the soul’s individual struggle to reach an exultant peace in relation to more cosmic forces than any social system, just or unjust, can cope with or compass. What is wrong with so many clever people to-day is the fatal distrust lodged in their minds—and lodged there by a superstitious awe in the presence of transitory scientific theories—of the power in their own souls. What we need—and the key to it lies in ourselves—is a bold return to the magical view of life. I [mean] that kind of faith in the potentialities of the ego, with which all great poetry and all great philosophy has been concerned. That feeling of exultant liberation from the immediate pressure of practical life, which any “logos” from the arena of Goethe, or Spinoza, or Leonardo, or Plato, or Heraclitus, or Epictetus, or the old Chinese Taoists conveys, is what we need.”
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934)

E1.7.D.6.4. BERTRAND RUSSELL (1872-1970)
"Make your interests gradually wider and more impersonal, until bit by bit the walls of the ego recede, and your life becomes increasingly merged in the universal life. An individual human existence should be like a river — small at first, narrowly contained within its banks, and rushing passionately past rocks and over waterfalls. Gradually the river grows wider, the banks recede, the waters flow more quietly, and in the end, without any visible break, they become merged in the sea, and painlessly lose their individual being."
(Bertrand Russell, “How to Grow Old,” Portraits from Memory and Other Essays, 1956)

E1.7.D.6.4_REF1_PO "TO OLD AGE
I see in you the estuary that enlarges and spreads itself grandly as it pours in the great sea."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.7.D.6.5. ROBERT MUSIL (1880-1942)
The characters in Robert Musil's "The Man Without Qualities" contemplate their experiences of awakening, yet choose to disregard them. It's essentially a chronicle of failure.

E1.7.D.6.5.a. " ONE WAS NO LONGER SUBJECT TO ANY OF THE SEPARATIONS THAT CHARACTERIZE HUMANITY [...] all life's problems and incidents took on an incomparable gentleness, tenderness, peace, and at the same time an entirely different meaning from the old one. [...]. Thanks to these silent experiences, everything that makes up ordinary life took on an overwhelming significance, whatever the circumstances."

E1.7.D.6.5.a_REF1_LIT ULRICH, IN A STATE OF CONTEMPLATION AND ONENESS WITH NATURE, FEELS A COMPLETE TRANSFORMATION IN HIS PERCEPTION OF LIFE. The distinctions between beings and objects fade away, creating a new intimacy and clarity. Even the most mundane experience takes on a profound and moving meaning.
"The forgotten, exceedingly important affair with the major’s wife. [...]
The sun drew him out of sleep in the mornings, and when the fishermen were out on the water, the women and children keeping to the houses, then it seemed that he and a donkey grazing among the shrubs and on hillocks between the two little villages on the island were the only higher specimens of life that existed in this quaint outpost
of the world. He followed Brother Ass’s example and climbed up on one of the hillocks or lay down on the shore in the surrounding company of sea, rock and sky. There was no
presumption in this feeling of companionship, for the difference in magnitude disappeared, as also did the difference between mind and nature, animate and inanimate; indeed, every kind of difference between things grew less in such communion. To put it quite soberly, these differences doubtless neither disappeared nor grew less, but they shed their significance and one was ‘no longer subject to any of the separations that are the mark of mankind’, one was in the very condition described by those believers in God who have entered the state of mystic love, those of whom the young cavalry lieutenant at that time knew nothing at all. Nor did he reflect on these  henomena—as another man, like a huntsman on the trail, might try to track an observation down by thinking along after it—indeed, he was probably not even aware of them.
But he was absorbing them. He was sub merging himself in the landscape, although one might equally well say that it was an unutterable state of being buoyed up and borne along; and when the world overbrimmed the threshold of his eyes, its meaning lapped against him from within, in soundless waves. He had drifted into the very heart of the world. From him to the distant beloved was as far as to the next tree. Inscape had linked the living beings where space was no more, as in dreams two living beings can pass through each other without intermingling; and this altered all their relations. Otherwise, however, this state of mind had nothing in common with dream. It was clear, and abounding in clear thoughts. Only nothing in it moved according to cause, purpose and physical desire, but everything went rippling out in circle upon circle, as
when a continuous jet plays upon a pool of water. And precisely this was what he described in his letters; nothing else.

It was an utterly changed form of life. Everything about it was shifted out of the focus of ordinary attention and had lost its sharp outlines. Seen in this way, it was all a little scattered and blurred, and yet manifestly there were still other centres filling it again with delicate certainty and clarity. For all life’s problems and events took on an incomparable mildness, softness and serenity, and at the same time an utterly transformed meaning. If, for instance, a beetle, there, ran past the hand of the man sunk in thought, it was not a coming nearer, a passing by and a dis appearing, and it was not beetle and man; it was a happening ineffably touching the heart, and yet not even a happening but, although it happened, a state. And, aided by such tranquil experiences, everything that generally goes to make up ordinary life was imbued with transforming significance, wherever Ulrich met with it."
(Robert Musil, The man without Qualities, Volume 1, 1930)

E1.7.D.6.5.b. MUSIL REFLECTS ON PAUL ARNHEIM'S ORIGINAL COSMIC CONSCIOUSNESS EXPERIENCE. Arnheim is portrayed in a state where his soul overflows, leading to a heightened awareness, making real-world events seem distant. Despite this, he continues with his usual life. Musil questions whether this experience is an illusion or a reality that all religions affirm. However, over time, this experience fades and appears to have been a fleeting frenzy.

E1.7.D.6.5.b_REF1_LIT PAUL ARNHEIM, DESPITE HIS ORDINARY, COMMERCIAL BEHAVIOUR, USED TO EXPERIENCE A DEEP CONNECTION BETWEEN HIS INNER AND OUTER WORLDS. This experience, often associated with an original cosmic love, tended to fade with time, giving way to a different, more pragmatic reality that replaced wonder with routine.
"The Merchant King and the Fusion of Soul Trade Interests. Or again, all the paths of the mind start from the soul, but none leads back to it. [...] 
At that moment, even ambition fell silent, the events of the real world were as distant as the sounds heard behind a garden wall, it seemed to him that his soul had overflowed and was finally truly present. [...Even in this exalted state, it is true that the young Paul Arnheim, completely sure of himself, dined in some chic restaurant, frequented the best society, dressed with great care, and did everywhere what there was to do; But one could say that the distance from himself to himself was as great as from himself to beings to objects, that the outer world did not stop at his skin, and that the inner world did not shine only through the window of his reflection, but that these two worlds combined in an undivided presence and absence, as gentle, peaceful, and noble as a dreamless sleep. [...] Arnheim behaved exactly as usual, except that the events seemed to be charged with an elusive meaning: and behind the trembling flame, the inner man remained motionless, watching the outer man who, in front of it, was eating an apple while his tailor took the measurements of a suit.
Was it an illusion, or the shadow of a reality that we will never fully understand? The only answer that can be given is that all religions, at some stage in their evolution, have considered it a reality, as have all lovers, all romantics, and all men who have a special fondness for the moon, for spring, and for the radiant agony of the first days of autumn. But this feeling fades with time; one cannot say whether it evaporates or dries up, but one day one realizes that something else has taken its place, and one forgets it as quickly as one forgets unreal events, dreams and reveries. Since this experience of primordial cosmic love almost always goes hand in hand with first love, we believe that we know, not without relief, what value to attach to it, and we count it among the follies that one may commit only before obtaining the right to vote".
(Robert Musil, The man without Qualities, Volume 1, 1930)

E1.7.D.6.5.c. "AND NOW, WHAT DO WE DO?"
"While our contemporaries wield the hammer and slide rule during working hours and behave outside them like a horde of kids swept from one extravagance into another under the pressure of "And now, what do we do?" which is basically nothing more than the expression of bitter disgust, they cannot deliver themselves from a persistent, secret voice urging them to conversion. To this voice, they apply the principle of the division of labor by maintaining intellectuals specialized in this kind of presentiment and inner jeremiad: penitents and confessors of their time, absolvers by profession, prophets and Lenten preachers in literature, who are always precious to know are there when one doesn't have the possibility, personally, of living according to their principles."

E1.7.D.6.5.c_REF1_LIT ARNHEIM IS TORN BETWEEN TWO INNER VOICES: ONE PRAISES THE IMPORTANCE OF MONEY, REASON, AND MORALITY, WHILE THE OTHER DEMANDS THAT THESE VALUES BE ABANDONED IN FAVOR OF A MORE SPIRITUAL AND AUTHENTIC EXISTENCE. This duality reflects the contradictions of his era, in which the worship of money and order coexisted with a desire for inner depth. Arnheim, like his contemporaries, is torn between his role as a technician and businessman and his spiritual aspirations, but this division fails at the crucial moment of decision.
"What is the object of modern man's faith? God or the Head of the Universe Corporation? Arnheim hesitated to answer. [...] 
Arnheim is said to have spoken in this way because a deep voice told him clearly that one could no more renounce money than one could renounce reason and morality. But another voice, equally deep, told him no less clearly that one should boldly renounce reason, morality, and all the rationalism of existence. It was precisely in those dizzying moments when he felt no other need than to rush, like a wandering satellite, into Diotima's lonely mass, that this voice almost prevailed. Then the growth of thought seemed as alien to him as that of nails and hair. A moral life seemed to him a dead life, and a hidden aversion to order and morality made him blush. Arnheim was like his own age. The latter worshiped money, order, knowledge, calculation, measurement and weighing, in short, the spirit of money and its family, and at the same time deplored them. While our contemporaries wield hammers and slide rules during working hours and behave outside of them like a horde of children driven from one extravagance to another under the pressure of the question, "And what shall we do now?" which is really nothing more than an expression of bitter disgust, they cannot free themselves from a persistent and secret voice urging them to convert. To this voice they apply the principle of the division of labor, maintaining intellectuals specialized in this kind of premonitions and inner lamentations: penitents and confessors of their time, professional absolvers, prophets and Lenten preachers in literature, who are always valuable to know about when one does not have the opportunity personally to live according to their principles; and it is more or less the same kind of moral ransom represented by the phrases and subsidies that the state swallows every year in bottomless cultural institutions. 
This division of labor could even be found in Arnheim himself. When he was sitting in his director's office checking a profit and loss account, he would have blushed to think otherwise than as a technician and businessman; but as soon as his company's money was no longer at stake, he would have blushed not to think otherwise and not to proclaim that it is necessary to give man the possibility of rising other than through the dead-end paths of regularity, prescriptions, standards, and other such things, the results of which are completely devoid of interiority and profoundly superficial. There is no doubt that this other way is what we call religion. Arnheim had written several books on the subject. In these books, he had also given this other way names: the myth, the return to simplicity, the kingdom of the soul, the spiritualization of the economy, the essence of the deed, and other similar formulas, because the problem had multiple aspects; in fact, it had exactly as many sides as Arnheim discovered when he examined himself with disinterestedness, as a man who has great duties before him must do. But it was obviously his destiny that this division of labor should lead to his downfall at the moment of decision. At the very moment when he felt the need to be as great, as whole as the figures of the earliest ages, as carefree as only true aristocrats can be, as integrally religious as the nature of love requires when it is deeply understood, at the very moment when he wanted to throw himself at Diotima's feet without regard for his trousers or his future, a voice held him back. It was the voice of reason, awakened at the wrong moment, or, as he said to himself with irritation, "the voice of calculation and greed, which today constantly opposes the edification of a noble life, the mystery of feeling".
(Robert Musil, The man without Qualities, Volume 1, 1930)

E1.7.D.6.5.d. ULRICH AND AGATHE DISCUSS MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE AND THE PERCEPTION OF REALITY. Ulrich states that one does not need to be a saint to experience transcendence. He suggests that something as simple as observing a herd of cows can transport someone to another life. In this state, typical perceptions are challenged, and details become familiar and intimate. The emerging relationships between all things are profound yet elusive. Within this state, evil has no place, and every action is driven by the love of this incredible state.

E1.7.D.6.5.d_REF1_LIT ULRICH DESCRIBES A TRANSCENDENTAL EXPERIENCE IN WHICH CONTEMPLATING A HERD OF COWS CAN MAKE ONE FEEL TRANSPORTED TO ANOTHER LIFE, FORGETTING PRACTICAL AND UTILITARIAN CONCERNS. This experience creates a new, intense but elusive relationship with the world, where everything seems intimately connected and where no heinous act can occur. This sense of tranquility and vastness is fragile and tends to dissipate.
"Sacred Conversations. Varied continuation. [...] 
[Ulrich] answered immediately: "You do not have to be a saint to have a similar experience! Just sitting on a felled tree or on a bench in the mountains and looking at a herd of grazing cows can make you feel as if you have suddenly been transported to another life! We forget ourselves and at the same time we find ourselves again: you have already spoken of this yourself. [...]
'Usually a herd is nothing more than grazing cattle in our eyes. Or a picturesque subject in front of a beautiful background. Or we hardly pay attention to it. The herds of cows on the mountain paths are part of the said paths, and one would only understand what one feels at the sight of them if there were a regulatory clock or an investment property in their place. In general, one wonders whether to sit or stand; one complains about the flies buzzing around the herd; one makes sure there isn't a bull in the middle; one wonders where the path leads: countless little intentions, little worries, little calculations, little perceptions that form like the paper on which the image of the herd is painted. We don't think about the paper, we just see the herd on it... - And suddenly the paper tears!
- That's it. Or rather, some habitual tissue in us is torn. So nothing edible is grazed; nothing pictorial; nothing stands in our way. You can't even form the words graze or browse, because that would require a number of practical, utilitarian concepts that you have suddenly lost. What remains on the surface could be described as a ripple of emotion, rising and falling, or breathing and extravagant, as if it filled the entire field of vision without having any precise contours. Of course, in this undulation we still find countless isolated perceptions, colors, horns, movements, smells, everything that is part of reality; but if we still take note of them, we no longer recognize them. I would say that these details are freed from the egoism that drew our attention to them, that they are fraternally and, in the literal sense of the word, intimately connected. Of course, it is not a question of the surface; somehow all things have lost their boundaries and have entered into you.' [...]
'Yes, the moment one escapes from inessential life, all things initiate new mutual relationships," Ulrich added. "One could almost say that there is no longer any relationship between them. For this new relationship is absolutely unknown; we have no experience of it at all, and all the others have been abolished; but this one, in spite of its obscurity, is so obvious that it cannot be denied. It is intense but elusive. Let us put it another way: usually, when we look at something, the gaze is like a stick or a taut thread, at both ends of which the eye leans on one side and the object looked at leans on the other, and one does not know what great weft of this kind is leaning every second; whereas, in this new relationship, there is rather something painfully sweet that keeps the rays of the gaze apart. 
"We no longer possess anything in the world, we no longer cling to anything. We are no longer held by anything," Agathe said. "Everything is like a great tree without a leaf stirring. In this state we cannot do anything bad. 
"It is said that nothing can happen in this state that is not in harmony with it," Ulrich continued. "The desire to surrender to this state is the sole motive, the sole form, the loving determination of every act and thought that occurs within it. It is something infinitely calm and infinitely vast, and everything that happens in it steadily increases its meaning, grows quietly. If it does not increase it, it is evil, but evil cannot happen, because at that moment the silence and clarity are torn apart and the wonderful state dissolves."
(Robert Musil, The man without Qualities, Volume 1, 1930)

E1.6.C.2.13.c_REF1_PH.wE1.7.D.6.5.d

E1.7.D.6.5.e. ULRICH CLAIMS THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A GENERAL SECRETARIAT OF SOUL AND PRECISION. Ulrich's life is symbolized by two trees: one represents his relentless ardor to influence reality, while the other illustrates the inactive aspect of his being, evident in his belief in the temporary usefulness of his actions. He acknowledges that the conflict between literature and reality uncovers a basic choice between metaphor and the principle of identity. Merging these two thought processes, he suggests, could result in a more advanced humanity.

E1.7.D.6.5.e_REF1_LIT ULRICH IS TORN BETWEEN TWO APPROACHES TO LIFE: A FIERCE QUEST FOR PRECISION AND ACTION ON THE ONE HAND, AND A MORE DREAMY AND INTUITIVE DIMENSION ON THE OTHER. He struggles to reconcile these two aspects, but often finds himself in conflict. He must decide whether to live an ordinary life with attainable goals or to take his seemingly impossible aspirations seriously.
"The two trees of life. Ulrich called for the creation of a General Secretariat of Soul and Precision. [...] 
This need to attack and dominate life had always been very visible in Ulrich, appearing in the form of a rejection of the established order, a shifting aspiration for a new order, a moral or logical demand, or simply the need to keep his body in shape. Everything Ulrich had called over the years existentialism, a sense of possibility, imaginative precision as opposed to pedantic precision; everything he had wished for: that we should invent history, that we should experience the history of ideas instead of universal history, that we should take possession of what we cannot fully realise, and that at last one should live, perhaps not as a human being, but as a character in a book, stripped of all that is unimportant, so that the rest of the world forms a magical unity - all these variations of his thought, which by their extraordinary intransigence made them truly hostile to reality, had in common that they wanted to act on reality with an obvious and implacable eagerness.

More difficult to distinguish, because closer to the realm of shadow and dream, were the elements of the other tree in whose image his life was reflected. At its root, no doubt, was the deep memory of a childhood relationship with the world, of trust and abandonment; and this feeling had been prolonged by the intuition of having once glimpsed an immense land, later reduced to a little soil in the flowerpot where morality cultivates its miserable plants. [...] Perhaps this inactive half of his being had manifested itself above all in the involuntary conviction that the usefulness of the active and restless half was only temporary, a conviction that it projected like a shadow over the other. In everything he undertook (the passions of the body as well as those of the mind), Ulrich had felt himself a prisoner of preparation, always insufficient; with the years, the sense of necessity in his life had been exhausted like the oil in a lamp. His development had obviously split into two paths, one exposed in broad daylight and the other obscure and closed to traffic. The state of moral stagnation in which he found himself and which had oppressed him for a long time, perhaps more than was reasonable, could only have come about because he had never managed to merge these two paths into one. 
Now, remembering that the impossibility of their fusion had recently manifested itself to him in the tension between literature and reality, between comparison and truth, Ulrich suddenly realized that there was infinitely more to it than a simple accidental inspiration arising from those confused, aimless dialogues he had recently had with the interlocutors least able to understand him. No matter how far back in history we go, we find these two fundamental attitudes, one governed by metaphor, the other by the principle of identity. The principle of identity is the law of lucid thought and action; it manifests itself as much in the unassailable conclusion of a line of reasoning as in the brain of a blackmailer who pushes his victim before him step by step; it is a law imposed by the misery of our life, to which we would succumb if relations could not take an unambiguous form. The metaphor, on the other hand, is the way of associating images that reigns in the dream; it is the flexible logic of the soul to which, in the intuitions of art and religion, the kinship of all things corresponds. Ordinary likes and dislikes, approval and disapproval, admiration, subordination, domination, imitation and their opposites, these various relations of man to man and of man to nature, which are not yet and perhaps never will be purely objective, can only be grasped by metaphor. What is called higher humanity is undoubtedly an attempt to fuse together these two great halves of life, metaphor and truth, after they have been carefully separated. But when, in a metaphor, we separate everything that might be true from what is mere froth, we usually gain only a little truth while destroying all the value of the metaphor. This separation may have been inevitable in intellectual evolution, but it has had the same effect as boiling a substance to thicken it: the evaporation of the best of it in the process. Nowadays one sometimes has the strong impression that moral concepts and rules are nothing more than worn-out metaphors around which the unbearable kitchen smells of humanism waft. [...]

The way back [...] 

Ulrich felt that he finally had to make up his mind: either live like everyone else for an attainable goal, or take these 'impossibilities' seriously".
(Robert Musil, The man without Qualities, Volume 1, 1930)

E1.7.D.6.5.e_REF1.1_LIT  FELIPE PINHO: ISN'T MUSIL PROPOSING A NEW CONCEPT IN 'THE MAN WITHOUT QUALITIES'? Isn't he leading us, through this philosophical fable, to the realization that man does not have to choose between the principle of identity and that of metaphor? None of the characters come to this conclusion on their own, but isn't it the reader's conclusion?
Pierre Schindler: But none of the characters are really happy, because they have all renounced their experiences of awakening by classifying them as futile. Isn't it a chronicle of that kind of failure?
(Conversation on April 10, 2019 with Felipe Pinho while jogging in Parque do Povo, São Paulo, Brazil)

E1.7.D.6.5.f. ULRICH REFLECTS ON FEELINGS, MUSIC, ACTIVITY AND PASSIVITY, AND THEIR RELATIONSHIP TO SPIRITUAL EVOLUTION. He begins to view change and progress as mere descriptors of the fact that human endeavors never reach absolute conviction. Furthermore, he suggests that knowledge may have expelled mankind from its original state, requiring countless experiments to find its way back to wisdom. In essence, Ulrich acknowledges the concepts of Original Sin and the Fall, but interprets them differently from traditional perspectives.

E1.7.D.6.5.f_REF1_LIT "ULRICH REPLIED SHARPLY: « WHEN I THINK OF MY VERY YOUNG AGE, I WOULD SAY THAT THE INSIDE AND THE OUTSIDE WERE THEN HARDLY DISTINCT. When I crawled towards an object, the object flew towards me; when an event looked important to my eyes, I was not the only one to be moved by it: things themselves began to bubble. [...] I did not yet own myself; deep down, "I" was not yet, my personal states were not yet clearly separated from those of the world. It may seem strange, yet it is true to say that my feelings, my inclinations, that I myself was not yet entirely within myself. Even stranger, I could also say that I wasn't quite far from myself yet. Today indeed, as you think you are in full possession of yourself, if you wonder who you are, in the end, you will discover that you always see yourself from the outside, as an object. You will perceive that one occasion makes you sad and another furious, as your coat is sometimes wet, sometimes warm. By observing yourself, with all the attention possible, you will succeed, at most, in ending up behind yourself, never inside. Whatever you do, you stay outside of yourself, except precisely for the rare moments when the others would say about you that you are outside yourself. To compensate, we adults have been able to say "I am" on any occasion, if it pleases us. You see a car and in a way you see at the same time, like a shadow, the sentence: I see a car. You love, or you are sad, and you see that you are. Strictly speaking, however, neither the car, nor your sadness, nor your love, nor you are entirely there. Nothing is there entirely like it was in childhood. Everything you touch, as soon as you have succeeded in being a personality, freezes even within your deep intimacy. All that remains is a thin thread of self-awareness and troubled self-esteem, enveloped in an entirely exterior life. So what is wrong? We have the feeling that something could still be fixed but we don't know what. In fact how can we say that a child has absolutely different experiences from those of an adult? I don't have a definitive answer to these questions, although one or two thoughts come to mind. But it's been a long time since I've responded in my own way: by losing all love for this way of being "someone" and for this kind of world. »"
(Robert Musil, The Man Without Qualities, Volume 1, 1930)

E1.7.D.6.5.f_REF1.1_LIT ULRICH STRUGGLES WITH INTERNAL CONTRADICTIONS CONCERNING THE PURITY OF FEELINGS AND HUMAN ACTIVITY 
"Where we go from Koniatowski's critique of Danielli's principle to original sin, and from original sin to the emotional mystery of the sister. [...]
The feeling is quite rare. To preserve a certain temperature of feeling from the cold is probably to preserve the heat necessary for incubation, without which there is no spiritual evolution. When a man is torn away from the confusion of intelligent intentions that embarrass him with a thousand foreign objects, when he is placed for a few moments in a state of absolute disinterestedness, for example, when he listens to music, he almost returns to the state of flowers on which rain and sunlight pass. He was about to add that there is an eternity more eternal in the pauses and rest of the human spirit than in its activity; but he had been thinking sometimes of "feeling" and sometimes of "experience," which led to a contradiction. For there were also experiences of the will! There were also experiences of action at its height! No doubt one could admit that each of these experiences, when it reaches its greatest radiance of bitterness, is nothing more than feeling: but the contradiction would then be that the state of feeling, in its greatest purity, would be a rest, a fallout of activity! Or was there no contradiction at all? Was there a marvelous order in which the highest activity, at its center, would be immobility? It seemed that this series of inspirations was less an ulterior motive than an undesirable thought: for Ulrich, in a sudden reaction against the sentimental turn that the considerations in which he had become involved had taken, withdrew them. He had no intention of meditating on certain states, nor, in reflecting on feelings, of falling prey to them himself. [...]
That is why it also seemed to Ulrich that what we call change, or even progress of the times, was only a word to express that no attempt succeeds at the point where they all should unite, on the way to an absolutely total conviction, that is, towards the possibility of continuous development, lasting enjoyment, and that gravity of great beauty which now hardly ever casts a shadow on our lives. [...] When it came down to it, one was not far from thinking that Ulrich believed in the "Fall" and "Original Sin". In other words, he would have readily admitted that at some point an essential change had occurred in human behavior, like when the lover regains his composure: he sees "the whole truth," but something greater has been destroyed, and the truth is now nothing more than a remnant sewn back together as best it can. Perhaps it was indeed the fruit of "knowledge" that had caused this change in the mind, and had driven the human race from its original state, from which it could only find its way back after countless experiences and thanks to the wisdom that sin brings. Ulrich did not believe in these stories as they have been handed down to us, but as he had discovered them: he believed in them like a calculator who, having before his eyes the system of his feelings, concludes from the impossibility of justifying them separately to the necessity of introducing an imaginary hypothesis whose nature can only be sensed".
(Robert Musil, The Man Without Qualities, Volume 1, 1930)

E1.7.D.6.6. PIERRE TEILHARD DE CHARDIN (1881-1955)
The spiritual experiences we have can arise from atoms and molecules. At the same time, some of these experiences, and certainly their very personal and subjective nature, cannot be fully understood in terms of atoms and molecules.

E1.7.D.6.6_REF1_PH PIERRE TEILHARD DE CHARDIN DESCRIBES HIS LIFELONG SPIRITUAL JOURNEY, WHERE AN INNATE SPARK IGNITED A PROFOUND CONNECTION WITH THE UNIVERSE, TRANSFORMING HIS PERCEPTION OF MATTER INTO A DIVINE, LUMINOUS EXPERIENCE. He emphasizes the existence of an essential, higher order that encompasses all spiritual emotions and brings ultimate happiness and clarity.
"I shall try… to show how, starting from the point at which a spark was first struck, a point that was built into me congenitally, the World gradually caught fire for me, burst into flames; how this happened all during my life, and as a result of my whole life, until it formed a great luminous mass, lit from within that surrounded me. [...]
Within every being and every event there was a progressive expansion of a mysterious inner clarity which transfigured them… Crimson gleams of Matter, gliding imperceptibly into the gold of Spirit, ultimately to become transformed into the incandescence of a Universe that is Person… The Diaphany of the Divine at the heart of a glowing Universe, as I have experienced it through contact with the Earth — the Divine radiating from the depths of a blazing Matter. [...]
To be completely at home and completely happy, there must be the knowledge that “Something, essential by nature” exists, to which everything else is no more than an accessory or perhaps an ornament… which it is impossible (once one has experienced it) to confuse with any other spiritual emotion, whether joy in knowledge or discovery, joy in creation or in loving: and this not so much because it is different from all those emotions, but because it belongs to a higher order and contains them all."
(Pierre Teilhard de Chardin,  The Heart of Matter)

E1.7.D.6.6_REF2_PH "I’M A SCIENTIST AND HAVE ALWAYS HAD A SCIENTIFIC VIEW OF THE WORLD — by which I mean that the universe is made of material stuff, and only material stuff, and that stuff is governed by a small number of fundamental laws. Every phenomenon has a cause, which originates in the physical universe. I’m a materialist. Not in the sense of seeking happiness in cars and nice clothes, but in the literal sense of the word: the belief that everything is made out of atoms and molecules, and nothing more. Yet, I have transcendent experiences. I communed with two ospreys that summer in Maine. I have feelings of being part of things larger than myself. I have a sense of connection to other people and to the world of living things, even to the stars. I have a sense of beauty. I have experiences of awe. And I’ve had transporting creative moments. [...]
I believe that the spiritual experiences we have can arise from atoms and molecules. At the same time, some of these experiences, and certainly their very personal and subjective nature, cannot be fully understood in terms of atoms and molecules. I believe in the laws of chemistry and biology and physics — in fact, as a scientist I much admire those laws — but I don’t think they capture, or can capture, the first-person experience of making eye contact with wild animals and similar transcendent moments. Some human experiences are simply not reducible to zeros and ones. [...]

A common feature of all aspects of spirituality is a loss of self, a letting go, a willingness to embrace something outside of ourselves, a willingness to listen rather than talk, a recognition that we are small and the cosmos is large. […]

Most transcendent experiences are completely ego-free. In the moment, we lose track of time and space, we lose track of our bodies, we lose track of our selves. We dissolve. And yet… spirituality emerges from consciousness and the material brain. And the paramount signature of consciousness is a sense of self, an “I-ness” distinct from the rest of the cosmos. Thus, curiously, a thing centered on self creates a thing absent of self. […]

More self, less connection to the larger world."
(Alan Lightman, The Transcendent Brain: Spirituality in the Age of Science, 2023)

E1.7.D.6.6_REF2.1_PH NOT ALL THINGS ARE SUBJECT TO QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS "Although as a child I developed a scientific view of the world, I also understood that not all things were subject to quantitative analysis… I was about nine years old. It was a Sunday afternoon. I was alone in a bedroom of my home in Memphis, Tennessee, gazing out the window at the empty street, listening to the faint sound of a train passing a great distance away. Suddenly I felt that I was looking at myself from outside my body. For a brief few moments, I had the sensation of seeing my entire life, and indeed the life of the entire planet, as a brief flicker in a great chasm of time, with an infinite span of time before my existence and an infinite span of time afterward. My fleeting sensation included infinite space. Without body or mind, I was somehow floating in the gargantuan stretch of space, far beyond the solar system and even the galaxy, space that stretched on and on and on. I felt myself to be a tiny speck, insignificant. A speck in a huge universe that cared nothing about me or any living beings and their little dots of existence — a universe that simply was. And I felt that everything I had experienced in my young life, the joy and the sadness, and everything that I would later experience meant absolutely nothing in the grand scheme of things. It was a realization both liberating and terrifying at once… Despite the dismal feeling that the universe didn’t care a whit about me, I did feel connected to something far larger than myself."
(Alan Lightman, The Transcendent Brain: Spirituality in the Age of Science, 2023)

E1.7.D.6.7. WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS  (1883-1963)
"So much depends
Upon

A red wheel
Barrow

Glazed with rain
Water

Beside the white
Chickens"

E1.7.D.6.7_REF1_PO "I WANTED TO WRITE A POEM THAT YOU COULD UNDERSTAND; what good would it do if I wrote you something that was not intelligible.
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                   Here it is
can you see how are the little girls who linger playing on the sidewalk in the shadow
                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                    of dusk 
when they should be home 
                                                                                                                    for dinner?

I'm like that too."
(William Carlos Williams)

E1.7.D.6.8. D.H. LAWRENCE (1885-1930)
"The vast marvel is to be alive… The supreme triumph is to be most vividly, most perfectly alive."

E1.7.D.6.8_REF1_LIT "THE VAST MARVEL IS TO BE ALIVE… The supreme triumph is to be most vividly, most perfectly alive. Whatever the unborn and the dead may know, they cannot know the beauty, the marvel of being alive in the flesh. The dead may look after the afterwards. But the magnificent here and now of life in the flesh is ours, and ours alone, and ours only for a time. We ought to dance with rapture that we should be alive and in the flesh, and part of the living, incarnate cosmos. I am part of the sun as my eye is part of me. That I am part of the earth my feet know perfectly, and my blood is part of the sea. My soul knows that I am part of the human race, my soul is an organic part of the great human soul… There is nothing of me that is alone and absolute except my mind, and we shall find that the mind has no existence by itself, it is only the glitter of the sun on the surface of the waters."
(D.H. Lawrence, Apocalypse, 1931)

E1.7.D.6.9. T.S.ELIOT (1888-1965)
“At the still point of turning world. Neither flesh nor fleshness; 
Neither from nor towards; at the still point, there the dance is”

E1.7.D.6.9_REF1_PO "[...] AT THE STILL POINT OF TURNING WORLD. Neither flesh nor fleshness; 
Neither from nor towards; at the still point, there the dance is, 
But neither arrest nor movement. 
And do not call it fixity. 
Where past and future are gathered. Neither movement from nor towards. 
Neither ascent nor decline. Except for the point, the still point, 
There would be no dance, and there is only the dance. 
I can only say, there we have been: but I cannot say where. 
And I cannot say, how long, for that is to place it in time. 
The inner freedom from the practical desire. 
The release from action and suffering, release from the inner 
And the outer compulsion, yet surrounded 
By a grace of sense, a white light still and moving. 
Movement without motion, concentration 
Without elimination, both a new world 
And the old made explicit, understood 
In the completion of its partial ecstasy. 
The resolution of its partial horror [...]."
(T.S. Eliot, The Four Quartets, 1943)

E1.7.D.6.10. LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN (1889-1951)
"My experience above all others? The best way to describe it would be to say that, when I experience it, I am filled with wonder at the existence of the world".

E1.7.D.6.10.a. THE TRACTATUS ENDS IN THE "MYSTICAL," WHICH CONSISTS OF THREE ELEMENTS: THE FEELING OF EXISTENCE, THE FEELING OF THE LIMITED WHOLE, AND THE FEELING OF THE INEFFABLE. These elements express the impossibility of giving meaning to the world, its existence and its totality from language and from within the world. The "mystical" begins when the indicative use of language provokes a feeling of limitation or totality in us. "Wittgenstein wants to describe the impression of strangeness (which can go as far as ecstasy) that we feel in front of Dasein (the fact that the world is)."

E1.7.D.6.10.a_REF1_PH WITTGENSTEIN HIGHLIGHTS THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF FINDING MEANING WITHIN THE WORLD AND LANGUAGE. Wittgenstein suggests that understanding the meaning of life is an indescribable experience, resonating with Éric Weil's notion that true comprehension transcends philosophical discourse and is only recognized in retrospect.
Here we find Wittgenstein's famous statement: 'Whoever understands me, recognizes my propositions as nonsense.' But the context puts this statement into a new perspective. All these propositions that conclude the Tractatus belong to the fourth kind of use of language: they try to show the inexpressible by their falsity. But insofar as they attempt to show the inexpressible, they appear to be nonsense. Insofar as they have a kind of meaning and truth, one might say, they appear to be nonsense. "By transcending them, we have the right vision of the world. Here we arrive at what Wittgenstein calls the mystical. [...] 
I think that Wittgenstein thinks that the "mystical" begins at the moment when the indicative use of language provokes in us a feeling of limitation or totality, which amounts to the same thing: "The feeling of the world as something limited is the mystical feeling. I think Wittgenstein wants to describe the feeling of strangeness (which can go as far as ecstasy) that we experience in the face of Dasein (the fact that the world is). [...]
In any case, the Tractatus ends in the 'mystical'. This 'mystical' seems to have three components: the sense of existence, the sense of the limited whole, and the sense of the inexpressible, that is, of something beyond language. These three components are in fact three different expressions of the same goal: the impossibility of giving meaning to the world, to its existence and its totality, from within the world and language. Wittgenstein tells us nothing more. Was his intuition of the meaninglessness of the world connected with the feeling of an inexpressible presence? Is that why he says that he who has discovered the meaning of life cannot say what it consists of (6.521)? Éric Weil seems to express a similar experience when he writes

'The man who lives in feeling and in the present, the man when he is there rather than when he lives there, has no need of philosophy, because he has no need. As soon as he is no longer there, he speaks of a "poetic moment," of a "mystical enlightenment," of a "flash," of an "eruption," or of an "irruption," and when he remembers his "inspired" language, his tat tvam asi, his cry in which the One is revealed, the symbols in which the unity of all life and all death appears, the love so penetrating that it is the light that devours, he knows that he has understood, that there has been understanding, the disappearance of all exteriority, of all strangeness, but he only knows this and no longer realizes that he has understood (1)'.

Note : (1) Weil, Logic of Philosophy. 
(Pierre Hadot, Wittgenstein and the Limits of Language, 2004)

E1.7.D.6.10.a_REF2_PH LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN AFFIRMS THAT SKEPTICISM IS SENSELESS WHEN IT DOUBTS WHERE A QUESTION CANNOT BE ASKED. He stresses that the problems of life are not solved by scientific answers. He mentions the existence of the inexpressible, which manifests itself as the mystical, and concludes that the propositions of language must be transcended in order to obtain a correct vision of the world.
"Scepticism is not irrefutable, but palpably senseless, if it would doubt where a question cannot be asked. For doubt can only exist where there is a question; a question
only where there is an answer, and this only where something can be said. (6.51).
We feel that even if all possible scientic questions be answered, the problems of life have still not been touched at all. Of course there is then no question left, and just this is the answer. (6.52).
The solution of the problem of life is seen in the vanishing of this problem.
(Is not this the reason why men to whom after long doubting the sense of life became clear, could not then say wherein this sense consisted?) (6.521). 
There is indeed the inexpressible. This shows itself; it is the mystical. (6.522). 
The right method of philosophy would be this. To say nothing except what can be said, i.e. the propositions of natural science, i.e. something that has nothing to do with philosophy: and then always, when someone else wished to say something metaphysical, to demonstrate to him that he had given no meaning to certain signs in his ropositions. This method would be unsatisfying to the otherhe would not have the feeling that we were teaching him philosophybut it would be the only strictly correct method. My propositions are elucidatory in this way: he who understands me nally recognizes them as senseless, when he has climbed out through them, on them, over them. (He must so to speak throw away the ladder, after he has climbed up on it.) He must surmount these propositions; then he sees the world rightly. (6.54). 
Whereof one cannot speak, thereof one must be silent. (7)."
(Ludwig Wittgenstein, Tractatus philosophicus, 1921)

E1.7.D.6.10.a_REF3_PH “GOOD SNOWFLAKES. THEY DON’T FALL ANYWHERE ELSE.
—LAYMAN PANG (740–808)

Meditation originates and culminates in the everyday sublime. I have little interest in achieving states of sustained concentration in which the sensory richness of experience is replaced by pure introspective rapture. I have no interest in reciting mantras, visualizing Buddhas or mandalas, gaining out-of-body experiences, reading other people’s thoughts, practicing lucid dreaming, or channeling psychic energies through chakras, let alone letting my consciousness be absorbed in the transcendent perfection of the Unconditioned. Meditation is about embracing what is happening to this organism as it touches its environment in this moment. I do not reject the experience of the mystical. I reject only the view that the mystical is concealed behind what is merely apparent, that it is anything other than what is occurring in time and space right now. The mystical does not transcend the world but saturates it. “The mystical is not how the world is,” noted Ludwig Wittgenstein in 1921, “but that it is.”
As understood by Edmund Burke and the Romantic poets, the sublime exceeds our capacity for representation. The world is excessive: every blade of grass, every ray of sun, every falling leaf is excessive. None of these things can be adequately captured in concepts, images, or words. They overreach us, spilling beyond the boundaries of thought. Their sublimity brings the thinking, calculating mind to a stop, leaving one speechless, overwhelmed with either wonder or terror. Yet for we human animals who delight and revel in our place, who crave security, certainty, and consolation, the sublime is banished and forgotten. As a result, life is rendered opaque and flat. Each day is reduced to the repetition of familiar actions and events, which are blandly comforting but devoid of an intensity we both yearn for and fear.
To experience the everyday sublime requires that we dismantle the perceptual conditioning that insists on seeing ourselves and the world as essentially comfortable, permanent, solid, and “mine.” It means to embrace suffering and conflict rather than to shy away from them, to cultivate the embodied attention that contemplates the tragic, changing, empty, and impersonal dimensions of life, rather than succumbing to fantasies of self-glorification or self-loathing. This takes time. It is a lifelong practice.
The everyday sublime is our ordinary life experienced from the perspective of the fourfold task. As we have seen, this entails (1) an openhearted embrace of the totality of one’s existential situation, (2) a letting go of the habitual reactive patterns of thought and behavior triggered by that situation, (3) a conscious valorization of those moments in which such reactive patterns have stilled, and (4) a commitment to a way of life that emerges from such stillness and responds empathetically, ethically, and creatively to the situation at hand.
Understood in this way, meditation is not about gaining proficiency in technical procedures claimed to guarantee attainments that correspond to the dogmas of a particular religious orthodoxy. Nor is its goal to achieve a privileged, transcendent insight into the ultimate nature of reality, mind, or God. In the light of the fourfold task, meditation is the ongoing cultivation of a sensibility, a way of attending to every aspect of experience within a framework of ethical values and goals.
Over the course of history monks and yogins in Buddhist cultures have developed spiritual technologies to a high degree, resulting in levels of mental refinement, control, and absorption that may seem incredible to modern Westerners. Yet from a dharmic perspective the value of these attainments lies not in their being humanly possible but in their contribution to the practice of the fourfold task. It is not hard to imagine being highly accomplished in certain meditative techniques, yet still failing to embrace wholeheartedly the condition of dukkha that pervades the life of oneself and others, still failing to let go of self-centered reactions to dukkha, still failing to behold the stopping of such reactivity, and still failing to cultivate a radically different way of being in this world.
As a sensibility, meditation enables us to cultivate an understanding of moment-to-moment experience much as we develop an appreciation of art or poetry or nature. Grounded in the body and the senses, we value an open-mindedness to what is unfamiliar, probe our sensorium with relentless curiosity, listen attentively to what others have to say, are willing to suspend habitual attitudes and opinions, and question what is going on instead of simply taking things for granted. The disengagement of meditation is not an aloof regard (or disregard) but a perspective that engenders another kind of response to what is happening. And it begins with the breath, our primordial relationship to the fabric of the world in which we are embedded.”
(Stephen Batchelor, After Buddhism, rethinking the dharma for a secular age, 2016)

E1.7.D.6.10.a_REF4_PO CZESLAW MILOSZ SHARES THE WISDOM AND CLARITY HE REACHED AT THE VERY END OF HIS LIFE, NEAR HIS "NINETIETH YEAR."
“LATE RIPENESS
Not soon, as late as the approach of my ninetieth year,
I felt a door opening in me and I entered
the clarity of early morning.
One after another my former lives were departing,
like ships, together with their sorrow.
And the countries, cities, gardens, the bays of seas
assigned to my brush came closer,
ready now to be described better than they were before.
I was not separated from people,
grief and pity joined us.
We forget - I kept saying - that we are all children of the King.
For where we come from there is no division
into Yes and No, into is, was, and will be.
We were miserable, we used no more than a hundredth part of the gift we received for our long journey.
Moments from yesterday and from centuries ago -
a sword blow, the painting of eyelashes before a mirror
of polished metal, a lethal musket shot, a caravel
staving its hull against a reef - they dwell in us,
waiting for a fulfillment.
I knew, always, that I would be a worker in the vineyard,
as are all men and women living at the same time,
whether they are aware of it or not.”
(Czeslaw Milosz)

E1.7.D.6.10.b. "THE 'JUST VISION OF THE WORLD' CONSISTS IN ACHIEVING A NAÏVE CONTEMPLATION OF REALITY CLEAR OF PREJUDGEMENTS, liberated from pseudo-concepts and pseudo-problems. The liberation entails an analysis of language, which aids in rectifying its misuse. The philosopher's wisdom is an ineffable experience, a perspective of perceiving things devoid of hollow concepts. This critique of language leads to the unrepresentable and inexpressible, aligning with a realm beyond the world and language, a form of mysticism or ecstasy.”

E1.7.D.6.10.b_REF1_PH PHILOSOPHY, ACCORDING TO WITTGENSTEIN, IS LIKENED TO SELF-THERAPY OR PSYCHOANALYSIS OF LANGUAGE, LEADING TO INEXPRESSIBLE WISDOM. It culminates in a mysticism in which the inexpressible is revealed, suggesting an ecstasy beyond the limits of language and the world.
"Obviously," the reader will have thought, "if the propositions about objects, facts, propositions, etc., are nonsense because they sin against logical symbolism, then almost all the propositions of the Tractatus are such nonsense. One might say that philosophical activity consists in discovering one's own nonsense, in recognizing oneself as an illegitimate user of language. But the paradox remains. One wonders how one can understand these propositions of the Tractatus if, in the end, they make no sense. But the audacity of the paradox should make us think. 
What will be "this just vision of the world" of which Wittgenstein speaks? The result of going beyond philosophical propositions can only be a naive view of reality. This naive view can only be achieved after liberation from all prejudices, all pseudo-concepts, all pseudo-problems. The misuse of language has separated man from the world. In a kind of self-therapy, philosophy cures itself, through language, of this misuse of language. A kind of psychoanalysis is at work here. And once "analyzed", the philosopher is no longer a philosopher, he is no longer "in search of wisdom", he is "wise". His wisdom is a pure incommunicable experience, a way of looking at things that cannot be expressed. The critique of language eliminates the emptiness of concepts in favor of the fullness of lived existence. [...]
Wittgenstein's positivism thus leads to mysticism: 'There is no doubt that there is something inexpressible; it shows itself; that is the 'mystical' (6.522). Wittgenstein is desperately succinct here. We are reduced to interpreting as best we can. If we are in language, as we are in the world, the inexpressible corresponds to something beyond the limits of language and the limits of the world. The unrepresentable and the inexpressible that we encountered in logic gave us a glimpse of this beyond. The 'mystic' that Wittgenstein speaks of seems to correspond to an ecstasy in which we "see" a world beyond the world and language, its meaning, its significance, the fact of its existence. [...]"
(Pierre Hadot, Wittgenstein and the Limits of Language, 2004)

E1.7.D.6.10.b_REF2_MU ON THE DIFFICULTY OF ACKNOWLEDGING REALITY

Schubert Fantasie in F minor D940

Listen to it on YouTube: https://youtu.be/9_KYkpu1cBQ?feature=shared

E1.7.D.6.10.c. WHAT IS EXPRESSED IN LANGUAGE, WE CANNOT EXPRESS BY LANGUAGE
"It seems to me that the whole Tractatus can be summed up in this extraordinarily concise formula: 'What is expressed in language, we cannot express by language (4.121).' No one has ever expressed so clearly and so profoundly what must be called the mystery of language, which is identical to the mystery of the world."

E1.7.D.6.10.c_REF1_PH WITTGENSTEIN AFFIRMS THAT WHAT IS EXPRESSED IN LANGUAGE CANNOT BE EXPRESSED BY LANGUAGE ITSELF, THUS EMPHASIZING THE MYSTERY OF LANGUAGE AND THE WORLD. Philosophy must critique this intrinsic limitation.
"It seems to me that the whole of the Tractatus can be summed up in this extraordinarily succinct formula: 'What is expressed in language, we cannot express in language' (4.121). No one has ever expressed so clearly and profoundly what must be called the mystery of language, which is identical with the mystery of the world. This formula governs both Wittgenstein's logical symbolism and his "mysticism. In symbolism, we cannot express through signs what is shown in the signs themselves. We cannot represent the unrepresentable. And it is in this sense of the critique of language that philosophy must be. As for "mysticism," it corresponds to the following idea: the inexpressible is shown in language; the essence of language is to aim at the inexpressible by expressing the expressible; we cannot express in language what we see; the ultimate meaning of language cannot be expressed in language. No doubt we are in language; this situation is insurmountable. But it is precisely in this insurmountable situation that transcendence reveals itself to us. [...]"
(Pierre Hadot, Wittgenstein and the Limits of Language, 2004)

E1.7.D.6.10.d. "THE ASPECTS OF THINGS THAT FOR US ARE MOST IMPORTANT ARE HIDDEN FROM US BECAUSE THEY ARE SIMPLE AND "ORDINARY", (We can't notice them - because they're always right in front of our eyes.) The authentic foundations of man's search don't astonish him. They have only astonished him once. - This means: what, once recognized, is most astonishing and extraordinary, does not astonish us [anymore].”

E1.7.D.6.10.d_REF1_PH MARVELING AT SIMPLE, DAILY THINGS IS A KEY THEME FOR WITTGENSTEIN, who believed that the most important aspects of reality often escape us because they are familiar. 
"It is what is simplest and most familiar that should fill us with wonder: instead of the false glory of Solomon, we should prefer the splendor of the lilies of the field:
The aspects of things that are most important to us are hidden from us because they are simple and "everyday" (we cannot notice them because they are always in front of us). The authentic foundations of his research do not surprise man. Only once did it surprise him. - This means that what, once recognized, is most astonishing and extraordinary, does not astonish us (§ 129) We are certainly touching here on the deepest concerns of Wittgenstein, for whom wonder at reality was always a fundamental feeling:
"My experience par excellence? The best way to describe it would be to say that when I experience it, I am filled with wonder at the existence of the world".
(Pierre Hadot, Wittgenstein and the Limits of Language, 2004)

E1.7.D.6.10.d_REF1.1_PH "THERE IS NO PROBLEM. EVERYTHING is open before us, there is nothing to explain (§ 126). Wittgenstein's new philosophy would have nothing to do if it were not for traditional philosophies which, by their aberrant use of language, conceal the true substance of that language. [...]"
(Pierre Hadot, Wittgenstein and the Limits of Language, 2004)

E1.7.D.6.10.d_REF2_PH WITTGENSTEIN'S INSPIRATION AND GOAL REMAIN IDENTICAL THROUGHOUT HIS WORK: TO PROPOSE A CURE FOR PHILOSOPHY, WHICH HE REGARDED AS A DISEASE OF LANGUAGE. "Compared to the Tractatus logico-philosophicus, first published in 1921-1922, [...] the Philosophical Investigations, which constitute Wittgenstein's second major work, mark a profound evolution, and the author himself emphasizes this point in his preface: in his view, the second book constitutes a correction of the errors of the first. 
From one to the other, however, Wittgenstein's inspiration and purpose remained the same. A therapy is proposed to us. Philosophy is a disease of language; philosophical problems arise when "language takes a vacation" (§ 38). True philosophy, therefore, will consist in curing itself of philosophy, in making every philosophical problem disappear completely and definitively [...] 
Wittgenstein thus continues to devote himself to the same mission: to bring a radical and definitive peace to metaphysical anxiety."
(Pierre Hadot, Wittgenstein and the Limits of Language, 2004)

E1.7.D.6.11. MARTIN HEIDEGGER (1889-1976)
"We are truly Human only insofar as we are in the manifestation of Being".

E1.7.D.6.11_REF1_PH THE THOUGHT OF MARTIN HEIDEGGER SHOWS A STRIKING SIMILARITY TO THE BUDDHISM OF THE GREAT VEHICLE, SUGGESTING THAT IN THE 20th CENTURY, THE WESTERN WORLD MIGHT BE READY TO RECEIVE THIS MESSAGE, IGNORED FOR 2500 YEARS
"The question of Being and the unfolding of this question presuppose an interpretation of Dasein, that is, of the being of man. The idea underlying my thinking is precisely that Being, or the power of the manifestation of Being, needs man; and that, conversely, man is man only insofar as he is in the manifestation of Being. This should settle the question of the extent to which I am concerned only with Being and forget man. One cannot ask the question of being without asking the question of man's being," Martin Heidegger in 1969, illustrating the similarity of phenomenological thought to that of Great Vehicle Buddhism; replace "being" with "awakening," and the similarity is disturbing. Perhaps it is a question of time: from the 20th century onwards, the West may be ready to receive the message of Buddhism - whereas Victor Hugo, who had access to haiku, found it only "cute"."
(Alexis Lavis on the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on 03/14/2019 on France Culture)

Listen to the podcast in French:
https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/l-avenir-appartient-a-ceux-qui-s-eveillent-tot-7763349

E1.7.D.6.12. KRISHNAMURTI (1895-1986)
"DO YOU REALIZE THAT THE MIND IS ONLY CAPABLE OF EXPERIENCING WHAT IT ALREADY KNOWS? THE MIND IS COMPLETELY INCAPABLE OF EXPERIENCING THE INEFFABLE."

E1.7.B.2.3.f.iv_REF1_PH.wE1.7.D.6.12.

E1.7.D.6.13. JACQUES LACAN (1901-1981)
"Between the real and the subject who formulates it, the relation is conflictual, each of the two terms opposing a resistance to the affirmation of the other"

E1.7.D.6.13_REF1_PH "BETWEEN REALITY AND THE SUBJECT THAT EXPRESSES IT, THE RELATIONSHIP IS CONFLICTIVE, with each of the two terms resisting the affirmation of the other. Thus, when the subject establishes itself as the master and possessor of the "real" - through measurement, surveying, or conquest - the real itself is dissolved in the symbolic, since it is then replaced by the words that designate it, the coordinates that delimit it, the maps that orient it. Conversely, when reality appears in its majesty, in the fullness of its manifestation, it is the subject that is annihilated by the power of its appearance. The subject or the object, the thought or the thing: you can't serve these two masters at the same time. The balance of appropriateness is a balance of terror, therefore infinitely improbable, and if one is the master - the real or the subject - the other will necessarily be domesticated or enslaved - the subject or the real. What is a subject who falls into the servitude of the Real, who succumbs to its revelation? It is a subject that loses its right to any subjectivity - what Lacan writes in his algebra $, which reads "barred subject" - that is, what remains of the subject when it loses thought, language and consciousness, which is not much, a residue, a "being there," a being that knows neither who it is nor what it should do. Faced with the emergence of reality, the subject falls into catalepsy, like certain animals that, unable to escape from a predator, freeze and play dead, as if anticipating in their imagination an imminent and very real death. When the Real appears, it is the subject that becomes the object; and conversely, when it is the subject that dictates the law, it is the Real that becomes the object that submits to the language that defines it. In this sense, the Real is an irrefutable presence, since the subject, who is its witness, not to say its martyr, is fascinated by this appearance, loses all its faculties and is therefore no longer able to refute anything. In this sense, for Lacan, the Real plays a role similar to that of death for Epicurus: when it is there, the sage said, I am no longer there, and when I am there, it has not yet come. Because of this analogy, the relationship of alternate occlusion, which applies to the subject and the real as well as to life and death, is not unrelated to the death instinct, which Lacan, unlike Freud, relates to the reality principle, that is, to the experience of the real. For Lacan, this principle cannot be reduced to the only adaptive mechanism that regulates, by trial and error, the homeostasis of living beings and their environment, of the subject and his world; on the contrary, it is necessary to posit an insurmountable maladjustment or inadequacy of the human subject - due to its prematurity - in its relationship to the real, because when the real shows itself in the fullness of its presence, the subject, disarmed, is immediately subjected. [...]

For Lacan, the relationship between the subject and the real is rather one of passage to the limit, and this is precisely why he can say that the real is "at the limit of our experience" and not beyond it: just as it should be said that the subject does not die, but experiences itself as dying, so it must be said that the subject experiences itself as fainting when it is exposed to the violence of the real, it feels itself disappearing according to the degree of intensity of the appearance of the real. Fear is the affect caused by this passage to the limit of being, to nothingness. The subject, then, is not a substance that establishes its own existence - based on the Cartesian model of "I think, therefore I am" - but the alienated term of an asymmetrical dipole, of which the Real is the other term. To explain this, Lacan draws on a notion he borrows from Ernest Jones, the subject's aphanisis, a Greek term meaning repression, disappearance, rather than fainting. Jones introduced this term in a 1927 article on female sexuality to denote a state in which sexual desire is abolished, a state long before the castration anxiety that intervenes in the unfolding of the Oedipus complex. But while for Jones aphanisis is an object of revulsion - fear of the disappearance of desire - for Lacan it is, conversely, a refuge for the subject terrorized by the advent of the real. Like the animal playing dead, the subject confronted with the real mimics its own disappearance by passing into unconsciousness. Lacan also speaks of the "fading" of the subject, from the English "to fade," to vanish, to fade away. This relationship of alternate disappearance - depending on whether one of the two terms, subject or real, dominates the other, real or subject - is still the one that, according to Lacan, defines fantasy, that is, the object of desire, which, in Lacanian algebra, is written: "$ ◇ a": "We symbolize the result, the limit, the end of that which constitutes the question of the subject by the symbol S crossed out in the presence of the small a ($ ◇ a), and we call it the fantasy." Common sense will object that this is a contradiction, since it would simultaneously state that the real is the object of terror and desire, of repulsion and attraction. This would be to misunderstand the ambivalence of desire - as well as its very act: transgression, crossing the line. For this reason, desire is necessarily divided between horror and terror, between lust and alarm, with an intensity that increases the closer it comes to its goal".
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan, Listening to Madness, III- The Real, 2019)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Lacan/Ecouterlafolie/Ecouterlafolie3.html

E1.7.D.6.14. LOREN EISELEY (1907-1977)
"The time has to be right; one has to be, by chance or intention, upon the border of two worlds. And sometimes these two borders may shift or interpenetrate and one sees the miraculous."

E1.7.D.6.14_REF1_LIT LOREN EISELEY REFLECTS ON THE CONTINUITY OF LIFE AND THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE EARTH'S ELEMENTS OVER MILLIONS OF YEARS AS HE OBSERVES A FLOCK OF BIRDS MIGRATING AT SUNSET. The scene evokes a sense of wonder and the miraculous, highlighting the interconnectedness of life and the passage of time.
"The time has to be right; one has to be, by chance or intention, upon the border of two worlds. And sometimes these two borders may shift or interpenetrate and one sees the miraculous. [...]

It was a late hour on a cold, wind-bitten autumn day when I climbed a great hill spined like a dinosaur’s back and tried to take my bearings. The tumbled waste fell away in waves in all directions. Blue air was darkening into purple along the bases of the hills. I shifted my knapsack, heavy with the petrified bones of long-vanished creatures, and studied my compass. I wanted to be out of there by nightfall, and already the sun was going sullenly down in the west.

It was then that I saw the flight coming on. It was moving like a little close-knit body of black specks that danced and darted and closed again. It was pouring from the north and heading toward me with the undeviating relentlessness of a compass needle. It streamed through the shadows rising out of monstrous gorges. It rushed over towering pinnacles in the red light of the sun or momentarily sank from sight within their shade. Across that desert of eroding clay and wind-worn stone they came with a faint wild twittering that filled all the air about me as those tiny living bullets hurtled past into the night. [...]

It may not strike you as a marvel. It would not, perhaps, unless you stood in the middle of a dead world at sunset, but that was where I stood. Fifty million years lay under my feet, fifty million years of bellowing monsters moving in a green world now gone so utterly that its very light was traveling on the farther edge of space. The chemicals of all that vanished age lay about me in the ground. Around me still lay the shearing molars of dead titanotheres, the delicate sabers of soft-stepping cats, the hollow sockets that had held the eyes of many a strange, outmoded beast. Those eyes had looked out upon a world as real as ours; dark, savage brains had roamed and roared their challenges into the steaming night.

Now they were still here, or, put it as you will, the chemicals that made them were here about me in the ground. The carbon that had driven them ran blackly in the eroding stone. The stain of iron was in the clays. The iron did not remember the blood it had once moved within, the phosphorus had forgot the savage brain. The little individual moment had ebbed from all those strange combinations of chemicals as it would ebb from our living bodies into the sinks and runnels of oncoming time. [...]

I had lifted up a fistful of that ground. I held it while that wild flight of south-bound warblers hurtled over me into the oncoming dark. There went phosphorus, there went iron, there went carbon, there beat the calcium in those hurrying wings. Alone on a dead planet I watched that incredible miracle speeding past. It ran by some true compass over field and waste land. It cried its individual ecstasies into the air until the gullies rang. It swerved like a single body, it knew itself, and, lonely, it bunched close in the racing darkness, its individual entities feeling about them the rising night. And so, crying to each other their identity, they passed away out of my view.

I dropped my fistful of earth. I heard it roll inanimate back into the gully at the base of the hill: iron, carbon, the chemicals of life. Like men from those wild tribes who had haunted these hills before me seeking visions, I made my sign to the great darkness. It was not a mocking sign, and I was not mocked. As I walked into my camp late that night, one man, rousing from his blankets beside the fire, asked sleepily, “What did you see?”

“I think, a miracle,” I said softly, but I said it to myself. Behind me that vast waste began to glow under the rising moon."
(Loren Eiseley, The Judgment of the Birds published in The Star Thrower, 1957)

E1.7.D.6.15. RENÉ CHAR (1907-1988)
"I was the equal of things whose secret held under the ray of a wing. For most of us, the essential is never born, and those who possess it cannot exchange it without harming themselves. No one is willing to lose what he has conquered at the apex of his effort! Otherwise it would be youth and grace, source and delta would have the same purity. "

E1.7.D.6.15_REF1_PO "SEMI-DARKNESS
I was in one of those forests where the sun has no access but where, at night, the stars penetrate. This place was only allowed to exist, because the states' inquisition had forgotten it. The abandoned trails showed me their contempt. I had lost the compulsion to punish. In places, the memory of a force caressed the peasant fugue of the grass. I governed myself without doctrine, with a serene vehemence. I was the equal of things whose secret held under the ray of a wing. For most of us, the essential is never born, and those who possess it cannot exchange it without harming themselves. No one is willing to lose what he has conquered at the apex of his effort! Otherwise it would be youth and grace, source and delta would have the same purity. 

I was in one of those forests where the sun has no access but where, at night, the stars penetrate for implacable hostilities."
(René Char, The loyal adversaries)

E1.7.D.6.16. CLAUDE LÉVI-STRAUSS (1908-2009)
"What else have I learned, indeed, from the masters I've listened to, the philosophers I've read, the societies I've visited, and this very science from which the West derives its pride, if not snippets of lessons which, laid end to end, reconstitute the meditation of the Sage at the foot of the tree?"

E1.7.D.1.2_REF1_PH.wE1.7.D.6.16

E1.7.D.1.2.a_REF1_PH.wE1.7.D.6.16

E1.7.D.6.17. SIMONE WEIL (1909-1943)
"If we bring to the present the point of that desire in us which corresponds to finality , it pierces through to eternity."

E1.7.B.2.6.c_REF2_PH.E1.7.D.6.17.

E1.7.D.6.18. EUGÈNE IONESCO (1909-1994)
"This force seemed to have been hidden under the mask of things, and here it was bursting out, exploding."

E1.7.D.6.18_REF1_LIT “THIS FORCE SEEMED TO HAVE BEEN HIDDEN UNDER THE MASK OF THINGS, and now it burst forth, exploded. A single light: things had been the particular events of this light, the object-events in which it was particularized. [...] I had had the revelation of the essential; the rest was inessential.”
(Eugene Ionesco, Fragments of a Journal, 1967)

E1.7.D.6.18_REF2_LIT "I TOLD MYSELF THAT THIS WAS THE 'TRUTH' WITHOUT KNOWING HOW TO DEFINE THIS TRUTH. No doubt, if I had tried to define it, it would have vanished. [...] 
I told myself again that if this event had happened, and since I had experienced it, since I knew everything, I would never be unhappy again, because I had learned that one does not die: I only had to remember those moments to overcome all future worries and fears. I had the revelation of the essential, the rest was unimportant. [I wonder if this unusual feeling, this astonishment without an answer and almost without a question, is not a reaction of my deepest conscience. In truth, I don't ask: I know that this astonishment is my most authentic conscience. I know that the answer is precisely the impossibility of giving one. The non-answer is the best answer."
(Eugene Ionesco, Fragments of a Journal, 1967)

E1.7.D.6.19. ALBERT CAMUS (1913-1960)
Albert Camus' works "Noces à Tipasa" and "Retour à Tipasa" draw a contrast between the vibrancy of life in an earthly paradise and the aftermath of war. In the former, he celebrates the self-sufficiency of life, while in the latter, he documents his struggle to rekindle this sentiment after experiencing the savagery of war. Ultimately, he discovers a bond with nature that unveils a tragic understanding central to existence, a theme he continually explores in his writing.

E1.7.D.6.19.a. LIFE IS SELF-SUFFICIENT. THERE'S NO NEED TO SEARCH FOR A MEANING TO EXISTENCE, FOR IT IS FULL AND COMPLETE.
In "Noces à Tipasa", Albert Camus shares an experience that contrasts with Roquentin's metaphysical disgust in "La Nausée". In this tribute to a breathtaking landscape, he celebrates the fullness of life in an earthly paradise, where the gods are in the flowers and scenery. Here, life is self-sufficient. There's no need to search for a meaning to existence because it is already full and complete.

E1.7.B.1.3.d.ii_REF1_PH.wE1.7.D.6.19.a.

E1.7.D.6.19.b. CAMUS' COMMUNION WITH NATURE OPENED HIM UP TO THE UNDERSTANDING OF A TRAGIC KNOWLEDGE, WHICH LIES AT THE VERY HEART OF BEING, AND WHICH ENABLES US TO LIVE THE ENIGMA OF EXISTENCE IN THE LIGHT.
In 1952, Albert Camus wrote "Retour à Tipasa" (Return to Tipasa), chronicling his return to the same place two decades later. He had hoped to rediscover the freedom he had known back then, but the barbarity of war had tainted the world, and his first attempt was a failure. However, on his second attempt, Camus once again felt a communion with nature that melted away years of fury and darkness. This communion opened him up to the understanding of a tragic knowledge that lies at the very heart of Being, and enables us to live the Enigma of existence in the light. Camus spent his life attempting to articulate this elusive wisdom through his writing.

E1.7.B.1.3.d.iii_REF1_PH.wE1.7.D.6.19.b.

E1.7.D.6.19.b_REF2_PH CAMUS CELEBRATES THE FUSION OF LIFE AND DEATH, RUINS AND THE SUN, IN AN ODE TO THE EARTH AND THE UNBEARABLE PRESENCE OF NATURE. His visits to Tipasa symbolize the search for aesthetic purity and eternity rediscovered in the present, despite disappointments and obstacles.
"One could not end this long variation on the Nietzschean maxim without quoting the magnificent text of an inspired young man of twenty-three, who often said he was close to Nietzsche, and who, in a few sun-drenched pages, went straight to the heart of this imperative of the present that gives the maxim of authenticity its power. Camus drafted the text of Noces à Tipasa in 1936 and completed it the following year. Tipasa is a village west of Algiers, where Roman ruins rise among the flowers, closed on the land side by the high Chenoua massif, open to the boundless sea, overlooked by the ruins of the ancient city. This text is a prose poem, a kind of pagan ode to the glory of the earth and its unbearable presence. A marriage of life and death, of ruins and the sun. The evening epiphany of Silvaplana's ecstasy becomes here the incandescent embrace of desire with the world, the barbaric marriage of mortal man with the earth, the sun and the sea: "What hours I spent crushing absinthes, caressing ruins, trying to match my breathing to the tumultuous sighs of the world! Immersed in the wild scents and the concerts of sleepy insects, I open my eyes and my heart to the unbearable grandeur of this warm sky. It is not so easy to become who we are, to find our true measure. But as I gazed at the Chenoua Ridge, my heart was soothed by a strange certainty. I was learning to breathe, I was integrating, and I was fulfilling. I climbed one hill after another, each one holding a reward for me, like that temple whose columns measure the course of the sun and from which you can see the whole village, its white and pink walls and its green verandas" (Pléiade, Essays). It may well be that Camus only became a writer in order to rediscover (which he undoubtedly never managed to do) this poetry of pure immanence, this aesthetic enthusiasm that literally burns these few pages: "Once you have had the chance of a powerful love, life is spent again in search of that fervor and that light" (Return to Tipasa). In this "Fauvist" assumption of presence, in this carnal celebration of immanence, whose "kingdom" is entirely of this world, aesthetic intentionality is taken to its limit, to its critical reversal, on the threshold of the abolition of the phenomenon in the abstract vibration of pure light. The discovery of paradise on earth brings the aesthetic quest to an end. After the war, the author of The Myth of Sisyphus (1942) and The Rebel (1951) returned to Tipasa in a kind of pilgrimage to the source that would give him a second life ("Return to Tipasa", in L'Eté, 1954). He returned twice. The first visit was disappointing: it was raining that morning and "the ruins were surrounded by barbed wire, which could only be crossed at authorized points. For reasons apparently approved by morality, it was also forbidden to go there at night; during the day one would meet a sworn guard. By chance, no doubt, it rained that morning over the entire area of the ruins" (Pléiade, 870). But a few days later, after a melancholy return to Algiers, when the rain stopped and the sun came out, "I set out again for Tipasa" (872). And then occurred the miracle of the eternal return and the reunion of eternity in the heart of time, eternity that is the sea that has gone with the sun. In that moment, as if time had stopped, the future and the past merge in the blaze of the present, and life finally becomes what it is: "I finally cross the barbed wire and find myself among the ruins. And in the glorious December light, as happens only once or twice in a life that can consider itself fulfilled after such moments, I found exactly what I had been looking for, and what, despite the weather and the world, had been offered to me, really only to me, in this deserted natural setting. From the olive grove plateau, I could see the village below. Not a sound came from it: only light smoke rose into the clear air. The sea, too, was silent, as if suffocated by the uninterrupted shower of a sparkling, cold light. A distant rooster crow from Chenoua was the only celebration of the fragile glory of dawn. On the side of the ruins, as far as the eye could see, there were only hail- and wormwood-strewn stones, trees, and columns, perfect in the transparency of the crystalline air. It seemed as if the morning had stood still, the sun stopped for an incalculable moment. In this light and silence, years of anger and night slowly melted away. I listened to an almost forgotten sound within me, as if my heart, which had stopped beating long ago, was slowly beginning to beat again" (872-873)."
(Jacques Darriulat, "Become what you are", 2007-2008)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Nietzsche/Imperatifpresent/Imperatifpresent1.html

E1.7.D.6.19.b_REF3_PO “EARTH AGAIN
They are incomprehensible, the things of this earth.
The lure of waters. The lure of fruits.
Lure of two breasts and the long hair of a maiden.
In rouge, in vermillion, in that color of ponds
Found only in the Green Lakes near Wilno.
An ungraspable multitudes swarm, come together
In the crinkles of tree bark, in the telescope's eye,
For an endless wedding,
For the kindling of eyes, for a sweet dance
In the elements of air, sea, earth, and subterranean caves,
So that for a short moment there is no death
And time does not unreel like a skein of yarn
Thrown into an abyss.”
(Czeslaw Milosz)

E1.7.D.6.20. ALAN WATTS (1915-1973)
"There is a contradiction in wanting to be perfectly secure in a universe whose very nature is momentariness and fluidity. But the contradiction lies a little deeper than the mere conflict between the desire for security and the fact of change. If I want to be secure, that is, protected from the flux of life, I am wanting to be separate from life. Yet it is this very sense of separateness which makes me feel insecure. To be secure means to isolate and fortify the “I,” but it is just the feeling of being an isolated “I” which makes me feel lonely and afraid."

E1.7.D.6.20_REF1_PH ALAN WATTS HIGHLIGHTS THE CONTRADICTION IN SEEKING SECURITY IN A CONSTANTLY CHANGING UNIVERSE, noting that the desire for security stems from a sense of separation from life, which in turn creates insecurity. 
"Working rightly, the brain is the highest form of “instinctual wisdom.” Thus it should work like the homing instinct of pigeons and the formation of the fetus in the womb — without verbalizing the process or knowing “how” it does it. The self-conscious brain, like the self-conscious heart, is a disorder, and manifests itself in the acute feeling of separation between “I” and my experience. The brain can only assume its proper behavior when consciousness is doing what it is designed for: not writhing and whirling to get out of present experience, but being effortlessly aware of it. [...]
There is a contradiction in wanting to be perfectly secure in a universe whose very nature is momentariness and fluidity. But the contradiction lies a little deeper than the mere conflict between the desire for security and the fact of change. If I want to be secure, that is, protected from the flux of life, I am wanting to be separate from life. Yet it is this very sense of separateness which makes me feel insecure. To be secure means to isolate and fortify the “I,” but it is just the feeling of being an isolated “I” which makes me feel lonely and afraid. In other words, the more security I can get, the more I shall want.
To put it still more plainly: the desire for security and the feeling of insecurity are the same thing. To hold your breath is to lose your breath. A society based on the quest for security is nothing but a breath-retention contest in which everyone is as taut as a drum and as purple as a beet.
(Alan Watts, The Wisdom of Insecurity: A Message for an Age of Anxiety, 1951)

E1.7.D.6.20_REF1.1_PH “NOT TO BE AFRAID WHEN YOU ARE ALL ALONE IS THE ONLY TRUE WAY OF BEING NOT AFRAID. Where does your courage come in, when you cannot find it in your own self but always have to grasp God morally?”
(Olga Jacoby, Words in Pain: Letters on Life and Death, 1919)

E1.7.D.6.20_REF2_PH ALAN WATTS ARGUES THAT THE NOTION OF A SEPARATE SELF OR "I" DISTINCT FROM EXPERIENCE IS AN ILLUSION CREATED BY MEMORY AND THE RAPID CHANGE OF THOUGHTS. "The notion of a separate thinker, of an « I » distinct from the experience, comes from memory and from the rapidity with which thought changes. It is like whirling a burning stick to give the illusion of a continuous circle of fire. If you imagine that memory is a direct knowledge of the past rather than a present experience, you get the illusion of knowing the past and the present at the same time. This suggests that there is something in you distinct from both the past and the present experiences. You reason, « I know this present experience, and it is different from that past experience. If I can compare the two, and notice that experience has changed, I must be something constant and apart. »
But, as a matter of fact, you cannot compare this present experience with a past experience. You can only compare it with a memory of the past, which is a part of the present experience. When you see clearly that memory is a form of present experience, it will be obvious that trying to separate yourself from this experience is as impossible as trying to make your teeth bite themselves. There is simply experience. There is not something or someone experiencing experience! You do not feel feelings, think thoughts, or sense sensations any more than you hear hearing, see sight, or smell smelling. « I feel fine » means that a fine feeling is present. It does not mean that there is one thing called an « I » and another separate thing called a feeling, so that when you bring them together this « I » feels the fine feeling. There are no feelings but present feelings, and whatever feeling is present is « I. » No one ever found an « I » apart from some present experience, or some experience apart from an « I » - which is only to say that the two are the same thing.
As a mere philosophical argument this is a waste of time. We are not trying to have an « intellectual discussion. » We are being aware of the fact that any separate « I » who thinks thoughts and experiences experience is an illusion. To understand this is to realize that life is entirely momentary, that there is neither permanence nor security, and that there is no « I » which can be protected. [...]"
(Alan Watts, The wisdom of insecurity, 1951)

E1.7.D.6.21. ROLAND BARTHES (1915-1980)
"I felt like I was frozen in an ice field that stretched for thousands of miles, and inside me there was a feeling of absolute safety.”

E1.7.D.6.21_REF1_PH "OUTSIDE THE REALM OF RATIONALITY

[...] Zen satori does not come under language, and therefore definition, or even description; therefore, literally, it is untranslatable, because we would come up against Christian language: conversion, illumination, whereas satori is not a descent into a truth, a God, but rather a sudden emergence into the void: “enlightenment” is not a good word because it does not illuminate anything → contradiction: it dispels doubt, but not in favor of certainty. Satori: a kind of mental catastrophe that occurs all at once → experienced by the Buddha under the Bodhi tree = Nirvana achieved during earthly life.

Reports of satori are extremely rare (which is somewhat frustrating). This one, however, is the satori of Hakouin (modern Zen, 18th century Japan): Sudden, immense mental concentration: “I had the impression of being frozen in a field of ice that stretched for thousands of miles, and within me there was a feeling of absolute security” - this makes me think of Friedrich's painting, The Wreck of the HOPE Ship Grounded by the Ice: the intense desolation of this painting produces in me a kind of catastrophe, agony (primitive agony) (absolute, eternal abandonment, the loss of the mother); but perhaps satori is just the other side (or the place) of this catastrophe. In any case, for us [in the West], satoris are brief flashes, perhaps on the side of romanticism. [...]

“That's it”

The word of satori = the exclamation: That's it / Suzuki (II, 617): “The time will come when your mind will suddenly stop like an old rat caught in a dead end. Then there will be a leap into the unknown with the cry: ‘Ah, that's it!’”
(Roland Barthes, The Neutral, Course at the Collège de France, 1977-1978)

E1.7.D.6.22. PAUL WATZLAWICK (1921-2007)
"Is that it?" The answer came to him immediately: No, that, nor anything else in the world can ever be anything but a name for "it", and names are just empty sounds. At that moment, the split between him and "it" disappeared; or, as the philosophers say, there was no longer any separation between subject and object."

E1.7.A.1.4_REF1_TH.wE1.7.D.6.22.

E1.7.D.6.23. JACK KEROUAC (1922-1969)
"That’s the story.
That’s the message.
Nobody understands it,
nobody listens, they’re
all running around like chickens with heads cut
off. I will try to teach it but it will
be in vain"

E1.7.D.6.23_REF1_PO "THE WORLD YOU SEE IS JUST A MOVIE IN YOUR MIND.
Rocks don't see it.
Bless and sit down.
Forgive and forget.
Practice kindness all day to everybody
and you will realize you’re already
in heaven now.
That’s the story.
That’s the message.
Nobody understands it,
nobody listens, they’re
all running around like chickens with heads cut
off. I will try to teach it but it will
be in vain, s’why I’ll
end up in a shack
praying and being
cool and singing
by my woodstove
making pancakes."
(Jack Kerouac in a letter sent to his first wife, Edie Kerouac Parker, in late January of 1957, a decade after their marriage had been annulled. Found in The Portable Jack Kerouac)

E1.7.D.6.24. THICH NHAT HANH (1926-2022)
Our environment can influence our emotions and make us mistake our societal "false self" for our authentic "true self." These inner conflicts can create turmoil, but surviving them leads to growth. Thich Nhat Hanh experienced such a storm while reading a book in a library. In a moment of insight, he realized he was devoid of ideals, hopes, viewpoints, or allegiances. He felt as carefree as a grasshopper on a blade of grass, where there is no division, resistance, or blame. Some life experiences go beyond study or rational thought; we must experience them, cherish them, and unite with them.

E1.7.D.6.24_REF1_PH THICH NHAT HANH REFLECTS ON A MOMENT OF PROFOUND INSIGHT IN A LIBRARY, WHERE HE FELT A DEEP CONNECTION WITH PAST BORROWERS OF A BOOK AND EXPERIENCED A SENSE OF EMPTINESS AND UNITY WITH THE UNIVERSE. This realization led him to understand the transient nature of identity and the importance of embracing life's difficulties to grow and find peace.
"It’s funny how much our surroundings influence our emotions. Our joys and sorrows, likes and dislikes are colored by our environment so much that often we just let our surroundings dictate our course. We go along with “public” feelings until we no longer even know our own true aspirations. We become a stranger to ourselves, molded entirely by society… Sometimes I feel caught between two opposing selves — the “false self” imposed by society and what I would call my “true self.” How often we confuse the two and assume society’s mold to be our true self. Battles between our two selves rarely result in a peaceful reconciliation. Our mind becomes a battlefield on which the Five Aggregates — the form, feelings, perceptions, mental formations, and consciousness of our being — are strewn about like debris in a hurricane. Trees topple, branches snap, houses crash.
These are our loneliest moments. Yet every time we survive such a storm, we grow a little. Without storms like these, I would not be who I am today. But I rarely hear such a storm coming until it is already upon me. It seems to appear without warning, as though treading silently on silk slippers. I know it must have been brewing a long time, simmering in my own thoughts and mental formations, but when such a frenzied hurricane strikes, nothing outside can help. I am battered and torn apart, and I am also saved. [...]
[He goes on to detail what occasioned the storm of his unselfing] The feeling began shortly before eleven o’clock at night on October first. I was browsing on the eleventh floor of Butler Library. I knew the library was about to close, and I saw a book that concerned the area of my research. I slid it off the shelf and held it in my two hands. It was large and heavy. I read that it had been published in 1892, and it was donated to the Columbia Library the same year. On the back cover was a slip of paper that recorded the names of borrowers and the dates they took it out of the library. The first time it had been borrowed was in 1915, the second time was in 1932. I would be the third. Can you imagine? I was only the third borrower, on October 1, 1962. For seventy years, only two other people had stood in the same spot I now stood, pulled the book from the shelf, and decided to check it out. I was overcome with the wish to meet those two people. I don’t know why, but I wanted to hug them. But they had vanished, and I, too, will soon disappear. Two points on the same straight line will never meet. I was able to encounter two people in space, but not in time. [...]
I feel as though I’ve lived a long time and have seen so much of life. I’m almost thirty-six, which is not young. But that night, while standing amidst the stacks at Butler Library, I saw that I am neither young nor old, existent nor nonexistent. My friends know I can be as playful and mischievous as a child. I love to kid around and enter fully into the game of life. I also know what it is to get angry. And I know the pleasure of being praised. I am often on the verge of tears or laughter. But beneath all of these emotions, what else is there? How can I touch it? If there isn’t anything, why would I be so certain that there is?
Still holding the book, I felt a glimmer of insight. I understood that I am empty of ideals, hopes, viewpoints, or allegiances. I have no promises to keep with others. In that moment, the sense of myself as an entity among other entities disappeared. I knew that this insight did not arise from disappointment, despair, fear, desire, or ignorance. A veil silently lifted effortlessly. That is all. If you beat me, stone me, or even shoot me, everything that is considered to be “me” will disintegrate. Then, what is actually there will reveal itself — faint as smoke, elusive as emptiness, and yet neither smoke nor emptiness, ugly, nor not ugly, beautiful, yet not beautiful. It is like a shadow on a screen. [...]
At that moment, I had the deep feeling that I had returned. My clothes, my shoes, even the essence of my being had vanished, and I was carefree as a grasshopper pausing on a blade of grass… When a grasshopper sits on a blade of grass, he has no thought of separation, resistance, or blame… The green grasshopper blends completely with the green grass… It neither retreats nor beckons. It knows nothing of philosophy or ideals. It is simply grateful for its ordinary life. Dash across the meadow, my dear friend, and greet yesterday’s child. When you can’t see me, you yourself will return. Even when your heart is filled with despair, you will find the same grasshopper on the same blade of grass… Some life dilemmas cannot be solved by study or rational thought. We just live with them, struggle with them, and become one with them… To live, we must die every instant. We must perish again and again in the storms that make life possible."
(Thich Nhat Hanh, Fragrant Palm Leaves: Journals, 1962–1966)

E1.7.D.6.25. FRANÇOIS CHENG (1929-2002)
TACIT CONCORD WITH REALITY
François Cheng introduces three fundamental notions of Chinese aesthetics for evaluating art. The highest quality a work can possess is divine resonance, a presence that aligns with divine spirit and enlightenment. The pinnacle of art suggests a deep connection between man and the divine [or the world, for non-believers]. This connection is referred to in Chinese as "tacit concord".

E1.7.A.3.3_REF4_PO.wE1.7.D.6.25.

E1.7.A.3.1_REF4.1_PO.wE1.7.D.6.25.

E1.7.A.3.1_REF4_PO.wE1.7.D.6.25.

E1.7.D.6.25_REF4_PO "WHEN THEY CAME HERE, THE GODS 
HAVE HIDDEN THEIR SECRET.
With our blood we have 
Traced the flowery paths. 
Then we ran 
From hill to hill 
Under the untouchable azure. 
*
To bury in you the most secret 
Of ourselves, in the depths of what we had not 
Dared to say nor hope for. The world is there. 
As it was in childhood, sprung 
From within, clear and round, round the sky. 
Round the earth. Plain-chanting fruits. 
In unison titmouse and waterfall. 
*
When the souls become songs, 
The world suddenly remembers. 
*
The night awakens to its dawn 
The breath retrieves its rhythm. 
Beyond death, Human
Summer rustles with resonance."
(François Cheng, When Souls Become Songs, 2018)

E1.7.D.6.25_REF2_LIT "THE PARADOXICAL EXPRESSION AN « INSTANT OF ETERNITY » CONVEYS AN EXTREMELY PRIVILEGED EXPERIENCE. Thus spoke Friedrich Nietzsche, quoted by the poet Jean Mambrino in L'Hespérie, Country of the Evening: « Let us admit that we say "yes" to a single moment, we would have said "yes" not only to ourselves, but to everything that exists. For nothing is isolated, neither in us nor in things, and if even once joy resounded in our soul, the whole preceeding eternity was needed to create the conditions for this one moment, and all of eternity was approved, justified in that one moment that we said "yes" ». We feel, confusedly but deeply convinced, that the moment as we have just evoked it is related, by its flavor of plenitude, to what eternity must be."
(François Cheng, Five meditations on death)

E1.7.D.6.25_REF3_PH FRANÇOIS CHENG EXAMINES THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN BEAUTY, THE GAZE AND MEMORY, EMPHASIZING THAT BEAUTY TAKES ON ITS FULL MEANING WHEN IT IS PERCEPTED: "On a higher level, another encounter occurs when this scene is captured by a gaze. If it is not captured by a gaze, beauty is not known; it is a "waste," it does not take on its full meaning. "Taking on meaning" here means that whenever the universe tends toward the state of beauty, it offers a chance - or revives a promise - of enjoyment. This gaze of a subject that captures the scene of beauty in the moment leads to a new encounter that is located on another level, that of memory.
In memory, or more precisely in its duration, each present gaze of a subject joins all the past gazes when the subject has encountered beauty; it also joins the gazes of other creators whose works the subject has admired. This is in accordance with the truth I mentioned earlier, that beauty attracts beauty, that it increases and elevates it. From there, from gaze to gaze, the subject, if inspired, can aspire to a supreme encounter that would connect it to the original gaze of the universe. Without the need for belief, it may instinctively feel that this universe, which was capable of creating beings endowed with a gaze, must itself have possessed a gaze. If the universe created itself, it must have 'seen' itself being created, and in the end it 'said' to itself, 'This is beautiful,' or more simply, 'This is it. If it hadn't said, "It's beautiful," would man ever have been able to say, "It's beautiful?

In the light of these few reflections, we understand that the act of looking is almost always linked to time, in the sense that this act, carried out by a subject, is immediately accompanied by another effort, that of recognition, which is linked to memory. In other words, what is looked at refers, in the subject, to all that he has looked at in the past or in the imagination, and, more deeply, to the intimate experience he has of a revelation of the self that is spread out over time.

In this regard, I would like to recall a remark by Henri Makliney, according to which the noun regard and the verb regarder are two words that many languages can envy French. The combination of re and garder is rich in connotations. More than the act of surreptitiously capturing a sight or an image, it evokes the resumption or renewal of something that has been preserved and that, with each new opportunity, demands to be developed as a future. Let us add that contemplation also carries the idea of respect; it always encourages the beholder to a deeper commitment.

Is there a source of the gaze that would be the gaze itself? Even a people as supposedly nonreligious as the Chinese, as we have said, instinctively feel that this universe that was capable of creating living beings with eyes must itself have been driven by the need to see and the ability to see. Moreover, in Chinese, the character that denotes the gaze holds the key to the sacred, to the divine. Moreover, an almost banal expression has taken root in the popular imagination: lao-tian-you-yan, "Heaven has its eyes. We have just seen that the entire poetic and artistic tradition in China was driven by this fundamental conviction. Later, Buddhism introduced the notion of the "eye of wisdom" or the "third eye. The gaze produced by this eye is a function of the universal consciousness that inhabits it, which it can acquire only after the experience of emptiness, rather than of the sagacity of the subject. [...] 

I will content myself with quoting a phrase of Meister Eckhart's, which later interested Hegel very much: "The eye with which I see God is the eye with which God sees me." [...] Ibn 'Arabi, one of the greatest Sufi poets of the 13th century, expressed in his own way the relationship between the gaze of the Creator and that of the creature. From a rather long poem, let us listen to the following four verses, which bring out a subtle dialectic of gaze. Here, too, it is the Creator who speaks:

I have created in you your perception to be the object of my perception.
Through my gaze you see me and I see you.
You cannot perceive me through yourself
On the other hand, if you perceive me, you perceive yourself.

[...] The second verse clarifies further: it is through the gaze of the Creator that the creature sees Him. The creature meets the gaze of the Creator and sees Him. And suddenly the Creator, meeting the gaze of the creature that sees Him, sees the creature.
The third verse confirms that the creature cannot see the Creator through itself. With the fourth verse, we understand that when the creature sees the Creator, it can truly see itself. What this verse says can also be reversed by suggesting that likewise, if the Creator sees the creature, it can truly see itself. In this long poem, if the Creator teaches the Creature the secret of the gaze, it is because He wants to enter into a relationship of love with the Creature. He asks the creature not to be content with looking through itself; he literally begs it to meet the Creator's gaze.

[...] In love, as in beauty, every gaze is a mutual gaze. This is why Merleau-Ponty defines perception with the concept of the chiasm, this interpenetration, precisely, between what looks and what is looked at. An isolated gaze can hardly achieve beauty. Only crossed gazes can provoke the spark that illuminates, and in the extreme case of Creator and creature, only they allow the divine light to reveal itself. But in an authentic experience of love and beauty, if not every creature is elevated to the dignity of the Creator, so is it true that exchanged gazes give birth to each other and make them be.

[...] At the next level, the gaze goes beyond the fascination of the figure and accesses the light of the soul, which is true presence. This light, received from the outside, penetrates within and becomes an inner light that allows us to see the soul of the other and our own soul in a vision of coming and going, like a fountain with intersecting jets. In this moment, you close your eyes as if in prayer or ecstasy.

I am thinking of the Khmer heads in the Guimet Museum. You can no longer see the eyes, but curiously, you can see the gaze turned toward the infinite space within. On the subject of this infinite space within, let us add a clarification. If we stick to the physical body, it is a terribly limited space. If we recognize and accept the spiritual body, that is, the body animated by the breath of spirit, the infinite is practically there, but the spiritual body must awaken and come into exchange, into resonance with the breath that animates the living universe, for the infinite is that which never ceases to spring forth into open life. But the space within is inevitable. You have to go through it, and from there everything can radiate again.

The dimension in question is truly that of the soul. It is in the depths of the inner space that we can hear the voice of the soul, that we can perceive the vision of the soul. When we look at a Khmer head in contemplation, we see that we have before us a face completely absorbed by the gaze, a face that becomes pure gaze and pure smile, a face of vision where the visible and the invisible nourish each other, where the source of beauty and the effective beauty become one. Turned inward and then turned outward again, this face will then be able to radiate another kind of light, that of transfiguration."
(François Cheng, Five meditations on beauty – Fourth meditation, 2006)

E1.7.D.6.25_REF4_PH "FOR MY PART, I WILL RETAIN THREE NOTIONS OF CHINESE AESTHETICS THAT SEEM FUNDAMENTAL TO ME. All three are primarily concerned with visual art, but are also valid for other art forms. They form a three-tiered "system" that can be used as a criterion for evaluating and judging works of art. I will present them in the following organic order: yin-yun, qi-yun and shen-yun.

1. As a basic level, yin-yun, "unifying interaction. [...] Thus, in the brush stroke that realizes yin-yun, the carnal relationship is forged between the feeling body of the artist and the feeling body of the landscape. All in all, yin-yun is indeed this intrinsic quality of a work: a unifying order that emerges from a multi-level interaction between the various elements that make up a material, between matter and spirit, and ultimately between the human subject and the living universe, which is itself a subject.

2. As an intermediate level, qi-yun, "rhythmic breath. [...] A rhythm does not unfold in time and space, it is the generator of its space-time. The emergence of a rhythmic space is one with the constitutive transformation of all the elements of a work of art into a moment of form, into a moment of rhythm. This rhythm is not before us; it is not something that can be had. We are in the rhythm. Present to it, we discover ourselves present to ourselves. We exist in this opening of being. Rhythm is a form of surprised existence... Rare are the works in which we have reason to be present.

3. Finally, at the highest level, shen-yun, "divine resonance. This term refers to the supreme quality a work must have: to be of the highest order. It seems difficult to grasp because it suggests something abstract and vague. The Chinese are careful not to fix it in an overly rigid definition, considering the quality it evokes as a state that can be experienced without being able to explain it. [...] 
The appearance of a presence - not in the figurative or anthropological sense of the word, which can be felt or sensed, but the very presence of the divine spirit. In all its invisible aspects, this presence corresponds to what Chinese theorists call xiang-wai-zhi-xiang, "the image beyond images. It is also close to what Chan spirituality experiences as enlightenment. When we stand in front of a natural scene, a tree in bloom, a bird flying with a cry, a ray of sunlight or moonlight illuminating a moment of silence, we suddenly go to the other side of the scene, we find ourselves beyond the screen of phenomena, and we experience the impression of a presence that is self-evident, It comes to us, whole, undivided, inexplicable and yet undeniable, like a generous gift that makes everything miraculously present, spreading a light of original color, whispering a song native from heart to heart, from soul to soul.

I have just said the word "soul"; it brings to mind the notion of yi-jing, "soul dimension," which we encountered in the second meditation on the rose, and which in Chinese aesthetic thought is somewhat equivalent to shen-yun, "divine resonance. Like shen, yi, "disposition of the heart, of the soul," is what both human beings and the living universe are endowed with. The yi-jing thus suggests a soul to soul understanding between man and the divine, which the Chinese language refers to as mo-qi, "tacit understanding.
An understanding that is never complete: there will always be a hiatus, a suspension, a gap to be filled. The sought-after infinity is in fact an un-infinity. The void that stretches across a scroll of Chinese painting is there to signify this. This breathless emptiness conceals an expectation, a listening, ready to welcome a new arrival, to herald a new understanding. For his part, the artist is always ready to endure pain and sorrow, hardship and ruin, to the point of being consumed by the fire of his act, of being drawn into the space of the work. He knows that beauty, more than a given, is the supreme gift of what has been offered. And that for man, more than an achievement, it will always be a challenge, a gamble".
(François Cheng, Five Meditations on Beauty, Fifth meditation, 2006)

E1.7.D.6.26. TONI MORRISON (1931-2019)
"It comes unadorned

Unadorned
Like a phrase
Strong enough to cast a spell;
It comes
Unbidden,
Like the turn of sun through hills
Or stars in wheels of song.
The jeweled feet of women dance the earth.
Arousing it to spring.
Shoulders broad as a road bend to share the weight of years.
Profiles breach the distance and lean
Toward an ordinary kiss.
Bliss.
It comes naked into the world like a charm."
(Toni Morrison)

E1.7.D.6.27. MARY OLIVER (1935-2019)
"Let me keep company always with those who say
“Look!” and laugh in astonishment,
and bow their heads."

E1.7.D.6.27_REF1_PO WHEN I AM AMONG THE TREES
When I am among the trees,
especially the willows and the honey locust,
equally the beech, the oaks and the pines,
they give off such hints of gladness.
I would almost say that they save me, and daily.

I am so distant from the hope of myself,
in which I have goodness, and discernment,
and never hurry through the world
    but walk slowly, and bow often.

Around me the trees stir in their leaves
and call out, “Stay awhile.”
The light flows from their branches.

And they call again, “It’s simple,” they say,
“and you too have come
into the world to do this, to go easy, to be filled
with light, and to shine.”
(Mary Oliver, Thirst, 2006)

E1.7.D.6.27_REF2_PO "I DON'T WANT TO BE DEMURE OR RESPECTABLE

I don't want to be demure or respectable.

was that way, asleep, for years.

That way, you forget too many important things.

How the little stones, even if you can't hear them, are singing.

How the river can't wait to get to the ocean and the sky, it's been there before.

What traveling is that!

It is a joy to imagine such distances.

I could skip sleep for the next hundred years.

There is a fire in the lashes of my eyes.

It doesn't matter where I am, it could be a small room.

The glimmer of gold Böhme saw on the kitchen pot was missed by everyone else in the house. [...]"
(Mary Oliver, Blue horses, 2014)

E1.7.D.6.27_REF3_PO "MYSTERIES, YES

"Truly, we live with mysteries too marvelous
to be understood.

How grass can be nourishing in the
mouths of the lambs.
How rivers and stones are forever
in allegiance with gravity
while we ourselves dream of rising.
How two hands touch and the bonds will
never be broken.
How people come, from delight or the
scars of damage,
to the comfort of a poem.

Let me keep my distance, always, from those
who think they have the answers.

Let me keep company always with those who say
“Look!” and laugh in astonishment,
and bow their heads."
(Mary Oliver, Evidence, 2009)

E1.7.D.6.27_REF4_PO "INVITATION

Oh do you have time
    to linger 
        for just a little while 
            out of your busy 

and very important day 
    for the goldfinches 
        that have gathered 
            in a field of thistles

for a musical battle, 
    to see who can sing 
        the highest note, 
            or the lowest,

or the most expressive of mirth, 
    or the most tender? 
        Their strong, blunt beaks
            drink the air

as they strive 
    melodiously 
        not for your sake 
            and not for mine

and not for the sake of winning 
    but for sheer delight and gratitude - 
        believe us, they say, 
            it is a serious thing

just to be alive 
    on this fresh morning 
        in this broken world. 
            I beg of you,

do not walk by 
    without pausing 
        to attend to this 
            rather ridiculous performance.

It could mean something.
    It could mean everything. 
        It could be what Rilke meant, when he wrote: 
            You must change your life."
(Mary Oliver, Red Bird, 2008)

E1.7.D.6.27_REF5_PO "TO BEGIN WITH, THE SWEET GRASS

[...]

The witchery of living 
is my whole conversation 
with you, my darlings.
All I can tell you is what I know.

Look, and look again.
This world is not just a little thrill for the eyes.

It's more than bones.
It's more than the delicate wrist with its personal pulse.
It's more than the beating of the single heart.
It's praising.
It's giving until the giving feels like receiving.
You have a life - just imagine that!
You have this day, and maybe another, and maybe still another. 

[...]

Let me ask you this.
Do you also think that beauty exists for some fabulous reason?

And, if you have not been enchanted by this adventure - 
your life - 
what would do for you?  

[...]

What I loved in the beginning, I think, was mostly myself. Never mind that I had to, since somebody had to.
That was many years ago.
Since then I have gone out from my confinements,
    though with difficulty. 

I mean the ones that thought to rule my heart.
I cast them out, I put them on the mush pile.
They will be nourishment somehow (everything is nourishment somehow or another).

And I have become the child of the clouds, and of hope.
I have become the friend of the enemy, whoever that is.
I have become older and, cherishing what I have learned,
I have become younger.

And what do I risk to tell you this, which is all I know? Love yourself. Then forget it. Then, love the world. "
(Mary Oliver, Evidence, 2009)

E1.7.D.6.27_REF6_PO "ON MEDITATING, SORT OF

Meditation, so I've heard, is best accomplished 
if you entertain a certain strict posture. 
Frankly, I prefer just to lounge under a tree. 
So why should I think I could ever be successful?

Some days I fall asleep, or land in that 
even better place-half-asleep-where the world, 
spring, summer, autumn, winter - 
flies through my mind in its 
hardy ascent and its uncompromising descent.

So I just lie like that, while distance and time 
reveal their true attitudes: they never 
heard of me, and never will, or ever need to.

Of course I wake up finally 
thinking, how wonderful to be who I am, 
made out of earth and water, 
my own thoughts, my own fingerprints- 
all that glorious, temporary stuff"
(Mary Oliver, Blue horses, 2014)

E1.7.D.6.27_REF6.1_PH "A NEW LOOK AT MEDITATION 

Spiritual experience, then, in the vision of things that it entails, does not resolve the contradictions: it undoes them while maintaining the concepts. In short, to use Ronald Laing's words, it sees through. So, after all that has been covered in this chapter, I propose to return to the example that raised the question in the first place - namely, meditation and the contradictory judgments to which it has been subjected. The previous considerations reveal a new point of view that seems contradictory, but may not be as contradictory as it seems. What if meditating and not meditating were not mutually exclusive? What if there were several ways to meditate, one of which was not to meditate? What if the non-meditation of the meditator was different from that of the non-meditator? What if there was a place from which the two possibilities appeared as variants of the same way of being? What if the pair meditate/not meditate was the binary designation of an inner position that cannot be named as a single entity? And what if this position is precisely the one the spiritual seeker is trying to reach? I leave the question open for now, in the hope that this book will help those who read (and write) it to discover their own answer."
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond wisdom, How to live?, 2023)

E1.7.D.6.27_REF6.2_PH “THE PROGRESSION OF SPIRITUAL UNDERSTANDING [...]

A AND NON-A

But spiritual research takes those who practice it even further. Not only can it lead to a succession of opposing judgments by reversing the pros and cons, but, even more profoundly, it leads the seeker to a vision of things where what is being examined is not fully describable as either A or non-A. The least bad designation in logical terms would be paradoxical: A, provided that it is non-A; or non-A, it being understood that it is A. And even these formulations would be insufficient, because the dialectical process at work is even more radical, since it tends, as Anne Cheng writes, “to refute an idea as being, as not being, as being both being and not being, as being neither being nor not being”.

For now, it will suffice to stick to the first two stages. Since what we want to describe, which I will call "A-not-A", has the qualities of both A and not-A, it is not a matter of finding some kind of middle ground, but of accessing a place of vision that lies beyond their opposition and from which we perceive that it is a matter of a flattening of reality. When the mind is faced with an insurmountable difficulty, it is because it seeks the solution at the level of the contradiction: but another level must be reached. Not so that the problem finds its solution in the terms in which it was posed (which never happens in spiritual inquiry), but so that it disappears as such. Before it is overcome, the contradiction is a dead end; and those who try to go beyond it fall into another dead end, because it is not surmountable as such - at a higher level it simply has no place. And when the researcher looks back (which, in my opinion, he should do more often because it is instructive), it appears to him as a logical optical illusion due to the inadequacy of his vision."
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond wisdom, How to live?, 2023)

E1.7.D.6.27_REF6.3_PH "EXPRESSING OPPOSITES WHILE DELIVERING THEM FROM THEIR CONTRADICTION

It is not that language lacks precision, but that it has too much of it, because it discriminates according to its nature and function. Therefore, in order to describe the spiritual, one is often led to juxtapose contradictory qualities. Let us examine how this can be done.

The contradiction can unfold in successive moments, as in this well-known fragment of Heraclitus: "God: day-night, winter-summer, war-peace, satiety-famine." But if we imagine that the different phases of description or argumentation are condensed into a single statement that unites them, then we arrive at a different kind of formula, for example that of the well-known Mazu (Ma-Tsou), who proclaims that "Zen is the ordinary mind. Of course it is and it is not, while being it without being it... Let's say it is, under certain conditions that mean it is no longer what it seems to be. The grasping of the contradiction, which has lost its temporality, has united itself into a proof that seems paradoxical... or simply cunning. And the apparently simple affirmation that results says more than it expresses at first glance, because it captures the complexity of the path of understanding that led to it.

Such statements are often said to be provocative, but this qualifier is superficial. Even Dali, who comes so close to provocation in his famous phrases, goes beyond it, in my opinion. For example, if we look at one of Dali's famous statements, "The station of Perpignan is the center of the world," and we unfold its complex meaning, we realize that it condenses three different times:

1) To say this is absurd and deliberately provocative - Perpignan station, an ordinary place, is not, of course. 2) But yes, it is. All I have to do is decide, and the center of the world will be there, by virtue of an aesthetic decision. The world that spreads out from such a center will be seen differently. Reality will become surreal. 3) Yes, but it will still be Perpignan station, and it will be promoted as such. The tone of the sentence is, of course, subtly humorous. The irony is signaled and distanced, transcended while remaining present, and the sentence becomes unsettling and banal, surprising and ordinary. The contradictory stages that it implies have merged into a simultaneous formulation that presents them together without neutralizing them.

Admittedly, Dalí's references are far from Zen, but here he joins it in his own way. Through a completely surreal aesthetic operation, he sublimates banality to the point of dissolving it while respecting it, thus joining Mazu in his aforementioned formula; the first level of understanding is not rejected or fought against, but preserved and transcended at the same time, like a koan that accepts absurdity and strikes it down without ever opposing it".
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond wisdom, How to live?, 2023)

E1.7.D.6.27_REF7_PO "IT WAS EARLY

It was early, 
    which has always been my hour 
        to begin looking 
            at the world

and of course, 
    even in the darkness, 
        to begin 
            listening into it,

especially 
    under the pines 
        where the owl lives 
            and sometimes calls out

as I walk by, 
    as he did 
        on this morning. 
            So many gifts!

What do they mean? 
    In the marshes 
        where the pink light 
            was just arriving

the mink
    with his bristle tail 
        was stalking 
            the soft-eared mice,

and in the pines
    the cones were heavy, 
        each one 
            ordained to open.

Sometimes 
    I need only to stand 
        wherever I am 
            to be blessed.

Little mink, let me watch you. 
    Little mice, run and run. 
        Dear pine cone, let me hold you 
            as you open."
(Mary Oliver, Evidence, 2009)

E1.7.D.6.27_REF8_PO "MINDFUL

Every day 
    I see or I hear 
        something 
            that more or less

kills me 
    with delight, 
        that leaves me 
            like a needle

in the haystack
    of light. 
        It is what I was born for- 
            to look, to listen,

to lose myself 
    inside this soft world- 
        to instruct myself 
            over and over

in joy, 
    and acclamation. 
        Nor am I talking 
            about the exceptional,

the fearful, the dreadful, 
    the very extravagant- 
        but of the ordinary, 
            the common, the very drab,

the daily presentations. 
    Oh, good scholar, 
        I say to myself, 
            how can you help

but grow wise 
    with such teachings 
        as these - 
            the untrimmable light

of the world, 
    the ocean's shine, 
        the prayers that are made 
            out of grass?"
(Mary Oliver, Why I wake early, 2004)

E1.7.D.6.27_REF9_PO "WHITE FLOWERS

Last night 
in the fields 
I lay down in the darkness
 to think about death, 
but instead I fell asleep, 
as if in a vast and sloping room 
filled with those white flowers 
that open all summer, 
sticky and untidy, 
in the warm fields. 
When I woke 
the morning light was just slipping 
in front of the stars, 
and I was covered 
with blossoms. 
I don't know 
how it happened -
I don't know 
if my body went diving down 
under the sugary vines 
in some sleep-sharpened affinity 
with the depths, or whether 
that green energy 
rose like a wave 
and curled over me, claiming me 
in its husky arms. 
I pushed them away, but I didn't rise. 
Never in my life had I felt so plush, 
or so slippery,
or so resplendently empty. 
Never in my life 
had I felt myself so near 
that porous line 
where my own body was done with 
and the roots and the stems and the flowers 
began."
(Mary Oliver, New and selected poems: Volume one, 1992)

E1.7.D.6.27_REF10_PO "RICE

It grew in the black mud. 
It grew under the tiger's orange paws. 
Its stems thinner than candles, and as straight. 
Its leaves like the feathers of egrets, but green. 
The grains cresting, wanting to burst. 
Oh, blood of the tiger.

I don't want you just to sit down at the table. 
I don't want you just to eat, and be content. 
I want you to walk out into the fields 
where the water is shining, and the rice has risen. 
I want you to stand there, far from the white tablecloth. 
I want you to fill your hands with the mud, like a blessing."
(Mary Oliver, New and selected poems: Volume one, 1992)

E1.7.D.6.27_REF11_PO "A MEETING

She steps into the dark swamp 
where the long wait ends.

The secret slippery package 
drops to the weeds.

She leans her long neck and tongues it 
between breaths slack with exhaustion

and after a while it rises and becomes a creature 
like her, but much smaller.

So now there are two. And they walk together 
like a dream under the trees.

In early June, at the edge of a field 
thick with pink and yellow flowers

I meet them. 
I can only stare.

She is the most beautiful woman 
I have ever seen.

Her child leaps among the flowers, 
the blue of the sky falls over me

like silk, the flowers burn, and I want 
to live my life all over again, to begin again,

to be utterly 
wild."
(Mary Oliver, Amercian primitive, 1983)

E1.7.D.6.27_REF12_PO "AT BLACKWATER POND

At Blackwater Pond the tossed waters have settled 
after a night of rain.
I dip my cupped hands. I drink 
a long time. It tastes 
like stone, leaves, fire. It falls cold 
into my body, waking the bones. I hear them 
deep inside me, whispering 
oh what is that beautiful thing 
that just happened?"
(Mary Oliver, Three rivers poetry journal, 1980)

E1.7.D.6.28. WENDELL BERRY born 1934
"One’s inner voices become audible. One feels the attraction of one’s most intimate sources.
In consequence, one responds more clearly to other lives. The more coherent one becomes within oneself as a creature, the more fully one enters into the communion of all creatures."

E1.7.D.6.28_REF1_PO "THE PEACE OF WILD THINGS

When despair for the world grows in me
and I wake in the night at the least sound
in fear of what my life and my children’s lives may be,
I go and lie down where the wood drake
rests in his beauty on the water, and the great heron feeds.
I come into the peace of wild things
who do not tax their lives with forethought
of grief. I come into the presence of still water.
And I feel above me the day-blind stars
waiting with their light. For a time
I rest in the grace of the world, and am free."
(Wendell Berry)

E1.7.D.6.28_REF2_PO "WE ENTER SOLITUDE, IN WHICH ALSO WE LOSE LONELINESS…
True solitude is found in the wild places, where one is without human obligation.
One’s inner voices become audible. One feels the attraction of one’s most intimate sources.
In consequence, one responds more clearly to other lives. The more coherent one becomes within oneself as a creature, the more fully one enters into the communion of all creatures. [...]
From the order of nature we return to the order — and the disorder — of humanity.
From the larger circle we must go back to the smaller, the smaller within the larger and dependent on it.
One enters the larger circle by willingness to be a creature, the smaller by choosing to be a human.
And having returned from the woods, we remember with regret its restfulness. For all creatures there are in place, hence at rest.
In their most strenuous striving, sleeping and waking, dead and living, they are at rest.
In the circle of the human we are weary with striving, and are without rest."
(Wendell Berry, What Are People For?)

E1.7.D.6.28_REF3_PO “FINALLY WILL IT NOT BE ENOUGH,
after much living, after 
much love, after much dying 
of those you have loved, 
to sit on the porch near sundown
 with your eyes simply open, 
watching the wind shape the clouds 
into the shapes of clouds?

Even then you will remember 
the history of love, shaped 
in the shapes of flesh, ever-changing
as the clouds that pass, the blessed 
yearning of the body for body, 
unending light. You will remember, watching 
the clouds, the future of love.”
(Wendell Berry, Sabbath poem, 1994)

E1.7.D.6.29. WIM WENDERS born 1945
Hirayama cleans Tokyo’s public toilets for a living, but he embodies the traits of a Zen master.

E1.7.A.1.1_REF3_CUR DESPITE HIS HUMBLE JOB, HIRAYAMA, A TOKYO PUBLIC TOILET CLEANER, REMAINS PATIENT, ADAPTABLE, AND WISE, EMBODYING THE TRAITS OF A ZEN MASTER.
Hirayama (Koji Yakusho) cleans Tokyo’s public toilets for a living, rising before dawn to gently water the seedlings he grows in his home and then drive off to begin his shift.Hirayama clearly derives enjoyment from performing his work well, but there’s more to his life than labor, and more to this movie than a simplistic celebration of manual toil.

Hirayama is a man of few words, observing Tokyo and its inhabitants with a tenderness and patience that, if overlooked, could be mistaken for a simple disposition. He deeply observes people and his surroundings, finding immense satisfaction in the beauty of nature, music, literature, and human interactions. His interactions are devoid of pride, even when overlooked due to his job, and he exhibits no anger, even when faced with adversity. He displays empathy and tenderness towards people of all ages, being able to establish intimate relationships inrecord time with kids, adolescent and adults alike.

Hirayama is an educated man who reads a classical literature book each month. He is adaptable, despite adhering to a routine. He understands that his wisdom cannot be conveyed merely through words, but through smiles, loving actions, jokes, and games. Hirayama embodies the traits of a Zen master.

Watch the trailer: https://www.imdb.com/title/tt27503384/?ref_=ext_shr_lnk

E1.7.D.6.30. JACQUES DARRIULAT born 1946
"In this immense drama - where energy unfolds in the life of matter like an expanding sphere and invention multiplies in the life of the spirit - we have a role that we can't ignore. However, we have the choice to either fully embrace that role or deny it, and to exist in the light of Being without ever comprehending the infinite power which grants us life and existence, and enables us to persist in that bliss, which is the enjoyment of simply existing."

E1.7.D.6.30_REF1_PH SPINOZA TEACHES THAT BLISS LIES IN THE UNDERSTANDING OF OUR ETERNAL ESSENCE AND THE ENJOYMENT OF THAT FULLNESS. "In this immense drama-the expanding sphere in which the energy that unfolds in the life of matter is actualized as invention that multiplies in the life of spirit-a role is assigned to us from which it is not in our power to depart. But we are given the choice of living it to the full, or of denying it and passing into the light of being without ever fathoming the infinite power that gives us life and existence and makes us persevere in that bliss which is the enjoyment of pure being. The lesson of ethics teaches us not to choose our destiny - a vain pretense of the imagination that dreams with open eyes and knows nothing of the life that is its essence - but to live it to the full and to enjoy knowing ourselves as an expression among the infinity of possibilities, all equally destined to a necessary realization, of the living God who animates, in varying degrees, all things that have been granted the incomprehensible gift of existence. "For what we have shown so far is quite general and also concerns human beings and other individuals, all of whom are animated, albeit to different degrees" (Scholia on II, 13). Life is not worth living because of the choices we could make, because of an imaginary freedom that we ascribe to ourselves only because we are unaware of the true causes that determine us and the necessity that leads us as if by the hand. Life is worth living because it offers us the experience, albeit limited in time and space, of participating in the life that is in God, of feeling and experiencing ourselves as such, by virtue of the very essence that makes us exist, eternally: "We feel and experience that we are eternal. […] 

We feel that our spirit, insofar as it embraces the essence of the body in the aspect of eternity - sub aeternitatis specie - is eternal, and that its existence cannot be defined by time, that is, explained by duration" (V, Scholium 23). Eternity is not immortality. The former places being in a dimension beyond time, a definition that is simply negative, not yet affirmative; the latter, on the contrary, prolongs indefinitely the time granted to this singular existence. In terms of bliss, the ancient Greeks knew only the second, and they knew nothing more divine than being immortal, to the point of making this attribute the very name of the deity, since they said of their gods that they were the Immortals. But the Jewish God knows Himself to be infinite, not indefinite, and it is not enough for Him to live indefinitely in time; He must live in the glory of eternity - which triumphs over the dissent and diaspora that form the intimate fabric of duration - and re-establish Himself in perfect conformity with Himself, in the bliss of being and knowing Himself fully, and of enjoying this fullness forever."
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the Fullness of this World, 6 - “We feel and experience that we are eternal”, 2017)

Read teh full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Spinoza/Introduction/Introd6.html

E1.7.D.6.30_REF2_PH FOR SPINOZA, THE VALUE OF LIFE IS NOT IN THE FREEDOM OF CHOICE BUT IN THE EXPERIENCE OF FEELING ETERNAL. "In this immense drama - where energy unfolds in the life of matter like an expanding sphere and invention multiplies in the life of the spirit - we have a role that we can't ignore. However, we have the choice to either fully embrace that role or deny it, and to exist in the light of Being without ever comprehending the infinite power which grants us life and existence, and enables us to persist in that bliss, which is the enjoyment of simply existing. [Spinoza's] Ethic teaches us not how to choose our destiny - vain pretension of the imagination, which dreams with eyes opened and doesn't know anything of the real life which constitutes its essence - but how to live it in fullness, and to enjoy knowing ourselves, as an expression among the infinity of possibilities, all equally destined for necessary realization [...]
The value of our lives doesn't reside in the choices we would be able to make, because of an imaginary freedom that we attribute to ourselves only because we ignore the real causes that determine us as well as the necessity that lead us by the hand. The value of our lives reside in that it offers us the experience, although limited in time and in space, [...] to feel and experience ourselves eternal: « We feel and we experience that we are eternal. […] We feel that our spirit, insofar as it envelops the essence of the body under the aspect of eternity - sub aeternitatis specie - is eternal, and that its existence cannot be defined by time, in other words, be explained by duration » (Baruch Spinoza, Ethics V, scolie 23).”
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the plenitude of this world, 6 - “We feel and we experience that we are eternal”, 2017)


E1.7.D.6.30_REF3_PH JACQUES DARRIULAT EXPLORES THE NOTION OF EXISTENCE IN PHILOSOPHY, EMPHASIZING THE IMPORTANCE OF THE WONDER OF BEING ALIVE, WHICH IS OFTEN OVERLOOKED IN EVERYDAY LIFE. 
"At every moment, assaulted by existence, immersed in it, we no longer know how to be amazed by it. Everywhere and nowhere at once, always present and yet always absent, existence is forgotten, it remains incognito among us. Always the same, never questioned, existence therefore has no history for us. [...]

To follow the thread of Wittgenstein's meditation, the "world" tries to show its existence to the man who thinks it.
For about two centuries now, the "existence" of the world has no longer been taken for granted by modern man. To exist then means "to be real," not in an apparent but in an authentic reality. We can suspect that existence is not unrelated to truth. [What can it mean to think the nonsense of the world's existence "authentically"?
It was undoubtedly necessary for us to meet Heidegger on our way, since he was one of the first - the first to listen to him since Parmenides - to shift the axis of philosophical wonder from thinking to being. Plato founded philosophy in the sense that he was the first to think that there is nothing more astonishing for thought than the power to think and conceive that is in thought, a consciousness that he calls "reminiscence" or "anamnesis" in the sense that thought has always known it but has forgotten it. Heidegger begins the foundation of philosophy anew - at least that is his claim - by thinking that there is nothing more astonishing and more worthy of thought for thought than the fact of being, the single source from which all the determined, singular existences that come before our eyes, that come to hand, proceed. What he calls "Being" [...], multiple and diverse, while Being (capitalized) is necessarily one. What Heidegger calls the "decadence" of philosophy, or the "decay" of thought, comes from the fact that thought forgets to think - not thought itself, as the tradition of the classics taught - but being. Forgetting to think of Being, we no longer consider anything other than the beings that come to hand, which we can use as we please, like so many tools that we handle, and no longer as riddles that require thinking. There is no need to think: it is enough to work and master the world thanks to our technical skills. For philosophy to be reborn, therefore, we would have to go back to the beginning of philosophy, before the Platonic foundation, to the time of the Presocratics, mainly Heraclitus and Parmenides. [...]

Heidegger's question is not about the diversity of things, but about what they have in common and what unites them, namely "existence"."
(Jacques Darriulat, Being and Existence, 2-To Speak of Existence, 2020)

E1.7.D.6.31. ALAN LIGHTMAN born 1948
THE PERSONAL AND SUBJECTIVE NATURE OF OUR SPIRITUAL EXPERIENCES CANNOT BE FULLY UNDERSTOOD BY REASON
"The spiritual experiences we have can arise from atoms and molecules. At the same time, some of these experiences, and certainly their very personal and subjective nature, cannot be fully understood in terms of atoms and molecules."

E1.7.B.1.2.d.wE1.7.D.6.31. THE PERSONAL AND SUBJECTIVE NATURE OF OUR SPIRITUAL EXPERIENCES CANNOT BE FULLY UNDERSTOOD BY REASON
The spiritual experiences we have can arise from atoms and molecules. At the same time, some of these experiences, and certainly their very personal and subjective nature, cannot be fully understood in terms of atoms and molecules.


E1.7.D.6.32. JANE HIRSHFIELD born 1953
"A poem plucks the interconnection of the experiencing self and all being. In poetry’s words, life calls to life with the same inevitability and gladness that bird calls to bird, whale to whale, frog to frog. Listening across the night or ocean or pond, they recognize one another and are warmed by that knowledge."

E1.7.D.6.32_REF1_PO JANE HIRSHFIELD EXPLORES HOW GOOD ART, PARTICULARLY POETRY, TRANSFORMS AND ENLARGES HUMAN PERCEPTION. Art changes both the inner self and the outer world by creating new ways of seeing and understanding. 
"Good art is a truing of vision, in the way a saw is trued in the saw shop, to cut more cleanly. It is also a changing of vision. Entering a good poem, a person feels, tastes, hears, thinks, and sees in altered ways. Why ask art into a life at all, if not to be transformed and enlarged by its presence and mysterious means? … And by changing selves, one by one, art changes also the outer world that selves create and share…. Inside the intricate clockworks of language and music, event and life, what allows and invites us to feel and know as we do, and then increase our feeling and knowing? Such a question cannot be answered. “We” are different, from one another and, moment by moment, from even ourselves. “Art,” too, is a word deceptively single of surface. Still, following this question for thirty years has given me pleasure, and some sense of approaching more nearly a destination whose center cannot ever be mapped or reached. [...]

A mysterious quickening inhabits the depths of any good poem—protean, elusive, alive in its own right…. We feel something stir, shiver, swim its way into the world when a good poem opens its eyes. Poetry’s work is not simply the recording of inner or outer perception; it makes by words and music new possibilities of perceiving…. The eyes and ears must learn to abandon the habits of useful serving and take up instead a participatory delight in their own ends. A work of art is not a piece of fruit lifted from a tree branch: it is a ripening collaboration of artist, receiver, and world. […]

All writers recognize this surge of striking; in its energies the objects of the world are made new, alchemized by their passage through the imaginal, musical, world-foraging and word-forging mind.

This altered vision is the secret happiness of poems, of poets. It is as if the poem encounters the world and finds in it a hidden language, a Braille unreadable except when raised by the awakened imaginative mind. [...]


Poetry itself, when allowed to, becomes within us a playable organ of perception, sounding out its own forms of knowledge and forms of discovery. Poems do not simply express. They make, they find, they sound (in both meanings of that word) things undiscoverable by other means. […]

A poem is not the outer event or phenomenon it ostensibly describes, nor is it the feeling or insight it may seem to reveal or evoke. A poem may involve both, but is, more complexly, a living fabrication of new comprehension — “fabrication” meaning, not accidentally, both “lie,” “falsehood,” and, more simply and fundamentally, anything created and made: the bringing of something freshly into being. Fabric, whether of material or mind, is an interwoven invention: some substance — silk or cotton, wool or image — made stronger, larger than itself, by the dual-natured meeting of warp thread and weft thread. A work of art holds our lives as they are known when fully engaged with the multiple, crossing experience-strands of self, language, culture, emotion, senses, and mind. [...]

The desire of monks and mystics is not unlike that of artists: to perceive the extraordinary within the ordinary by changing not the world but the eyes that look… To form the intention of new awareness is already to transform and be transformed. [...]

A poem plucks the interconnection of the experiencing self and all being. In poetry’s words, life calls to life with the same inevitability and gladness that bird calls to bird, whale to whale, frog to frog. Listening across the night or ocean or pond, they recognize one another and are warmed by that knowledge."
(Jane Hirshfield,  Ten Windows: How Great Poems Transform the World, 2015)

E1.7.D.6.33. DAVID WHYTE born 1955
"The Journey

Above the mountains
the geese turn into
the light again

Painting their
black silhouettes
on an open sky.

Sometimes everything
has to be
enscribed across
the heavens

so you can find
the one line
already written
inside you.

Sometimes it takes
a great sky
to find that

small, bright
and indescribable
wedge of freedom
in your own heart.

Sometimes with
the bones of the black
sticks left when the fire
has gone out

someone has written
something new
in the ashes of your life.

You are not leaving
you are arriving."
(David Whyte)"

E1.7.D.6.34. VALÉRIE ROUZEAU born 1967

E1.7.A.3.3_REF6_PO.wE1.7.D.6.34.

E1.7.A.3.3_REF6.1_PO.wE1.7.D.6.34.

E1.7.A.3.3_REF6.1.a_PO.wE1.7.D.6.34.

E1.7.D.6.34_REF4_PO “To say it all in an Alexandrian verse
It will be within my range of my vocal range
You know the loneliness when you turn the pages 
I thus have come to the following conclusion 
I see on the horizon the tall trees rising 
The books sleeping on their shelves, the child who remains
Does not take his eyes off the distant pine trees 
How so sad it would be to look at one's own feet."
(Valérie Rouzeau, gleaned at the Marché de la poésie in Paris in 2018 - Valérie Rouzeau says that only the second verse is hers)


"UN JOUR JE DIRAI TOUT DANS UN ALEXANDRIN
Ce sera dans mes cordes dans mes vocales cordes
Tu sais la solitude quand tu tournes les pages 
J'en suis arrivée à la conclusion suivante 
Je vois sur l'horizon les grands arbres qui montent 
Les livres qui dorment sur leurs étagères 
L'enfant qui reste ne quitte pas les sapins des yeux 
Comme ce serait dommage de regarder ses pieds.”
(Valérie Rouzeau, glanés sur le Marché de la poésie à Paris en 2018 - Valérie Rouzeau dit que seul le deuxième vers est d’elle)

E1.7.D.6.35. TRISTAN GARCIA born 1981
"Forgetting the self doesn't make me truer, but happier".

E1.7.D.6.35_REF1_PH TRISTAN GARCIA SUGGESTS THAT WISDOM, WHETHER WESTERN OR EASTERN, IS AN ILLUSION THAT ATTEMPTS TO HARMONIZE WHO WE ARE WITH THAT PART OF THE WORLD WHICH WE ARE ABLE TO COMPREHEND. "Wisdom reveals to me, by comprehending things, that the world is equal. Then it teaches me that I must remain equal to the image of this flattened world. Since everything is equal, you are also equal, you can be neither more nor less, your character can be equal, you can seek out the flat world, and you can draw a single line on this plane and fold yourself over it. Wisdom articulates being and comprehension; it is necessary to be in the world in the image of what one comprehends of it.

All (Eastern and Western) wisdom is the illusion that it would be possible to bring what I am into accord with what I know. By some sleight of hand, wisdom attributes a unique and absolute meaning to what I comprehend of the world in me and to what I am myself in this world.

The world is equal, and because it is so it doesn’t matter whether I am equal to it or not. Will the sage be more and better in the world than the one who has lived without wisdom? Since sages shape themselves in the image of the world, in the image of what really is, do they think that they will be more, that they will be better than the one who has comprehended nothing?
The consciousness of truth never makes something more true."
(Tristan Garcia, Form and Object: A Treatise on things, 2011)

E1.7.D.6.36. MARIA POPOVA born 1984
"AND STILL
when the constellation of starlings
flickers across the evening sky,
it is     enough

to stand here
for an irrevocable minute
     agape with wonder.

It is     eternity."

E1.7.D.6.36_REF1_PO "BUT WE HAD MUSIC

Right this minute
across time zones and opinions people are
making plans
making meals
making promises and poems

while

at the center of our galaxy
a black hole with the mass of four billion suns
screams its open-mouth kiss
     of oblivion.

Someday it will swallow
Euclid’s postulates and the Goldberg Variations,
swallow calculus and Leaves of Grass.

I know this.

And still
when the constellation of starlings
flickers across the evening sky,
it is     enough

to stand here
for an irrevocable minute
     agape with wonder.

It is     eternity."
(Maria Popova)

Nick Cave reads the poem on an animation by Daniel Bruson: https://youtu.be/-akjypHazAM

E1.7.D.6.37. ANNIE MURPHY PAUL born 1986
"In the space that is made available [when we contemplate nature], currently active thoughts can mingle with the deep stores of memories, emotions, and ideas already present in the brain, generating inspired collisions."

E1.7.D.6.37_REF1_SCI NATURAL SCENES ACTIVATE THE BRAIN'S "DEFAULT MODE NETWORK," ALLOWING FOR A RELAXED, ASSOCIATIVE STATE THAT FOSTERS UNEXPECTED CONNECTIONS AND INSIGHTS. This state, combined with the positive emotions nature evokes, leads to expansive and open-minded thinking, enabling the mingling of active thoughts with deep memories and ideas, thus generating inspiration.
"Scientists theorize that the “soft fascination” evoked by natural scenes engages what’s known as the brain’s “default mode network.” When this network is activated, we enter a loose associative state in which we’re not focused on any one particular task but are receptive to unexpected connections and insights. In nature, few decisions and choices are demanded of us, granting our minds the freedom to follow our thoughts wherever they lead. At the same time, nature is pleasantly diverting, in a fashion that lifts our mood without occupying all our mental powers; such positive emotion in turn leads us to think more expansively and open-mindedly. In the space that is thus made available, currently active thoughts can mingle with the deep stores of memories, emotions, and ideas already present in the brain, generating inspired collisions."
 (Annie Murphy Paul, The Extended Mind: The Power of Thinking Outside the Brain, 2021)

E1.7.D.6.38. ELLA FRANCES SANDERS
"A SENSE OF WONDER CAN FIND YOU IN MANY FORMS, sometimes loudly, sometimes as a whispering, sometimes even hiding inside other feelings — being in love, or unbalanced, or blue."

E1.7.C.1.2.b_REF1_LIT.wE1.7.D.6.38. "A SENSE OF WONDER CAN FIND YOU IN MANY FORMS, sometimes loudly, sometimes as a whispering, sometimes even hiding inside other feelings — being in love, or unbalanced, or blue.
For me, it is looking at the night for so long that my eyes ache and I’m stuck seeing stars for hours afterwards, watching the way the ocean sways itself to sleep, or as the sky washes itself in colors for which I know I will never have the words — a world made from layers of rock and fossil and glittered imaginings that keeps tripping me up, demanding I pay attention to one leaf at a time, ensuring I can never pick up quite where I left off. [...]
When one is considering the universe, unseen matter, our small backyard of the stuff, I think it is important, sensible even, to try and find some balance between laughter and uncontrollable weeping.
Cry because we cannot even begin to understand how beautiful it is, cry because we are terribly flawed as a species, cry because it all seems so shockingly improbable that maybe our existence could be nothing but a dreamscape — celestial elephants in rooms without walls. But then? Surely, we can laugh.
Laugh because being riddled head-to-toe with human emotions while trying to come to terms with just how indisputably tiny we are in the grand scheme of things, makes absolutely everything and everyone seem quite ridiculous, entirely farcical. We have heads? Ridiculous! There are arguments about who is in charge here? Ridiculous! The universe is expanding? Ridiculous! We feel it necessary to keep secrets? Ridiculous. [...]
Depending on where you look, what you touch, you are changing all the time. The carbon inside you, accounting for about 18 percent of your being, could have existed in any number of creatures or natural disasters before finding you. That particular atom residing somewhere above your left eyebrow? It could well have been a smooth, riverbed pebble before deciding to call you home.
You see, you are not so soft after all; you are rock and wave and the peeling bark of trees, you are ladybirds and the smell of a garden after the rain. When you put your best foot forward, you are taking the north side of a mountain with you. [...]
The idea of an unchanging “you” or “self” is inherently fraught with confusion and conflict, and if you consider the topic for too long it can begin to feel clammy, almost suspect. An apparent string running through all the previous versions of you — the one five minutes ago, a few hours ago, several years — the idea of “self” inevitably gets tangled up in things like the physical body and appearance, like memory. It’s clear that you cannot pin yourself down as any one particular “thing” but rather that you resemble a story line, an endless progression, variations on a theme, something that enables you to relate your present “self” to the past and future ones. [...]
We do seem to make sense of ourselves and the world as a part of a narrative — we think in terms of main characters, those we speak and interact with, and where the beginnings, the middles, and the endings are. [...]
A lot of our time is spent trying to tie up loose ends, trying to shape disorder into something recognizably smooth, trying to escape the very limits that hold us close, happily ignoring rough edges and the inevitable. We separate ourselves out into past, present, and future, if only to show that we have changed, that we know better, that we have understood something inherent; if only to draw neat lines from start to finish without looking back.
The problem is that chaos is always only ever sitting just across the table, frequently glancing up from its newspaper, from its coffee cup filled with discolored and imploding stars. Because chaos too waits. Waits for you to notice it, for you to realize it’s the most dazzling thing you’ve ever seen, for all of your atoms to collectively shriek in belated recognition and stare, mouth open, at how exquisitely embedded it is in everything. Because we are not designed to be more orderly than anything else; seams have a tendency to come apart with time — you and the universe are the same in this way, which makes for a delicately overwhelming struggle.
So, then, if you can’t ever end things neatly, can’t ever put them back quite the way you found them, surely the alternative is to remain stubbornly carbonated with possibility, to never rest from your rotation. To keep assembling stories between us, stories about how everything was everything, about how much we loved."
(Ella Frances Sanders,  Eating the Sun: Small Musings on a Vast Universe)

E1.7.D.6.39. JOHN KOENIG
Uncommonly lovely invented words for what we feel but cannot name. John Koenig “get to work redefining the world around us, until our language more closely matches the reality we experience.”

E1.7.D.6.39._REF1_LIT “IN LANGUAGE, ALL THINGS ARE POSSIBLE. Which means that no emotion is untranslatable. No sorrow is too obscure to define. We just have to do it. […]
Despite what dictionaries would have us believe, this world is still mostly undefined. […]"
(John Koenig, The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021)

E1.7.A.2_REF5.b_LIT.wE1.7.D.6.39. WORDS CAN CAPTURE THE FRAGILITY AND BEAUTY OF EXISTENCE, EMPHASIZING OUR VULNERABILITY AND LIMITED CONTROL OVER LIFE'S CIRCUMSTANCES. “There are words that anchor us in both the smallness and the grandeur of existence, its fierce fragility, its devastating beauty; words tasked with holding the hardest truth — that we are children of chance, born of a billion bright improbabilities that prevailed over the infinitely greater odds of nonexistence, living with only marginal and mostly illusory control over the circumstances of our lives and other people’s choices, forever vulnerable to the accidents of a universe insentient to our hopes.”
(Maria Popova's review of John Koenig's The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021 - in The Marginalian)

E1.7.D.6.40. ANDRÉE CHEDID
“I CAN'T HELP BUT BE AMAZED
At the lapping of the water
The chirping of the birds
The joys of the earth
I can't help but be amazed
At an invincible love
Always present

I can't help but be amazed
At this ardent love
That fears neither
The torrent of time
Nor the carnage
Of the days accrued

In my mirror
Faded
I still smile at myself
I remain amazed
Despite everything
Love has taken root
Once
And for all
I can't help but be amazed at this ardent love.”

(Andrée Chedid)

“Je reste émerveillée
Du clapotis de l’eau
Des oiseaux gazouilleurs
Ces bonheurs de la terre
Je reste émerveillée
D’un amour
Invincible
Toujours présent

Je reste émerveillée
De cet amour
Ardent
Qui ne craint
Ni le torrent du temps
Ni l’hécatombe
Des jours accumulés

Dans mon miroir
Défraîchi
Je me souris encore
Je reste émerveillée
Rien n’y fait
L’amour s’est implanté
Une fois 
Pour toutes.
De cet amour ardent je reste émerveillée.”

(Andrée Chedid)