E2.1. Why do we want to be free?

E2.1.A. The Foundational Human Desire for Agency and Autonomy

E2.1.A.1. The Innate Human Drive for Self-Direction: Explore the fundamental human inclination to be the author of one's own actions and choices, independent of external control.


“INSISTENCE
It's a word I've gotten into the habit of contrasting with 'existence,' in the existentialist sense, which allows us to think about it differently. To exist is to be outside (outside oneself, outside everything). To insist is to be inside and strive to remain there. In what? Being, the present, and the world. How could we exist otherwise? In the sense in which I use the word, insistence is another name for conatus. It exists only in time and space and is always confronted with something else that it resists. Insistence is less the opposite of existence than it is the truth of existence. No one opposes nature except by being within it, and no one projects themselves into the future except in the present. To exist is to insist and resist. Man is neither an empire within an empire nor nothingness within being. There is no transcendence; only immanence, impermanence, and the hard desire to endure exist. There are only forces and power relations. There is only history. There is only being and the insistence of being."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)


"INSISTENTIALISM
Insistentialism is not humanism; it is a philosophy of being, not of man. It teaches that essence precedes existence. In other words, nothing exists except essence. Essence and existence are confused in the present of being. Spinoza calls this actual essence, which is one with power in action. Eth., III, Prop. 7 et seq.). Nothing exists except what insists. It is a philosophy not of man, but of nature. Not of transcendence, but of immanence. Not of nothingness, but of being. Not of the subject, but of becoming. Not of consciousness, but of action. Not of free will, but of liberation."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

“ABSENCE OF FEELING OF NEW CHAINS.—So long as we do not feel that we are in some way dependent, we consider ourselves independent—a false conclusion that shows how proud man is, how eager for dominion. For he hereby assumes that he would always be sure to observe and recognise dependence so soon as he suffered it, the preliminary hypothesis being that he generally lives in independence, and that, should he lose that independence for once in a way, he would immediately detect a contrary sensation.—Suppose, however, the reverse to be true—that he is always living in a complex state of dependence, but thinks himself free where, through long habit, he no longer feels the weight of the chain? He only suffers from new chains, and “free will” really means nothing more than an absence of feeling of new chains.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human III, Aphorism 10, 1878)

"Therefore it is fruitless to argue whether or not liberty is natural, since none can be held in slavery without being wronged, and in a world governed by a nature, which is reasonable, there is nothing so contrary as an injustice. Since freedom is our natural state, we are not only in possession of it but have the urge to defend it. Now, if perchance some cast a doubt on this conclusion and are so corrupted that they are not able to recognize their rights and inborn tendencies, I shall have to do them the honor that is properly theirs and place, so to speak, brute beasts in the pulpit to throw light on their nature and condition. The very beasts, God help me! if men are not too deaf, cry out to them, “Long live Liberty!” Many among them die as soon as captured: just as the fish loses life as soon as he leaves the water, so do these creatures close their eyes upon the light and have no desire to survive the loss of their natural freedom. If the animals were to constitute their kingdom by rank, their nobility would be chosen from this type. Others, from the largest to the smallest, when captured put up such a strong resistance by means of claws, horns, beak, and paws, that they show clearly enough how they cling to what they are losing [...]"
 (Etienne de la Boétie, The discourse of voluntary servitude, 1546)


"Don't stop the music." The soul is the "continuous bass" of every being—that rhythmic music almost in unison with the heartbeat that everyone carries within themselves from birth. It lies at a deeper, more intimate level than consciousness. Sometimes it is muted or muffled, but it is never interrupted. In moments of emotion or awakening, it can be heard".
(François Cheng)

FREEDOM TO DO WHAT? TO CONFORM TO WHAT IDEAL? EVERYONE HAS THEIR OWN.
"HIM: But isn't it because I had some common sense and candour for a moment that I have no idea where to get a meal this evening?
ME: Not at all. The reason is you've not had those qualities all along. It's because you didn't realize early on that it's first
necessary to create options for yourself which will make you independent, free from serving others.
HIM: Independent or not, what I've made for myself is at least the most comfortable.
ME: And the least secure and the least honest.
HIM: But it's the one best suited to my character as a lazy man, fool, and scoundrel.
ME: I agree with that.
HIM: And since I can find happiness through vices natural to me, which I've acquired without working, which I maintain without effort, which are compatible with the customs of my country, which suit the taste of those who protect me and are closer to their small particular needs than virtues which would embarrass them, by criticizing them morning and night, it would be really odd if I were to go on tormenting myself like some soul in hell in order to cut myself up and make myself something other than I am, to give myself a character foreign to my own, very worthy qualities--I'll concede that, to avoid an argument--but which would cost me a great deal to acquire and to practise, and which would lead to nothing, perhaps worse than nothing, because all the time I'd have to satirize the rich people among whom beggars like me have to find a living. [...]
HIM: There's nothing odd about it. I'm happy enough to be abject, but I want that to happen without any compulsion. It's all right with me to abandon my dignity... What's so funny?
ME: Your dignity makes me laugh.
HIM: Everyone has his own. I'm happy to forget mine, but at my own discretion, and not on someone else's orders. Does it have to be the case that when someone can say to me "Crawl" I have to crawl? That's how a worm operates--and it's my way, too. We both follow it, when people leave us alone. But we raise ourselves up when someone steps on our tails. People have stepped on my tail, and I straightened up. [...]"
(Denis Diderot, Rameau's Nephew, 1805)

Nature has never told me, “Don't be poor,” much less, “Be rich,” but it cries out to me, “Be independent.”
(Nicolas Chamfort, Maxims and Thoughts, Characters and Anecdotes)

"I believe what appeals to people about war is that they are the ones doing it. There's an obvious sense of freedom when a man is armed, and we'd laugh at a military command that tried to force men to fight. However, as soon as they experience their newfound freedom, they adapt to it. One must always fear death, await it, and ultimately accept it. However, he who goes forward to meet death, as it were, calling it to a fair fight, feels himself stronger than death. Everyone knows it's easier for soldiers to seek death than wait for it. We prefer the destiny we create to the one time brings. There is therefore a poetry in war that causes us to no longer hate the enemy. This intoxication of freedom makes us understand war and all passions. A plague is imposed, but war is invented as if it were a game.
(Alain, On Happiness, April 3, 1911)

FAR FROM BEING FREE BECAUSE WE WANT TO BE, IT IS ON THE CONTRARY BECAUSE WE ARE NATURAL THAT WE MUST CHOOSE OUR NATURE.
"Because every living being tends to achieve its ultimate form as the fulfillment of its own perfection, this tendency has sometimes been identified as a kind of desire. However, no matter what goal man chooses, how vehemently he strives for it, or how intensely he desires it, he cannot achieve it without wanting to. Since he does not naturally carry within himself his own end as a destination that determines him throughout time and constitutes him, he must instead choose it. He must determine himself in relation to it and consequently assign it to himself as a task." Always waiting for himself, man can only rely on his will for his identity." [...]
Rather than being free because we want to be, we must choose our nature, set it as a task, and realize it through will because we are denatured. This original denaturation is what we call freedom. It is the foundation of our will. [...]
"What is this freedom that we feel so strongly within us if not the capacity to break everything and start again at every moment? Moving house is a question I constantly discuss with my soul"
(Nicolas Grimaldi, Ambiguities of Freedom, 1999)

THIS SCENE FROM ROMEO & JULIET STAGES A DIRECT CONFLICT BETWEEN TWO DIFFERENT WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING ONE'S CONDITION:
•	The Objective View (Friar Lawrence): The Friar sees the situation rationally and legally. Romeo's crime deserves death, so banishment is a "dear mercy." From this perspective, Romeo has been granted a measure of freedom.
•	The Subjective View (Romeo): Romeo experiences the same situation from a purely emotional and personal perspective. For him, a life without Juliet is a "living death," a form of "torture, and not mercy."
“SCENE III. Friar Lawrence’s cell.

 Enter Friar Lawrence.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man.
Affliction is enanmour’d of thy parts
And thou art wedded to calamity.

 Enter Romeo.

ROMEO.
Father, what news? What is the Prince’s doom?
What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand,
That I yet know not?

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Too familiar
Is my dear son with such sour company.
I bring thee tidings of the Prince’s doom.

ROMEO.
What less than doomsday is the Prince’s doom?

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
A gentler judgment vanish’d from his lips,
Not body’s death, but body’s banishment.

ROMEO.
Ha, banishment? Be merciful, say death;
For exile hath more terror in his look,
Much more than death. Do not say banishment.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Hence from Verona art thou banished.
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.

ROMEO.
There is no world without Verona walls,
But purgatory, torture, hell itself.
Hence banished is banish’d from the world,
And world’s exile is death. Then banished
Is death misterm’d. Calling death banished,
Thou cutt’st my head off with a golden axe,
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
O deadly sin, O rude unthankfulness!
Thy fault our law calls death, but the kind Prince,
Taking thy part, hath brush’d aside the law,
And turn’d that black word death to banishment.
This is dear mercy, and thou see’st it not.

ROMEO.
’Tis torture, and not mercy. Heaven is here
Where Juliet lives, and every cat and dog,
And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
Live here in heaven and may look on her,
But Romeo may not. More validity,
More honourable state, more courtship lives
In carrion flies than Romeo. They may seize
On the white wonder of dear Juliet’s hand,
And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
Who, even in pure and vestal modesty
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin.
But Romeo may not, he is banished.
This may flies do, when I from this must fly.
They are free men but I am banished.
And say’st thou yet that exile is not death?
Hadst thou no poison mix’d, no sharp-ground knife,
No sudden mean of death, though ne’er so mean,
But banished to kill me? Banished?
O Friar, the damned use that word in hell.
Howling attends it. How hast thou the heart,
Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,
A sin-absolver, and my friend profess’d,
To mangle me with that word banished?

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Thou fond mad man, hear me speak a little,

ROMEO.
O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
I’ll give thee armour to keep off that word,
Adversity’s sweet milk, philosophy,
To comfort thee, though thou art banished.

ROMEO.
Yet banished? Hang up philosophy.
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
Displant a town, reverse a Prince’s doom,
It helps not, it prevails not, talk no more.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
O, then I see that mad men have no ears.

ROMEO.
How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.

ROMEO.
Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel.
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,
Doting like me, and like me banished,
Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,
And fall upon the ground as I do now,
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.”
(William Shakespeare, Romeo and Juliet, 1597)


E2.1.A.2. Freedom as a Prerequisite for Meaningful Action: Argue that our sense of purpose and the significance we attribute to our actions are intrinsically linked to the feeling of acting freely.

E1.6.B.2.1.b.i_REF1_PH "ALL TRADES ARE PLEASANT AS LONG AS YOU ARE IN CHARGE, and unpleasant when you are ordered about.

“THERE IS NOTHING WRONG WITH STRIVING TO IMPROVE YOUR LIFE SITUATION.  You can improve your life situation, but you cannot improve your life.  Life is primary. Life is your deepest inner Being.  It is already whole, complete, perfect.  Your life situation consists of your circumstances and your experiences.  There is nothing wrong with setting goals and striving to achieve things.  The mistake lies in using it as a substitute for the feeling of life, for Being.  The only point of access for that is the Now.  You are then like an architect who pays no attention to the foundation of a building but spends a lot of time working on the superstructure.
Your life's journey has an outer purpose and an inner purpose.  The outer purpose is to arrive at your goal or destination, to accomplish what you set out to do, to achieve this or that, which, of course, implies future.  But if your destination, or the steps you are going to take in the future, take up so much of your attention that they become more important to you than the step you are taking now, then you completely miss the journey's inner purpose, which has nothing to do with where you are going or what you are doing, but everything to do with how.  It has nothing to do with future but everything to do with the quality of your consciousness at this moment.  The outer purpose belongs to the horizontal dimension of space and time; the inner purpose concerns a deepening of your Being in the vertical dimension of the timeless Now.  Your outer journey may contain a million steps; your inner journey only has one: the step you are taking right now.  As you become more deeply aware of this one step, you realize that it already contains within itself all the other steps as well as the destination.  This one step then becomes transformed into an expression of perfection, an act of great beauty and quality.  It will have taken you into Being, and the light of Being will shine through it.  This is both the purpose and the fulfillment of your inner journey, the journey into yourself.
Does it matter whether we achieve our outer purpose, whether we succeed or fail in the world?
It will matter to you as long as you haven't realized your inner purpose.  After that, the outer purpose is just a game that you may continue to play simply because you enjoy it.  It is also possible to fail completely in your outer purpose and at the same time totally succeed in your inner purpose.  Or the other way around, which is actually more common: outer riches and inner poverty, or to "gain the world and lose your soul," as Jesus puts it.  Ultimately, of course, every outer purpose is doomed to "fail" sooner or later, simply because it is subject to the law of impermanence of all things.  The sooner you realize that your outer purpose cannot give you lasting fulfillment, the better.  When you have seen the limitations of your outer purpose, you give up your unrealistic expectation that it should make you happy, and you make it subservient to your inner purpose.”
(Eckhart Tolle, The Power Of Now, 1997)

E2.1.A.3. The Universal Aversion to Coercion: Examine the common human resistance to being controlled or manipulated by external forces, highlighting the inherent value placed on autonomy.

"RESISTANCE
is a force that opposes another force. It is the ordinary state of conatus; every being strives to persevere and opposes those who press upon, attack, or threaten it as much as it can. Thus, the resistance of one body against another that crushes it. Of an organism against microbes. Of life against death. Of a free man against tyrants. Destutt de Tracy and Maine de Biran identified the resistance of external bodies to our actions as one of the sources of our consciousness of ourselves and of something (the world) that is not us, along with effort. This is a practical rejection of solipsism. However, Spinoza is undoubtedly the most valuable thinker when it comes to resistance. Resistance is neither an accident nor the mark of reactive thought. Rather, it is the truth of being insofar as it is the power to exist and act since this power is both one in substance and multiple in modes. Only the infinite is pure affirmation (Eth., I, 8, scholium). Everything finite can be limited (Eth., I, Def. 2) or destroyed (Eth., IV, Axiom) by something of the same nature. This condemns it to resistance. Existence is both insisting (striving to be and endure) and resisting. Conatus is this "singular power of affirmation and resistance." (Laurent Bove, La Stratégie du conatus: Affirmation et résistance chez Spinoza, Vrin, 1996, p. 14): "Every finite being tends to persevere in its existence by resisting destruction or oppression." This is particularly true for those who resist sadness and death. Spinozist ethics is an ethics of power and joy. However, it is also "an ethics of resistance and love" (L. Bove, op. cit., p. 139 ff.). Spinoza's politics are politics of power and freedom. This is why they lead to a strategy of resistance and sovereignty. If "obedience makes subjects" (T. Th. P., XVII), then "resistance makes citizens" (L. Bove, op. cit., p. 301). It's no wonder that Alain wrote, "To obey while resisting is the whole secret. What destroys obedience is anarchy, and what destroys resistance is tyranny".
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

"The Life that tied too tight escapes
Will ever after run
With a prudential look behind
And spectres of the Rein-
The Horse that scents the living Grass
And sees the Pastures smile
Will be retaken with a shot
If he is caught at all-"
(Emily Dickinson, circa 1881)

"- It's not that bad, you know, he was born in captivity."
Paul Lambda @LambdaPaul


We love to obey, but we don't like being told what to do. Advertising understands this and develops desires that become slogans.
 
Consider the story of the fly drawn in the urinals of the La Rotonde restaurant, which encouraged drinkers to aim properly and reduced cleaning costs. Raphaël Enthoven describes this "nudge" strategy in his book Little Brother, which recounts a state in which coercion has been replaced by suggestion.

"CONTRE LES LOIS
A partir d’aujourd’hui par une corde de crin 
A mon cou je suspends une montre : 
A partir d’aujourd’hui cesse le cours des 
astres,
Du soleil, le chant du coq et les ombres, 
Et quoi que puisse m’annoncer le temps, 
Tout pour moi, à présent,
Est muet et sourd et aveugle. 
Toute nature autour de moi fait silence 
Au tic-tac de la loi et de la montre."
(Nietzsche, The Gay Science, Aphorism 48, 1882)


"HAVING FREEDOM" AND "BEING FREE"
"To have freedom is to be free from constraint. Therefore, we can have as many freedoms as there are constraints.

[...] These are freedoms that we have and feel keenly because we have not always had them or because others do not have them.
However, these freedoms are more negative than positive. They characterize less the capacities or faculties we possess than the impediments, obstacles, prohibitions, and impossibilities that have been removed.

[...] Such is the second paradox of this type of freedom: when we have it, we do not feel it; we only begin to feel it when it is gone. It is a kind of freedom whose presence is imperceptible, and whose absence is all we feel.
 

[...] Just as obstacles hinder the natural spontaneity of animals by preventing them from exercising their faculties—running, galloping, jumping, and going wherever they please—constraints mutilate the nature of each human being by preventing them from following their inclinations, impulses, and most spontaneous tendencies. They are prevented from expressing what they experience as most intimate, as their own nature and identity. He is locked within himself, as if in a secret place. Since he is neither sought nor pursued, he does not have to hide physically. Morally, however, he must hide, unable to express himself, his opinion, his faith, his feelings, or his inclinations. He has become metaphysically clandestine. This experience of constraint is sufficient to characterize the status of freedoms that are no longer ours.

Therefore, freedom consists of being able to express one's inner self and appear as one is. In other words, it means showing oneself to others as one imagines or feels one is. The first requirement of my freedom is being seen. I want to objectify my subjectivity. Contrary to Rousseau's belief, existence alone is not enough for me. I want to inscribe, realize, and manifest my identity among others and things. One of the primary meanings of freedom is literally being able to take one's place in the world.
 
A second freedom, suspended and repressed by constraint, consists of this initiative of possibilities, which is the exercise of our own contingency. We recognize our identity less in the fact of being here, engaged in a particular task with particular companions, than in the choices we have made and the initiatives we could take at any moment to do something else or go elsewhere with different people. Our identity is not fixed or constituted; it is an ever-open perspective and the expectation of indeterminable possibilities. We feel it: What we are is always yet to come. Constraint keeps us distant from ourselves by closing off possibilities and blocking avenues. By taking away our power of initiative and denying us the possibility of possibility, constraint condemns us to an unfinished and unfulfilled identity forever. If we rage at never having arrived, it is because we have always been prevented from leaving.

Even though we felt neither haste nor wanderlust when we had the freedom to set sail at any moment, it is enough that we no longer have that freedom for the rope that holds us back to immediately chafe us. Therefore, freedom is purely imaginary. We have just observed that indulging in all possibilities matters less to our experience of freedom than having the leisure or initiative to do so. Similarly, it matters less to us to travel than to be able to do so.
 

To have freedom is to feel what we imagine is possible and, consequently, to imagine a freedom we have yet to feel. It is to have the initiative of time. What will happen? Will it be this rather than that? This way rather than another? We feel this availability and have the power to initiate one causal series or another.


[...] Conversely, when we lack freedom, we can imagine a thousand projects, initiatives, and other possible existences. However, this is only an imaginary contingency. The resistance of reality and adversity forces us to imagine the possible without ever being able to realize it. Paradoxically, imagining the possible and representing it as unachievable are one and the same. Thus, by experiencing the impossibility of all possibility, we experience the withering, stunting, and frailty of the future. Initially, what was just a military setback, a political mishap, or a historical blunder has become an ontological monstrosity. Through a kind of relation of time, the present has become petrified. Whatever we may be waiting for, we wait in vain because nothing can happen anymore. Life goes on, but it is unable to undertake, innovate, or change anything; it has been devitalized. Therefore, we feel that, by suppressing or suspending our freedoms, we have been permitted to exist; however, our lives have been taken away from us. Not having freedoms is enough to make us feel not free, even though having them is not enough to make us free."
(Nicolas Grimaldi, Ambiguities of Freedom, 1999)

P_Robert Bresson_A man escaped_1956_(1) ; P_Robert Bresson_A man escaped_1956_(2) ; P_Robert Bresson_A man escaped_1956_(3)

"I never hear the word "escape"
Without a quicker blood,
A sudden expectation,
A Hying attItude'"
(Emily Dickinson, circa 1859)

"REVOLT
Resolute or violent opposition is the refusal to obey, submit, or resign oneself. The word is used, above all, to describe an individual attitude. For collective revolts, we would use terms such as riot, uprising, or revolution. This is because Camus was there. 'What is a man in revolt?' A man who says no. But if he refuses, he does not give up; he is also a man who says yes from the outset" (The Rebel, I). Yes to what? To his revolt, to his struggle, and to the values that underpin or arise from it. In the etymological sense, the rebel turns around. He was walking under the whip of the master. Now, he faces him (ibid.). This "passionate affirmation" distinguishes rebellion from resentment. "Apparently negative since it creates nothing, rebellion is profoundly positive since it reveals what in man is always worth defending" (ibid.). This is how we emerge from solitude: "Revolt is a commonplace that establishes the first value for all men. I revolt, therefore we are" (ibid.). This is where we emerge from nihilism. We emerge from revolt itself, or rather, we include it in a larger whole—life—and a higher value—love. Revolt is "the very movement of life"; it is "love and fertility, or it is nothing" (op. cit., V). "Man is the only creature who refuses to be what he is" (op. cit., Introduction). This much must be accepted. Thus, revolt is merely a transition between the absurd and love, between no and yes. We must enter into it since "the absurd is only a starting point" (ibid.). We do not have the right to leave it entirely. It is like a ternary rhythm. First, the world says no to man (the absurd); then man says no to the world (rebellion); finally, there is the great yes of wisdom, which does not cancel out the two preceding nos that prepare for it. It prolongs them. It accepts them. This applies to the absurd, which is merely a starting point, yet remains unchanged (wisdom is neither a justification nor a hermeneutic). This applies even more to revolt. Saying yes to everything is the only wisdom and also means saying yes to the no of revolt and of man."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E2.1.A.4. We are also sometimes scared of freedom or cease to value it

E2.1.A.4.1. The Vertigo of Freedom: The Fear of Choice and Responsibility
This chapter will explore the active, psychological reasons why human beings can be afraid of freedom. It focuses on the anxiety, discomfort, and burden that accompany absolute liberty, leading to a desire for order, rules, and subordination.

E2.1.A.4.1.a. Anxiety as the Price of Possibility
This sub-topic will argue that freedom, by its very nature, is an encounter with the unknown and the potential for creation or destruction, which induces a profound anxiety.

E2.1.A.4.1.a.i. The "Vertigo of Freedom": anxiety as the direct, subjective experience of freedom. It is the "anxiety gap" created by possibility, the future, and the weight of "unbearable responsibility."

E2.1.A.4.1.a.i_REF1_PH "ANXIETY
The experience of possibility is freedom. This is why freedom causes anxiety: it has the power to create what does not exist and, as Sartre says, destroy what does. "Anxiety," wrote Kierkegaard, "is the reality of freedom as a possibility offered to possibility": it is "the vertigo of freedom." To be free is to see change, not of oneself, since one has the power to choose. Freedom touches on nothingness through the imagination or even stems from it. "Human reality is free," writes Sartre, "in the exact measure that it has to be its own nothingness." This explains the anxiety experienced by those who accept it ("Anxiety is the reflexive grasp of freedom by itself"), as well as the bad faith experienced by those who deny it. We would be left with no choice but to choose between nothingness and lies. [...]"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E2.1.A.4.1.a.i_REF2_PH THE ORIGIN OF FEAR
“You mentioned fear as being part of our basic underlying emotional pain.  How does fear arise, and why is there so much of it in people's lives ?  And isn't a certain amount of fear just healthy self-protection?  If I didn't have a fear of fire, I might put my hand in it and get burned.
The reason why you don't put your hand in the fire is not because of fear, it's because you know that you'll get burned.  You don't need fear to avoid unnecessary danger -- just a minimum of intelligence and common sense.  For such practical matters, it is useful to apply the lessons learned in the past.  Now if someone threatened you with fire or with physical violence, you might experience something like fear.  This is an instinctive shrinking back from danger, but not the psychological condition of fear that we are talking about here.  The psychological condition of fear is divorced from any concrete and true immediate danger.  It comes in many forms: unease, worry, anxiety, nervousness, tension, dread, phobia, and so on.  This kind of psychological fear is always of something that might happen, not of something that is happening now.  You are in the here and now, while your mind is in the future.  This creates an anxiety gap.  And if you are identified with your mind and have lost touch with the power and simplicity of the Now, that anxiety gap will be your constant companion.  You can always cope with the present moment, but you cannot cope with something that is only a mind projection -- you cannot cope with the future.
Moreover, as long as you are identified with your mind, the ego runs your life, as I pointed out earlier.  Because of its phantom nature, and despite elaborate defense mechanisms, the ego is very vulnerable and insecure, and it sees itself as constantly under threat.  This, by the way, is the case even if the ego is outwardly very confident.  Now remember that an emotion is the body's reaction to your mind.  What message is the body receiving continuously from the ego, the false, mind-made self?.  Danger, I am under threat.  And what is the emotion generated by this continuous message?  Fear, of course.
Fear seems to have many causes, Fear of loss, fear of failure, fear of being hurt, and so on, but ultimately all fear is the ego's fear of death, of annihilation.  To the ego, death is always just around the corner.  In this mind-identified state, fear of death affects every aspect of your life.  For example, even such a seemingly trivial and "normal" thing as the compulsive need to be right in an argument and make the other person wrong -- defending the mental position with which you have identified -- is due to the fear of death.  If you identify with a mental position, then if you are wrong, your mind-based sense of self is seriously threatened with annihilation.  So you as the ego cannot afford to be wrong.  To be wrong is to die.  Wars have been fought over this, and countless relationships have broken down.
Once you have disidentified from your mind, whether you are right or wrong makes no difference to your sense of self at all, so the forcefully compulsive and deeply unconscious need to be right, which is a form of violence, will no longer be there.  You can state clearly and firmly how you feel or what you think, but there will be no aggressiveness or defensiveness about it.  Your sense of self is then derived from a deeper and truer place within yourself, not from the mind. Watch out for any kind of defensiveness within yourself.  What are you defending?  An illusory identity, an image in your mind, a fictitious entity.  By making this pattern conscious, by witnessing it, you disidentify from it.  In the light of your consciousness, the unconscious pattern will then quickly dissolve. This is the end of all arguments and power games, which are so corrosive to relationships.  Power over others is weakness disguised as strength.  True power is within, and it is available to you now.
So anyone who is identified with their mind and, therefore, disconnected from their true power, their deeper self rooted in Being, will have fear as their constant companion.  The number of people who have gone beyond mind is as yet extremely small, so you can assume that virtually everyone you meet or know lives in a state of fear.  Only the intensity of it varies.  It fluctuates between anxiety and dread at one end of the scale and a vague unease and distant sense of threat at the other.  Most people become conscious of it only when it takes on one of its more acute forms.”
(Eckhart Tolle, The Power Of Now, 1997)

E2.1.A.4.1.a.i_REF3_LIT KUNDERA DESCRIBES THE WORLD OF ETERNAL RETURN—A WORLD OF ABSOLUTE CONSEQUENCE—AS A "TERRIFYING PROSPECT."
“Lightness and Weight
The idea of eternal return is a mysterious one, and Nietzsche has often perplexed other philosophers with it: to think that everything recurs as we once experienced it, and that the recurrence itself recurs ad infinitum! What does this mad myth signify? 
Putting it negatively, the myth of eternal return states that a life which disappears once and for all, which does not return, is like a shadow, without weight, dead in advance, and whether it was horrible, beautiful, or sublime, its horror, sublimity, and beauty mean nothing. We need take no more note of it than of a war between two African kingdoms in the fourteenth century, a war that altered nothing in the destiny of the world, even if a hundred thousand blacks perished in excruciating torment. Will the war between two African kingdoms in the fourteenth century itself be altered if it recurs again and again, in eternal return? 
It will: it will become a solid mass, permanently protuberant, its inanity irreparable. 
If the French Revolution were to recur eternally, French historians would be less proud of Robespierre. But because they deal with something that will not return, the bloody years of the Revolution have turned into mere words, theories, and discussions, have become lighter than feathers, frightening no one. There is an infinite difference between a Robespierre who occurs only once in history and a Robespierre who eternally returns, chopping off French heads. 
Let us therefore agree that the idea of eternal return implies a perspective from which things appear other than as we know them: they appear without the mitigating circumstance of their transitory nature. This mitigating circumstance prevents us from coming to a verdict. For how can we condemn something that is ephemeral, in transit? In the sunset of dissolution, everything is illuminated by the aura of nostalgia, even the guillotine. 
Not long ago, I caught myself experiencing a most incredible sensation. Leafing through a book on Hitler, I was touched by some of his portraits: they reminded me of my childhood. I grew up during the war; several members of my family perished in Hitler's concentration camps; but what were their deaths compared with the memories of a lost period in my life, a period that would never return? 
This reconciliation with Hitler reveals the profound moral perversity of a world that rests essentially on the nonexistence of return, for in this world everything is pardoned in advance and therefore everything cynically permitted. 
If every second of our lives recurs an infinite number of times, we are nailed to eternity as Jesus Christ was nailed to the cross. It is a terrifying prospect. In the world of eternal return the weight of unbearable responsibility lies heavy on every move we make. That is why Nietzsche called the idea of eternal return the heaviest of burdens (das schwerste Gewicht).
If eternal return is the heaviest of burdens, then our lives can stand out against it in all their splendid lightness.
But is heaviness truly deplorable and lightness splendid?
The heaviest of burdens crushes us, we sink beneath it, it pins us to the ground. But in the love poetry of every age, the woman longs to be
weighed down by the man's body. The heaviest of burdens is therefore simultaneously an image of life's most intense fulfillment. The heavier the burden, the closer our lives come to the earth, the more real and truthful they become.
Conversely, the absolute absence of a burden causes man to be lighter than air, to soar into the heights, take leave of the earth and his earthly being, and become only half real, his movements as free as they are insignificant.
What then shall we choose? Weight or lightness?
Parmenides posed this very question in the sixth century before Christ. He saw the world divided into pairs of opposites:
light/darkness, fineness/coarseness, warmth/cold, being/non-being. One half of the opposition he called positive (light, fineness, warmth, being), the other negative. We might find this division into positive and negative poles childishly simple except for one difficulty: which one is positive, weight or lightness?
Parmenides responded: lightness is positive, weight negative.
Was he correct or not? That is the question. The only certainty is: the lightness/weight opposition is the most mysterious, most ambiguous of all.”
(Milan Kundera, The Unbearable Lightness of Being, 1984)

E2.1.A.4.1.a.i_REF4_LIT CATHERINE'S SUDDEN AND OVERWHELMING ANXIETY ATTACK IS NOT TIED TO A SPECIFIC, RATIONAL THREAT BUT IS A FREE-FLOATING "HORROR THAT YOU CAN'T DESCRIBE," A FEELING OF "MORTAL DANGER" FROM AN UNKNOWN SOURCE.
"Katie darling," he said gently, "what happened?"
"Nothing. It's not that anything really happened. Only I had to speak to you. Now. Tonight."
He looked at Mrs. Keating. "If you'd rather..."
"No. It's perfectly all right. Mrs. Keating can hear it. Maybe it's better if she hears it." She turned to his mother and said very simply: "You see, Mrs. Keating, Peter and I are engaged." She turned to him and added, her voice breaking: "Peter, I want to be married now, tomorrow, as soon as possible."
Mrs. Keating's hand descended slowly to her lap. She looked at Catherine, her eyes expressionless. She said quietly, with a dignity Keating had never expected of her:
"I didn't know it, I am very happy, my dear."
"You don't mind? You really don't mind at all?" Catherine asked desperately.
"Why, child, such things are to be decided only by you and my son."
"Katie!" he gasped, regaining his voice. "What happened? Why as soon as possible?"
"Oh! oh, it did sound as if...as if I were in the kind of trouble girls are supposed to..." She blushed furiously. "Oh, my God! No! It's not that! You know it couldn't be! Oh, you couldn't think, Peter, that I...that..."
"No, of course not," he laughed, sitting down on the floor by her side, slipping an arm around her. "But pull yourself together. What is it? You know I'd marry you tonight if you wanted me to. Only what happened?"
"Nothing. I'm all right now. I'll tell you. You'll think I'm crazy. I just suddenly had the feeling that I'd never marry you, that something dreadful was happening to me and I had to escape from it."
"What was happening to you?"
"I don't know. Not a thing. I was working on my research notes all day, and nothing had happened at all. No calls or visitors. And then suddenly tonight, I had that feeling, it was like a nightmare, you know, the kind of horror that you can't describe, that's not like anything normal at all. Just the feeling that I was in mortal danger, that something was closing in on me, that I'd never escape it, because it wouldn't let me and it was too late."
"That you'd never escape what?"
"I don't know exactly. Everything. My whole life. You know, like quicksand. Smooth and natural. With not a thing that you can notice about it or suspect. And you walk on it easily. When you've noticed, it's too late....And I felt that it would get me, that I'd never marry you, that I had to run, now, now or never. Haven't you ever had a feeling like that, just fear that you couldn't explain?"
(Ayn Rand, The fountainhead,1943)

E2.1.A.4.1.a.i_REF5_PO Firenze Lai, Exit
"SOMETIMES
Sometimes
if you move carefully
through the forest,
breathing
like the ones
in the old stories,
who could cross
a shimmering bed of leaves
without a sound,
you come to a place
whose only task
is to trouble you
with tiny
but frightening requests,
conceived out of nowhere
but in this place
beginning to lead everywhere.
Requests to stop what
you are doing right now,
and
to stop what you
are becoming
while you do it,
questions
that can make
or unmake
a life,
questions
that have patiently
waited for you,
questions
that have no right
to go away."
(David Whyte, Everything Is Waiting for You)

Art :
- Firenze Lai, Exit

E2.1.A.4.1.a.ii. The Source of Anxiety: The "Terrible Unknown" - Fear is our "a priori" or default state, rooted in our evolutionary past and our relationship with a world that is inherently dangerous.

E2.1.A.4.1.a.ii_REF1_HIS WHY ANXIETY IS A FUNDAMENTAL PART OF THE HUMAN PSYCHE
"We assume that a large brain, the use of tools, superior learning abilities and complex social structures are huge advantages. It seems self-evident that these have made humankind the most powerful animal on earth. But humans enjoyed all of these advantages for a full 2 million years during which they remained weak and marginal creatures. Thus humans who lived a million years ago, despite their big brains and sharp stone tools, dwelt in constant fear of predators, rarely hunted large game, and subsisted mainly by gathering plants, scooping up insects, stalking small animals, and eating the carrion left behind by other more powerful carnivores.
One of the most common uses of early stone tools was to crack open bones in order to get to the marrow. Some researchers believe this was our original niche.
Just as woodpeckers specialise in extracting insects from the trunks of trees, the first humans specialised in extracting marrow from bones. Why marrow? Well, suppose you observe a pride of lions take down and devour a giraffe. You wait patiently until they’re done. But it’s still not your turn because first the hyenas and jackals – and you don’t dare interfere with them scavenge the leftovers. Only then would you and your band dare approach the carcass, look cautiously left and right – and dig into the edible tissue that remained.

This is a key to understanding our history and psychology.

Genus Homo’s position in the food chain was, until quite recently, solidly in the middle. For millions of years, humans hunted smaller creatures and gathered what they could, all the while being hunted by larger predators. It was only 400,000 years ago that several species of man began to hunt large game on a regular basis, and only in the last 100,000 years – with the rise of Homo sapiens – that man jumped to the top of the food chain."
(Yuval Noah Harari, Sapiens, A Brief History of Humankind, 2011)

E2.1.A.4.1.a.ii_REF2_LIT THE VAST "POSSIBILITY" OF AN OMNIVORE'S DIET COMES WITH A DIRECT "PRICE": THE ANXIETY THAT SOME OF THOSE POTENTIAL FOODS COULD "SICKEN OR KILL YOU."
“OUR NATIONAL EATING DISORDER
What should we have for dinner?
This book is a long and fairly involved answer to this seemingly simple question. Along the way, it also tries to figure out how such a simple question could ever have gotten so complicated. As a culture we seem to have arrived at a place where whatever native wisdom we may once have possessed about eating has been replaced by confusion and anxiety. Somehow this most elemental of activities—figuring out what to eat—has come to require a remarkable amount of expert help. How did we ever get to a point where we need investigative journalists to tell us where our food comes from and nutritionists to determine the dinner menu?
For me the absurdity of the situation became inescapable in the fall of 2002, when one of the most ancient and venerable staples of human life abruptly disappeared from the American dinner table. I'm talking of course about bread. Virtually overnight, Americans changed the way they eat. A collective spasm of what can only be described as carbopho bia seized the country, supplanting an era of national lipophobia dating to the Carter administration. That was when, in 1 977, a Senate committee had issued a set of "dietary goals" warning beef-loving Americans to lay off the red meat. And so we dutifully had done, until now.
What set off the sea change? It appears to have been a perfect media storm of diet books, scientific studies, and one timely magazine article. The new diet books, many of them inspired by the formerly discredited Dr. Robert C. Atkins, brought Americans the welcome news that they could eat more meat and lose weight just so long as they laid off the bread and pasta. These high-protein, low-carb diets found support in a handful of new epidemiological studies suggesting that the nutritional orthodoxy that had held sway in America since the 1970s might be wrong. It was not, as official opinion claimed, fat that made us fat, but the carbohydrates we'd been eating precisely in order to stay slim. So conditions were ripe for a swing of the dietary pendulum when, in the summer of 2002, the NewYork Times Magazine published a cover story on the new research entitled "What if Fat Doesn't Make You Fat?" Within months, supermarket shelves were restocked and restaurant menus rewritten to reflect the new nutritional wisdom. The blamelessness of steak restored, two of the most wholesome and uncontroversial foods known to man—bread and pasta—acquired a moral stain that promptly bankrupted dozens of bakeries and noodle firms and ruined an untold number of perfectly good meals.
So violent a change in a culture's eating habits is surely the sign of a national eating disorder. Certainly it would never have happened in a culture in possession of deeply rooted traditions surrounding food and eating. But then, such a culture would not feel the need for its most august legislative body to ever deliberate the nation's "dietary goals"—or, for that matter, to wage political battle every few years over the precise design of an official government graphic called the "food pyramid." A country with a stable culture of food would not shell out millions for the quackery (or common sense) of a new diet book every January. It would not be susceptible to the pendulum swings of food scares or fads, to the apotheosis every few years of one newly discovered nutrient and the demonization of another. It would not be apt to confuse protein bars and food supplements with meals or breakfast cereals with medicines. It probably would not eat a fifth of its meals in cars or feed fully a third of its children at a fast-food outlet every day. And it surely would not be nearly so fat.
Nor would such a culture be shocked to discover that there are other countries, such as Italy and France, that decide their dinner questions on the basis of such quaint and unscientific criteria as pleasure and tradition, eat all manner of "unhealthy" foods, and, lo and behold, wind up actually healthier and happier in their eating than we are. We show our surprise at this by speaking of something called the "French paradox," for how could a people who eat such demonstrably toxic substances as foie gras and triple creme cheese actually be slimmer and healthier than we are? Yet I wonder if it doesn't make more sense to speak in terms of an American paradox—that is, a notably unhealthy people obsessed by the idea of eating healthily.”
(Michael Pollan, The Omnivores Dilemma, 2006)

THE HUMAN FREEDOM TO "EAT JUST ABOUT ANYTHING NATURE HAS TO OFFER" IS THE DIRECT CAUSE OF AN "INEVITABLE" AND "EXISTENTIAL" ANXIETY.
"My encounter with the chanterelle—or was it a false chanterelle?—put me in touch with one of the most elemental facts about human eating: It can be dangerous, and even when it isn't dangerous, it is fraught. The blessing of the omnivore is that he can eat a great many different things in nature. The curse of the omnivore is that when it comes to figuring out which of those things are safe to eat, he's pretty much on his own.
As noted at the beginning of this book, the omnivore's dilemma, or paradox, was first described in the 1976 paper, "The Selection of Foods by Rats, Humans, and Other Animals," by University of Pennsylvania psychologist Paul Rozin. Rozin studied food selection behavior in rats, which are omnivores, in the hopes of understanding something about food selection in people. Like us, rats daily confront the bounty of nature and its manifold perils—perils designed to protect plants, animals, and microbes from being eaten. To defend themselves from predation, plants and fungi produce a great many poisons, everything from cyanide and oxalic acid to a wide variety of toxic alkaloids and glucosides; similarly, bacteria colonizing dead plants and animals produce toxins to keep other potential eaters at bay. (Also similarly, we humans manufacture toxins to keep rats from eating our food.)
Among the more specialized eaters, natural selection takes care of the whole problem of food selection, hardwiring the monarch butterfly, say, to regard the milkweed as food and everything else in nature as not food. No thought or emotion need go into deciding whether to eat any given thing. This approach works for the monarch because its digestion can wring everything it needs for its survival from milkweed leaves (including a toxin that makes the butterfly itself unappetizing to birds) . But rats and humans require a wider range of nutrients and so must eat a wider range of foods, some of them questionable. Whenever they encounter a potential new food they find themselves torn between two conflicting emotions unknown to the specialist eater, each with its own biological rationale: neophobia, a sensible fear of ingesting anything new, and neophilia, a risky but necessary openness to new tastes. Rozin found that the rat minimizes the risk of the new by treating its digestive tract as a kind of laboratory. It nibbles a very little bit of the new food (assuming it is food) and then waits to see what happens. The animal evidently has a good enough grasp of causality ("delayed learning," as the social scientists call it) to link a stomachache in the present to something it ingested a half hour before, and a good enough memory to store that finding as a lifelong aversion to that particular substance. (This is what makes poisoning rats so difficult.) I might have used the same strategy to test my chanterelle, eating a tiny bite of it and waiting to see what happened.
Rozin's early work on food selection behavior postulated that the "omnivoral problem" would explain a great deal, not only about how and what we eat, but who we are as a species, and subsequent research by him and others, in anthropology as well as psychology, has done much to confirm his hunch. The concept of the omnivore's dilemma helps unlock not only simple food-selection behaviors in animals, but much more complex "biocultural" adaptations in primates (humans included) as well as a wide range of otherwise baffling cultural practices in humans, the species for whom, as Claude Levi-Strauss famously said, food must be "not only good to eat, but also good to think." The omnivore's dilemma is replayed every time we decide whether or not to ingest a wild mushroom, but it also figures in our less primordial encounters with the putatively edible: when we're deliberating the nutritional claims on the boxes in the cereal aisle; when we're settling on a weight-loss regimen (low fat or low carb?) ; or deciding whether to sample McDonald's' newly reformulated chicken nugget; or weighing the costs and benefits of buying the organic strawberries over the conventional ones; or choosing to observe (or flout) kosher or halal rules; or determining whether or not it is ethically defensible to eat meat—that is, whether meat, or any other of these things, is not only good to eat, but good to think as well."
(Michael Polla, The Omnivores Dilemma, 2006)

E2.1.A.4.1.a.ii_REF3_LIT See E1.3.

WHAT AN ENCOUNTER WITH ULTIMATE REALITY OR POSSIBILITY FEELS LIKE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF PSYCHEDELICS. IT IS NOT A GENTLE LIBERATION BUT A "BURNING, PURGATORIAL FIRE" AND A "PURE LIGHT OF THE VOID" THAT INDUCES "AGONY." 
“Confronted by a chair which looked like the Last Judgment—or, to be more accurate, by a Last Judgment which, after a long time and with considerable difficulty, I recognized as a chair—I found myself all at once on the brink of panic. This, I suddenly felt, was going too far. Too far, even though the going was into intenser beauty, deeper significance. The fear, as I analyze it in retrospect, was of being overwhelmed, of disintegrating under a pressure of reality greater than a mind, accustomed to living most of the time in a cosy world of symbols, could possibly bear. The literature of religious experience abounds in references to the pains and terrors overwhelming those who have come, too suddenly, face to face with some manifestation of the Mysterium tremendum.
In theological language, this fear is due to the incompatibility between man's egotism and the divine purity, between man's self-aggravated separateness and the infinity of God. Following Boehme and William Law, we may say that, by unregenerate souls, the divine Light at its full blaze can be apprehended only as a burning, purgatorial fire. An almost identical doctrine is to be found in The Tibetan Book of the Dead, where the departed soul is described as shrinking in agony from the Pure Light of the Void, and even from the lesser, tempered Lights, in order to rush headlong into the comforting darkness of selfhood as a reborn human being, or even as a beast, an unhappy ghost, a denizen of hell. Anything rather than the burning brightness of unmitigated Reality—anything!
The schizophrenic is a soul not merely unregenerate, but desperately sick into the bargain. His sickness consists in the inability to take refuge from inner and outer reality (as the sane person habitually does) in the homemade universe of common sense—the strictly human world of useful notions, shared symbols and socially acceptable conventions. The schizophrenic is like a man permanently under the influence of mescalin, and therefore unable to shut off the experience of a reality which he is not holy enough to live with, which he cannot explain away because it is the most stubborn of primary facts, and which, because it never permits him to look at the world with merely human eyes, scares him into interpreting its unremitting strangeness, its burning intensity of significance, as the manifestations of human or even cosmic malevolence, calling for the most desperate countermeasures, its full blaze can be apprehended only as a burning, purgatorial fire. An almost identical doctrine is to be found in The Tibetan Book of the Dead, where the departed soul is described as shrinking in agony from the Pure Light of the Void, and even from the lesser, tempered Lights, in order to rush headlong into the comforting darkness of selfhood as a reborn human being, or even as a beast, an unhappy ghost, a denizen of hell. Anything rather than the burning brightness of unmitigated Reality—anything!
The schizophrenic is a soul not merely unregenerate, but desperately sick into the bargain. His sickness consists in the inability to take refuge from inner and outer reality (as the sane person habitually does) in the homemade universe of common sense—the strictly human world of useful notions, shared symbols and socially acceptable conventions. The schizophrenic is like a man permanently under the influence of mescalin, and therefore unable to shut off the experience of a reality which he is not holy enough to live with, which he cannot explain away because it is the most stubborn of primary facts, and which, because it never permits him to look at the world with merely human eyes, scares him into interpreting its unremitting strangeness, its burning intensity of significance, as the manifestations of human or even cosmic malevolence, calling for the most desperate countermeasures, from murderous violence at one end of the scale to catatonia, or psychological suicide, at the other. And once embarked upon the downward, the infernal road, one would never be able to stop. That, now, was only too obvious.”
(Aldous Huxley, The doors of perception, 1954)

E2.1.A.4.1.a.ii_REF4_PSI FEAR IS NOT LEARNED; IT IS OUR INNATE, DEFAULT, A PRIORI POSITION TOWARDS ANYTHING UNKNOWN OR UNPREDICTABLE. "FEAR IS NOT CONDITIONED; SECURITY IS... LEARNED." IT EXPLAINS WHY HUMANS ARE SO POWERFULLY MOTIVATED TO MAINTAIN THEIR CURRENT WORLDVIEW ("PROTECTIVE CULTURAL 'STORIES'")
“In exceptional, non-normal circumstances—that is, when a  major error has been committed—such activity culminates in revolution, in modification  of the entire story guiding affective evaluation and behavioral programming. Such  revolutionary modification means update of modeled reality, past, present and future,  through incorporation of information generated during exploratory behavior. Successful  exploration transforms the unknown into the expected, desired and predictable;  establishes appropriate behavioral measures (and expectations of those measures) for next  contact. Unsuccessful exploration, by contrast—avoidance or escape—leaves the novel  object firmly entrenched in its initial, “natural,” anxiety-provoking category. This  observation sets the stage for a fundamental realization: human beings do not learn to fear  new objects or situations, or even really “learn” to fear something that previously  appeared safe, when it manifests a dangerous property. Fear is the a priori position, the  natural response to everything for which no structure of behavioral adaptation has been  designed and inculcated. Fear is the innate reaction to everything that has not been  rendered predictable, as a consequence of successful, creative exploratory behavior  undertaken in its presence, at some time in the past. LeDoux states:   
    "It is well established that emotionally neutral stimuli can acquire the  capacity to evoke striking emotional reaction following temporal pairing  with an aversive event. Conditioning does not create new emotional  responses but instead simply allows new stimuli to serve as triggers  capable of activating existing, often hard-wired, species-specific  emotional reactions. In the rat, for example, a pure tone previously paired  with footshock evokes a conditioned fear reaction consisting of freezing  behavior accompanied by a host of autonomic adjustments, including  increases in arterial pressure and heart rate. Similar responses are  expressed when laboratory rats are exposed to a cat for the first time, but  following amygdala lesions such responses are no longer present,  suggesting that the responses are genetically specified (since they appear  when the rat sees a cat, a natural predator, for the first time) and involve  the amygdala. The fact that electrical stimulation of the amygdala is  capable of eliciting the similar response patterns further supports the  notion that the responses are hard-wired.”

Fear is not conditioned; security is unlearned, in the presence of particular things or  contexts, as a consequence of violation of explicit or implicit presupposition. Classical  behavioral psychology is wrong in the same manner our folk presumptions are wrong:  fear is not secondary, not learned; security is secondary, learned. Everything not explored  is tainted, a priori, with apprehension. Anything or situation that undermines the  foundations of the familiar and secure is therefore to be feared. It is difficult for us to formulate a clear picture of the subjective effects of the systems  that dominate our initial response to the truly unpredictable, because we strive with all  our might to ensure that everything around us remains normal. Under “normal”  conditions, therefore, these primordial systems never operate with their full force. It  might be said, with a certain amount of justification, that we devote our entire lives to  making sure that we never have to face anything unknown, in the revolutionary sense—at  least not accidentally. Our success in doing so deludes us about the true nature, power  and intensity of our potential emotional responses. As civilized people, we are secure. We  can predict the behaviors of others (that is, if they share our stories); furthermore, we can  control our environments well enough to ensure that our subjection to threat and  punishment remains at a minimum. It is the cumulative consequences of our adaptive  struggle—our cultures—which enable this prediction and control. The existence of our  cultures, however, blinds us to the nature of our true (emotional) natures—at least to the  range of that nature, and to the consequences of its emergence.”
(Jordan Peterson, Maps of Meaning The Architecture of Belief, 1999)

E2.1.A.4.1.a.ii_REF5_PSI ERIK ERIKSON ARGUES THAT THE AMERICAN ADOLESCENT "FEELS SO RICH IN HIS OPPORTUNITIES FOR FREE EXPRESSION THAT HE OFTEN NO LONGER KNOWS WHAT IT IS HE IS FREE FROM." His sense of freedom has become so comfortable and habitual that it has withered to the point where he "does not recognize his native autocrats when he sees them."
“This American adolescent, then, is faced, as are the adolescents of all countries who have entered or are entering the machine age, with the question: freedom for what, and at what price? The American feels so rich in his opportunities for free expression that he often no longer knows what it is he is free from. Neither does he know where he is not free; he does not recognize his native autocrats when he sees them. He is too immediately occupied with being efficient and being decent.
This adolescent will make an efficient and decent leader in a circumscribed job, a good manager or professional worker and a good officer, and will most enjoy his recreation with "the boys" in the organizations to which he belongs. As a specimen, he illustrates the fact that in war or in peace, the fruit of American education is to be found in a combination of native mechanical ability, managerial autonomy, personalized leadership, and un-obtrusive tolerance. These young men truly are the backbone of the nation.
But are they, as men, not strangely disinterested in the running of the nation? Are these freeborn sons not apt to be remarkably naïve, overly optimistic, and morbidly self-restrained in their dealings with the men who run them? They know how to accept a circumscribed task; they can be boisterous when on a spree; but on the whole, they respectfully shy away bigness, whether it is dollars or loud words. They (theoretically) away from all hate autocrats, but they tolerate bossism because they usually cannot differentiate between a boss and "bosses." We have repeatedly mentioned this category of "boss," and it is time to state explicitly that there is a boss and a "boss," just as there is a Mom and a "Mom." We use both words without quotation marks in their more colloquial and more affectionate sense, in the sense of my Mom, and my boss; while we designate with quotation marks the "Moms" who make for Momism as discussed above and the "bosses" that constitute the bossism to which we must now make reference.
For the old autocrats have disappeared, and the new ones know how to hide behind the ambiguity of language, which fills the legislatures and the daily press, industrial strife and organized entertainment. "Bosses" are self-made autocrats and, therefore, consider themselves and one another the crown of democracy. As far as is necessary, a "boss" stays within the law, and as far as is possible he enters boldly into the vacuum left by the emancipated sons in their endeavor to restrict themselves in fairness to others. He looks for areas where the law has been deliberately uncharted (in order to leave room for checks, balances, and amendments) and tries to use it and abuse it for his own purposes. He is the one who to speak in highway terms-passes and cuts in where others leave a little space for decency's and safety's sake.
Here it is not a matter of taste or mere principle which makes me join those who decry the danger of bossism. I approach the matter from the point of view of psychological economy. "Bosses" and "machines," I have learned, are a danger to the American identity, and thus to the mental health of the nation. For they present to the emancipated generations, to the generations with tentative identities, the ideal of an autocracy of irresponsibility. In them is seen the apparently successful model, "he who measures himself solely by what he can get away with and by what he can appear to be." They make "functioning" itself a value above all other values. In their positions of autocratic power in legislation, in industry, in the press, and in the entertainment world, they knowingly and unknowingly use the machinery of democracy to put something over on the naïve sons of democracy. They thrive on the complication of "machinery"-a machinery kept deliberately complicated in order that it may remain dependent on the hard-bitten professional of the "inside track." That these men run themselves like machinery is a matter for their doctor, psychiatrist, or undertaker. That they view the world and run the people as machinery becomes a danger to national health. Consider our adolescent boy. In his early childhood he was faced with a training which tended to make him machinelike and clocklike. Thus standardized, he found chances, in his later childhood, to develop autonomy, initiative, and industry, with the implied promise that decency in human relations, skill in technical details, and knowledge of facts would permit him freedom of choice in his pursuits, that the identity of free choice would balance his self-coercion. As an adolescent and man, how-ever, he finds himself confronted with superior machines, com-plicated, incomprehensible, and impersonally dictatorial in their power to standardize his pursuits and tastes. These machines do their powerful best to convert him into a consumer idiot, a fun egotist, and an efficiency slave-and this by offering him what he seems to demand. Often he remains untouched and keeps his course: this will largely depend on the wife whom he as the saying goes chooses. Otherwise, what else can he become but a childish joiner, or a cynical little boss, trying to get in on some big boss' "inside track" or a neurotic character, a psychosomatic case?
For the sake of its emotional health, then, a democracy cannot afford to let matters develop to a point where intelligent youth, proud in its independence and burning with initiative, must leave matters of legislation, law, and general policy to "insiders" and "bosses." American youth can gain the full measure of its identity and of its vitality only by being fully aware of autocratic trends in this and in any other land as they repeatedly emerge from changing history. And this not only because political conscience cannot regress without catastrophic consequences, but also be-cause political ideals are part and parcel of an evolution in con-science structure which, if ignored, must lead to illness. As Freud put it: men are not only worse, but also better, than they think they are.
As we consider what consequences must arise from the particular dangers threatening the emotional state of the nation, our attention is drawn to Momism and to bossism, the two trends which have usurped the place of paternalism: Momism in alliance with the autocratic rigor of a new continent, and bossism with the
autocracy of the machine and the "machines." Psychiatric enlightenment has begun to debunk the superstition that to manage a machine you must become a machine, and that to raise masters of the machine you must mechanize the im-pulses of childhood. But let it be clear that the humanization of early childhood-as pioneered by enlightened obstetricians and pediatricians-must have its counterpart in a political rejuvenation. Men and women in power must make a concerted effort to overcome the rooted conception that man, for his own good, must be subject to "machines" either in politics, business, education, or entertainment. American adolescents believe deeply in truly free enterprise; they prefer one big chance in a hundred little ones to an average-sized certainty. The very fact that for this same reason they do not contemplate rebellion (as those seem to fear who would gag their sources of information) obligates us to protect youth against a state of affairs which may make their gestures of free men seem hollow and their faith unfounded.
The question of our time is, How can our sons preserve their freedom and share it with those whom, on the basis of new knowledge and new identity, they must consider equals? This makes it necessary for men and women in power to give absolute priority over precedent and circumstance, convention and privilege, to the one effort which can keep a democratic country healthy: the effort to "summon forth the potential intelligence of the younger generation" (Parrington).
In America, this problem is the dilemma of the grandsons of rebels. In other countries youth is still involved in the first phases of revolution against autocracy-revolution immensely more complicated than was the American struggle for freedom. Let us turn to their problems.”
(Erik Erikson, Childhood And Society, 1950)

E2.1.A.4.1.a.iii. Compromise or Creation: We can either flee from possibility and "settle for something that is safe" (Compromise), or we can use the anxiety and the "encounter with chaos" as the "raw material" for a "rebirth" (Creation).

E2.1.A.4.1.a.iii_REF1_LIT “But I haven’t time to read books that way!” it will be objected. “I have other things to do. I have duties and responsibilities.” Precisely. Whoever speaks thus is the very one for whom these words are intended. Whoever fears to neglect his duties by reading leisurely and thoughtfully, by cultivating his own thoughts, will neglect his duties anyway, and for worse reasons. Perhaps it was intended that you lose your job, your wife, your home. If the reading of a book can stir you so deeply as to make you forget your responsibilities, then those responsibilities could not have had much meaning for you. Then you had higher responsibilities. [...]
If you had trusted your own inner promptings you would have followed through to firmer ground, to vantage ground. But you were afraid a voice might whisper: “Turn here! Knock there! Enter by this door!” You were afraid of being deserted and abandoned. You thought of security instead of new life, new fields of adventure and exploration."
(Henry Miller, The books in my life, 1952)

E2.1.A.4.1.a.iii_REF2_LIT "One of the sad things today is that so many people are frightened by the wonder of their own presence. They are dying to tie themselves into a system, a role, or to an image, or to a predetermined identity that other people have actually settled on for them. This identity may be totally at variance with the wild energies that are rising inside in their souls. Many of us get very afraid and we eventually compromise. We settle for something that is safe, rather than engaging the danger and the wildness that is in our own hearts."
(John O’Donohue, Walking on the pastures of wonder)

E2.1.A.4.1.a.iii_REF3_PSI WHILE THE HERO VOLUNTARILY CONFRONTS THE TERROR OF THE UNKNOWN TO CREATE NEW LIFE, THE ADVERSARY, SUCCUMBING TO THAT SAME TERROR, CHOOSES A PATH OF LIES THAT LEADS TO THE "VICIOUS CIRCLE" OF SELF-DESTRUCTION.
"If everything new and different  is rejected out of hand, the personality cannot adjust itself to changing circumstances.  
Circumstances change inevitably, however, as a consequence of simple maturation; as a  consequence of entropy itself. It is of little use to be entirely prepared for the past;  furthermore, it is only possible to remain prepared for the future, by facing the present.  Anomaly is, therefore, spiritual “food,” in the most literal sense: the unknown is the raw  material out of which the personality is manufactured, in the course of exploratory  activity. The act of rejecting anomaly transforms the personality into something starved,  something senile, and something increasingly terrified of change, as each failure to face  the truth undermines capacity to face truth in the future. The man who comes to adopt an  inappropriate attitude toward the unknown severs his connection with the source of all  knowledge, undermining his personality, perhaps irreparably. This dissolution of strength  is self-perpetuating: every weakness increases the likelihood of further weakness:   
For he that hath, to him shall be given: and he that hath not, from him  shall be taken even that which he hath. (Mark 4:25)   
The individual who turns away from indications of his own insufficiency increases the  probability that he will seek to repress and destroy all information that indicates threat to  current belief. Avoided, suppressed or otherwise undeveloped elements of personality are  not accessible for use in conscious adaptation—will in fact offer resistance to such  adaptation, as a consequence of their “resentment” at being twisted and ignored. Failure  to utilize full human potential severely undermines strength of individual character.  
Dissociation of action, imagination and ideation weakens personality. Weakness of  personality means inability to bear the weight of the conscious world. The result of the  hypocritical suppression of individual differences, in the service of the social unit and its  intrapsychic representative, is frailty in the face of the unknown:   
And if a house be divided against itself, that house cannot stand. (Mark  3:25)"
(Jordan Peterson, Maps of Meaning The Architecture of Belief, 1999)

E2.1.A.4.1.a.iii_REF4_PSI AN "ENCOUNTER WITH THE TERRIBLE UNKNOWN”: WHEN "CHAOS HAS EATEN YOUR SOUL."
 "You are shocked beyond belief, paralyzed into immobility. Your vision of the future  with this company vanishes, replaced by apprehensions of unemployment, social disgrace  and failure. You find it difficult to breathe. You flush and perspire profusely; your face is  a mask of barely suppressed horror. You cannot believe that your boss is such a bitch.  “You have been with us for five years,” she continues, “and it is obvious that your  performance is not likely to improve. You are definitely not suited for this sort of career,  and you are interfering with the progress of the many competent others around you. In  consequence, we have decided to terminate your contract with us, effective immediately.  If I were you, I would take a good look at myself.”   You have just received unexpected information, but of a different order of magnitude  than the petty anomalies, irritations, threats and frustrations that disturbed your  equilibrium in the morning. You have just been presented with incontrovertible evidence  that your characterizations of the present and of the ideal future are seriously, perhaps  irreparably, flawed. Your presumptions about the nature of the world are in error. The  world you know has just crumbled around you. Nothing is what it seemed; everything is  unexpected and new again. You leave the office in shock. In the hallway, other  employees avert their gaze from you, in embarrassment. Why did you not see this  coming? How could you have been so mistaken in your judgment?   Maybe everyone is out to get you.   Better not think that.   You stumble home, in a daze, and collapse on the couch. You can’t move. You are  hurt and terrified. You feel like you might go insane. Now what? How will you face  people? The comfortable, predictable, rewarding present has vanished. The future has  opened up in front of you like a pit, and you have fallen in. For the next month, you find  yourself unable to act. Your spirit has been extinguished. You sleep and wake at odd  hours; your appetite is disturbed. You are anxious, hopeless and aggressive, at  unpredictable intervals. You snap at your family and torture yourself. Suicidal thoughts  enter the theater of your imagination. You do not know what to think or what to do: you  are the victim of an internal war of emotion.   Your encounter with the terrible unknown has shaken the foundations of your  worldview. You have been exposed, involuntarily, to the unexpected and revolutionary.  Chaos has eaten your soul. This means that your long-term goals have to be  reconstructed, and the motivational significance of events in your current environment re- evaluated—literally revalued. This capacity for complete revaluation, in the light of new  information, is even more particularly human than the aforementioned capability for  exploration of the unknown and generation of new information. Sometimes, in the course  of our actions, we elicit phenomena   Maps of meaning     30 — Jordan Peterson_Maps of Meaning The Architecture of Belief_1999_page52",
    "Figure 4: Revolutionary Adaptation   whose very existence is impossible, according to our standard methods of construal  (which are at base a mode of attributing motivational significance to events). Exploration  of these new phenomena, and integration of our findings into our knowledge,  occasionally means reconceptualization of that knowledge43 (and consequent re-exposure  to the unknown, no longer inhibited by our mode of classification).44 This means that  simple movement from present to future is occasionally interrupted by a complete  breakdown and reformulation, a reconstitution of what the present is and what the future  should be. The ascent of the individual, so to speak, is punctuated by periods of  dissolution and rebirth.45 The more general model of human adaptation—conceptualized  most simply as steady state, breach, crisis, redress46—therefore ends up looking like  Figure 4: Revolutionary Adaptation. The processes of revolutionary adaptation, enacted  and represented, underlie diverse cultural phenomena ranging from the rites of  “primitive” initiation47 to the conceptions of sophisticated religious systems.48 Indeed,  our very cultures are erected upon the foundation of a single great story: paradise,  encounter with chaos, fall and redemption.   A month after you were fired, a new idea finds its way into your head. Although you  never let yourself admit it, you didn’t really like your job. You only took it because you  felt that it was expected of you. You never put your full effort into it, because you really  wanted to do something else—something other people thought was risky or foolish. You  made a bad decision, a long time ago. Maybe you needed this blow, to put you back on but where you are doing what you actually want to do. The possibility of undisturbed sleep returns, and you start eating properly again. You are quieter, less arrogant, more accepting—except in your weaker moments. Others make remarks, some admiring, some envious, about the change they perceive in you. You are a man recovering from a long illness—a man reborn.”
(Jordan Peterson, Maps of Meaning The Architecture of Belief, 1999)

E2.1.A.4.1.b. The Discomfort of Indecision and the Allure of Order
This sub-topic will examine how the lack of a clear path or external rules can be deeply unsettling, making the structure and certainty of an imposed order seem peaceful and desirable.


"A man who is surprised and put on notice is a sick man." That is why freedom makes men wicked. Children demonstrate this: There is no free play that does not turn to brutality. It would be a mistake to suppose that evil instincts are always repressed by the law. However, the law is pleasing, while the absence of law is displeasing and irritating due to its lack of resolution, which leads to excess. Man is frenzied. Costume is already a form of law, and every law is pleasing like a costume. Louis XIV had astonishing and seemingly inexplicable power over those who approached him. This power came from the laws he established for rising, sitting down, and using the toilet. It would be incorrect to say that he imposed these laws because he had power; rather, he had power because he was the law. Everyone around him always knew exactly what to do, which gave rise to an idea of Egyptian peace.
 
War has everything to displease, but reasoning is mistaken here because men immediately find true peace in it, the peace that dwells within us. Everyone knows what they must do. Reason vainly evokes misfortune, but it does not frighten. It cannot cover up a foundation of joy. Everyone sees a well-defined function that is his lot and actions that he cannot postpone. All his thoughts run to it, and his body follows. This consent immediately creates a state of affairs that must be endured like a cyclone. One might be surprised that the powers obtain so much, but they obtain much precisely because they demand much. Such is the monastic rule, which effectively cures indecision. It is no use advising prayer; one must prescribe a particular prayer at a particular time. Authority's wisdom always results in a dry command without reason. The slightest reason will immediately give rise to two thoughts and a thousand more."
(Alain, On Happiness, September 23, 1934)

[MEN] DID NOT REALLY WANT TO SET UP THIS [MORAL] LAW FOR THEMSELVES, BUT TO TAKE IT FROM SOMEWHERE, OR TO FIND IT SOMEWHERE, OR HAVE IT ORDERED FROM SOMEWHERE.
"A few theses.—We ought not to give to the individual, in as far as he wishes for his own happiness, any precepts for the road to happiness; for individual happiness springs from particular laws unknown to everybody, outside precepts could only prevent or check it. The precepts, which are called moral, are, in reality, directed against the individual, and do not in the least tend to their happiness. Equally slight is the relationship of these precepts to the “ happiness and welfare of mankind ” ; words with which it is altogether impossible to associate definite notions; much less could we use them as guiding stars on the dark ocean of moral aspirations. It is not true that morality, so says prejudice, is more favourably inclined towards the development of reason than immorality. It is not true that the unconscious goal in the development of every conscious being (animal, man, mankind, &c.), is his “ greatest happiness.” On the contrary, at every step of our development we may gain a special and incomparable happiness, one that is neither superior nor inferior, but indeed a peculiar happiness. Development does not aim at happiness, but at development and nothing else. Only if mankind possessed a universally accepted goal, could we propose: “ This or that ought to be our line of action ” ; for the present there is no such goal. Hence we ought not to bring the requirements of morals into any relation whatever to mankind, which would be irrational and childish. To recommend a goal to mankind is quite a different thing; in this case the goal is put as something which lies with us; suppose that mankind would agree to such a recommendation, they might then impose on themselves a moral law at their own free will. But, up to now, the moral law was to rise supreme above discretion; they did not really want to set up this law for themselves, but to take it from somewhere, or to find it somewhere, or have it ordered from somewhere."
 (Friedrich Nietzsche, The dawn of day, Aphorism 108, 1881)

Photo : Thierry des Ouches, Off topic

"It is the exception that makes the party. Its freedom's spontaneity and its adventures happen in a time and place that usage has fixed with a kind of necessity. For, if it is left to improvisation, the party is as regulated as a liturgy. More even than the exuberance and the tradition that it celebrates. In a rigorously determined, predictable, expected way, each hour has its celebrations, its offices, its processions, its music, its dances and its songs. Each brotherhood has its clothes, its functions, its roles, its responsibility, and never fails. This tumultuous disorder is regulated by an infallible order. As if during the party time was the moving image of some eternity, an absolute necessity governs all this contingency. 
However, it is not exactly the same freedom that the party offers to all its participants. It is its spontaneity, its disorder and its contingency that some experience as a paroxysm of freedom. No more renunciation, nor repression: everything inside is outside. Conversely, it is the immutability of tradition and this liturgy of the eternal return that gives others a feeling of freedom, by making them experience the world in conformity with their memories and identical to their expectations. No disturbance, no intrusion, no strangeness: all the outside is inside. In spite of such different attitudes, all the party's participants share another experience of freedom, so unanimous that it is enough to spread among them that feeling of paradoxical communion which is the essence of a party. This freedom consists in the suspension and almost disappearence of the self. Although almost all of them are active, almost none of them pursue any objective. Excluding any singular goal, the party dissolves any personal project. Even desire is as if stunned by this temporality in fusion, without tension or delay. All are absorbed in this frenzy of imminence, as unconcerned with any past as with any future, experiencing one's life both as a pulsation and as a mirror of universal life, each one feels delivered from his singularity and almost from his identity."
(Nicolas Grimaldi, Ambiguities of Freedom, 1999)


THINKING WITH ROBERT MUSIL ABOUT THE NEED TO OVERCOME CONSTRAINTS IN ORDER TO BECOME AWARE OF DESIRE
"Ulrich [...] [...]
His father would have said something like, “If we let him do as he pleases, he'll end up banging his head against the wall out of sheer perplexity,” or “When you can do whatever you want, you soon find you don't know what to desire anymore.” Ulrich repeated these sentences to himself with delight. This ancestral wisdom seemed extraordinarily new to him. A man must first feel limited by all kinds of prejudices, traditions, obstacles, and boundaries in his possibilities, feelings, and plans, like a madman in a straitjacket, before what he achieves can have value, duration, and maturity. In truth, the scope of this idea can hardly be measured!"
(Robert Musil, The man without qualities, Part I, 1930)

BECAUSE THE EMOTIONAL CONSEQUENCES OF ENCOUNTERING CHAOS CAN BE "LITERALLY OVERWHELMING," INDIVIDUALS ARE "HIGHLY MOTIVATED TO AVOID" IT AND WILL "GO TO ALMOST ANY LENGTH TO ENSURE THAT THEIR PROTECTIVE CULTURAL 'STORIES' REMAIN INTACT."
“The processes of maturation change the  conditions of existence, introducing anomaly where only certainty once stood, making  necessary not only a change of plans, but reconceptualization of where those plans might  lead, and what or who they refer to, in the present.   The known, our current story, protects us from the unknown, from chaos—which is to  say, provides our experience with determinate and predictable structure. Chaos has a  nature all of its own. That nature is experienced as affective valence, at first exposure, not  as objective property. If something unknown or unpredictable occurs, while we are  carrying out our motivated plans, we are first surprised. That surprise—which is a  combination of apprehension and curiosity—comprises our instinctive emotional  response to the occurrence of something we did not desire. The appearance of something  unexpected is proof that we do not know how to act—by definition, as it is the production  of what we want that we use as evidence for the integrity of our knowledge. If we are  somewhere we don’t know how to act, we are (probably) in trouble—we might learn  something new, but we are still in trouble. When we are in trouble, we get scared. When  we are in the domain of the known, so to speak, there is no reason for fear. Outside that  domain, panic reigns. It is for this reason that we dislike having our plans disrupted, and  cling to what we understand. This conservative strategy does not always work, however,  because what we understand about the present is not necessarily sufficient to deal with  the future. This means that we have to be able to modify what we understand, even  though to do so is to risk our own undoing. The trick, of course, is to modify and yet to  remain secure. This is not so simple. Too much modification brings chaos. Too little  modification brings stagnation (and then, when the future we are unprepared for  appears—chaos).   Involuntary exposure to chaos means accidental encounter with the forces that  undermine the known world. The affective consequences of such encounter can be  literally overwhelming. It is for this reason that individuals are highly motivated to avoid  sudden manifestations of the unknown. And this is why individuals will go to almost any  length to ensure that their protective cultural “stories” remain intact.”
(Jordan Peterson, Maps of Meaning The Architecture of Belief, 1999)

A NEW VIEWPOINT IS NOT MINOR. IT IS A "CATASTROPHIC" EVENT THAT "PRODUCES DISRUPTION OF AFFECT ON AN EQUIVALENT SCALE." IT RISKS EXPOSING US TO "INDETERMINATE UNCERTAINTY," "EXISTENTIAL ANXIETY, PAIN AND DEPRESSION," AND "COGNITIVE CHAOS."
“It may  be more generally said that processes of “discovery” which upset large-scale space-time  “maps” produce disruption of affect on an equivalent scale (and that it is such large-scale  disruption that we entitle revolution).   Mythologically structured social and individual “presumptions”—articles of faith— provide the environment in which a given culture-specific adaptive pattern retains its  conditional validity. This pre-rational mythic environment is analogous in structure to the  physical or natural environment itself—as the structure adapted to the environment  rapidly becomes a constituent element of the environment itself, with the same essential  characteristics. (Or, to say it somewhat differently, everything contained outside the wall  defining “presently considered space” is “environment,” even though much of it is  actually the consequence of historical or even individual activity). Disruption of the “pre- rational mythic ‘environment’” is just as catastrophic as disruption of the “physical or  natural environment” (the two “disruptions” may not really be distinguishable, in the  final analysis). This means essentially that to give serious consideration to another’s  viewpoint means to risk exposure to indeterminate uncertainty—to risk a rise in  existential anxiety, pain and depression; to experience temporally indeterminate affective,  imagistic and cognitive chaos. It is much more likely, in consequence, that a foreign  viewpoint will appear evil or will come to be defined as such (especially during times  rendered unstable—unbearably novel—for additional alternative reasons). Once such  definition occurs, application of aggression, designed to obliterate the source of threat,  appears morally justified, even required by duty. The alternative or foreign viewpoint is  in fact reasonably considered evil (although this consideration is dangerously one-sided),  when viewed in terms of its potential destructive capacity, from within the strict confines  of the historically determined social-psychological adaptive structure. It is only within the  domain of meta-morality (which is the morality designed to update moral rules) that the  strange may be tolerated or even welcomed.   
The group, in its external social and intrapsychic incarnations, is the current  expression of a form of acting and thinking that has been given particular content over  the course of thousands of years. These particular contents, patterns of behavior and their  representations, were established initially by individuals who faced the unknown and  prevailed, who were able to do or think something that no one had been able to do or  think before. In this manner, heroic individuals create new assumptions and formulate  new values. The integration of these assumptions and values into the group, through the  competitive process that begins with imitation and ends with verbal abstraction, increases  the permanent behavioral and abstract logical repertoire of the individuals that form that  group. The sum total of such behavioral patterns (and second- and third-order  descriptions thereof), shared within a social group, constitutes that group. Groups are  predicated upon a collective, historically determined structure of (abstractly represented)  behavioral patterns (and consequences thereof), which tends toward internal consistency  and stability over time. Internalization of this behavioral pattern and representations  thereof protects the individuals who compose the group against fear of their own  experience. The group is the culturally determined hierarchical structure of behavior— and abstracted conceptualization thereof—which inhibits fear of novelty, the Terrible  Mother, source of all nightmares. The group is the historical structure that humanity has  erected between the individual and the unknown. The group, in its beneficial guise, serves to protect the individuals who compose it from threat and the unknown. The social establishment of how to behave, when presented with a given situation, inhibits the paralyzing fear that situation would otherwise instinctively induce.”
(Jordan Peterson, Maps of Meaning The Architecture of Belief, 1999)

E2.1.A.4.1.c. The Burden of Command and the Habit of Obedience
This sub-topic will focus on the idea that humanity has been historically conditioned for obedience, and that following is often perceived as easier and more natural than the difficult art of commanding.

"For as long as there have been people, there have been herds of people as well (racial groups, communities, tribes, folk, states, churches), and a very large number of people who obey compared to relatively few who command. So, considering the fact that humanity has been the best and most long-standing breeding ground for the cultivation of obedience so far, it is reasonable to suppose that the average person has an innate need to obey as a type of formal conscience that commands: “Thou shalt unconditionally do something, unconditionally not do something,” in short: “Thou shalt.” This need tries to satisfy itself and give its form a content, so, like a crude appetite, it indiscriminately grabs hold and accepts whatever gets screamed into its ear by some commander or another – a parent, teacher, the law, class prejudice, public opinion – according to its strength, impatience, and tension. The oddly limited character of human development – its hesitancy and lengthiness, its frequent regressions and reversals – is due to the fact that the herd instinct of obedience is inherited the best and at the cost of the art of commanding. If we imagine this instinct ever advancing to its furthest excesses, in the end there will be nobody with independence or the ability to command; or, such people will suffer inwardly from bad consciences and need to fool themselves into thinking that they too are only obeying before they are able to command. This is in fact the situation in Europe today; I call it the moral hypocrisy of the commanders. They do not know how to protect themselves from their bad consciences except by acting like executors of older or higher commands (from their ancestors, constitution, justice system, laws, or God himself) or even by borrowing herd maxims from the herd mentality, such as the “first servants of the people,” or the “instruments of the commonweal.” For his part, the herd man of today’s Europe gives himself the
appearance of being the only permissible type of man and glorifies those characteristics that make him tame, easy-going and useful to the herd as
the true human virtues, namely: public spirit, goodwill, consideration, industry, moderation, modesty, clemency, and pity. But in those cases where
people think they cannot do without a leader and bellwether, they keep trying to replace the commander with an agglomeration of clever herd men: this is the origin of all representative constitutions, for example. What a relief it is for these European herd animals, what a deliverance from an increasingly intolerable pressure, when, in spite of everything, someone appears who can issue unconditional commands; the impact of Napoleon’s appearance is the last major piece of evidence for this: – the history of Napoleon’s impact is practically the history of the higher happiness attained by this whole century in its most worthwhile people and moments."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Beyond good and Evil, Aphorism 199, 1886)

“Most men are doomed to obedience. As soon as they discover or conceive of a form of servitude, their boss will be the one who concentrates the tedious tasks in his hands. We have seen this happen time and time again. It is a strange fascination: let´s not give up hope!”
(René Char, Sleeping Windows and Door on the Roof)

"La plupart des hommes sont voués à l’entrain de l’obéissance. Sitôt qu’ils découvrent ou conçoivent au loin une servitude repeinte, leur patron sera celui qui concentrera dans ses mains les ponctuelles besognes dépeçantes. Nous n’avons cessé d’assister à cela. Charme bizarre : sans renoncer à l’espoir!"
(René Char, Fenêtres dormantes et porte sur le toit)

Photo @irenasormova, Sicilia
"Europe is for the conscious preservation of the old—and the timid, cautious trying out of the new. Europe is not a sleepwalker. Europe is a tired old man, weary of wisdom yet unable to show faith. Fear and anxiety are the ruling passions. [...]
The European [...] is not being asked if he wishes to participate in the new, nameless, terrifying order which is taking possession of the world.“ If it is what I sense taking place in Russia,” he says, “ if it is like what is going on in China or America or India, then I would rather not have it.” He is even ready to take his religion seriously, he thinks to himself, if only it will avert the panic in his soul. The idea that the new way of life may be a godless one, the idea that the responsibility may be wrested from God and conferred upon humanity as a whole, only adds to his terror."
(Henry Miller, The books in my life, 1969)

Los Carpinteros_150 People

Is religion ridiculous? Many atheists think that it is. Alain de Botton is an atheist, but he believes there is much that atheists can learn from religions, mainly organisational aspects: Rituals, communal, educational aspects:
Curing ourselves from our paranoia of freedom: For the last 200 years, secular societies have been focused on raising the level of freedom. Have we been too far? We are free to mess-up our lives - to succeed but also to fail - and suggestions on optimal ways to live, reminders are not always limits to freedom. The obsession on not been told what to do can cut us off from good ideas about what we might do. Are we unfairly paranoid about influence?
Is it wrong to pick from religions the bets bits and leave the rest? Isn't it what we do with art, literature, cooking - anything really?
(Alain de Botton on Atheism 2.0 on Philosophy Bites)

Listen to theepisode: http://philosophybites.com/2012/01/alain-de-botton-on-atheism-20-1.html

ERNEST BECKER ARGUES THAT THE PSYCHOLOGICAL PHENOMENON OF TRANSFERENCE—OUR DEEP-SEATED, OFTEN UNCONSCIOUS, AND COWARDLY DESIRE TO SURRENDER OUR WILL TO A POWERFUL LEADER—IS THE KEY TO UNDERSTANDING GROUP BEHAVIOR, AS IT ALLOWS INDIVIDUALS TO REGRESS TO A CHILDLIKE STATE OF DEPENDENCY, ILLUSION, AND GUILTLESSNESS.
“Men don’t become slaves out of mere calculating self-interest; the slavishness is in the soul, as
Gorky complained. The thing that has to be explained in human relations is precisely the fascination of the person who holds or symbolizes power. There is something about him that seems to radiate out to others and to melt them into his aura, a “fascinating effect,” as Christine Olden called it, of “the narcissistic personality” or, as Jung preferred to call him, the “mana-personality.” But people don’t actually radiate blue or golden auras. The mana-personality may try to work up a gleam in his eye or a special mystification of painted signs on his forehead, a costume, and a way of holding himself, but he is still Homo sapiens, standard vintage, practically indistinguishable from others unless one is especially interested in him. The mana of the mana-personality is in the eyes of the beholder; the fascination is in the one who experiences it. This is the very thing that has to be explained: if all people are more or less alike, why do we burn with such allconsuming passions for some of them? […]

‘As the highest ambition of the child is to obey the all-powerful parent, to believe in him, and to imitate him, what is more natural than an instant, imaginary return to childhood via the hypnotic trance? The explanation of the ease of hypnosis, said Ferenczi, is that “In our innermost soul we are still children, and we remain so throughout life.” And so, in one theoretical sweep Ferenczi could destroy the mystery of hypnosis by showing that the subject carries in himself the predisposition to it:
… there is no such thing as a “hypnotising,” a “giving of ideas” in the sense of psychical incorporating of something quite foreign from without, but only procedures that are able to set going unconscious, pre-existing, auto-suggestive mechanisms… . According to this conception, the application of suggestion and hypnosis consists in the deliberate establishment of conditions under which the tendency to blind belief and uncritical obedience present in everyone, but usually kept repressed … may unconsciously be transferred to the person hypnotising or suggesting.’ […]

I am lingering on Ferenczi’s unlocking of the secret of hypnosis for a very important reason. By discovering a universal predisposition at the heart of man, Freudian psychology itself gained the key to a universal underlying historical psychology. As not everyone undergoes formal hypnosis, most people can hide and disguise their inner urge to merge themselves with power figures. But the predisposition to hypnosis is the same one that gives rise to transference, and no one is
immune to that, no one can argue away the manifestations of transference in everyday human affairs. It is not visible on the surface: adults walk around looking quite independent; they play the role of parent themselves and seem quite grown up—and so they are. They couldn’t function if they still carried with them the childhood feeling of awe for their parents, the tendency to obey them automatically and uncritically. But, says Ferenczi, although these things normally disappear,
“the need to be subject to someone remains; only the part of the father is transferred to teachers, superiors, impressive personalities; the submissive loyalty to rulers that is so wide-spread is also a transference of this sort.

With a theoretical background that unlocked the problem of hypnosis and that discovered the universal mechanism of the transference, Freud was almost obliged to provide the best insights ever into the psychology of leadership; and so he wrote his great work Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego, a book of fewer than 100 pages that in my opinion is probably the single most potentially liberating tract that has ever been fashioned by man. In his later years Freud wrote a few books that reflected personal and ideological preferences; but Group Psychology was a serious scientific work that consciously placed itself in a long tradition.
Early theorists of group psychology had tried to explain why men were so sheeplike when they functioned in groups. They developed ideas like “mental contagion” and “herd instinct,” which became very popular. But as Freud was quick to see, these ideas never really did explain what men did with their judgment and common sense when they got caught up in groups. Freud saw right away what they did with it: they simply became dependent children again, blindly following the inner voice of their parents, which now came to them under the hypnotic spell of the leader. They abandoned their egos to his, identified with his power, tried to function with him as an ideal.

It is not so much that man is a herd animal, said Freud, but that he is a horde animal led by a chief. It is this alone that can explain the “uncanny and coercive characteristics of group formations.” The chief is a “dangerous personality, toward whom only a passive-masochistic attitude is possible, to whom one’s will has to be surrendered,—while to be alone with him, ‘to look him in the face,’ appears a hazardous enterprise.” This alone, says Freud, explains the “paralysis” that exists in the link between a person with inferior power to one of superior power. Man has “an extreme passion for authority” and “wishes to be governed by unrestricted force.” It is this trait that the leader hypnotically embodies in his own masterful person. Or as Fenichel later put it, people have a “longing for being hypnotized” precisely because they want to get back to the magical protection, the participation in omnipotence, the “oceanic feeling” that they enjoyed when they were loved and protected by their parents. And so, as Freud argues, it is not that groups bring out anything new in people; it is just that they satisfy the deep-seated erotic longings that people constantly carry around unconsciously. For Freud, this was the life force that held groups together. It functioned as a kind of psychic cement that locked people into mutual and mindless interdependence: the magnetic powers of the leader, reciprocated by the guilty delegation of everyone’s will to him. […]

By explaining the precise power that held groups together Freud could also show why groups did not fear danger. The members do not feel that they are alone with their own smallness and helplessness, as they have the powers of the hero-leader with whom they are identified. Natural narcissism—the feeling that the person next to you will die, but not you—is reinforced by trusting dependence on the leader’s power. No wonder that hundreds of thousands of men marched up from trenches in the face of blistering gunfire in World War I. They were partially self-hypnotised, so to speak. No wonder men imagine victories against impossible odds: don’t they have the omnipotent powers of the parental figure? Why are groups so blind and stupid?—men have always asked. Because they demand illusions, answered Freud, they “constantly give what is unreal precedence over what is real.” And we know why. The real world is simply too terrible to admit; it tells man that he is a small, trembling animal who will decay and die. Illusion changes all this, makes man seem important, vital to the universe, immortal in some way. Who transmits this illusion, if not the parents by imparting the macro-lie of the cultural causa sui? The masses look to the leaders to give them just the untruth that they need; the leader continues the illusions that triumph over the castration complex and magnifies them into a truly heroic victory. Furthermore, he makes possible a new experience, the expression of forbidden impulses, secret wishes, and fantasies. In group behavior anything goes because the leader okays it. It is like being an omnipotent infant again, encouraged by the parent to indulge oneself plentifully, or like being in psychoanalytic therapy where the analyst doesn’t censure you for anything you feel or think. In the group each man seems an omnipotent hero who can give full vent to his appetites under the approving eye of the father. And so we understand the terrifying sadism of group activity. […]

All of which leads us to muse wistfully on how unheroic is the average man, even when he follows heroes. He simply loads them up with his own baggage; he follows them with reservations, with a dishonest heart. The noted psychoanalyst Paul Schilder had already observed that man goes into the hypnotic trance itself with reservations. He said penetratingly that it was this fact that deprived hypnosis of the “profound seriousness which distinguishes every truly great passion.” And so he called it “timid” because it lacked “the great, free, unconditional surrender.” I think this characterization is beautifully apt to describe the timid “heroisms” of group behavior. There is nothing free or manly about them. Even when one merges his ego with the authoritarian father, the “spell” is in his own narrow interests.
People use their leaders almost as an excuse. When they give in to the leader’s commands they can always reserve the feeling that these commands are alien to them, that they are the leader’s responsibility, that the terrible acts they are committing are in his name and not theirs. This, then, is another thing that makes people feel so guiltless, as Canetti points out: they can imagine themselves as temporary victims of the leader. The more they give in to his spell, and the more terrible the crimes they commit, the more they can feel that the wrongs are not natural to them. It is all so neat, this usage of the leader; it reminds us of James Frazer’s discovery that in the remote past tribes often used their kings as scapegoats who, when they no longer served the people’s needs, were put to death. These are the many ways in which men can play the hero, all the while that they are avoiding responsibility for their own acts in a cowardly way. […]

If transference relates to cowardice we can understand why it goes all the way back to childhood; it reflects the whole of the child’s attempts to create an environment that will give him safety and satisfaction; he learns to act and to perceive his environment in such a way that he banishes anxiety from it. But now the fatality of transference: when you set up your perception-action world to eliminate what is basic to it (anxiety), then you fundamentally falsify it. This is why psychoanalysts have always understood transference as a regressive phenomenon, uncritical, wishful, a matter of automatic control of one’s world. Silverberg gives a classic psycho-analytic definition: Transference indicates a need to exert complete control over external circumstances. … In all its variety and multiplicity of manifestation … transference may be regarded as the enduring monument of man’s profound rebellion against reality and his stubborn persistence in the ways of immaturity.

For Erich Fromm transference reflects man’s alienation:
’In order to overcome his sense of inner emptiness and impotence, [man] … chooses an object onto whom he projects all his own human qualities: his love, intelligence, courage, etc. By submitting to this object, he feels in touch with his own qualities; he feels strong, wise, courageous, and secure. To lose the object means the danger of losing himself. This mechanism, idolatric worship of an object, based on the fact of the individual’s alienation, is the central dynamism of transference, that which gives transference its strength and intensity.’ […]”
(Ernest Becker, The Denial of Death, 1973)

ERNEST BECKER DEFINES TRANSFERENCE AS A UNIVERSAL PSYCHOLOGICAL MECHANISM FOR "TAMING TERROR," IN WHICH A PERSON PROJECTS THE OVERWHELMING AND CHAOTIC POWER OF THE UNIVERSE ONTO A SINGLE INDIVIDUAL TO MAKE THEIR FATE FEEL CONTROLLABLE, THEREBY PARADOXICALLY CREATING A NEW AND COMPULSIVE DEPENDENCY ON THAT VERY OBJECT.
“This is how we can understand the essence of transference: as a taming of terror. Realistically the universe contains overwhelming power. Beyond ourselves we sense chaos. We can’t really do much about this unbelievable power, except for one thing: we can endow certain persons with it. The child takes natural awe and terror and focusses them on individual beings, which allows him to find the power and the horror all in one place instead of diffused throughout a chaotic universe. Mirabile! The transference object, being endowed with the transcendent powers of the universe, now has in himself the power to control, order, and combat them. In Rank’s words the transference object comes to represent for the individual “the great biological forces of nature, to which the ego binds itself emotionally and which then form the essence of the human and his fate.” By this means, the child can control his fate. As ultimately power means power over life and death, the child can now safely emerge in relation to the transference object. The object becomes his locus of safe operation. All he has to do is conform to it in the ways that he learns; conciliate it if it becomes terrible; use it serenely for automatic daily activities. For this reason Angyal could well say that transference is not an “emotional mistake” but the experience of the other as one’s whole world—just as the home actually is, for the child, his whole world.

This totality of the transference object also helps explain its ambivalence. In some complex ways the child has to fight against the power of the parents in their awesome miraculousness. They are just as overwhelming as the background of nature from which they emerge. The child learns to naturalize them by techniques of accommodation and manipulation. At the same time, however, he has to focus on them the whole problem of terror and power, making them the
center of it in order to cut down and naturalize the world around them. Now we see why the transference object poses so many problems. The child does partly control his larger fate by it, but it becomes his new fate. He binds himself to one person to automatically control terror, to mediate wonder, and to defeat death by that person’s strength. But then he experiences “transference terror”; the terror of losing the object, of displeasing it, of not being able to live without it. The terror of his own finitude and impotence still haunts him, but now in the precise form of the transference object. How implacably ironic is human life. The transference object
always looms larger than life size because it represents all of life and hence all of one’s fate. The transference object becomes the focus of the problem of one’s freedom because one is compulsively dependent on it it sums up all other natural dependencies and emotions. This quality is true of either positive or negative transference objects. In the negative transference the object becomes the focalization of terror, but now experienced as evil and constraint. It is the source, too, of much of the bitter memories of childhood and of our accusations of our parents. We try to make them the sole repositories of our own unhappiness in a much of the bitter memories of childhood and of our accusations of our parents. We try to make them the sole repositories of our own unhappiness in a fundamentally demonic world. We seem to be pretending that the world does not contain terror and evil but only our parents. In the negative transference, too, then, we see an attempt to control our fate in an automatic way.

No wonder Freud could say that transference was a “universal phenomenon of the human mind” that “dominates the whole of each person’s relation to his human environment.” Or that Ferenczi could talk about the “neurotic passion for transference,” the “stimulus-hungry affects of neurotics.” We don’t have to talk only about neurotics but about the hunger and passion of everyone for a localized stimulus that takes the place of the whole world. We might better say that transference proves that everyone is neurotic, as it is a universal distortion of reality by the artificial fixation of it. It follows, of course, that the less ego power one has and the more fear, the stronger the transference. This explains the peculiar intensity of schizophrenic transference: the total and desperate focalization of horror and wonder in one person, and the abject surrender to him and complete worship of him in a kind of dazed, hypnotic way. Only to hear his voice or touch a piece of his clothing or be granted the privilege of kissing and licking his feet—that would be heaven itself. This is a logical fate for the utterly helpless person: the more you
fear death and the emptier you are, the more you people your world with omnipotent father-figures, extra-magical helpers. The schizophrenic transference helps us to understand how naturally we remain glued to the object even in “normal” transference: all the power to cure the diseases of life, the ills of the world, are present in the transference object. How can we not be under its spell?”
(Ernest Becker, The Denial of Death, 1973)

ERNEST BECKER REFRAMES TRANSFERENCE NOT AS A SIMPLE DISTORTION OF REALITY, BUT AS A VITAL AND CREATIVE HUMAN DRIVE TO MANAGE THE TERROR OF EXISTENCE BY PROJECTING OUR DEEP-SEATED NEED FOR HEROIC SELF-EXPANSION AND COSMIC MEANING ONTO ANOTHER PERSON.
“Much of what we have said so far about transference puts mankind in an unflattering light; it is now time to shift the tone. True, transference is a reflex of cowardice in the face of both life and death, but it is also a reflex of the urge to heroism and self-unfolding. This puts our discussion of transference on still a different level, and on this new perspective I now want to linger.
One thing that has always amazed man is his own inner yearning to be good, an inner sensitivity about the “way things ought to be,” and an excruciatingly warm and melting attraction toward the “rightness” of beauty, goodness, and perfection. We call this inner sensitivity “conscience.” For the great philosopher Immanuel Kant it was one of the two sublime mysteries of creation, this “moral law within” man, and there was no way to explain it—it was just given. Nature carries feeling right in her own “heart,” in the interiors of striving organisms. This self-feeling in nature is more fantastic than any science-fiction fact. Any philosophy or any science that is going to speak intelligently about the meaning of life has to take it into account and treat it with the highest reverence—as 19thcentury thinkers like Vincenzo Gioberti and Antonio Rosmini understood. Curiously, this vital ontology of organismic self-feeling—which was central for thinkers like Thomas Davidson and Henri Bergson—hardly made a rustle in modern science until the appearance of the new “humanistic psychology.” This fact alone seems to me to explain the unbelievable sterility of the human sciences in our time and, more especially, their willingness to manipulate and negate man. I think that the true greatness of Freud’s contribution emerges when we see it as directly related to this tradition of ontological thought. Freud showed how the particular rules for goodness or conscience were built into the child in a given society, how he learns the rules for feeling good. By showing the artificiality of these social rules for feeling good, Freud mapped out the dream of freedom of the Enlightenment: to expose artificial moral constraints on the expansive self-feeling of the life force.

But the recognition of such social constraints still leaves unexplained the inner urge of the human being to feel good and right—the very thing that awed Kant seems to exist independent of any rules: as far as we can tell—as I put it elsewhere—“all organisms like to ‘feel good’ about themselves.” They push themselves to maximize this feeling. As philosophers have long noted, it is as though the heart of nature is pulsating in its own joyful self-expansion. When we get to the level of man, of course, this process acquires its greatest interest. It is most intense in man and in him relatively undetermined—he can pulsate and expand both organismically and symbolically. This expansion takes the form of man’s tremendous urge for a feeling of total “rightness” about himself and his world. This perhaps clumsy way to talk seems to me to sum up what man is really trying to do and why conscience is his fate. Man is the only organism in nature fated to puzzle out what it actually means to feel “right.”
But on top of this special burden nature has arranged that it is impossible for man to feel “right” in any straightforward way. Here we have to introduce a paradox that seems to go right to the heart of organismic life and that is especially sharpened in man. The paradox takes the form of two motives or urges that seem to be part of creature consciousness and that point in two opposite directions. On the one hand the creature is impelled by a powerful desire to identify with the cosmic process, to merge himself with the rest of nature. On the other hand he wants to be unique, to stand out as something different and apart. The first motive—to merge and lose oneself in something larger—comes from man’s horror of isolation, of being thrust back upon his own feeble energies alone; he feels tremblingly small and impotent in the face of transcendent nature. If he gives in to his natural feeling of cosmic dependence, the desire to be part of something bigger, it puts him at peace and at oneness, gives him a sense of self-expansion in a larger beyond, and so heightens his being, giving him truly a feeling of transcendent value. This is the Christian motive of Agape—the natural melding of created life in the “Creation-in-love” which transcends it. As Rank put it, man yearns for a “feeling of
kinship with the All.” He wants to be “delivered from his isolation” and become “part of a greater and higher whole.” The person reaches out naturally for a self beyond his own self in order to know who he is at all, in order to feel that he belongs in the universe. Long before Camus penned the words of the epigraph to this chapter, Rank said: “For only by living in close union with a god-ideal that has been erected outside one’s own ego is one able to live at all. […]

Now we see what we might call the ontological or creature tragedy that is so peculiar to man: If he gives in to Agape he risks failing to develop himself, his active contribution to the rest of life. If he expands Eros too much he risks cutting himself off from natural dependency, from duty to a larger creation; he pulls away from the healing power of gratitude and humility that he must naturally feel for having been created, for having been given the opportunity of life experience.

Man thus has the absolute tension of the dualism. Individuation means that the human creature has to oppose itself to the rest of nature. It creates precisely the isolation that one can’t stand—and yet needs in order to develop distinctively. It creates the difference that becomes such a burden; it accents the smallness of oneself and the sticking-outness at the same time. This is natural guilt. The person experiences this as “unworthiness” or “badness” and dumb inner dissatisfaction. And the reason is realistic. Compared to the rest of nature man is not a very satisfactory creation. He is riddled with fear and powerlessness.
The problem becomes how to get rid of badness, of natural guilt, which is really a matter of reversing one’s position vis-à-vis the universe. It is a matter of achieving size, importance, durability: how to be bigger and better than one really is. The whole basis of the urge to goodness is to be something that has value, that endures. We seem to know it intuitively when we console our children after their nightmares and other frights. We tell them not to worry, that they are “good” and nothing can hurt them, and so on: goodness = safety and special immunity. You might say that the urge to morality is based entirely on the physical situation of the creature. Man is moral because he senses his true situation and what lies in store for him, whereas other animals don’t. He uses morality to try to get a place of special belongingness and perpetuation in the universe, in two ways. First, he overcomes badness (smallness, unimportance, finitude) by conforming to the rules made by the representatives of natural power (the transference-objects); in this way his safe belongingness is assured. This too is natural: we tell the child when he is good so that he doesn’t have to be afraid. Second, he attempts to overcome badness by developing a really valuable heroic gift, becoming extra-special. […]

The point of our brief discursus on ontological motives is to make compellingly clear how transference is connected to the foundations of organismic life. We can now understand fully how wrong it would be to look at transference in a totally derogatory way when it fulfills such vital drives toward human wholeness. Man needs to infuse his life with value so that he can pronounce it “good.” The transference-object is then a natural fetishization for man’s highest yearnings and strivings. Again we see what a marvelous “talent” transference is. It is a form of creative fetishism, the establishment of a locus from which our lives can draw the powers they need and want. What is more wanted than immortality-power? How wonderful and how facile to be able to take our whole immortality-striving and make it part of a dialogue with a single human being. We don’t know, on this planet, what the universe wants from us or is prepared to give us. We don’t have an answer to the question that troubled Kant of what our duty is, what we should be doing on earth. We live in utter darkness about who we are and why we are here, yet we know it must have some meaning. What is more natural, then, than to take this unspeakable mystery and dispel it straightaway by addressing our performance of heroics to another human being, knowing thus daily whether this performance is good enough to earn us eternity. If it is bad, we know that it is bad by his reactions and so are able instantly to change it. […]

No wonder too, for a final time, that transference is a universal passion. It represents a natural attempt to be healed and to be whole, through heroic selfexpansion in the “other.” Transference represents the larger reality that one needs, which is why Freud and Ferenczi could already say that transference represents psychotherapy, the “self-taught attempts on the patient’s part to cure himself.” People create the reality they need in order to discover themselves. The implications of these remarks are perhaps not immediately evident, but they are immense for a theory of the transference. If transference represents the natural heroic striving for a “beyond” that gives self-validation and if people need this validation in order to live, then the psychoanalytic view of transference as simply unreal projection is destroyed. Projection is necessary and desirable for self-fulfillment. Otherwise man is overwhelmed by his loneliness and separation and negated by the very burden of his own life. As Rank so wisely saw, projection is a necessary unburdening of the individual; man cannot live closed upon himself and for himself. He must project the meaning of his life outward, the reason for it, even the blame for it. We did not create ourselves, but we are stuck with ourselves. Technically we say that transference is a distortion of reality. But now we see that this distortion has two dimensions: distortion due to the fear of life and death and distortion due to the heroic attempt to assure self-expansion and the intimate connection of one’s inner self to surrounding nature. In other words, transference reflects the whole of the human condition and raises the largest philosophical question about that condition.”
(Ernest Becker, The Denial of Death, 1973)

Other toppics

"IT IS IN ANGUISH THAT MAN GETS THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF HIS FREEDOM... ANGUISH IS THE MODE OF BEING OF FREEDOM AS CONSCIOUSNESS OF BEING." 
“It remains to explain what this separation is, this disengaging of Consciousness which conditions every negation. If we consider the prior consciousness envisaged as motivation, we see suddenly and evidently that nothing has just slipped in between that state and the present state. There has been no break in continuity within the flux of the temporal development, for that would force us to return to the inadmissible concept of the infinite divisibility of time and of the temporal point or instant as the limit of the division. Neither has there been an abrupt interpolation of an opaque element to separate prior from subsequent in the way that a knife blade cuts a piece of fruit in two. Nor is there a weakening of the motivating force of the prior consciousness; it remains what it is, it does not lose anything of its urgency. What separates prior from subsequent is exactly nothing. This nothing is absolutely impassable, just because it is nothing; for in every obstacle to be cleared there is something positive which gives itself as about to be cleared. The prior consciousness is always there (though with the modification of "pastness"). It constantly maintains a relation of interpretation with the present consciousness, but on the basis of this existential relation it is put out of the game, out of the circuit, between parentheses-exactly as [the world both is within one’s eyes and outside].
Thus the condition on which human reality can deny all or part of the world is that human reality carry nothingness within itself as the nothing which separates its present from all its past. But this is still not all, for the nothing envisaged would not yet have the sense of nothingness; a suspension of being which would remain unnamed, which would not be consciousness of suspending being would come from outside consciousness and by reintroducing opacity into the heart of this absolute lucidity, would have the effect of cutting it in two. Furthermore this nothing would by no means be negative. Nothingness, as we have seen above, is the ground of the negation because it conceals the negation within itself, because it is the negation as being. It is necessary then that conscious being constitute itself in relation to its past as separated from this past by a nothingness. It must necessarily be conscious of this cleavage in being, but not as a phenomenon which it experiences, rather as a structure of consciousness which it is. Freedom is the human being putting his past out of play by secreting his own nothingness. Let us understand indeed that this original necessity of being its own nothingness does not belong to consciousness intermittently and on the occasion of particular negations. This does not happen just at a particular moment in psychic life when negative or interrogative attitudes appear; consciousness continually experiences itself as the nihilation of its past being.
But someone doubtless will believe that he can use against us here an objection which we have frequently raised ourselves: if the nihilating consciousness exists only as consciousness of nihilation, we ought to be able to define and describe a constant mode of consciousness, present qua consciousness, which would be consciousness of nihilation. Does this consciousness exist? Behold a new question has been raised here: if freedom is the being of consciousness, consciousness ought to exist a consciousness of freedom. What form does this consciousness of freedom assume? In freedom the human being is his own past (as also his own future) in the form of nihilation. If our analysis has not led us astray, there ought to exist for the human being, in so far as he is conscious of being, a certain mode Of standing opposite his past and his future, as being both this past and this future and as not being them. We shall be able to furnish an immediate reply to this question; it is in anguish that man gets the consciousness of his freedom, or if you prefer, anguish is the mode of being of freedom as consciousness of being; it is in anguish that freedom is, in its being, in question for itself.
Kierkegaard describing anguish in the face of what one lacks characterizes it as anguish in the face of freedom. But Heidegger, whom we know to have been greatly influenced by Kierkegaard, to considers anguish instead as the apprehension of nothingness. These two descriptions of anguish do not appear to us contradictory; on the contrary the one implies the other.
First we must acknowledge that Kierkegaard is right; anguish is distinguished from fear in that fear is fear of beings in the world whereas anguish is anguish before myself. Vertigo is anguish to the extent that I am afraid not of falling over the precipice, but of throwing myself over. A situation provokes fear if there is a possibility of my life being changed from without; my being provokes anguish to the extent that I distrust myself and my own reactions in that situation. The artillery preparation which precedes the attack can provoke fear in the soldier who undergoes the bombardment, but anguish is born in him when he tries ,to foresee the conduct with which he will face the bombardment, when he asks himself if he is going to be able to "hold up." Similarly the recruit who reports for active duty at the beginning of the war can in some instances be afraid of death, but more often he is "afraid of being afraid;" that is, he is filled with anguish before himself. Most of the time dangerous or threatening situations present themselves in facets; they will be apprehended through a feeling of fear or of anguish according to whether we envisage the situation as acting on the man or the man as acting on the situation. The man who has just received a hard blow-for example, losing a great part of his wealth in a crash-can have the fear of threatening poverty, he will experience anguish a moment later when nervously wringing his hands (a symbolic reaction to the action which is imposed but which remains still wholly undetermined), he exclaims to himself: "What am I going to do? But what am I going to do?" In this sense fear and anguish are exclusive of one another since fear is unreflective apprehension of the transcendent and anguish is reflective apprehension of the self; the one is born in the destruction of the other. The normal process in the case which I have just cited is a constant transition from the one to the other. But there exist also situations where anguish appears pure; that is, without ever being preceded or followed by fear. If, for example, I have been raised to a new dignity and charged with a delicate and flattering mission, I can feel anguish at the thought that I will not be capable ,perhaps of fulfilling it, and yet I will not have the least fear in the world of the consequences of my possible failure.
What is the meaning of anguish in the various examples which I have just given? Let us take up again the example of vertigo. Vertigo announces itself through fear; I am on a narrow path-without a guard-rail-which goes along a precipice. The precipice presents itself to me as to be avoided; it represents a danger of death. At the same time I conceive of a certain number of causes, originating in universal determinism, which can transform that threat of death into reality; I can slip on a stone and fall into the abyss; the crumbling earth of the path can give way under my steps. Through these various anticipations, I am given to myself as a thing; I am passive in relation to these possibilities; they come to me from without; in so far as I am also an object in the world, subject to gravitation, they are my possibilities. At this moment fear appears, which in terms of the situation is the apprehension of myself as a destructible transcendent in the midst of transcendents, as an object which does not contain in itself the origin of its future disappearance. My reaction will be of the reflective order; I will pay attention to the stones in the road; I will keep myself as far as possible from the edge of the path. I realize myself as pushing away the threatening situation with all my strength, and I project before myself a certain number of future conducts destined to keep the threats of the world at a distance from me. These conducts are my possibilities. I escape fear by the very fact that I am placing myself on a plane where my own possibilities are substituted for the transcendent probabilities where human action had no place."
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

"IT IS IN ANGUISH THAT MAN GETS THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF HIS FREEDOM... ANGUISH IS THE MODE OF BEING OF FREEDOM AS CONSCIOUSNESS OF BEING." (Continued 1)
“But these conducts, precisely because they are my possibilities, do not appear to me as determined by foreign causes. Not only is it not strictly certain that they will be effective; in particular it is not strictly certain that they will be adopted, for they do not have existence sufficient in itself. We could say, varying the expression of Berkeley, that their "being is a sustained-being" and that their "possibility of being is only an ought-to be-sustained." Due to this fact their possibility has as a necessary condition the possibility of negative conduct (not to pay attention to the stones in the road, to run, to think of something else) and the pos The possibility which I make my concrete possibility can appear as my possibility only by raising itself on the basis of the totality of the logical possibilities which the situation allows. But these rejected possibles in turn have no other being than their "sustained-being;" it is I who sustain them in being, and inversely, their present non-being is an "ought-not-to-be-sustained." No external cause will remove them. I alone am the permanent source of their non-being, I engage myself in them; in order to cause my possibility to appear, I posit the other possibilities so as to nihilate them. This would not produce anguish if I could apprehend myself in my relations with these possibles as a cause producing its effects. In this case the effect defined as my possibility would be strictly determined. But then it would cease to be possible; it would become simply "about-to-happen." If then I wished to avoid anguish and vertigo, it would be enough if I were to consider the motives (instinct of self-preservation, prior fear, etc.), which make me reject the situation envisaged, as determining my prior activity in the same way that the presence at a determined point of one given mass determines the courses followed by other masses; it would be necessary, in other words, that I apprehend in myself a strict psychological determinism. But I am in anguish precisely because any conduct on my part is only possible, and this means that while constituting a totality of motives for pushing away that situation, I at the same moment apprehend these motives as not sufficiently effective. At the very moment when I apprehend my being as horror of the precipice, I am conscious of that horror as not determinant in relation to my possible conduct. In one sense that horror calls for prudent conduct, and it is in itself a pre-outline of that conduct; in another sense, it posits the final developments of that conduct only as possible, precisely because I do not apprehend it as the cause of these final developments but as need, appeal, etc.
Now as we have seen, consciousness of being is the being of consciousness. There is no question here of a contemplation which I could make after the event, of an horror already constituted; it is the very being of horror to appear to itself as "not being the cause" of the conduct it calls for. In short, to avoid fear, which reveals to me a transcendent future strictly determined, I take refuge in reflection, but the latter has only an undetermined future to offer. This means that in establishing a certain conduct as a possibility and precisely because it is my possibility, I am aware that nothing can compel me to adopt that conduct. Yet I am indeed already there in the future; it is for the sake of that being which I will be there at the turning of the path that I now exert all my strength, and in this sense there is already a relation between my future being and my present being. But a nothingness has slipped into the heart of this relation; I am not the self which I will be. First I am not that self because time separates me from it. Secondly, I am not that self because what I am is not the foundation of what I will be. Finally I am not that self because no actual existent can determine strictly what I am going to be. Yet as I am already what I will be (otherwise I would not be interested in anyone being more than another), I am the self which I will be, in the mode of not being it. It is through my horror that I am carried toward the future, and the horror nihilates itself in that" it constitutes the future as possible. Anguish is precisely my consciousness of being my own future, in the mode of not-being. To be exact, the nihilation of horror as a motive, which has the effect of reinforcing horror as a state, has as its positive counterpart the appearance of other forms of conduct (in particular that which consists in throwing myself over the precipice) as my possible possibilities. If nothing compels me to save my life, nothing prevents me from precipitating myself into the abyss. The decisive conduct will emanate from a self which I am not yet. Thus the self which I am depends on the self which I am not yet to the exact extent that the self which I am not yet does not depend on the self which I am. Vertigo appears as the apprehension of this dependence. I approach the precipice, and my scrutiny is searching for myself in my very depths. In terms of this moment, I play with my possibilities. My eyes, running over the abyss from top to bottom, imitate the possible fall and realize it symbolically; at the same time suicide, from the fact that it becomes a possibility possible for me, now causes to appear possible motives for adopting it (suicide would cause anguish' to cease). Fortunately these motives in their turn, from the sole fact that they are motives of a possibility, present themselves as ineffective, as non-determinant; they can no more produce the suicide than my horror of the fall can determine me to avoid it. It is this counter-anguish which generally puts an end to anguish by transmuting it into indecision. Indecision in its turn, calls for decision. I abruptly put myself at a distance from the edge of the precipice and resume my way.
The example which we have just analyzed has shown us what we could call "anguish in the face of the future." There exists another: anguish in the face of the past. It is that of the gambler who has freely and sincerely decided not to gamble anymore and who when he approaches the gaming table, suddenly sees all his resolutions melt away. This phenomenon has often been described as if the sight of the gaming table reawakened in us a tendency which entered into conflict with our former resolulion and ended by drawing us in spite of this. Aside from the fact that such a description is done in materialistic terms and peoples the mind with opposing forces (there is, for example, the moralists' famous "struggle of reason with the passions"), it does not account for the facts. In reality -the letters of Dostoevsky bear witness to this-there is nothing in us which resembles an inner debate as if we had to weigh motives and incentives before deciding. The earlier resolution of "not playing anymore" is always there, and in the majority of cases the gambler when in the presence of the gaming table, turns toward it as if to ask it for help; for he does not wish to play, or rather having taken his resolution the day before, he thinks of himself still as not wishing to play anymore; he believes in the effectiveness of this resolution. But what he apprehends then in anguish is precisely the total inefficacy of the past resolution. It is there doubtless but fixed, ineffectual, surpassed by the very fact that I am conscious of it. The resolution is still me to the extent that I realize constantly my identity with myself across the temporal flux, but it is no longer me-due to the fact that it has become an object for my consciousness. I am not subject to it, it fails in the mission which I have given it. The resolution is there still, I am it in the mode of not-being. What the gambler apprehends at this instant is again the permanent rupture in determinism; it is nothingness which separates him from himself; I should have liked so much not to gamble anymore; yesterday I even had a synthetic apprehension of the situation (threatening ruin, disappointment of my relatives) as forbidding me to play. It seemed to me that I had established a real barrier between gambling and myself, and now I suddenly perceive that my former understanding of the situation is no more than a memory of an idea, a memory of a feeling. In order for it to come to my aid once more, I must remake it ex nihilo and freely. The not-gambling is only one of my possibilities, as the fact of gambling is another of them, neither more nor less. I must rediscover the fear of financial ruin or of disappointing my family, etc., I must re-create it as experienced fear. It stands behind me like a boneless phantom. It depends on me alone to lend it flesh. I am alone and naked before temptation as I was the day before. After having patiently built up barriers and walls, after enclosing myself in the magic circle of a resolution, I perceive with anguish that nothing prevents me from gambling. The anguish is me since by the very fact of taking my position in existence as consciousness of being, I make myself not to be the past of good resolutions which I am."
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

"IT IS IN ANGUISH THAT MAN GETS THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF HIS FREEDOM... ANGUISH IS THE MODE OF BEING OF FREEDOM AS CONSCIOUSNESS OF BEING." (Continued 2)
“It would be in vain to object that the sole condition of this anguish is ignorance of the underlying psychological determinism. According to such a view my anxiety would come from lack of knowing the real and effective incentives which in the darkness of the unconscious determine my action. In reply we shall point out first that anguish has not appeared to us as a proof of human freedom; the latter was given to us as the necessary condition for the question. We wished only to show that there exists a specific consciousness of freedom, and we wished to show that this consciousness is anguish. This means that we wished to established anguish in its essential structure as consciousness of freedom. Now from this point of view the existence of a psychological determinism could not invalidate the results of our description. Either indeed anguish is actually an unrealized ignorance of this determinism-and then anguish apprehends itself in fact as freedom-or else one may claim that anguish is consciousness of being ignorant of the real causes of our acts. In the latter case anguish would come from that of which we have a presentiment, a screen deep within ourselves for monstrous motives which would suddenly release guilty acts. But in this case we should suddenly appear to ourselves as things in the world; we should be to ourselves our own transcendent situation. Then anguish would disappear to give away to fear, for fear is a synthetic apprehension of the transcendent as dreadful.
This freedom which reveals itself to us in anguish can be characterized by the existence of that nothing which insinuates itself between motives and act. It is not because I am free that my act is not subject to the determination of motives; on the contrary, the structure of motives as ineffective is the condition of my freedom. If someone asks what this nothing is which provides a foundation for freedom, we shall reply that we cannot describe it since it is not, but we can at least hint at its meaning by saying that this nothing is made-to-be by the human being in his relation with himself. The nothing here corresponds to the necessity for the motive to appear as motive only as a correlate of a consciousness of motive. In short, as soon as we abandon the hypothesis of the contents of consciousness, we must recognize that there is never a motive in consciousness; motives are only for consciousness. And due to the very fact that the motive can arise only as appearance, it constitutes itself as ineffective. Of course it does not have the externality of a temporal-spatial thing; it always belongs to subjectivity and it is apprehended as mine. But it is by nature transcendence in immanence, and consciousness is not subject to it because of the very fact that consciousness posits it; for consciousness has now the task of conferring on the motive its meaning and its importance. Thus the nothing which separates the motive from consciousness characterizes itself as transcendence in immanence. It is by arising as immanence that consciousness nihilates the nothing which makes consciousness exist for itself as transcendence. But we see that the nothingness which is the condition of all transcendent negation can be elucidated only in terms of two other original nihilations: (1) Consciousness is not its own motive inasmuch as it is empty of all content. This refers us to a nihilating structure of the pre-reflective cogito. (2) Consciousness confronts its past and its future as facing a self which it is in the mode of not-being. This refers us to a nihilating structure of temporality.
There can be for us as yet no question of elucidating these two types of nihilation; we do not at the moment have the necessary techniques at our disposal. It is sufficient to observe here that the definitive explanation of negation cannot be given without a description of self-consciousness and of temporality. 
What we should note at present is that freedom, which manifests itself through anguish, is characterized by a constantly renewed obligation to remake the Self which designates the free being. As a matter of fact when we showed earlier that my possibilities were filled with anguish because it depended on me alone to sustain them in their existence, that did not mean that they derived from a Me which to itself at least, would first be given and would then pass in the temporal flux from one consciousness to another consciousness. The gambler who must realize anew the synthetic apperception of a situation which would forbid him to play, must rediscover at the same time the self which can appreciate that situation, which "is in situation." This self with its a priori and historical content is the essence of man. Anguish as the manifestation of freedom in the face of self means that man is always separated by a nothingness from his essence. We should refer here to Hegel's statement: "Wesen ist was gewesen ist." Essence is what has been. Essence is everything in the human being which we can indicate by the words-that is. Due to this fact it is the totality of characteristics which explain the act. But the ad is always beyond· that essence; it is a human act only in so far as it surpasses every explanation which we can give of it, precisely because the very application of the formula "that is" to man causes all that is designated, to have-been. Man continually carries with him a pre-judicative comprehension of his essence, but due to this very fact he is separated from it by a nothingness. Essence is all that human reality apprehends in itself as having been. It is here that anguish appears as an apprehension of self in as much as its exists in the perpetual mode of  detachment from what is; better yet, in so far as it makes itself exist as such. For we call never apprehend an Erlebnis as a living consequence of that nature which is ours. The overflow of our consciousness progressively constitutes that nature, but it remains always behind us and it dwells in us as the permanent object of our retrospective comprehension. It is in so far as this nature is a demand without being a recourse that it is apprehended in anguish.
In anguish freedom is anguished before itself inasmuch as it is instigated and bound by nothing. Someone will say, freedom has just been defined as a permanent structure of the human being; if anguish manifests it, then anguish ought to be a permanent state of my affectivity. But, on the contrary, it is completely exceptional. How can we explain the rarity of the phenomenon of anguish?”
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

E2.1.A.4.2. The Withering of Freedom: Apathy, Comfort, and Habituation
This chapter will shift from active fear to the more passive ways in which freedom is devalued, forgotten, or traded away. It explores how comfort, apathy, a lack of purpose, and social conditioning can lead us to "cease to value" liberty.

E2.1.A.4.2.a. Servitude by Comfort: Trading Liberty for Largess
This sub-topic will argue that material comfort and the satisfaction of basic pleasures can "tame" populations, making them indifferent to the loss of their freedom.

“To achieve the good that they desire, the bold do not fear danger; the intelligent do not refuse to undergo suffering. It is
the stupid and cowardly who are neither able to endure hardship nor to vindicate their rights; they stop at merely longing for them, and lose through timidity the valor roused by the effort to claim their rights, although the desire to enjoy them still remains as part of their nature. A longing common to both the wise and the foolish, to brave men and to cowards, is this longing for all those things which, when acquired, would make them happy and contented. Yet one element appears to be lacking. I do not know how it happens that nature fails to place within the hearts of men a burning desire for liberty, a blessing so great and so desirable that when it is lost all evils follow thereafter, and even the blessings that remain lose taste and savor because of their corruption by servitude. Liberty is the only joy upon which men do not seem to insist; for surely if they really wanted it they would receive it. Apparently they refuse this wonderful privilege because it is so easily acquired."
(La Boétie, The discourse of voluntary servitude, 1577)


"La Boétie describes the mechanism of voluntary servitude as the abandonment of our free will in a non-democratic regime. How can we apply this concept to our democracy? What forms of voluntary servitude do we engage in when our free will is no longer threatened?
- One example is submission to others through "bewitchment" in relationships, friendships, or at work.
- Social media exposes our lives to those in power, who may have malicious intentions.
- The loss of privacy in the name of freedom of expression, such as the invasion of the private lives of celebrities."

WE CAN BE TAMED LIKE ANIMALS BY COMFORT TO THE POINT OF FORGETTING FREEDOM.
"Roman tyrants invented a further refinement. They often provided the city wards with feasts to cajole the rabble, always more readily tempted by the pleasure of eating than by anything else. The most intelligent and understanding amongst them would not have quit his soup bowl to recover the liberty of the Republic of Plato. Tyrants would distribute largess, a bushel of wheat, a gallon of wine, and a sesterce: and then everybody would shamelessly cry, “Long live the King!” The fools did not realize that they were merely recovering a portion of their own property, and that their ruler could not have given them what they were receiving without having first taken it from them."
(La Boétie, The discourse of voluntary servitude, 1577)

SOME OF US LOVE THEIR ROUTINE
""It would be a shame. Boss Vasques, bookkeeper Moreira, cashier Borges—all the good guys—the cheerful boy who takes the letters to the post office, the handyman, and the sweet cat had all become part of my life. I couldn't leave them behind without crying. I couldn't leave without understanding that as bad as it seemed, part of me was staying with them. Separating myself from them was like dying. [...] I feel tenderness, to the point of tears, for the books I write in, the old inkwell I use, and Sergio's bent back, as he makes shipping labels a little way behind me. Perhaps I love this because I have nothing else to love, or perhaps it's because nothing is worth the love of a soul. If we feel we must give it, we might as well give it to my inkwell as to the stars' indifference. [...] Just as we wash our bodies, we should wash our destinies and change our lives as we change our clothes—not to save our lives as we eat and sleep but out of respect for ourselves, which we call cleanliness. There are many for whom uncleanliness is not a disposition of the will but a shrugging of the intellectual shoulders. There are also many in whom the dullness and sameness of life is not a reflection of their desires or a natural acceptance of their circumstances, but rather an erasure of their intelligence and an automatic irony of knowledge. Some pigs are repulsed by their own filth but do not move away from it because of the same extreme feeling that causes the terrified not to move away from danger. There are pigs of destiny, like me, who do not move away from everyday banality because of this attraction to their own impotence. They are birds fascinated by the absence of snakes, flies that hover on tree trunks without seeing the chameleon's slimy tongue until it reaches them. Thus, I slowly wander in my conscious unconsciousness on my usual tree trunk."
(Fernando Pessoa, o Livro do Desassossego)

“Freedom is not something that anybody can be given,freedom is something people take and people are as free as they want to be. [...]
“one hasn’t got to have an enormous military machine in order to be un-free when it’s simpler to be asleep, when it’s simpler to be apathetic, when it’s simpler, in fact, not to want to be free” 
(James Baldwin)

THE OVERWHELMING MAJORITY OF GERMANS WILLINGLY ACCEPTED THE LOSS OF PERSONAL FREEDOM IN 1934 AGAINST ECONOMIC SECURITY AND NATIONAL PRIDE.
“LIFE IN THE THIRD REICH: 1933–37 IT WAS AT THIS TIME, in the late summer of 1934, that I came to live and work in the Third Reich. There was much that impressed, puzzled and troubled a foreign observer about the new Germany. The overwhelming majority of Germans did not seem to mind that their personal freedom had been taken away, that so much of their culture had been destroyed and replaced with a mindless barbarism, or that their life and work had become regimented to a degree never before experienced even by a people accustomed for generations to a great deal of regimentation. In the background, to be sure, there lurked the terror of the Gestapo and the fear of the concentration camp for those who got out of line or who had been Communists or Socialists or too liberal or too pacifist, or who were Jews. The Blood Purge of June 30, 1934, was a warning of how ruthless the new leaders could be. Yet the Nazi terror in the early years affected the lives of relatively few Germans and a newly arrived observer was somewhat surprised to see that the people of this country did not seem to feel that they were being cowed and held down by an unscrupulous and brutal dictatorship. On the contrary, they supported it with genuine enthusiasm. Somehow it imbued them with a new hope and a new confidence and an astonishing faith in the future of their country. Hitler was liquidating the past, with all its frustrations and disappointments. Step by step, and rapidly (as we shall see in detail later), he was freeing Germany from the shackles of Versailles, confounding the victorious Allies and making Germany militarily strong again. This was what most Germans wanted and they were willing to make the sacrifices which the Leader demanded of them to get it: the loss of personal freedom, a Spartan diet (“Guns before Butter”) and hard work. By the autumn of 1936 the problem of unemployment had been largely licked, almost everyone had a job again* and one heard workers who had been deprived of their trade- union rights joking, over their full dinner pails, that at least under Hitler there was no more freedom to starve. “Gemeinnutz vor Eigennutz!” (The Common Interest before Self!) was a popular Nazi slogan in those days, and though many a party leader, Goering above all, was secretly enriching himself and the profits of business were mounting, there was no doubt that the masses were taken in by the new “national socialism” which ostensibly put the welfare of the community above one’s personal gain.”
(William Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, A History of Nazi Germany, 2011)

GERMAN BUSINESSMEN "WELCOMED HITLER’S REGIME SO ENTHUSIASTICALLY BECAUSE THEY EXPECTED IT TO DESTROY ORGANIZED LABOR AND ALLOW AN ENTREPRENEUR TO PRACTICE UNTRAMMELED FREE ENTERPRISE."
“His invention of the so-called “Mefo” bills was a good example. These were simply bills created by the Reichsbank and guaranteed by the State and used to pay armament manufacturers. The bills were accepted by all German banks and ultimately discounted by the Reichsbank. Since they appeared neither in the published statements of the national bank nor in the government’s budget they helped maintain secrecy as to the extent of Germany’s rearmament. From 1935 to 1938 they were used exclusively to finance rearmament and amounted to a total of twelve billion marks. In explaining them once to Hitler, Count Schwerin von Krosigk, the harassed Minister of Finance, remarked that they were merely a way of “printing money.” In September 1936, with the inauguration of the Four-Year Plan under the iron control of Goering, who replaced Schacht as economic dictator though he was almost as ignorant of business as was Hitler, Germany went over to a total war economy. The purpose of the plan was to make Germany self- sufficient in four years, so that a wartime blockade would not stifle it. Imports were reduced to a bare minimum, severe price and wage controls were introduced, dividends restricted to 6 per cent, great factories set up to make synthetic rubber, textiles, fuel and other products from Germany’s own sources of raw materials, and a giant Hermann Goering Works established to make steel out of the local low-grade ore. In short, the German economy was mobilized for war, and businessmen, though their profits soared, became mere cogs in a war machine, their work circumscribed by so many restrictions, by so many forms to fill out, that Dr. Funk, who succeeded Schacht in 1937 as Minister of Economics and in 1939 as president of the Reichsbank, was forced to admit ruefully that “official communications now make up more than one half of a German manufacturer’s entire correspondence” and that “Germany’s export trade involves 40,000 separate transactions daily; yet for a single transaction as many as forty different forms must be filled out.” Buried under mountains of red tape, directed by the State as to what they could produce, how much and at what price, burdened by increasing taxation and milked by steep and never ending “special contributions” to the party, the businessmen, who had welcomed Hitler’s regime so enthusiastically because they expected it to destroy organized labor and allow an entrepreneur to practice untrammeled free enterprise, became greatly disillusioned. One of them was Fritz Thyssen, one of the earliest and biggest contributors to the party. Fleeing Germany at the outbreak of the war, he recognized that the “Nazi regime has ruined German industry.” And to all he met abroad he proclaimed, “What a fool [Dummkopf] I was!”
(William Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, A History of Nazi Germany, 2011)

MODERN MARKET FORCES HAVE RESHAPED OUR RELATIONSHIP WITH FOOD, LEADING TO A PARADOXICAL STATE OF ANXIETY AND UNFREEDOM
“Because we have no […] culture of food in America almost every question about eating is up for grabs. Fats or carbs? Three squares or continuous grazing? Raw or cooked? Organic or industrial? Veg or vegan? Meat or mock meat? Foods of astounding novelty fill the shelves of our supermarket, and the line between a food and a "nutritional supplement" has fogged to the point where people make meals of protein bars and shakes. Consuming these neo-pseudo-foods alone in our cars, we have become a nation of antinomian eaters, each of us struggling to work out our dietary salvation on our own. Is it any wonder Americans suffer from so many eating disorders? In the absence of any lasting consensus about what and how and where and when to eat, the omnivore's dilemma has returned to America with an almost atavistic force.
This situation suits the food industry just fine, of course. The more anxious we are about eating, the more vulnerable we are to the seductions of the marketer and the expert's advice. Food marketing in particular thrives on dietary instability and so tends to exacerbate it. Since it's difficult to sell more food to such a well-fed population (though not, as we're discovering, impossible), food companies put their efforts into grabbing market share by introducing new kinds of highly processed foods, which have the virtue of being both highly profitable and infinitely adaptable. Sold under the banner of "convenience," these processed foods are frequently designed to create whole new eating occasions, such as in the bus on the way to school (the protein bar or Pop-Tart) or in the car on the way to work (Campbell's recently introduced a onehanded microwaveable microchunked soup in a container designed to fit a car's cup holder).
The success of food marketers in exploiting shifting eating patterns and nutritional fashions has a steep cost. Getting us to change how we eat over and over again tends to undermine the various social structures that surround and steady our eating, institutions like the family dinner, for example, or taboos on snacking between meals and eating alone. In their relentless pursuit of new markets, food companies (with some crucial help from the microwave oven, which made "cooking" something even small children could do) have broken Mom's hold over the American menu by marketing to every conceivable demographic—and especially to children.
A vice president of marketing at General Mills once painted for me a picture of the state of the American family dinner, courtesy of video cameras that the company's consulting anthropologists paid families to let them install in the ceiling above the kitchen and dining room tables. Mom, perhaps feeling sentimental about the dinners of her childhood, still prepares a dish and a salad that she usually winds up eating by herself. Meanwhile, the kids, and Dad, too, if he's around, each fix something different for themselves, because Dad's on a low-carb diet, the teenager's become a vegetarian, and the eight-year-old is on a strict ration of pizza that the shrink says it's best to indulge (lest she develop eating disorders later on in life) . So over the course of a half hour or so each family member roams into the kitchen, removes a single-portion entree from the freezer, and zaps it in the microwave. (Many of these entrees have been helpfully designed to be safely "cooked" by an eight year-old.) After the sound of the beep each diner brings his microwaveable dish to the dining room table, where he or she may or may not cross paths with another family member at the table for a few minutes. Families who eat this way are among the 47 percent of Americans who report to pollsters that they still sit down to a family meal every night.”
(Michael Polla, The Omnivores Dilemma, 2006)

THE PIVOTAL MOMENT OF DORIAN'S MORAL TRANSFORMATION, OR RATHER, HIS DECISION TO ABANDON A MORAL LIFE. At thismoment it seems to Dorian Gray that there is no trade off to make between freedom and largess.
“He felt that the time had really come for making his choice. Or had his choice already been made? Yes, life had decided that for him—life, and his own infinite curiosity about life. Eternal youth, infinite passion, pleasures subtle and secret, wild joys and wilder sins—he was to have all these things. The portrait was to bear the burden of his shame: that was all.
A feeling of pain crept over him as he thought of the desecration that was in store for the fair face on the canvas. Once, in boyish mockery of Narcissus, he had kissed, or feigned to kiss, those painted lips that now smiled so cruelly at him. Morning after morning he had sat before the portrait wondering at its beauty, almost enamoured of it, as it seemed to him at times. Was it to alter now with every mood to which he yielded? Was it to become a monstrous and loathsome thing, to be hidden away in a locked room, to be shut out from the sunlight that had so often touched to brighter gold the waving wonder of its hair? The pity of it! the pity of it!
For a moment, he thought of praying that the horrible sympathy that existed between him and the picture might cease. It had changed in answer to a prayer; perhaps in answer to a prayer it might remain unchanged. And yet, who, that knew anything about life, would surrender the chance of remaining always young, however fantastic that chance might be, or with what fateful consequences it might be fraught?” […]
For there would be a real pleasure in watching it. He would be able to follow his mind into its secret places. This portrait would be to him the most magical of mirrors. As it had revealed to him his own body, so it would reveal to him his own soul. And when winter came upon it, he would still be standing where spring trembles on the verge of summer. When the blood crept from its face, and left behind a pallid mask of chalk with leaden eyes, he would keep the glamour of boyhood. Not one blossom of his loveliness would ever fade. Not one pulse of his life would ever weaken. Like the gods of the Greeks, he would be strong, and fleet, and joyous. What did it matter what happened to the colouredimage on the canvas? He would be safe. That was everything.
(Oscar Wilde, The Picture of Dorian Gray, 1890)

MARATHE'S CRITIQUE IS THAT A SOCIETY TRAINED ONLY TO "MAXIMIZE PLEASURE, MINIMIZE DISPLEASURE" WILL, WHEN FACED WITH THE ULTIMATE PLEASURE, WILLINGLY CHOOSE IT EVEN IF IT MEANS DEATH.
'Well. We both crave badly the entire recyclable Single-Serving can of this Habitant.' Marathe sniffed. Tn my mind I know it is true that I must not simply make a bonking of your head and take away the soup, because my overall happiness of pleasure of the long term needs a community of "rien de bonk."174 But this is the long term, Steeply. This is down the road of my happiness, this respecting of you. How do I calculate this distant road of long term into my action of this moment, now, with our dead comrade clutching the soup and both of us with spittle on our chins as we regard the soup? My question is trying to say: if the most pleasure right now, en ce moment, is in the whole serving of Habitant, how is my self able to put aside this moment's desire to make bonk on you 
and take this soup? How am I able to think past this soup to the future of soup down my road?' 
'In other words delayed gratification.' 
'Good. This is well. Delayed gratification. How is my U.S.A. type able in my mind to calculate my long-term overall pleasure, then decide to sacrifice this intense soup-craving of this moment to the long term and overall?' 
Steeply sent out two hard tusks of smoke from the nostrils of his nose. His expression was one of patience together with polite impatience. 'I think it's called simply being a mature and adult American instead of a childish and immature American. A term we might use might be "enlightened self-interest." 
'D'éclaisant.' 
Steeply, he did not smile back. 'Enlightened. For example your example from before. The little kid who'll eat candy all day because it's what tastes best at each individual moment.' 
'Even if he knows inside his mind that it will hurt his stomach and rot his little fangs.' 
'Teeth,' Steeply corrected. 'But see that here it can't be a Fascist matter of screaming at the kid or giving him electric shocks each time he overindulges in candy. You can't induce a moral sensibility the same way you'd train a rat. The kid has to learn by his own experience how to learn to balance the short- and long-term pursuit of what he wants.' 
'He must be freely enlightened to self.' 
'This is the crux of the educational system you find so appalling. Not to teach what to desire. To teach how to be free. To teach how to make knowledgeable choices about pleasure and delay and the kid's overall down-the-road maximal interests.' 
Marathe farted mildly into his cushion, nodding as if with thought. 
'And I know what you'll say,' Steeply said, 'and no, the system isn't perfect. There is greed, there is crime, there are drugs and cruelty and ruin and infidelity and divorce and suicide. Murder.' 
'To bonk the head.' 
Steeply again dug at this strap. He would snap open the purse and then pause to move the brassiere's tight strap and then dig into the purse, which sounded femininely full and cluttered. He said 'But this is just the price. This is the price of the free pursuit. Not everybody learns it in childhood, how to balance his interests.' 
Marathe tried to envision thin men with horn-rim spectacles and natural-shoulder sportcoats or white coats of the laboratory, carefully packing with clutter the purse of a field-operative to create the female effect. Now Steeply had his pack of Flanderfumes cigarettes and his finger of pinkie in the pack's hole, evidently trying to gauge how many were left. Venus was low in the northeast rim. When Marathe's wife was born as an infant without a skull, there had been at first suspicion that the cause was that her parents smoked cigarettes as a habit. The light of the stars and moon had become sullen. The moon had not yet set. It seemed as if sometimes the bonfire of youthful mafficking was there and then when the eyes were averted in the next moment it was not there. Time was passing in a silence. Steeply was using a nail to extract slowly one of the cigarettes. Marathe, as a small child and with legs, had always disliked persons who made comments about how much others smoked. Steeply now had learned here just 
how he must stand to keep the match alive. Some wind had died down, but there were scattered chill gusts that it seemed came from nowhere. Marathe sniffed so deeply that it became a sigh. The struck match sounded loud; there was no echo. 
Marathe sniffed again and said: 
'But of these types of your persons — the different types, the mature who see down the road, the puerile type that eats the candy and soup in the moment only. Entre nous, here on this shelf, Hugh Steeply: which do you think describes the U.S.A. of O.N.A.N. and the Great Convexity, this U.S.A. you feel pain that others might wish to harm?' Hands which shake out matches act always as if they are burned, this motion of snapping. Marathe sniffed. 'Are you understanding? I am asking between only us. How could it be that A.F.R. malice could hurt all of the U.S.A. culture by making available something as momentary and free as the choice to view only this one Entertainment? You know there can be no forcing to watch a thing. If we disseminate the samizdat, the choice will be free, no? Free from force, no? Yes? Freely chosen?' 
M. Hugh Steeply of B.S.S. was standing then with his weight on one hip and looked his most female when he smoked, with his elbow in his arm and the hand to his mouth and the back of this hand to Marathe, a type of fussy ennui that reminded Marathe of women in hats and padded shoulders in black-and-white films, smoking. Marathe said: 
'You believe we are underestimating to see all you as selfish, decadent. But the question has been raised: are we cells of Canada alone in this view? Aren't you afraid, you of your government and gendarmes? If not, your B.S.S., why work so hard to prevent dissemination? Why make a simple Entertainment, no matter how seducing its pleasures, a samizdat and forbidden in the first place, if you do not fear so many U.S.A.s cannot make the enlightened choices?' 
This now was the closest large Steeply had come, to stand over Marathe to look down, looming. The rising astral body Venus lit his left side of the face to the color of pallid cheese. 'Get real. The Entertainment isn't candy or beer. Look at Boston just now. You can't compare this kind of insidious enslaving process to your little cases of sugar and soup.' 
Marathe smiled bleakly into the chiaroscuro flesh of this round and hairless U.S.A. face. 'Perhaps the facts are true, after the first watching: that then there seems to be no choice. But to decide to be this pleasurably entertained in the first place. This is still a choice, no? Sacred to the viewing self, and free? No? Yes?' 
(David Foster Wallace, Infinite Jest, 1996)

THE ULTIMATE FORM OF "LARGESS" OR "COMFORT": DIRECT, UNMEDIATED, AND ALL-CONSUMING PLEASURE DELIVERED BY AN ELECTRODE TO THE BRAIN'S "DEPARTMENT OF EUPHORIA."
“'I can't remember if I read about it or heard a lecture or what. The implantation was a pretty inexact science. It was all experimental. A whole lot of electrodes had to be implanted in an incredibly small area in the temporal lobe to hope to find the nerve-terminals that involved epileptic seizures, and it was trial and error, stimulating each electrode and checking the reaction.' 
'Temporal lobes of the brain,' Marathe said. 
'What happened was that Olders and the Canadian neuroscientists happened to find, during all the trial and error, that firing certain electrodes in certain parts of the lobes gave the brain intense feelings of pleasure.' Steeply looked back over his shoulder at Marathe. 'I mean we're talking about intense pleasure, Rémy. I'm remembering Olders called these little strips of stimulatable pleasure-tissue p-terminals.' 
' "P" wishing to mean "the pleasure." 
'And that their location seemed maddeningly inexact and unpredictable, even within brains of the same species — a p-terminal'd turn out to be right up next to some other neuron whose stimulation would cause pain, or hunger, or God knows what.' 
'The human brain is very dense; it is the truth.' 
'The whole point is they weren't doing it on humans yet. It was regarded as radically experimental. They used animals and animal-lobes. But soon the pleasure-stimulation phenomenon was its own separate radical experiment, while the second-string neuro-team stuck with the epileptic animals. Older — or Elder, some Anglo-Canadian name — headed the team to map these what he called quote "Rivers of Reward," the p-terminals in the lobes.' 
Marathe idly felt at the little pills of cotton in his windbreaker's cotton pockets, pleasantly nodding. 'An experimental program of Canada, you stated.' 
'I even remember. The Brandon Psychiatric Center.' 
Marathe pretended to cough in the recognition of this. 'This is a mental hospital. The far north of Manitoba. Forbidding wastelands. The center of nothing.' 
'Because they were theorizing that these quote "rivers" or terminals were also the brain's receptors for things like beta-endorphins, L-dopa, Q-dopa, serotonin, all the 
various neurotransmitters of pleasure.' 
'The Department of Euphoria, so to speak, within the human brain.' 
There was no hint or suggestion yet of dawn or light. 
'But not humans yet,' Steeply said. 'Older's earliest subject were rats, and the results were apparently sobering. The Nu— the Canadians found that if they rigged an auto-stimulation lever, the rat would press the lever to stimulate his p-terminal over and over, thousands of times an hour, over and over, ignoring food and female rats in heat, completely fixated on the lever's stimulation, day and night, stopping only when the rat finally died of dehydration or simple fatigue.' 
Marathe said 'Not of the pleasure itself, however.' 
'I think dehydration. I'm fuzzy on just what the rat died of.' 
Marathe shrugged. 'But the envy of all experimental rats everywhere, this rat, I think.' 
'Then likewise implantations and levers for cats, dogs, swine, monkeys, primates, even a dolphin.' 
'Up the evolving scale, p-terminals for each. Each died?' 
'Eventually,' Steeply said, 'or else they had to be lobotomized. Because I remember even if the pleasure-electrode was removed, the stimulation-lever removed, the subject'd run around pressing anything that could be pressed or flipped, trying to get one more jolt.' 
'The dolphin, probably it swam about and did this, I think.' 
'You seem amused by this, Rémy. This was totally a Canadian show, this little neuroelectric adventure.' 
'I am amused while you make a way toward your point so slowly.' 
'Because then eventually Elder and company of course wanted to try human subjects, to see whether the human lobe had p-terminals and so on; and because of the sobering consequences for the subject-animals in the program they couldn't legally use prisoners or patients, they had to try to secure volunteers.' 
'Because of a risk,' Marathe said. 
'The whole thing was apparently a nightmare of Canadian legalities and statutes.' 
Marathe pursed the lips: 'I have doubts in my mind: Ottawa could easily have asked your then CIA for, what is the term, "Persons of Expendability" from Southeast Asia or Negroes, the subjects expended for your inspiring U.S.A.'s MK-Ultra.'198 
Steeply elected ignoring this, rummaging in the purse. 'But what apparently happened was that somehow word of the p-terminal discovery and experiments had gotten out up in Manitoba — some low-level worker at Brandon had broken security and leaked word.' 
'Very little else to do in northern Manitoba besides leaking and gossiping.' 
'...And suddenly the neuro-team at Brandon pull in to work one day and find human volunteers lining up literally around the block outside the place, able-bodied and I should remember to recall mostly young Canadians, lining up and literally trampling each other in their desire to sign up as volunteers for p-terminal-electrode implantation and stimulation.' 
'In full knowledge of the rat's and dolphin's death, from pressing the lever.' 
Marathe's father had always assigned it to Rémy, his youngest, to go first inside some 
public restaurant or shop to check for the presence of a microwave or GC-type of transmitter. Of special concerns were stores with instruments for thwarting a shoplifter, the shrieking instruments at doors.”
(David Foster Wallace, Infinite Jest, 1996)

THE ULTIMATE FORM OF "LARGESS" OR "COMFORT": DIRECT, UNMEDIATED, AND ALL-CONSUMING PLEASURE DELIVERED BY AN ELECTRODE TO THE BRAIN'S "DEPARTMENT OF EUPHORIA." (Continued 1)
“Steeply said 'And of course this eagerness for implantation put a whole new disturbing spin on the study of human pleasure and behavior, and a whole new Brandon Hospital team was hastily assembled to study the psych-profiles of all these people willing to trample one another to undergo invasive brain surgery and foreign-object implantation —' 
'To become some crazed rats.' 
'— All just for the chance at this kind of pleasure, and the M.M.P.I.s and Millon's and Approception tests on all these hordes of prospective volunteers — the hordes were told it was part of the screening — the scores came out fascinatingly, chillingly average, normal.' 
'In other words not any deviants.' 
'Nonabnormal along every axis they could see. Just regular young people — Canadian young people.' 
'Volunteering for fatal addiction to the electrical pleasure.' 
'But Rémy, apparently the purest, most refined pleasure imaginable. The neural distillate of, say, orgasm, religious enlightenment, ecstatic drugs, shiatsu, a crackling fire on a winter night — the sum of all possible pleasures refined into pure current and deliverable at the flip of a hand-held lever. Thousands of times an hour, at will.' 
Marathe gave him a bland look. 
Steeply examined a cuticle. 'By free choice, of course.' 
Marathe assumed an expression that lampooned a dullard's hard thought. 'Thus, but how long before these leaks and rumors of p-terminals reach the Ottawa of government and public weal, for Canada's government reacts with horror at the prospect of this.' 
'Oh, and not just Ottawa,' Steeply said. 'You can see the implications if a technology like Elder's really became available. I know Ottawa informed Turner, Bush, Casey, whoever it was at the time, and everyone at Langley bit their knuckle in horror.' 
'The CIA chewed a hand?' 
'Because surely you can see the implications for any industrialized, market-driven, high-discretionary-spending society.' 
'But it would be illegalized,' Marathe said, noting to remember the various routines of movements Steeply made for keeping warm. 
'Stop with the babe-in-woods charade,' Steeply said. 'There was still the prospect of an underground market exponentially more pernicious than narcotics or LSD. The electrode-and-lever technology looked expensive at the time, but it was easy to foresee enormous widespread demand bringing it down to where electrodes'd be no more exotic than syringes.' 
'But yes, but surgery, this would be a different matter to implant.' 
'Plenty of surgeons were already willing to perform illegal procedures. Abortions. Electric penile implants.' 
'The MK-Ultra surgeries.' 
Steeply laughed without mirth. 'Or off-the-record amputations for daring young train-
cultists, no?' 
Marathe blew just one nostril of his nose. This was the Québecois way: one of the nostrils at a time. Marathe's father's generation, they had used to bend and blow the one nostril out into the gutter in the street. 
Steeply said 'Picture millions of average nonabnormal North Americans, all implanted with Briggs electrodes, all with electronic access to their own personal p-terminals, never leaving home, thumbing their personal stimulation levers over and over.' 
'Lying upon their divans. Ignoring females in rutting. Having rivers of reward without earning reward.' 
'Bug-eyed, drooling, moaning, trembling, incontinent, dehydrated. Not working, not consuming, not interacting or taking part in community life. Finally pitching forward from sheer —' 
Marathe said 'Giving away their souls and lives for p-terminal stimulation, you are saying.' 
'You can maybe see the analogy,' Steeply said, over the shoulders to smile in a wry way. 'In Canada, my friend, this was.' 
Marathe made a very slight version of his rotary motion of impatience: 'From the A.D. 1970s of time. This never has come to be. There would have been no development of the Happy Patch ...' 
'We both went in. Both our nations.' 
Tn secret.' 
'Ottawa first cutting the Brandon program's funding, which Turner or Casey or whoever howled at — our old CIA wanted the procedure developed and perfected, then Classified — military use or something.' 
Marathe said 'But the civilian guardians of the weal of the public felt differently.' 
'I think I'm remembering Carter was President. Both our combined nations made it a Security priority, shutting it down. Our old N.S.A., your old C7 with the R.C.M.P.s.' 
'Bright red jackets and hats with wide brims. In the 1970s still on horses.' 
Steeply held his mouth of the purse half up to the faint lights of Tucson, peering for something. 'I recall they went in directly. As in guns drawn. Boomed the doors. Dismantled the labs. Mercy-killed dolphins and goats. Olders disappeared somewhere.' 
Marathe's slow circular gesture. 'Your point finally is Canadians also, we would choose dying for this, the total pleasure of a passive goat.'
(David Foster Wallace, Infinite Jest, 1996)

E2.1.A.4.2.b. The Disappearance of Freedom's Purpose
This sub-topic will explore the idea that freedom loses its meaning and value when a society no longer knows what to do with it, or for what higher purpose it should be used.

E2.1.A.4.2.b.i. The Collapse of a Higher Purpose: The "landmark values," "objective norms," and "utopias" that once gave freedom its direction have failed or died, leaving a void.

E2.1.A.4.2.b.i_REF1_CUR A_Luis Camnitzer_Hospicio de utopias fallidas [Hospice of failed utopias]_ 2018

How can we free ourselves from our illusions and beliefs? What about utopia, which is the desire for freedom but lacks a sense of reality?

The "Failed Utopia": The artwork's title, Hospice of failed utopias, is the central clue. A utopia represents a grand, ultimate purpose for which one might desire and use freedom. A "hospice" for these failed ideals is a place where purpose goes to die, where the great "why" of freedom withers away.

Visualizing the Loss of Purpose: The image powerfully visualizes this concept. The stark, institutional room represents a mundane, inescapable reality. The beautiful sky-portal represents the "failed utopia"—a vision of absolute freedom that is ultimately just an image, an illusion, a beautiful but unreachable destination. Freedom loses its meaning when its purpose is revealed to be an inaccessible dream on a wall.

E2.1.A.4.2.b.i_REF2_PH Hélio Fervenza, Desencontro, Planos de fuga [Rencontre ratée, Plan de fuite] Application d'adhésifs , 2018

"We must understand the paradoxical nature of the phrase 'God is dead.' It tells us something impossible: the immortal being is dead. To understand this aphorism, we must remove the phrase from its strictly theological context. It does not primarily have a religious meaning. What Nietzsche refers to with the word 'God' is not only the divinity that is the object of belief. God is an image. Nietzsche almost always expresses himself imaginatively, brilliantly playing with words. "God" means something with philosophical depth. Why did he choose this word? God represents the sacred: what we revere; what we hold most precious as believers; what constitutes the indisputable, objective norm of existence. It is precisely this that Nietzsche borrows from the notion of God to apply to the whole of human life. He refers to those things that are sacred and fundamental beliefs that govern human life as it is organized in the West. He tells us that what is sacred and untouchable—what he technically calls "values" when addressing philosophers—is in crisis and losing its status as values, norms, and references". 
(Patrick Woltering)
 In paragraph 125 of The Gay Science, the madman announces the death of God in the marketplace and says that he has come too early, given his contemporaries' incomprehension. He means that the conditions of life, the values, beliefs, and truths to which a civilization has become attached, are changing slowly and with great inertia. Between Heraclitus and Nietzsche, no other philosophers have questioned the notion of truth more. In Beyond Good and Evil, Nietzsche says that Christianity is Platonism for the people. Perhaps only Dostoevsky, shortly before Nietzsche in The Brothers Karamazov, questioned the notion of truth with his "If God is dead, everything is permitted!" to justify the murder of the father. For Nietzsche, this passive, nihilistic interpretation, born of despair in the wake of the death of God, is that of those who have not understood—those confronted by the madman in The Gay Science. According to Nietzsche, our norms are choices—probably poorly chosen values. He does not say that we can live without norms but rather that we must choose better ones. There is no life possible without a set of values. Unfortunately, passive nihilism took hold at the beginning of the 20th century. According to Nietzsche, nihilism occurs when we cease to believe in values. Philosophers react with joy to this realization, embracing an active nihilism that will create new values conducive to fulfilling life. Nietzsche claimed that his ability to make this diagnosis was not due to his personal genius, but rather to the evolution of values throughout history that brought him to the right moment. The values of Platonism, which led us to believe that goodness is imperceptible and lifeless, crumbled during Nietzsche's time. Nietzsche is not a relativist because he does not claim that all values are equal or that everyone has their own. Rather, he argues that a culture chooses values that become conditions of life, which its members respect. Unfortunately, values are often imposed by the strongest and are not necessarily the best. There is no theoretical standard for comparing values; however, there is a hierarchy of values, and some are more conducive to life. For example, consider the Greek miracle during the era of Pre-Socratic tragedy, which valued life. See also the preface of Human, All Too Human (1886), sections 6 and 7. The fact that fanaticism still proliferates today, 150 years after Nietzsche, confirms the despair predicted by those experiencing the collapse of values in the form of passive nihilism. Are we in a society where scientists and philosophers are creating new values for our time? We are probably still in the period of nihilism. See also Human, All Too Human, 25."
(Patrick Wotling, in the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture September 10, 2019)

Listen to the Podcast in French:
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/quatre-malentendus-nietzscheens-24-dieu-est-mort

E2.1.A.4.2.b.ii. The Liberated Society Adrift: Freedom From, Not For - Society  has achieved liberation from constraints (like labor or social control) but "no longer knows what to do with it."

E2.1.A.4.2.b.ii_REF1_LIT "Man refuses to acknowledge his own God-given rights: he demands deliverance or salvation by and through an intermediary; he seeks guides, counselors, leaders, systems, rituals. He looks for solutions which are in his own breast. He puts learning above wisdom, power above the art of discrimination. But above all, he refuses to work for his own liberation, pretending that first “the world “ must be liberated. [...]
Pretending that what they most ardently wish is to extricate themselves from the cruel difficulties in which they find themselves, what they really adore is to make everything difficult, obscure and capable of realization only in a distant future. That their difficulties are of their own making is the last thing they will admit usually. [...]
Reality, if for one moment they allow themselves to be persuaded it exists - in everyday life is always referred to as “harsh” reality. It is spoken of as that which stands opposed to divine reality, or, we might say, a soft, hidden paradise. The hope that we may one day awaken to a condition of life utterly different from that which we experience daily makes men willing victims of every form of tyranny and suppression. Man is stultified by hope and fear. The myth which he lives from day to day is the myth that he may one day escape from the prison which he has created for himself and which he attributes to the machinations of others. Every true hero has made reality his own. In liberating himself, the hero explodes the myth which binds us to past and future. This is the very essence of myth – that it veils the wondrous here and now."
(Henry Miller, The books in my life, 1952)

E2.1.A.4.2.b.ii_REF_PH "Man cannot be free if he does not know that he is subject to necessity, because his freedom is always won in his never wholly successful attempts to liberate himself from necessity. And while it may be true that his strongest impulse toward this liberation comes from his "repugnance to futility," it is also likely that the impulse may grow weaker as this "futility" appears easier, as it requires less effort. [...]
The emancipation of labor and the concomitant emancipation of the laboring classes from oppression and exploitation certainly meant progress in the direction of non-violence. It is much less certain that it was also progress in the direction of freedom. [...]
The modern age has carried with it a theoretical glorification of labor and has resulted in a factual transformation of the whole of society into a laboring society. The fulfilment of the wish, therefore, like the fulfilment of wishes in fairy tales, comes at a moment when it can only be self-defeating. It is a society of laborers which is about to be liberated from the fetters of labor, and this society does no longer know of those other higher and more meaningful activities for the sake of which this freedom would deserve to be won. Within this society, which is egalitarian because this is labor's way of making men live together, there is no class left, no aristocracy of either a political or spiritual nature from which a restoration of the other capacities of man could start anew. Even presidents, kings, and prime ministers think of their offices in terms of a job necessary for the life of society, and among the intellectuals, only solitary individuals are left who consider what they are doing in terms of work and not in terms of making a living. What we are confronted with is the prospect of a society of laborers without labor, that is, without the only activity left to them. Surely, nothing could be worse."
(Hannan Arendt, The Human Condition, 1958)

E2.1.A.4.2.b.iiREF3_LIT THE STORY OF STEEPLY'S FATHER IS A POWERFUL EXAMPLE OF A LIFE THAT HAS WITHERED INTO A PASSIVE, OBSESSIVE STATE. HE HAS RETREATED FROM THE WORLD INTO HIS CHAIR, ENDLESSLY CONSUMING MEDIA, HAVING LOST ALL OTHER FUNCTIONS.
“The old man'd been trying to correspond with different past and present "M*A*S*H" personas in letters the family never saw get mailed but whose content, the attorneys said, raised quote grave concern and could quote constitute grounds for strenuous legal action.' Steeply raised the foot to look, his face in pain. He said, 'Then the program's final episode ran. Late autumn of B.S. 1983.1 was on an ROTC marching-band trip to 
Fort Ticonderoga. My kid sister, who'd by this time left home herself, and who could blame the kid, she reported that the Mumkinsky was talking very casually and uncomplainingly of the old man's now refusing to leave his den.' 
'This, the final enclosing isolation of obsession.' 
Steeply looked over his shoulder on one awkward foot to look slightly at Marathe. 'As in even to go to the bathroom, now, the not leaving.' 
'Your mother's prescriptions prevented some episodes of great anxiety, I think.' 
'He'd gotten a special A.C.D.C. cable hook-up that brought in extra syndication. When reruns weren't running, the video-magnetic tapes ran constantly. He was haggard and spectral and his easy chair was all but unrecognizable. Cheery Oil was keeping him on the books until he could get his thirty years in at age sixty. My kid sister and I started reluctantly discussing intervening on Mummykins to intervene on the old man and force him to see somebody.' 
'Yourselves, you could not reach him.' 
'He died just before his birthday. He died in his easy chair, set at full Recline, watching an episode in which Alda's Hawkeye can't stop sleepwalking and fears he's going out of his fucking mind until a professional military therapist reassures him, I remember.' 
'Me, I too have seen this episode rerunning, in my childhood.' 
'All I can recall of it is the army professional telling Alda not to worry, that if he was truly crazy he'd sleep like a newborn, as did the notorious Burns-slash-Linville.' 
'The program's character of Burns slept exceptionally well, I remember.' 
'His secret book's manuscript filled scores of notebooks. This is what the notebooks turned out to be. One closet in the den had to be forced open. All these notebooks tumbled out. The whole thing was written in a kind of medical-slash-military-looking code, though, indecipherable — Sis and her first husband and I spent some time trying to decode them. After his death in the chair.' 
'His unbalance of temptation cost him life. An otherwise harmless U.S.A. broadcast television program took his life, because of the consuming obsession. This is your anecdote.' 
'No. It was a transmural infarction. Blew out a whole ventricle. His whole family had a history: the heart. The pathologist said it was amazing he'd lasted this long.' 
Marathe shrugged. 'The obsessed frequently endure.' 
Steeply shook the head. 'It must have been hell on the poor old Mumkinsky.' 
'She never complained, however.' 
Already the sun was up and pulsing. Light ran over everything in a sickening yellow way like gravy. All birds and living animals had been silenced, stunned already by heat, and the site's bright loaders had not yet been started in movement. All was calm. All was bright. Steeply's shadow on the shelf was squat and blunt, already shorter than the living figure of Steeply himself, who was leaning outward to try to find a spot far below to litter with a crumpled Belgian packing with one prayed no more finally to smoke. 
Marathe took his watch from out of the windbreaker's pocket. 
Steeply shrugged. 'I think you're right, that it's part of both the horror and the pull. When I'm east and thinking of Flatto's lab and I sort of look up and find myself tempted.' 
'About the Entertainment of now.' 
'And I kind of half-picture Hank Hoyne in the old man's old recliner, hunched and scribbling feverishly.' 
'In military coding.' 
'His eyes, they got like that, too, the old man's, like Hoyne's. Periodically.' 
Heat began to shimmer, as well, off the lionhide floor of a desert. The mesquite and cactus wobbled, and Tucson AZ resumed once more the appearance of the mirage, as it had appeared when Marathe had first arrived and found his shadow so entrancing in its size and reach. The sun of A.M. had no radial knives of light. It appeared brutal and businesslike and harmful to look upon. Marathe allowed himself a few diverting seconds of watching the Mountains of the Rincons' widening shadows melt slowly backward into the base of the Mountains of the Rincons. Steeply hawked and spat, still holding the last crumpled pack of Flanderfumes. 
'My time is sharply finite to remain.' Marathe said this. Every change of his postures brought small squeaks of leather and metal. 'I would feel gratitude if you departed first.' 
Steeply figured Marathe wanted him to have no idea how he got up and down, in and out. To no real purpose; a personal point of pride. Steeply squatted for adjusting the straps of his high heels. His prostheses were still not quite aligned. He spoke with the faintly breathless quality of large men trying to bend: 
'Well. Rémy, but I don't think Dick Willis's "empty of intent" quite does it. Captures it. The eye-factor. Hoyne, the Arab internist. The old man. Not for eyes like that.' 
'You would say it does not capture these eyes' expression.' 
Looking up while squatting, this made Steeply's neck appear thick. He stared past Marathe, at the shale. He said 'The expressions seem more like — fuck, how to say it. Fuck,' Steeply said in concentration. 
'Petrified,' Marathe said. 'Ossified. Inanimate.' 
'No. Not inanimate. More like the opposite. More as if... stuck in some way.' 
Marathe's neck itself was stiff from so much time looking out and down from a height. 'What is it this wishes here to mean? Glued?' 
Steeply was doing something to a toenail's cracked polish. 'Stuck. Fixed. Held. Trapped. As in trapped in some sort of middle. Between two things. Pulled apart in different directions.' 
Marathe's eyes searched the sky, which this was already too light blue for his pleasure, filmed with a sort of eggy plura of heat. 'Meaning between different cravings of great intensity, this.' 
'Not even cravings so much. Emptier than that. As if he were stuck wondering. As if there was something he'd forgotten.' 
'Misplaced. Lost.' 
'Misplaced.' 
'Lost.' 
'Misplaced.' 
'As you wish.'
(David Foster Wallace, Infinite Jest, 1996)

E2.1.A.4.2.b.ii_REF4_LIT TO ESCAPE THE VACUUM OF HIS PURPOSELESS LIFE, DON QUIXOTE IMMERSES HIMSELF COMPLETELY IN A WORLD OF FICTION—BOOKS OF CHIVALRY. THESE STORIES PROVIDE HIM WITH THE "GREATER AND MORE ABSORBING THOUGHTS" AND THE GRAND SENSE OF PURPOSE THAT HIS REAL LIFE LACKS.
“WHICH TREATS OF THE CHARACTER AND PURSUITS OF THE FAMOUS GENTLEMAN DON
QUIXOTE OF LA MANCHA
In a village of La Mancha, the name of which I have no desire to call to mind, there lived not long since one of those gentlemen that keep a lance in the lance-rack, an old buckler, a lean hack, and a greyhound for coursing. An olla of rather more beef than mutton, a salad on most nights, scraps on Saturdays, lentils on Fridays, and a pigeon or so extra on Sundays, made away with three-quarters of his income. The rest of it went in a doublet of fine cloth and velvet breeches and shoes to match for holidays, while on week-days he made a brave figure in his best homespun. He had in his house a housekeeper past forty, a niece under twenty, and a lad for the field and market-place, who used to saddle the hack as well as handle the bill-hook. The age of this gentleman of ours was bordering on fifty; he was of a hardy habit, spare, gaunt-featured, a very early riser and a great sportsman. They will have it his surname was Quixada or Quesada (for here there is some difference of opinion among the authors who write on the subject), although from reasonable conjectures it seems plain that he was called Quexana. This, however, is of but little importance to our tale; it will be enough not to stray a hair’s breadth from the truth in the telling of it.
You must know, then, that the above-named gentleman whenever he was at leisure (which was mostly all the year round) gave himself up to reading books of chivalry with such ardour and avidity that he almost entirely neglected the pursuit of his field-sports, and even the management of his property; and to such a pitch did his eagerness and infatuation go that he sold many an acre of tillageland to buy books of chivalry to read, and brought home as many of them as he could get. But of all there were none he liked so well as those of the famous Feliciano de Silva’s composition, for their lucidity of style and complicated conceits were as pearls in his sight, particularly when in his reading he came upon courtships and cartels, where he often found passages like “the reason of the unreason with which my reason is afflicted so weakens my reason that with reason I murmur at your beauty;” or again, “the high heavens, that of your divinity divinely fortify you with the stars, render you deserving of the desert your greatness deserves.” Over conceits of this sort the poor gentleman lost his wits, and used to lie awake striving to understand them and worm the meaning out of them; what Aristotle himself could not have made out or extracted had he come to life again for that special purpose. He was not at all easy about the wounds which Don Belianis gave and took, because it seemed to him that, great as were the surgeons who had cured him, he must have had his face and body covered all over withseams and scars. He commended, however, the author’s way of ending his book with the promise of that interminable adventure, and many a time was he tempted to take up his pen and finish it properly as is there proposed, which no doubt he would have done, and made a successful piece of work of it too, had not greater and more absorbing thoughts prevented him.”
(Miguel de Cervantes, The History of Don Quixote, Vol 1, 1605)

E2.1.A.4.2.b.iii. When the "disappearance of purpose" takes hold, the void of freedom is filled by fear, nihilism, and, ultimately, new forms of control that promise to restore meaning.

E2.1.A.4.2.b.iiiREF1_CUR Kader Attia, Demo(n)cracy, 2010
Aren't fear and nihilism taking root in our societies after the disappearance of landmark values that anchored our society ? Fear is all the more amplified as it seems that we have abandoned the notion of progress which had placed a hope of renewal in the future, since the age of Enlightenment. We also seem to have forgotten the part of contribution which is ours, delegating responsibility for change to the system and politicians. With rampant nihilism and in the absence of proposals of new values adapted to our times, the place is made free for populism - which exploits our fears - to gain ground; and history shows us how populism paves the way to totalitarianism.

Art :
- Kader Attia, Demo(n)cracy, 2010

E2.1.A.4.2.b.iii_REF2_HIS HOW ELITES CAN ACTIVELY SUPPORT A MOVEMENT THAT WILL ULTIMATELY DESTROY THEIR OWN FREEDOM.
“Not all German businessmen jumped on the Hitler bandwagon after the Nazi election showing in 1930. Funk mentions that the big electric corporations Siemens and A.E.G. stood aloof, as did the king of the munition makers, Krupp von Bohlen und Halbach. Fritz Thyssen in his confessions declares that Krupp was a “violent opponent” of Hitler and that as late as the day before Hindenburg appointed him Chancellor Krupp urgently warned the old Field Marshal against such a folly. However, Krupp soon saw the light and quickly became, in the words of the repentant Thyssen, “a super Nazi.”15 It is obvious, then, that in his final drive for power Hitler had considerable financial backing from a fairly large chunk of the German business world. How much the bankers and businessmen actually contributed to the Nazi Party in those last three years before January 1933 has never been established. Funk says it probably amounted to no more than “a couple of million marks.” Thyssen estimates it at two millions a year; he says he himself personally gave one million marks. But judged by the large sums which the party had at its disposal in those days, though Goebbels complained it was never enough, the total gifts from business were certainly larger than these estimates by many times. What good they eventually did these politically childish men of the business world will be seen later in this narrative. One of the most enthusiastic of them at this time—as he was one of the most bitterly disillusioned of them afterward—was Dr. Schacht, who resigned his presidency of the Reichsbank in 1930 because of his opposition to the Young Plan, met Goering in that year and Hitler in 1931 and for the next two years devoted all of his considerable abilities to bringing the Fuehrer closer to his banker and industrialist friends and ever closer to the great goal of the Chancellor’s seat. By 1932 this economic wizard, whose responsibility for the coming of the Third Reich and for its early successes proved to be so immeasurably great, was writing Hitler: “I have no doubt that the present development of things can only lead to your becoming Chancellor … Your movement is carried internally by so strong a truth and necessity that victory cannot elude you long … No matter where my work may take me in the near future, even if someday you should see me imprisoned in a fortress, you can always count on me as your loyal supporter.” One of the two letters from which these words are taken was signed: “With a vigorous ‘Heil.’”16 One “so strong a truth” of the Nazi movement, which Hitler had never made any secret of, was that if the party ever took over Germany it would stamp out a German’s personal freedom, including that of Dr. Schacht and his business friends.”
(William Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, A History of Nazi Germany, 2011)


E2.1.A.4.2.b.iii_REF3_PH BERTRAND RUSSELL DESCRIBES THE HUMAN TYPES THAT EMERGE WHEN FREEDOM LOSES ITS CONSTRUCTIVE PURPOSE. The "prosaic every-day virtues" are abandoned, and people either become amoral "adventurers" or "timid time-servers," both of whom have given up on the project of building a stable, long-term, and virtuous life.
“Ages of prolonged uncertainty, while they are compatible with the highest degree of saintliness in a few, are inimical to the prosaic every-day virtues of respectable citizens. There seems no use in thrift, when tomorrow all your savings may be dissipated; no advantage in honesty, when the man towards whom you practise it is pretty sure to swindle you; no point in steadfast adherence to a cause, when no cause is important or has a chance of stable victory; no argument in favour of truthfulness, when only supple tergiversation makes the preservation of life and fortune possible. The man whose virtue has no source except a purely terrestrial prudence will, in such a world, become an adventurer if he has the courage, and, if not, will seek obscurity as a timid time-server.
Menander, who belongs to this age, says:
So many cases I have known
Of men who, though not naturally rogues.
Became so, through misfortune, by constraint.
This sums up the moral character of the third century b.c. except for a few exceptional men. Even among these few, fear took the place of hope; the purpose of life was rather to escape misfortune than to achieve any positive good. ‘Metaphysics sink into the background, and ethics, now individual, become of the first importance. Philosophy is no longer the pillar of fire going before a few intrepid seekers after truth: it is rather an ambulance following in the wake of the struggle for existence and picking up the weak and wounded.’”
(Bertrand Russell, History Of Western Philosophy, 1945)

E2.1.A.4.2.b.iiiREF4_PO “DRINK UP! LIFE ISN’T GOOD OR BAD. 
WHAT WE’VE GIVEN IT IS WHAT IT GIVES US. 
Everything is restored to what wasn’t. 
And no one knows what it is or what will be.

Effort lasts as long as faith lasts. 
But what lasts, and how long, for one who isn’t? 
Ah, drink, drink, drink till you forget 
How and why, where from and where to!

I’m weary of hearing “I’ll do this.” 
Of doing or not doing, who is king? 
An animal on whom the soul was foisted, 
Man sleeps ﬁtfully. That’s all I know.

Don’t say that the soul lives eternally 
Or that the body, once buried, feels nothing. 
What can you know about what you don’t know? 
Drink! You know only the nothing of today.”
(Fernando Pessoa, A Little Larger Than the Entire Universe Selected Poems)

E2.1.A.4.2.c. Habituation and the Normalization of Unfreedom
This sub-topic will examine how long-term exposure to a system of control, or the delegation of responsibility to that system, makes unfreedom feel normal and liberty seem monstrous or unnatural.

"Such people as have been bred up to liberty, and subject to no other dominion but the authority of
their own will, look upon all other form of government as monstrous and contrary to nature. Those
who are inured to monarchy do the same; and what opportunity soever fortune presents them with to
change, even then, when with the greatest difficulties they have disengaged themselves from one
master, that was troublesome and grievous to them, they presently run, with the same difficulties, to
create another; being unable to take into hatred subjection itself."
(Montaigne, Essays, Chapter XXII - Of custom, and that we should not easily change a law received, 1580)

Luc Tuymans_Dirt road [Chemin de terre], 2003_cur_1
"Dirt Road was first presented in New York for the exhibition Fortune. All the exhibition artworks referred one way or another to the state of the world after 11 September 2001, in particular in the United States. The painting doesn't show anything in particular, only a bit of sidewalk at night seen from above and from a sideways angle. This could be an image from a surveillance camera placed above a street door,	 or our own view when looking through the window to see who is ringing the door bell. The space is closed-off; but at the same time seems to escape from all sides. Similarly, given that each texture is precisely, painstakingly detailed, the viewer is drawn into the depth of each layer of paint even though in reality they would only encounter insurmountable opacities. This is typical of Luc Tuymans' paradoxes: to open ways out or possibilities in the representation when, in reality, everything would seem inescapably closed and obtuse. In other words, breaking with the fanaticism and fatalism that is at the heart of the emerging suspicion and surveillance society."
(Marc Donnadieu, from the catalogue of the La Pelle / Luc Tuymans exhibition at Palazzo Grassi, Venice, 2019)

Art:
- Luc Tuymans_Dirt road [Chemin de terre], 2003_cur_1

Luc Tuymans_Pigeons, 2018_cur_1
"In his youth, when holidaying in Brittany, Luc Tuymans was fascinated by the large dovecotes that once housed pigeons reared for hunting or slaughtering. He learned that owning such a building was a privilege of nobility, and that the dimensions and prestige of an estate would dictate its orientation and size. These historic dovecotes and pigeon racing in general were the starting point of numerous works by Tuymans, including The Rumour (2001), which already features three large pigeon eyes shown in close up. 
Sometimes magnificent, other times dirty and crippled by disease and decay, Luc Tuymans' pigeons compose a strange, creepy, threatening crowd, more artificial than natural, like some secret society parallel to ours, which symbolizes the shapes and images of political, religious, social, medical and environmental power... 
In the 2018 version, the pigeon's eye, which is treated in bleak and mute tones and enlarged almost monstrously, is definitely not anymore that of the animal that embellishes our squares and streets, but rather a mutating or genetically modified eye, the frosty, icy embodiment of a society that is permanently under surveillance."
(Marc Donnadieu, from the catalogue of the La Pelle / Luc Tuymans exhibition at Palazzo Grassi, Venice, 2019)

Art:
- Luc Tuymans_Pigeons, 2018_cur_1

Kader Attia, Demo(n)cracy, 2010
Aren't fear and nihilism taking root in our societies after the disappearance of landmark values that anchored our society ? Fear is all the more amplified as it seems that we have abandoned the notion of progress which had placed a hope of renewal in the future, since the age of Enlightenment. We also seem to have forgotten the part of contribution which is ours, delegating responsibility for change to the system and politicians. With rampant nihilism and in the absence of proposals of new values adapted to our times, the place is made free for populism - which exploits our fears - to gain ground; and history shows us how populism paves the way to totalitarianism.

Art :
- Kader Attia, Demo(n)cracy, 2010

Sometimes, we seek out voluntary servitude because we like to obey and belong. Being free also means being responsible for our choices. Do we shy away from this responsibility sometimes? We are conditioned to believe that we are free, yet we do not want what we already believe we have. In fact, we must first ask ourselves how much we really want to be free before asking why. Even those who voluntarily submit to the strictest servitude must remember situations in which they suffered from a lack of freedom, such as time constraints, stylistic constraints, or the authority of others. It seems that we all need freedom, at least in certain areas—even if those areas are different for everyone. Let's map out these essential areas of freedom and the motivations behind them.

THE AGRICULTURAL REVOLUTION WAS NOT A CONSCIOUS CHOICE FOR A BETTER LIFE, BUT A SLOW TRAP.
"Foragers knew the secrets of nature long before the Agricultural Revolution, since their survival depended on an intimate knowledge of the animals they hunted and the plants they gathered. Rather than heralding a new era of easy living, the Agricultural Revolution left farmers with lives generally more di cult and less satisfying than those of foragers. Hunter-gatherers spent their time in more stimulating and varied ways, and were less in danger of starvation and disease. The Agricultural Revolution certainly enlarged the sum total of food at the disposal of humankind, but the extra food did not translate into a better diet or more leisure. Rather, it translated into population explosions and pampered elites. The average farmer worked harder than the average forager, and got a worse diet in return. The Agricultural Revolution was history’s biggest fraud. 2
Who was responsible? Neither kings, nor priests, nor merchants. The culprits were a handful of plant species, including wheat, rice and potatoes. These plants domesticated Homo sapiens, rather than vice versa.
Think for a moment about the Agricultural Revolution from the viewpoint of wheat. Ten thousand years ago wheat was just a wild grass, one of many, confined to a small range in the Middle East. Suddenly, within just a few short millennia, it was growing all over the world. According to the basic evolutionary criteria of survival and reproduction, wheat has become one of the most successful plants in the history of the earth. In areas such as the Great Plains of North
America, where not a single wheat stalk grew 10,000 years ago, you can today walk for hundreds upon hundreds of kilometres without encountering any other plant. Worldwide, wheat covers about 2.25 million square kilometres of the globes surface, almost ten times the size of Britain. How did this grass turn from insignificant to ubiquitous?
Wheat did it by manipulating Homo sapiens to its advantage. This ape had been living a fairly comfortable life hunting and gathering until about 10,000 years ago, but then began to invest more and more effort in cultivating wheat. Within a couple of millennia, humans in many parts of the world were doing little from dawn to dusk other than taking care of wheat plants. It wasn’t easy. Wheat demanded a lot of them. Wheat didn’t like rocks and pebbles, so Sapiens broke their backs clearing fields. Wheat didn’t like sharing its space, water and nutrients with other plants, so men and women laboured long days weeding under the scorching sun. Wheat got sick, so Sapiens had to keep a watch out for worms and blight. Wheat was defenceless against other organisms that liked to eat it, from rabbits to locust swarms, so the farmers had to guard and protect it. Wheat was thirsty, so humans lugged water from springs and streams to water it. Its hunger even impelled Sapiens to collect animal faeces to nourish the ground in which wheat grew.
The body of Homo sapiens had not evolved for such tasks. It was adapted to climbing apple trees and running after gazelles, not to clearing rocks and carrying water buckets. Human spines, knees, necks and arches paid the price. Studies of ancient skeletons indicate that the transition to agriculture brought about a plethora of ailments, such as slipped discs, arthritis and hernias. Moreover, the new agricultural tasks demanded so much time that people were forced to settle permanently next to their wheat fields. This completely changed their way of life.
We did not domesticate wheat. It domesticated us. The word ‘domesticate’ comes from the Latin domus, which means
‘house’. Who’s the one living in a house? Not the wheat. It’s the Sapiens."
(Yuval Noah Harari, Sapiens, A Brief History of Humankind, 2011)

THE AGRICULTURAL REVOLUTION WAS NOT A CONSCIOUS CHOICE FOR A BETTER LIFE, BUT A SLOW TRAP (CONTINUED)
"The essence of the Agricultural Revolution [is] the ability to keep more people alive under worse conditions.
Yet why should individuals care about this evolutionary calculus? Why would any sane person lower his or her standard of living just to multiply the number of copies of the Homo sapiens genome? Nobody agreed to this deal: the Agricultural Revolution was a trap.

The Luxury Trap

The rise of farming was a very gradual a air spread over centuries and millennia.
A band of Homo sapiens gathering mushrooms and nuts and hunting deer and rabbit did not all of a sudden settle in a permanent village, ploughing fields, sowing wheat and carrying water from the river. The change proceeded by stages, each of which involved just a small alteration in daily life.
Homo sapiens reached the Middle East around 70,000 years ago. For the next 50,000 years our ancestors flourished there without agriculture. The natural resources of the area were enough to support its human population. In times of plenty people had a few more children, and in times of need a few less. Humans, like many mammals, have hormonal and genetic mechanisms that help control procreation. In good times females reach puberty earlier, and their chances of getting pregnant are a bit higher. In bad times puberty is late and fertility decreases.
To these natural population controls were added cultural mechanisms. Babies and small children, who move slowly and demand much attention, were a burden on nomadic foragers. People tried to space their children three to four years apart. [...]
With the move to permanent villages and the increase in food supply, the population began to grow. Giving up the nomadic lifestyle enabled women to have a child every year. Babies were weaned at an earlier age – they could be fed on porridge and gruel. The extra hands were sorely needed in the fields. But the extra mouths quickly wiped out the food surpluses, so even more elds had to be planted. As people began living in disease-ridden settlements, as children fed more on cereals and less on mother’s milk, and as each child competed for his or her porridge with more and more siblings, child mortality soared. In most agricultural societies at least one out of every three children died before reaching twenty. 5 Yet the increase in births still outpaced the increase in deaths; humans kept having larger numbers of children.
With time, the ‘wheat bargain’ became more and more burdensome. Children died in droves, and adults ate bread by the sweat of their brows. The average person in Jericho of 8500 BC lived a harder life than the average person in Jericho of 9500 BC or 13,000 BC. But nobody realised what was happening. Every generation continued to live like the previous generation, making only small improvements here and there in the way things were done. Paradoxically, a series of ‘improvements’, each of which was meant to make life easier, added up to a millstone around the necks of these farmers.
Why did people make such a fateful miscalculation? For the same reason that people throughout history have miscalculated."
(Yuval Noah Harari, Sapiens, A Brief History of Humankind, 2011)

See E1.6. Psychedelics

OUR SOCIETY HAS NORMALIZED THE USE OF TWO HIGHLY DESTRUCTIVE DRUGS, ALCOHOL AND TOBACCO. DESPITE CLEAR EVIDENCE OF THE IMMENSE HARM THEY CAUSE. A SOCIALLY ACCEPTED HABIT CAN LEAD TO A PROFOUND LOSS OF PERSONAL FREEDOM FOR THE "GROWING ARMY OF HOPELESS ALCOHOLICS”. What is needed is a new drug opening access to altered states of consciousness with no short and long term side effects. But does it exist?
“We now spend a good deal more on drink and smoke than we spend on education. This, of course, is not surprising. The urge to escape from selfhood and the environment is in almost everyone almost all the time. The urge to do something for the young is strong only in parents, and in them only for the few years during which their children go to school. Equally unsurprising is the current attitude towards drink and smoke. In spite of the growing army of hopeless alcoholics, in spite of the hundreds of thousands of persons annually maimed or killed by drunken drivers, popular comedians still crack jokes about alcohol and its addicts. And in spite of the evidence linking cigarettes with lung cancer, practically everybody regards tobacco smoking as being hardly less normal and natural than eating. From the point of view of the rationalist utilitarian this may seem odd. For the historian, it is exactly what you would expect. A firm conviction of the material reality of Hell never prevented medieval Christians from doing what their ambition, lust or covetousness suggested. Lung cancer, traffic accidents and the millions of miserable and misery-creating alcoholics are facts even more certain than was, in Dante's day, the fact of the Inferno. But all such facts are remote and unsubstantial compared with the near, felt fact of a craving, here and now, for release or sedation, for a drink or a smoke.
Ours is the age, among other things, of the automobile and of rocketing population. Alcohol is incompatible with safety on the roads, and its production, like that of tobacco, condemns to virtual sterility many millions of acres of the most fertile soil. The problems raised by alcohol and tobacco cannot, it goes without saying, be solved by prohibition. The universal and ever-present urge to self-transcendence is not to be abolished by slamming the currently popular Doors in the Wall. The only reasonable policy is to open other, better doors in the hope of inducing men and women to exchange their old bad habits for new and less harmful ones. Some of these other, better doors will be social and technological in nature, others religious or psychological, others dietetic, educational, athletic. But the need for frequent chemical vacations from intolerable selfhood and repulsive surroundings will undoubtedly remain. What is needed is a new drug which will relieve and console our suffering species without doing more harm in the long run than it does good in the short. Such a drug must be potent in minute doses and synthesizable. If it does not possess these qualities, its production, like that of wine, beer, spirits and tobacco will interfere with the raising of indispensable food and fibers. It must be less toxic than opium or cocaine, less likely to produce undesirable social consequences than alcohol or the barbiturates, less inimical to heart and lungs than the tars and nicotine of cigarettes. And, on the positive side, it should produce changes in consciousness more interesting, more intrinsically valuable than mere sedation or dreaminess, delusions of omnipotence or release from inhibition.”
(Aldous Huxley, The doors of perception, 1954)

THE PROTAGONIST IN KOBO ABE’S THE WOMAN IN THE DUNES EXPLORE HOW IT IS POSSIBLE FOR PEOPLE TO LIVE IN A STATE OF "SLAVERY" AND TO HAVE "LOST ALL WILL TO ESCAPE." 
“HE had made it! 
His fingernails struck the sandbags and, not caring if his hands were stripped of their skin, he frantically scrambled up. There! He was on top! He no longer had to worry about slipping back even if he relaxed his grip. Yet it was impossible for him to straighten his arms and for minutes he remained as he was, clutching the bags tightly to him. 
On this day of his liberation, the forty-sixth he had been in the pit, a violent wind was raging. As he began to crawl along, his face and neck were struck by stinging grains of sand. He had not counted on such a savage wind. In the hole he had just felt that the sound of the sea was closer than usual, and right now should be the moment of the evening calm. Yet if it was blowing this much, surely he could not hope for any mist. Maybe the sky had looked muddy only from within the hole. He might well have mistaken the wind-blown sand for mist Whichever way it was, the situation was delicate. 
He looked up nervously. In the fading light the fire tower seemed to be leaning unsteadily to one side. It was surprisingly slight and far away. But as the man in it would be watching him through binoculars, he couldn't count on the distance to be in his favor. He wondered if they had already spotted him. No, if they had, they would have instantly rung the alarm bell. […]
From the village side of the wall they could apparently go in and out as they pleased. When he raised his head a little he could see all the way to the center of the town. Roofs of tile, zinc, and thatch clustered in black splotches in the center of the undulating terrain, which opened out like a fan before him. There was a straggling grove of pine, and he could see something that looked like a pond. And just to protect this pitiful bit of geography, more than ten households on the sea side had to submit to a life of slavery. 
The slave holes were now situated in a line on the left of the road. Here and there were branching paths made by the basket crews, and beyond, threadbare sandbags buried in the sand told where the holes were. It pained him just to look at them. In some places no rope ladders were looped around the bags, but more places had them than not. Not a few of the slaves, he supposed, and already lost all will to escape. 
He could easily understand how it was possible to live such a life. There were kitchens, there were stoves with fires burning in them, there were apple crates, in place of desks, piled full of books, there were kitchens, there were sunken hearths, there were lamps, there were stoves with fires burning in them, there were torn shoji, there were sooty ceilings, there were kitchens, there were clocks that were running and clocks that weren't, there were blaring radios and broken radios, there were kitchens and stoves with fires in them… And in the midst of them all were scattered hundred-yen pieces, domestic animals, children, sex, promissory notes, adultery, incense burners, souvenir photos, and… It goes on, terrifyingly repetitive. One could not do without repetition in life, like the beating of the heart, but it was also true that the beating of the heart was not all there was to life.”
(Kobo Abe, The woman in the dunes, 1962)

E2.1.A.5. Our relationship to authority

E2.1.A.5.1.  The Allure of Submission: Security, Order, and the Abdication of Self
This chapter examines the deep-seated psychological and social factors that compel individuals to submit to authority. It explores how the fear of freedom, the desire for security, and the mechanics of power create a landscape where obedience often becomes the path of least resistance.

E2.1.A.5.1.a. The Burden of Freedom and the Comfort of the Herd

E2.1.A.5.1.a.i. The Unbearable Weight of Individuality: This section will argue that modern freedom, while granting independence, has also created an isolating and anxious existence.

"Wasn't it a deliciously neurotic sensation to walk along the bottom of these vertiginous architectural precipices? To take one of the narrow alleys separating two immense walls by just a few meters? To glimpse, high above—very high above—a patch of blue sky? Sometimes, even a light cloud passing like gauze, pushed by the sea wind? Didn't we secretly rejoice that we could never reach the supreme lightness of being that floated carefree high above at the end of this vertical tunnel? Here, far below, protected by walls and mechanized by the imperatives of automatic, regimented labor, we could enjoy the happiness of the anthill better than anywhere else. We were freed from the temptation to exist too fully, which terrified us more than anything else because of its risks, embarrassing choices, and potential dangers.
Here, safe and warm in the heart of the secure citadel, we could abandon ourselves to the tranquil, ritualized thoughtlessness of long-term prisoners who, we were often told, were terrified at the idea of being released one day."
(Denis Grozdanovitch, Dreamers and Swimmers, or Pleasure Among Difficulties, 2005)

"Modern man, freed from the bonds of pre-individualistic society, which simultaneously gave him security and limited him, has not gained freedom in the positive sense of the realization of his individual self; that is, the expression of his intellectual, emotional and sensuous potentialities. Freedom, though it has brought him independence and rationality, has made him isolated and, thereby, anxious and powerless. This isolation is unbearable and the alternatives he is confronted with are either to escape from the burden of his freedom into new dependencies and submission, or to advance to the full realization of positive freedom which is based upon the uniqueness and individuality of man." 
(Erich Fromm , Escape from freedom, 1941)
"Modern man still is anxious and tempted to surrender his freedom to dictators of all kinds, or to lose it by transforming himself into a small cog in the machine, well fed, and well clothed, yet not a free man but an automaton."
(Erich Fromm , Foreword in the 1965 edition of  Escape from freedom, 1941)

"The crucial difficulty with which we are confronted lies in the fact that the development of man’s intellectual capacities has far outstripped the development of his emotions. Man’s brain lives in the twentieth century; the heart of most men lives still in the Stone Age. The majority of men have not yet acquired the maturity to be independent, to be rational, to be objective. They need myths and idols to endure the fact that man is all by himself, that there is no authority which gives meaning to life except man himself. Man represses the irrational passions of destructiveness, hate, envy, revenge; he worships power, money, the sovereign state, the nation; while he pays lip service to the teachings of the great spiritual leaders of the human race, those of Buddha, the prophets, Socrates, Jesus, Mohammed — he has transformed these teachings into a jungle of superstition and idol-worship."
(Erich Fromm , Escape from freedom, 1941)

"Is there not also, perhaps, besides an innate desire for freedom, an instinctive wish for submission? If there is not, how can we account for the attraction which submission to a leader has for so many today? Is submission always to an overt authority, or is there also submission to internalized authorities, such as duty or conscience, to inner compulsions or to anonymous authorities like public opinion? Is there a hidden satisfaction in submitting, and what is its essence? What is it that creates in men an insatiable lust for power? Is it the strength of their vital energy — or is it a fundamental weakness and inability to experience life spontaneously and lovingly? What are the psychological conditions that make for the strength of these strivings? What are the social conditions upon which such psychological conditions in turn are based?"
(Erich Fromm , Foreword in the 1965 edition of  Escape from freedom, 1941)

"There is only one possible, productive solution for the relationship of individualized man with the world: his active solidarity with all men and his spontaneous activity, love and work, which unite him again with the world, not by primary ties but as a free and independent individual.

However, if the economic, social and political conditions on which the whole process of human individuation depends, do not offer a basis for the realization of individuality in the sense just mentioned, while at the same time people have lost those ties which gave them security, this lag makes freedom an unbearable burden. It then becomes identical with doubt, with a kind of life which lacks meaning and direction. Powerful tendencies arise to escape from this kind of freedom into submission or some kind of relationship to man and the world which promises relief from uncertainty, even if it deprives the individual of his freedom."
(Erich Fromm , Escape from freedom, 1941)

"Admittedly, regulating others is no small matter, given the many difficulties that arise when regulating only ourselves. As for giving orders, which seems so easy, I am firmly of the opinion that it is much easier and more pleasant to follow than to lead. It is a great peace of mind to have only a path to follow and to be responsible only for oneself, considering the weakness of human judgment and the difficulty of choice with the challenges of novelty and doubt."
(Montaigne, Essays, 1580)

THE STATE AND MARKET TOOK OVER THE FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMUNITY, THEREBY "LIBERATING" THE INDIVIDUAL FROM TRADITIONAL BONDS BUT SIMULTANEOUSLY MAKING THEM MORE DEPENDENT ON AND VULNERABLE TO THESE NEW, IMPERSONAL POWERS. 
“The liberation of the individual comes at a cost. Many of us now bewail the loss of strong families and communities and feel alienated and threatened by the power the impersonal state and market wield over our lives. States and markets composed of alienated individuals can intervene in the lives of their members much more easily than states and markets composed of strong families and communities. When neighbours in a high-rise apartment building cannot even agree on how much to pay their janitor, how can we expect them to resist the state?
The deal between states, markets and individuals is an uneasy one. The state and the market disagree about their mutual rights and obligations, and individuals complain that both demand too much and provide too little. In many cases individuals are exploited by markets, and states employ their armies, police forces and bureaucracies to persecute individuals instead of defending them. Yet it is amazing that this deal works at all – however imperfectly. For it breaches countless generations of human social arrangements. Millions of years of evolution have designed us to live and think as community members. Within a mere two centuries we have become alienated individuals. Nothing testifies better to the awesome power of culture.
The nuclear family did not disappear completely from the modern landscape.
When states and markets took from the family most of its economic and political roles, they left it some important emotional functions. The modern family is still supposed to provide for intimate needs, which state and market are (so far) incapable of providing. Yet even here the family is subject to increasing interventions. The market shapes to an ever-greater degree the way people conduct their romantic and sexual lives. Whereas traditionally the family was the main matchmaker, today it’s the market that tailors our romantic and sexual preferences, and then lends a hand in providing for them – for a fat fee.
Previously bride and groom met in the family living room, and money passed from the hands of one father to another. Today courting is done at bars and cafés, and money passes from the hands of lovers to waitresses. Even more money is transferred to the bank accounts of fashion designers, gym managers, dieticians, cosmeticians and plastic surgeons, who help us arrive at the café looking as similar as possible to the markets ideal of beauty.
The state, too, keeps a sharper eye on family relations, especially between parents and children. Parents are obliged to send their children to be educated by the state. Parents who are especially abusive or violent with their children may be restrained by the state. If need be, the state may even imprison the parents or transfer their children to foster families. Until not long ago, the suggestion that the state ought to prevent parents from beating or humiliating their children would have been rejected out of hand as ludicrous and unworkable. In most societies parental authority was sacred. Respect of and obedience to one’s parents were among the most hallowed values, and parents could do almost anything they wanted, including killing newborn babies, selling children into slavery and marrying o daughters to men more than twice their age. Today, parental authority is in full retreat. Youngsters are increasingly excused from obeying their elders, whereas parents are blamed for anything that goes wrong in the life of their child. Mum and Dad are about as likely to get o in the Freudian courtroom as were defendants in a Stalinist show trial.”
(Yuval Noah Harari, Sapiens, A Brief History of Humankind, 2011)

"IMAGINED COMMUNITIES"—SPECIFICALLY THE NATION AND THE CONSUMER TRIBE—HAVE RISEN TO "FILL IN THE EMOTIONAL VACUUM” LEFT AFTER THE DESEGREGATION OF FORMER COMMUNITIES.
Imagined Communities
Like the nuclear family, the community could not completely disappear from our world without any emotional replacement. Markets and states today provide most of the material needs once provided by communities, but they must also supply tribal bonds.
Markets and states do so by fostering ‘imagined communities’ that contain millions of strangers, and which are tailored to national and commercial needs.
An imagined community is a community of people who don’t really know each other, but imagine that they do. Such communities are not a novel invention.
Kingdoms, empires and churches functioned for millennia as imagined communities. In ancient China, tens of millions of people saw themselves as members of a single family, with the emperor as its father. In the Middle Ages, millions of devout Muslims imagined that they were all brothers and sisters in the great community of Islam. Yet throughout history, such imagined communities played second fiddle to intimate communities of several dozen people who knew each other well. The intimate communities fulfilled the emotional needs of their members and were essential for everyone’s survival and welfare. In the last two centuries, the intimate communities have withered, leaving imagined communities to ﬁll in the emotional vacuum.
The two most important examples for the rise of such imagined communities are the nation and the consumer tribe. The nation is the imagined community of the state. The consumer tribe is the imagined community of the market. Both are imagined communities because it is impossible for all customers in a market or for all members of a nation really to know one another the way villagers knew one another in the past. No German can intimately know the other 80 million members of the German nation, or the other 500 million customers inhabiting the European Common Market (which evolved first into the European Community and ﬁnally became the European Union).
Consumerism and nationalism work extra hours to make us imagine that millions of strangers belong to the same community as ourselves, that we all have a common past, common interests and a common future. This isn’t a lie. It’s imagination. Like money, limited liability companies and human rights, nations and consumer tribes are inter-subjective realities. They exist only in our collective imagination, yet their power is immense. As long as millions of Germans believe in the existence of a German nation, get excited at the sight of German national symbols, retell German national myths, and are willing to sacrifice money, time and limbs for the German nation, Germany will remain one of the strongest powers in the world.
The nation does its best to hide its imagined character. Most nations argue that they are a natural and eternal entity, created in some primordial epoch by mixing the soil of the motherland with the blood of the people. Yet such claims are usually exaggerated. Nations existed in the distant past, but their importance was much smaller than today because the importance of the state was much smaller. A resident of medieval Nuremberg might have felt some loyalty towards the German nation, but she felt far more loyalty towards her family and local community, which took care of most of her needs. Moreover, whatever importance ancient nations may have had, few of them survived. Most existing nations evolved only after the Industrial Revolution.”
(Yuval Noah Harari, Sapiens, A Brief History of Humankind, 2011)


THE RISE OF NAZI GERMANY IS ARGUABLY THE MOST SIGNIFICANT AND TERRIFYING MODERN EXAMPLE OF A FREE SOCIETY CHOOSING TO SUBMIT TO A TOTALITARIAN AUTHORITY.
“Adolf Hitler is probably the last of the great adventurer-conquerors in the tradition of Alexander, Caesar and Napoleon, and the Third Reich the last of the empires which set out on the path taken earlier by France, Rome and Macedonia. The curtain was rung down on that phase of history, at least, by the sudden invention of the hydrogen bomb, of the ballistic missile and of rockets that can be aimed to hit the moon. In our new age of terrifying, lethal gadgets, which supplanted so swiftly the old one, the first great aggressive war, if it should come, will be launched by suicidal little madmen pressing an electronic button. Such a war will not last long and none will ever follow it. There will be no conquerors and no conquests, but only the charred bones of the dead on an uninhabited planet. […]
The Third Reich which was born on January 30, 1933, Hitler boasted, would endure for a thousand years,9 and in Nazi parlance it was often referred to as the “Thousand-Year Reich.” It lasted twelve years and four months, but in that flicker of time, as history goes, it caused an eruption on this earth more violent and shattering than any previously experienced, raising the German people to heights of power they had not known in more than a millennium, making them at one time the masters of Europe from the Atlantic to the Volga, from the North Cape to the Mediterranean, and then plunging them to the depths of destruction and desolation at the end of a world war which their nation had cold-bloodedly provoked and during which it instituted a reign of terror over the conquered peoples which, in its calculated butchery of human life and the human spirit, outdid all the savage oppressions of the previous ages. The man who founded the Third Reich, who ruled it ruthlessly and often with uncommon shrewdness, who led it to such dizzy heights and to such a sorry end, was a person of undoubted, if evil, genius. It is true that he found in the German people, as a mysterious Providence and centuries of experience had molded them up to that time, a natural instrument which he was able to shape to his own sinister ends. But without Adolf Hitler, who was possessed of a demonic personality, a granite will, uncanny instincts, a cold ruthlessness, a remarkable intellect, a soaring imagination and—until toward the end, when, drunk with power and success, he overreached himself—an amazing capacity to size up people and situations, there almost certainly would never have been a Third Reich. “It is one of the great examples,” as Friedrich Meinecke, the eminent German historian, said, “of the singular and incalculable power of personality in historical life.”10 To some Germans and, no doubt, to most foreigners it appeared that a charlatan had come to power in Berlin. To the majority of Germans Hitler had—or would shortly assume—the aura of a truly charismatic leader. They were to follow him blindly, as if he possessed a divine judgment, for the next twelve tempestuous years. Considering his origins and his early life, it would be difficult to imagine a more unlikely figure to succeed to the mantle of Bismarck, the Hohenzollern emperors and President Hindenburg than this singular Austrian of peasant stock who was born at half past six on the evening of April 20, 1889, in the Gasthof zum Pommer, a modest inn in the town of Braunau am Inn, across the border from Bavaria. The place of birth on the Austro–German frontier was to prove significant, for early in his life, as a mere youth, Hitler became obsessed with the idea that there should be no border between these two German- speaking peoples and that they both belonged in the same Reich. So strong and enduring were his feelings that at thirty-five, when he sat in a German prison dictating the book that would become the blueprint for the Third Reich, his very first lines were concerned with the symbolic significance of his birthplace. Mein Kampf begins with these words: Today it seems to me providential that fate should have chosen Braunau am Inn as my birthplace. For this little town lies on the boundary between two German states which we of the younger generation at least have made it our life-work to reunite by every means at our disposal…. This little city on the border seems to me the symbol of a great mission.”
(William Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, A History of Nazi Germany, 2011)

THE RISE OF NAZI GERMANY IS ARGUABLY THE MOST SIGNIFICANT AND TERRIFYING MODERN EXAMPLE OF A FREE SOCIETY CHOOSING TO SUBMIT TO A TOTALITARIAN AUTHORITY (Continued).
"For whatever other accusations can be made against Adolf Hitler, no one can accuse him of not putting down in writing exactly the kind of Germany he intended to make if he ever came to power and the kind of world he meant to create by armed German conquest. The blueprint of the Third Reich and, what is more, of the barbaric New Order which Hitler inflicted on conquered Europe in the triumphant years between 1939 and 1945 is set down in all its appalling crudity at great length and in detail between the covers of this revealing book. As we have seen, Hitler’s basic ideas were formed in his early twenties in Vienna, and we have his own word for it that he learned little afterward and altered nothing in his thinking, † When he left Austria for Germany in 1913 at the age of twenty-four, he was full of a burning passion for German nationalism, a hatred for democracy, Marxism and the Jews and a certainty that Providence had chosen the Aryans, especially the Germans, to be the master race. In Mein Kampf he expanded his views and applied them specifically to the problem of not only restoring a defeated and chaotic Germany to a place in the sun greater than it had ever had before but making a new kind of state, one which would be based on race and would include all Germans then living outside the Reich’s frontiers, and in which would be established the absolute dictatorship of the Leader—himself—with an array of smaller leaders taking orders from above and giving them to those below. Thus the book contains, first, an outline of the future German state and of the means by which it can one day become “lord of the earth,” as the author puts it on the very last page; and, second, a point of view, a conception of life, or, to use Hitler’s favorite German word, a Weltanschauung. That this view of life would strike a normal mind of the twentieth century as a grotesque hodgepodge concocted by a half-baked, uneducated neurotic goes without saying. What makes it important is that it was embraced so fanatically by so many millions of Germans."
(William Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, A History of Nazi Germany, 2011)

THE CLASSIC PRECONDITIONS FOR A SOCIETY TO BECOME SUSCEPTIBLE TO THE ALLURE OF A TOTALITARIAN MOVEMENT: POLITICAL PARALYSIS, SEVERE ECONOMIC CRISIS, AND WIDESPREAD POPULAR DESPAIR.
“Bruening was unable to induce a majority of the Reichstag to approve certain measures in his financial program. He thereupon asked Hindenburg to invoke Article 48 of the constitution and under its emergency powers approve his financial bill by presidential decree. The chamber responded by voting a demand for the withdrawal of the decree. Parliamentary government was breaking down at a moment when the economic crisis made strong government imperative. In an effort to find a way out of the impasse, Bruening requested the President in July 1930 to dissolve the Reichstag. New elections were called for September 14. How Bruening expected to get a stable parliamentary majority in a new election is a question that was never answered. But Hitler realized that his own opportunity had come sooner than he expected. The hard-pressed people were demanding a way out of their sorry predicament. The millions of unemployed wanted jobs. The shopkeepers wanted help. Some four million youths who had come of voting age since the last election wanted some prospect of a future that would at least give them a living. To all the millions of discontented Hitler in a whirlwind campaign offered what seemed to them, in their misery, some measure of hope. He would make Germany strong again, refuse to pay reparations, repudiate the Versailles Treaty, stamp out corruption, bring the money barons to heel (especially if they were Jews) and see to it that every German had a job and bread. To hopeless, hungry men seeking not only relief but new faith and new gods, the appeal was not without effect. Though his hopes were high, Hitler was surprised on the night of September 14, 1930, when the election returns came in. Two years before, his party had polled 810,000 votes and elected 12 members to the Reichstag. This time he had counted on quadrupling the Nazi vote and securing perhaps 50 seats in Parliament. But on this day the vote of the N.S.D.A.P. rose to 6,409,600, entitling the party to 107 seats in the Reichstag and propelling it from the ninth and smallest party in Parliament to the second largest. At the other extreme, the Communists had also gained, from 3,265,000 votes in 1928 to 4,592,000, with their representation in the Reichstag increased from 54 to 77. The moderate middle-class parties, with the exception of the Catholic Center, lost over a million votes, as did the Social Democrats, despite the addition of four million new voters at the polls. The vote of the right-wing Nationalists of Hugenberg dropped from four to two million. It was clear that the Nazis had captured millions of adherents from the other middle-class parties.”
(William Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, A History of Nazi Germany, 2011)

E2.1.A.5.1.a.ii. The Happiness of the "Last Man": Using Friedrich Nietzsche's concept of the "last man," this part will describe the societal ideal of a conflict-free, comfortable existence.

NO SHEPHERD, AND ONE HERD! EVERY ONE WANTETH THE SAME; EVERY ONE IS EQUAL: HE WHO HATH OTHER SENTIMENTS GOETH VOLUNTARILY INTO THE MADHOUSE.
"“What is love? What is creation? What is longing? What is a star?”—so
asketh the last man and blinketh.

The earth hath then become small, and on it there hoppeth the last man
who maketh everything small. His species is ineradicable like that of
the ground-flea; the last man liveth longest.

“We have discovered happiness”—say the last men, and blink thereby.

They have left the regions where it is hard to live; for they need
warmth. One still loveth one’s neighbour and rubbeth against him; for
one needeth warmth.

Turning ill and being distrustful, they consider sinful: they walk
warily. He is a fool who still stumbleth over stones or men!

A little poison now and then: that maketh pleasant dreams. And much
poison at last for a pleasant death.

One still worketh, for work is a pastime. But one is careful lest the
pastime should hurt one.

One no longer becometh poor or rich; both are too burdensome. Who still
wanteth to rule? Who still wanteth to obey? Both are too burdensome.

No shepherd, and one herd! Every one wanteth the same; every one is
equal: he who hath other sentiments goeth voluntarily into the madhouse.

“Formerly all the world was insane,”—say the subtlest of them, and
blink thereby.

They are clever and know all that hath happened: so there is
no end to their raillery. People still fall out, but are soon
reconciled—otherwise it spoileth their stomachs.

They have their little pleasures for the day, and their little pleasures
for the night, but they have a regard for health.

“We have discovered happiness,”—say the last men, and blink thereby.—
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Thus Spake Zarathustra, 1883)

STEEPLY, LAYS OUT A COMPREHENSIVE LIST OF WHAT CONSTITUTES THE IDEAL LIFE IN MODERN AMERICA. WHILE IT BEGINS WITH NOBLE SENTIMENTS ("FREEDOM FROM TYRANNY"), IT QUICKLY DESCENDS INTO A CATALOGUE OF PERSONAL COMFORTS, CONVENIENCES, AND PASSIVE PLEASURES.
'Me, for me personally, as an American, Rémy, if you're really serious, I think it's probably your standard old basic American dreams and ideals. Freedom from tyranny, from excessive want, fear, censorship of speech and thought.' He was looking with seriousness, even in this wig. 'The old ones, tested by time. Relative plenty, meaningful work, adequate leisure-time. The ones you might call corny.' His smiling revealed to Marathe lipstick upon one incisor. 'We want choice. A sense of efficaciousness and choice. To be loved by someone. To freely love who you happen to love. To be loved irregardless of whether you can tell them Classified stuff about your job. To have them just trust you and trust that you know what you're doing. To feel valued. Not to be agendalessly despised. To have good neighborly relations. Cheap and abundant energy. Pride in your work and family, and home.' The lipstick had been smeared onto the tooth when the finger had removed the grain of tobacco. He was 'faisait monter la pression':170 'The little things. Access to transport. Good digestion. Work-saving appliances. A wife who doesn't mistake your job's requirements for your own fetishes. Reliable waste-removal and disposal. Sunsets over the Pacific. Shoes that don't cut off circulation. Frozen yogurt. A tall lemonade on a squeak-free porch swing.' 
Marathe's face, it showed nothing. 'The loyalty of a domestic pet.' 
Steeply pointed the cigarette. 'There you go, friend.' 
'High-quality entertainment. High value for the dollar of leisure and spectation.' 
Steeply laughed agreeably, exhaling a shaped sausage of smoke. In response to this, Marathe smiled. There was some silence for thinking until Marathe finally said, looking up and off to think: 'This U.S.A. type of person and desires appears to me like almost the classic, how do you say, utilitaire.' 
'A French appliance?' 
'Comme on dit,' Marathe said, 'utilitarienne. Maximize pleasure, minimize displeasure: result: what is good. This is the U.S.A. of you.' 
(David Foster Wallace, Infinite Jest, 1996)

E2.1.A.5.1.a.iii. Obedience as a Vital Need: This section will explore Simone Weil's assertion that obedience is a "vital need of the human soul."

"The daily wear-and-tear.—These young men are lacking neither character, nor talent, nor industry, but they have never been allowed sufficient leisure to choose their own course ; on the contrary, they have been accustomed from childhood to some one’s guidance. At the time when they were ripe to “ be sent into the desert,” something else was done with them—they were employed,
they were estranged from themselves, they were trained to being worn out with the daily toil ; this was imposed as a duty upon them— and now they are neither able nor willing to do without it. The only thing that cannot he denied these poor beasts of burden is their “ vacation,” as they call it, this ideal of leisure amid an overstrained century, where we may for once be idle, idiotic, and childish to our heart’s content."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, The dawn of day, Aphorism 178, 1881)


"A devout person does not spontaneously reject certain practices; rather, they refuse to engage in them without reason or 'order' (in both the imperative and normative sense). They are open to any practice provided an authority approves it and gives it validity. For example, they will immediately adopt something considered impious if a lawyer assures them that it is done, a police officer that it is allowed, a doctor that it is recommended, or a philosopher that it is rational.
 
One may wonder about the reasons for the fear of the unnecessary, which allows one to resign one's freedom in favor of an imposed order. There is no doubt that rejecting the gratuitous is only one aspect of rejecting reality, one of the many defense mechanisms that activate as soon as reality is perceived as cruel"
(Clément Rosset, The Real: Treatise on Idiocy, 1977)

Cem Aydogan, A Practice for an Artist, 2017

"Obedience is a vital need of the human soul. It is of two kinds: obedience to established rules and obedience to human beings looked upon as leaders. It presupposes consent, not in regard to every single order received, but the kind of consent that is given once and for all, with the sole reservation, in case of need, that the demands of conscience be satisfied.

It requires to be generally recognized, and above all by leaders themselves, that consent and not fear of punishment or hope of reward constitutes, in fact, the mainspring of obedience, so that submission may never be mistaken for servility. It should also be realized that those who command, obey in their turn, and the whole hierarchy should have its face set in the direction of a goal whose importance and even grandeur can be felt by all, from the highest to the lowest."
(Simone Weil, The Need for Roots, 1943)

"THOUGHT
Of obedience, faith, adhesiveness;
As I stand aloof and look there is to me something profoundly affecting
     in large masses of men following the lead of those who do not believe in
     men."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

"Quand on commence en demi-Dieu on finit en porte-clefs"
(Raphaël Enthoven)
Tags: LA CHRONIQUE DE RAPHAËL ENTHOVEN

E2.1.A.5.1.b. The Architecture of Power: From Visible Hierarchies to Invisible Influence

E2.1.A.5.1.b.i. Distinguishing Authority, Power, and Violence: This section will introduce Hannah Arendt's crucial distinctions. Authority is not coercion or persuasion but rests on a mutually recognized hierarchy. This framework explains how obedience can be secured without the overt use of force.

I am a friend of subordination, a most conducive to the happiness of society. There is a reciprocal pleasure in governing and being governed.
(James Boswell)

"In a dispute between representatives from Geneva and the Chevalier de Bouteville, one of them lost his temper. The Chevalier said to him, 'Do you know that I am the representative of my king? The Genevois replied, ‘Do you know that I am the representative of my equals?’”
(Chamfort, Maxims and Thoughts, Characters and Anecdotes, Maxim 826, 1857).

Alexandra Bircken, Topdown  Bottom up, 2020

"Since authority always demands obedience, it is commonly mistaken for some form of power or violence. Yet authority precludes the use of external means of coercion; where force is used, authority itself has failed. Authority, on the other hand, is incompatible with persuasion, which presupposes equality and works through a process of argumentation. Where arguments are used, authority is left in abeyance. Against the egalitarian order of persuasion stands the authoritarian order, which is always hierarchical. If authority is to be defined at all, then, it must be in contradistinction to both coercion by force and persuasion through arguments. (The authoritarian relation between the one who commands and the one who obeys rests neither on common reason nor on the power of the one who commands; what they have in common is the hierarchy itself, whose rightness and legitimacy both recognize and where both have their predetermined stable place.) This point is of historical importance; one aspect of our concept of authority is Platonic in origin, and when Plato began to consider the introduction of authority into the handling of public affairs in the polis, he knew he was seeking an alternative to the common Greek way of handling domestic affairs, which was persuasion ( ) as well as to the common way of handling foreign affairs, which was force and violence.

Historically, we may say that the loss of authority is merely the final, though decisive, phase of a development which for centuries undermined primarily religion and tradition. Of tradition, religion, and authority—whose interconnectedness we shall discuss later—authority has proved to be the most stable element. With the loss of authority, however, the general doubt of the modern age also invaded the political realm, where things not only assume a more radical expression but become endowed with a reality peculiar to the political realm alone. What perhaps hitherto had been of spiritual significance only for the few now has become a concern of one and all. Only now, as it were after the fact, the loss of tradition and of religion have become political events of the first order."
(Hannah Arendt, Between Past and Future, 1961)

"Behind the liberal identification of totalitarianism with authoritarianism, and the concomitant inclination to see “totalitarian” trends in every authoritarian limitation of freedom, lies an older confusion of authority with tyranny, and of legitimate power with violence. The difference between tyranny and authoritarian government has always been that the tyrant rules in accordance with his own will and interest, whereas even the most draconic authoritarian government is bound by laws. Its acts are tested by a code which was made either not by man at all, as in the case of the law of nature or God’s Commandments or the Platonic ideas, or at least not by those actually in power. The source of authority in authoritarian government is always a force external and superior to its own power; it is always this source, this external force which transcends the political realm, from which the authorities derive their “authority,” that is, their legitimacy, and against which their power can be checked. [...]

The differences between tyranny and dictatorship on one side, and totalitarian domination on the other, are no less distinct than those between authoritarianism and totalitarianism.
These structural differences become apparent the moment we leave the over-all theories behind and concentrate our attention on the apparatus of rule, the technical forms of administration, and the organization of the body politic. For brevity’s sake, it may be permitted to sum up the technical structural differences between authoritarian, tyrannical, and totalitarian government in the image of three different representative models. As an image for authoritarian government, I propose the shape of the pyramid, which is well known in traditional political thought. The pyramid is indeed a particularly fitting image for a governmental structure whose source of authority lies outside itself, but whose seat of power is located at the top, from which authority and power is filtered down to the base in such a way that each successive layer possesses some authority, but less than the one above it, and where, precisely because of this careful filtering process, all layers from top to bottom are not only firmly integrated into the whole but are interrelated like converging rays whose common focal point is the top of the pyramid as well as the transcending source of authority above it. This image, it is true, can be used only for the Christian type of authoritarian rule as it developed through and under the constant influence of the Church during the Middle Ages, when the focal point above and beyond the earthly pyramid provided the necessary point of reference for the Christian type of equality, the strictly hierarchical structure of life on earth notwithstanding. The Roman understanding of political authority, where the source of authority lay exclusively in the past, in the foundation of Rome and the greatness of ancestors, leads into institutional structures whose shape requires a different kind of image—about which more later. In any event, an authoritarian form of government with its hierarchical structure is the least egalitarian of all forms; it incorporates inequality and distinction as its all-permeating principles.

All political theories concerning tyranny agree that it belongs strictly among the egalitarian forms of government; the tyrant is the ruler who rules as one against all, and the “all” he oppresses are all equal, namely equally powerless. If we stick to the image of the pyramid, it is as though all intervening layers between top and bottom were destroyed, so that the top remains suspended, supported only by the proverbial bayonets, over a mass of carefully isolated, disintegrated, and completely equal individuals. Classical political theory used to rule the tyrant out of mankind altogether, to call him a “wolf in human shape” (Plato), because of this position of one against all, in which he had put himself and which sharply distinguished his rule, the rule of one, which Plato still calls indiscriminately tyranny, from various forms of kingship.

In contradistinction to both tyrannical and authoritarian regimes, the proper image of totalitarian rule and organization seems to me to be the structure of the onion, in whose center, in a kind of empty space, the leader is located; whatever he does—whether he integrates the body politic as in an authoritarian hierarchy, or oppresses his subjects like a tyrant—he does it from within, and not from without or above. All the extraordinarily manifold parts of the movement—the front organizations, the various professional societies, the party membership, the party bureaucracy, the elite formations, and police groups—are related in such a way that each forms the façade in one direction and the center in the other, that is, plays the role of normal outside world for one layer and the role of radical extremism for another. The great advantage of this system is that the movement provides for each of its layers, even under conditions of totalitarian rule, the fiction of a normal world along with a consciousness of being different from and more radical than it. Thus, the sympathizers in the front organizations, whose convictions differ only in intensity from those of the party membership, surround the whole movement and provide a deceptive façade of normality to the outside world because of their lack of fanaticism and extremism, while, at the same time, they represent the normal world to the totalitarian movement, whose members come to believe that their convictions differ only in degree from those of other people, so that they need never be aware of the abyss which separates their own world from that which actually surrounds it. The onion structure makes the system organizationally shock-proof against the factuality of the real world."
(Hannah Arendt, Between Past and Future, 1961)

"ANARCHISM
[...] It places freedom above everything else and too highly. But how could it exist without constraints or imposed, controlled order? How could it replace law, equality, and justice?
Anarchy would be a perfect system for angels, which is why it is considered stupid (Pascal: "He who wants to be an angel is a beast").

ANARCHY
Democrats know full well that disorder almost always plays into the hands of force and that no force is valid except in the service of justice or liberty. [...]
Justice without force is just a dream. That dream is anarchy. Force without justice is a reality. It is war. It is the market. It is the tyranny of the most powerful or the richest. [...]"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

Frederico Clapis, Escape projection, 2020

PLATO'S REGULATORY IDEAS IN THE REPUBLIC
"In the parable of the cave in The Republic, the sky of ideas stretches above the cave of human existence, and therefore can become its standard. But the philosopher who leaves the cave for the pure sky of ideas does not originally do so in order to acquire those standards and learn the “art of measurement”11 but to contemplate the true essence of Being [...] The basically authoritative element of the ideas, that is, the quality which enables them to rule and compel, is therefore not at all a matter of course. The ideas become measures only after the philosopher has left the bright sky of ideas and returned to the dark cave of human existence. In this part of the story Plato touches upon the deepest reason for the conflict between the philosopher and the polis.12 He tells of the philosopher’s loss of orientation in human affairs, of the blindness striking the eyes, of the predicament of not being able to communicate what he has seen, and of the actual danger to his life which thereby arises. It is in this predicament that the philosopher resorts to what he has seen, the ideas, as standards and measures, and finally, in fear of his life, uses them as instruments of domination. [...]
The lives of the many in the cave over which the philosopher has established his rule are characterized not by contemplation but by speech and action; it is therefore characteristic that in the parable of the cave Plato depicts the lives of the inhabitants as though they too were interested only in seeing: first the images on the screen, then the things themselves in the dim light of the fire in the cave, until finally those who want to see truth itself must leave the common world of the cave altogether and embark upon their new adventure all by themselves."
(Hannah Arendt, Between Past and Future, 1961)

THE TEXT OFFERS A PROFOUND EXPLANATION FOR THE ORIGIN OF POWER IN THE MOST FUNDAMENTAL HUMAN ENCOUNTER. THE EXPERIENCE OF "THE LOOK" IS PRESENTED AS THE MOMENT OUR FREEDOM IS CONFRONTED BY THE FREEDOM OF "THE OTHER." In this moment, our own possibilities "die," and we experience ourselves as an object in their world. This is the primordial experience of being subjected to another's power.
“The Other looks at me not as he is "in the midst of" my world but as he comes toward the world and toward me from all his transcendence; when he looks at me, he is separated from me by no distance, by no object of the world whether real or ideal-by nobody in the world, but the sale fact of his nature as Other. Thus the appearance of the Other's look is not an appearance in the world-neither in "mine" nor in the "Other's"-and the relation which unites me to the Other cannot be a relation of exteriority inside the world. By the Other's look I effect the concrete proof that there is a "beyond the world." The Other is present to me without any intermediary as a transcendence which is not mine. But this presence is not reciprocal. All of the world's density is necessary in order that I may myself be present to the Other. An omnipresent and inapprehensible transcendence, posited upon me without intermediary as I am my being unrevealed, a transcendence separated from me by the infinity of being, as I am plunged by this look into the heart of a world complete with its distances and its instruments-such is the Other's look when first I experience it as a look.
Furthermore by fixing my possibilities the Other reveals to me the impossibility of my being an object except for another freedom. I can not be an object for myself, for I am what I am; thrown back on its own resources, the reflective effort toward a dissociation results in failure; I am always reapprehended by myself. And when I naively assume that it is possible for me to be an objective being without being responsible for it, I thereby implicitly suppose the Other's existence; for how could I be an object if not for a subject. Thus for me the Other is first the being for whom I am an object; that is, the being through whom I gain my abjectness. If I am to be able to conceive of even one of my properties in the objective mode, then the Other is already given. He is given not as a being of my universe but as a pure subject. Thus this pure subject which by definition 1am unable to know-i.e., to posit as object-is always there out of reach and without distance whenever I try to grasp myself as object. In experiencing the look, in experiencing myself as an unrevealed object-ness, I experience the inapprehensible subjectivity of the Other directly and with my being.
At the same time I experience the Other's infinite freedom. It is for and by means of a freedom and only for and by means of it that my possibles can be limited and fixed. A material obstacle. cannot fix my possibilities; it is only the occasion for my projecting myself toward other possibles and cannot confer upon them an outside. To remain at home because it is raining and to remain at home because one has been forbidden to go out are by no means the same thing. In the first case I myself determine to stay inside in consideration of the consequences of my acts; I surpass the obstacle "rain" toward myself and I make an instrument of it. In the second case it is my very possibilities of going out of or staying inside which are presented to me as surpassed and fixed and which a freedom simultaneously foresees and prevents. It is not mere caprice which causes us often to do very naturally and without annoyance what would irritate us if another commanded it. This is because the order and the prohibition cause us to experience the Other's freedom across our own slavery. Thus in the look the death of my possibilities causes me to experience the Other's freedom. This death is realized only at the heart of that freedom; I am inaccessible to myself and yet myself, thrown, abandoned at the heart of the Other's freedom. In connection with this experience my belonging to universal time can appear to me only as contained and realized by an autonomous temporalization; only a for-itself which temporalizes itself can throw me into time.
Thus through the look I experience the Other concretely as a free, conscious subject who causes there to be a world by temporalizing himself toward his own possibilities. That subject's presence without intermediary is the necessary condition of all thought which I would attempt to form concerning myself. The Other is that "myself" from which nothing separates me, absolutely nothing except his pure and total freedom; that is, that indetermination of himself which he has to be for and through himself. We know enough at present to attempt to explain that unshakable resistance which common sense has always opposed to the solipsistic argument. This resistance indeed is based on the fact that the Other is given to me as a concrete evident presence which I can in no way derive from myself and which can in no way be placed in doubt nor made the object of a phenomenological reduction […].
If someone looks at me, I am conscious of being an object. But this consciousness can be produced only in and through the existence of the Other. In this respect, Hegel was right. However that other consciousness and that other freedom are never given to me; for if they were, they would be' known and would therefore be an object, which would cause me to cease being an object. Neither can I derive the concept or the representation of them from my own background. First because I do not "conceive" them nor "represent" them to myself; expressions like these would refer us again to "knowing," which on principle is removed from ~consideration. In addition this concrete proof of freedom which I can effect by myself is the proof of my freedom; every concrete apprehension of a consciousness is consciousness (of) my consciousness; the very notion of consciousness makes reference only to my possible consciousnesses. Indeed we established in our Introduction that the existence of freedom and of consciousness precedes and conditions their essence; consequently these essences can subsume only concrete exemplifications of my consciousness or of my freedom. In the third place the Other's freedom and consciousness cannot be categories serving for the unification of my representations. To be sure, as Husserl has shown, the ontological structure of "my" world demands that it be also a world for others. But to the extent that the Other confers a particular type of objectivity on the objects of my world, this is because he is already in this world in the capacity of an object. If it is correct that Pierre, who is reading before me, gives a particular type of objectivity to the face of the book which is turned toward him, then this objectivity is conferred on a face which on principle I can see (although as we have said, it escapes me in so far as it is read), on a face which belongs to the world where I am and, which consequently by a magic bond is connected beyond distance to Pierre-as-object. Under these conditions the concept of the Other can in fact be fixed as an empty form and employed constantly as a reinforcement of objectivity for the world which is mine. But the Other's presence in his look-looking cannot contribute to reinforce the world, for on the contrary it undoes the world by the very fact that it causes the world to escape me. The escape of the world from me when it is relative and when it is an escape toward the Other-as-object, reinforces objectivity. The escape of the world and of myself from me when it is absolute and when it is effected toward a freedom which is not mine, is a dissolution of my knowledge. The world disintegrates in order to be reintegrated over there as a world; but this disintegration is not given to me; I cannot know it nor even think it. The presence to me of the Other-as-a-look is therefore neither a knowledge nor a projection of my being nor a form of unification nor a category. It is and I cannot derive it from me.”
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

SARTRE EXPLAINS THAT BEING LOOKED AT BY THE OTHER CAUSES THE "DEATH OF MY POSSIBILITIES" AND THE "ALIENATION OF MY BEING." This is a profound, phenomenological description of what it feels like to be subjected to the power of another's freedom.
 “the Other-as-object is an explosive instrument which I handle with care because I foresee around him the permanent possibility that they are going to make it explode and that with this explosion I shall suddenly experience the flight of the world away from me and the alienation of my being. Therefore my constant concern is to contain the Other within his objectivity, and my relations with the Other-as-object are essentially made up of ruses designed to make him remain an object. But one look on the part of the Other is sufficient to make all these schemes collapse and to make me experience once more the transfiguration of the Other. Thus I am referred from transfiguration to degradation and from degradation to transfiguration without ever being able either to get a total view of the ensemble of these two modes of being on the part of the Other-for each of them is self-sufficient and refers only to itself-or to hold firmly to either one of them-for each has its own instability and collapses in order for the other to rise from its ruins. Only the dead can be perpetually objects without every becoming, subjects-for to die is not to lose one's objectivity in the midst of the world; all the dead are there in the world around us. But to die is to lose all possibility of revealing oneself as subject to an Other.
At this point in our investigation now we have elucidated the essential structures of being-for-others, there is an obvious temptation to raise the metaphysical question: "Why are there Others?" As we have seen, the existence of Others is not a consequence which can derive from the ontological structure of the for-itself. It is a primary event, to be sure, but of a metapl1ysical order; that is, it results from the contingency of being. The question "why" is essentially connected with these metaphysical existences.
We know very well that the answer to the "why" can only refer us to an original contingency, but still it is necessary to prove that the metaphysical phenomenon which we are considering is an irreducible contingency. In this sense ontology appears to us capable of being defined as the specification of the structures of being of the existent taken as a totality, and we shall define metaphysics rather as raising the question of the existence of the existent. This is why in view of the absolute contingency of the existent, we are convinced that any metaphysics must conclude with a "that is"-i.e., in a direct intuition of that contingency.
Is it possible to posit the question of the existence of Others? Is this existence an irreducible fact, or is it to be derived from a fundamental contingency? Such are the preliminary questions which we can in turn pose to the metaphysician who questions us concerning the existence of Others.”
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

SARTRE DESCRIBES THE FUNDAMENTAL ACT OF POWER IN INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS: TURNING ANOTHER FREE SUBJECT INTO AN OBJECT. HE EXPLAINS THAT WHAT FOR THE OTHER IS THEIR LIVED, SUBJECTIVE EXPERIENCE BECOMES FOR ME AN OBJECT IN MY WORLD.
This analysis provides the deep, ontological foundation for all subsequent forms of power and authority. Before any social or political hierarchy can exist, there must be this fundamental human capacity to objectify another free being.
“The Other's appearance is the revelation of the taste of his being as an immediate existence. I, however, do not grasp this taste as he does. Nausea for him is not knowledge; it is the non-thetic apprehension of the contingency which he is. It is the surpassing of this contingency toward the unique possibilities of the for-itself. It is an existed contingency, a contingency submitted to and refused. It is this same contingency, and no other, which I presently grasp. But I am not this contingency. I surpass it toward my own possibilities, but this surpassing is the transcendence of an Other. It is given to me in entirety and without appeal; it is irremediable. The Other's for-itself wrenches itself away from this contingency and perpetually surpasses it. But in so far as I transcend the Other's transcendence, I fix it. It is no longer a resource against facticity; quite the contrary, it participates in turn in facticity, it emanates from facticity. Thus nothing comes to interpose itself between the Other's pure contingency as a taste lor himself and my consciousness. Indeed I apprehend this taste as it is existed. However, from the very fact of my otherness, this taste appears as a known and given this in the midst of the world. This body of the Other is given to me as the pure in-itself of his being-an in-itself among in-itselfs and one which I surpass toward my possibilities. This body of the Other is revealed therefore with two equally contingent characteristics: it is here and could be elsewhere; that is, instrumental-things could be arranged otherwise in relation to it, could indicate it otherwise; the distance between the chair and this body could be different; the body is like this and could be otherwise-i.e., I grasp its original contingency in the form of an objective and contingent configuration. But in reality these two characteristics are only one. The second only makes the first present, only makes it explicit for me. This body of the Other is the pure fact of the Other's presence in my world as a being-there which is expressed by a being-as-this. Thus the Other's very existence as the Other-for-me implies that he is revealed as a tool possessing the property of knowing and that this property of knowing is bound to some objective existence. This is what we shall call the necessity for the Other to be contingent for me. From the moment that there is an Other, it must be concluded that he is an instrument provided with certain sense organs. But these considerations only serve to show the abstract necessity for the Other to have a body. This body of the Other as I encounter it is the revelation as object-for-me of the contingent form assumed by the necessity of this contingency. Every Other must have sense organs but not necessarily these sense organs, not any particular face and finally not this face. But face, sense organs, presence-all that is nothing but the/contingent form of the Other's necessity to exist himself as belonging to a race, a class, an environment, etc., in so far as this contingent form is surpassed by a transcendence which does not have to exist it. What for the Other is his taste of himself becomes for me the Other's flesh. The flesh is the pure contingency of presence. It is ordinarily hidden by clothes, make-up, the cut of the hair or beard, the expression, etc. But in the course of long acquaintance with a person there always comes an instant when all these disguises are thrown off and when I find myself in the presence of the pure contingency of his presence. In this case I achieve in the face or the other parts of a body the pure intuition of the flesh. This intuition is not only knowledge; it is the affective apprehension of an absolute contingency, and this apprehension is a particular type of nausea.”
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

SARTRE DETAILS THE INHERENTLY CONTRADICTORY GOAL OF THE LOVER: TO HAVE THE BELOVED BE SIMULTANEOUSLY "FREE AND YET CHAINED."
“It is the Other's freedom as such that we want to get hold of. Not because of a desire for power. The tyrant scorns love, he is content with fear. If he seeks t-o win the love of his subjects, it is for political reasons; and if he finds a more economical way to enslave them, he adopts it immediately. On the other hand, the man who wants to be loved does not desire the enslavement of the beloved. He is not bent on becoming the object of passion which flows forth mechanically. He does not want to possess an automaton, and if we want to humiliate him, we need only try to persuade him that the beloved's passion is the result of a psychological determinism. The lover will then feel that both his love and his being are cheapened. If Tristan and Isolde fall madly in love because of a love potion, they are less interesting. The total enslavement of the beloved kills the love of the lover. The end is surpassed; if the beloved is transformed into an automaton, the lover finds himself alone. Thus the lover does not desire to possess the beloved as one possesses a thing; he demands a special type of appropriation. He wants to possess a freedom as freedom.
On the other hand, the lover cannot be satisfied with that superior form of freedom which is a free and voluntary engagement. Who would be content with a love given as pure loyalty to a sworn oath? Who would be satisfied with the words, "I love you because I have freely engaged myself to love you and because I do not wish to go back on my word." Thus the lover demands a pledge, yet is irritated by a pledge. He wants to be loved by a freedom but demands that this freedom as freedom should no longer be free. He wishes that the Other's freedom should determine itself to become love-and this not only at the beginning of the affair but at each instant-and at the same time he wants this freedom to be captured by itself, to turn back upon itself, as in madness, as in a dream, so as to will its own captivity. This captivity must be a resignation that is both free and yet chained in our hands. In love it is not a determinism of the passions which we desire in the Other nor a freedom beyond reach; it is a freedom which plays the role of a determinism of the passions and which is caught in its own role. For himself the lover does not demand that he be the cause of this radical modification of freedom but that he be the unique and privileged occasion of it. In fact he could not want to be the cause of it without immediately submerging the beloved in the midst of the world as a tool which can be transcended. That is not the essence of love. On the contrary, in Love the Lover wants to be. "the whole World" for the beloved. This means that he puts himself on the side of the world; he is the one who assumes and symbolizes the world; he is a this which includes all other thises. He is and consents to be an object. But On the other hand, he wants to be the object in which the Other's freedom consents to lose itself, the object in which the Other consents to find his being and his raison d'être as his second facticity-the object limit of transcendence, that toward which the Other's transcendence transcends all other objects but which it can in no way transcend. And everywhere he desires the circle of the Other's freedom; that is, at each instant as the Other's freedom accepts this limit to his transcendence, this acceptance is already present as the motivation of the acceptance considered. It is in the capacity of an end already chosen that the lover wishes to be chosen as an end. This allows us to grasp what basically the lover demands of the beloved; he does not want to act on the Other's freedom but to exist a priori as the objective limit of this freedom; that is, to be given at one stroke along with it and in its very upsurge as the limit which the freedom must accept in order to be free. By this very fact, what he demands is a liming, a gluing down of the Other's freedom by itself; this limit of structure is in fact a given, and the very appearance of the given as the limit of freedom means that the freedom makes itself exist within the given by being its own prohibition against surpassing it. This prohibition is envisaged by the lover simultaneously as something lived-that is, something suffered (in a word, as a facticity) and as some· thing freely consented to. It must be freely consented to since it must be effected only with the upsurge of a freedom which chooses itself as freedom. But it must be only what is lived since it must be an impossibility always present, a facticity which surges back to the heart of the Other's freedom. This is expressed psychologically by the demand that the free decision to love me, which the beloved formerly has taken, must slip in as a magically determining motivation within his present free engagement.”
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

SARTRE DETAILS THE PSYCHOLOGICAL "ALLURE" OF TREATING OTHER PEOPLE AS PREDICTABLE OBJECTS OR FUNCTIONS RATHER THAN AS FREE SUBJECTS. The allure is that this attitude makes us feel "reassured," "self-confident," and "at ease," because it protects us from the anxiety and shame of being an object for the Other's freedom.
“I direct my look upon the Other who is looking at me. But a look cannot be looked at. As soon as I look in the direction of the look it disappears, and I no longer see anything but eyes. At this instant the Other becomes a being which I possess and which recognizes my freedom. It seems that my goal has been achieved since I possess the being who has the key to my object state and since I can cause him to make proof of my freedom in a thousand different ways. But in reality the whole structure has coIlapsed, for the being which remains within my hands is an Other-as-object. As such he has lost the key to my being-as-object, and he possesses a pure and simple image of me which is nothing but one of its objective affects and which no longer touches me. If he experiences the effects of my freedom, if I can act upon his being in a thousand different ways and transcend his possibilities with all my possibilities, this is only in so far as he is an object in the world and as such is outside the state of recognizing my freedom. My disappointment is complete since I seek to appropriate the Other's freedom and perceive suddenly that I can act upon the Other only in so far as this freedom has coIlapsed beneath my look. This disappointment will be the result of my further attempts to seek again for the Other's freedom across the object which he is for me and to find privileged attitudes or conduct which would appropriate this freedom across a total appropriation of the Other's body. These attempts, as one may suspect, are on principle doomed to failure.
But it can happen also that "to look at the look" is my original reaction to my being-for-others. This means that in my upsurge into the world, I can choose myself as looking at the Other's look and can build my subjectivity upon the collapse of the subjectivity of the Other. It is this attitude which we shall calI indifference toward others. Then we are dealing with a kind of blindness with respect to others. But the term "blindness" must not lead us astray. I do not suffer this blindness as a state. I am my own blindness with regard to others, and this blindness includes an implicit comprehension of being-for-others; that is, of the Other's transcendence as a look. This comprehension is simply what I myself determine to hide from myself. I practice then a sort of factual solipsism; others are those forms which pass by in the street, those magic objects which are capable of acting at a distance and upon which I can act by means of determined conduct. I scarcely notice them; I act as if I were alone in the world. I brush against "people" as I brush against a waIl; I avoid them as I avoid obstacles. Their freedom-as-object is for me only their "coefficient of adversity.". I do not even imagine that they can look at me. Of course they have some knowledge of me, but this knowledge does not touch me. It is a question of pure modifications of their being which do not pass from them to me and which are tainted with what we call a "suffered-subjectivity" or "subjectivity-as-object;" that is, they express what they are, not what I am, and they are the effect of my action upon them. Those "people" are functions: the ticket-coIlector is only the function of collecting tickets; the cafe waiter is nothing but the function of serving the patrons. In this capacity they will be most useful if I know their keys and those "master-words" which can release their mechanisms.”
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

SARTRE DEFINES HATE AS THE PROJECT TO "SUPPRESS OTHER CONSCIOUSNESSES." THIS IS A PHILOSOPHICAL DEFINITION OF THE DESIRE FOR VIOLENCE—THE WILL TO ELIMINATE THE OTHER WHO, THROUGH THEIR FREEDOM, POSES A THREAT TO ONE'S OWN.
“My project of suppressing him is a project of suppressing others in general; that is, of recapturing my non-substantial freedom as for-itself. In hate there is given an understanding of the fact that my dimension of being-alienated is a real enslavement which comes to me through others. It is the suppression of this enslavement which is projected. That is why hate is a black feeling; that is, a feeling which aims at the suppression of an Other and which qua project is consciously projected against the disapproval of others. I disapprove of the hate which one person bears toward another; it makes me uneasy and I seek to suppress it because although it is not explicitly aimed at me, I know that it concerns me and that it is realized against me. And in fact it aims at destroying me not in so far as it would seek to suppress me but in so far as it principally lays claim to my disapproval in order to pass beyond it. Hate demands to be hated-so that to hate is equivalent to an uneasy recognition of the freedom of the one who hates.
But hate too is in turn a failure. Its initial project is to suppress other consciousnesses. But even if it succeeded in this-i.e., if it could at this moment abolish the Other-it could not bring it about that the Other had not been. Better yet, if the abolition of the Other is to be lived as the triumph of hate, it implies the explicit recognition that the Other has existed. Immediately my being-for-others by slipping into the past becomes an irremediable dimension of myself. It is what I have to be as having-been-it. Therefore I cannot free myself from it. At least, someone will say, I escape it for the present, I shall escape it in the future. But no. He who has once been for-others is contaminated in his being for the rest of his days even if the Other should be entirely suppressed; he will never cease to apprehend his dimension of being-for-others as a permanent possibility of his being. He can never recapture what he has alienated; he has even lost all hope of acting on this alienation and turning it to his own advantage since the destroyed Other has carried the key to this alienation along with him to the grave. What I was for the Other is fixed by the Other's death, and I shall irremediably be it in the past. I shall be it also and in the same way in the present if I persevere in the attitude, the projects, and the mode of life which have been judged by the Other. The Other's death constitutes me as an irremediable object exactly as my own death would do. Thus the triumph of hate is in its very upsurge transformed into failure. Hate does not enable us to get out of the circle. It simply represents the final attempt, the attempt of despair. After the failure of this attempt nothing remains for the for-itself except to re-enter the circle and allow itself to be indefinitely tossed from one to the other of the two fundamental attitudes.”
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

LEVINAS'S DEFINITION OF VIOLENCE IS NOT JUST PHYSICAL FORCE, BUT IS FUNDAMENTALLY AN ACT OF "IGNORING THE FACE OF A BEING, AVOIDING THE GAZE," AND TREATING ANOTHER FREEDOM AS A MERE FORCE OR OBJECT TO BE CALCULATED AND MASTERED.
“To command is to act on a will. Among all the forms of doing, to act on a will is to truly act. It is to act on an independent reality, on what does not only offer great resistance, but absolute resistance, resistance of a different order from great resistance. It is not he who labors, that is, moves matter, that we call a man of action, not he who makes war, but he who orders others to labor and to war. 
Action does not only imply the freedom of the agent, or one's not being influenced by some exterior thing; it also implies an efficacious transition and determines something exterior and independent. But a reality that is exterior and independent can only be free. Yet freedom is just what refuses to undergo an action. 
How then is action possible? For how can one bend a freedom which by definition is inflexible? How can one act on what does not involve anything passive? How can one move an unmoved mover? 
Since antiquity this impossibility of commanding and of action has been resolved by affirming that to command is to be in advance in accord with the will that one commands. 
In the Republic Plato says that qua leader no leader proposes or orders what is useful for himself, but what is useful for the one he commands.1 To command is then to do the will of the one who obeys. 
The apparent heteronomy of a command is in reality but an autonomy, for the freedom to command is not a blind force but a rational act of thought. A will can accept the order of another will only because it finds that order in itself. The exteriority of the command is but inwardness. If the order is contrary to reason, it will come up against the absolute resistance of reason. 
A rational being can, to be sure, risk death in refusing an absurd order, but it is said that it is enough for him to accept death to remain free. In his freedom of thought he preserves an unlimited power of refusal.
Yet things are not so simple. A freedom of thought reduced to itself, a freedom of thought which is nothing but freedom of thought, is, by that very fact, a consciousness of tyranny. Along with the rational orders of the philosopher-king appears the tyrant's orders, which the freedom of thought resists, knowing itself to be violated. In these conditions would not tyranny be real action, and the tyrant the only free being? 
This possibility, and the disquietude such a possibility awakens, constitute, we know, a major theme of ancient philosophy, and especially Platonic philosophy. While affirming action as a relationship between man and man, since action appeals to the reason in man, Plato's philosophy is as it were obsessed by the threat of tyranny. 
This is because free thought is not simply the consciousness of a tyranny exercised over our animality; it is not a mere spectator of this destitute animality agitated by fear and love; reason does not simply recognize the animality in us - it is as it were infected by it from within. The threat of tyranny is not simply known by reason; it puts reason in distress, paradoxical as the expression "a reason moved" may seem. The despotism of the senses constitutes the source of tyranny. The incomprehensible union of reason and animality, a union underlying their distinctness, makes a mockery of autonomy. 
But the power of tyranny over reason, which Plato knew, goes much further than he sometimes seems to say. In his execution Socrates is free. He has a fine death. His body becomes progressively benumbed, and from bottom upwards.2 It is an unjust death, but a fine death. Up to the last instant his thinking remains a refusal. He keeps his friends, who do not deny him. Yet we know that the possibilities of tyranny are much more extensive. It has unlimited resources at its disposal, those of love and wealth, torture and hunger, silence and rhetoric. It can exterminate in the tyrannized soul even the very capacity to be struck, that is, even the ability to obey on command. 
True heteronomy begins when obedience ceases to be obedient consciousness and becomes an inclination. The supreme violence is in that supreme gentleness. To have a servile soul is to be incapable of being jarred, incapable of being ordered. The love for the master fills the soul to such an extent that the soul no longer takes its distances. Fear fills the soul to such an extent that one no longer sees it, but sees from its perspective. 
That one can create a servile soul is not only the most painful experience of modern man, but perhaps the very refutation of human freedom. 
Human freedom is essentially unheroic. That one could, by intimidation, by torture, break the absolute resistance of freedom, even in its freedom of thought, that an alien order no longer hits us in the face, that we could accept it as though it came from ourselves, show how derisible is our freedom.
So great is the power of the tyrant, so total does its efficacity prove to be, that in the final analysis it is null, for the absolute on which this tyranny is exercised is but so much material exposed to violence. The substance forcibly seized upon by the tyrant is nowise a substance; there is no one in front of him. The tyrant has never commanded, has never acted; he has always been alone. 
But what does remain free is the capacity to foresee one's own degradation, and arm oneself against it. Freedom consists in instituting outside of oneself an order of reason, in entrusting the rational to a written text, in resorting to institutions. Freedom, in its fear of tyranny, leads to institutions, to a commitment of freedom in the very name of freedom, to a State. 
Freedom, as obedience to law, certainly is bound to the universality of maxims, but also to the incorruptibility of the exterior existence of law, whereby it is protected from subjective degradation, sheltered from feeling. The supreme work of freedom consists in guaranteeing freedom. It can only be guaranteed by setting up a world where it would be spared the ordeals of tyranny. 
Let us remember Cephalus, at the beginning of the Republic, who sees in wealth the possibility of not committing injustice: he finds the possibility of being free outside of himself.3
To conceive of and to bring about a human order is to set up a just State, which then is the possibility of surmounting the obstacles that threaten freedom. It is the only way to preserve freedom from tyranny. One can, if one likes, scoff at this preoccupation with making permanent our privileged instants, acting like property-owners with them, but that is the sole possibility we can have of not abdicating. 
Here then is our conclusion at this point: we must impose commands on ourselves in order to be free. But it must be an exterior command, not simply a rational law, not a categorical imperative, which is defenseless against tyranny; it must be an exterior law, a written law, armed with force against tyranny. Such are commands as the political condition for freedom.”
(Emmanuel Levinas, Collected Philosophical Papers, 1987)

ADDRESSING THE PROBLEM OF TYRANNY, LEVINAS FIRST ACKNOWLEDGES THE PLATONIC SOLUTION (THE JUST STATE BASED ON IMPERSONAL REASON) BUT THEN ARGUES THIS IS INSUFFICIENT. Levinas posits that the only true foundation for a non-tyrannical authority is the prior, ethical, face-to-face encounter between individuals. 
“When one sets up freedoms alongside of one another like forces which affirm one another in negating one another, one ends up with war, where each limits the others. They inevitably contest or are ignorant of one another, that is, exercise but violence and tyranny. Plato has shown that the tyrant is neither free, nor happy.
This order of tyranny and exteriority can be replaced by a rational order where the relations between separate wills are reduced to the common participation of wills in reason, which is not exterior to wills. This is the State. It is the interiorization of external relations. "Every one had better be ruled by divine wisdom dwelling within him; or, if this be impossible, then by an external authority, in order that we may be all, as far as possible, under the same government, friends and equals."13 Likewise in the myth of Er of Pamphyly14 the simple fact of having lived in a well-governed State does not keep one from making a bad choice, and it is philosophy, that is, the divine wisdom dwelling within us, that makes us immune to tyranny. 
We find here expressed a necessity of an order without tyranny in order to ensure freedom. Despite its apparent action and freedom, tyranny is seen to be neither action nor freedom. The struggle against the myths of a tyrannical religion in Books II and III of the Republic leads, in Book X15, to freeing human action from the gods and from fate, limiting necessity to the responsibility which derives from choice, and leaving the order in which choices are made to chance, without this resulting in the least impediment to the freedom of choice. The struggle against the prestige of incantatory art, in Book VIII, and the denunciation of poetry aim at the violence and tyranny involved in them. All these Platonic teachings constitute an absolutely valid part of the political solution of the problem of action and freedom. 
But the subordination of the will to impersonal reason, to discourse in itself, to written laws, requires discourse as the encounter of man with man. In the light of a face we have sought to bring out the relationship that is non-tyrannical, and yet transitive. We have sought to set forth exteriority, the other, as that which is nowise tyrannical and makes freedom possible, opposes us because it turns itself toward us. This exteriority is beyond the violence of brutality, but also that of incantation, ecstasy and love. One could call this situation religion, the situation where outside of all dogmas, all speculation about the divine or - God forbid - about the sacred and its violences, one speaks to the other. We have taken the position that commanding is speech, or that the true speech, speech in its essence, is commanding.”
(Emmanuel Levinas, Collected Philosophical Papers, 1987)

LEVINAS ARGUES THAT THE ORIGIN OF THOUGHT, AND THUS OF A TRULY HUMAN WORLD, IS THE ENCOUNTER WITH A "FREEDOM EXTERNAL TO MY OWN." Violence is the act of "ignoring the face" and treating the other as a mere force or object. Ethical authority, conversely, is born from the encounter with the Face, which "puts my freedom into action" in a non-coercive, responsible way.
“Thought begins at the very point that consciousness becomes conscious of its particularity, that is, conceives of the exteriority which lies beyond its nature qua living being and encloses it; when it becomes self-conscious at the same time that it becomes conscious of the exteriority that lies beyond its nature - when it becomes metaphysical. Thought establishes a relationship with an exterioritiy which is not assumed. Qua thinker man is the one for whom the exterior world exists. From that moment on, his so-called biological life, his strictly inward life, is illuminated with thought. The object of need, which is henceforth an external object, transcends utility. Desire recognizes the desirable in an exotic world. Bergson's expression, "instinct illuminated by intellect"7 (here setting aside Bergson's particular theory concerning reason), designates a transformation which self-consciousness brings to biological consciousness, which is blind to exteriority. This central existence, welcoming every exteriority in function of its own inwardness, but capable of conceiving an exteriority as something foreign to the inward system, and of representing to itself an exteriority that is not yet assumed, makes a life of labor possible. Thought does not spring forth from labor and the will; it is not the same as labor interrupted or will neutralized; labor and will rest on thought. The positing of man, the rational animal, in being is brought about as will and labor. Rational animal cannot mean an animal saddled with reason; the interpenetration of the terms indicates an original structure. 
The inward system of instinct can run up against exteriority as against a completely unassimilable obstacle which sends the system to its death. In this sense death would be a radical transcendence. But exteriority can have no significance for instinct, since its entry into this system means the disappearance of vital consciousness. The relationship between instinct and exteriority is not a type of knowledge, but death. Through death a living being enters the totality, but no longer thinks anything. In thinking, a being which situates itself in the totality is not absorbed into it. It exists in relationship with a totality, but remains here,8 separated from the totality - me. 
How then is this situation of being simultaneously a position in the totality, and a reserve with respect to it or a separation, brought about? What can a relationship with an exteriority which remains non-assumed in this relationship mean? Such is the problem of the ego and of totality which we wish to raise. It is the very problem of innocence. It is not resolved by simply affirming separation between free beings - since innocence involves a relationship between beings and engagement in a totality. Innocence is not a sovereign inward state. For exteriority to be able to present itself to me, it, as exteriority, must overflow the "terms" of vital consciousness, but at the same time, as present, it must not be fatal to consciousness. This penetration of a total system into a partial system which cannot assimilate it is a miracle. The possibility of thought is the consciousness of a miracle, or wonder. This miracle breaks up biological consciousness; it has an intermediary ontological status, between the lived and thought. It is the beginning of thought, or experience. As thought begins, it finds itself before the miracle of facts. The structure of facts as distinct from ideas lies in this miracle. Thought then is not simply reminiscence, but always cognition of the new. 
But the miracle does not explain the beginning of thought; it already presupposes it. One cannot deduce thought from biological consciousness. For the miracle to hold the attention of vital consciousness, for an event such as attention to first be able to appear in this consciousness, it must already have been in relationship with the whole, and this relationship must be not reducible to absorption by the whole, or death. The a posteriori of facts refers to the a priori of a thought. This a priori cannot be a foreknowledge of the facts themselves. It must on the one hand consist in the thinking individual positing himself in the totality, so as to be part of it - in defining himself,9 that is, situating himself with respect to other parts, in acquiring his identity from what distinguishes him from the other parts with which he is compromised; but, at the same time, it must consist in remaining outside, in not coinciding with his concept, acquiring his identity not from his place in the whole (from his character, work, or heritage), but from himself - in being me. The individuality of the ego is distinguished from every given individuality by the fact that its identity is not constituted by what distinguishes it from others, but by its self-reference. The totality in which a thinking being is situated is not a pure and simple addition of beings, but an addition of beings which do not make up a number with one another. That is what is distinctive of society alone. The simultaneity of participation and non-participation is an existence which moves between guilt and innocence, between ascendancy over others, the betrayal of oneself, and the return to oneself. This relationship of an individual with the totality which thought is, in which the ego takes account of what is not itself and yet is not dissolved into it, presupposes that the totality is manifested not as a milieu that as it were only brushes up against the skin of a living being, as the element in which it is immersed, but is manifested as a face in which a being confronts me. This relationship of both participation and separation which marks the advent of, and the a priori proper to, thought, in which the bonds between the parts are constituted only by the freedom of the parts, is a society, is beings that speak, that face one another. Thought begins with the possibility of conceiving a freedom external to my own. Conceiving of a freedom external to my own is the first thought. It marks my very presence in the world. The world of perception manifests a face: things affect us as possessed by the other.”
(Emmanuel Levinas, Collected Philosophical Papers, 1987)

PLATO'S DEFINITION OF "SELF-CONTROL" (SOPHROSYNE) IN THE STATE REQUIRES A CLEAR DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE "NATURALLY SUPERIOR" WHO ARE FIT TO RULE AND THE "NATURALLY INFERIOR" WHO ARE TO BE RULED. What makes this hierarchy legitimate and stable in Plato's view is not just rule by force, but a state of "agreement" (homonoia) where all classes are "unanimous as to who should rule and who obey."
“Just as a dyer, if he wishes a wool to take the right colour and to hold it, must choose the right material carefully  and take pains in preparing it for dyeing, so we must  first choose the right nature to train for our purpose, and  then take great pains in preparing it by early education,  in order that afterwards, by the process of obedience to  the law, the belief which the law expresses may sink into  it past washing out.  From this courage of the citizen  Plato distinguishes the courage of the brute and the slave, which do not express any such character as he has  described; they are not the result of education, but are  blind and irrational, and not subservient to law. In  leaving the subject, he indicates that his account ... of  courage is not final, and does not tell us all that complete  courage would involve. What does this mean ? Courage,  as he has here described it, implies an authority which  imposes the belief that is to be preserved ; and there  must be a kind of courage which shows itself in holding  fast beliefs which result from one's own reason and  conviction.  Such a virtue is briefly described later  (486 A, B).  Starting, then, from a narrow conception of  courage, Plato widens it to include everything that we  should call moral courage, and represents the courage of  the soldier as a particular instance of this more general  moral principle.  
We should notice here and further on how Plato  calls virtues ' powers ' […].  One is apt to think  of virtues as abstractions, or as, so to say, appendages  hung on to a man.  He emphatically represents them  as forces, powers to do something ; a man of great  virtue in Greek means a man with a great power of  doing certain things.  
The next virtue (430 D to 43z B), 'self-control'  […], has been implied in the constitution of the  state, with its distinction between higher and lower orders and the recognition by the citizens generally that  this is a right distinction. Appealing to the popular  usage of the word, Plato finds that […] means  'stronger than oneself' […], or, as we might  say, master of oneself.  This phrase seems a contradiction  in terms. It can only be explained by the conception  that the self is not simple but complex, and that there  is in it a superior and an inferior part.  In using the  phrase we imply that one part of the self ought to rule  the other.  Turning to society, where do we find this  self-control showing itself on a great scale? We find that  the superior elements in the soul are chiefly developed  in the minority who are fit to rule, and the inferior  chiefly in the masses.  For a state to be called self- controlled there must be a distinction of the naturally  Miperior and the naturally inferior, and the former must  rule.  But this is not enough ; there must also be  agreement […] between the classes, and a general  recognition that this constitution is right.  The inferior  might be subordinate without this agreement ; but a  really self-controlled community like our state is unanimous as to who should rule and who obey. We may  then call self-control, whether as seen in the public life  of the state, or as seen in the way an individual man  regulates the different parts of his own nature, a sort of  harmony or symphony, because the essence of it is  a unity of different elements; and we cannot say that it  resides in any one class of the community more than in  the rest, any more than in a concord the harmony resides  in one particular note.”
(Richard Lewis Nettleship, Lectures on the Republic of Plato, 1901)

A DIRECT, BRUTAL, AND UNAMBIGUOUS EXAMPLE OF COERCIVE POWER 
“CAPULET.
When the sun sets, the air doth drizzle dew;
But for the sunset of my brother’s son
It rains downright.
How now? A conduit, girl? What, still in tears?
Evermore showering? In one little body
Thou counterfeits a bark, a sea, a wind.
For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is,
Sailing in this salt flood, the winds, thy sighs,
Who raging with thy tears and they with them,
Without a sudden calm will overset
Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife?
Have you deliver’d to her our decree?

LADY CAPULET.
Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks.
I would the fool were married to her grave.

CAPULET.
Soft. Take me with you, take me with you, wife.
How, will she none? Doth she not give us thanks?
Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blest,
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?

JULIET.
Not proud you have, but thankful that you have.
Proud can I never be of what I hate;
But thankful even for hate that is meant love.

CAPULET.
How now, how now, chopp’d logic? What is this?
Proud, and, I thank you, and I thank you not;
And yet not proud. Mistress minion you,
Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,
But fettle your fine joints ’gainst Thursday next
To go with Paris to Saint Peter’s Church,
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
Out, you green-sickness carrion! Out, you baggage!
You tallow-face!

LADY CAPULET.
Fie, fie! What, are you mad?

JULIET.
Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.

CAPULET.
Hang thee young baggage, disobedient wretch!
I tell thee what,—get thee to church a Thursday,
Or never after look me in the face.
Speak not, reply not, do not answer me.
My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest
That God had lent us but this only child;
But now I see this one is one too much,
And that we have a curse in having her.
Out on her, hilding.

NURSE.
God in heaven bless her.
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.

CAPULET.
And why, my lady wisdom? Hold your tongue,
Good prudence; smatter with your gossips, go.

NURSE.
I speak no treason.

CAPULET.
O God ye good-en!

NURSE.
May not one speak?

CAPULET.
Peace, you mumbling fool!
Utter your gravity o’er a gossip’s bowl,
For here we need it not.

LADY CAPULET.
You are too hot.

CAPULET.
God’s bread, it makes me mad!
Day, night, hour, ride, time, work, play,
Alone, in company, still my care hath been
To have her match’d, and having now provided
A gentleman of noble parentage,
Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly allied,
Stuff’d, as they say, with honourable parts,
Proportion’d as one’s thought would wish a man,
And then to have a wretched puling fool,
A whining mammet, in her fortune’s tender,
To answer, ‘I’ll not wed, I cannot love,
I am too young, I pray you pardon me.’
But, and you will not wed, I’ll pardon you.
Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.
Look to’t, think on’t, I do not use to jest.
Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise.
And you be mine, I’ll give you to my friend;
And you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,
For by my soul, I’ll ne’er acknowledge thee,
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good.
Trust to’t, bethink you, I’ll not be forsworn.

 [_Exit._]

JULIET.
Is there no pity sitting in the clouds,
That sees into the bottom of my grief?
O sweet my mother, cast me not away,
Delay this marriage for a month, a week,
Or, if you do not, make the bridal bed
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.

LADY CAPULET.
Talk not to me, for I’ll not speak a word.
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.”
(William Shakespeare, Romeo and Juliet, 1597)

E2.1.A.5.1.b.ii. POWER OPERATES MOST EFFECTIVELY NOT THROUGH OVERT COERCION, BUT BY INSIDIOUSLY SHAPING BELIEFS, PREFERENCES, AND SOCIAL HIERARCHIES—a "third face" of power that, whether seen in totalitarian regimes, corporate training, or personal relationships, convinces the subjugated to accept their "imagined hierarchies" as natural, inevitable, or even their own choice.

E2.1.A.5.1.b.ii.1. The "Third Face" of Power: The Illusion of Choice - This "insidious" power differs from overt coercion. It is most effective when the subjugated not only comply but are convinced they are willing participants.

E2.1.A.5.1.b.ii.1_REF1_PH "THE SOCIAL IMPRINT
[...] The powerful, if they carry oppression beyond a certain point, necessarily end by making themselves adored by their slaves. For the thought of being under absolute compulsion, the plaything of another, is unendurable for a human being. Hence, if every way of escape from this constraint is taken from him, there is nothing left for him to do but to persuade himself that he does the things he is forced to do willingly, that is to say, to substitute devotion for obedience. And sometimes he will even strive to do more than he is obliged and will suffer less thereby, in the same way as children when they are playing will endure with a laugh physical suffering which they would find unbearable if it were inflicted on them as a punishment. It is by this twist that slavery debases the soul: this devotion is in fact based on a lie, since the reasons for it cannot bear investigation. [...] revolt, if it does not immediately pass into definite and effective action, is always changed into its opposite through the feeling of utter impotence which results from it. In other words the chief support of the oppressor lies precisely in the unavailing revolt of the oppressed.."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace , 1947)

E2.1.A.5.1.b.ii.1_REF2_PH Cristina Suzuki_que culpa é essa?, 2018, retrato da artista com texto carimbado sobre a pele

"Relations of power affect us all. But do we know what power is? Steven Lukes sets out his three-dimensional account of this key concept. For a start, he defines power as the capacity to convince others to comply, without the use of force. It is different from the authority exerted by truth with which one would comply or rather incorporate. 
The first face of power is who wins when there is a conflict of interest. 
The second face of power is who decides what is decided or in other words, who controls the agenda of issues submitted to decision making. 
The third face of power is who shapes peoples beliefs and preferences. This aspect of power can be exercised unintentionally. Groups influencing beliefs and preferences can be powerful without intending to do so. Power is most effective when its effects are not identified by those being convinced to comply. People who do not want to think can just talk about social norms, but Michel Foucault believed that identifying the mechanisms of power is liberating for the subject than can organize resistance."
(Steven Lukes on Power, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the podcast :
https://philosophybites.com/2015/06/steven-lukes-on-power.html

E2.1.A.5.1.b.ii.1_REF3_CUR "In John Carpenter's film They Live (1988), aliens have taken over Earth, disguised as humans, and formed an alliance with the capitalist elite to subjugate the rest of the population to a state of semi-consciousness by controlling their brain functions.

The premise of John Carpenter's film They Live is a perfect fictional allegory for the third face of power as described by Steven Lukes: the ability to shape people's beliefs, preferences, and desires, often without their knowledge.

Illustrates Invisible Influence: The aliens' method of control is not overt force but a hidden, ideological subjugation. They keep the population in a state of "semi-consciousness" by embedding commands directly into media. As the video scene shows, the population sees normal advertisements, but the special glasses reveal the true, stark commands underneath: "OBEY," "CONSUME," "MARRY AND REPRODUCE," and "DO NOT QUESTION AUTHORITY" [02:05].

Power is Most Effective When Unidentified: The film demonstrates Lukes's point that power is most effective when its subjects do not know they are being controlled. The people in the film go about their lives thinking they are making their own choices, unaware that their entire reality is constructed to ensure their compliance.

Revealing the Mechanism is Liberating: The moment John Nada puts on the glasses [00:17] and sees the hidden reality is the beginning of his resistance. This aligns with the idea that identifying the mechanisms of power is the first step toward fighting them."

Watch the scene where John Nada puts on the glasses for the first time on YouTube: https://youtu.be/g4XiKChyK7A?si=3v9QYbJwXuOUDDQs

E2.1.A.5.1.b.ii.1_REF4_LIT MARTIN IS DRAWN TO PALMER NOT BECAUSE PALMER OFFERS RIGID ORDER, BUT BECAUSE HE OFFERS THE OPPOSITE: LIBERATION FROM "THE RULES." This shows that the allure of submission is not always about seeking safety, but can also be about seeking a guided or sanctioned form of freedom.
““How is Antonia’s analysis going?”
“Fizzingly. She enjoys it disgracefully. Of course, it’s all for fun anyhow. She’s got a tremendous transference.”
“Palmer Anderson,” said Georgie, naming Antonia’s psycho-analyst, who was also a close friend of Antonia and myself.
 “Yes, I can imagine becoming addicted to him. He has a clever face. I imagine he’s good at his trade.”
“I don’t know,” I said. “I dislike what you call his trade. But he’s certainly good at something. Perhaps he’s just good. He’s not simply sweet and polite and gentle as only Americans can be sweet and polite and gentle, though he is that. He has real power in him.”
“You sound rather carried away by him yourself” said Georgie. She edged into a more comfortable position, her head in the crook of my knee.
“Perhaps I am,” I said. “Knowing him has made a lot of difference to me.”
“In what way?”
“I can’t say exactly. Perhaps he has made me worry less about the rules!”
“The rules!” Georgie laughed. “Darling, surely you became indifferent to the rules long ago.”
“Good heavens, no!” I said. “I’m not indifferent to them now. I’m not a Child of Nature like you. No, it’s not exactly that. But Palmer is good at setting people free.”
“If you think I don’t worry—but never mind. As for setting people free, I don’t trust these professional liberators. Anyone who is good at setting people free is also good at enslaving them, if we are to believe Plato. The trouble with you, Martin, is that you are always looking for a master.”
(Iris Murdoch, A Severed Head, 1961)

E2.1.A.5.1.b.ii.1_REF4_LIT TALEB SHOWS HOW THE DOMINANCE OF THE MINORITY CAN CREATE AN "OPTICAL ILLUSION," WHERE A "NAIVE OBSERVER" MISTAKENLY BELIEVES THAT THE OUTCOME REPRESENTS THE PREFERENCE OF THE MAJORITY. IN THIS INSTANCE, THE MECHANISM OF POWER IS NOT IMMEDIATELY OBVIOUS.
“The main idea behind complex systems is that the ensemble behaves in ways not predicted by its components. The interactions matter more than the nature of the units. Studying individual ants will almost never give us a clear indication of how the ant colony operates. For that, one needs to understand an ant colony as an ant colony, no less, no more, not a collection of ants. This is called an “emergent” property of the whole, by which parts and whole differ because what matters are the interactions between such parts. And interactions can obey very simple rules.
The rule we discuss in this chapter is the minority rule, the mother of all asymmetries. It suffices for an intransigent minority—a certain type of intransigent minority—with significant skin in the game (or, better, soul in the game) to reach a minutely small level, say 3 or 4 percent of the total population, for the entire population to have to submit to their preferences. Further, an optical illusion comes with the dominance of the minority: a naive observer (who looks at the standard average) would be under the impression that the choices and preferences are those of the majority. If it seems absurd, it is because our scientific intuitions aren’t calibrated for this. (Fughedabout scientific and academic intuitions and snap judgments; they don’t work, and your standard intellectualization fails with complex systems, though your grandmothers’ wisdom doesn’t.)
Among other things, many other things, the minority rule will show us how all it takes is a small number of intolerant, virtuous people with skin in the game, in the form of courage, for society to function properly.”
(Nassim Nicholas Taleb, Skin in the game, 2017)

HOW A SMALL, "INTRANSIGENT MINORITY" CAN IMPOSE ITS WILL ON A PASSIVE MAJORITY.
“IMPOSING VIRTUE ON OTHERS
This idea of one-sidedness can help us debunk a few more misconceptions. How do books get banned? Certainly not because they offend the average person—most persons are passive and don’t really care, or don’t care enough to request the banning. From past episodes, it looks like all it takes is a few (motivated) activists for the banning of some books, or the blacklisting of some people. The great philosopher and logician Bertrand Russell lost his job at the City University of New York owing to a letter by an angry—and stubborn—mother who did not wish to have her daughter in the same room as the fellow with a dissolute lifestyle and unruly ideas.
The same seems to apply to prohibitions—at least to the prohibition of alcohol in the United States, which led to interesting mafia stories.
Let us conjecture that the formation of moral values in society doesn’t come from the evolution of the consensus. No, it is the most intolerant person who imposes virtue on others precisely because of that intolerance. The same can apply to civil rights.
An insight into how the mechanisms of religion and the transmission of morals obey the same renormalization dynamics as dietary laws—and how we can show that morality is more likely to be something enforced by a minority. We saw earlier in the chapter the asymmetry between obeying and breaking rules: a law-abiding (or rule-abiding) fellow always follows the rules, but a felon or someone with looser sets of principles will not always break the rules. Likewise we discussed the strong asymmetric effects of halal dietary laws. Let us merge the two. It turns out that, in classical Arabic, the term halal has one opposite: haram. Violating legal and moral rules—any rule—is called haram. It is the exact same interdict that governs food intake and all other human behaviors, like sleeping with the wife of your neighbor, lending with interest (without partaking of downside of the borrower), or killing one’s landlord for pleasure. Haram is haram and is asymmetric.
Once a moral rule is established, it will suffice to have a small, intransigent minority of geographically distributed followers to dictate a norm in society. The sad news is that one person looking at mankind as an aggregate may mistakenly believe that humans are spontaneously becoming more moral, better, and more gentle, with better breath, when this applies to only a small proportion of mankind.
But things work both ways, the good and the bad. While some believe that the average Pole was complicit in the liquidation of Jews, the historian Peter Fritzsche, when asked, “Why didn’t the Poles in Warsaw help their Jewish neighbors more?,” responded that they generally did. But it took seven or eight Poles to help one Jew. It took only one Pole, acting as an informer, to turn in a dozen Jews. Even if such select Polish anti-Semitism is contestable, we can easily imagine bad outcomes stemming from a minority of bad agents.”
 (Nassim Nicholas Taleb, Skin in the game, 2017)

WITH THE EXAMPLE OF THE "TOTALLY FREE" GYROVAGUE MONK—WHO IS UNCONTROLLABLE PRECISELY BECAUSE HE HAS NOTHING TO LOSE AND WANTS FOR NOTHING— NASSIM NICHOLAS TALEB HIGHLIGHTS WHY ORGANIZATIONS HAVE A FUNDAMENTAL NEED TO CREATE THESE ARCHITECTURES OF POWER. 
“How to Legally Own Another Person
Even the church had its hippies—Coase does not need math—Avoid lawyers during Oktoberfest—The expat life ends one day—People who have been employees are signaling domestication
n its early phase, as the church was starting to get established in Europe, there was a group of itinerant people called the gyrovagues. They were gyrating and roaming monks without any affiliation to any institution. Theirs was a freelance (and ambulatory) variety of monasticism, and their order was sustainable, as the members lived off begging and from the good graces of townsmen who took interest in them. It was a weak form of sustainability, as one can hardly call sustainable a group of a people with vows of celibacy: they cannot grow organically, and would need continuous enrollment. But they managed to survive thanks to help from the population, who provided them with food and temporary shelter.
Until sometime around the fifth century, when they started disappearing—they are now extinct. The gyrovagues were unpopular with the church, banned by the Council of Chalcedon in the fifth century, then banned again by the second Council of Nicaea about three hundred years later. In the West, Saint Benedict of Nursia, their greatest detractor, favored a more institutional brand of monasticism, and ended up prevailing with his rules that codified the activity, with a hierarchy and strong supervision by an abbot. For instance, Benedict’s rules, put together in a sort of instruction manual, stipulate that a monk’s possessions should be in the hands of the abbot (Rule 33), and Rule 70 bans angry monks from hitting other monks.
Why were they banned? They were, simply, totally free. They were financially free, and secure, not because of their means but because of their lack of wants. Ironically, by being beggars, they had the equivalent of f*** you money, which we can more easily get by being at the lowest rung than by joining the income-dependent classes.
Complete freedom is the last thing you want if you have an organized religion to run. Total freedom for your employees is also a very, very bad thing if you have a firm to run, so this chapter is about the question of employees and the nature of the firm and other institutions.
Benedict’s instruction manual aims explicitly at removing any hint of freedom from the monks under the principles of stabilitate sua et conversatione morum suorum et oboedientia—“stability, conversion of manners, and obedience.” And of course monks are put through a probation period of one year to see if they are sufficiently obedient.
In short, every organization wants a certain number of people associated with it to be deprived of a certain share of their freedom. How do you own these people? First, by conditioning and psychological manipulation; second, by tweaking them to have some skin in the game, forcing them to have something significant to lose if they disobey authority—something hard to do with gyrovague beggars who flout their scorn for material possessions. In the orders of the mafia, things are simple: made men (that is, ordained) can be whacked if the capo suspects a lack of allegiance, with a transitory stay in the trunk of a car—and a guaranteed presence of the boss at their funerals. For other professions, skin in the game comes in more subtle forms.
(Nassim Nicholas Taleb, Skin in the game, 2017)

E2.1.A.5.1.b.ii.2. Naturalizing the "Imagined Hierarchy": How Fictions Become Real - Convincing people to accept "imagined hierarchies" as "natural and inevitable" and solidifying these hierarchies into "very real social structures."

E2.1.A.5.1.b.ii.2REF1_HIS EVERY "IMAGINED HIERARCHY" (A POWER STRUCTURE) JUSTIFIES ITSELF BY CLAIMING TO BE "NATURAL AND INEVITABLE."
"All distinctions – between free persons and slaves, between whites and blacks, between rich and poor – are rooted in fictions. (The hierarchy of men and women will be discussed later.) Yet it is an iron rule of history that every imagined hierarchy disavows its fictional origins and claims to be natural and inevitable. For instance, many people who have viewed the hierarchy of free persons and slaves as natural and correct have argued that slavery is not a human invention. Hammurabi saw it as ordained by the gods.

Aristotle argued that slaves have a ‘slavish nature’ whereas free people have a

‘free nature’. Their status in society is merely a reﬂection of their innate nature.

Ask white supremacists about the racial hierarchy, and you are in for a pseudoscientific lecture concerning the biological differences between the races.

You are likely to be told that there is something in Caucasian blood or genes that makes whites naturally more intelligent, moral and hardworking. Ask a die hard capitalist about the hierarchy of wealth, and you are likely to hear that it is the inevitable outcome of objective differences in abilities. The rich have more money, in this view, because they are more capable and diligent. No one should be bothered, then, if the wealthy get better health care, better education and better nutrition. The rich richly deserve every perk they enjoy."
(Yuval Noah Harari, Sapiens, A Brief History of Humankind, 2011)

E2.1.A.5.1.b.ii.2_REF2_HIS WHY SYSTEMS OF "UNJUST DISCRIMINATION" CAN SEEM "PERFECTLY SENSIBLE" TO MANY PEOPLE.
“The hierarchy of rich and poor – which mandates that rich people live in separate and more luxurious neighborhoods, study in separate and more prestigious schools, and receive medical treatment in separate and better-equipped facilities – seems perfectly sensible to many Americans and Europeans. Yet it’s a proven fact that most rich people are rich for the simple reason that they were born into a rich family, while most poor people will remain poor throughout their lives simply because they were born into a poor family.
Unfortunately, complex human societies seem to require imagined hierarchies and unjust discrimination. Of course not all hierarchies are morally identical, and some societies suffered from more extreme types of discrimination than others, yet scholars know of no large society that has been able to dispense with
discrimination altogether. Time and again people have created order in their societies by classifying the population into imagined categories, such as superiors, commoners and slaves; whites and blacks; patricians and plebeians; Brahmins and Shudras; or rich and poor. These categories have regulated relations between millions of humans by making some people legally, politically or socially superior to others. [...]
Unjust discrimination often gets worse, not better, with time. Money comes to money, and poverty to poverty. Education comes to education, and ignorance to ignorance. Those once victimised by history are likely to be victimised yet again.
And those whom history has privileged are more likely to be privileged again.
Most sociopolitical hierarchies lack a logical or biological basis – they are nothing but the perpetuation of chance events supported by myths. That is one good reason to study history. If the division into blacks and whites or Brahmins and Shudras was grounded in biological realities –that is, if Brahmins really had better brains than Shudras –biology would be suficient for understanding human society. Since the biological distinctions between different groups of Homo sapiens are, in fact, negligible, biology can’t explain the intricacies of Indian society or American racial dynamics. We can only understand those phenomena by studying the events, circumstances, and power relations that transformed figments of imagination into cruel – and very real – social structures..”
(Yuval Noah Harari, Sapiens, A Brief History of Humankind, 201)

E2.1.A.5.1.b.ii.2_REF3_HIS AN EXAMPLE OF POWER SHAPING BELIEF AT THE DEEPEST POSSIBLE LEVEL.
“A small, insignifcant mountain town called Numantia, inhabited by the peninsula’s native Celts, had dared to throw o the Roman yoke. Rome at the time was the unquestioned master of the entire Mediterranean basin, having vanquished the Macedonian and Seleucid empires, subjugated the proud city states of Greece, and turned Carthage into a smoldering ruin. The Numantians had nothing on their side but their fierce love of freedom and their inhospitable terrain. Yet they forced legion after legion to surrender or retreat in shame.
Eventually, in 134 BC, Roman patience snapped. The Senate decided to send Scipio Aemilianus, Rome’s foremost general and the man who had levelled Carthage, to take care of the Numantians. He was given a massive army of more than 30,000 soldiers. Scipio, who respected the fighting spirit and martial skill of the Numantians, preferred not to waste his soldiers in unnecessary combat.
Instead, he encircled Numantia with a line of fortifications, blocking the town’s contact with the outside world. Hunger did his work for him. After more than a year, the food supply ran out. When the Numantians realized that all hope was lost, they burned down their town; according to Roman accounts, most of them killed themselves so as not to become Roman slaves.
Numantia later became a symbol of Spanish independence and courage. Miguel de Cervantes, the author of Don Quixote, wrote a tragedy called The Siege of Numantia which ends with the town’s destruction, but also with a vision of Spain’s future greatness. Poets composed paeans to its fierce defenders and painters committed majestic depictions of the siege to canvas. In 1882, its ruins were declared a national monument’ and became a pilgrimage site for Spanish patriots.
In the 1950s and 1960s, the most popular comic books in Spain weren’t about Superman and Spiderman – they told of the adventures of El Jabato, an imaginary ancient Iberian hero who fought against the Roman oppressors. The ancient
Numantians are to this day Spain’s paragons of heroism and patriotism, cast as role models for the country’s young people.
Yet Spanish patriots extol the Numantians in Spanish – a romance language that is a progeny of Scipio’s Latin. The Numantians spoke a now dead and lost Celtic language. Cervantes wrote The Siege of Numantia in Latin script, and the play follows Graeco-Roman artistic models. Numantia had no theatres. Spanish patriots who admire Numantian heroism tend also to be loyal followers of the Roman Catholic Church – don’t miss that rst word – a church whose leader still sits in Rome and whose God prefers to be addressed in Latin. Similarly, modern Spanish law derives from Roman law; Spanish politics is built on Roman foundations; and Spanish cuisine and architecture owe a far greater debt to Roman legacies than to those of the Celts of Iberia. Nothing is really left of Numantia save ruins. Even its story has reached us thanks only to the writings of Roman historians. It was tailored to the tastes of Roman audiences which relished tales of freedom-loving barbarians. The victory of Rome over Numantia was so complete that the victors co-opted the very memory of the vanquished.
It’s not our kind of story. We like to see underdogs win. But there is no justice in history. Most past cultures have sooner or later fallen prey to the armies of some ruthless empire, which have consigned them to oblivion. Empires, too, ultimately fall, but they tend to leave behind rich and enduring legacies. Almost all people in the twenty-ﬁrst century are the oﬀspring of one empire or another.”
(Yuval Noah Harari, Sapiens, A Brief History of Humankind, 201)

E2.1.A.5.1.b.ii.2_REF4_HIS THIS SINGLE NARRATIVE OF THE VIKINGS' CONVERSION TO CHRISTIANITY PROVIDES CLEAR EXAMPLES OF ALL THREE FACES OF POWER.
"When the Vikings began their overseas expansion in the a.d. 800s, they still were “pagans” worshipping gods traditional in Germanic religion, such as the fertility god Frey, the sky god Thor, and the war god Odin. What most horrified European societies targeted by Viking raiders was that Vikings were not Christians and did not observe the taboos of a Christian society. Quite the opposite: they seemed to take sadistic pleasure in targeting churches and monasteries for attack. For instance, when in a.d. 843 a large Viking fleet went plundering up the Loire River in France, the raiders began by capturing the cathedral of Nantes at the river’s mouth and killing the bishop and all the priests. Actually, though, the Vikings had no sadistic special fondness for plundering churches, nor any prejudice against secular sources of booty. While the undefended wealth of churches and monasteries was an obvious source of easy rich pickings, the Vikings were also pleased to attack rich trading centers whenever the opportunity presented itself.
Once established overseas in Christian lands, Vikings were quite prepared to intermarry and adapt to local customs, and that included embracing Christianity. Conversions of Vikings overseas contributed to the emergence of Christianity at home in Scandinavia, as overseas Vikings returning on visits brought information about the new religion, and as chiefs and kings in Scandinavia began to recognize the political advantages that Christianity could bring them. Some Scandinavian chiefs adopted Christianity informally, even before their kings did. Decisive events in Christianity’s establishment in Scandinavia were the “official” conversion of Denmark under its king Harold Bluetooth around a.d. 960, of Norway beginning around a.d. 995, and of Sweden during the following century.
When Norway began to convert, the overseas Viking colonies of Orkney, Shetland, Faeroe, Iceland, and Greenland followed suit. That was partly because the colonies had few ships of their own, depended on Norwegian shipping for trade, and had to recognize the impossibility of remaining pagan after Norway became Christian. For instance, when Norway’s King Olaf I converted, he banned pagan Icelanders from trading with Norway, captured Icelanders visiting Norway (including relatives of leading Iceland pagans), and threatened to mutilate or kill those hostages unless Iceland renounced paganism. At the meeting of Iceland’s national assembly in the summer of
a.d. 999, Icelanders accepted the inevitable and declared themselves Christian. Around that same year, Leif Eriksson, the son of that Erik the Red who founded the Greenland colony, supposedly introduced Christianity to Greenland."
(Jared Diamond, Collapse, How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed, 2004)

THIS SINGLE NARRATIVE OF THE VIKINGS' CONVERSION TO CHRISTIANITY PROVIDES CLEAR EXAMPLES OF ALL THREE FACES OF POWER (Continued).
"The Christian churches that were created in Iceland and Greenland after
a.d. 1000 were not independent entities owning their own land and buildings, as are modern churches. Instead, they were built and owned by a leading local farmer/chief on his own land, and the farmer was entitled to a share of the taxes collected as tithes by that church from other local people. It was as if the chief negotiated a franchise agreement with McDonald’s, under which he was granted a local monopoly by McDonald’s, erected a church building and supplied merchandise according to uniform McDon-ald’s standards, and kept a part of the proceeds for himself while sending the rest of the proceeds to central management—in this case, the pope in Rome via the archbishop in Nidaros (modern Trondheim). Naturally, the Catholic Church struggled to make its churches independent of the farmers/ owners. In 1297 the Church finally succeeded in forcing Iceland church owners to transfer ownership of many church farms to the bishop. No records have been preserved to show whether something similar also happened in Greenland, but Greenland’s acceptance (at least nominally) of Norwegian rule in 1261 probably put some pressure on Greenland church owners. We do know that in 1341 the bishop of Bergen sent to Greenland an overseer named Ivar Bardarson, who eventually returned to Norway with a detailed list and description of all Greenland churches, suggesting that the bishopric was trying to tighten its grip on its Greenland “franchises” as it did in Iceland.
The conversion to Christianity constituted a dramatic cultural break for the Viking overseas colonies. Christianity’s claims of exclusivity, as the sole true religion, meant abandoning pagan traditions. Art and architecture became Christian, based on continental models. Overseas Vikings built big churches and even cathedrals equal in size to those of much more populous mainland Scandinavia, and thus huge in relation to the size of the much smaller overseas populations supporting them. The colonies took Christianity seriously enough that they paid tithes to Rome: we have records of the crusade tithe that the Greenland bishop sent to the pope in 1282 (paid in walrus tusks and polar bear hides rather than in money), and also an official papal receipt in 1327 acknowledging the delivery of the six-years’ tithe from Greenland. The Church became a major vehicle for introducing the latest European ideas to Greenland, especially because every bishop appoint
ed to Greenland was a mainland Scandinavian rather than a native Greenlander.
Perhaps the most important consequence of the colonists’ conversion to Christianity involved how they viewed themselves. The outcome reminds me of how Australians, long after the founding of Britain’s Australian colonies in 1788, continued to think of themselves not as an Asian and Pacific people but as overseas British, still prepared to die in 1915 at far-off Gallipoli fighting with the British against Turks irrelevant to Australia’s national interests. In the same way, Viking colonists on the North Atlantic islands thought of themselves as European Christians. They kept in step with mainland changes in church architecture, burial customs, and units of measurement. That shared identity enabled a few thousand Greenlanders to cooperate with each other, withstand hardships, and maintain their existence in a harsh environment for four centuries. As we shall see, it also prevented them from learning from the Inuit, and from modifying their identity in ways that might have permitted them to survive beyond four centuries."
(Jared Diamond, Collapse, How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed, 2004)

E2.1.A.5.1.b.ii.2_REF5_LIT CERVANTES PROVIDES A CLEAR AND COMICAL EXAMPLE OF A CHARACTER, DON QUIXOTE, ATTEMPTING TO CONSTRUCT A SPECIFIC "VISIBLE HIERARCHY" BETWEEN HIMSELF AND HIS SQUIRE. HE EXPLICITLY LAYS OUT THE RULES FOR THIS POWER DYNAMIC, BASED ON HIS READING. 
““It may be on the dice,” said Don Quixote, “that all thou sayest will come true; overlook the past, for thou art shrewd enough to know that our first movements are not in our own control; and one thing for the future bear in mind, that thou curb and restrain thy loquacity in my company; for in all the books of chivalry that I have read, and they are innumerable, I never met with a squire who talked so much to his lord as thou dost to thine; and in fact I feel it to be a great fault of thine and of mine: of thine, that thou hast so little respect for me; of mine, that I do not make myself more respected. There was Gandalin, the squire of Amadis of Gaul, that was Count of the Insula Firme, and we read of him that he always addressed his lord with his cap in his hand, his head bowed down and his body bent double, more turquesco. And then, what shall we say of Gasabal, the squire of Galaor, who was so silent that in order to indicate to us the greatness of his marvellous taciturnity his name is only once mentioned in the whole of that history, as long as it is truthful? From all I have said thou wilt gather, Sancho, that there must be a difference between master and man, between lord and lackey, between knight and squire: so that from this day forward in our intercourse we must observe more respect and take less liberties, for in whatever way I may be provoked with you it will be bad for the pitcher. The favours and benefits that I have promised you will come in due time, and if they do not your wages at least will not be lost, as I have already told you.”
“All that your worship says is very well,” said Sancho, “but I should like to know (in case the time of favours should not come, and it might be necessary to fall back upon wages) how much did the squire of a knight-errant get in those days, and did they agree by the month, or by the day like bricklayers?”
“I do not believe,” replied Don Quixote, “that such squires were ever on wages, but were dependent on favour; and if I have now mentioned thine in the sealed will I have left at home, it was with a view to what may happen; for as yet I know not how chivalry will turn out in these wretched times of ours, and I do not wish my soul to suffer for trifles in the other world; for I would have thee know, Sancho, that in this there is no condition more hazardous than that of adventurers.”
“That is true,” said Sancho, “since the mere noise of the hammers of a fulling mill can disturb and disquiet the heart of such a valiant errant adventurer as your worship; but you may be sure I will not open my lips henceforward to make light of anything of your worship’s, but only to honour you as my master and natural lord.”
“By so doing,” replied Don Quixote, “shalt thou live long on the face of the earth; for next to parents, masters are to be respected as though they were parents.”
(Miguel de Cervantes, The History of Don Quixote, Vol 1, 1605)

IN A DETAILED NEGOTIATION OF THE "ARCHITECTURE" OF THEIR FUTURE NOBLE LIFE, DON QUIXOTE AND SANCHO ARE PLANNING FOR DON QUIXOTE TO BE KING AND FOR SANCHO PANZA TO BE MADE A COUNT. 
““It comes to this, too,” said Sancho, “what some naughty people say, ‘Never ask as a favour what thou canst take by force;’ though it would fit better to say, ‘A clear escape is better than good men’s prayers.’ I say so because if my lord the king, your worship’s father-in-law, will not condescend to give you my lady the princess, there is nothing for it but, as your worship says, to seize her and transport her. But the mischief is that until peace is made and you come into the peaceful enjoyment of your kingdom, the poor squire is famishing as far as rewards go, unless it be that the confidante damsel that is to be his wife comes with the princess, and that with her he tides over his bad luck until Heaven otherwise orders things; for his master, I suppose, may as well give her to him at once for a lawful wife.”
“Nobody can object to that,” said Don Quixote.
“Then since that may be,” said Sancho, “there is nothing for it but to commend ourselves to God, and let fortune take what course it will.”
“God guide it according to my wishes and thy wants,” said Don Quixote, “and mean be he who thinks himself mean.”
“In God’s name let him be so,” said Sancho: “I am an old Christian, and to fit me for a count that’s enough.”
“And more than enough for thee,” said Don Quixote; “and even wert thou not, it would make no difference, because I being the king can easily give thee nobility without purchase or service rendered by thee, for when I make thee a count, then thou art at once a gentleman; and they may say what they will, but by my faith they will have to call thee ‘your lordship,’ whether they like it or not.”
“Not a doubt of it; and I’ll know how to support the tittle,” said Sancho.
“Title thou shouldst say, not tittle,” said his master.
“So be it,” answered Sancho. “I say I will know how to behave, for once in my life I was beadle of a brotherhood, and the beadle’s gown sat so well on me that all said I looked as if I was to be steward of the same brotherhood. What will it be, then, when I put a duke’s robe on my back, or dress myself in gold and pearls like a count? I believe they’ll come a hundred leagues to see me.”
“Thou wilt look well,” said Don Quixote, “but thou must shave thy beard often, for thou hast it so thick and rough and unkempt, that if thou dost not shave it every second day at least, they will see what thou art at the distance of a musket shot.”
“What more will it be,” said Sancho, “than having a barber, and keeping him at wages in the house? and even if it be necessary, I will make him go behind me like a nobleman’s equerry.”
“Why, how dost thou know that noblemen have equerries behind them?” asked Don Quixote.
“I will tell you,” answered Sancho. “Years ago I was for a month at the capital and there I saw taking the air a very small gentleman who they said was a very great man, and a man following him on horseback in every turn he took, just as if he was his tail. I asked why this man did not join the other man, instead of always going behind him; they answered me that he was his equerry, and that it was the custom with nobles to have such persons behind them, and ever since then I know it, for I have never forgotten it.”
“Thou art right,” said Don Quixote, “and in the same way thou mayest carry thy barber with thee, for customs did not come into use all together, nor were they all invented at once, and thou mayest be the first count to have a barber to follow him; and, indeed, shaving one’s beard is a greater trust than saddling one’s horse.”
“Let the barber business be my look-out,” said Sancho; “and your worship’s be it to strive to become a king, and make me a count.”
“So it shall be,” answered Don Quixote, and raising his eyes he saw what will be told in the following chapter.”
(Miguel de Cervantes, The History of Don Quixote, Vol 1, 1605)

E2.1.A.5.1.b.ii.3. The Techniques of Control: Case Studies in Shaping Beliefs

E2.1.A.5.1.b.ii.3_REF1_HIS Totalitarian & Political Control

E2.1.A.5.1.b.ii.3_REF1.1_HIS HOW A TOTALITARIAN REGIME CONSOLIDATES POWER NOT JUST THROUGH BRUTE FORCE, BUT BY STRATEGICALLY MANIPULATING THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK, CONTROLLING THE POLITICAL AGENDA, AND SHAPING THE VERY BELIEFS OF THE POPULATION.
“Hitler had lost no time in exploiting the Reichstag fire to the limit. On the day following the fire, February 28, he prevailed on President Hindenburg to sign a decree “for the Protection of the People and the State” suspending the seven sections of the constitution which guaranteed individual and civil liberties. Described as a “defensive measure against Communist acts of violence endangering the state,” the decree laid down that:   Restrictions on personal liberty, on the right of free expression of opinion, including freedom of the press; on the rights of assembly and association; and violations of the privacy of postal, telegraphic and telephonic communications; and warrants for house searchers, orders for confiscations as well as restrictions on property, are also permissible beyond the legal limits otherwise prescribed. In addition, the decree authorized the Reich government to take over complete power in the federal states when necessary and imposed the death sentence for a number of crimes, including “serious disturbances of the peace” by armed persons.8 Thus with one stroke Hitler was able not only to legally gag his opponents and arrest them at his will but, by making the trumped-up Communist threat “official,” as it were, to throw millions of the middle class and the peasantry into a frenzy of fear that unless they voted for National Socialism at the elections a week hence, the Bolsheviks might take over. Some four thousand Communist officials and a great many Social Democrat and liberal leaders were arrested, including members of the Reichstag, who, according to the law, were immune from arrest. This was the first experience Germans had had with Nazi terror backed up by the government. Truckloads of storm troopers roared through the streets all over Germany, breaking into homes, rounding up victims and carting them off to S.A. barracks, where they were tortured and beaten. The Communist press and political meetings were suppressed; the Social Democrat newspapers and many liberal journals were suspended and the meetings of the democratic parties either banned or broken up. Only the Nazis and their Nationalist allies were permitted to campaign unmolested. With all the resources of the national and Prussian governments at their disposal and with plenty of money from big business in their coffers, the Nazis carried on an election propaganda such as Germany had never seen before. For the first time the State-run radio carried the voices of Hitler, Goering and Goebbels to every corner of the land.”
(William Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, A History of Nazi Germany, 2011)

E2.1.A.5.1.b.ii.3_REF1.2_HIS THE EXPLICIT PURPOSE OF THE HITLER YOUTH WAS TO EDUCATE CHILDREN "PHYSICALLY, INTELLECTUALLY AND MORALLY IN THE SPIRIT OF NATIONAL SOCIALISM."
“All of the German youth in the Reich is organized within the Hitler Youth. The German youth, besides being reared within the family and schools, shall be educated physically, intellectually and morally in the spirit of National Socialism … through the Hitler Youth.11 Schirach, whose office had formerly been subordinate to the Ministry of Education, was made responsible directly to Hitler. This half-baked young man of twenty-nine, who wrote maudlin verse in praise of Hitler (“this genius grazing the stars”) and followed Rosenberg in his weird paganism and Streicher in his virulent anti-Semitism, had become the dictator of youth in the Third Reich. From the age of six to eighteen, when conscription for the Labor Service and the Army began, girls as well as boys were organized in the various cadres of the Hitler Youth. Parents found guilty of trying to keep their children from joining the organization were subject to heavy prison sentences even though, as in some cases, they merely objected to having their daughters enter some of the services where cases of pregnancy had reached scandalous proportions. From the age of six to ten, a boy served a sort of apprenticeship for the Hitler Youth as a Pimpf. Each youngster was given a performance book in which would be recorded his progress through the entire Nazi youth movement, including his ideological growth. At ten, after passing suitable tests in athletics, camping and Nazified history, he graduated into the Jungvolk (“Young Folk”), where he took the following oath: In the presence of this blood banner, which represents our Fuehrer, I swear to devote all my energies and my strength to the savior of our country, Adolf Hitler. I am willing and ready to give up my life for him, so help me God. At fourteen the boy entered the Hitler Youth proper and remained there until he was eighteen, when he passed into the Labor Service and the Army. It was a vast organization organized on paramilitary lines similar to the S.A. and in which the youngsters approaching manhood received systematic training not only in camping, sports and Nazi ideology but in soldiering. On many a weekend in the environs of Berlin this writer would be interrupted in his picnicking by Hitler Youths scrambling through the woods or over the heath, rifles at the ready and heavy army packs on their backs. Sometimes the young ladies would be playing at soldiering, too, for the Hitler Youth movement did not neglect the maidens. From ten to fourteen, German girls were enrolled as Jungmaedel—literally, “young maidens”—"and they too had a uniform, made up of a white blouse, full blue skirt, socks and heavy—and most unfeminine—marching shoes. Their training was much like that of the boys of the same age and included long marches on weekends with heavy packs and the usual indoctrination in the Nazi philosophy. But emphasis was put on the role of women in the Third Reich —to be, above all, healthy mothers of healthy children. This was stressed even more when the girls became, at fourteen, members of the B.D.M. —Bund Deutscher Maedel (League of German Maidens). At eighteen, several thousand of the girls in the B.D.M. (they remained in it until 21) did a year’s service on the farms—their so-called Land Jahr, which was equivalent to the Labor Service of the young men. Their task was to help both in the house and in the fields. The girls lived sometimes in the farmhouses and often in small camps in rural districts from which they were taken by truck early each morning to the farms. Moral problems soon arose. The presence of a pretty young city girl sometimes disrupted a peasant’s household, and angry complaints from parents about their daughters’ having been made pregnant on the farms began to be heard. But that wasn’t the only problem. Usually a girls’ camp was located near a Labor Service camp for young men. This juxtaposition seems to have made for many pregnancies too. One couplet—a take-off on the “Strength through Joy” movement of the Labor Front, but it applied especially to the Land Jahr of the young maidens —went the rounds of Germany: In the fields and on the heath I lose Strength through Joy. Similar moral problems also arose during the Household Year for Girls, in which some half a million Hitler Youth maidens spent a year at domestic service in a city household. Actually, the more sincere Nazis did not consider them moral problems at all. On more than one occasion I listened to women leaders of the B.D.M.—they were invariably of the plainer type and usually unmarried—lecture their young charges on the moral and patriotic duty of bearing children for Hitler’s Reich—within wedlock if possible, but without it if necessary. By the end of 1938 the Hitler Youth numbered 7,728,259. Large as this number was, obviously some four million youth had managed to stay out of the organization, and in March 1939 the government issued a law conscripting all youth into the Hitler Youth on the same basis as they were drafted into the Army. Recalcitrant parents were warned that their children would be taken away from them and put into orphanages or other homes unless they enrolled.”
(William Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, A History of Nazi Germany, 2011)

E2.1.A.5.1.b.ii.3_REF1.3_HIS THE POLITICAL POWER STRUGGLE AND THE FINAL CONSOLIDATION OF HITLER'S CONTROL OVER THE MILITARY.
“The old leaders of the Army were jubilant. Not only would their Commander in Chief be vindicated and restored to his leadership of the Army. The machinations of the S.S. and the Gestapo, of those two unscrupulous men, Himmler and Heydrich, who held such unbridled power in the country, would be exposed and they and the S.S. would go the way of Roehm and the S.A. four years before. It would be a blow too to the party and to Hitler himself; it would shake the foundations of the Third Reich so violently that the Fuehrer himself might topple over. If he tried to cover up the crime, the Army itself, with a clear conscience, now that the truth was known, would take matters in its own hands. But once again, as so often in the past five years, the generals were outsmarted by the former Austrian corporal and then utterly defeated by fate, which the Leader, if not they, knew how to take advantage of for his own ends. All through the last week of January 1938 a tension, reminiscent of that of late June 1934, gripped Berlin. Again the capital seethed with rumors. Hitler had dismissed the two top men in the Army, for reasons unknown. The generals were in revolt. They were plotting a military putsch. Ambassador François-Poncet heard that Fritsch, who had invited him to dinner for February 2 and then canceled the invitation, had been arrested. There were reports that the Army planned to surround the Reichstag, when it met to hear Hitler’s fifth-anniversary speech on January 30, and arrest the entire Nazi government and its hand-picked deputies. Credence of such reports grew when it was announced that the meeting of the Reichstag had been indefinitely postponed. The German dictator was obviously in difficulties. He had met his match at last in the unbending senior generals of the German Army. Or so the latter must have thought, but they were in error. On February 4, 1938, the German cabinet met for what was to prove the last time. Whatever difficulties Hitler had experienced, he now resolved them in a manner which eliminated those who stood in his way, not only in the Army but in the Foreign Office. A decree which he hastily put through the cabinet that day and which was announced to the nation and the world on the radio shortly before midnight began: “From now on I take over personally the command of the whole armed forces.” As head of state, Hitler of course had been the Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces, but now he took over Blomberg’s office of Commander in Chief and abolished the War Ministry, over which the now moon-struck bridegroom had also presided. In its place was created the organization which was to become familiar to the world during World War II, the High Command of the Armed Forces (Oberkommando der Wehrmacht, or OKW), to which the three fighting services, the Army, the Navy and the Air Force, were subordinated. Hitler was its Supreme Commander, and under him was a chief of staff, with the high-sounding title of “Chief of the High Command of the Armed Forces”—a post which went to the toady Keitel, who managed to keep it to the end.”
(William Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, A History of Nazi Germany, 2011)

E2.1.A.5.1.b.ii.3_REF1.4_LIT THE REVOLUTIONARY LEADERS, MONSIEUR AND MADAME DEFARGE, ARE SYSTEMATICALLY SHAPING A POOR, SIMPLE MAN—THE "MENDER OF ROADS"—INTO A REVOLUTIONARY. They are not giving him orders, but are subtly manipulating his perceptions and emotions.

“There was a murmur of confidence and approval, and then the man who
hungered, asked: “Is this rustic to be sent back soon? I hope so. He is
very simple; is he not a little dangerous?”

“He knows nothing,” said Defarge; “at least nothing more than would
easily elevate himself to a gallows of the same height. I charge myself
with him; let him remain with me; I will take care of him, and set him
on his road. He wishes to see the fine world--the King, the Queen, and
Court; let him see them on Sunday.”

“What?” exclaimed the hungry man, staring. “Is it a good sign, that he
wishes to see Royalty and Nobility?”

“Jacques,” said Defarge; “judiciously show a cat milk, if you wish her
to thirst for it. Judiciously show a dog his natural prey, if you wish
him to bring it down one day.”

Nothing more was said, and the mender of roads, being found already
dozing on the topmost stair, was advised to lay himself down on the
pallet-bed and take some rest. He needed no persuasion, and was soon
asleep.

Worse quarters than Defarge’s wine-shop, could easily have been found
in Paris for a provincial slave of that degree. Saving for a mysterious
dread of madame by which he was constantly haunted, his life was very
new and agreeable. But, madame sat all day at her counter, so expressly
unconscious of him, and so particularly determined not to perceive that
his being there had any connection with anything below the surface, that
he shook in his wooden shoes whenever his eye lighted on her. For, he
contended with himself that it was impossible to foresee what that lady
might pretend next; and he felt assured that if she should take it
into her brightly ornamented head to pretend that she had seen him do a
murder and afterwards flay the victim, she would infallibly go through
with it until the play was played out.

Therefore, when Sunday came, the mender of roads was not enchanted
(though he said he was) to find that madame was to accompany monsieur
and himself to Versailles. It was additionally disconcerting to have
madame knitting all the way there, in a public conveyance; it was
additionally disconcerting yet, to have madame in the crowd in the
afternoon, still with her knitting in her hands as the crowd waited to
see the carriage of the King and Queen.

“You work hard, madame,” said a man near her.

“Yes,” answered Madame Defarge; “I have a good deal to do.”

“What do you make, madame?”

“Many things.”

“For instance--”

“For instance,” returned Madame Defarge, composedly, “shrouds.”

The man moved a little further away, as soon as he could, and the mender
of roads fanned himself with his blue cap: feeling it mightily close
and oppressive. If he needed a King and Queen to restore him, he was
fortunate in having his remedy at hand; for, soon the large-faced King
and the fair-faced Queen came in their golden coach, attended by the
shining Bull’s Eye of their Court, a glittering multitude of laughing
ladies and fine lords; and in jewels and silks and powder and splendour
and elegantly spurning figures and handsomely disdainful faces of both
sexes, the mender of roads bathed himself, so much to his temporary
intoxication, that he cried Long live the King, Long live the Queen,
Long live everybody and everything! as if he had never heard of
ubiquitous Jacques in his time. Then, there were gardens, courtyards,
terraces, fountains, green banks, more King and Queen, more Bull’s Eye,
more lords and ladies, more Long live they all! until he absolutely wept
with sentiment. During the whole of this scene, which lasted some three
hours, he had plenty of shouting and weeping and sentimental company,
and throughout Defarge held him by the collar, as if to restrain him
from flying at the objects of his brief devotion and tearing them to
pieces.

“Bravo!” said Defarge, clapping him on the back when it was over, like a
patron; “you are a good boy!”

The mender of roads was now coming to himself, and was mistrustful of
having made a mistake in his late demonstrations; but no.

“You are the fellow we want,” said Defarge, in his ear; “you make
these fools believe that it will last for ever. Then, they are the more
insolent, and it is the nearer ended.”

“Hey!” cried the mender of roads, reflectively; “that’s true.”

“These fools know nothing. While they despise your breath, and would
stop it for ever and ever, in you or in a hundred like you rather than
in one of their own horses or dogs, they only know what your breath
tells them. Let it deceive them, then, a little longer; it cannot
deceive them too much.”

Madame Defarge looked superciliously at the client, and nodded in
confirmation.

“As to you,” said she, “you would shout and shed tears for anything, if
it made a show and a noise. Say! Would you not?”

“Truly, madame, I think so. For the moment.”

“If you were shown a great heap of dolls, and were set upon them to
pluck them to pieces and despoil them for your own advantage, you would
pick out the richest and gayest. Say! Would you not?”

“Truly yes, madame.”

“Yes. And if you were shown a flock of birds, unable to fly, and were
set upon them to strip them of their feathers for your own advantage,
you would set upon the birds of the finest feathers; would you not?”

“It is true, madame.”

“You have seen both dolls and birds to-day,” said Madame Defarge, with
a wave of her hand towards the place where they had last been apparent;
“now, go home!”
(Charles Dickens, A Tale of Two Cities, 1859)

E2.1.A.5.1.b.ii.3_REF2_SOC Corporate & Institutional Control

E2.1.A.5.1.b.ii.3_REF2.1_LIT THE CHILDREN AT HAILSHAM ARE CONTROLLED NOT BY OVERT FORCE, BUT BY A LONG-TERM PROCESS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL CONDITIONING THAT SHAPES THEIR VERY UNDERSTANDING OF THEMSELVES AND THEIR WORLD. 
“She was standing at the same spot as before, but she'd turned to face us now, so her back was against the rail, and the rainy sky behind her.
"No, no, I'm sorry, I'm going to have to interrupt you," she was saying, and I could see she was talking to two boys sitting on the benches immediately in front of her. Her voice wasn't exactly strange, but she was speaking very loudly, in the sort of voice she'd use to announce something to the lot of us, and that was why we'd all gone quiet. "No, Peter, I'm going to have to stop you. I can't listen to you any more and keep silent."
Then she raised her gaze to include the rest of us and took a deep breath. "All right, you can hear this, it's for all of you. It's time someone spelt it out."
We waited while she kept staring at us. Later, some people said they'd thought she was going to give us a big telling-off; others that she was about to announce a new rule on how we played rounders. But I knew before she said another word it would be something more.
"Boys, you must forgive me for listening. But you were right behind me, sol couldn't help it. Peter, why don't you tell the others what you were saying to Gordon just now?"
Peter J. looked bewildered and I could see him getting ready his injured innocence face. But then Miss Lucy said again, this time much more gently:
"Peter, go on. Please tell the others what you were just saying."
Peter shrugged. "We were just talking about what it would feel like if we became actors. What sort of life it would be."
"Yes," Miss Lucy said, "and you were saying to Gordon you'd have to go to America to stand the best chance."
Peter J. shrugged again and muttered quietly: "Yes, Miss Lucy."
But Miss Lucy was now moving her gaze over the lot of us. "I know you don't mean any harm. But there's just too much talk like this. I hear it all the time, it's been allowed to go on, and it's not right." I could see more drops coming off the gutter and landing on her shoulder, but she didn't seem to notice. "If no one else will talk to you," she continued, "then I will. The problem, as I see it, is that you've been told and not told. You've been told, but none of you really understand, and I dare say, some people are quite happy to leave it that way. But I'm not. If you're going to have and know properly. None of you will go to America, none of you will be film stars. And none of you will be working in supermarkets as I heard some of you planning the other day. Your lives are set out for you. You'll become adults, then before you're old, before you're even middle-aged, you'll start to donate your vital organs. That's what each of you was created to do. You're not like the actors you watch on your videos, you're not even like me. You were brought into this world for a purpose, and your futures, all of them, have been decided. So you're not to talk that way any more. You'll be leaving Hailsham before long, and it's not so far off, the day you'll be preparing for your first donations. You need to remember that. If you're to have decent lives, you have to know who you are and what lies ahead of you, every one of you."
Then she went silent, but my impression was that she was continuing to say things inside her head, because for some time her gaze kept roving over us, going from face to face just as if she were still speaking to us. We were all pretty relieved when she turned to look out over the playing field again.
"It's not so bad now," she said, even though the rain was as steady as ever. "Let's just go out there. Then maybe the sun will come out too."
I think that was all she said. When I was discussing it with Ruth a few years ago at the centre in Dover, she claimed Miss Lucy had told us a lot more; that she'd explained how before donations we'd all spend some time first as carers, about the usual sequence of the donations, the recovery centres and so on-but I'm pretty sure she didn't. Okay, she probably intended to when she began talking. But my guess is once she'd set off, once she'd seen the puzzled, uncomfortable faces in front of her, she realised the impossibility of completing what she'd started.
It's hard to say clearly what sort of impact Miss Lucy's outburst at the pavilion made. Word got round fast enough, but the talk mostly focused on Miss Lucy herself rather than on what she'd been trying to tell us. Some students thought she'd lost her marbles for a moment; others that she'd been asked to say what she had by Miss Emily and the other guardians; there were even some who'd actually been there and who thought Miss Lucy had been telling us off for being too rowdy on the veranda. But as I say there was surprisingly little discussion about what she'd said. If it did come up, people tended to say: "Well so what? We already knew all that."
But that had been Miss Lucy's point exactly. We'd been "told and not told," as she'd put it. A few years ago, when Tommy and I were going over it all again, and I reminded him of Miss Lucy's "told and not told" idea, he came up with a theory Tommy thought it possible the guardians had, throughout all our years af Hailsham, timed very carefully and deliberately everything they told us, so that we were always just too young to understand properly the latest piece of information. But of course we'd take it in at some level, so that before long all this stuff was there in our heads without us ever having examined it properly.
It's a bit too much like a conspiracy theory for me-I don't think our guardians were that crafty-but there's probably something in it. Certainly, it feels like I always knew about donations in some vague way, even as early as six or seven. And it's curious, when we were older and the guardians were giving us those talks, nothing came as a complete surprise. It was like we'd heard everything somewhere before.
One thing that occurs to me now is that when the guardians first started giving us proper lectures about sex, they tended to run them together with talk about the donations. At that age-again, I'm talking of around thirteen-we were all pretty worried and excited about sex, and naturally would have pushed the other stuff into the background. in other words, it's possible the guardians managed to smuggle into our heads a lot of the basic facts about our futures.
Now to be fair, it was probably natural to run these two subjects together. If, say, they were telling us how we'd have to be very careful to avoid diseases when we had sex, it would have been odd not to mention how much more important this was for us than for normal people outside. And that, of course, Would bring us onto the donations.
Then there was the whole business about our not being able to have babies. Miss Emily used to give a lot of the sex lectures herself, and I remember onсе, she brought in a life-size skeleton from the biology class to demonstrate how it was done. We watched in complete astonishment as she put the skeleton through various contortions, thrusting her pointer around without the slightest self-consciousness. She was going through all the nuts and bolts of how you did it, what went in where, the different variations, like this was still Geography. Then suddenly, with the skeleton in an obscene heap on the desktop, she turned away and began telling us how we had to be careful who we had sex with. Not just because of the diseases, but because, she said, "sex affects emotions in ways you'd never expect." We had to be extremely careful about having sex in the outside world, especially with people who weren't students, because out there sex meant all sorts of things. Out there people were even fighting and killing each other over who had sex with whom. And the reason it meant so much-so much more than, say, dancing or table-tennis-was because the people out there were different from us students: they could have babies from sex. That was why it was so important to them, this question of who did it with whom. And even though, as we knew, it was completely impossible for any of us to have babies, out there, we had to behave like them. We had to respect the rules and treat sex as something pretty special.
Miss Emily's lecture that day was typical of what I'm talking about. We'd be focusing on sex, and then the other stuff would creep in. I suppose that was all part of how we came to be "told and not told."
I think in the end we must have absorbed quite a lot of information, because I remember, around that age, a marked change in the way we approached the whole territory surrounding the donations. Until then, as I've said, we'd done everything to avoid the subject; we'd backed off at the first sign we were entering that ground, and there'd been severe punishment for any idiot-like Marge that time-who got careless. But from when we were thirteen, like I say, things started to change. We still didn't discuss the donations and all that went with them; we still found the whole area awkward enough. But it became something we made jokes about, in much the way we joked about sex. Looking back now, I'd say the rule about not discussing the donations openly was still there, as strong as ever. But now it was okay, almost required, every now and then, to make some jokey allusion to these things that lay in front of us.”
 (Kazuo Ishiguro, Never Let Me Go, 2005)

E2.1.A.5.1.b.ii.3_REF2.2_SOC ARLIE RUSSELL HOCHSCHILD PROVIDES A DETAILED ACCOUNT OF THE SPECIFIC TECHNIQUES USED BY AN ORGANIZATION TO CONTROL ITS EMPLOYEES AT THE DEEPEST LEVEL. IT IS A PRACTICAL GUIDE TO THE "SOCIAL ENGINEERING OF FEELING."
“The cabin-to-home analogy is vulnerable from another side too. The flight attendant is asked to see the passenger as a potential friend, or as like one, and to be as understanding as one would be with a good friend. The if personalizes an impersonal relation. On the other hand, the student is warned, the reciprocity of real friendship is not part of the if friendship. The passenger has no obligation to return empathy or even courtesy. As one trainer commented: "If a passenger snaps at you and you didn't do anything wrong, just remember it's not you he is snapping at. It's your uniform, it's your role as a Delta flight attendant. Don't take it personally." The passenger, unlike a real friend or guest in a home, assumes a right to unsuppressed anger at irritations, having purchased that tacit right with the ticket.
Flight attendants are reminded of this one-way personalization whenever passengers confuse one flight attendant with another ("You look so much alike") or ask questions that reveal that they never thought of the attendants as real people. "Passengers are surprised when they discover that we eat, too. They think we can go for twenty hours without being allowed to eat. Or they will get off the plane in Hong Kong after a fifteen-hour flight-which is a sixteen- or seventeen-hour duty day for us-and say, 'Are you going on to Bangkok?' 'Are you going on to Delhi?' Yes, right, sure we go round the world and get sent back with the airplane for rif-pairs." Just as the flight attendant's empathy is stretched thin into a commercial offering, the passenger's try at empathy is usually pinched into the narrow grooves of public manners.
It is when the going gets rough-when flights are crowded and planes are late, when babies bawl and smokers bicker noisily with nonsmokers, when the meals run out and the air conditioning fails-that maintaining the analogy to home, amid the Muzak and the drinks, becomes truly a monument to our human capacity to suppress feeling.
Under such conditions some passengers exercise the privilege of not suppressing their irritation; they become "irates" When that happens, back-up analogies are brought into service. In training, the recruit was told: "Basically, the passengers are just like children. They need attention. Sometimes first-time riders are real nervous. And some of the troublemakers really just want your attention." The passenger-as-child analogy was extended to cover sibling rivalry: "You can't play cards with just one passenger because the other passengers will get jealous." To think of unruly passengers as "just like children" is to widen tolerance of them. If their needs are like those of a child, those needs are supposed to come first. The worker's right to anger is correspondingly reduced; as an adult he must work to inhibit and suppress anger at children.
Should the analogy to children fail to induce the necessary deep acting, surface-acting strategies for handling the "irate" can be brought into play. Attendants were urged to "work" the passenger's name, as in "Yes, Mr. Jones, it's true the flight is delayed." This reminds the passenger that he is not anonymous, that there is at least some pretension to a personal relation and that some emotion management is owed. Again, workers were told to use terms of empathy. As one flight attendant, a veteran of fifteen years with United, recalled from her training: "Whatever happens, you're supposed to say, I know just how you feel. Lost your luggage? I know just how you feel. Late for a connection? I know just how you feel Didn't get that steak you were counting on? I know just how you feel." Flight attendants report that such expressions of empathy are useful in convincing passengers that they have misplaced the blame and misaimed their anger.
Perspectives elicit feeling. In deep acting, perspectives are evoked and suppressed in part through a way of speaking. One way of keeping the living room analogy alive is to speak in company language. In a near-Orwellian Newspeak, the company seems to have officially eliminated the very idea of getting angry at the passenger, the source of revenue. Super-visors never speak officially of an obnoxious or outrageous passenger, only of an uncontrolled passenger. The term suggests that a fact has somehow attached itself to this passenger-not that the passenger has lost control or even had any control to lose. Again, the common phrase "mishandled passenger" suggests a bungle somewhere up the line, by someone des tined to remain lost in the web of workers that stretches from curbside to airplane cabin. By linguistically avoiding any attribution of blame, the idea of a right to be angry at the passenger is smuggled out of discourse. Linguistically speaking. the passenger never does anything wrong, so he can't be blamed or made the object of anger.
In passenger-handling classes, one trainer described how she passed a dinner tray to a man in a window seat. To do this, she had to pass it across a woman sitting on the aisle seat. As the tray went by, the woman snitched the man's dessert. The flight attendant politely responded, "I notice this man's dessert is on your tray." The dirty deed was done, but, the implication was, by no one in particular. Such implicit reframing dulls a sense of cause and effect. It separates object from verb and verb from subject. The passenger does not feel accused, and the flight attendant does not feel as if she is accusing. Emotion work has been accomplished, but it has hidden its tracks with words”
(Arlie Russell Hochschild, The managed heart, 2003)

E2.1.A.5.1.b.ii.3_REF2.3_SOC ARLIE RUSSELL HOCHSCHILD DESCRIBE THE CORPORATE "SOCIAL ENGINEERING OF FEELING." This is a form of influence that is largely invisible because its goal is to produce an emotional display that appears authentic and sincere. 
“In public life, expressions of feeling often make news. For example, a TV sports newscaster noted: "Tennis has passed the stage of trying to survive as a commercial sport. We're beyond that now. The women's tennis teams, too. The women are really serious players. They get really mad if they hit a net ball. They get even madder than the guys, I'd say."* He had seen a woman tennis player miss a shot (it was a net ball), redden in the face, stamp her foot, and spank the net with her racket. From this he inferred that the woman "re-ally wants to win." Wanting to win, she is a "serious" player-a pro. Being a pro, she can be expected to see the tennis match as something on which her professional reputation and financial future depend. Further, from the way she broke an ordinary field of calm with a brief display of anger, the commentator inferred that she really meant it-she was "serious." He also inferred what she must have wanted and expected just before the net ball and what the newly grasped reality-a miss-must have felt like. He tried to pick out what part of her went into seeing the ball. A miss, if you really want to win, is maddening.
From the commentator's words and tone, TV viewers could infer his point of view. He assessed the woman's anger in relation to a prior expectation about how pros in general see, feel, and act and about how women in general act. Women tennis pros, he implied, do not laugh apologetically at a miss, as a nonprofessional woman player might. They feel, he said, in a way that is appropriate to the role of a professional player. In fact, as newcomers they overconform. "They get even madder than the guys." Thus the viewers can ferret out the sportscaster's mental set and the role of women in it.
In the same way that we infer other people's viewpoints from how they display feeling, we decide what we ourselves are really like by reflecting on how we feel about ordinary events. Consider, for example, this statement by a young man of nineteen:
I had agreed to give a party with a young woman who was an old friend. As the time approached, it became apparent to me that, while I liked her, I didn't want the [social] identification with her that such an action [the jointly sponsored party) would bring. I tried explaining this to her without success, and at first I resolved to do the socially acceptable thing-go through with it. But the day before the party, I knew I simply couldn't do it, so I canceled out. My friend didn't understand and was placed in a very embarrassing position.... I can't feel ashamed no matter how hard I try. All I felt then was relief, and this is still my dominant response. I acted selfishly, but fully consciously. I imagine that my friendship could not have meant that much.
The young man reached his conclusion by reasoning back from his absence of guilt or shame, from the feeling of relief he experienced. (He might also have concluded: "I've shown myself to be the sort of fellow who can feel square with him-self in cases of unmet obligation. I can withstand the guilt. It's enough for me that I tried to feel shame.")
For the sportscaster and the young man, feeling was taken as a signal. To observer and actor alike it was a clue to an underlying truth, a truth that had to be dug out or inferred, a truth about the self vis-à-vis a situation. The sportscaster took the anger of the woman tennis player as a clue to how seriously she took the game of tennis. The young man who backed out on his friend took his sense of relief and absence of guilty feelings as a clue to the absence of seriousness in his "old friendship".
Feeling can be used to give a clue to the operating truth, but in private life as well as on the job, two complications can arise. The first one lies between the clue of feeling and the interpretation of it. We are capable of disguising what we feel, of pretending to feel what we do not-of doing surface acting. The box of clues is hidden, but it is not changed. The second complication emerges in a more fundamental relation between stimulus and response, between a net ball and feeling frustration, between letting someone down and feeling guilty, between being called names by an "irate" and get-ting angry back. Here the clues can be dissolved by deep acting, which from one point of view involves deceiving one-self as much as deceiving others. In surface acting we deceive others about what we really feel, but we do not deceive ourselves. Diplomats and actors do this best, and very small children do it worst (it is part of their charm).
In deep acting we make feigning easy by making it unnecessary. At Delta, the techniques of deep acting are joined to the principles of social engineering. Can a flight attendant suppress her anger at a passenger who insults her? Delta Airlines can teach her how-if she is qualified for the job by a demonstrably friendly disposition to start with. She may have lost for a while the sense of what she would have felt had she not been trying so hard to feel something else. By taking over the levers of feeling production, by pretending deeply, she alters herself.
Deep acting has always had the edge over simple pretending in its power to convince, as any good Recurrent Training instructor knows. In jobs that require dealing with the public, employers are wise to want workers to be sincere, to go well beyond the smile that's "just painted on." Gregg Snazelle, who directed all the commercials for Toyota's fall 1980 campaign. teaches his advertising students in the first class "to always be honest." Behind the most effective display is the feeling that fits it, and that feeling can be managed.
As workers, the more seriously social engineering affects our behavior and our feelings, the more intensely we must address a new ambiguity about who is directing them (is this me or the company talking?). As customers, the greater our awareness of social engineering, the more effort we put into distinguishing between gestures of real personal feeling and gestures of company policy. We have a practical knowledge of the commercial takeover of the signal function of feeling. In a routine way, we make up for it; at either end, as worker or customer, we try to correct for the social engineering of feeling. We mentally subtract feeling with commercial purpose to it from the total pattern of display that we sense to be sincerely felt. In interpreting a smile, we try to take out what social engineering put in, pocketing only what seems meant just for us. We say, "It's her job to be friendly," or "They have to believe in their product like that in order to sell it."
In the end, it seems, we make up an idea of our "real self," an inner jewel that remains our unique possession no matter whose billboard is on our back or whose smile is on our face. We push this "real self" further inside, making it more inaccessible. Subtracting credibility from the parts of our emotional machinery that are in commercial hands, we turn to what is left to find out who we "really are." And around the surface of our human character, where once we were naked, we don a cloak to protect us against the commercial elements.”
(Arlie Russell Hochschild, The managed heart, 2003)

ARLIE RUSSELL HOCHSCHILD SHOWS HOW AUTHORITIES SHAPE NOT JUST OUR EXTERNAL BEHAVIOR, BUT OUR INNER EMOTIONAL LIVES. THE POWER TO DEFINE "HOW WE SHOULD FEEL" IS A SUBTLE BUT PROFOUND FORM OF SOCIAL CONTROL.
“According to which standard, among all those that are culturally available, do we assess how appropriate our feelings are to a situation? If periods of rapid change induce status anxiety, they also lead to anxiety about what, after all, the feeling rules are."
In times of uncertainty, the expert rises to prominence. Authorities on how a situation ought to be viewed are also authorities on how we should feel. The need for guidance felt by those who must cross shifting social sands only adds importance to a more fundamental principle: in the matter of what to feel, the social bottom usually looks for guidance to the social top. Authority carries with it a certain mandate over feeling rules. A parent may show a child how much fear to feel about the new bull terrier on the block. An English literature professor may suggest to students how strongly they should feel about Rilke's first Duino Elegy. A supervisor may comment on a cheer worn thin in a secretary's "Here's your correspondence, sir." It is mainly the authorities who are the keepers of feeling rules.19 And so when an authority like Gail Sheehy tells us that "a restless vitality wells up as we approach thirty," it can, as Christopher Lasch points out, be-come part of the experience of turning thirty to address the "restless vitality" norm. Similarly, it can become part of the experience of greeting a passenger, or collecting a bill, to ad-dress official ideas about what we should feel as we do it.”
(Arlie Russell Hochschild, The managed heart, 2003)

E2.1.A.5.1.b.ii.3_REF3_LIT Personal & Interpersonal Control

E2.1.A.5.1.b.ii.3_REF3.1_LIT ELLSWORTH TOOHEY'S CORE TECHNIQUE FOR GAINING INFLUENCE IS TO SEEK OUT PEOPLE IN PAIN OR INSECURITY AND OFFERS THEM A NEW BELIEF SYSTEM THAT SANCTIFIES THEIR SUFFERING ("IT'S GOOD TO SUFFER... IT MAKES YOU BETTER").
“At this period he began to acquire friends. He liked to speak of faith and he found those who liked to listen. Only, he discovered that the bright, the strong, the able boys of his class felt no need of listening, felt no need of him at all. But the suffering and ill-endowed came to him. Drippy Munn began to follow him about with the silent devotion of a dog. Billy Wilson lost his mother, and came wandering to the Toohey house in the evenings, to sit with Ellsworth on the porch, listening, shivering once in a while, saying nothing, his eyes wide, dry and pleading. Skinny Dix got infantile paralysis--and would lie in bed, watching the street corner beyond the window, waiting for Ellsworth. Rusty Hazelton failed to pass in his grades, and sat for many hours, crying, with Ellsworth's cold, steady hand on his shoulder. It was never clear whether they all discovered Ellsworth or Ellsworth discovered them. It seemed to work more like a law of nature: as nature allows no vacuum, so pain and Ellsworth Toohey drew each other. His rich, beautiful voice said to them: "It's good to suffer. Don't complain. Bear, bow, accept--and be grateful that God has made you suffer. For this makes you better than the people who are laughing and happy. If you don't understand this, don't try to understand. Everything bad comes from the mind, because the mind asks too many questions. It is blessed to believe, not to understand. So if you didn't get passing grades, be glad of it. It means that you are better than the smart boys who think too much and too easily."
People said it was touching, the way Ellsworth's friends clung to him. After they had taken him for a while, they could not do without him. It was like a drug habit.
Ellsworth was fifteen, when he astonished the Bible-class teacher by an odd question. The teacher had been elaborating upon the text: "What shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?" Ellsworth asked: "Then in order to be truly wealthy, a man should collect souls?" The teacher was about to ask him what the hell did he mean, but controlled himself and asked what did he mean. Ellsworth would not elucidate.
At the age of sixteen, Ellsworth lost interest in religion. He discovered socialism. His transition shocked Aunt Adeline. "In the first place, it is blasphemous and drivel," she said. "In the second place, it doesn't make sense. I'm surprised at you, Elsie. 'The poor in spirit'--that was fine, but just 'the poor'--that doesn't sound respectable at all. Besides it's not like you. You're not cut out to make big trouble--only little trouble. Something's crazy somewhere, Elsie. It just don't fit. It's not like you at all."
"In the first place, my dear aunt," he answered, "don't call me Elsie. In the second place, you're wrong."
The change seemed good for Ellsworth. He did not become an aggressive zealot. He became gentler, quieter, milder. He became more attentively considerate of people. It was as if something had taken the nervous edges off his personality and given him new confidence. Those around him began to like him. Aunt Adeline stopped worrying. Nothing actual seemed to come of his preoccupation with revolutionary theories. He joined no political party. He read a great deal and he attended a few dubious meetings, where he spoke once or twice, not too well, but mostly sat in a corner, listening, watching, thinking. […]
He did not talk about God and the nobility of suffering. He talked about the masses. He proved to a rapt audience, at bull sessions lasting till dawn, that religion bred selfishness; because, he stated, religion overemphasized the importance of the individual spirit; religion preached nothing but a single concern--the salvation of one's own soul.
"To achieve virtue in the absolute sense," said Ellsworth Toohey, "a man must be willing to take the foulest crimes upon his soul--for the sake of his brothers. To mortify the flesh is nothing. To mortify the soul is the only act of virtue. So you think you love the broad mass of mankind? You know nothing of love. You give two bucks to a strike fund and you think you've done your duty? You poor fools! No gift is worth a damn, unless it's the most precious thing you've got. Give your soul. To a lie? Yes, if others believe it. To deceit? Yes, if others need it. To treachery, knavery, crime? Yes! To whatever it is that seems lowest and vilest in your eyes. Only when you can feel contempt for your own priceless little ego, only then can you achieve the true, broad peace of selflessness, the merging of your spirit with the vast collective spirit of mankind. There is no room for the love of others within the tight, crowded miser's hole of a private ego. Be empty in order to be filled. 'He that loveth his life shall lose it; and he that hateth his life in this world shall keep it unto life eternal.' The opium peddlers of the church had something there, but they didn't know what they had. Self-abnegation? Yes, my friends, by all means. But one doesn't abnegate by keeping one's self pure and proud of its own purity. The sacrifice that includes the destruction of one's soul--ah, but what am I talking about? This is only for heroes to grasp and to achieve."
(Ayn Rand, The fountainhead,1943)

TOOHEY'S ENTIRE "EXPERIMENT" IS ABOUT MANIPULATING PUBLIC OPINION AND SHAPING BELIEFS. 
“Don't you find it interesting to see a huge, complicated piece of machinery, such as our society, all levers and belts and interlocking gears, the kind that looks as if one would need an army to operate it--and you find that by pressing your little finger against one spot, the one vital spot, the center of all its gravity, you can make the thing crumble into a worthless heap of scrap iron? It can be done, my dear. But it takes a long time. It takes centuries. I have the advantage of many experts who came before me. I think I shall be the last and the successful one of the line, because--though not abler than they were--I see more clearly what we're after. However, that's abstraction. Speaking of concrete reality, don't you find anything amusing in my little experiment? I do. For instance, do you notice that all the wrong people are on the wrong sides? Alvah Scarret, the college professors, the newspaper editors, the respectable mothers and the Chambers of Commerce should have come flying to the defense of Howard Roark--if they value their own lives. But they didn't. They are upholding Hopton Stoddard. On the other hand I heard that some screwy bunch of cafeteria radicals called 'The New League of Proletarian Art' tried to enlist in support of Howard Roark--they said he was a victim of capitalism--when they should have known that Hopton Stoddard is their champion. Roark, by the way, had the good sense to decline. He understands. You do. I do. Not many others. Oh, well. Scrap iron has its uses." 
(Ayn Rand, The fountainhead,1943)

ELLSWORTH TOOHEY, SYSTEMATICALLY BREAKS DOWN AN INDIVIDUAL'S WILL BY SHAPING HER CORE BELIEFS. HE PRESENTS A PHILOSOPHY THAT DEMANDS THE COMPLETE ANNIHILATION OF THE SELF AS A PREREQUISITE FOR "SPIRITUAL GRANDEUR." 
"You mean, I must want to be unhappy?"
"No. You must stop wanting anything. You must forget how important Miss Catherine Halsey is. Because, you see, she isn't. Men are important only in relation to other men, in their usefulness, in the service they render. Unless you understand that completely, you can expect nothing but one form of misery or another. Why make such a cosmic tragedy out of the fact that you've found yourself feeling cruel toward people? So what? It's just growing pains. One can't jump from a state of animal brutality into a state of spiritual living without certain transitions. And some of them may seem evil. A beautiful woman is usually a gawky adolescent first. All growth demands destruction. You can't make an omelet without breaking eggs. You must be willing to suffer, to be cruel, to be dishonest, to be unclean--anything, my dear, anything to kill the most stubborn of roots, the ego. And only when it is dead, when you care no longer, when you have lost your identity and forgotten the name of your soul--only then will you know the kind of happiness I spoke about, and the gates of spiritual grandeur will fall open before you."
"But, Uncle Ellsworth," she whispered, "when the gates fall open, who is it that's going to enter?"
He laughed aloud, crisply. It sounded like a laugh of appreciation. "My dear," he said, "I never thought you could surprise me."
Then his face became earnest again.
"It was a smart crack, Katie, but you know, I hope, that it was only a smart crack?"
"Yes," she said uncertainly, "I suppose so. Still..."
"We can't be too literal when we deal in abstractions. Of course it's you who'll enter. You won't have lost your identity--you will merely have acquired a broader one, an identity that will be part of everybody else and of the whole universe."
"How? In what way? Part of what?"
"Now you see how difficult it is to discuss these things when our entire language is the language of individualism, with all its terms and superstitions. 'Identity'--it's an illusion, you know. But you can't build a new house out of crumbling old bricks. You can't expect to understand me completely through the medium of present-day conceptions. We are poisoned by the superstition of the ego. We cannot know what will be right or wrong in a selfless society, nor what we'll feel, nor in what manner. We must destroy the ego first. That is why the mind is so unreliable. We must not think. We must believe. Believe, Katie, even if your mind objects. Don't think. Believe. Trust your heart, not your brain. Don't think. Feel. Believe."
(Ayn Rand, The fountainhead,1943)

ELLSWORTH TOOHEY, A MASTER MANIPULATOR USING SOPHISTICATED RHETORIC, AIMS AT COMPLETELY RESHAPING HIS AUDIENCE'S UNDERSTANDING OF A CORE VALUE: "IN ESSENCE, FREEDOM AND COMPULSION ARE ONE".
"THE BASIC trouble with the modern world," said Ellsworth Toohey, "is the intellectual fallacy that freedom and compulsion are opposites. To solve the gigantic problems crushing the world today, we must clarify our mental confusion. We must acquire a philosophical perspective. In essence, freedom and compulsion are one. Let me give you a simple illustration. Traffic lights restrain your freedom to cross a street whenever you wish. But this restraint gives you the freedom from being run over by a truck. If you were assigned to a job and prohibited from leaving it, it would restrain the freedom of your career. But it would give you freedom from the fear of unemployment. Whenever a new compulsion is imposed upon us, we automatically gain a new freedom. The two are inseparable. Only by accepting total compulsion can we achieve total freedom."
"That's right!" shrieked Mitchell Layton.
It was an actual shriek, thin and high. It had come with the startling suddenness of a fire siren. His guests looked at Mitchell Layton.
He sat in a tapestry armchair of his drawing room, half lying, legs and stomach forward, like an obnoxious child flaunting his bad posture. Everything about the person of Mitchell Layton was almost and not quite, just short of succeeding: his body had started out to be tall, but changed its mind, leaving him with a long torso above short, stocky legs; his face had delicate bones, but the flesh had played a joke on them, puffing out, not enough to achieve obesity, just enough to suggest permanent mumps. Mitchell Layton pouted. It was not a temporary expression nor a matter of facial arrangement. It was a chronic attribute, pervading his entire person. He pouted with his whole body.
Mitchell Layton had inherited a quarter of a billion dollars and had spent the thirty-three years of his life trying to make amends for it.
Ellsworth Toohey, in dinner clothes, stood lounging against a cabinet. His nonchalance had an air of gracious informality and a touch of impertinence, as if the people around him did not deserve the preservation of rigid good manners.
His eyes moved about the room. The room was not exactly modern, not quite Colonial and just a little short of French Empire; the furnishings presented straight planes and swan-neck supports, black mirrors and electric hurricane lamps, chromium and tapestry; there was unity in a single attribute: in the expensiveness of everything.
"That's right," said Mitchell Layton belligerently, as if he expected everyone to disagree and was insulting them in advance. "People make too damn much fuss about freedom. What I mean is it's a vague, over abused word. I'm not even sure it's such a God-damn blessing. I think people would be much happier in a regulated society that had a definite pattern and a unified form--like a folk dance. You know how beautiful a folk dance is. And rhythmic too. That's because it took generations to work it out and they don't let just any chance fool come along to change it. That's what we need. Pattern, I mean, and rhythm. Also beauty."
"That's an apt comparison, Mitch," said Ellsworth Toohey. "I've always told you that you had a creative mind."

(Ayn Rand, The fountainhead,1943)

TO SUCCEED IN CREATING A UNIFIED IDEOLOGICAL MOVEMENT, TOOHEY'S CORE STRATEGY, IS TO "UNITE AND RULE," AS A MORE POTENT ALTERNATIVE TO "DIVIDE AND CONQUER."
“It's much simpler than it appears to you, Peter. That's because you think in terms of personalities. You think it's done piecemeal. But dear me, the lifetimes of a hundred press agents wouldn't be enough. It can be done much faster. This is the age of time-saving devices. If you want something to grow, you don't nurture each seed separately. You just spread a certain fertilizer. Nature will do the rest. I believe you think I'm the only one responsible. But I'm not. Goodness, no. I'm just one figure out of many, one lever in a very vast movement. Very vast and very ancient. It just so happened that I chose the field that interests you--the field of art--because I thought that it focused the decisive factors in the task we had to accomplish."
"Yes, of course, but I mean, I think you were so clever. I mean, that you could pick young people who had talent, who had a future. Damned if I know how you guessed in advance. Remember the awful loft we had for the Council of American Builders? And nobody took us seriously. And people used to laugh at you for wasting time on all kinds of silly organizations."
"My dear Peter, people go by so many erroneous assumptions. For instance, that old one--divide and conquer. Well, it has its applications. But it remained for our century to discover a much more potent formula. Unite and rule."
(Ayn Rand, The fountainhead,1943)

A DIRECT CONFESSION FROM ELLSWORTH TOOHEY, A MASTER MANIPULATOR ON HOW TO ACHIEVE TOTAL CONTROL 
“I shall rule."
"Whom...?"
"You. The world. It's only a matter of discovering the lever. If you learn how to rule one single man's soul, you can get the rest of mankind. It's the soul, Peter, the soul. Not whips or swords or fire or guns. That's why the Caesars, the Attilas, the Napoleons were fools and did not last. We will. The soul, Peter, is that which can't be ruled. It must be broken. Drive a wedge in, get your fingers on it--and the man is yours. You won't need a whip--he'll bring it to you and ask to be whipped. Set him in reverse--and his own mechanism will do your work for you. Use him against himself. Want to know how it's done? See if I ever lied to you. See if you haven't heard all this for years, but didn't want to hear, and the fault is yours, not mine. There are many ways. Here's one. Make man feel small. Make him feel guilty. Kill his aspiration and his integrity. That's difficult. The worst among you gropes for an ideal in his own twisted way. Kill integrity by internal corruption. Use it against itself. Direct it toward a goal destructive of all integrity. Preach selflessness. Tell man that he must live for others. Tell men that altruism is the ideal. Not a single one of them has ever achieved it and not a single one ever will. His every living instinct screams against it. But don't you see what you accomplish? Man realizes that he's incapable of what he's accepted as the noblest virtue--and it gives him a sense of guilt, of sin, of his own basic unworthiness. Since the supreme ideal is beyond his grasp, he gives up eventually all ideals, all aspiration, all sense of his personal value. He feels himself obliged to preach what he can't practice. But one can't be good halfway or honest approximately. To preserve one's integrity is a hard battle. Why preserve that which one knows to be corrupt already? His soul gives up its self-respect. You've got him. He'll obey. He'll be glad to obey--because he can't trust himself, he feels uncertain, he feels unclean. That's one way. Here's another. Kill man's sense of values. Kill his capacity to recognize greatness or to achieve it. Great men can't be ruled. We don't want any great men. Don't deny the conception of greatness. Destroy it from within. The great is the rare, the difficult, the exceptional. Set up standards of achievement open to all, to the least, to the most inept--and you stop the impetus to effort in all men, great or small. You stop all incentive to improvement, to excellence, to perfection. Laugh at Roark and hold Peter Keating as a great architect. You've destroyed architecture. Build up Lois Cook and you've destroyed literature. Hail Ike and you've destroyed the theater. Glorify Lancelot Clokey and you've destroyed the press. Don't set out to raze all shrines--you'll frighten men. Enshrine mediocrity--and the shrines are razed. Then there's another way. Kill by laughter. Laughter is an instrument of human joy. Learn to use it as a weapon of destruction. Turn it into a sneer. It's simple. Tell them to laugh at everything. Tell them that a sense of humor is an unlimited virtue. Don't let anything remain sacred in a man's soul--and his soul won't be sacred to him. Kill reverence and you've killed the hero in man. One doesn't reverence with a giggle. He'll obey and he'll set no limits to his obedience--anything goes--nothing is too serious. Here's another way. This is most important. Don't allow men to be happy. Happiness is self-contained and self-sufficient. Happy men have no time and no use for you. Happy men are free men. So kill their joy in living. Take away from them whatever is dear or important to them. Never let them have what they want. Make them feel that the mere fact of a personal desire is evil. Bring them to a state where saying I want' is no longer a natural right, but a shameful admission. Altruism is of great help in this. Unhappy men will come to you. They'll need you. They'll come for consolation, for support, for escape. Nature allows no vacuum. Empty man's soul--and the space is yours to fill. I don't see why you should look so shocked, Peter. This is the oldest one of all. Look back at history. Look at any great system of ethics, from the Orient up. Didn't they all preach the sacrifice of personal joy? Under all the complications of verbiage, haven't they all had a single leitmotif: sacrifice, renunciation, self-denial? Haven't you been able to catch their theme song--'Give up, give up, give up, give up'? Look at the moral atmosphere of today. Everything enjoyable, from cigarettes to sex to ambition to the profit motive, is considered depraved or sinful. Just prove that a thing makes men happy--and you've damned it. That's how far we've come. We've tied happiness to guilt. And we've got mankind by the throat. Throw your first-born into a sacrificial furnace--lie on a bed of nails--go into the desert to mortify the flesh--don't dance--don't go to the movies on Sunday--don't try to get rich--don't smoke--don't drink. It's all the same line. The great line. Fools think that taboos of this nature are just nonsense. Something left over, old-fashioned. But there's always a purpose in nonsense. Don't bother to examine a folly--ask yourself only what it accomplishes. Every system of ethics that preached sacrifice grew into a world power and ruled millions of men. Of course, you must dress it up. You must tell people that they'll achieve a superior kind of happiness by giving up everything that makes them happy. You don't have to be too clear about it. Use big vague words. 'Universal 
Harmony'--'Eternal Spirit'--'Divine Purpose'--'Nirvana'--'Paradise'--'Racial Supremacy'--'The Dictatorship of the Proletariat.' Internal corruption, Peter. That's the oldest one of all. The farce has been going on for centuries and men still fall for it. Yet the test should be so simple: just listen to any prophet and if you hear him speak of sacrifice--run. Run faster than from a plague. It stands to reason that where there's sacrifice, there's someone collecting sacrificial offerings. Where there's service, there's someone being served. The man who speaks to you of sacrifice, speaks of slaves and masters. And intends to be the master. But if ever you hear a man telling you that you must be happy, that it's your natural right, that your first duty is to yourself--that will be the man who's not after your soul. That will be the man who has nothing to gain from you. But let him come and you'll scream your empty heads off, howling that he's a selfish monster. So the racket is safe for many, many centuries. But here you might have noticed something. I said, 'It stands to reason.' Do you see? Men have a weapon against you. Reason. So you must be very sure to take it away from them. Cut the props from under it. But be careful. Don't deny outright. Never deny anything outright, you give your hand away. Don't say reason is evil--though some have gone that far and with astonishing success. Just say that reason is limited. That there's something above it. What? You don't have to be too clear about it either.  The field's inexhaustible.  'Instinct'--'Feeling'--'Revelation'--'Divine 
Intuition'--'Dialectic Materialism.' If you get caught at some crucial point and somebody tells you that your doctrine doesn't make sense--you're ready for him. You tell him that there's something above sense. That here he must not try to think, he must feel. He must believe. Suspend reason and you play it deuces wild. Anything goes in any manner you wish whenever you need it. You've got him. Can you rule a thinking man? We don't want any thinking men."
(Ayn Rand, The fountainhead,1943)

E2.1.A.5.1.b.ii.3_REF3.2_LIT THE PROTAGONIST, EMMA WOODHOUSE, BORED AND SECURE IN HER HIGH SOCIAL STATUS, DECIDES TO TAKE THE SOCIALLY INFERIOR HARRIET SMITH ON AS A "PROJECT." This is not a relationship between equals, but an exercise of Emma's "leisure, and powers."
“As she sat one morning, looking forward to exactly such a close of the
present day, a note was brought from Mrs. Goddard, requesting, in most
respectful terms, to be allowed to bring Miss Smith with her; a most
welcome request: for Miss Smith was a girl of seventeen, whom Emma knew
very well by sight, and had long felt an interest in, on account of her
beauty. A very gracious invitation was returned, and the evening no
longer dreaded by the fair mistress of the mansion.

Harriet Smith was the natural daughter of somebody. Somebody had placed
her, several years back, at Mrs. Goddard’s school, and somebody had
lately raised her from the condition of scholar to that of
parlour-boarder. This was all that was generally known of her history.
She had no visible friends but what had been acquired at Highbury, and
was now just returned from a long visit in the country to some young
ladies who had been at school there with her.

She was a very pretty girl, and her beauty happened to be of a sort
which Emma particularly admired. She was short, plump, and fair, with a
fine bloom, blue eyes, light hair, regular features, and a look of
great sweetness, and, before the end of the evening, Emma was as much
pleased with her manners as her person, and quite determined to
continue the acquaintance.

She was not struck by any thing remarkably clever in Miss Smith’s
conversation, but she found her altogether very engaging—not
inconveniently shy, not unwilling to talk—and yet so far from pushing,
shewing so proper and becoming a deference, seeming so pleasantly
grateful for being admitted to Hartfield, and so artlessly impressed by
the appearance of every thing in so superior a style to what she had
been used to, that she must have good sense, and deserve encouragement.
Encouragement should be given. Those soft blue eyes, and all those
natural graces, should not be wasted on the inferior society of
Highbury and its connexions. The acquaintance she had already formed
were unworthy of her. The friends from whom she had just parted, though
very good sort of people, must be doing her harm. They were a family of
the name of Martin, whom Emma well knew by character, as renting a
large farm of Mr. Knightley, and residing in the parish of Donwell—very
creditably, she believed—she knew Mr. Knightley thought highly of
them—but they must be coarse and unpolished, and very unfit to be the
intimates of a girl who wanted only a little more knowledge and
elegance to be quite perfect. _She_ would notice her; she would improve
her; she would detach her from her bad acquaintance, and introduce her
into good society; she would form her opinions and her manners. It
would be an interesting, and certainly a very kind undertaking; highly
becoming her own situation in life, her leisure, and powers.”
(Jane Austen, Emma, 1815)

EMMA WOODHOUSE DOESN'T COMMAND OR THREATEN HARRIET SMITH OUTRIGHT. INSTEAD, SHE USES A MORE INSIDIOUS TECHNIQUE 
"Do you think I had better say ‘No?’”

“Not for the world,” said Emma, smiling graciously, “would I advise you
either way. You must be the best judge of your own happiness. If you
prefer Mr. Martin to every other person; if you think him the most
agreeable man you have ever been in company with, why should you
hesitate? You blush, Harriet.—Does any body else occur to you at this
moment under such a definition? Harriet, Harriet, do not deceive
yourself; do not be run away with by gratitude and compassion. At this
moment whom are you thinking of?”

The symptoms were favourable.—Instead of answering, Harriet turned away
confused, and stood thoughtfully by the fire; and though the letter was
still in her hand, it was now mechanically twisted about without
regard. Emma waited the result with impatience, but not without strong
hopes. At last, with some hesitation, Harriet said—

“Miss Woodhouse, as you will not give me your opinion, I must do as
well as I can by myself; and I have now quite determined, and really
almost made up my mind—to refuse Mr. Martin. Do you think I am right?”

“Perfectly, perfectly right, my dearest Harriet; you are doing just
what you ought. While you were at all in suspense I kept my feelings to
myself, but now that you are so completely decided I have no hesitation
in approving. Dear Harriet, I give myself joy of this. It would have
grieved me to lose your acquaintance, which must have been the
consequence of your marrying Mr. Martin. While you were in the smallest
degree wavering, I said nothing about it, because I would not
influence; but it would have been the loss of a friend to me. I could
not have visited Mrs. Robert Martin, of Abbey-Mill Farm. Now I am
secure of you for ever.”

Harriet had not surmised her own danger, but the idea of it struck her
forcibly.

“You could not have visited me!” she cried, looking aghast. “No, to be
sure you could not; but I never thought of that before. That would have
been too dreadful!—What an escape!—Dear Miss Woodhouse, I would not
give up the pleasure and honour of being intimate with you for any
thing in the world.”

“Indeed, Harriet, it would have been a severe pang to lose you; but it
must have been. You would have thrown yourself out of all good society.
I must have given you up.”

“Dear me!—How should I ever have borne it! It would have killed me
never to come to Hartfield any more!”

“Dear affectionate creature!—_You_ banished to Abbey-Mill Farm!—_You_
confined to the society of the illiterate and vulgar all your life! I
wonder how the young man could have the assurance to ask it. He must
have a pretty good opinion of himself.”

“I do not think he is conceited either, in general,” said Harriet, her
conscience opposing such censure; “at least, he is very good natured,
and I shall always feel much obliged to him, and have a great regard
for—but that is quite a different thing from—and you know, though he
may like me, it does not follow that I should—and certainly I must
confess that since my visiting here I have seen people—and if one comes
to compare them, person and manners, there is no comparison at all,
_one_ is so very handsome and agreeable. However, I do really think Mr.
Martin a very amiable young man, and have a great opinion of him; and
his being so much attached to me—and his writing such a letter—but as
to leaving you, it is what I would not do upon any consideration.”

“Thank you, thank you, my own sweet little friend. We will not be
parted. A woman is not to marry a man merely because she is asked, or
because he is attached to her, and can write a tolerable letter.”

“Oh no;—and it is but a short letter too.”

Emma felt the bad taste of her friend, but let it pass with a “very
true; and it would be a small consolation to her, for the clownish
manner which might be offending her every hour of the day, to know that
her husband could write a good letter.”

“Oh! yes, very. Nobody cares for a letter; the thing is, to be always
happy with pleasant companions. I am quite determined to refuse him.
But how shall I do? What shall I say?”

Emma assured her there would be no difficulty in the answer, and
advised its being written directly, which was agreed to, in the hope of
her assistance; and though Emma continued to protest against any
assistance being wanted, it was in fact given in the formation of every
sentence. The looking over his letter again, in replying to it, had
such a softening tendency, that it was particularly necessary to brace
her up with a few decisive expressions; and she was so very much
concerned at the idea of making him unhappy, and thought so much of
what his mother and sisters would think and say, and was so anxious
that they should not fancy her ungrateful, that Emma believed if the
young man had come in her way at that moment, he would have been
accepted after all.

This letter, however, was written, and sealed, and sent. The business
was finished, and Harriet safe. She was rather low all the evening, but
Emma could allow for her amiable regrets, and sometimes relieved them
by speaking of her own affection, sometimes by bringing forward the
idea of Mr. Elton.

“I shall never be invited to Abbey-Mill again,” was said in rather a
sorrowful tone.

“Nor, if you were, could I ever bear to part with you, my Harriet. You
are a great deal too necessary at Hartfield to be spared to
Abbey-Mill.”

“And I am sure I should never want to go there; for I am never happy
but at Hartfield.”
(Jane Austen, Emma, 1815)

E2.1.A.5.1.b.iii. The Agent of the System: Based on Stanley Milgram's experiments, this section will discuss the "agency theory," where individuals in a complex system abdicate personal responsibility for their actions, attributing them to the authority they serve.

In his experiments on obedience and disobedience to authority, Stanley Milgram demonstrated that only 35% of subjects refused to torture an innocent man. He hypothesized that, due to the division of labor in modern society, we are conditioned to obey a system in which our contribution is a very small part of the overall process. Thus, we tend to shift responsibility for our actions onto the system (agency theory). Once we accept the role of agent, it becomes extremely difficult to disobey authority.

Watch the trailer of Experimenter a film by Michael Almereyda (2015) about Stanley Milgram's experiments: https://youtu.be/sngGqBOLWaI?si=Zo83WFZ60YVuQd8s


"AGENT
Alain, the master of republican wisdom, knows how to calm our nerves. If the traffic cop wanted to be fair, he would question everyone and let the doctor and midwife go first. In reality, though, that would cause chaos, and everyone would be unhappy.
 The officer doesn't bother to find out who's in a hurry or why. He simply cuts off the flow. He carries out an order as it stands. It's no better than any other order, but it's an order." His idea, if he has one, is that disorder leads to injustices. But he has no idea. The power of order comes from its renunciation of guiding human affairs by ideas. The man of order resists this because he would like to worship order, but order is not God. Nor are its agents saints."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E2.1.A.5.1.b.iv. The Architecture of Power under totalitarism.

HITLER INTENTIONALLY FOSTERED "CUTTHROAT RIVALRIES" AMONG HIS SUBORDINATES TO "PREVENT ANY CLOSING OF THE RANKS AGAINST HIM" AND SOLIDIFY HIS OWN POSITION AS THE "SUPREME ARBITER," THE SOLE SOURCE OF ULTIMATE POWER.
“In truth, Hitler was bored by the details of day-to-day governing and after he had consolidated his position following the death of Hindenburg he left them largely to his aides. Old party comrades such as Goering, Goebbels, Himmler, Ley and Schirach were given free rein to carve out their own empires of power—and usually profit. Schacht was given a free hand at first to raise the money for expanding government expenditures by whatever sleight of hand he could think up. Whenever these men clashed over the division of power or spoils, Hitler intervened. He did not mind these quarrels. Indeed, he often encouraged them, because they added status to his position as supreme arbiter and prevented any closing of the ranks against him. Thus he seemed to take delight at the spectacle of three men competing with each other in foreign affairs: Neurath, the Foreign Minister, Rosenberg, the head of the party’s Foreign Affairs Department, and Ribbentrop, who had his own “Ribbentrop Bureau” which dabbled in foreign policy. All three men were at loggerheads with each other and Hitler kept them so by maintaining their rival offices until in the end he chose the dull-witted Ribbentrop to become his Foreign Minister and carry out his orders in foreign affairs. Such was the government of the Third Reich, administered from top to bottom on the so-called leadership principle by a vast and sprawling bureaucracy, having little of the efficiency usually credited to the Germans, poisoned by graft, beset by constant confusion and cutthroat rivalries augmented by the muddling interference of party potentates and often rendered impotent by the terror of the S.S.-Gestapo. At the top of the swarming heap stood the onetime Austrian vagabond, now become, with the exception of Stalin, the most powerful dictator on earth. As Dr. Hans Frank reminded a convention of lawyers in the spring of 1936, “There is in Germany today only one authority, and that is the authority of the Fuehrer.” With that authority Hitler had quickly destroyed those who opposed him, unified and Nazified the State, regimented the country’s institutions and culture, suppressed individual freedom, abolished unemployment and set the wheels of industry and commerce humming—no small achievement after only three or four years in office. Now he turned—in fact, he already had turned—to the two chief passions of his life: the shaping of Germany’s foreign policy toward war and conquest and the creation of a mighty military machine which would enable him to achieve his goal.”
(William Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, A History of Nazi Germany, 2011)

New sub-topic

THE NIHILISTIC PHILOSOPHY OF THE CHARACTER DOMINIQUE FRANCON, IS A POWERFUL AND COMPLEX EXAMPLE OF A PATHOLOGICAL RESPONSE TO THE WORLD. 
"It's not only that, Alvah. It's not you alone. If I found a job, a project, an idea or a person I wanted--I'd have to depend on the whole world. Everything has strings leading to everything else. We're all so tied together. We're all in a net, the net is waiting, and we're pushed into it by one single desire. You want a thing and it's precious to you. Do you know who is standing ready to tear it out of your hands? You can't know, it may be so involved and so far away, but someone is ready, and you're afraid of them all. And you cringe and you crawl and you beg and you accept them--just so they'll let you keep it. And look at whom you come to accept."
"If I'm correct in gathering that you're criticizing mankind in general..."
"You know, it's such a peculiar thing--our idea of mankind in general. We all have a sort of vague, glowing picture when we say that, something solemn, big and important. But actually all we know of it is the people we meet in our lifetime. Look at them. Do you know any you'd feel big and solemn about? There's nothing but housewives haggling at pushcarts, drooling brats who write dirty words on the sidewalks, and drunken debutantes. Or their spiritual equivalent. As a matter of fact, one can feel some respect for people when they suffer. They have a certain dignity. But have you ever looked at them when they're enjoying themselves? That's when you see the truth. Look at those who spend the money they've slaved for--at amusement parks and side shows. Look at those who're rich and have the whole world open to them. Observe what they pick out for enjoyment. Watch them in the smarter speak-easies. That's your mankind in general. I don't want to touch it."
"But hell! That's not the way to look at it. That's not the whole picture. There's some good in the worst of us. There's always a redeeming feature."
"So much the worse. Is it an inspiring sight to see a man commit a heroic gesture, and then learn that he goes to vaudeville shows for relaxation? Or see a man who's painted a magnificent canvas--and learn that he spends his time sleeping with every slut he meets?"
"What do you want? Perfection?"
"--or nothing. So, you see, I take the nothing."
"That doesn't make sense."
"I take the only desire one can really permit oneself. Freedom, Alvah, freedom."
"You call that freedom?"
"To ask nothing. To expect nothing. To depend on nothing."
"What if you found something you wanted?"
"I won't find it. I won't choose to see it. It would be part of that lovely world of yours. I'd have to share it with all the rest of you--and I wouldn't. You know, I never open again any great book I've read and loved. It hurts me to think of the other eyes that have read it and of what they were. Things like that can't be shared. Not with people like that."
"Dominique, it's abnormal to feel so strongly about anything."
"That's the only way I can feel. Or not at all."
(Ayn Rand, The fountainhead,1943)

TOOHEY COMMANDS HIS LISTENERS TO "RENOUNCE THE THOUGHTS OF HIS PETTY LITTLE PROBLEMS, OF GAIN, OF COMFORT, OF SELF-GRATIFICATION" AND TO "MERGE HIS SELF IN A GREAT CURRENT."
“Ladies and gentlemen, I have the great honor of presenting to you now Mr. Ellsworth Monkton Toohey!" […]
"My friends, […] My brothers, […] I am more touched by this reception than I should allow myself to be. I hope I shall be forgiven for a trace of the vain child which is in all of us. But I realize--and in that spirit I accept it--that this tribute was paid not to my person, but to a principle which chance has granted me to represent in all humility tonight."
It was not a voice, it was a miracle. It unrolled as a velvet banner. It spoke English words, but the resonant clarity of each syllable made it sound like a new language spoken for the first time. It was the voice of a giant.
Keating stood, his mouth open. He did not hear what the voice was saying. He heard the beauty of the sounds without meaning. He felt no need to know the meaning; he could accept anything, he would be led blindly anywhere.
"...and so, my friends," the voice was saying, "the lesson to be learned from our tragic struggle is the lesson of unity. We shall unite or we shall be defeated. Our will--the will of the disinherited, the forgotten, the oppressed--shall weld us into a solid bulwark, with a common faith and a common goal. This is the time for every man to renounce the thoughts of his petty little problems, of gain, of comfort, of self-gratification. This is the time to merge his self in a great current, in the rising tide which is approaching to sweep us all, willing or unwilling, into the future. History, my friends, does not ask questions or acquiescence. It is irrevocable, as the voice of the masses that determine it. Let us listen to the call. Let us organize, my brothers. Let us organize. Let us organize. Let us organize."
Keating looked at Catherine. There was no Catherine; there was only a white face dissolving in the sounds of the loudspeaker. It was not that she heard her uncle; Keating could feel no jealousy of him; he wished he could. It was not affection. It was something cold and impersonal that left her empty, her will surrendered and no human will holding hers, but a nameless thing in which she was being swallowed.
"Let's get out of here," he whispered. His voice was savage. He was afraid.
She turned to him, as if she were emerging from unconsciousness. He knew that she was trying to recognize him and everything he implied. She whispered: "Yes. Let's get out."
(Ayn Rand, The fountainhead,1943)

A SCATHING AND INSIGHTFUL PSYCHOLOGICAL DISSECTION OF THE VARIOUS PSYCHOLOGICAL MOTIVATIONS IN GROUP OF COLLECTIVIST ELITES.
“Eve Layton was beautiful. She stood under the light of a chandelier, her smooth black hair clinging to her skull, the pale green satin of her gown alive like water about to stream off and expose the rest of her soft, tanned skin. She had the special faculty of making satin and perfume appear as modern as an aluminum table top. She was Venus rising out of a submarine hatch.
Eve Layton believed that her mission in life was to be the vanguard--it did not matter of what. Her method had always been to take a careless leap and land triumphantly far ahead of all others. Her philosophy consisted of one sentence--"I can get away with anything." In conversation she paraphrased it to her favorite line: "I? I'm the day after tomorrow." She was an expert horsewoman, a racing driver, a stunt pilot, a swimming champion. When she saw that the emphasis of the day had switched to the realm of ideas, she took another leap, as she did over any ditch. She landed well in front, in the latest. Having landed, she was amazed to find that there were people who questioned her feat. Nobody had ever questioned her other achievements. She acquired an impatient anger against all those who disagreed with her political views. It was a personal issue. She had to be right, since she was the day after tomorrow.
Her husband, Mitchell Layton, hated her.
"It's a perfectly valid discussion," he snapped. "Everybody can't be as competent as you, my dear. We must help the others. It's the moral duty of intellectual leaders. What I mean is we ought to lose that bugaboo of being scared of the word compulsion. It's not compulsion when it's for a good cause. What I mean is in the name of love. But I don't know how we can make this country understand it. Americans are so stuffy."
He could not forgive his country because it had given him a quarter of a billion dollars and then refused to grant him an equal amount of reverence. People would not take his views on art, literature, history, biology, sociology and metaphysics as they took his checks. He complained that people identified him with his money too much; he hated them because they did not identify him enough.
"There's a great deal to be said for compulsion," stated Homer Slottern. "Provided it's democratically planned. The common good must always come first, whether we like it or not."
Translated into language, Homer Slottern's attitude consisted of two parts, they were contradictory parts, but this did not trouble him, since they remained untranslated in his mind. First, he felt that abstract theories were nonsense, and if the customers wanted this particular kind, it was perfectly safe to give it to them, and good business, besides. Second, he felt uneasy that he had neglected whatever it was people called spiritual life, in the rush of making money; maybe men like Toohey had something there. And what if his stores were taken away from him? Wouldn't it really be easier to live as manager of a State-owned Department Store? Wouldn't a manager's salary give him all the prestige and comfort he now enjoyed, without the responsibility of ownership?
"Is it true that in the future society any woman will sleep with any man she wants," asked Renee Slottern. It had started as a question, but it petered out. She did not really want to know. She merely felt a vapid wonder about how it felt to have a man one really wanted and how one went about wanting.
"It's stupid to talk about personal choice," said Eve Layton. "It's old-fashioned. There's no such thing as a person. There's only a collective entity. It's self-evident."
Ellsworth Toohey smiled and said nothing.
"Something's got to be done about the masses," Mitchell Layton declared. "They've got to be led. They don't know what's good for them. What I mean is, I can't understand why people of culture and position like us understand the great ideal of collectivism so well and are willing to sacrifice our personal advantages, while the working man who has everything to gain from it remains so stupidly indifferent. I can't understand why the workers in this country have so little sympathy with collectivism."
(Ayn Rand, The fountainhead,1943)

GAIL WYNAND DEWCRIBES HOW HE MADE HIMSELF INTO A BAROMETER SUBJECT TO THE PRESSURE OF THE WHOLE WORLD". HE ERASED HIS EGO OUT OF EXISTENCE AND GAVE THE WORLD HIS SOUL IN EXCHANGE FOR POWER.
"Do you know what it really is? Avarice. I'm a miser about two things on earth: you and Dominique. I'm a millionaire who's never owned anything. Do you remember what you said about ownership? I'm like a savage who's discovered the idea of private property and run amuck on it. It's funny. Think of Ellsworth Toohey."
"Why Ellsworth Toohey?"
"I mean, the things he preaches, I've been wondering lately whether he really understands what he's advocating. Selflessness in the absolute sense? Why, that's what I've been. Does he know that I'm the embodiment of his ideal? Of course, he wouldn't approve of my motive, but motives never alter facts. If it's true selflessness he's after, in the philosophical sense--and Mr. Toohey is a philosopher--in a sense much beyond matters of money, why, let him look at me. I've never owned anything. I've never wanted anything. I didn't give a damn--in the most cosmic way Toohey could ever hope for. I made myself into a barometer subject to the pressure of the whole world. The voice of his masses pushed me up and down. Of course, I collected a fortune in the process. Does that change the intrinsic reality of the picture? Suppose I gave away every penny of it. Suppose I had never wished to take any money at all, but had set out in pure altruism to serve the people. What would I have to do? Exactly what I've done. Give the greatest pleasure to the greatest number. Express the opinions, the desires, the tastes of the majority. The majority that voted me its approval and support freely, in the shape of a three-cent ballot dropped at the corner newsstand every morning. The Wynand papers? For thirty-one years they have represented everybody except Gail Wynand. I erased my ego out of existence in a way never achieved by any saint in a cloister. Yet people call me corrupt. Why? The saint in a cloister sacrifices only material things. It's a small price to pay for the glory of his soul. He hoards his soul and gives up the world. But I--I took automobiles, silk pyjamas, a penthouse, and gave the world my soul in exchange. Who's sacrificed more--if sacrifice is the test of virtue? Who's the actual saint?"
"Gail...I didn't think you'd ever admit that to yourself."
"Why not? I knew what I was doing. I wanted power over a collective soul and I got it. A collective soul. It's a messy kind of concept, but if anyone wishes to visualize it concretely, let him pick up a copy of the New York Banner."
"Yes..."
"Of course, Toohey would tell me that this is not what he means by altruism. He means I shouldn't leave it up to the people to decide what they want I should decide it. I should determine, not what I like nor what they like, but what I think they should like, and then ram it down their throats. It would have to be rammed, since their voluntary choice is the Banner. Well, there are several such altruists in the world today."
"You realize that?"
"Of course. What else can one do if one must serve the people? If one must live for others? Either pander to everybody's wishes and be called corrupt; or impose on everybody by force your own idea of everybody's good. Can you think of any other way?"
"No."
"What's left then? Where does decency start? What begins where altruism ends? Do you see what I'm in love with?" 
(Ayn Rand, The fountainhead,1943)

LOOKING BACK, JORDAN PETERSON RECOGNIZES HIS TURN TO POLITICAL IDEOLOGY AS FALLING INTO A "STEREOTYPICAL... IDEOLOGICAL TRAP." 
“After  all, many of the basic tenets of Christian belief were incomprehensible, if not clearly  absurd. The virgin birth was an impossibility; likewise, the notion that someone could  rise from the dead.   Did my act of rebellion precipitate a familial or a social crisis? No. My actions were so  predictable, in a sense, that they upset no one, with the exception of my mother (and even  she was soon resigned to the inevitable). The other members of the church—my  “community”—had become absolutely habituated to the increasingly more frequent act  of defection, and did not even notice.   Did my act of rebellion upset me, personally? Only in a manner I was not able to  perceive, until many years later. I developed a premature concern with large-scale  political and social issues, at about the same time I quit attending church. Why were  some countries, some people, rich, happy and successful, while others were doomed to  misery? Why were the forces of NATO and the Soviet Union continually at each other’s  throats? How was it possible for people to act the way the Nazis had during World War  II? Underlying these specific considerations was a broader, but at the time ill- conceptualized question: how did evil—particularly group-fostered evil—come to play  its role in the world?   I abandoned the traditions that supported me, at about the same time I left childhood.  This meant that I had no broader socially constructed “philosophy” at hand to aid my  understanding as I became aware of the existential problems that accompany maturity.  The final consequences of that lack took years to become fully manifest. In the meantime,  however, my nascent concern with questions of moral justice found immediate  resolution. I started working as a volunteer for a mildly socialist political party, and  adopted the party line.   Economic injustice was at the root of all evil, as far as I was concerned. Such injustice  could be rectified, as a consequence of the rearrangement of social organizations. I could  play a part in that admirable revolution, carrying out my ideological beliefs. Doubt  vanished; my role was clear. Looking back, I am amazed at how stereotypical my  actions—reactions—really were. I could not rationally accept the premises of religion as  I understood them. I turned, in consequence, to dreams of political utopia, and personal  power. The same ideological trap caught millions of others, in recent centuries.   When I was seventeen I left the town I grew up in. I moved nearby and attended a  small college, which offered the first two years of undergraduate education. I involved  myself there in university politics—which were more or less left wing at that time—and  was elected to the college board of governors. The board was composed of politically and  ideologically conservative people: lawyers, doctors, and businessmen. They were all well  (or at least practically) educated, pragmatic, confident, outspoken; they had all  accomplished something worthwhile and difficult. I could not help but admire them, even  though I did not share their political stance. I found the fact of my admiration unsettling.   I had attended several left-wing party congresses, as a student politician and active  party worker. I hoped to emulate the socialist leaders. The left had a long and honorable  history in Canada, and attracted some truly competent and caring people. However, I  could not generate much respect for the numerous low-level party activists I encountered  at these meetings. They seemed to live to complain."
(Jordan Peterson, Maps of Meaning The Architecture of Belief, 1999)

IN DAVID FOSTER WALLACE’S INFINITE JEST, BOSTON A.A.  OFFERS WHAT IT DESCRIBES AS THE ONLY EFFECTIVE PROTECTION AGAINST THE "SEDUCTIVE GHOST" OF ADDICTION AND A RETURN TO THE CHAOS OF "OUT THERE." The allure is the promise of survival and a way to manage an otherwise unmanageable life.
“To make a long story short (the speaker says, not trying to be funny as far as the Flaggers can see), the traumatically scarred adopted girl had legged it from the bedroom and foster house into the brooding North Shore teen-runaway night, and had stripped and semi-whored and IV-injected her way all the way to that standard two-option addicted cliff-edge, hoping only to Forget. That's what caused it, she says; that's what she's trying to recover from, a Day at a Time, and she's sure grateful to be here with her Group today, sober and courageously remembering, and newcomers should definitely Keep Coming... As she's telling what she sees as etiological truth, even though the monologue seems sincere and unaffected and at least a B+ on the overall AA-story lucidity-scale, faces in the hall are averted and heads clutched and postures uneasily shifted in empathetic distress at the look-what-happened-to-poor-me invitation implicit in the tale, the talk's tone of self-pity itself less offensive (even though plenty of these White Flaggers, Gately knows, had personal childhoods that made this girl's look like a day at Six Flags Over the Poconos) than the subcurrent of explanation, an appeal to exterior Cause that can slide, in the addictive mind, so insidiously into Excuse that any causal attribution is in Boston AA feared, shunned, punished by empathic distress. The Why of the Disease is a labrynth it is strongly suggested all AAs boycott, inhabited as the maze is by the twin minotaurs of Why Me? and Why Not?, a.k.a. Self-Pity and Denial, two of the smily-faced Sergeant at Arms' more fearsome aides de camp. The Boston AA 'In Here' that protects against a return to 'Out There' is not about explaining what caused your Disease. It's about a goofily simple practical recipe for how to remember you've got the Disease day by day and how to treat the Disease day by day, how to keep the seductive ghost of a bliss long absconded from baiting you and hooking you and pulling you back Out and eating your heart raw and (if you're lucky) eliminating your map for good. So no whys or wherefores allowed. In other words check your head at the door. Though it can't be conventionally enforced, this, Boston AA's real root axiom, is almost classically authoritarian, maybe 
even proto-Fascist. Some ironist who decamped back Out There and left his meager effects to be bagged and tossed by Staff into the Ennet House attic had, all the way back in the Year of the Tucks Medicated Pad, permanently engraved his tribute to AA's real Prime Directive with a rosewood-handled boot-knife in the plastic seat of the 5-Man men's room's commode: 
'Do not ask WHY If you dont want to DIE 
Do like your TOLD If you want to get OLD'
(David Foster Wallace, Infinite Jest, 1996)

HOBBES'S LEVIATHAN IS DESIGNED TO SHOW WHY SUBMISSION TO A SOVEREIGN IS NOT ONLY NECESSARY BUT RATIONAL. 
“The political opinions expressed in the Leviathan, which were Royalist in the extreme, had been held by Hobbes for a long time. When the Parliament of 1628 drew up the Petition of Right, he published a translation of Thucydides, with the expressed intention of showing the evils of democracy. When the Long Parliament met in 1640, and Laud and Strafford were sent to the Tower, Hobbes was terrified and fled to France. His book, Dc Give, written in 1641, though not published till 1647, sets forth essentially the same theory as that of the Leviathan. It was not the actual occurrence of the Civil War that caused his opinions, but the prospect of it; naturally, however, his convictions were strengthened when his fears were realized.
In Paris he was welcomed by many of the leading mathematicians and men of science. He was one of those who saw Descartes' Meditations before they were published, and wrote objections to them, which were printed by Descartes with his replies. He also soon had a large company of English Royalist refugees with whom to associate. For a time, from 1646 to 1648, he taught mathematics to the future Charles II, When, however, in 1651, he published the Leviathan, it pleased no one. Its rationalism offended most of the refugees, and its bitter attacks on the Catholic Church offended the French Government. Hobbes therefore fled secretly to London, where he made submission to Cromwell, and abstained from all political activity.
He was not idle, however, either at this time or at any other during his long life. He had a controversy with Bishop Bramhall on free will; he was himself a rigid determinist. Over-estimating his own capacities as a geometer, he imagined that he had discovered how to square the circle; on this subject he very foolishly embarked on a controversy with Wallis, the professor of geometry at Oxford. Naturally the professor succeeded in making him look silly.
At the Restoration, Hobbes was taken up by the less earnest of the king's friends, and by the king himself, who not only had Hobbes's portrait on his walls, but awarded him a pension of £100 a year—which, however. His Majesty forgot to pay. The Lord Chancellor Clarendon was shocked by the favour shown to a man suspected of atheism, and so was Parliament. After the Plague and the Great Fire, when people's superstitious fears were aroused, the House of Commons appointed a committee to inquire into atheistical writings, specially mentioning those of Hobbes. From this time onwards, he could not obtain leave in England to print anything on controversial subjects. Even his history of the Long Parliament, which he called Behemoth, though it set forth the most orthodox doctrine, had to be printed abroad (1668). The collected edition of his works in 1688 appeared in Amsterdam. In his old age, his reputation abroad was much greater than in England. To occupy his leisure, he wrote, at eighty-four, an autobiography in Latin verse, and published, at eighty-seven, a translation of Homer. I cannot discover that he wrote any large books after the age of eighty-seven. We will now consider the doctrines of the Leviathan, upon which the fame of Hobbes mainly rests.
He proclaims, at the very beginning of the book, his thoroughgoing materialism. Life, he says, is nothing but a motion of the limbs, and therefore automata have an artificial life. The commonwealth, which he calls Leviathan, is a creation of art, and is in fact an artificial man. This is intended as more than an analogy, and is worked out in some detail. The sovereignty is an artificial soul. The pacts and covenants by which 'Leviathan' is first created take the place of God's fiat when He said 'Let Us make man'. The first part deals with man as an individual, and with such general philosophy as Hobbes deems necessary. Sensations are caused by the pressure of objects; colours, sounds, etc., arc not in the objects. The qualities in objects that correspond to our sensations arc motions. The first law of motion is stated, and is immediately applied to psychology: imagination is a decaying sense, both being motions. Imagination when asleep is dreaming; the religions of the gentiles came of not distinguishing dreams from waking life. (The rash reader may apply the same argument to the Christian religion, but Hobbes is much too cautious to do so himself.') Belief that dreams are prophetic is a delusion; so is the belief in witchcraft and in ghosts.
The succession of our thoughts is not arbitrary, but governed by laws—sometimes those of association, sometimes those depending upon a purpose in our thinking. (This is important as an application of determinism to psychology.) 
Hobbes, as might be expected, is an out-and-out nominalist. There is, he says, nothing universal but names, and without words we could not conceive any general ideas. Without language, there would be no truth or falsehood, for ‘true’ and ‘false’ are attributes of speech.
He considers geometry the one genuine science so far created. Reasoning is of the nature of reckoning, and should start from definitions. But it is necessary to avoid self-contradictory notions in definitions, which is not usually done in philosophy. ‘Incorporeal substance*, for instance, is nonsense. When it is objected that God is an incorporeal substance, Hobbes has two answers : first, that God is not an object of philosophy; second, that many philosophers have thought God corporeal. All error in general propositions, he says, comes from absurdity (i.e. self-contradiction); he gives as examples of absurdity the idea of free will, and of cheese having the accidents of bread. (We know that, according to the Catholic faith, the accidents of bread can inhere in a substance that is not bread.) In this passage Hobbes shows an old-fashioned rationalism. Kepler had arrived at a general proposition : 'Planets go round the sun in ellipses*; but other views, such as those of Ptolemy, are not logically absurd. Hobbes has not appreciated the use of induction for arriving at general laws, in spite of his admiration for Kepler and Galileo.
As against Plato, Hobbes, holds that reason is not innate, but is developed by industry.
He comes next to a consideration of the passions. ‘Endeavour’ may be defined as a small beginning of motion; if towards something, it is desire, and if away from something it is aversion. Love is the same as desire, and hate is the same as aversion. We call a thing ‘good’ when it is an object of desire, and ‘bad’ when it is an object of aversion. (It will be observed that these definitions give no objectivity to ‘good’ and ‘bad’; if men differ in their desires, there is no theoretical method of adjusting their differences.) There are definitions of various passions, mostly based on a competitive view of life; for instance, laughter is sudden glory. Fear of invisible power, if publicly allowed, is religion; if not allowed, superstition. Thus the decision as to what is religion and what superstition rests with the legislator. Felicity involves continual progress; it consists in prospering, not in having prospered; there is no such thing as a static happiness—excepting, of course, the joys of heaven, which surpass our comprehension.
Will is nothing but the last appetite or aversion remaining in deliberation. That is to say, will is not something different from desire and aversion, but merely the strongest in a case of conflict. This is connected, obviously, with Hobbes*s denial of free will. Unlike most defenders of despotic government, Hobbes holds that all men are naturally equal. In a state of nature, before there is any government, every man desires to preserve his own liberty, but to acquire dominion over others; both these desires are dictated by the impulse to self-preservation. From their conflict arises a war of nil against all, which makes life ‘nasty, brutish, and short’. In a state of nature, there is no property, no justice or injustice; there is only war, and ‘force and fraud are, in war, the two cardinal virtues’.”
(Bertrand Russell, History Of Western Philosophy, 1945)


HOBBES'S LEVIATHAN IS DESIGNED TO SHOW WHY SUBMISSION TO A SOVEREIGN IS NOT ONLY NECESSARY BUT RATIONAL.  (Continued)
The second part tells how men escape from these evils by combining into communities each subject to a central authority. This is represented as happening by means of a social contract. It is supposed that a number of people come together and agree to choose a sovereign, or a sovereign body, which shall exercise authority over them and put an end to the universal war. I do not think this ‘covenant’ (as Hobbes usually calls it) is thought of as a definite historical event; it is certainly irrelevant to the argument to think of it as such. It is an explanatory myth, used to explain why men submit, and should submit, to the limitations on personal freedom entailed in submission to authority. The purpose of the restraint men put upon themselves, says Hobbes, is self-preservation from the universal war resulting from our love of liberty for ourselves and of dominion over others.
Hobbes considers the question why men cannot co-operate like ants and bees. Bees in the same hive, he says, do not compete; they have no desire for honour; and they do not use reason to criticize the government. Their agreement is natural, but that of men can only be artificial, by covenant. The covenant must confer power on one man or one assembly, since otherwise it cannot be enforced.
‘Covenants, without the sword, are but words.* (President Wilson unfortunately forgot this.) The covenant is not, as afterwards in Locke and Rousseau, between the citizens and the ruling power; it is a covenant made by the citizens with each other to obey such ruling power as the majority shall choose. When they have chosen, their political power is at an end. The minority is as much bound as the majority, since the covenant was to obey the government chosen by the majority. When the government has been chosen, the citizens lose all rights except such as the government may find it expedient to grant. There is no right of rebellion, because the ruler is not bound by any contract, whereas the subjects are. A multitude so united is called a commonwealth. This ‘Leviathan’ is a mortal God.
Hobbes prefers monarchy, but all his abstract arguments are equally applicable to all forms of government in which there is one supreme authority not limited by the legal rights of other bodies. He could tolerate Parliament alone, but not a system in which governmental power is shared between King and Parliament. This is the exact antithesis to the views of Locke and Montesquieu. The English Civil War occurred, says Hobbes, because power was divided between King, Lords, and Commons.
The supreme power, whether a man or an assembly, is called the Sovereign. The powers of the sovereign, in Hobbes's system, are unlimited. He has the right of censorship over all expression of opinion. It is assumed that his main interest is the preservation of internal peace, and that therefore he will not use the power of censorship to suppress truth, for a doctrine repugnant to peace cannot be true. (A singularly pragmatist view!) The laws of property are to be entirely subject to the sovereign; for in a state of nature there is no property, and therefore property is created by government, which may control its creation as it pleases.
It is admitted that the sovereign may be despotic, but even the worst despotism is better than anarchy. Moreover, in many points the interests of the sovereign are identical with those of his subjects. He is richer if they are richer, safer if they are law-abiding, and so on. Rebellion is wrong, both because it usually fails, and because, if it succeeds, it sets a bad example, and teaches others to rebel. The Aristotelian distinction between tyranny and monarchy is rejected; a 'tyranny', according to Hobbes, is merely a monarchy that the speaker happens to dislike.
Various reasons are given for preferring government by a monarch to government by an assembly. It is admitted that the monarch will usually follow his private interest when it conflicts
with that of the public, but so will an assembly. A monarch may have favourites, but so may every member of an assembly; therefore the total number of favourites is likely to be fewer under a monarchy. A monarch can hear advice from anybody secretly; an assembly can only hear advice from its own members, and that publicly. In an assembly, the chance absence of some may cause a different party to obtain the majority, and thus produce a change of policy. Moreover, if the assembly is divided against itself, the result may be civil war. For all these reasons, Hobbes concludes, a monarchy is best.
Throughout the Leviathan, Hobbes never considers the possible effect of periodical elections in curbing the tendency of assemblies to sacrifice the public interest to the private interest of their members. He seems, in fact, to be thinking, not of democratically elected Parliaments, but of bodies like the Grand Council in Venice or the House of Lords in England. He conceives democracy, in the manner of antiquity, as involving the direct participation of every citizen in legislation and administration; at least, this seems to be his view.
The part of the people, in Hobbes’s system, ends completely with the first choice of a sovereign. The succession is to be determined by the sovereign, as was the practice in the Roman Empire when mutinies did not interfere. It is admitted that the sovereign will usually choose one of his own children, or a near relative if he has no children, but it is held that no law ought to prevent him from choosing otherwise.
There is a chapter on the liberty of subjects, which begins with an admirably precise definition : Liberty is the absence of external impediments to motion. In this sense, liberty is consistent with necessity; for instance, water necessarily flows down hill when there are no impediments to its motion, and when, therefore, according to the definition, it is free. A man is free to do what he wills, but necessitated to do what God wills. All our volitions have causes, and are in this sense necessary. As for the liberty of subjects, they are free where the laws do not interfere; this is no limitation of sovereignty, since the laws could interfere if the sovereign so decided. Subjects have no rights as against the sovereign, except what the sovereign voluntarily concedes. When David caused Uriah to be killed, he did no injury to Uriah because Uriah was his subject; but he did an injury to God, because he was God's subject and was disobeying God's law.
The ancient authors, with their praises of liberty, have led men, according to Hobbes, to favour tumults and seditions. He maintains that, when they are rightly interpreted, the liberty they praised was that of sovereigns, i.e. liberty from foreign domination. Internal resistance to sovereigns he condemns even when it might seem most justified. For example, he holds that St Ambrose had no right to excommunicate the Emperor Theodosius after the massacre of Thessalonica. And he vehemently censures Pope Zachary for having helped to depose the last of the Merovingians in favour of Pepin.
He admits, however, one limitation on the duty of submission to sovereigns. The right of self-preservation he regards as absolute, and subjects have the right of self-defence, even against monarchs. This is logical, since he has made self-preservation the motive for instituting government. On this ground he holds (though with limitations) that a man has a right to refuse to fight when called upon by the government to do so. This is a right which no modem government concedes. A curious result of his egoistic ethic is that resistance to the sovereign is only justified in se/f-defence; resistance in defence of another is always culpable.
There is one other quite logical exception : a man has no duty to a sovereign who has not the power to protect him. This justified Hobbes's submission to Cromwell while Charles II was in exile. There must, of course, be no such bodies, as political parties or what we should now call trade unions. All teachers are to be ministers of the sovereign, and are to teach only what the sovereign thinks useful. The rights of property are only valid as against other subjects, not as against the sovereign. The sovereign has the right to regulate foreign trade. He is not subject to the civil law. His right to punish comes to him. not from any concept of justice, but because he retains the liberty that all men had in the state of nature, when no man could be blamed for inflicting injury on another.”
(Bertrand Russell, History Of Western Philosophy, 1945)

E2.1.A.5.2. The Imperative of Resistance: Transgression, Rebellion, and the Creation of a True Self
This chapter shifts focus to the act of challenging and breaking from authority. It investigates the motivations for disobedience, distinguishing between mere rancor and a constructive rebellion that aims to reclaim individual and collective dignity, ultimately leading to a more profound form of freedom.

E2.1.A.5.2.a. The Act of Disobedience: From Civil Duty to Subversive Gestures

E2.1.A.5.2.a.i. The Duty to Disobey: This section will frame disobedience not as a selfish act but as a potential moral and political duty.

Christo, Temporary Wall of Oil Barrels - Thé Iron curtain, rue Visconti, Paris, 27 juin 1962

"Christo's artistic vocabulary, in addition to the wrapping of small metal cans, also extended to oil barrels, which the artist stacked either vertically or horizontally. In October 1961, in response to the recent construction of the Berlin Wall, he imagined barricading the rue Visconti - one of the narrowest streets in Paris - with oil barrels. In collaboration with Jeanne-Claude. he managed to carry out the project on the night of June 27, 1962, before being ordered by police to dismantle the temporary sculpture. In keeping with what would be his first Parisian urban project, he presented installations, photographs and drawings on his work with barrels for a few days at the Galerie J, whose advisor was the art critic Pierre Restany This would also be his first solo exhibition in Paris."
The work perfectly illustrates how art can be a medium for resistance and civil disobedience. It moves beyond the gallery to physically and symbolically disrupt the everyday functioning of the city, forcing passersby to confront a political reality.

Olivier Abel, Résistances/s (1'20"-3'50")
There must already be a sufficiently strong institution for there to be resistance.

Watch the interview in its integrity:
http://editionsartulis.fr/artulis/olivier-abel.html

"Legal positivism, invented by Jeremy Bentham and John Austin was modernised by H.L.A. Hart. It adopts the view that laws are posited by human authority and aren't natural. It stands in contrast to the Kantian law of natural law which comes with a moral intrinsic validity. For legal positivists the moral quality of law is separate from its validity - you can thus have an unjust law and as a citizen should be vigilant and disobey such laws out of our political responsibility. What is law is a different question than the value of law which is for the legislative to debate over and for the individual to evaluate. Law is a political artifact.
Legal realism, originated in the US, focuses on predicting most accurately the outcome of the judicial decision process based on the division of power in the system. A legal realist would be focused primarily on "what you are obliged to do". A legal positivist focuses on "what are your obligations": You can be obliged to do something because of the exercice of power over you without accepting that you have an obligation to do so."
(Nicola Lacey on H.L.A. Hart and Legal Positivism, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: http://philosophybites.com/2014/02/nicola-lacey-on-hla-hart-and-legal-positivism.html

"DISOBEDIENCE
It is the refusal to submit to legitimate authority. It should only be an exception, otherwise there would be no authority or legitimacy. However, it is sometimes necessary, otherwise there would be no freedom.
 
Refusing to submit to a thug who attacks me or a tyrant who oppresses me is not disobedience; it is resistance, combat, revolt, or war—the state of nature. Disobedience only occurs when I transgress a legitimate law. Why, then, break it? Most often, it is out of selfishness (because the law is against my interests); sometimes, it is out of duty (because the law goes against my conscience). This raises the problem of civil disobedience—or rather, it is the only way to resolve it. The question is not whether a particular law is good or bad. If every citizen obeyed only the laws they approved of, there would be no republic, and therefore no laws or citizens. The real question is whether we can obey the state in certain circumstances without sacrificing something more important than the republic itself. If not, then we must disobey. Everyone understands that, in a state governed by the rule of law, such circumstances can only be exceptional. The rule is simple to formulate but difficult to apply: we have the right to disobey, but only when disobedience is a duty."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)


"LEGITIMACY
The concept lies at the intersection of law and morality, as well as law and politics. To act legitimately is to act within one's rights. This implies that a right is not always legitimate. Legitimacy involves not only conformity to the law (legality), but also to justice or a higher interest. Stealing to avoid starvation, plotting against a tyrant, disobeying a totalitarian government, and resisting an occupying force are all behaviors that are often illegal but nonetheless legitimate, except in very specific circumstances. The question arises as to who decides. A court can decide, if it is strong and fair enough, but it will usually do so only after the fact—when it is too late—and often at the risk of making a mistake. Only the victors have courts, with few exceptions, and there is nothing to prevent justice from sometimes being on the side of the vanquished. This is why legitimization remains important for those who lack it or who would like a guarantee. But this must suffice since there is nothing else. Who was the legitimate representative of France during World War II: Marshal Pétain or General de Gaulle? The answer is easy today. But that's when it mattered."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

THE MARBURG SPEECH IS A PERFECT HISTORICAL CASE OF AN INDIVIDUAL CHOOSING TO FULFILL A PERCEIVED DUTY TO DISOBEY A DANGEROUS AND IMMORAL AUTHORITY.
“The dilettante Papen, who had been rudely shoved to the sidelines by Hitler and Goering but who was still nominally Vice-Chancellor and still enjoyed the confidence of Hindenburg, summoned enough courage to speak out publicly against the excesses of the regime which he had done so much to foist on Germany. In May he had seen the ailing President off to Neudeck —it was the last time he was to see his protector alive—and the grizzly but enfeebled old Field Marshal had said to him: “Things are going badly, Papen. See what you can do to put them right.” Thus encouraged, Papen had accepted an invitation to make an address at the University of Marburg on June 17. The speech was largely written by one of his personal advisers, Edgar Jung, a brilliant Munich lawyer and writer and a Protestant, though certain ideas were furnished by one of the Vice-Chancellor’s secretaries, Herbert von Bose, and by Erich Klausener, the leader of Catholic Action—a collaboration that soon cost all three of them their lives. It was a courageous utterance and, thanks to Jung, eloquent in style and dignified in tone. It called for an end of the revolution, for a termination of the Nazi terror, for the restoration of normal decencies and the return of some measure of freedom, especially of freedom of the press. Addressing Dr. Goebbels, the Propaganda Minister, Papen said: Open manly discussions would be of more service to the German people than, for instance, the present state of the German press. The government [must be] mindful of the old maxim, “Only weaklings suffer no criticism” … Great men are not created by propaganda … If one desires close contact and unity with the people, one must not underestimate their understanding. One must not everlastingly keep them on leading strings … No organization, no propaganda, however excellent, can alone maintain confidence in the long run. It is not by incitement … and not by threats against the helpless part of the nation but only by talking things over with people that confidence and devotion can be maintained. People treated as morons, however, have no confidence to give away … It is time to join together in fraternal friendship and respect for all our fellow countrymen, to avoid disturbing the labors of serious men and to silence fanatics. The speech, when it became known, was widely heralded in Germany, but it fell like a bombshell on the little group of Nazi leaders gathered at Gera, and Goebbels moved quickly to see that it became known as little as possible. He forbade the broadcast of a recording of the speech scheduled for the same evening as well as any reference to it in the press, and ordered the police to seize copies of the Frankfurter Zeitung which were on the streets with a partial text. But not even the absolute powers of the Propaganda Minister were sufficient to keep the German people and the outside world from learning the contents of the defiant address. The wily Papen had provided the foreign correspondents and diplomats in Berlin with advance texts, and several thousand copies were hastily run off on the presses of Papen’s newspaper, Germania, and secretly distributed. On learning of the Marburg speech, Hitler was stung to fury.”
(William Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, A History of Nazi Germany, 2011)

FRIEDRICH HOLDERIN PROVIDES A POETIC MANIFESTO FOR REBELLION AGAINST THE OVERREACH OF STATE POWER. HYPERION'S CENTRAL ARGUMENT IS A REJECTION OF THE STATE'S CLAIM TO MORAL AND SPIRITUAL AUTHORITY.
“‘Say what you will, you grant too much power to the state. It may not demand what it cannot enforce. Yet what love gives, and the spirit, cannot be enforced. Let it leave that untouched, or we should take its precious law and nail it to the pillory! By heaven! he little knows how much he sins who would turn the state into a school of morals. It’s this that’s always made the state into a hell, that man has tried to make of it his heaven.
‘The state is the coarse husk round life’s kernel and nothing more. It’s the wall around the garden of human fruits and flowers. 
‘But what help is the wall around the garden when the soil lies parched? Then all that helps is rainfall from heaven. 
‘O rainfall from heaven! O inspiration! You will bring again to us the springtime of the peoples. The state cannot command you hither. But let it not hinder you, then you will come, come you will, with your almighty joys, wreathe us in golden clouds and lift us high above mortality, and we shall marvel and wonder whether we’re still who we were, we, the needy who’d ask the stars if a blossoming spring awaited us there — do you ask me when this shall come to pass? Then when the darling of time, the youngest, most beautiful daughter of time, the new church arises from these soiled and worn-out forms, when the wakened feeling for the divine brings back to man his divinity and beautiful youth to his breast, when — I can’t proclaim it, for I barely sense it, but it shall surely, surely come. Death is a herald of life, and that we’re now slumbering in our sickhouses, that’s a sure sign there’ll soon be a healthy awakening. Then, only then shall we truly be, then is the spirits’ element found!’
Alabanda was silent, and looked at me astonished for a while. I was rapt with endless hopes; divine energies carried me away like a wisp of cloud — 
‘Come!’ I cried, grasping Alabanda by his garment, ‘come, who can stand it any longer in the benighted dungeon that surrounds us?’
‘Whither, my drunken dreamer?’ answered Alabanda dryly, and a shade of derision seemed to pass across his face.
I felt that I’d been flung down from the clouds. ‘Go!’ I said, ‘you’re a little man!’
At that moment several strangers entered the room, striking figures, mostly gaunt and pale, as far as I could tell in the moonlight, and calm, but there was something in their mien that pierced the soul like a sword, and it was like standing in the presence of omniscience; one might have doubted whether these were the aspects of needy natures, had not murdered feeling left behind its traces here and there. 
One I found particularly striking. The stillness of his features was the stillness of a battlefield. Within this man wrath and love had raged, and intelligence beamed out above the wreckage of his heart like the eye of a hawk, perched on palace ruins. Deep contempt lay on his lips. One sensed it was no trivial purpose that engaged this man.
Another more likely owed his calm to natural hardness of heart. He displayed barely any trace of violence, either freely willed or inflicted by fate.”
(Friedrich Holderin, Hyperion, or the hermit in Greece, 1797)

THE DIALOGUE STAGES A DIRECT AND IRRECONCILABLE CONFLICT BETWEEN TWO WORLDVIEWS: THE CYNICAL TYRANNY OF THE MARQUIS AND THE MORAL RESISTANCE OF HIS NEPHEW, CHARLES DARNAY. 
“Every fine straight line in the clear whiteness of his face, was
cruelly, craftily, and closely compressed, while he stood looking
quietly at his nephew, with his snuff-box in his hand. Once again he
touched him on the breast, as though his finger were the fine point of
a small sword, with which, in delicate finesse, he ran him through the
body, and said,

“My friend, I will die, perpetuating the system under which I have
lived.”

When he had said it, he took a culminating pinch of snuff, and put his
box in his pocket.

“Better to be a rational creature,” he added then, after ringing a small
bell on the table, “and accept your natural destiny. But you are lost,
Monsieur Charles, I see.”

“This property and France are lost to me,” said the nephew, sadly; “I
renounce them.”

“Are they both yours to renounce? France may be, but is the property? It
is scarcely worth mentioning; but, is it yet?”

“I had no intention, in the words I used, to claim it yet. If it passed
to me from you, to-morrow--”

“Which I have the vanity to hope is not probable.”

“--or twenty years hence--”

“You do me too much honour,” said the Marquis; “still, I prefer that
supposition.”

“--I would abandon it, and live otherwise and elsewhere. It is little to
relinquish. What is it but a wilderness of misery and ruin!”

“Hah!” said the Marquis, glancing round the luxurious room.

“To the eye it is fair enough, here; but seen in its integrity,
under the sky, and by the daylight, it is a crumbling tower of waste,
mismanagement, extortion, debt, mortgage, oppression, hunger, nakedness,
and suffering.”

“Hah!” said the Marquis again, in a well-satisfied manner.

“If it ever becomes mine, it shall be put into some hands better
qualified to free it slowly (if such a thing is possible) from the
weight that drags it down, so that the miserable people who cannot leave
it and who have been long wrung to the last point of endurance, may, in
another generation, suffer less; but it is not for me. There is a curse
on it, and on all this land.”

“And you?” said the uncle. “Forgive my curiosity; do you, under your new
philosophy, graciously intend to live?”

“I must do, to live, what others of my countrymen, even with nobility at
their backs, may have to do some day--work.”
(Charles Dickens, A Tale of Two Cities, 1859)

YOU CAN THUS HAVE AN UNJUST LAW AND AS A CITIZEN SHOULD BE VIGILANT AND DISOBEY SUCH LAWS OUT OF OUR POLITICAL RESPONSIBILITY
"Legal positivism, invented by Jeremy Bentham and John Austin was modernised by H.L.A. Hart. It adopts the view that laws are posited by human authority and aren't natural. It stands in contrast to the Kantian law of natural law which comes with a moral intrinsic validity. For legal positivists the moral quality of law is separate from its validity - you can thus have an unjust law and as a citizen should be vigilant and disobey such laws out of our political responsibility. What is law is a different question than the value of law which is for the legislative to debate over and for the individual to evaluate. Law is a political artifact.
Legal realism, originated in the US, focuses on predicting most accurately the outcome of the judicial decision process based on the division of power in the system. A legal realist would be focused primarily on "what you are obliged to do". A legal positivist focuses on "what are your obligations": You can be obliged to do something because of the exercice of power over you without accepting that you have an obligation to do so."
(Nicola Lacey on H.L.A. Hart and Legal Positivism)

Listen to the episode: http://philosophybites.com/2014/02/nicola-lacey-on-hla-hart-and-legal-positivism.html

E2.1.A.5.2.a.ii. In Praise of Transgression: This part will explore transgression as a creative and liberating act.

E2.1.A.5.2.a.ii.1. Transgression is not mere nihilism, but a necessary and "magnificent" act of "disobedience" and "Breaking Ranks" that questions established roles and opens a path to the unknown.

E2.1.A.5.2.a.ii.1_REF1_CUR Art: Philippe Ramette_In praise of transgression
"Philippe Ramette's work offers off-kilter and quirky perspectives on the world. Returning to the codes of classical sculpture, he does not so much pay tribute to a person's glory as he does to a certain attitude.
Éloge de la transgression depicts a schoolgirl climbing onto an empty pedestal. That is, unless she's climbing off...? As always with Philippe Ramette, it's all a question of perspective."
(Curatorship: Voyage à Nantes, 2023)

Art: 
- Philippe Ramette_In praise of transgression

E2.1.A.5.2.a.ii.1_REF2_PH Illustration: Maria Stavreva_La transgression pour l'invention
Faut-il désobéir pour inventer ?

(Georges Didi-Huberman & Frédéric Gros au micro de l'émission Avec Philosophie, diffusée sur France Culture le 09/01/2024)

Écouter le Podcast:
https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/avec-philosophie/faut-il-desobeir-pour-inventer-8754622

Illustration:
- Maria Stavreva_La transgression pour l'invention

E2.1.A.5.2.a.ii.1_REF3_LIT SABINA DEFINES HER CORE VALUE, BETRAYAL, NOT AS A MORAL FAILING BUT AS A MAGNIFICENT ACT OF LIBERATION: "BETRAYAL MEANS BREAKING RANKS AND GOING OFF INTO THE UNKNOWN."
“He loved her from the time he was a child until the time he accompanied her to the cemetery; he loved her in his memories as well. That is what made him feel that fidelity deserved pride of place among the virtues: fidelity gave a unity to lives that would otherwise splinter into thousands of split-second impressions. 
Franz often spoke about his mother to Sabina, perhaps even with a certain unconscious ulterior motive: he assumed that Sabina would be charmed by his ability to be faithful, that it would win her over. 
What he did not know was that Sabina was charmed more by betrayal than by fidelity. The word
"fidelity" reminded her of her father, a small-town puritan, who spent his Sundays painting away at canvases of woodland sunsets and roses in vases. Thanks to him, she started drawing as a child. When she was fourteen, she fell in love with a boy her age. Her father was so frightened that he would not let her out of the house by herself for a year. One day, he showed her some Picasso reproductions and made fun of them. If she couldn't love her fourteen-year-old schoolboy, she could at least love cubism. After completing school, she went off to Prague with the euphoric feeling that now at last she could betray her home. 
Betrayal. From tender youth we are told by father and teacher that betrayal is the most heinous offense imaginable. But what is betrayal? Betrayal means breaking ranks. Betrayal means breaking ranks and going off into the unknown. Sabina knew of nothing more magnificent than going off into the unknown. 
Though a student at the Academy of Fine Arts, she was not allowed to paint like Picasso. It was the period when so-called socialist realism was prescribed and the school manufactured Portraits of Communist statesmen. Her longing to betray her rather remained unsatisfied: Communism was merely another rather, a father equally strict and limited, a father who forbade her love (the times were puritanical) and Picasso, too. And if she married a second-rate actor, it was only because he had a reputation for being eccentric and was unacceptable to both fathers. Then her mother died. The day following her return to Prague from the funeral, she received a telegram saying that her father had taken his life out of grief. 
Suddenly she felt pangs of conscience: Was it really so terrible that her father had painted vases filled with roses and hated Picasso? Was it really so reprehensible that he was afraid of his fourteen-year-old daughter's coming home pregnant? Was it really so laughable that he could not go on living without his wife? 
And again she felt a longing to betray: betray her own betrayal. She announced to her husband (whom she now considered a difficult drunk rather than an eccentric) that she was leaving him. 
But if we betray B., for whom we betrayed A., it does not necessarily follow that we have placated A. 
The life of a divorcee-painter did not in the least resemble the life of the parents she had betrayed. The first betrayal is irreparable. It calls forth a chain reaction of further betrayals, each of which takes us farther and farther away from the point of our original betrayal.”
 (Milan Kundera, The Unbearable Lightness of Being, 1984)

E2.1.A.5.2.a.ii.1_REF4_CUR Film: Nelly Kaplan, The Pirate's Bride, 1969
"Marie and her mother live in misery in a small cabin lent to them by a farmer. Considered vagabonds, they are ideal laborers for the locals. One day, Marie's mother is hit by a car and dies instantly. The young woman then sets out to take revenge on all the village notables she considers responsible for her misfortunes...
She uses the violent desire she provokes in the inhabitants of this tiny village, both men and women, to lay down the law and tyrannize those who thought they could exploit her. Although the other inhabitants should in theory have the upper hand over her because of their social position, she dominates them all because she is afraid of nothing, does not fear anyone's judgment, and remains constantly joyful even though she is completely alone in the world and repeatedly risks being murdered or lynched by the exasperated crowd. In all these adventures, she always has the upper hand because her freedom knows no bounds; she always takes her adversaries by surprise because she dares to do what they cannot even imagine. No one can resist the truths she reveals in ways that are unthinkable to the other characters—truths that bring down the hypocritical constructs in which they are trapped. Marie completely escapes the norms that prohibit certain behaviors in her adversaries, allowing her to strike in ways that others cannot use against her in return."
(Pierre Schindler)

E2.1.A.5.2.a.ii.2. All new ideas and forms of "truth" are born from an act of transgression against the established "slothful routine" of the past.

E2.1.A.5.2.a.ii.2_REF1_CUR Paula Rego, Dog-women & Edgar Degas, The woman with a dog (waking up), 1880-1885

Commenting on her paintings Paula Rego says: "It is a play on Degas’ sketches. In my paintings every woman is a dog woman, not downtrodden, but powerful. To be bestial is good. It's physical. Eating, snarling, all activities to do with sensation are positive. To picture a woman as a dog is utterly believable." (Paula Rego)

The intimacy of Degas' woman with a dog is invaded. She's seen form behind, squatting, unbalanced, vulnerable, waking up. Paula Rego's dog-women face us, they defend themselves, they are ready to pounce.
It takes the tradition of the female subject, often depicted as vulnerable or passive (like Degas's "unbalanced, vulnerable" woman), and aggressively subverts it.
By embracing the "bestial" and portraying women as powerful, "snarling," and "ready to pounce," Rego reclaims terms and images often used to demean women. She transgresses the expected boundaries of feminine behavior, transforming what might be an insult into a source of defiant strength.
The result is not destructive but powerfully creative. She creates a new image of female power that is physical, primal, and unapologetic. This act is liberating, as it rejects the "downtrodden" status and offers a new, powerful mode of being.

E2.1.A.5.2.a.ii.2_REF2_LIT IN A REDEMPTIVE MOMENT, AFTER A LIFETIME OF PANDERING TO THE MASSES, GAIL WYNAND ENGAGES IN A "REAL WAR" TO RESIST THEIR "FILTHY HOWLING", DEFENDING HOWARD ROARK.
“Gail Wynand went against the current.
"Gail!" Alvah Scarret had gasped. "We can't defend a dynamiter!"
"Keep still, Alvah," Wynand had said, "before I bash your teeth in."
Gail Wynand stood alone in the middle of his office, his head thrown back, glad to be living, as he had stood on a wharf on a dark night facing the lights of a city.
"In the filthy howling now going on all around us," said an editorial in the Banner, signed "Gail Wynand" in big letters, "nobody seems to remember that Howard Roark surrendered himself of his own free will. If he blew up that building--did he have to remain at the scene to be arrested? But we don't wait to discover his reasons. We have convicted him without a hearing. We want him to be guilty. We are delighted with this case. What you hear is not indignation--it's gloating. Any illiterate maniac, any worthless moron who commits some revolting murder, gets shrieks of sympathy from us and marshals an army of humanitarian defenders. But a man of genius is guilty by definition. Granted that it is vicious injustice to condemn a man simply because he is weak and small. To what level of depravity has a society descended when it condemns a man simply because he is strong and great? Such, however, is the whole moral atmosphere of our century--the century of the second-rater."
"We hear it shouted," said another Wynand editorial, "that Howard Roark spends his career in and out of courtrooms. Well, that is true. A man like Roark is on trial before society all his life. Whom does that indict--Roark or society?"
"We have never made an effort to understand what is greatness in man and how to recognize it," said another Wynand editorial. "We have come to hold, in a kind of mawkish stupor, that greatness is to be gauged by self-sacrifice. Self-sacrifice, we drool, is the ultimate virtue. Let's stop and think for a moment. Is sacrifice a virtue? Can a man sacrifice his integrity? His honor? His freedom? His ideal? His convictions? The honesty of his feelings? The independence of his thought? But these are a man's supreme possessions. Anything he gives up for them is not a sacrifice but an easy bargain. They, however, are above sacrificing to any cause or consideration whatsoever. Should we not, then, stop preaching dangerous and vicious nonsense? Self-sacrifice? But it is precisely the self that cannot and must not be sacrificed. It is the unsacrificed self that we must respect in man above all."
This editorial was quoted in the New Frontiers and in many newspapers, reprinted in a box under the heading: "Look who's talking!"
Gail Wynand laughed. Resistance fed him and made him stronger. This was a war, and he had not engaged in a real war for years, not since the time when he laid the foundations of his empire amid cries of protest from the whole profession. He was granted the impossible, the dream of every man: the chance and intensity of youth, to be used with the wisdom of experience. A new beginning and a climax, together. I have waited and lived, he thought, for this.
His twenty-two newspapers, his magazines, his newsreels were given the order: Defend Roark. Sell Roark to the public. Stem the lynching.”
(Ayn Rand, The fountainhead,1943)

HOWARD ROARK'S CLIMACTIC SPEECH IN AYN RAND'S THE FOUNTAINHEAD, IS A POWERFUL AND UNCOMPROMISING MANIFESTO OF INDIVIDUALISM. 
Thousands of years ago, the first man discovered how to make fire. He was probably burned at the stake he had taught his brothers to light. He was considered an evildoer who had dealt with a demon mankind dreaded. But thereafter men had fire to keep them warm, to cook their food, to light their caves. He had left them a gift they had not conceived and he had lifted darkness off the earth. Centuries later, the first man invented the wheel. He was probably torn on the rack he had taught his brothers to build. He was considered a transgressor who ventured into forbidden territory. But thereafter, men could travel past any horizon. He had left them a gift they had not conceived and he had opened the roads of the world.
"That man, the unsubmissive and first, stands in the opening chapter of every legend mankind has recorded about its beginning. Prometheus was chained to a rock and torn by vultures--because he had stolen the fire of the gods. Adam was condemned to suffer--because he had eaten the fruit of the tree of knowledge. Whatever the legend, somewhere in the shadows of its memory mankind knew that its glory began with one and that that one paid for his courage.
"Throughout the centuries there were men who took first steps down new roads armed with nothing but their own vision. Their goals differed, but they all had this in common: that the step was first, the road new, the vision unborrowed, and the response they received--hatred. The great creators--the thinkers, the artists, the scientists, the inventors--stood alone against the men of their time. Every great new thought was opposed. Every great new invention was denounced. The first motor was considered foolish. The airplane was considered impossible. The power loom was considered vicious. Anesthesia was considered sinful. But the men of unborrowed vision went ahead. They fought, they suffered and they paid. But they won.
"No creator was prompted by a desire to serve his brothers, for his brothers rejected the gift he offered and that gift destroyed the slothful routine of their lives. His truth was his only motive. His own truth, and his own work to achieve it in his own way. A symphony, a book, an engine, a philosophy, an airplane or a building--that was his goal and his life. Not those who heard, read, operated, believed, flew or inhabited the thing he had created. The creation, not its users. The creation, not the benefits others derived from it. The creation which gave form to his truth. He held his truth above all things and against all men.
"His vision, his strength, his courage came from his own spirit. A man's spirit, however, is his self. That entity which is his consciousness. To think, to feel, to judge, to act are functions of the ego.
"The creators were not selfless. It is the whole secret of their power--that it was self-sufficient, self-motivated, self-generated. A first cause, a fount of energy, a life force, a Prime Mover. The creator served nothing and no one. He had lived for himself.
"And only by living for himself was he able to achieve the things which are the glory of mankind. Such is the nature of achievement.
"Man cannot survive except through his mind. He comes on earth unarmed. His brain is his only weapon. Animals obtain food by force. Man has no claws, no fangs, no horns, no great strength of muscle. He must plant his food or hunt it. To plant, he needs a process of thought. To hunt, he needs weapons, and to make weapons--a process of thought. From this simplest necessity to the highest religious abstraction, from the wheel to the skyscraper, everything we are and everything we have comes from a single attribute of man--the function of his reasoning mind.
"But the mind is an attribute of the individual. There is no such thing as a collective brain. There is no such thing as a collective thought. An agreement reached by a group of men is only a compromise or an average drawn upon many individual thoughts. It is a secondary consequence. The primary act--the process of reason--must be performed by each man alone. We can divide a meal among many men. We cannot digest it in a collective stomach. No man can use his lungs to breathe for another man. No man can use his brain to think for another. All the functions of body and spirit are private. They cannot be shared or transferred.”
(Ayn Rand, The fountainhead,1943)

HOWARD ROARK'S CLIMACTIC SPEECH IN AYN RAND'S THE FOUNTAINHEAD, IS A POWERFUL AND UNCOMPROMISING MANIFESTO OF INDIVIDUALISM (Continued 1). 
"We inherit the products of the thought of other men. We inherit the wheel. We make a cart. The cart becomes an automobile. The automobile becomes an airplane. But all through the process what we receive from others is only the end product of their thinking. The moving force is the creative faculty which takes this product as material, uses it and originates the next step. This creative faculty cannot be given or received, shared or borrowed. It belongs to single, individual men. That which it creates is the property of the creator. Men learn from one another. But all learning is only the exchange of material. No man can give another the capacity to think. Yet that capacity is our only means of survival.
"Nothing is given to man on earth. Everything he needs has to be produced. And here man faces his basic alternative: he can survive in only one of two ways--by the independent work of his own mind or as a parasite fed by the minds of others. The creator originates. The parasite borrows. The creator faces nature alone. The parasite faces nature through an intermediary.
"The creator's concern is the conquest of nature. The parasite's concern is the conquest of men.
"The creator lives for his work. He needs no other men. His primary goal is within himself. The parasite lives second-hand. He needs others. Others become his prime motive.
"The basic need of the creator is independence. The reasoning mind cannot work under any form of compulsion. It cannot be curbed, sacrificed or subordinated to any consideration whatsoever. It demands total independence in function and in motive. To a creator, all relations with men are secondary.
"The basic need of the second-hander is to secure his ties with men in order to be fed. He places relations first. He declares that man exists in order to serve others. He preaches altruism.
"Altruism is the doctrine which demands that man live for others and place others above self.
"No man can live for another. He cannot share his spirit just as he cannot share his body. But the second-hander has used altruism as a weapon of exploitation and reversed the base of mankind's moral principles. Men have been taught every precept that destroys the creator. Men have been taught dependence as a virtue.
"The man who attempts to live for others is a dependent. He is a parasite in motive and makes parasites of those he serves. The relationship produces nothing but mutual corruption. It is impossible in concept. The nearest approach to it in reality--the man who lives to serve others--is the slave. If physical slavery is repulsive, how much more repulsive is the concept of servility of the spirit? The conquered slave has a vestige of honor. He has the merit of having resisted and of considering his condition evil. But the man who enslaves himself voluntarily in the name of love is the basest of creatures. He degrades the dignity of man and he degrades the conception of love. But this is the essence of altruism.
"Men have been taught that the highest virtue is not to achieve, but to give. Yet one cannot give that which has not been created. Creation comes before distribution--or there will be nothing to distribute. The need of the creator comes before the need of any possible beneficiary. Yet we are taught to admire the second-hander who dispenses gifts he has not produced above the man who made the gifts possible. We praise an act of charity. We shrug at an act of achievement.
"Men have been taught that their first concern is to relieve the suffering of others. But suffering is a disease. Should one come upon it, one tries to give relief and assistance. To make that the highest test of virtue is to make suffering the most important part of life. Then man must wish to see others suffer--in order that he may be virtuous. Such is the nature of altruism. The creator is not concerned with disease, but with life. Yet the work of the creators has eliminated one form of disease after another, in man's body and spirit, and brought more relief from suffering than any altruist could ever conceive.
"Men have been taught that it is a virtue to agree with others. But the creator is the man who disagrees. Men have been taught that it is a virtue to swim with the current. But the creator is the man who goes against the current. Men have been taught that it is a virtue to stand together. But the creator is the man who stands alone.
"Men have been taught that the ego is the synonym of evil, and selflessness the ideal of virtue. But the creator is the egotist in the absolute sense, and the selfless man is the one who does not think, feel, judge, or act. These are functions of the self.
"Here the basic reversal is most deadly. The issue has been perverted and man has been left no alternative--and no freedom. As poles of good and evil, he was offered two conceptions: egotism and altruism. Egotism was held to mean the sacrifice of others to self. Altruism--the sacrifice of self to others. This tied man irrevocably to other men and left him nothing but a choice of pain: his own pain borne for the sake of others or pain inflicted upon others for the sake of self. When it was added that man must find joy in self-immolation, the trap was closed. Man was forced to accept masochism as his ideal--under the threat that sadism was his only alternative. This was the greatest fraud ever perpetrated on mankind.
"This was the device by which dependence and suffering were perpetuated as fundamentals of life.”
(Ayn Rand, The fountainhead,1943)

HOWARD ROARK'S CLIMACTIC SPEECH IN AYN RAND'S THE FOUNTAINHEAD, IS A POWERFUL AND UNCOMPROMISING MANIFESTO OF INDIVIDUALISM (Continued 2). 
"The choice is not self-sacrifice or domination. The choice is independence or dependence. The code of the creator or the code of the second-hander. This is the basic issue. It rests upon the alternative of life or death. The code of the creator is built on the needs of the reasoning mind which allows man to survive. The code of the second-hander is built on the needs of a mind incapable of survival. All that which proceeds from man's independent ego is good. All that which proceeds from man's dependence upon men is evil.
"The egotist in the absolute sense is not the man who sacrifices others. He is the man who stands above the need of using others in any manner. He does not function through them. He is not concerned with them in any primary matter. Not in his aim, not in his motive, not in his thinking, not in his desires, not in the source of his energy. He does not exist for any other man--and he asks no other man to exist for him. This is the only form of brotherhood and mutual respect possible between men.
"Degrees of ability vary, but the basic principle remains the same: the degree of a man's independence, initiative and personal love for his work determines his talent as a worker and his worth as a man. Independence is the only gauge of human virtue and value. What a man is and makes of himself; not what he has or hasn't done for others. There is no substitute for personal dignity. There is no standard of personal dignity except independence.
"In all proper relationships there is no sacrifice of anyone to anyone. An architect needs clients, but he does not subordinate his work to their wishes. They need him, but they do not order a house just to give him a commission. Men exchange their work by free, mutual consent to mutual advantage when their personal interests agree and they both desire the exchange. If they do not desire it, they are not forced to deal with each other. They seek further. This is the only possible form of relationship between equals. Anything else is a relation of slave to master, or victim to executioner.
"No work is ever done collectively, by a majority decision. Every creative job is achieved under the guidance of a single individual thought. An architect requires a great many men to erect his building. But he does not ask them to vote on his design. They work together by free agreement and each is free in his proper function. An architect uses steel, glass, concrete, produced by others. But the materials remain just so much steel, glass and concrete until he touches them. What he does with them is his individual product and his individual property. This is the only pattern for proper co-operation among men.
"The first right on earth is the right of the ego. Man's first duty is to himself. His moral law is never to place his prime goal within the persons of others. His moral obligation is to do what he wishes, provided his wish does not depend primarily upon other men. This includes the whole sphere of his creative faculty, his thinking, his work. But it does not include the sphere of the gangster, the altruist and the dictator.
"A man thinks and works alone. A man cannot rob, exploit or rule--alone. Robbery, exploitation and ruling presuppose victims. They imply dependence. They are the province of the second-hander.
"Rulers of men are not egotists. They create nothing. They exist entirely through the persons of others. Their goal is in their subjects, in the activity of enslaving. They are as dependent as the beggar, the social worker and the bandit. The form of dependence does not matter.”
(Ayn Rand, The fountainhead,1943)

E2.1.A.5.2.a.ii.3. Transgression as the Path to Selfhood: Individuals use transgression to break free from specific constraints—be they social roles, psychological obsessions, or oppressive personal relationships—in order to "recover freedom" and "feel real."

E2.1.A.5.2.a.ii.3_REF1_LIT MARTIN PLANS TO PERFORM A SIGNIFICANT TRANSGRESSIVE ACT: TAKING HIS MISTRESS, GEORGIE, INTO HIS MARITAL HOME. He states that his motivation is to "break an obsession" and "recover a sense of freedom." He believes this specific act of transgression will be liberating and transformative.
“I said suddenly, “Georgie, I want to take you to Hereford Square.” 
Georgie sat up straight and put her hands on my shoulders.
She studied me, grave and intent. “Surely that is not wise.”
“If you’re thinking of Antonia, she’s gone to the country with Palmer. There’s not the slightest chance of her turning up.”
“It’s not exactly that,” said Georgie. “Do you really want to see me there, so soon?”
We looked at each other, trying to guess at thoughts.
Georgie added, “Don’t misunderstand me, Martin.” She meant that her words held no implied expectation of ever living at Hereford Square.
“I don’t misunderstand you,” I said. “You mean it may upset me to see you there. On the contrary. It will be good and liberating and somehow natural. It will break down some of the doubleness.”
“You don’t think you will just feel resentment?” said Georgie. “I can see that all this has made you fall in love again with Antonia.”
“You’re a clever girl,” I said. “But no, no resentment. I want to give you something, Georgie. I want to give you that.”
“You want to do something hostile to Antonia.”
“No, no, no!” I said. “I’m not in that sort of emotional state about Antonia. I just want to break an obsession. I want you to know that Hereford Square really exists.” Georgie had never questioned me about my home, and I knew how carefully she had averted her thoughts from all my life away from her.
“Yes," said Georgie softly. She stroked my nose now. “I do want to know that it exists. But not yet, Martin. I’m frightened. You will see me there as an intruder. As for breaking down the doubleness, we can’t really do that until we stop telling lies.”
I didn’t want this argument. I said, “It will symbolize breaking down the doubleness. I want to see you there, Georgie. It will do something very important for me to see you there.”
“It’s odd,” said Georgie. “I’m not usually superstitious. But I feel that something disastrous will happen if we go to Hereford Square.”
“You make me all the more determined to take you, primitive child,” I said. “I tell you, it will help me. I need air, Georgie. I need to recover a sense of freedom. Seeing you there will open up a new world.” Even as I spoke I realized more fully that what I had thought of as a somewhat bizarre treat for Georgie was in fact, as she had immediately seen, a move of great importance: not something I would give her, but something she would do for me, would do to me; and I conjectured, with a thrill both of joy and of fear, that what I had just said might indeed prove true.”
 (Iris Murdoch, A Severed Head, 1961

E2.1.A.5.2.a.ii.3_REF2_LIT GEORGIE STATES THAT THE LIES AND PARALYSIS OF THE SITUATION "DIDN’T LET ME BE... QUITE AND ENTIRELY MYSELF." Her independent action was a necessary step to becoming real, and the result is that she feels "twice as real now."
“I asked Honor to introduce me to Alexander and she kindly did so. She invited me to lunch and I accepted. I’m a free agent after all!” […] “You’re being beastly, Martin,” said Georgie. “It’s not Alexander’s fault. And of course you should have introduced us long ago. I know all this is unfortunate in a way, and it’s a great pity you turned up just now. But I’ve felt so bloody miserable lately and so damnably tied up, I wanted to take some action of my own, I wanted to feel a bit free. I didn’t do it to hurt you, but just somehow to ease myself. And anyway it’s not so important.” […]
“You don’t understand,” said Georgie. “It was all much more accidental than it seems. I just said that to Honor Klein on the spur of the moment, about wanting to meet your brother. Then I forgot about it and I was quite surprised when she rang me up and suggested this.”
“You ought not to have gone,” I said. “Oh well, it doesn't matter.” I sat down on Georgie's bed. I felt sunk in misery and confusion.
“It does matter,” said Georgie. “Martin, Tm miles nearer the edge than you've got any notion of. I can't tell you how much I’ve suffered not only from the lies but from feeling so paralysed, I had to do something of my own. I feel twice as real now. I was just stopping being free. And for me that's stopping existing. I was getting to be no good to either myself or to you. You’ve got to see me, Martin. I’m to blame. I’ve never been quite and entirely myself with you. The situation didn’t let me be. The untruthfulness infected everything. I must break out a little. Do you see at all?”
 (Iris Murdoch, A Severed Head, 1961)

E2.1.A.5.2.a.ii.3_REF3_LIT KAFKA REBELS AGAINST THE GENTLE YET POWERFUL AUTHORITY OF DOMESTIC ROUTINE, COMFORT, AND FAMILY EXPECTATIONS. 
“When It looks as if you had made up your mind finally to stay at horn,- for the evening, when you have put on your house jacket and sat down after supper with a light on the table to the piece of work or the game that usually precedes your going to bed, when the weather outside is unpleasant so that staying indoors seems natural, and when you have already been sitting quietly at the table for so long that your departure must occasion not only paternal anger but surprise to everyone, when besides, the stairs are in darkness and the front door locked and in spite of all that you have started up m a sudden fit of restlessness, changed your jacket, abruptly dressed yourself for the street, explained that you must go out and with a few curt words of leave-taking actually gone out, banging the flat door more or less hastily according to the degree of displeasure you think you have left behind you and so cut off the general discussion of your departure, and when you find yourself once more in the street with limbs swinging extra freely in answer to the unexpected liberty you have procured for them, when as a result of this decisive action you feel aroused within yourself all the potentialities of decisive action, when you recognize with more than usual significance that your strength is greater than your need to accomplish effortlessly the swiftest of changes, that left alone you grow in understanding and calm, and in the enjoyment of them—then for that evening you have so completely got away from your family that the most distant journey could not take you farther and you have lived through what is for Europe so extreme an experience of solitude that one can only call it Russian. All this is still heightened if at such a late hour in the evening you look up a friend to see how he is getting on.”
(Franz Kafka, The Diaries, 1910-1913)

E2.1.A.5.2.a.ii.3_REF4_TH THE ADOLESCENT PHASE IS DEFINED BY THE "NEED TO REPUDIATE THE FALSE SOLUTION," THE "NEED TO FEEL REAL," AND THE "NEED TO DEFY." 
“HEALTH AND ILLNESS 
 That which shows in the normal adolescent is related to that which shows in various kinds of ill persons. For instance, the idea of the repudiation of the false solution corresponds with the schizophrenic patient’s inability to compromise; and in contrast with this there is psychoneurotic ambivalence and also the deceptiveness and self-deception to be found in healthy people. Again, the need to feel real corresponds with the feelings of unreality associated with psychotic depression, with depersonalization. And the need to defy corresponds with one aspect of the antisocial tendency as it appears in delinquency. 
 From this it follows that in a group of adolescents the various tendencies tend to be represented by the more ill members of the group. One member of a group takes an overdose of a drug, another lies in bed in a depression, another is free with the ﬂ ick knife. In each case there are grouped a band of adolescent isolates behind the ill individual whose extreme symptom has impinged on society. Yet in the majority of these individuals, whether or not they get involved, there was not enough drive behind the tendency to bring the symptom into inconvenient existence and to produce a social reaction. The ill one had to act for the others. 
 To repeat: if the adolescent is to get through this developmental stage by natural process, then there must be expected a phenomenon which could be called adolescent doldrums. Society needs to include this as a permanent feature and to tolerate it, to go to meet it, but not to cure it. The question is, has our society the health to do this? 
 Complicating this issue is the fact that some individuals are too ill (either with psychoneurosis or with depression or with schizophrenia) to reach a stage of emotional development that could be called adolescence, or they can only reach this in a highly distorted way. It has not been possible to include in this brief statement a picture of severe psychiatric illness as it appears at this age level. Nevertheless there is one type of illness that cannot be set aside in any statement about adolescence: delinquency. 
 Here again, there is a close relationship between the normal difﬁculties of adolescence and the abnormality that may be called the antisocial tendency. The difference between these two states does not lie so much in the clinical picture each presents as in the dynamics – in the origin – of each. At the root of the antisocial tendency there is always a deprivation. It may simply be that the mother, at a critical time, was in a withdrawn state or depressed, or it may be that the family broke up. Even a minor deprivation occurring at a difﬁcult moment in the life of a child may have a lasting result by overstraining the available defences. Behind the antisocial tendency there is always a history of some health and then an interruption, after which things were never the same again. The antisocial child is searching in some way or other, violently or gently, to get the world to acknowledge its debt, trying to make the world reform the framework which got broken up. In the root of the antisocial tendency is deprivation. 
 In the root of healthy adolescence in general it is not possible to say that there is inherently a deprivation, but still there is something in a diffused way which is the same but in a degree just not strong enough to overstrain the available defences. This means that in the group that the adolescent ﬁnds to identify with, the extreme members of the group are acting for the total group. All sorts of things in the adolescent’s struggle, the stealing, the knives, the breaking out and the breaking in; all these have to be contained in the dynamic of this group sitting round listening to blue jazz, or whatever is on. 
 If nothing happens, the individual members begin to feel unsure of the reality of their protest, and yet they are not in themselves disturbed enough to do an antisocial act. But if in the group there is an antisocial boy or girl who is willing to do the antisocial thing which produces a social reaction, this makes all the others cohere, makes them feel real, and temporarily gives the group a structure. Each will be loyal and will support the individual who will act for the group, although not one of them would have approved of the thing that the extreme antisocial did. 
 I think that this principle applies to the use of other kinds of illness. The suicide attempt of one of the members is very important to all the others. Or, one of them cannot get up, he is paralysed with depression. The others all know this is happening. Such happenings belong to the whole group and the group is shifting and the individuals are changing their groups, but somehow the individual members of the group use the extremes to help themselves to feel real, in their struggle to endure this doldrums period. 
 It comes down to a problem of: how to be adolescent during adolescence? This is an extremely brave thing for anybody to be. It does not mean that we grown-ups have to be saying: ‘Look at these dear little adolescents having their adolescence; we must put up with everything and let our windows get broken.’ This is not the point. The point is that we are challenged and we meet the challenge as part of the function of adult living. But we meet the challenge rather than set out to cure what is essentially healthy.
The big threat from the adolescent is the threat to the bit of ourselves that has not really had its adolescence. This bit of ourselves makes us resent these people being able to have their phase of the doldrums and makes us want to ﬁnd a solution for them. There are hundreds of false solutions. Anything we say or do is wrong. We give support and we are wrong, we withdraw support and that is wrong too. We dare not be ‘understanding’. But in the course of time we ﬁ nd that this adolescent boy and this adolescent girl has come out of the doldrums phase and is now able to begin identifying with society, with parents, and with wider groups, and to do so without feeling threatened with personal extinction.”
(D W Winnicott, Deprivation and Delinquency, 1984)

E2.1.A.5.2.a.ii.3_REF5_LIT MR. CASAUBON IS DEMANDING THAT DOROTHEA SUBSTITUTE HIS JUDGMENT FOR HER OWN IN PERPETUITY. DOROTHEA IS RESISTING BEING TURNED INTO A POSTHUMOUS INSTRUMENT OF HIS WILL, FORCED TO SPEND HER LIFE ON A SCHOLARLY PROJECT SHE HAS COME TO BELIEVE IS FUTILE.
““Before I sleep, I have a request to make, Dorothea.”

“What is it?” said Dorothea, with dread in her mind.

“It is that you will let me know, deliberately, whether, in case of my
death, you will carry out my wishes: whether you will avoid doing what
I should deprecate, and apply yourself to do what I should desire.”

Dorothea was not taken by surprise: many incidents had been leading her
to the conjecture of some intention on her husband’s part which might
make a new yoke for her. She did not answer immediately.

“You refuse?” said Mr. Casaubon, with more edge in his tone.

“No, I do not yet refuse,” said Dorothea, in a clear voice, the need of
freedom asserting itself within her; “but it is too solemn—I think it
is not right—to make a promise when I am ignorant what it will bind me
to. Whatever affection prompted I would do without promising.”

“But you would use your own judgment: I ask you to obey mine; you
refuse.”

“No, dear, no!” said Dorothea, beseechingly, crushed by opposing fears.
“But may I wait and reflect a little while? I desire with my whole soul
to do what will comfort you; but I cannot give any pledge
suddenly—still less a pledge to do I know not what.”

“You cannot then confide in the nature of my wishes?”

“Grant me till to-morrow,” said Dorothea, beseechingly.

“Till to-morrow then,” said Mr. Casaubon.

Soon she could hear that he was sleeping, but there was no more sleep
for her. While she constrained herself to lie still lest she should
disturb him, her mind was carrying on a conflict in which imagination
ranged its forces first on one side and then on the other. She had no
presentiment that the power which her husband wished to establish over
her future action had relation to anything else than his work. But it
was clear enough to her that he would expect her to devote herself to
sifting those mixed heaps of material, which were to be the doubtful
illustration of principles still more doubtful. The poor child had
become altogether unbelieving as to the trustworthiness of that Key
which had made the ambition and the labor of her husband’s life. It was
not wonderful that, in spite of her small instruction, her judgment in
this matter was truer than his: for she looked with unbiassed
comparison and healthy sense at probabilities on which he had risked
all his egoism. And now she pictured to herself the days, and months,
and years which she must spend in sorting what might be called
shattered mummies, and fragments of a tradition which was itself a
mosaic wrought from crushed ruins—sorting them as food for a theory
which was already withered in the birth like an elfin child. Doubtless
a vigorous error vigorously pursued has kept the embryos of truth
a-breathing: the quest of gold being at the same time a questioning of
substances, the body of chemistry is prepared for its soul, and
Lavoisier is born. But Mr. Casaubon’s theory of the elements which made
the seed of all tradition was not likely to bruise itself unawares
against discoveries: it floated among flexible conjectures no more
solid than those etymologies which seemed strong because of likeness in
sound until it was shown that likeness in sound made them impossible:
it was a method of interpretation which was not tested by the necessity
of forming anything which had sharper collisions than an elaborate
notion of Gog and Magog: it was as free from interruption as a plan for
threading the stars together. And Dorothea had so often had to check
her weariness and impatience over this questionable riddle-guessing, as
it revealed itself to her instead of the fellowship in high knowledge
which was to make life worthier! She could understand well enough now
why her husband had come to cling to her, as possibly the only hope
left that his labors would ever take a shape in which they could be
given to the world. At first it had seemed that he wished to keep even
her aloof from any close knowledge of what he was doing; but gradually
the terrible stringency of human need—the prospect of a too speedy
death—

And here Dorothea’s pity turned from her own future to her husband’s
past—nay, to his present hard struggle with a lot which had grown out
of that past: the lonely labor, the ambition breathing hardly under the
pressure of self-distrust; the goal receding, and the heavier limbs;
and now at last the sword visibly trembling above him! And had she not
wished to marry him that she might help him in his life’s labor?—But
she had thought the work was to be something greater, which she could
serve in devoutly for its own sake. Was it right, even to soothe his
grief—would it be possible, even if she promised—to work as in a
treadmill fruitlessly?

And yet, could she deny him? Could she say, “I refuse to content this
pining hunger?” It would be refusing to do for him dead, what she was
almost sure to do for him living. If he lived as Lydgate had said he
might, for fifteen years or more, her life would certainly be spent in
helping him and obeying him.

Still, there was a deep difference between that devotion to the living
and that indefinite promise of devotion to the dead. While he lived, he
could claim nothing that she would not still be free to remonstrate
against, and even to refuse. But—the thought passed through her mind
more than once, though she could not believe in it—might he not mean to
demand something more from her than she had been able to imagine, since
he wanted her pledge to carry out his wishes without telling her
exactly what they were? No; his heart was bound up in his work only:
that was the end for which his failing life was to be eked out by hers.

And now, if she were to say, “No! if you die, I will put no finger to
your work”—it seemed as if she would be crushing that bruised heart.

For four hours Dorothea lay in this conflict, till she felt ill and
bewildered, unable to resolve, praying mutely. Helpless as a child
which has sobbed and sought too long, she fell into a late morning
sleep, and when she waked Mr. Casaubon was already up. Tantripp told
her that he had read prayers, breakfasted, and was in the library.

“I never saw you look so pale, madam,” said Tantripp, a solid-figured
woman who had been with the sisters at Lausanne.

“Was I ever high-colored, Tantripp?” said Dorothea, smiling faintly.

“Well, not to say high-colored, but with a bloom like a Chiny rose. But
always smelling those leather books, what can be expected? Do rest a
little this morning, madam. Let me say you are ill and not able to go
into that close library.”

“Oh no, no! let me make haste,” said Dorothea. “Mr. Casaubon wants me
particularly.”

When she went down she felt sure that she should promise to fulfil his
wishes; but that would be later in the day—not yet.”
(George Eliot, Middlemarch, 1871)


E2.1.A.5.2.a.ii.3_REF6_CUR A_Cyril Pedrosa_L'évasion [The escape]_2022

ESCAPING ASSIGNED ROLES
“The agency in charge of Nantes' drinking fountains wished to draw the public's attention to the availability of water throughout the city. It has done this through the emblematic fontaine Wallace those magnificent green fountains found around Paris since 1871.

150 years later, Le Voyage à Nantes invited artist-author-illustrator Cyril Pedrosa to design a project involving this historical emblem of urban design, and write the next chapter to its original mythology imagined by artist-sculptor Charles-Auguste Lebourg (Born in Nantes).

For this new chapter in the story of Wallace fountains, Pedrosa has woven a tale in four chapters and four locations in the centre of Nantes: "The sculptures on these fountains are meant to embody Goodness, Charity, Simplicity, and Sobriety, carrying a dome on their shoulders. However noble and virtuous this role may be, they had neither chosen nor desired it. So, like countless other women throughout the world, the four caryatids of the Wallace fountains have patiently organized their escape..."

Through this metaphorical account of the long history of feminism and, more broadly, the history of humanity's quest for emancipation, Pedrosa pays a respectful and poetic homage to those who seek to escape the roles assigned to them.”
(Curatorship: Le Voyage à Nantes, 20225)

E2.1.A.5.2.a.iii. Subverting the Rules of Engagement: This section will analyze resistance on a linguistic level. It will discuss the power dynamics inherent in dialogue and refusing to conform to imposed intellectual frameworks.

"THE ANSWER

[...] 1) The answer: part of speech constrained by the form ”question." But what I want to point out is that there is always a terrorism of the question; in every question there is an implication of power. The question denies the right not to know, or the right to uncertain desire → For some people—including myself—any question triggers a certain panic; all the more so if the question is, or is intended to be, precise (precision as power, intimidation: this is the great power of science) → always wanting to answer precise questions imprecisely: this vagueness in the answer, even if it comes across as a weakness, is an indirect way of demystifying the question: because every question comes from someone who means something other than a literal answer → every question can be read as a situation of questioning, of power, of inquisition (the State, bureaucracy: very questioning figures). → The same power situation exists in interviews: 

a) presupposes that we know how to answer big essay questions (what is writing? nature? health? etc.), that we must be interested in the question, that we must accept the way the question is asked [...]

b) When responding to something the other person says, I am constrained by conformity, rules, and rules of conversation.
There are four rules or maxims:
1. The maxim of quantity: "Don't be too informative or too uninformative."
2. Maxim of quality: "Do not say what you believe to be false or lack evidence for."
3. Maxim of Relation: "Be relevant."
4. Maxim of Manner: "Be clear."
Conformity of responses (sequences) to these maxims results in complete satisfaction of conversational conformity. To produce a subversive, provocative, or confusing text, simply take the opposite approach: be unexpectedly enigmatic. Be maniacally informative or ironically obscure. Be exaggeratedly elliptical. Position yourself outside the realm of true or false. Say something irrelevant in relation to what has just been said. Say something outlandish. We will now examine these off-the-mark responses, which belong to the realm of the neutral since they thwart the arrogance of demanding a good reply. [...]"
(Roland Barthes, The Neutral, Lectures at the Collège de France, 1977–1978)

"ANSWERING EVASIVELY [...]

c) Incongruities

Deviation: mild, non-provocative deviations: exhaustion, not traumatic in Zen, technique of shaking up in preparation for Satori (see below): for each question-proposal, a response-reply of maximum incongruity: the story of Kao-fêng and his old master: Suzuki, I, 322.

A Zen lesson
(master/disciple relationship) Kao-feng and his old master

The master: “Who carries this lifeless body for you?” Kao-fêng throws him a “ho!”. The master takes his stick to hit him.
The disciple stops him: “You cannot hit me today.”
- Why not?"
Instead of answering him, Kao-feng abruptly leaves. The next day, the master says: “All things return to the One, and where does the One return?
- The dog laps the boiling water in the cauldron.
- Where did you get such stupidity?
- You'd better ask yourself that.” “The master was entirely satisfied.”
 

Observations on this Zen lesson: it can be said that all the rules of conformity according to Grice are cheerfully subverted, with a kind of impetuous, radical casualness (no information, no clarity, no relevance, outside the realm of true and false) and that all types of inappropriate responses are staged: silence, departure, deviation, the greatest incongruity being the master's final satisfaction: it's Marx Brothers. [...]"
(Roland Barthes, The Neutral, Lectures at the Collège de France, 1977–1978)

"ANOTHER LOGIC? ANOTHER DIALOGUE [...]

Zen rules of anti-relevance. Shaking up the logic of the social self, shaking up relevance: sought, systematized, and practiced by Zen, with a view to producing in the consciousness that kind of empty flash that is satori (“enlightenment”: improper: one sees nothing except perhaps that there is nothing to see). [...]

Suzuki, II, 622

Advice on Zen and koan:
1. Do not calculate according to your imagination.
2. Do not let your attention be distracted when the master raises his eyebrows or winks.
3. Do not try to derive meaning from the way the koan is formulated.
4. Do not try to demonstrate the meaning of the words.
5. Do not think that the meaning of the koan must be grasped where it is presented as an object of thought.
6. Do not take Zen to be a state of mere passivity.
7. Do not judge the koan according to the dualistic law of lou (Sanskrit asti: “it is”) and ou (Sanskrit nasti: “it is not”).
8. Do not take the koan as designating absolute emptiness.
9. Do not ratiocinate over the koan.
10. Do not leave your mind in the attitude of waiting for satori to appear.

4) The “gesture” of epoché [suspension of judgment]. Let us return to the Western habitus of responding in a roundabout way: acts that are less violent and less radical than Zen koans, closer to simple flight: “Shying away from the logical arrogance of the partner-adversary.” → it is a matter of suspending the logical routine into which the partner (socius, who embodies society, social constraint) wants to draw you: a true epoché of the logical line of the spoken chain; we have seen examples of this, from Gide to Euryloque; in these examples, I now point to a gesture (of flight and casualness): this means that the “no” opposed to ‘discussion’ must be accompanied by a connotation, a theatricality (it is a “gesture”) that makes it something active (stopping the image of the passive coward) and unexpected (leaving the disputant speechless, and a little ridiculous?). I will formulate the epoché in three forms of gestures:
a) “Ciao.” Let's take another look: Eurylochus, undressing and throwing himself into the Alpheus to escape the questions he was being asked. We must see the response (beside him) in the form of a bodily movement, and we can say that all Pyrrhonian skepticism (said to be empirical, not dogmatic) was born from this movement: Pyrrho and Timon (and Eurylochus): escaping the subtleties of the Sophists: obsessed and exhausted by these endless discussions: they decide to no longer answer anyone → hence: “I know nothing, I define nothing.” → This (at least originally, in Pyrrhon, because later it became dogmatic) does not imply a theory of non-knowledge, of non-definition, but only the repetition of a bodily gesture: the gesture of Eurylochus, whose only spoken expression would be this trivial, casual word: “Ciao,” “Bye-bye.” [...]: by denial: I am free, leave me alone, I am not accountable to you [...]"
(Roland Barthes, Le neutre, Cours au Collège de France, 1977-1978)

OPPOSING AUTHORITY WILL BE SEEN AS A SIGN OF FREEDOM ACCORDING TO THE PARADIGM WE HAVE CHOSEN FOR OUR ETHICAL CODE.

"Ancestral opposition between Confucius and Lao Tzu. Confucianism and Taoism: two great archetypes, two postulates, an eternal paradigm to study: mythical paradigms; Plato/Aristotle, Voltaire/Rousseau, Dostoevsky/Tolstoy. Let us recall:

Confucius	          Lao Tzu
Preaching →			Retreat
Legislation →			Nature
Social man →			Individual
Harmony →				Rest
Adequacy →			Abandonment
“Doing for nothing” →	“Doing nothing”
(Roland Barthes, The Neutral, Lectures at the Collège de France, 1977–1978)

Gala Porras-Kim_Whistling and Language Transfiguration (WaLT), 2012, Assobios e transfiguração da linguagem + gravação audio

"Gala Porras-Kim examines the political, social, economic, and spiritual contexts that influenced the value of, and contributed to the preservation or destruction of, objects and cultures during the process of colonization. In Whistling and Language Transfiguration (Walt), she explores the possibility of translating the Zapotec language, a minority indigenous language, and the political and linguistic implications of its representation. Zapotec is an oral tradition originating in the Oaxaca region of Mexico. It is tonal, meaning its meanings are partially contained in the intonation of speech, its musicality. For this reason, it can be reproduced through whistling—a strategy the Zapotec people used to prevent the Spanish from decoding their messages. Today, Zapotec suffers from successive Mexican governments' neglect to preserve and strengthen the country's original cultures. WaLT interprets the tonal Zapotec as a coded message that remains hidden yet present, resisting the linguistic domination imposed by the colonists centuries ago."
(Curator of the 34th São Paulo Biennial, 2020)

Nelly Kaplan, La fiancée du pirate, 1969
Marie et sa mère vivent misérablement dans une petite cabane prêtée par une fermière. Considérées comme des vagabondes, elles constituent une main d'œuvre idéale pour les habitants. Un jour, la mère de Marie est renversée par une voiture et meurt sur le coup. La jeune femme entreprend alors une vengeance envers tous les notables du village qu'elle juge responsables de ses malheurs...
Elle utilise la violence du désir qu'elle provoque chez les habitants de ce tout petit patelin, hommes comme femmes, pour faire la loi et tyranniser ceux qui pensaient pouvoir l'exploiter. Bien que les autres habitants devraient en théorie avoir le dessus sur elle de par leur position sociale, elle les domine tous parce qu'elle n'a peur de rien, ne craint le jugement de personne, et que sa joie se maintient constante alors qu'elle est absolument seule au monde et qu'elle encourt même à plusieures reprises le risque d'être assassinée ou bien d'être lynchée par la foule au comble de l'exaspération. Dans toutes ces péripéties, elle a toujours le dessus parce que sa liberté n'a pas de bornes; elle prend toujours ses adversaires par surprise parce qu'elle ose ce qu'ils ne peuvent même pas imaginer. Personne ne résiste non plus aux vérités qu'elle assaine de façon impensable pour les autres personnages - des vérités qui font s'écrouler les constructions hypocrites dont ils sont prisonniers. Marie échappe complètement aux normes qui interdisent certaines conduites à ses adversaires, ce qui lui permet de frapper d'une façon terrible que les autres ne peuvent utiliser en retour contre elle.

Regarder un extraoit sur YouTube:
https://youtu.be/G4nKkeYb2XY?si=IRB8LPwY5cM6TBcs

THE POLICEMAN'S GOAL IS TO IMPOSE A FRAMEWORK WHERE TOMAS ACCEPTS GUILT AND PERFORMS LOYALTY. TOMAS'S CLEVER RESPONSE REFUSES TO ENTER THIS FRAMEWORK. By focusing on the act of writing itself, he reclaims a measure of agency and dignity without escalating to a direct, and likely more dangerous, confrontation.
“Two weeks later, the man from the Ministry paid him another visit. Once more he invited him out for a drink, but this time Tomas requested that they stay in his office.
"I understand perfectly, Doctor," said the man, with a smile.
Tomas was intrigued by his words. He said them like a chess player who is letting his opponent know he made an error in the previous move.
They sat opposite each other, Tomas at his desk. After about ten minutes, during which they talked about the flu epidemic raging at the time, the man said, "We've given your case a lot of thought. If we were the only ones involved, there would be nothing to it. But we have public opinion to take into account. Whether you meant to or not, you fanned the flames of anti-Communist hysteria with your article.
I must tell you there was even a proposal to take you to court for that article. There's a law against public incitement to violence."
The man from the Ministry of the Interior paused to look Tomas in the eye. Tomas shrugged his shoulders. The man assumed his comforting tone again. "We voted down the proposal. No matter what your responsibility in the affair, society has an interest in seeing you use your abilities to the utmost. The chief surgeon of your hospital speaks very highly of you. We have reports from your patients as well. You are a fine specialist. Nobody requires a doctor to understand politics. You let yourself be carried away. 
It's high time we settled this thing once and for all. That's why we've put together a sample statement for you. All you have to do is make it available to the press, and we'll make sure it comes out at the proper time." He handed Tomas a piece of paper.
Tomas read what was in it and panicked. It was much worse than what the chief surgeon had asked him to sign two years before. It did not stop at a retraction of the Oedipus article. It contained words of love for the Soviet Union, vows of fidelity to the Communist Party; it condemned the intelligentsia, which wanted to push the country into civil war; and, above all, it denounced the editors of the writers' weekly (with special emphasis on the tall, stooped editor; Tomas had never met him, though he knew his name and had seen pictures of him), who had consciously distorted his article and used it for their own devices, turning it into a call for counterrevolution: too cowardly to write such an article themselves, they had hid behind a naive doctor. 
The man from the Ministry saw the panic in Tomas's eyes. He leaned over and gave his knee a friendly pat under the table. "Remember now, Doctor, it's only a sample! Think it over, and if there's something you want to change, I'm sure we can come to an agreement. After all, it's your statement!" Tomas held the paper out to the secret policeman as if he were afraid to keep it in his hands another second, as if he were worried someone would find his fingerprints on it. 
But instead of taking the paper, the man from the Ministry spread his arms in feigned amazement (the same gesture the Pope uses to bless the crowds from his balcony). "Now why do a thing like that, Doctor?
Keep it. Think it over calmly at home."
Tomas shook his head and patiently held the paper in his outstretched hand. In the end, the man from the Ministry was forced to abandon his papal gesture and take the paper back.
Tomas was on the point of telling him emphatically that he would neither write nor sign any text
whatever, but at the last moment he changed his tone and said mildly, "I'm no illiterate, am I? Why should I sign something I didn't write myself?"
"Very well, then, Doctor. Let's do it your way. You write it up yourself, and we'll go over it together.
You can use what you've just read as a model."
Why didn't Tomas give the secret policeman an immediate and unconditional no?
This is what probably went through his head: Besides using a statement like that to demoralize the nation in general (which is clearly the Russian strategy), the police could have a concrete goal in his case: they might be gathering evidence for a trial against the editors of the weekly that had published Tomas's article. If that was so, they would need his statement for the hearing and for the smear campaign the press would conduct against them. Were he to refuse flatly, on principle, there was always the danger that the police would print the prepared statement over his signature, whether he gave his consent or not. No newspaper would dare publish his denial. No one in the world would believe that he hadn't written or signed it. People derived too much pleasure from seeing their fellow man morally humiliated to spoil that pleasure by hearing out an explanation. 
By giving the police the hope that he would write a text of his own, he gained a bit of time. The very next day he resigned from the clinic, assuming (correctly) that after he had descended voluntarily to the lowest rung of the social ladder (a descent being made by thousands of intellectuals in other fields at the time), the police would have no more hold over him and he would cease to interest them. Once he had reached the lowest rung on the ladder, they would no longer be able to publish a statement in his name, for the simple reason that no one would accept it as genuine. Humiliating public statements are associated exclusively with the signatories' rise, not fall.
But in Tomas's country, doctors are state employees, and the state may or may not release them from its service. The official with whom Tomas negotiated his resignation knew him by name and reputation and tried to talk him into staying on. Tomas suddenly realized that he was not at all sure he had made the proper choice, but he felt bound to it by then by an unspoken vow of fidelity, so he stood fast. And that is how he became a window washer.”
 (Milan Kundera, The Unbearable Lightness of Being, 1984)

DE GUICHE, A POWERFUL NOBLEMAN, EXPECTS A STRAIGHTFORWARD INTERACTION (EITHER A FIGHT OR TO BE LET PASS). CYRANO REFUSES TO ENGAGE ON THESE TERMS AND INSTEAD TRAPS HIM IN AN ABSURD THEATRICAL PERFORMANCE.
“Scene 3.XI.

Cyrano, De Guiche.

DE GUICHE (who enters, masked, feeling his way in the dark):
  What can that cursed Friar be about?

CYRANO:
  The devil!. . .If he knows my voice!
(Letting go with one hand, he pretends to turn an invisible key.  Solemnly):
  Cric!  Crac!
  Assume thou, Cyrano, to serve the turn,
  The accent of thy native Bergerac!. . .

DE GUICHE (looking at the house):
  'Tis there.  I see dim,--this mask hinders me!
(He is about to enter, when Cyrano leaps from the balcony, holding on to the
branch, which bends, dropping him between the door and De Guiche; he pretends
to fall heavily, as from a great height, and lies flat on the ground,
motionless, as if stunned.  De Guiche starts back):
  What's this?
(When he looks up, the branch has sprung back into its place.  He sees only
the sky, and is lost in amazement):
  Where fell that man from?

CYRANO (sitting up, and speaking with a Gascon accent):
  From the moon!

DE GUICHE:
  From?. . .

CYRANO (in a dreamy voice):
  What's o'clock?

DE GUICHE:
  He's lost his mind, for sure!

CYRANO:
  What hour?  What country this?  What month?  What day?

DE GUICHE:
  But. . .

CYRANO:
  I am stupefied!

DE GUICHE:
  Sir!

CYRANO:
  Like a bomb
  I fell from the moon!

DE GUICHE (impatiently):
  Come now!

CYRANO (rising, in a terrible voice):
  I say,--the moon!

DE GUICHE (recoiling):
  Good, good! let it be so!. . .He's raving mad!

CYRANO (walking up to him):
  I say from the moon!  I mean no metaphor!. . .

DE GUICHE:
  But. . .

CYRANO:
  Was't a hundred years--a minute, since?
  --I cannot guess what time that fall embraced!--
  That I was in that saffron-colored ball?

DE GUICHE (shrugging his shoulders):
  Good! let me pass!

CYRANO (intercepting him):
  Where am I?  Tell the truth!
  Fear not to tell!  Oh, spare me not!  Where? where?
  Have I fallen like a shooting star?

DE GUICHE:
  Morbleu!

CYRANO:
  The fall was lightning-quick! no time to choose
  Where I should fall--I know not where it be!
  Oh, tell me!  Is it on a moon or earth,
  that my posterior weight has landed me?

DE GUICHE:
  I tell you, Sir. . .

CYRANO (with a screech of terror, which makes De Guiche start back):
  No?  Can it be?  I'm on
  A planet where men have black faces?

DE GUICHE (putting a hand to his face):
  What?

CYRANO (feigning great alarm):
  Am I in Africa?  A native you?

DE GUICHE (who has remembered his mask):
  This mask of mine. . .

CYRANO (pretending to be reassured):
  In Venice? ha!--or Rome?

DE GUICHE (trying to pass):
  A lady waits. .

CYRANO (quite reassured):
  Oh-ho!  I am in Paris!

DE GUICHE (smiling in spite of himself):
  The fool is comical!

CYRANO:
  You laugh?

DE GUICHE:
  I laugh,
  But would get by!

CYRANO (beaming with joy):
  I have shot back to Paris!
(Quite at ease, laughing, dusting himself, bowing):
  Come--pardon me--by the last water-spout,
  Covered with ether,--accident of travel!
  My eyes still full of star-dust, and my spurs
  Encumbered by the planets' filaments!
(Picking something off his sleeve):
  Ha! on my doublet?--ah, a comet's hair!. . .

(He puffs as if to blow it away.)

DE GUICHE (beside himself):
  Sir!. . .

CYRANO (just as he is about to pass, holds out his leg as if to show him
something and stops him):
  In my leg--the calf--there is a tooth
  Of the Great Bear, and, passing Neptune close,
  I would avoid his trident's point, and fell,
  Thus sitting, plump, right in the Scales!  My weight
  Is marked, still registered, up there in heaven!
(Hurriedly preventing De Guiche from passing, and detaining him by the button
of his doublet):
  I swear to you that if you squeezed my nose
  It would spout milk!

DE GUICHE:
  Milk?

CYRANO:
  From the Milky Way!

DE GUICHE:
  Oh, go to hell!”
(Edmond Rostand, Cyrano de Bergerac, 1897)

E2.1.A.5.2.b. The Spirit of Rebellion: Secession from the Herd

E2.1.A.5.2.b.i. The Rebel's Generosity: Based on Albert Camus' The Rebel, this section will define true rebellion not as a calculated, resentment-fueled revolution, but as a generous and immediate act.

I_Parameters for the brain
"All traditional views are held with such tenacity, such almost ferocity, because they belong to the class of views induced, not by individual experience, still less by reason, but by collective, or, as it is sometimes called “herd,” suggestion. This used to be called “faith.” The belief so held may or may not be true; collective suggestion is not in the least necessarily collective hallucination. Mere collective suggestions — that is the interesting point — have the quality of obviousness; they do not issue from the individual, but seem imposed from outside, and ineluctable; they have all the inevitableness of instinctive opinion… Hence they are held with an intensity of emotion far beyond any reasoned conviction. To doubt them is felt to be at once idiocy and irreverence. Inquiry into their rational bases is naturally, and in a sense rightly, resented, because they are not rationally based, though they may be rationally supported. It is by convictions such as this that a society of the homogenous kind — a society based on and held together by uniformity — lives and thrives. To attack them is to cripple and endanger its inmost life. [...]
"We decline to be ourselves part of an undifferentiated mass; we refuse to deal with others in classes and masses… We are dissatisfied now not only with the herd-sanctions of religion, but with many of those later sanctities of law to which some even emancipated thinkers ascribe a sort of divinity. We feel the inherent savagery of law in that it treats individuals as masses… Yet all the time we know that we can, with spiritual safety, rebel only in so far as we are personally sensitive to the claims of other individual lives that touch our own. The old herd-problem remains of how to live together; and as the union grows closer and more intricate the chances of mutual hurt are greater, and the sensitiveness must grow keener. Others are safe from and with us only when their pain is our pain, their joy ours."
(Jane Ellen Harrison, Heresy and Humanity, found in Alpha and Omega)

Illustration: Maria Stavreva_La transgression pour l'invention
Faut-il désobéir pour inventer ?

(Georges Didi-Huberman & Frédéric Gros au micro de l'émission Avec Philosophie, diffusée sur France Culture le 09/01/2024)

Écouter le Podcast:
https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/avec-philosophie/faut-il-desobeir-pour-inventer-8754622

Illustration:
- Maria Stavreva_La transgression pour l'invention

Paulo Nazareth_Tommie Smith, 2017

"Tommie (2017) is a gesture that echoes Olympic champion Tommie Smith's protest on the podium at the 1968 Mexico City Olympics. The silhouette of the Black athlete raising his fist in a symbol of pride and revolt was reproduced on paper and cardboard, structured as a tiny monument. Through his use of fragile materials, the artist offers an alternative perspective on the concept of a monument, replacing the traditional durability of public sculptures with the genuine significance of the gesture, which comes to life as the artist pays homage to pivotal figures in the fight for civil rights for the African-American community."
(São Paulo Biennial Curatorship, 2020)

Rebellion for the Humiliated: Tommie Smith's protest was not for personal gain; it was a powerful act of solidarity on a global stage, done on behalf of an oppressed and humiliated community. The text highlights this by noting the gesture was part of "the fight for civil rights for the African-American community." This aligns perfectly with the Camusian idea that true rebellion is born from a "strange form of love" for those who suffer.

A Selfless Gesture: Smith risked his career and reputation in a selfless act, giving his moment of personal glory to a collective cause. This embodies the "insane generosity" of the rebel that Camus describes—one who "unhesitatingly gives the strength of its love and without a moment's delay refuses injustice."

An Alternative, Human Monument: Paulo Nazareth’s artistic choice to use "fragile materials" and create a "tiny monument" reinforces this theme. He rejects the traditional, state-sanctioned bronze monument, which celebrates power and permanence. Instead, he focuses on the human fragility and immense courage of the gesture itself. The artwork is not a monument to a victor, but a tribute to the vulnerable and generous spirit of the rebel.

Art:
- Paulo Nazareth_Tommie Smith, 2017

REVOLT IS A KIND OF MADNESS, A GENEROSITY THAT GIVES STRENGTH THROUGH LOVE WITHOUT HESITATION AND REFUSES INJUSTICE WITHOUT DELAY. IT HONORS IS TO MAKE NO CALCULATION, DISTRIBUTING EVERYTHING TO THE PRESENT LIFE AND ITS LIVING BROTHERS.

"Beyond Nihilism There does exist for man, therefore, a way of acting and of thinking which is possible on the level of moderation to which he belongs. Every undertaking that is more ambitious than this proves to be contradictory. The absolute is not attained nor, above all, created through history.

Politics is not religion, or if it is, then it is nothing but the Inquisition. How would society define an absolute? Perhaps everyone is looking for this absolute on behalf of all. But society and politics only have the responsibility of arranging everyone's affairs so that each will have the leisure and the freedom to pursue this common search. History can then no longer be presented as an object of worship. It is only an opportunity that must be rendered fruitful by a vigilant rebellion.

"Obsession with the harvest and indifference to history," writes Rene Char admirably, "are the two extremities of my bow." If the duration of history is not synonymous with the duration of the harvest, then history, in effect, is no more than a fleeting and cruel shadow in which man has no more part. He who dedicates himself to this history dedicates himself to nothing and, in his turn, is nothing. But he who dedicates himself to the duration of his life, to the house he builds, to the dignity of mankind, dedicates himself to the earth and reaps from it the harvest that sows its seed and sustains the world again and again. Finally, it is those who know how to rebel, at the appropriate moment, against history who really advance its interests. To rebel against it supposes an interminable tension and the agonized serenity of which Rene Char also speaks. But the true life is present in the heart of this dichotomy. Life is this dichotomy itself, the mind soaring over volcanoes of light, the madness of justice, the extenuating intransigence of moderation. The words that reverberate for us at the confines of this long adventure of rebellion are not formulas for optimism, for which we have no possible use in the extremities of our unhappiness, but words of courage and intelligence which, on the shores of the eternal seas, even have the qualities of virtue.

No possible form of wisdom today can claim to give more. Rebellion indefatigably confronts evil, from which it can only derive a new impetus. Man can master in himself everything that should be mastered. He should rectify in creation everything that can be rectified. And after he has done so, children will still die unjustly even in a perfect society. Even by his greatest effort man can only propose to diminish arithmetically the sufferings of the world. But the injustice and the suffering of the world will remain and, no matter how limited they are, they will not cease to be an outrage. Dimitri Karamazov's cry of "Why?" will continue to resound; art and rebellion will die only with the last man.

There is an evil, undoubtedly, which men accumulate in their frantic desire for unity. But yet another evil lies at the roots of this inordinate movement. Confronted with this evil, confronted with death, man from the very depths of his soul cries out for justice. Historical Christianity has only replied to this protest against evil by the annunciation of the kingdom and then of eternal life, which demands faith. But suffering exhausts hope and faith and then is left alone and unexplained. The toiling masses, worn out with suffering and death, are masses without God. Our place is henceforth at their side, far from teachers, old or new. Historical Christianity postpones to a point beyond the span of history the cure of evil and murder, which are nevertheless experienced within the span of history. Contemporary materialism also believes that it can answer all questions. But, as a slave to history, it increases the domain of historic murder and at the same time leaves it without any justification, except in the future—which again demands faith. In both cases one must wait, and meanwhile the innocent continue to die. For twenty centuries the sum total of evil has not diminished in the world. No paradise, whether divine or revolutionary, has been realized. An injustice remains inextricably bound to all suffering, even the most deserved in the eyes of men. The long silence of Prometheus before the powers that overwhelmed him still cries out in protest. But Prometheus, meanwhile, has seen men rail and turn against him. Crushed between human evil and destiny, between terror and the arbitrary, all that remains to him is his power to rebel in order to save from murder him who can still be saved, without surrendering to the arrogance of blasphemy.

Then we understand that rebellion cannot exist without a strange form of love. Those who find no rest in God or in history are condemned to live for those who, like themselves, cannot live: in fact, for the humiliated. The most pure form of the movement of rebellion is thus crowned with the heart-rending cry of Karamazov: if all are not saved, what good is the salvation of one only? Thus Catholic prisoners, in the prison cells of Spain, refuse communion today because the priests of the regime have made it obligatory in certain prisons. These lonely witnesses to the crucifixion of innocence also refuse salvation if it must be paid for by injustice and oppression. This insane generosity is the generosity of rebellion, which unhesitatingly gives the strength of its love and without a moment's delay refuses injustice. Its merit lies in making no calculations, distributing everything it possesses to life and to living men. It is thus that it is prodigal in its gifts to men to come. Real generosity toward the future lies in giving all to the present. 

Rebellion proves in this way that it is the very movement of life and that it cannot be denied without renouncing life. Its purest outburst, on each occasion, gives birth to existence. Thus it is love and fecundity or it is nothing at all. Revolution without honor, calculated revolution which, in preferring an abstract concept of man to a man of flesh and blood, denies existence as many times as is necessary, puts resentment in the place of love. Immediately rebellion, forgetful of its generous origins, allows itself to be contaminated by resentment; it denies life, dashes toward destruction, and raises up the grimacing cohorts of petty rebels, embryo slaves all of them, who end by offering themselves for sale, today, in all the marketplaces

of Europe, to no matter what form of servitude. It is no longer either revolution or rebellion but rancor, malice, and tyranny. Then, when revolution in the name of power and of history becomes a murderous and immoderate mechanism, a new rebellion is consecrated in the name of moderation and of life. We are at that extremity now. At the end of this tunnel of darkness, however, there is inevitably a light, which we already divine and for which we only have to fight to ensure its coming. All of us, among the ruins, are preparing a renaissance beyond the limits of nihilism. But few of us know it.

Already, in fact, rebellion, without claiming to solve everything, can at least confront its problems. From this moment high noon is borne away on the fast-moving stream of history. Around the devouring flames, shadows writhe in mortal combat for an instant of time and then as suddenly disappear, and the blind, fingering their eyelids, cry out that this is history. The men of Europe, abandoned to the shadows, have turned their backs upon the fixed and radiant point of the present. They forget the present for the future, the fate of humanity for the delusion of power, the misery of the slums for the mirage of the eternal city, ordinary justice for an empty promised land. They despair of personal freedom and dream of a strange freedom of the species; reject solitary death and give the name of immortality to a vast collective agony. They no longer believe in the things that exist in the world and in living man; the secret of Europe is that it no longer loves life. Its blind men entertain the puerile belief that to love one single day of life amounts to justifying whole centuries of oppression. That is why they wanted to efface joy from the world and to postpone it until a much later date. Impatience with limits, the rejection of their double life, despair at being a man, have finally driven them to inhuman excesses. Denying the real grandeur of life, they have had to stake all on their own excellence. For want of something better to do, they deified themselves and their misfortunes began; these gods have had their eyes put out. Kaliayev, and his brothers throughout the entire world, refuse, on the contrary, to be deified in that they refuse the unlimited power to inflict death. They choose, and give us as an example the only original rule of life today: to learn to live and to die, and, in order to be a man, to refuse to be a god.

At this meridian of thought, the rebel thus rejects divinity in order to share in the struggles and destiny of all men. We shall choose Ithaca, the faithful land, frugal and audacious thought, lucid action, and the generosity of the man who understands. In the light, the earth remains our first and our last love. Our brothers are breathing under the same sky as we; justice is a living thing. Now is born that strange joy which helps one live and die, and which we shall never again postpone to a later time. On the sorrowing earth it is the unresting thorn, the bitter brew, the harsh wind off the sea, the old and the new dawn. With this joy, through long struggle, we shall remake the soul of our time, and a Europe which will exclude nothing. Not even that phantom Nietzsche, who for twelve years after his downfall was continually invoked by the West as the blasted image of its loftiest knowledge and its nihilism; nor the prophet of justice without mercy who lies, by mistake, in the unbelievers' plot at Highgate Cemetery; nor the deified mummy of the man of action in his glass coffin; nor any part of what the intelligence and energy of Europe have ceaselessly furnished to the pride of a contemptible period. All may indeed live again, side by side with the martyrs of 1905, but on condition that it is understood that they correct one another, and that a limit, under the sun, shall curb them all. Each tells the other that he is not God; this is the end of romanticism. At this moment, when each of us must fit an arrow to his bow and enter the lists anew, to reconquer, within history and in spite of it, that which he owns already, the thin yield of his fields, the brief love of this earth, at this moment when at last a man is born, it is time to forsake our age and its adolescent furies. The bow bends; the wood complains. At the moment of supreme tension, there will leap into flight an unswerving arrow, a shaft that is inflexible and free."
(Albert Camus, The Rebel, 1951)

"Animals, according to Hegel, have an immediate knowledge of the exterior world, a perception of the self, but not the knowledge of self, which distinguishes man. The latter is only really born at the moment when he becomes aware of himself as a rational being. Therefore his essential characteristic is self-consciousness. Consciousness of self, to be affirmed, must distinguish itself from what it is not. Man is a creature who, to affirm his existence and his difference, denies. What distinguishes consciousness of self from the world of nature is not the simple act of contemplation by which it identifies itself with the exterior world and finds oblivion, but the desire it can feel with regard to the world. This desire reestablishes its identity when it demonstrates that the exterior world is something apart. In its desire, the exterior world consists of what it does not possess, but which nevertheless exists, and of what it would like to exist but which no longer does. Consciousness of self is therefore, of necessity, desire. But in order to exist it must be satisfied, and it can only be satisfied by the gratification of its desire. It therefore acts in order to gratify itself and, in so doing, it denies and suppresses its means of gratification. It is the epitome of negation. To act is to destroy in order to give birth to the spiritual reality of consciousness. But to destroy an object unconsciously, as meat is destroyed, for example, in the act of eating, is a purely animal activity. To consume is not yet to be conscious. Desire for consciousness must be directed toward something other than unconscious nature. The only thing in the world that is distinct from nature is, precisely, self-consciousness. Therefore desire must be centered upon another form of desire; self-consciousness must be gratified by another form of self-consciousness. In simple words, man is not recognized—and does not recognize himself—as a man as long as he limits himself to subsisting like an animal. He must be acknowledged by other men. All consciousness is, basically, the desire to be recognized and proclaimed as such by other consciousnesses. It is others who beget us. Only in association do we receive a human value, as distinct from an animal value. 

In that the supreme value for the animal is the preservation of life, consciousness should raise itself above the level of that instinct in order to achieve human value. It should be capable of risking its life. To be recognized by another consciousness, man should be ready to risk his life and to accept the chance of death. Fundamental human relations are thus relations of pure prestige, a perpetual struggle, to the death, for recognition of one human being by another.

At the first stage of his dialectic, Hegel affirms that in so far as death is the common ground of man and animal, it is by accepting death and even by inviting it that the former differentiates himself from the latter. At the heart of this primordial struggle for recognition, man is thus identified with violent death. The mystic slogan "Die and become what you are" is taken up once more by Hegel. But "Become what you are" gives place to "Become what you so far are not." This primitive and passionate desire for recognition, which is confused with the will to exist, can be satisfied only by a recognition gradually extended until it embraces everyone. In that everyone wants equally much to be recognized by everyone, the fight for life will cease only with the recognition of all by all, which will mark the termination of history. The existence that Hegelian consciousness seeks to obtain is born in the hard-won glory of collective approval. It is not beside the point to note that, in the thought which will inspire our revolutions, the supreme good does not, in reality, coincide with existence, but with an arbitrary facsimile. The entire history of mankind is, in any case, nothing but a prolonged fight to the death for the conquest of universal prestige and absolute power. It is, in its essence, imperialist. We are far from the gentle savage of the eighteenth century and from the Social Contract. In the sound and fury of the passing centuries, each separate consciousness, to ensure its own existence, must henceforth desire the death of others. Moreover, this relentless tragedy is absurd, since, in the event of one consciousness being destroyed, the victorious consciousness is not recognized as such, in that it cannot be victorious in the eyes of something that no longer exists. In fact, it is here the philosophy of appearances reaches its limits."
(Albert Camus, The Rebel, 1951)

"No human reality would therefore have been engendered if, thanks to a propensity that can be considered" fortunate for Hegel's system, there had not existed, from the beginning of time, two kinds of consciousness, one of which has not the courage to renounce life and is therefore willing to recognize the other kind of consciousness without being recognized itself in return. It consents, in short, to being considered as an object. This type of consciousness, which, to preserve its animal existence, renounces independent life, is the consciousness of a slave. The type of consciousness which by being recognized achieves independence is that of the master. They are distinguished one from the other at the moment when they clash and when one submits to the other. The dilemma at this stage is not to be free or to die, but to kill or to enslave. This dilemma will resound throughout the course of history, though at this moment its absurdity has not yet been resolved.

Undoubtedly the master enjoys total freedom first as regards the slave, since the latter recognizes him totally, and then as regards the natural world, since by his work the slave transforms it into objects of enjoyment which the master consumes in a perpetual affirmation of his own identity. However, this autonomy is not absolute. The master, to his misfortune, is recognized in his autonomy by a consciousness that he himself does not recognize as autonomous. Therefore he cannot be satisfied and his autonomy is only negative. Mastery is a blind alley. Since, moreover, he cannot renounce mastery and become a slave again, the eternal destiny of masters is to live unsatisfied or to be killed. The master serves no other purpose in history than to arouse servile consciousness, the only form of consciousness that really creates history. The slave, in fact, is not bound to his condition, but wants to change it. Thus, unlike his master, he can improve himself, and what is called history is nothing but the effects of his long efforts to obtain real freedom. Already, by work, by his transformation of the natural world into a technical world, he manages to escape from the nature which was the basis of his slavery in that he did not know how to raise himself above it by accepting death. The very agony of death experienced in the humiliation of the entire being lifts the slave to the level of human totality. He knows, henceforth, that this totality exists; now it only remains for him to conquer it through a long series of struggles against nature and against the masters. History identifies itself, therefore, with the history of endeavor and rebellion. It is hardly astonishing that Marxism-Leninism derived from this dialectic the contemporary ideal of the soldier worker. [...]

"Kill or enslave!"—those who have read Hegel with this single and terrible purpose have really considered only the first part of the dilemma. From it they have derived a philosophy of scorn and despair and have deemed themselves slaves and nothing but slaves, bound by death to the absolute Master and by the whip to their terrestrial masters. This philosophy of the guilty conscience has merely taught them that every slave is enslaved only by his own consent, and can be liberated only by an act of protest which coincides with death. Answering the challenge, the most courageous among them have completely identified themselves with this act of protest and have dedicated themselves to death. After all, to say that negation is in itself a positive act justified in advance every kind of negation and predicted the cry of Bakunin and Nechaiev: "Our mission is to destroy, not to construct."
(Albert Camus, The Rebel, 1951)

ALBERT CAMUS BELIEVED THAT NIHILISTIC RAGE TURNED INTO CONFORMISM AFTER THE DISAPPEARANCE OF THE SACRED.
"Harrar was actually foretold in his work, but in the form of his final abdication. "And best of all, a drunken sleep on the beach." The fury of annihilation, appropriate to every rebel, then assumes its most common form. The apocalypse of crime—as conceived by Rimbaud in the person of the prince who insatiably slaughters his subjects—and endless licentiousness are rebellious themes that will be taken up again by the surrealists. But finally, even with Rimbaud, nihilist dejection prevailed; the struggle, the crime itself, proved too exacting for his exhausted mind. The seer who drank, if we may venture to say so, in order not to forget ended by finding in drunkenness the heavy sleep so well known to our contemporaries. One can sleep on the beach, or at Aden. And one consents, no longer actively, but passively, to accept the order of the world, even if the order is degrading. Rimbaud's silence is also a preparation for the silence of authority, which hovers over minds resigned to everything save to the necessity of putting up a fight. Rimbaud's great intellect, suddenly subordinated to money, proclaims the advent of other demands, which are at first excessive and which will later be put to use by the police. To be nothing—that is the cry of the mind exhausted by its own rebellion. This leads to the problem of suicide of the mind, which, after all, is less respectable than the surrealists' suicide, and more fraught with consequences. [...]
An urgent appeal to absent life is reinforced by a total rejection of the present world, as Breton's arrogant statement indicates: "Incapable of accepting the fate assigned to me, my highest perceptions outraged by this denial of justice, I refrain from adapting my existence to the ridiculous conditions of existence here below." [...]
Surrealist irreligion is methodical and rational. At first it established itself on the idea of the absolute nonculpability of man, to whom one should render "all the power that he has been capable of putting into the word God." [...]
The surrealists wanted to reconcile Marx's "let us transform the world" with Rimbaud's "let us change life." But the first leads to the conquest of the totality of the world and the second to the conquest of the unity of life. Paradoxically, every form of totality is restrictive. In the end, the two formulas succeeded in splitting the surrealist group. By choosing Rimbaud, Breton demonstrated that surrealism was not concerned with action, but with asceticism and spiritual experience. He again gave first place to what composed the profound originality of his movement: the restoration of the sacred and the conquest of unity, which make surrealism so invaluable for a consideration of the problem of rebellion. The more he elaborated on this original concept, the more irreparably he separated himself from his political companions, and at the same time from some of his first manifestoes.»
(Albert Camus, The Rebel, 1951)

E2.1.A.5.2.b.ii. Culture as Secession: Using Peter Sloterdijk's work, this part will frame cultural and ethical development as an act of secession—a breaking away from the "misery of conventions."

"Culture is observance."
The twilight of life forms, disciplinarism, and stratification without domination [...]
Culture arises from secession. [...]
Wittgenstein's use of the concept of “culture” leaves no room for doubt. In his view, culture arises only through the isolation of truly cultured people from the so-called “culture,” a confused aggregate of good and bad habits that produce little more than ordinary “filth.”From this point on, it is easier to explain why Wittgenstein is one of the few modern authors—perhaps the only one of high standing between Nietzsche and Foucault, apart from Heidegger—in whom we can observe philosophy's retrograde metamorphosis from an academic subject to a committed discipline. [...]
Only constant progress in distancing oneself from the misery of conventions can preserve the purity of the modernizing project—hence the rhythm of permanent secession that characterizes 20th-century art and continues until there is nothing left to secede from. [...]
As Allan Janik and Stephen Toulmin have shown, secessionist motives, in the broadest sense, were inherent in Viennese modernity. For its protagonists, the founding gesture of culture consisted of breaking out of the system of conventions in which the aristocratic-bourgeois public of the imperial capital had become complacent." [...]

Form and Life

I would not need to mention these contextual links if the Secession figure, regardless of its Viennese history, were not significant to the discussion of the forms of organization of life in practice, including its ancient and very ancient manifestations, which will be covered in the following pages. The act of secession itself expresses an imperative without which there could never be any "order," reform, or "revolution." Change your life! It is assumed here that life contains something that the individual can transform—or acquire the ability to transform. In 1937, Wittgenstein noted: "Life is problematic when it does not fit the form of living. You must therefore change your life. If it fits such a form, what is problematic will disappear." [...]
Finding the right form is a design task incorporating moral and logical practice. Philosophy itself implies such a task from the outset, which is why it can "teach." Schooling, as such, is already a phenomenon of secession. In Plato, the founder of the Academy, this is seen almost in the same way as in the Viennese moderns. Where there is secession, reformers have lost patience with the given facts. They no longer want to see the situations they are accustomed to or their reproductions. The time has come to turn to models. The model does not reproduce life; it precedes it. One could say that philosophy was born from the spirit of secession. It's no coincidence that Plato founded his Athenian educational institution in 387 BCE in a decentralized location. It operated continuously until its destruction by Sulla in 86 BCE. It was located a short distance west of the city center, next to a fairly large sports site, the gymnasium, which was clearly soon integrated into the curriculum.
Founding a school means rejecting the kitsch of destiny—whether it dates back to the end of Athens or the end of the Habsburg Empire. It requires that questions of destiny be transformed into missions of discipline. [...]
Let us state frankly the purpose of these reflections: by demonstrating that Wittgenstein's concept of culture expresses a strongly secessionist understanding of “work” on personal faults and those of collective sensibility, we remove all possibilities of recovering it for the egalitarian and relativist ideology that goes hand in hand with the various variants of Anglo-Saxon analytical philosophy. In reality, Wittgenstein's “work” could embody the harshest manifestation of ethical elitism known to the 20th century, except perhaps for Simone Weil, considered the only reformist elitist of equal stature. His secessionist and elitist approach descends to such depths that the author might even have preferred to withdraw from himself and his “filthy mess” if it had been possible. Once Wittgenstein's inexorable elitism—which is as radical as it is apolitical and ahistorical—has been brought to light, it not only contaminates the understanding of his most successful theorem, the “language game” theory, but also casts Wittgenstein's role as a teacher in a completely different light. [...]"
(Peter Sloterdijk,You must change your life, 2009)

The Association of Visual Artists Vienna Secession founded in 1897

"Only the constant progression in distancing oneself from the misery of convention can preserve the modernising projec's purity  - hence the rhythm of permanent secession that characterises twentieth-century art and remains in motion until there is nothing left with which to secede. [...] Secessionist motifs, in the broadest sense of the term, were inherent in Viennese modernity. For its protagonists, the founding gesture of culture consisted in breaking out of the system of conventions in which the aristocratic-bourgeois public of the empire's capital was indulging. [...]
The secession's gesture expresses the imperative without which there could never have been « a new order », « reform », « revolution »: You must change your life! Here it is assumed that  the individual has a competence for transforming his life - or can acquire it. In 1937, Wittgenstein noted: « If life is problematic, this means that your life does not fit the form of living. You must then change your life, and if it fits such a form, what is problematic will disappear. » [...]
Finding the right form is a design task that requires moral and logical practice. It is only because philosophy itself implies such a mission from the outset that it can « be passed on as the teachings of a school » - Plato's Academy was already a phenomenon of secession, almost in the same way as in the Viennese moderns. Where secession broods, the reformers have lost patience with the status quo. They want to depart from the situations they are used to and from their reproductions. The time has come to turn to a new model. The model does not reproduce life, it precedes it. One can almost speak of the birth of philosophy from the spirit of secession."
(Peter Sloterdijk, You must change your life, 2009)

“My whole art of self-expression in lecturing was as a matter of fact based upon a certain kind of mental independence, an independence which I was always desperately trying to convey to others, for I regarded it—and do still regard it—as one of the most important elements in human happiness and by no means exclusive of the devotion of a scholar to the Past. 
This cosmic pride of mine—you can call it “comic” if you like, but mine will be the last laugh in our altercation implied a mental process by which I thought of my “ego,” the inmost “self” within me, as independent of the accident of being born a man, or of being born a man upon this earth! 
To look at human life with the eyes of a stranger, as if I had suddenly been projected out of space—as indeed in a sense I had—into this particular society, was the attitude which I sought to assume as my final spiritual refuge; for this and this only could offer me a real escape from all the teasing frets and fevers, all the worrying envies and jealousies and competitions and comparisons, of the ambitions of the world.”
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber, p.522)

"Independence! Independence! That is the secret of all philosophy. To be independent of the opinions of your neighbours, of your relations, of your friends; to be independent of this ridiculous itch for “being heard of”; to take the neck of your desire to compete and wring it; and then, when it becomes a question of pride, to let your pride tower up like a wavering, fluctuating, gigantic Genie from the smoke bottle of your own magical soul! [...]
The grand secret of enjoying yourself with a free heart is to get rid of ambition, rid of even the most trifling competitions with other poor devils. But we must have our pride; and we must have a very deep pride. We must have a pride in simply being ourselves outside and beyond any conceivable competition. Luckily for me I have inherited from my father a towering pride; but not a pride in anything particular."
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber,  p.622-652)

"There is no difference in kind between good and bad actions, only in degree. Good deeds are sublimated bad deeds, and bad deeds are crude and foolish good deeds. The desire for self-gratification (combined with the fear of frustration) is always satisfied, regardless of how a person acts, whether through vanity, revenge, pleasure, self-interest, malice, perfidy, sacrifice, pity, or scientific research. The degree of judgment determines the direction in which each person allows themselves to be led by this desire. There is always a hierarchy of goods in every society and in every individual according to which they determine their actions and judge those of others. However, this scale varies continually. Many actions are considered evil when they are merely stupid because the level of intelligence that was decisive for them was low. In a sense, it is better, because the highest level of human intelligence that can be attained presently will surely be surpassed. Then, looking back, our entire conduct and all our judgments will appear just as narrow-minded and thoughtless. Realizing this can cause deep pain, but not without consolation; these are the pains of childbirth. The butterfly wants to break out of its shell. It tears it apart and rips it open. Then, it is blinded and intoxicated by the unknown light and the empire of freedom. It is among men capable of this sadness—how few there will be!—that the first attempt is made to determine whether moral humanity can become wise. [...]"
(Friedrich Nietzsche)

[EN] Vincent van Gogh, Self-portrait with bandaged ear, 1889
"We can speak of the good mental health of Van Gogh who, in his whole life, only cooked one of his hands and did no more, for the rest, than cut off his left ear once, ... compare this to a world [...] of anarchy, disorder, delirium, derangement, chronic madness [...].
And what is an authentic lunatic? He is a man who chose to become insane, in the sense in which we understand it socially, rather than to forfeit a certain superior idea of human honor. [...]
And where is the place of the human self in this delirium?
Van Gogh searched for his throughout his life, with a strange energy and determination.
And he did not commit suicide in a fit of madness, in the trance of not succeeding,
but on the contrary he had just succeeded
and had discovered what he was and who he was, when the general conscience of society, to punish him for having torn himself away from it
suicided him.
And it happened with Van Gogh as it always happens, on the occasion of a sex party, a mass, an absolution, or some other rite of consecration, possession, succubation or incubation.
It thus introduced itself into his body,
this society
absolved,
consecrated,
sanctified
and possessed,
erased in him the supernatural consciousness that he had just encountered, and like a flood of black crows in the fibers of his internal tree,
submerged him with a final blow,
and, taking his place,
killed him."
(Antonin Artaud, Van Gogh the man suicided by society, 1947)

Art:
- Vincent van Gogh, Self-portrait with bandaged ear, 1889

A PSYCHOLOGICAL AND MYTHOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK FOR UNDERSTANDING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE INDIVIDUAL, THE GROUP, AND THE UNKNOWN.
"Son, the archetypal individual, creative exploratory Word and  vengeful adversary. We are adapted to this world of divine  characters, much as to the objective world. The fact of this  adaptation implies that the environment is in “reality” a forum for  action, as well as a place of things.   Unprotected exposure to unexplored territory produces fear. The  individual is protected from such fear as a consequence of ritual  imitation of the Great Father—as a consequence of the adoption of  group identity, which restricts the meaning of things, and confers  predictability on social interactions. When identification with the  group is made absolute, however—when everything has to be  controlled, when the unknown is no longer allowed to exist—the  creative exploratory process that updates the group can no longer  manifest itself. This restriction of adaptive capacity dramatically  increases the probability of social aggression.   Rejection of the unknown is tantamount to “identification with the  devil,” the mythological counterpart and eternal adversary of the  world-creating exploratory hero. Such rejection and identification is  a consequence of Luciferian pride, which states: all that I know is  all that is necessary to know. This pride is totalitarian assumption of  omniscience—is adoption of God’s place by “reason”—is  something that inevitably generates a state of personal and social  being indistinguishable from hell. This hell develops because  creative  exploration—impossible,  without  (humble)  acknowledgment of the unknown—constitutes the process that  constructs and maintains the protective adaptive structure that  gives life much of its acceptable meaning.   “Identification with the devil” amplifies the dangers inherent in  group identification, which tends of its own accord towards  pathological stultification. Loyalty to personal interest-subjective  meaning—can serve as an antidote to the overwhelming  temptation constantly posed by the possibility of denying anomaly.  Personal interest—subjective meaning—reveals itself at the  juncture of explored and unexplored territory, and is indicative of  participation in the process that ensures continued healthy  individual and societal adaptation.   Loyalty to personal interest is equivalent to identification with the  archetypal hero—the “savior”—who upholds his association with  the creative Word in the face of death, and despite group pressure  to conform. Identification with the hero serves to decrease the  unbearable motivational valence of the unknown; furthermore,  provides the individual with a standpoint that simultaneously  transcends and maintains the group.”
(Jordan Peterson, Maps of Meaning The Architecture of Belief, 1999)

LORD HENRY, AN IMPERIOUS ARISTOCRAT AND A DECADENT DANDY WHO ESPOUSES A PHILOSOPHY OF SELF-INDULGENT HEDONISM DEFINES THE "MISERY" OF CONVENTIONAL MORALITY AS "DISCORD," which he describes as being "forced to be in harmony with others." The conventional life is presented as a state of inauthenticity. 
“Pleasure is the only thing worth having a theory about,” he answered in his slow melodious voice. “But I am afraid I cannot claim my theory as my own. It belongs to Nature, not to me. Pleasure is Nature’s test, her sign of approval. When we are happy, we are always good, but when we are good, we are not always happy.”
“Ah! but what do you mean by good?” cried Basil Hallward.
“Yes,” echoed Dorian, leaning back in his chair and looking at Lord Henry over the heavy clusters of purple-lipped irises that stood in the centre of the table, “what do you mean by good, Harry?”
“To be good is to be in harmony with one’s self,” he replied, touching the thin stem of his glass with his pale, fine-pointed fingers. “Discord is to be forced to be in harmony with others. One’s own life—that is the important thing. As for the lives of one’s neighbours, if one wishes to be a prig or a Puritan, one can flaunt one’s moral views about them, but they are not one’s concern. Besides, individualism has really the higher aim. Modern morality consists in accepting the standard of one’s age. I consider that for any man of culture to accept the standard of his age is a form of the grossest immorality.”
“But, surely, if one lives merely for one’s self, Harry, one pays a terrible price for doing so?” suggested the painter.
“Yes, we are overcharged for everything nowadays. I should fancy that the real tragedy of the poor is that they can afford nothing but self-denial. Beautiful sins, like beautiful things, are the privilege of the rich.”
“One has to pay in other ways but money.”
“What sort of ways, Basil?”
“Oh! I should fancy in remorse, in suffering, in ... well, in the consciousness of degradation.”
Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders. “My dear fellow, medieval art is charming, but medieval emotions are out of date. One can use them in fiction, of course. But then the only things that one can use in fiction are the things that one has ceased to use in fact. Believe me, no civilized man ever regrets a pleasure, and no uncivilized man ever knows what a pleasure is.” 
(Oscar Wilde, The Picture of Dorian Gray, 1890)

ROARK EXPLICITLY IDENTIFIES THE "CONVENTION" HE IS BREAKING AWAY FROM: THE BELIEF THAT "EVERYTHING BEAUTIFUL IN ARCHITECTURE HAS BEEN DONE ALREADY" AND THAT THE ONLY VALID PATH IS TO "RESPECTFULLY... REPEAT" THE PAST. 
The Dean moved in his chair. Roark made him uncomfortable. Roark's eyes were fixed on him politely. The Dean thought, there's nothing wrong with the way he's looking at me, in fact it's quite correct, most properly attentive; only, it's as if I were not here.
"Every problem you were given," the Dean went on, "every project you had to design--what did you do with it? Every one of them done in that--well, I cannot call it a style--in that incredible manner of yours. It is contrary to every principle we have tried to teach you, contrary to all established precedents and traditions of Art. You may think you are what is called a modernist, but it isn't even that. It is...it is sheer insanity, if you don't mind."
"I don't mind."
"When you were given projects that left the choice of style up to you and you turned in one of your wild stunts--well, frankly, your teachers passed you because they did not know what to make of it. But, when you were given an exercise in the historical styles, a Tudor chapel or a French opera house to design--and you turned in something that looked like a lot of boxes piled together without rhyme or reason--would you say it was an answer to an assignment or plain insubordination?"
"It was insubordination," said Roark.
"We wanted to give you a chance--in view of your brilliant record in all other subjects. But when you turn in this--" the Dean slammed his fist down on a sheet spread before him--"this as a Renaissance villa for your final project of the year--really, my boy, it was too much!"
The sheet bore a drawing--a house of glass and concrete. In the comer there was a sharp, angular signature: Howard Roark.
"How do you expect us to pass you after this?"
"I don't."
"You left us no choice in the matter. Naturally, you would feel bitterness toward us at this moment, but..."
"I feel nothing of the kind," said Roark quietly. "I owe you an apology. I don't usually let things happen to me. I made a mistake this time. I shouldn't have waited for you to throw me out. I should have left long ago."
"Now, now, don't get discouraged. This is not the right attitude to take. Particularly in view of what I am going to tell you."
The Dean smiled and leaned forward confidentially, enjoying the overture to a good deed.
"Here is the real purpose of our interview. I was anxious to let you know as soon as possible. I did not wish to leave you disheartened. Oh, I did, personally, take a chance with the President's temper when I mentioned this to him, but...Mind you, he did not commit himself, but...Here is how things stand: now that you realize how serious it is, if you take a year off, to rest, to think it over--shall we say to grow up?--there might be a chance of our taking you back. Mind you, I cannot promise anything--this is strictly unofficial--it would be most unusual, but in view of the circumstances and of your brilliant record, there might be a very good chance."
Roark smiled. It was not a happy smile, it was not a grateful one. It was a simple, easy smile and it was amused.
"I don't think you understood me," said Roark. "What made you suppose that I want to come back?"
"Eh?"
"I won't be back. I have nothing further to learn here."
"I don't understand you," said the Dean stiffly.
"Is there any point in explaining? It's of no interest to you any longer."
"You will kindly explain yourself."
"If you wish. I want to be an architect, not an archeologist. I see no purpose in doing Renaissance villas. Why learn to design them, when I'll never build them?"
"My dear boy, the great style of the Renaissance is far from dead. Houses of that style are being erected every day."
They are. And they will be. But not by me."
"Come, come, now, this is childish."
"I came here to learn about building. When I was given a project, its only value to me was to learn to solve it as I would solve    I a real one in the future. I did them the way I'll build them. I've    | learned all I could learn here--in the structural sciences of which    you don't approve. One more year of drawing Italian post cards would give me nothing." '
An hour ago the Dean had wished that this interview would proceed as calmly as possible. Now he wished that Roark would display some emotion; it seemed unnatural for him to be so quietly natural in the circumstances.
"Do you mean to tell me that you're thinking seriously of building that way, when and if you are an architect?"
"Yes."
"My dear fellow, who will let you?"
"That's not the point. The point is, who will stop me?"
"Look here, this is serious. I am sorry that I haven't had a long, earnest talk with you much earlier...I know, I know, I know, don't interrupt me, you've seen a modernistic building or two, and it gave you ideas. But do you realize what a passing fancy that whole so-called modern movement is? You must learn to understand--and it has been proved by all authorities--that everything beautiful in architecture has been done already. There is a treasure mine in every style of the past. We can only choose from the great masters. Who are we to improve upon them? We can only attempt, respectfully, to repeat."
"Why?" asked Howard Roark.
No, thought the Dean, no, he hasn't said anything else; it's a perfectly innocent word; he's not threatening me.
"But it's self-evident!" said the Dean.
"Look," said Roark evenly, and pointed at the window. "Can you see the campus and the town? Do you see how many men are walking and living down there? Well, I don't give a damn what any or all of them think about architecture--or about anything else, for that matter. Why should I consider what their grandfathers thought of it?"
"That is our sacred tradition."
"Why?"
"For heaven's sake, can't you stop being so naive about it?"
"But I don't understand. Why do you want me to think that this is great architecture?" He pointed to the picture of the Parthenon.
"That," said the Dean, "is the Parthenon."
"So it is."
"I haven't the time to waste on silly questions."
"All right, then." Roark got up, he took a long ruler from the desk, he walked to the picture. 
"Shall I tell you what's rotten about it?"
"It's the Parthenon!" said the Dean.
"Yes, God damn it, the Parthenon!"
The ruler struck the glass over the picture.
"Look," said Roark. "The famous flutings on the famous columns--what are they there for? To hide the joints in wood--when columns were made of wood, only these aren't, they're marble. The triglyphs, what are they? Wood. Wooden beams, the way they had to be laid when people began to build wooden shacks. Your Greeks took marble and they made copies of their wooden structures out of it, because others had done it that way. Then your masters of the Renaissance came along and made copies in plaster of copies in marble of copies in wood. Now here we are, making copies in steel and concrete of copies in plaster of copies in marble of copies in wood. Why?"
The Dean sat watching him curiously. Something puzzled him, not in the words, but in Roark's manner of saying them.
"Rules?" said Roark. "Here are my rules: what can be done with one substance must never be done with another. No two materials are alike. No two sites on earth are alike. No two buildings have the same purpose. The purpose, the site, the material determine the shape. Nothing can be reasonable or beautiful unless it's made by one central idea, and the idea sets every detail. A building is alive, like a man. Its integrity is to follow its own truth, its one single theme, and to serve its own single purpose. A man doesn't borrow pieces of his body. A building doesn't borrow hunks of its soul. Its maker gives it the soul and every wall, window and stairway to express it."
"But all the proper forms of expression have been discovered long ago."
"Expression--of what? The Parthenon did not serve the same purpose as its wooden ancestor. An airline terminal does not serve the same purpose as the Parthenon. Every form has its own meaning. Every man creates his meaning and form and goal. Why is it so important--what others have done? Why does it become sacred by the mere fact of not being your own? Why is anyone and everyone right--so long as it's not yourself? Why does the number of those others take the place of truth? Why is truth made a mere matter of arithmetic--and only of addition at that? Why is everything twisted out of all sense to fit everything else? There must be some reason. I don't know. I've never known it. I'd like to understand."
"For heaven's sake," said the Dean. "Sit down....That's better....Would you mind very much putting that ruler down?...Thank you....Now listen to me. No one has ever denied the importance of modern technique to an architect. We must learn to adapt the beauty of the past to the needs of the present. The voice of the past is the voice of the people. Nothing has ever been invented by one man in architecture. The proper creative process is a slow, gradual, anonymous, collective one, in which each man collaborates with all the others and subordinates himself to the standards of the majority."
"But you see," said Roark quietly, "I have, let's say, sixty years to live. Most of that time will be spent working. I've chosen the work I want to do. If I find no joy in it, then I'm only condemning myself to sixty years of torture. And I can find the joy only if I do my work in the best way possible to me. But the best is a matter of standards--and I set my own standards. I inherit nothing. I stand at the end of no tradition. I may, perhaps, stand at the beginning of one."
(Ayn Rand, The fountainhead, 1943)


THE YOUNG SPEAKER REJECTS THE ENTIRE ARCHETYPE OF THE "FATHER" AS A "REALITY-CONCEALING MACHINE," A "MACHINE FOR DISHING UP LIES," AND A FORCE THAT EXISTS ONLY TO "CONTAMINATE OUR FREEDOM AND OUR ABILITY."
“‘There is no such thing as a good father because the role itself is bad. Strict fathers, soft fathers, nice moderate fathers - one’s as bad as another. They stand in the way of our progress while they try to burden us with their inferiority complexes, and their unrealized aspirations, and their resentments, and their ideals, and the weaknesses they’ve never told anyone about, and their sins, and their sweeter-than-honey dreams, and the maxims they’ve never had the courage to live by - they’d like to unload all that silly crap on us, all of it! Even the most neglectful fathers, like mine, are no different. Their consciences hurt them because they’ve never paid any attention to their children and they want the kids to understand just how bad the pain is — to sympathize !
‘On New Year’s Day we went to Arashi Yania in Kyoto and as we were crossing the Bridge of Moons I asked my old man a question: “Dad, is there any purpose in life?” You see what I was getting at, don’t you, what I really meant? Father, can you give me one single reason why you go on living? Wouldn’t it be better just to fade away as quickly as possible? But a first-class insinuation never reaches a man like that. He just looked surprised and his eyes popped and he stared at me. I hate that kind of ridiculous adult surprise. And when he finally answered, what do you think he said? “Son, nobody is going to provide you with a purpose in life; you’ve got to make one for yourself.”
‘How’s that for a stupid, hackneyed moral! He just pressed a button and out came one of the things fathers are supposed to say. And did you ever look at a father’s eyes at a time like that? They’re suspicious of anything creative, anxious to whittle the world down into something puny they can handle. A father is a reality-concealing machine, a machine for dishing up lies to kids, and that isn’t even the worst of it: secretly he believes that he represents reality.
‘Fathers are the flies of this world. They hover round our heads waiting for a chance, and when they see something rotten, they buzz in and root in it. Filthy, lecherous flies broadcasting to the whole world that they’ve screwed our mothers. And there’s nothing they won’t do to contaminate our freedom and our ability. Nothing they won’t do to protect the filthy cities they’ve built for themselves.’
‘My old man still won’t buy me an air rifle,’ Number Two murmured, his arms round his knees.
‘And he never will, either. But it’s time you realized that a father who would buy you an air rifle is just as bad as one who won’t.’
‘My father beat me again yesterday. That makes the third time since the New Year.’
‘Beat you ?’ Noboru repeated in horror.
‘He slaps me across the face. Sometimes he even punches.’
‘ Why don’t you do something ?
‘’Cause I’m not strong enough to take him on.’ ‘Then you should - why don’t you’ - Noboru’s face was bright red and he was shouting - ‘ butter his toast with potassium cyanide or something like that !
‘There are worse things than being beaten.’ The Chief’s thin red upper lip curled. ‘There are lots of things worse than that, only you don’t know about them. You’re one of the fortunate ones. When your father died your case became special. But you’ve got to know about the evil in the world too; otherwise you’ll never have any real power.’
‘My old man is always coming home drunk and bullying my mother,’ Number Four said. ‘And when I stood up for her one time he got white as a sheet and grinned and said: “Keep out of this. You want to take away your mother’s pleasure?” But this time I’ve got something on him. He’s got three mistresses.’
‘All my father ever does is pray to God,’ said Number Five.
Noboru asked what he prayed for. ‘Well, the family’s safety, peace on earth, prosperity - stuff like that. He thinks we’re a model home or something. The bad part is he’s even got my old lady thinking the same thing. The whole house is spick-and-span and everybody’s supposed to be real honest and full of what he calls “the good”. We even leave food out for the mice in the rafters so they won’t have to sin by stealing. And you know what happens when dinner’s over ? Everybody hunches over and licks his plate clean so none of God’s grace will be wasted.’
‘Does your old man make you do that too ?’
‘He never makes you do anything. He starts doing all this crappy stuff himself and everybody else is sort of in the habit of copying him. . . . You’re really lucky, Noboru.
You should be thankful.’
Noboru was vexed at his immunity from the germs that infected the others, but at the same time he trembled at the fragility of his chance good fortune. Some providence he couldn’t name had exempted him from evil. 
His purity was as brittle as a new moon. His innocence had sent an intricate net of feelers snaking towards the world, but when would they be snapped? When would the world lose its vastness and lace him in a straitjacket ? That day, he knew, was not far away, and even now he could feel a lunatic courage welling within him . . .
The Chief had turned away so as not to see Noboru’s face. He was peering through a narrow gap in the crates at the convolutions of the smoke and clouds above the grey offing. He bit with small sharp shiny teeth at the red lining of his leather gloves.”
(Yukio Mishima, The Sailor Who Fell From Grace with the Sea, 1963)

“HIGH AGENCY: When passed over for fashion editor at Harper’s despite doing the job’s work, Anna Wintour didn’t complain or negotiate. She resigned immediately, taking her assistant with her. She moved to New York without a job lined up, betting everything on her vision. The system won’t fix itself for you. When merit meets politics, choose exodus over argument."
DON’T CARE WHAT THEY THINK: Putting Madonna on Vogue’s cover in 1989 horrified fashion purists. The woman had just lost her Pepsi sponsorship over a controversial video. Religious groups wanted boycotts. Anna did it anyway because a businessman on a plane said Vogue would “never” feature Madonna. The issue sold 200,000 extra copies. When everyone agrees something would “never” work, that’s precisely when it will. Consensus kills innovation. »
(Shane Parrish, FS-Brain Food, June 22, 2025)
Anna Wintour is a British-American media executive, who has been serving as editor-in-chief of Vogue since 1988.

E2.1.A.5.2.b.iii. Choosing Ithaca: The conclusion will synthesize these ideas. The ultimate goal of this relationship with authority is not anarchy but a state of "vigilant rebellion" (Camus). It is about choosing "Ithaca, the faithful land"—a life of lucid action, frugal thought, and shared dignity. True freedom is found not in escaping the world, but in actively remaking our soul and our world, armed with the courage to "stand tall and plow through the thin-legged arrogance" of those who refuse open dialogue (Nick Cave).

Benny Cruz, Now is an important moment to speak up

Using children's balloons to get his message across, Benny Cruz appeals to the « simplicity, naturalness and impartial honesty » of the child that is still inside us so that we find the courage to step out of inertia.
"It takes courage to break or question what goes without saying, to disturb worldly constellations: the novelties, zigzags, asymmetries of truth interrupt the bourgeois continuation of existence to which routine's and conformism's we have adapted so snugly. Courage here is to displease, to disappoint the expectation of others, or at least to deny, in the name of the truth, what others expect from our character. As much is the coward concerned of fulfilling and confirming the expectation the group has about him, the courageous one neglects his own comfort: he escapes from his definition and does not get stuck in the convenient roles and conventional character attributions that his class prepared for him; he voluntarily renounces public esteem, he will bore the women of the world and shock when he could charm. [...]
Against the temptations of automatism, courage is an ever vigilant effort towards simplicity, naturalness and impartial honesty, whatever it may cost our selfishness; it electrifies the will that is always ready to settle down at the sign of good will; it undoes the « genres » we give ourselves, even if our « genre » (the most subtle of all) is not to have any."
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, The Virtues and Love, 1970)

Jesse Darling, March of the Valedictorians, 2016
The school chairs on long, spindly legs are "standing tall" yet appear precarious and unstable. They perfectly capture the feeling of defiant self-elevation while also, as the text points out, representing the "thin-legged arrogance" of the very establishment one is confronting.

In issue #14 of the Red Hand Files, Nick Cave relates the advice his mother gave him as he was about to confront the establishment: "I was feeling a little intimidated by the whole thing because I was stepping out of my rock ‘n’ roll comfort zone, into the academic sphere and the whole affair had me feeling quite uncomfortable. I mentioned this to my mother, and as we stepped out of the car into the university grounds, she said: « Head high and fuck ‘em all. » ” 
When we feel oppressed by mainstream collective thought, although we honestly think our diverging position has value, we can find confidence remembering this advice before we stand tall and plow through the thin-legged arrogance of people who refuse to give a chance to debate our ideas in an open-minded and sincere dialogue.

E1.4.C.1.3. WHAT YOU WANT, WANT IT IN SUCH A WAY THAT YOU ALSO WANT THE ETERNAL RETURN OF IT ALL. "As an ethical thought, the concept of the eternal return is a new formulation of a practical synthesis: What you want, want it in such a way that you also want the eternal return of it all. «If, in all that you want to do, you start by asking yourself: am I sure that I want to do it an infinite number of times, it will be for you the most solid center of gravity.» One thing in the world disgusts Nietzsche: the small compensations, the small pleasures, the little joys, everything you agree to once, just once. The things you can only do again the next day if you have said to yourself the day before: tomorrow I won't do it again - all the ceremonial of the obsessed. Let us see better how the eternal return operates a selection here. It is the thought of the eternal return that selects. It makes wanting something whole. The thought of the eternal return eliminates from wanting everything that falls outside of the eternal return; it makes wanting a creation, it effectuates the equation wanting = creating."
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and philosophy, 1962)

E1.4.C.1.3.a. HE WHO IS, WHO IS REAL, WHO IS TRUE, IS AWARE THAT HE CONFERS HONOR ON THINGS, THAT HE CREATES VALUES. "Nietzsche announces that wanting is liberating; against the pain of the wanting, Nietzsche proclaims that wanting is joyful. Against the image of a desire that dreams of receiving established values, Nietzsche proclaims that to want is to create new values. [...]

Goodness describes the activity, the affirmation, the pleasures experienced in its exercise: a certain quality of the soul, “a certain fundamental certainty that a soul possesses about itself, something that is impossible to seek, impossible to find and perhaps even to lose”. What Nietzsche often calls distinction is the internal character of what we affirm (we don't have to look for it), of what we put into action (we can't find it), of what we enjoy (we can't lose it). The one who affirms and acts is at the same time the one who is: “The word esthlos means, according to its root, means one who is, who has reality, who is real, who is true”. “He who is is aware that he confers honor on things, that he creates values.”
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophy, 1962)


"When we make power an object of representation we necessarily make it dependent upon the factor according to which a thing is represented or not, recognised or not. Now, only values which are already current, only accepted values, give criteria of recognition in this way. The will to power, understood as the will to get oneself recognised, is necessarily the will to have the values current in a given society attributed to oneself (power, money, honours, reputation).9 But here again, who conceives of power as the acquisition of assignable values? "The common man never had any value but that which was attributed to him; in no way accustomed to positing values himself, he attributed to himself no other value than that which was recognised in him" (BGE 261), or even that which he got them to recognise. [...]
It is characteristic of established values to be brought into play in a struggle, but it is characteristic of the struggle to be always referred to established values: whether it is struggle for power, struggle for recognition or struggle for life - the schema is always the same. One cannot over emphasise the extent to which the notions of struggle, war, rivalry or even comparison are foreign to Nietzsche and to his conception of the will to power. It is not that he denies the existence of struggle: but he does not see it as in any way creative of values. [...]
"Good" qualifies activity, affirmation and the enjoyment which is experienced in their exercise: a certain quality of the soul, "some fundamental certainty which a noble soul possesses in regard to itself, something which may not be sought or found and perhaps may not be lost either" (BGE 287 p. 196). What Nietzsche often calls distinction is the eternal character of what is affirmed (it does not have to be looked for), of what is put into action (it is not found), of what is enjoyed (it cannot be lost). He who affirms and acts is at the same time the one who is: "The root of the word coined for this, esthlos signifies one who is, who possesses reality, who is actual, who is true" (GM 15 p. 29). "He knows himself to be that which in general first accords honour to things, he creates values."
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophy, 1962)

CYNICISM WAS A PHILOSOPHY OF COMPLETE AND TOTAL REBELLION AGAINST ALL SOCIAL NORMS AND INSTITUTIONS.
“The [school of the Cynics] is derived, through its founder Diogenes, from Antisthenes, a disciple of Socrates, about twenty years older than Plato. Antisthenes was a remarkable character, in some ways rather like Tolstoy. Until after the death of Socrates, he lived in the aristocratic circle of his fellow disciples, and showed no sign of unorthodoxy. Put something—whether the defeat of Athens, or the death of Socrates, or a distaste for philosophic quibbling—caused him, y/hen no longer young, to despise the things that he had formerly valued. He would have nothing but simple goodness. He associated with working men, and dressed as one of them. He took to open-air preaching, in a style that the uneducated could understand. All refined philosophy he held to be worthless; what could be known, could be known by the plain man. He believed in the ‘return to nature*, and carried this belief very far. There was to be no government, no private property, no marriage, no established religion. His followers, if not he himself, condemned slavery. He was not exactly ascetic, but he despised luxury and all pursuit of artificial pleasures of the senses. ‘I had rather be mad than delighted,' he said.'
The fame of Antisthenes was surpassed by that of his disciple Diogenes, ‘a young man from Sinope, on the Buxine, whom he [Antisthenes] did not take to at first sight; the son of a disreputable money-changer who had been sent to prison for defacing the coinage. Antisthenes ordered the lad away, but he paid no attention; he beat him with his stick, but he never moved. He wanted “wisdom", and saw that Antisthenes had it to give. His aim in life was to do as his father had done, to “deface the coinage", but on a much larger scale. He would deface all the coinage current in the world. Every conventional stamp was false. The men stamped as generals and kings; the things stamped as honour and wisdom and happiness and riches; all were base metal with lying superscription.'
He decided to live like a dog. and was therefore called a ‘cynic’, which means ‘canine*. He rejected all conventions—whether of religion, of manners, of dress, of housing, of food, or of decency. One is told that he lived in a tub, but Gilbert Murray assures us that this is a mistake: it was a large pitcher, of the sort used in primitive times for burials. He lived, like an Indian fakir, by begging. He proclaimed his brotherhood, not only with the whole human race, but also with animals. He was a man about whom stories gathered, even in his lifetime. Everyone knows how Alexander visited him, and asked if he desired any favour; ‘only to stand out of my light,' he replied.
The teaching of Diogenes was by no means what we now call 'cynical'—quite the contrary. He had an ardent passion for ‘virtue', in comparison with which he held worldly goods of no account. He sought virtue and moral freedom in liberation from desire: be indifferent to the goods that fortune has to bestow, and you will be emancipated from fear. In this respect, his doctrine, as we shall see, was taken up by the Stoics, but they did not follow him in rejecting the amenities of civilization. He considered that Prometheus was justly punished for bringing to man the arts that have produced the complication and artificiality of modern life. In this he resembled the Taoists and Rousseau and Tolstoy, but was more consistent than they were. His doctrine, though he was a contemporary of Aristotle, belongs in its temper to the Hellenistic age. Aristotle is the last Greek philosopher who faces the world cheerfully; after him, all have, in one form or another, a philosophy of retreat. The world is bad; let us  learn to be independent of it. External goods are precarious; they are the gift of fortune, not the reward of our own efforts. Only subjective goods—virtue, or contentment through resignation—are secure, and these alone, therefore, will be valued by the wise man. Diogenes personally was a man full of vigour, but his doctrine, like all those of the Hellenistic age, was one to appeal to weary men, in whom disappointment had destroyed natural zest. And it was certainly not a doctrine calculated to promote art or science or statesmanship, or any useful activity except one of protest against powerful evil.
It is interesting to observe what the Cynic teaching became when it was popularized. In the early part of the third century b.c., the cynics were the fashion, especially in Alexandria. They published little sermons pointing out how easy it is to do without material possessions, how happy one can be on simple food, how warm one can keep in winter without expensive clothes (which might be true in Egypt!), how silly it is to feel affection for one’s native country, or to mourn when one’s children or friends die. 'Because my son or wife is dead,' says Teles, who was one of these popularizing Cynics, ‘is that any reason for my neglecting myself, who am still alive, and ceasing to look after my property.’ At this point, it becomes difficult to feel any sympathy with the simple life, which has grown altogether too simple. One wonders who enjoyed these sermons. Was it the rich, who wished to think the sufferings of the poor imaginary? Or was it the new poor, who were trying to despise the successful business man? Or was it sycophants who persuaded themselves that the charity they accepted was unimportant? Teles says to a rich man : ‘You give liberally and I take valiantly from you, neither grovelling nor demeaning myself basely nor grumbling.’ A very convenient doctrine. Popular Cynicism did not teach abstinence from the good things of this world, but only a certain indifference to them. In the case of a borrower, this might take the form of minimizing the obligation to the lender.”
(Bertrand Russell, History Of Western Philosophy, 1945)

"FEARING FOR MY SANITY
Fearing for my sanity, 
I shed my shirt and tie, 
Walked out on my rectitude 
And waved myself goodbye.  

I did precisely as I pleased, 
Said only what was true; 
Cared not a whit whom I might hurt 
Or what debts might be due;  

Chose my orbit on my own 
And lived by my own light, 
Hurtling through the gravities 
That rule the lidless night;  

Unknowing in my innocence 
The iron laws that be, 
And that the more I worked my will, 
The less I would be free."
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

New sub-topic

DON QUIXOTE'S ENTIRE LIFE OF ADVENTURE WAS A REBELLION AGAINST MUNDANE REALITY THROUGH THE CREATION OF A HEROIC PERSONA. IN HIS FINAL MOMENTS, HIS LAST FREE ACT IS TO RESIST THAT VERY PERSONA AND RECLAIM HIS ORIGINAL IDENTITY: "I am no longer Don Quixote of La Mancha, but Alonso Quixano, whose way of life won for him the name of Good."
“The niece listened with attention to her uncle’s words, and they struck her as more coherent than what usually fell from him, at least during his illness, so she asked, “What are you saying, señor? Has anything strange occurred? What mercies or what sins of men are you talking of?”
“The mercies, niece,” said Don Quixote, “are those that God has this moment shown me, and with him, as I said, my sins are no impediment to them. My reason is now free and clear, rid of the dark shadows of ignorance that my unhappy constant study of those detestable books of chivalry cast over it. Now I see through their absurdities and deceptions, and it only grieves me that this destruction of my illusions has come so late that it leaves me no time to make some amends by reading other books that might be a light to my soul. Niece, I feel myself at the point of death, and I would fain meet it in such a way as to show that my life has not been so ill that I should leave behind me the name of a madman; for though I have been one, I would not that the fact should be made plainer at my death. Call in to me, my dear, my good friends the curate, the bachelor Samson Carrasco, and Master Nicholas the barber, for I wish to confess and make my will.” But his niece was saved the trouble by the entrance of the three. The instant Don Quixote saw them he exclaimed, “Good news for you, good sirs, that I am no longer Don Quixote of La Mancha, but Alonso Quixano, whose way of life won for him the name of Good. Now am I the enemy of Amadis of Gaul and of the whole countless troop of his descendants; odious to me now are all the profane stories of knight-errantry; now I perceive my folly, and the peril into which reading them brought me; now, by God’s mercy schooled into my right senses, I loathe them.”
When the three heard him speak in this way, they had no doubt whatever that some new craze had taken possession of him; and said Samson, “What? Señor Don Quixote! Now that we have intelligence of the lady Dulcinea being disenchanted, are you taking this line; now, just as we are on the point of becoming shepherds, to pass our lives singing, like princes, are you thinking of turning hermit? Hush, for heaven’s sake, be rational and let’s have no more nonsense.”
“All that nonsense,” said Don Quixote, “that until now has been a reality to my hurt, my death will, with heaven’s help, turn to my good. I feel, sirs, that I am rapidly drawing near death; a truce to jesting; let me have a confessor to confess me, and a notary to make my will; for in extremities like this, man must not trifle with his soul; and while the curate is confessing me let someone, I beg, go for the notary.”
They looked at one another, wondering at Don Quixote’s words; but, though uncertain, they were inclined to believe him, and one of the signs by which they came to the conclusion he was dying was this so sudden and complete return to his senses after having been mad; for to the words already quoted he added much more, so well expressed, so devout, and so rational, as to banish all doubt and convince them that he was sound of mind. The curate turned them all out, and left alone with him confessed him. The bachelor went for the notary and returned shortly afterwards with him and with Sancho, who, having already learned from the bachelor the condition his master was in, and finding the housekeeper and niece weeping, began to blubber and shed tears.
The confession over, the curate came out saying, “Alonso Quixano the Good is indeed dying, and is indeed in his right mind; we may now go in to him while he makes his will.”

This news gave a tremendous impulse to the brimming eyes of the housekeeper, niece, and Sancho Panza his good squire, making the tears burst from their eyes and a host of sighs from their hearts; for of a truth, as has been said more than once, whether as plain Alonso Quixano the Good, or as Don Quixote of La Mancha, Don Quixote was always of a gentle disposition and kindly in all his ways, and hence he was beloved, not only by those of his own house, but by all who knew him.
The notary came in with the rest, and as soon as the preamble of the will had been set out and Don Quixote had commended his soul to God with all the devout formalities that are usual, coming to the bequests, he said, “Item, it is my will that, touching certain moneys in the hands of Sancho Panza (whom in my madness I made my squire), inasmuch as between him and me there have been certain accounts and debits and credits, no claim be made against him, nor any account demanded of him in respect of them; but that if anything remain over and above, after he has paid himself what I owe him, the balance, which will be but little, shall be his, and much good may it do him; and if, as when I was mad I had a share in giving him the government of an island, so, now that I am in my senses, I could give him that of a kingdom, it should be his, for the simplicity of his character and the fidelity of his conduct deserve it.” And then, turning to Sancho, he said, “Forgive me, my friend, that I led thee to seem as mad as myself, making thee fall into the same error I myself fell into, that there were and still are knights-errant in the world.”
“Ah!” said Sancho weeping, “don’t die, master, but take my advice and live many years; for the foolishest thing a man can do in this life is to let himself die without rhyme or reason, without anybody killing him, or any hands but melancholy’s making an end of him. Come, don’t be lazy, but get up from your bed and let us take to the fields in shepherd’s trim as we agreed. Perhaps behind some bush we shall find the lady Dulcinea disenchanted, as fine as fine can be. If it be that you are dying of vexation at having been vanquished, lay the blame on me, and say you were overthrown because I had girthed Rocinante badly; besides you must have seen in your books of chivalry that it is a common thing for knights to upset one another, and for him who is conquered to-day to be conqueror to-morrow.”
“Very true,” said Samson, “and good Sancho Panza’s view of these cases is quite right.”
“Sirs, not so fast,” said Don Quixote, “‘in last year’s nests there are no birds this year.’ I was mad, now I am in my senses; I was Don Quixote of La Mancha, I am now, as I said, Alonso Quixano the Good; and may my repentance and sincerity restore me to the esteem you used to have for me; and now let Master Notary proceed. […]
At last Don Quixote’s end came, after he had received all the sacraments, and had in full and forcible terms expressed his detestation of books of chivalry. The notary was there at the time, and he said that in no book of chivalry had he ever read of any knight-errant dying in his bed so calmly and so like a Christian as Don Quixote, who amid the tears and lamentations of all present yielded up his spirit, that is to say died. On perceiving it the curate begged the notary to bear witness that Alonso Quixano the Good, commonly called Don Quixote of La Mancha, had passed away from this present life, and died naturally; and said he desired this testimony in order to remove the possibility of any other author save Cide Hamete Benengeli bringing him to life again falsely and making interminable stories out of his achievements.”
(Miguel de Cervantes, The History of Don Quixote, Vol 2, 1615)

BERTRAND RUSSELL CONSIDERS THE IMPACT OF THE REBELLION OF THE PROTESTANT REFORMATION AGAINST THE SINGULAR AUTHORITY OF THE CATHOLIC CHURCH. Truth was no longer found by "consulting authority," but by "inward meditation." Morality became based on the "individual conscience."
« The Catholic Church was derived from three sources. Its sacred history was Jewish, its theology was Greek, its government and canon law were, at least indirectly, Roman. The Reformation rejected the Roman elements, softened the Greek elements, and greatly strengthened the Judaic elements. It thus co-operated with the nationalist forces which were undoing the work of social cohesion which had been effected first by the Roman Empire and then by the Roman Church. In Catholic doctrine, divine revelation did not end with the scriptures, but continued from age to age through the medium of the Church, to which, therefore, it was the duty of the individual to submit his private opinions. Protestants, on the contrary, rejected the Church as a vehicle of revelation; truth was to be sought only in the Bible, which each man could interpret for himself. If men differed in their interpretation, there was no divinely appointed authority to decide the dispute. In practice, the State claimed the right that had formerly belonged to the Church, but this was a usurpation. In Protestant theory, there should be no earthly intermediary between the soul and God. The effects of this change were momentous. Truth was no longer to be ascertained by consulting authority, but by inward meditation. There was a tendency, quickly developed, towards anarchism in politics, and, in religion, towards mysticism, which had always fitted with difficulty into the framework of Catholic orthodoxy. There came to be not one Protestantism, but a multitude of sects; not one philosophy opposed to scholasticism, but as many as there were philosophers; not, as in the thirteenth century, one Emperor opposed to the Pope, but a large number of heretical kings. The result, in thought as in literature, was a continually deepening subjectivism, operating at first as a wholesome liberation from spiritual slavery, but advancing steadily towards a personal isolation inimical to social sanity.
Modern philosophy begins with Descartes, whose fundamental certainty is the existence of himself and his thoughts, from which the external world is to be inferred. This was only the first stage in a development, through Berkeley and Kant, to Fichte, for whom everything is only an emanation of the ego. This was insanity, and, from this extreme, philosophy has been attempting, ever since, to escape into the world of everyday common sense. With subjectivism in philosophy, anarchism in politics goes hand in hand. Already during Luther’s lifetime, unwelcome and unacknowledged disciples had developed the doctrine of Anabaptism, which, for a time, dominated the city of Munster. The Anabaptists repudiated all law, since they held that the good man will be guided at every moment by the Holy Spirit, who cannot be bound by formulas. From this premiss they arrive at communism and sexual promiscuity; they were therefore exterminated after a heroic resistance. But their doctrine, in softened forms, spread to Holland, England and America; historically, it is the source of Quakerism. A fiercer form of anarchism, no longer connected with religion, arose in the nineteenth century. In Russia, in Spain, and to a lesser degree in Italy, it had considerable success, and to this day it remains a bugbear of the American immigration authorities. This modern form, though anti-religious, has still much of the spirit of early Protestantism; it differs mainly in directing against secular governments the hostility that Luther directed against popes”
(Bertrand Russell, History Of Western Philosophy, 1945)

CHEKHOV'S CHARACTERS ARE STRUGGLING AGAINST THEIR OWN INNER "AFFECTATION, POSE, INSINCERITY" AND AGAINST THE EXTERNAL "INHUMANITY OF [THEIR] CIRCUMSTANCES" WHICH HAS "PERVERTED" THEM.
“Where the tune is familiar and the end emphatic—lovers united, villains discomfited, intrigues exposed—as it is in most Victorian fiction, we can scarcely go wrong, but where the tune is unfamiliar and the end a note of interrogation or merely the information that they went on talking, as it is in Tchekov, we need a very daring and alert sense of literature to make us hear the tune, and in particular those last notes which complete the harmony. Probably we have to read a great many stories before we feel, and the feeling is essential to our satisfaction, that we hold the parts together, and that Tchekov was not merely rambling disconnectedly, but struck now this note, now that with intention, in order to complete his meaning.  We have to cast about in order to discover where the emphasis in these strange stories rightly comes. Tchekov’s own words give us a lead in the right direction. “. . . such a conversation as this between us”, he says, “would have been unthinkable for our parents. At night they did not talk, but slept sound; we, our generation, sleep badly, are restless, but talk a great deal, and are always trying to settle whether we are right or not.” Our literature of social satire and psychological finesse both sprang from that restless sleep, that incessant talking; but after all, there is an enormous difference between Tchekov and Henry James, between Tchekov and Bernard Shaw. Obviously—but where does it arise? Tchekov, too, is aware of the evils and injustices of the social state; the condition of the peasants appals him, but the reformer’s zeal is not his—that is not the signal for us to stop. The mind interests him enormously; he is a most subtle and delicate analyst of human relations. But again, no; the end is not there. Is it that he is primarily interested not in the soul’s relation with other souls, but with the soul’s relation to health—with the soul’s relation to goodness? These stories are always showing us some affectation, pose, insincerity. Some woman has got into a false relation; some man has been perverted by the inhumanity of his circumstances. The soul is ill; the soul is cured; the soul is not cured. Those are the emphatic points in his stories.”
(Virginia Woolf, The Common Reader, 1925)

A CAGED BIRD STANDS ON THE GRAVE OF DREAMS
HIS SHADOW SHOUTS ON A NIGHTMARE SCREAM
HIS WINGS ARE CLIPPED AND HIS FEET ARE TIED
SO HE OPENS HIS THROAT TO SING.
“Caged Bird
A free bird leaps
on the back of the wind
and floats downstream
till the current ends
and dips his wing
in the orange sun ray
and dares to claim the sky.
But a bird that stalks
down his narrow cage
can seldom see through
his bars of rage
his wings are clipped and
his feet are tied
so he opens his throat to sing.
The caged bird sings
with a fearful trill
of things unknown
but longed for still
and his tune is heard
on the distant hill
for the caged bird
sings of freedom.
The free bird thinks of another breeze
and the trade winds soft through the sighing trees
and the fat worms waiting on a dawn-bright lawn
and he names the sky his own.
But a caged bird stands on the grave of dreams
his shadow shouts on a nightmare scream
his wings are clipped and his feet are tied
so he opens his throat to sing.
The caged bird sings
with a fearful trill
of things unknown
but longed for still
and his tune is heard
on the distant hill
for the caged bird
sings of freedom.”
(Maya Angelou)

AUDRE LORDE CALLS FOR BLACK WOMEN TO RESIST THEIR TRADITIONAL, SELF-SACRIFICING ROLE ("WE HAVE TRADITIONALLY HAD COMPASSION FOR EVERYBODY ELSE EXCEPT OURSELVES") AND TO BEGIN THE RADICAL ACT OF SELF-LOVE AND SELF-CARE.
“Staples’ “fact” that Black women get their sense of fulfillment from having children is only a fact when stated out of the even a “happily married” woman who has no pent-up frustrations that need release” is either a fool or insane. This smacks of the oldest sexist canard of all time, that all a woman needs to “keep her quiet” is a “good man.’ File that one alongside "Some of my best friends are...” 
Instead of beginning the much-needed dialogue between Black men and Black women, Staples retreats to a defensive stance reminiscent of white liberals of the 60s, many of whom. saw any statement of Black pride and self-assertion as an automatic threat to their own identity and an attempt to wipe them out, Here we have an intelligent Black man believing — or at least saying — that any call to Black women to love ourselves (and no one said only) is a denial of, or threat to, his Black male identity! 
In this country, Black women traditionally have had compassion for everybody else except ourselves. We have cared for whites because we had to for pay or survival; we have cared for our children and our fathers and our brothers and our lovers. History and popular culture, as well as our personal lives, are full of tales of Bl ack women who had “compassion for misguided black men." Our scarred, broken, battered and dead daughters and sisters are a mute testament to that reality. We need to learn to have care and compassion for ourselves, also. 
In the light of what Black women often willingly sacrifice for our children and our men, this is a much needed exhortation, rho matter what illegitimate use the white media makes of it. This call for self-value and self-love is quite different from narcissism, as Staples must certainly realize, Narcissism comes not out of selflove but out of self-hatred. 
The lack of a reasonable and articulate Black male viewpoint ‘on these questions is not the responsibility of Black women. We have too often been expected to be all things to all people and speak everyone else's position but our very own, Black men are not so passive that they must have Black women speak for them, Even my fourteen-year-old son knows that. Black men themselves must examine and articulate their own desires and positions and stand by the conclusions thereof. No point is served by a Black male professional who merely whines at the absence of his viewpoint in Black women's work. Oppressors always expect the oppressed to extend to them the understanding so lacking in themselves. 
For Staples to suggest, for instance, that Black men leave their families as a form of male protest against female decision making in the home is in direct contradiction to his own observations in “The Myth of the Black Matriarchy."
Now I am sure there are still some Black men who marry white women because they feel a white woman can better fit the model of “femininity” set forth in this country. But for Staples to justify that act using the reason it occurs, and take Black women to task for it, is not only another error in reasoning; it is like justifying the actions of a lemming who follows its companions over the cliff to sure death. Because it happens does not mean it should happen, nor thar itis functional for the well-being of the individual nor the group. 
It is not the destiny of Black america to repeat white america's mistakes. But we will, if we mistake the trappings of success in a sick society for the signs of a meaningful life. If Black men continue to define “femininity” instead of their own desires, and to do it in archaic european terms, they restrict our access to each other's energies. Freedom and future for Blacks does not mean absorbing the dominant white male disease of sexism. 
As Black women and men, we cannot hope to begin dialogue by denying the oppressive nature of male privilege. And if Black males choose to assume that privilege for whatever reason — raping, brutalizing, and killing Black women — then ignoring these acts of Black male oppression within our communities can only serve our destroyers, One oppression does not justify another. 
It has been said that Black men cannot be denied their per-sonal choice of the woman who meets their need to dominate. In that case, Black women also cannot be denied our personal choices, and those choices are becomingly increasingly self-assertive and female-oriented.”
(Audre Lorde, Sister outsider, 2007)

E2.1.B. The Psychological Imperative for Autonomy and Self-Determination

E2.1.B.1. The Need for Autonomy in Well-being: Analyze how the psychological need for autonomy – the feeling of volition and choice – is crucial for individual well-being, self-esteem, and intrinsic motivation.

E2.1.B.2. The Desire for Control Over One's Life: Explore the human drive to influence one's circumstances and future, arguing that freedom is perceived as essential for exercising this control and reducing feelings of helplessness.

"This problem reopens an old argument, a famous debate between Callicles and Socrates (Gorgias; discussion on "nature and convention", 481-527). The resemblance is so striking that it seems to us that Nietzsche is close to Callicles and that Callicles is immediately completed by Nietzsche. Callicles strives to distinguish nature and law. Everything that separates a force from what it can do he calls law. Law, in this sense, expresses the triumph of the weak over the strong Nietzsche adds: the triumph of reaction over action. Indeed,everything which separates a force is reactive as is the state of a force separated from what it can do. Every force which goes to the limit of its power is, on the contrary, active. It is not a law that every force goes to the limit, it is even the opposite of law.1 7 - Socrates replies to Callicles that there is no way of distinguishing nature and law; for the weak can only prevail if, by banding together, they can form a stronger force than the strong. Law triumphs from the point of view of nature itself. Callicles does not complain of not having been understood, he begins again. The slave does not stop being a slave by being triumphant; when the weak triumph it is not by forming a greater force but by separating force from what it can do. Forces must not be compared abstractly; from the point of view of nature concrete force is that which goes to its ultimate consequences, to the limit of power or desire."
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophy, 1962)

“People may be born into a time in which they feel that they can live, and they may not want to live in another time. We love this valley as it was 30 years ago. Since then, it has been filling up with people. I wouldn’t want to be living here if the valley became a strip mall, with a million people living on the valley floor between Missoula and Darby. A view of open space is important to me. The land across the road from my house is an old farm two miles long and half a mile wide, consisting entirely of pastureland, with a couple of barns as the only buildings. It’s owned by an out-of-state rock singer and actor called Huey Lewis, who comes here for just a month or so each year to hunt and fish, and for the rest of the year has a caretaker who runs cows, grows hay, and leases some of the land to farmers. If Huey Lewis’s land across the street got subdivided into house lots, I couldn’t stand the sight facing me every day, and I would move.

“I often think about how I would want to die. My own father recently died a slow death of lung disease. He lost control over his own life, and his last year was painful. I don’t want to die that way. It may seem cold-blooded, but here is my fantasy of how I would die if I had my choice. In my fantasy, Pat would die before me. That’s because, when we got married, I promised to love, honor, and take care of her, and if she died first, I would know that I had fulfilled my promise. Also, I have no life insurance to support her, so it would be hard if she outlived me. After Pat died—my fantasy continues—I would turn over the deed of the house to my son Cody, then I would go trout-fishing every day as long as I was physically in condition to do it. When I became no longer capable of fishing, I would get hold of a large supply of morphine and go off a long way into the woods. I would pick some remote place where nobody would ever find my body, and from which I could enjoy an especially beautiful view. I’d lie down facing that view and—take my morphine. That would be the best way to die: dying in the way that I chose, with the last sight I see being a view of Montana as I want to remember it.”
(Jared Diamond, Collapse, How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed, 2004)

E2.1.B.3. Freedom and the Development of Individuality: Discuss how the ability to make independent choices and express oneself without undue constraint is vital for forming a unique identity and pursuing personal interests.

MARTIN, OBSERVES THAT GEORGIE HAS A "NEW SENSE OF HER FREEDOM" AND A "VITALITY" THAT IS PALPABLE.
“I had no desire for these sentiments and confidences. I wanted to get past the moment of hearing Georgie’s voice. I turned and said to her more roughly than I had intended, “Come on, Georgie, speak up. It’s only your old friend Martin. So my headlong brother carried you off?”
“Yes,” said Georgie in a low tone, still not looking at me. […]
Georgie was looking at Alexander. She stretched out her long legs in a deliberate attempt to relax. Her breath came slowly and deeply. She was thinner and paler, wearing a black tweed pinafore dress with a high-necked striped blouse. Her hair, cascaded on top and carefully pinned, was immaculate. She seemed, with so much neatness, beautifully older. Alexander, with a cautious veiled tenderness, returned her look. The sense of my exclusion was for a moment almost unbearable; and I had a sudden repetition of an impression which I had had before in relation to Palmer and Antonia. They simply wanted me out of the way. I had to be somehow, tenderly, carefully, lovingly, but relentlessly dealt with before they could pass me by and get on with their lives together. Georgie at last had steadily turned to look up at me and our eyes met. Hers were big, intense, troubled, yet full of a vitality which might at any moment shamelessly declare itself as happiness. God knows what she saw in mine. In that interchange she could not help, very briefly, now that she had a hold upon her emotions, exhibiting, almost flaunting before me, her new sense of her freedom. She had said that without freedom she would not exist. No wonder I had lost her. I went to fetch the champagne.”
 (Iris Murdoch, A Severed Head, 1961)

AFTER EXPERIENCING THE BURDENS OF POWER, SANCHO PANZA DELIBERATELY CHOOSES TO LEAVE THE "CULTURE" OF AMBITION AND GOVERNANCE: "MAKE WAY, GENTLEMEN, AND LET ME GO BACK TO MY OLD FREEDOM." He contrasts the happiness of his old life with the "thousand miseries, a thousand troubles, and four thousand anxieties" that have entered his soul since he "mounted the towers of ambition and pride."
“[Sancho Panza] got himself dressed at last, and then, slowly, for he was sorely bruised and could not go fast, he proceeded to the stable, followed by all who were present, and going up to Dapple embraced him and gave him a loving kiss on the forehead, and said to him, not without tears in his eyes, “Come along, comrade and friend and partner of my toils and sorrows; when I was with you and had no cares to trouble me except mending your harness and feeding your little carcass, happy were my hours, my days, and my years; but since I left you, and mounted the towers of ambition and pride, a thousand miseries, a thousand troubles, and four thousand anxieties have entered into my soul;” and all the while he was speaking in this strain he was fixing the pack-saddle on the ass, without a word from anyone. Then having Dapple saddled, he, with great pain and difficulty, got up on him, and addressing himself to the majordomo, the secretary, the head-carver, and Pedro Recio the doctor and several others who stood by, he said, “Make way, gentlemen, and let me go back to my old freedom; let me go look for my past life, and raise myself up from this present death. I was not born to be a governor or protect islands or cities from the enemies that choose to attack them. Ploughing and digging, vinedressing and pruning, are more in my way than defending provinces or kingdoms. Saint Peter is very well at Rome; I mean each of us is best following the trade he was born to. A reaping-hook fits my hand better than a governor’s sceptre; I’d rather have my fill of gazpacho than be subject to the misery of a meddling doctor who kills me with hunger, and I’d rather lie in summer under the shade of an oak, and in winter wrap myself in a double sheepskin jacket in freedom, than go to bed between holland sheets and dress in sables under the restraint of a government. God be with your worships, and tell my lord the duke that ‘naked I was born, naked I find myself, I neither lose nor gain;’ I mean that without a farthing I came into this government, and without a farthing I go out of it, very different from the way governors commonly leave other islands. Stand aside and let me go; I have to plaster myself, for I believe every one of my ribs is crushed, thanks to the enemies that have been trampling over me to-night.”
(Miguel de Cervantes, The History of Don Quixote, Vol 2, 1615)

SØREN KIERKEGAARD CONTRASTS TWO TYPES OF INDIVIDUALITY: THE ANCIENT HERO (LIKE THE GREEK ANTIGONE), WHOSE IDENTITY IS EMBEDDED IN EXTERNAL, "SUBSTANTIAL DETERMINANTS" LIKE FAMILY AND FATE, VERSUS THE "MODERN ANTIGONE," WHOSE LIFE IS "TURNED INWARD." 
“In Antigone, the tragic guilt is focused upon a specific point, that she has buried her brother in defiance of the king's injunction. If this is viewed as an isolated fact, as a collision between sisterly love and piety and an arbitrary human injunction, Antigone would cease to be a Greek tragedy; it would be an altogether modern tragic theme. What provides the tragic interest in the Greek sense is that Oedipus's sad fate resonates in the brother's unfortunate death, in the sister's conflict with a specific human injunction; it is, as it were, the afterpains, Oedipus's tragic fate, spreading out into each branch of his family. This totality makes the spectator's sorrow so very profound. It is not an individual who goes under, but a little world; it is the objective grief, unloosed, that now strides ahead, like a force of nature, in its own terrible consistency, and Antigone's sad fate is like the echo of her father's, an intensified sorrow. Therefore, when Antigone, in defiance of the king's injunction, decides to bury her brother, we see in this not so much a free act as a fateful necessity, which visits the iniquities of the fathers upon the children. There is indeed enough freedom in it to enable us to love Antigone for her sisterly love, but in the inevitability of fate there is also a higher refrain, as it were, that encompasses not only Oedipus's life but also his family.
Whereas the Greek Antigone goes on living so free from care that, if this new fact had not come up, one could imagine her life as even happy in its gradual unfolding, our Antigone's life, on the other hand, is essentially at an end. I have not endowed her parsimoniously, and, as is said, a good word in the right place is like golden apples in a silver bowl; so also I have placed the fruit of grief in the bowl of pain. Her endowment is not vainglorious pomp that moth and rust can consume; it is an eternal treasure. Thieves cannot break in and steal it; she herself is too alert for that. Her life does not unfold like the Greek Antigone's; it is turned inward, not outward. The stage is inside, not outside; it is a spiritual stage.
My dear Συμπαρανεκρώμενοι, have I not managed to capture your interest for such a maiden, or shall I resort to a captatio benevolentiae [procedure aimed at gaining the favorable disposition of the judge or listener]? She, too, does not belong to the world in which she lives; although healthy and flourishing, her real life is nevertheless hidden. She, too, although alive, is in another sense dead; her life is quiet and concealed. The world does not hear even a sigh, for her sighing is concealed in the secrecy of her soul. I do not need to remind you that she is by no means a weak and morbid woman; on the contrary, she is proud and energetic.
Perhaps nothing ennobles a person so much as keeping a secret. It gives a person's whole life a significance, which it has, of course, only for himself; it saves a person from all futile con-sideration of the surrounding world. Sufficient unto himself, he rests blissful in his secret; this might be said even though his secret is a most baleful one.
So it is with our Antigone. She is proud of her secret, proud that she has been selected in a singular way to save the honor and glory of the lineage of Oedipus. When the grateful nation acclaims Oedipus with praise and thanksgiving, she feels her own significance, and her secret sinks deeper and deeper into her soul, ever more inaccessible to any living being. She feels how much has been placed into her hands, and this gives her the preternatural magnitude that is necessary in order for her to engage us tragically. She must be able to interest us as a particular character. She is more than a young girl in a general sense, and yet she is a young girl; she is a bride, and yet altogether virginal and pure. As a bride, woman has fulfilled her destiny, and therefore a woman generally can concern us only to the degree that she is brought in relation to this her destiny.”
(Søren Kierkegaard, Either or, part 1, 1843)

THE "MODERN ANTIGONE'S" LIFE IS "TURNED INWARD, NOT OUTWARD. THE STAGE IS INSIDE, NOT OUTSIDE; IT IS A SPIRITUAL STAGE." Søren Kierkegaard suggests that a powerful modern individuality can be formed not just through outward "expression," but also through its opposite: a willed, noble, and identity-forming concealment.
“As for the tragic guilt, it is related in part to the fact that she buries her brother and in part to the context of her father's sad fate implied by the two previous tragedies. Here I am face to face again with the curious dialectic that places the family's iniquities in relation to the individual. This is what is inherited. Ordinarily, dialectic is thought to be rather abstract-one thinks almost solely of logical operations. But life will quickly teach a person that there are many kinds of dialectic, that al-most every passion has its own. For this reason, the dialectic that connects the iniquity of kindred or of family to the individual subject in such a way that this one not only suffers un-der it (for this is a natural consequence against which one would futilely try to harden oneself) but also bears the guilt, participates in it-this dialectic is alien to us, contains nothing constraining for us. If, however, we were to imagine a rebirth of ancient tragedy, then every individual would have to con-template his own rebirth, not only in the spiritual sense but in the finite sense of the womb of family and kindred. The dialectic that connects the individual with family and kindred is no subjective dialectic, for that elevates the connection and the individual out of the context; it is an objective dialectic. It is essentially [familial] piety. To preserve this cannot be regarded as harmful to the individual. In our day something is deemed to hold in the sphere of nature that is not deemed to hold in the sphere of spirit. Yet one does not want to be so isolated, so un-natural, that one does not regard the family as a whole of which it can be said that when one member suffers, then they all suffer. One docs this spontaneously otherwise for what reason is the particular individual so afraid that another member of the family may bring disgrace upon it except that he feels a share of the suffering from it. Obviously the individual must put up with this suffering, whether he wants to or not. But since the point of departure is the individual, not the family line, this compulsory suffering is maximum; one feels that the person cannot quite become master of his inherited characteristics but nevertheless desires this as far as possible. But if the individual sees the inherited characteristics as a component of his truth, then this manifests itself in the world of spirit in such a way that the individual participates in the guilt. Perhaps not many are able to comprehend this conclusion, but then they would not be able to comprehend the tragic, either. If the individual is isolated, then cither he is absolutely the creator of his own fate, and then there is nothing tragic anymore, but only evil, for it is not even tragic that the individual was infatuated with or wrapped up in himself-it is his own doing; or the individuals are merely modifications of the eternal sub-stance of life, and so once again the tragic is lost.
With respect to tragic guilt, a difference in modern tragedy is readily apparent after it has assimilated the ancient, for only then can this really be discussed. In her childlike piety, the Greek Antigone participates in her father's guilt, and so also docs the modern Antigone. But for the Greek Antigone the father's guilt and suffering are an external fact, an unshakable fact, that her sorrow does not move (quod non volvit in pectore [something that she does not turn over in her heart]); and insofar as she personally suffers, as a natural consequence, under her father's guilt, this again is in all its external factuality. But for our Antigone it is different. I assume that Oedipus is dead. Even when he was alive, Antigone knew this secret but did not have the courage to confide in her father. By her father's death, she is deprived of the only means of being liberated from her secret. To confide in any other living being now would be to dishonor her father; her life acquires meaning for her in its devotion to showing him the last honors daily, almost hourly, by her unbroken silence. But one thing she does not know, whether or not her father knew it himself. Here is the modern element: it is the restlessness in her sorrow, it is the amphibolys in her pain. She loves her father with all her soul, and this love draws her out of herself into her father's guilt. As the fruit of such a love, she feels alien to humankind. She feels her guilt the more she loves her father; only with him can she find rest; as equally guilty, they would sorrow with each other. But while the father was living, she could not confide her sorrow to him, for she indeed did not know whether he knew it, and consequently there was the possibility of immersing him in a similar pain. And yet, if he had not known it, the guilt would be less. The movement here is continually relative. If Antigone had not definitely known the factual context, she would have been trivial, she would then have had nothing but a suspicion to struggle with, and that is too little to engage us tragically. But she knows everything; yet within this knowledge there is still an ignorance that can always keep the sorrow in motion, always transform it into pain. In addition, she is continually in conflict with her surrounding world. Oedipus lives in the memory of his people as a fortunate king, honored and extolled; Antigone herself has admired and also loved her father. She takes part in every commemoration and celebration of him; she is more enthusiastic about her father than any other maiden in the kingdom; her thoughts continually go back to him. She is extolled in the land as a model of a loving daughter, and yet this enthusiasm is the only way in which she can give vent to her sorrow. Her father is always in her thoughts, but how-that is her painful secret. And yet she does not dare to abandon herself to sorrow, does not dare to mourn; she feels how much depends upon her; she fears that a clue would be given if anyone saw her suffering, and so here, too, she finds not sorrow but pain.
Developed and elaborated in this way, Antigone can engage us, I believe, and I believe that you will not reproach me for frivolousness or paternal prejudice when I believe that she might very well venture into the tragic line and appear in a tragedy. Hitherto she has been only an epic character, and the tragic in her has had only epic interest.
A context appropriate to her is not very difficult to find, either; in that respect, one can very well be satisfied with what the Greek tragedy provides. She has a sister living; I shall have her be a little older and married. Her mother could also be alive. That these two always remain subordinate characters is, of course, taken for granted, as is the fact that tragedy generally contains an epic element in the manner of Greek tragedy, although this need not be so conspicuous because of that; nevertheless, monologue will always play a leading role here, even though the situation ought to be of assistance to it.
Everything must be thought of as focused on this one main point of interest that makes up the content of Antigone's life, and when the whole thing is designed in this way, then the question is: How is the dramatic interest to be produced?”
(Søren Kierkegaard, Either or, part 1, 1843)

YEATS ILLUSTRATES HOW A UNIQUE IDENTITY IS OFTEN FORGED IN RESPONSE TO SOCIAL CONFLICT. Yeats's identity as "Irish" is not a simple given; it is solidified and made conscious by the prejudice he encounters at his English school, where he is "called names for being Irish."
“I was sent to school at Hammersmith. It was a Gothic building of yellow brick: a large hall full of desks, some small class-rooms and a separate house for boarders, all built perhaps in 1840 or 1850. I thought it an ancient building and that it had belonged to the founder of the school, Lord Godolphin, who was romantic to me because there was a novel about him. I never read the novel, but I thought only romantic people were put in books. On one side, there was a piano factory of yellow brick, upon two sides half finished rows of little shops and villas all yellow brick, and on the fourth side, outside the wall of our playing field, a brickfield of cinders and piles of half-burned yellow bricks. All the names and faces of my school-fellows have faded from me except one name without a face and the face and name of one friend, mainly no doubt because it was all so long ago, but partly because I only seem to remember things that have mixed themselves up with scenes that have some quality to bring them again and again before the memory. For some days, as I walked homeward along the Hammersmith Road, I told myself that whatever I most cared for had been taken away. I had found a small, green-covered book given to my father by a Dublin man of science; it gave an account of the strange sea creatures the man of science had discovered among the rocks at Howth or dredged out of Dublin Bay. It had long been my favourite book; and when I read it I believed that I was growing very wise, but now I should have no time for it nor for my own thoughts. Every moment would be taken up learning or saying lessons or walking between school and home four times a day, for I came home in the middle of the day for dinner. But presently I forgot my trouble, absorbed in two things I had never known, companionship and enmity. After my first day's lesson, a circle of boys had got around me in a playing field and asked me questions, "who's your father?" "what does he do?" "how much money has he?" Presently a boy said something insulting. I had never struck anybody or been struck, and now all in a minute, without any intention upon my side, but as if I had been a doll moved by a string, I was hitting at the boys within reach and being hit. After that I was called names for being Irish, and had many fights and never, for years, got the better of any one of them; for I was delicate and had no muscles. Sometimes, however, I found means of retaliation, even of aggression. There was a boy with a big stride, much feared by little boys, and finding him alone in the playing field, I went up to him and said, "rise upon Sugaun and sink upon Gad." "What does that mean?" he said. "Rise upon hay-leg and sink upon straw," I answered and told him that in Ireland the sergeant tied straw and hay to the ankles of a stupid recruit to show him the difference between his legs. My ears were boxed, and when I complained to my friends, they said I had brought it upon myself; and that I deserved all I got. I probably dared myself to other feats of a like sort, for I did not think English people intelligent or well-behaved unless they were
artists. Everyone I knew well in Sligo despised Nationalists and Catholics, but all disliked England with a prejudice that had come down perhaps from the days of the Irish Parliament. I knew stories to the discredit of England, and took them all seriously. My mother had met some English woman who did not like Dublin because the legs of the men were too straight, and at Sligo, as everybody knew, an Englishman had once said to a car-driver, "if you people were not so lazy, you would pull down the mountain and spread it out over the sand and that would give you acres of good fields." At Sligo there is a wide river mouth and at ebb tide most of it is dry sand, but all Sligo knew that in some way I cannot remember it was the spreading of the tide over the sand that left the narrow channel fit for shipping. At any rate the carman had gone chuckling all over Sligo with his tale. People would tell it to prove that Englishmen were always grumbling. "They grumble about their dinners and everything--there was an Englishman who wanted to pull down Knock-na-Rea" and so on. My mother had shown them to me kissing at railway stations, and taught me to feel disgust at their lack of reserve, and my father told how my grandfather, William Yeats, who had died before I was born, when he came home to his Rectory in County Down from an English visit, spoke of some man he had met on a coach road who "Englishman-like" told him all his affairs. My father explained that an Englishman generally believed that his private affairs did him credit, while an Irishman, being poor and probably in debt, had no such confidence. I, however, did not believe in this explanation. My Sligo nurses, who had in all likelihood the Irish Catholic political hatred, had never spoken well of any Englishman.”
(William Butler Yeats, Reveries over Childhood and Youth, 1915)

YEATS DETAILS THE PROCESS BY WHICH HE MOVES AWAY FROM ESTABLISHED NORMS AND CREATES HIS OWN INTELLECTUAL AND ARTISTIC PATH.
"I did not believe with my intellect that you could be carried away body and soul, but I believed with my emotions and the belief of the country people made that easy. Once when I had crawled into the stone passage in some rath of the third Rosses, the pilot who had come with me called down the passage: "are you all right, sir?"  And one night as I came near the village of Rosses on the road from Sligo, a fire blazed up on a green bank at my right side seven or eight feet above me, and another fire suddenly answered from Knock-na-rea. I hurried on doubting, and yet hardly doubting in my heart that I saw again the fires that I had seen by the river at Ballisodare. I began occasionally telling people that one should believe whatever had been believed in all countries and periods, and only reject any part of it after much evidence, instead of starting all over afresh and only believing what one could prove. But I was always ready to deny or turn into a joke what was for all that my secret fanaticism. When I had read Darwin and Huxley and believed as they did, I had wanted, because an established authority was upon my side, to argue with everybody.
I no longer went to the Harcourt Street school and we had moved from Howth to Rathgar. I was at the Arts schools in Kildare Street, but my father, who came to the school now and then, was my teacher. The masters left me alone, for they liked a very smooth surface and a very neat outline, and indeed understood nothing but neatness and smoothness. A drawing of the Discobolus, after my father had touched it, making the shoulder stand out with swift and broken lines, had no meaning for them; and for the most part I exaggerated all that my father did. Sometimes indeed, out of rivalry to some student near, I too would try to be smooth and neat. One day I helped the student next me, who certainly had no artistic gifts, to make a drawing of some plaster fruit. In his gratitude he told me his history. "I don't care for art," he said. "I am a good billiard player, one of the best in Dublin; but my guardian said I must take a profession, so I asked my friends to tell me where I would not have to pass an examination, and here I am." It may be that I myself was there for no better reason. My father had wanted me to go to Trinity College and, when I would not, had said, "my father and grandfather and great-grandfather have been there." I did not tell him my reason was that I did not believe my classics or my mathematics good enough for any examination.”
(William Butler Yeats, Reveries over Childhood and Youth, 1915)

KAFKA’S  IDENTITY IS A PRODUCT OF RESISTANCE TO AN EDUCATION THAT "TRIED TO MAKE ANOTHER PERSON OUT OF ME THAN THE ONE I BECAME." 
“That is the reproach that I have to make. It has a sound core, theory supports it. That which really has been spoiled m me, however, I forget for the moment or excuse, and don’t as yet make any fuss about it. On the other hand, I Can prove at any time that my education tried to make another person out of me than the one I became. It is for the harm, therefore, that my educators could have done me in accordance with their intentions that I reproach them; I demand from their hands the person I now am, and since they cannot give him to me, I make of my reproach and laughter a drumbeat sounding into the world beyond; But all this only serves a different purpose. The reproach for having after all spoiled a part of me—for having spoiled a good, beautiful part (in my dreams sometimes it appears to me the way a dead bride appears to others)—the reproach that is forever on the point of becoming a sigh, this reproach should before all else reach there undamaged as an honest reproach, which is what it is, too.”
(Franz Kafka, The Diaries, 1910-1913)

ERIK ERIKSON ARGUES THAT IF A CHILD IS "DENIED THE GRADUAL AND WELL-GUIDED EXPERIENCE OF THE AUTONOMY OF FREE CHOICE" BY "TOO RIGID OR TOO EARLY TRAINING," THEIR VERY CAPACITY FOR FREEDOM WILL BE DAMAGED, LEADING TO A "COMPULSION NEUROSIS" OR A LIFE GOVERNED BY A "PRECOCIOUS CONSCIENCE." 
“AUTONOMY VS. SHAME AND DOUBT
Anal-muscular maturation sets the stage for experimentation with two simultaneous sets of social modalities: holding on and letting go. As is the case with all of these modalities, their basic conflicts can lead in the end to either hostile or benign expectations and attitudes. Thus, to hold can become a destructive and cruel retaining or restraining, and it can become a pattern of care: to have and to hold. To let go, too, can turn into an inimical let-ting loose of destructive forces, or it can become a relaxed "to let pass" and "to let be." Culturally speaking, these attitudes are neither good nor bad; their value depends on whether their hostile implications are turned against enemy, or fellow man-or the self.
The latter danger is the one best known to us. For if denied the gradual and well-guided experience of the autonomy of free choice (or if, indeed, weakened by an initial loss of trust) the child will turn against himself all his urge to discriminate and to manipulate. He will overmanipulate himself, he will develop a precocious conscience. Instead of taking possession of things in order to test them by purposeful repetition, he will become obsessed by his own repetitiveness. By such obsessiveness, of course, he then learns to repossess the environment and to gain power by stubborn and minute control, where he could not find large-scale mutual regulation. Such hollow victory is the infantile model for a compulsion neurosis. It is also the infantile source of later at-tempts in adult life to govern by the letter, rather than by the spirit.
Outer control at this stage, therefore, must be firmly reassuring. The infant must come to feel that the basic faith in existence, which is the lasting treasure saved from the rages of the oral stage, will not be jeopardized by this about-face of his, this sudden violent wish to have a choice, to appropriate demandingly, and to eliminate stubbornly. Firmness must protect him against the potential anarchy of his as yet untrained sense of discrimination, his inability to hold on and to let go with discretion. As his environment encourages him to "stand on his own feet," it must protect him against meaningless and arbitrary experiences of shame and of early doubt.
Shame is an emotion insufficiently studied, because in our civilization it is so early and easily absorbed by guilt. Shame supposes that one is completely exposed and conscious of being looked at: in one word, self-conscious. One is visible and not ready to be visible; which is why we dream of shame as a situation in which we are stared at in a condition of incomplete dress, in night attire, "with one's pants down." Shame is early expressed in an impulse to bury one's face, or to sink, right then and there, into the ground.
But this, I think, is essentially rage turned against the self. He who is ashamed would like to force the world not to look at him, not to notice his exposure. He would like to destroy the eyes of the world. Instead he must wish for his own invisibility. This potentiality is abundantly used in the educational method of "shaming" used so exclusively by some primitive peoples; its destructive-ness is balanced in some civilizations by devices for "saving face."
Visual shame precedes auditory guilt, which is a sense of badness to be had all by oneself when nobody watches and when every-thing is quiet-except the voice of the superego. Such shaming exploits an increasing sense of being small, which can develop only as the child stands up and as his awareness permits him to note the relative measures of size and power. (I would assume that the sense of omnipotence referred to in psychoanalytic literature as the earliest matrix of experience is actually a retrospective illusion which occurs when the child, now endowed with a more powerful muscular equipment, despairs of autonomy and revives oral rages and hallucinations.)
Doubt is the brother of shame. Where shame is dependent on the consciousness of being upright and exposed, doubt, so clinical observation leads me to believe, has much to do with a conscious-ness of having a front and a back and especially a "behind." For this reverse area of the body, with its aggressive and libidinal focus in the sphincters and in the buttocks, cannot be seen by the child, and yet it can be dominated by the will of others. The "behind" is thus the individual's dark continent, an area of the body which can be magically dominated and effectively invaded by those who would attack one's power of autonomy and who would designate as evil those products of the bowels which were felt to be all right when they were being passed. This basic sense of doubt in whatever one has left behind forms a substratum for later and more verbal forms of compulsive doubting, this finds its adult expression in paranoiac fears concerning hidden persecutors and secret persecutions threatening from behind and from within the behind.”
(Erik Erikson, Childhood And Society, 1950)

E2.1.E. Philosophical Perspectives on the Intrinsic Value of Freedom

E2.1.E.1. Freedom as an Inherent Aspect of Human Nature: Explore philosophical arguments that posit freedom as a fundamental characteristic of what it means to be human, linked to reason, consciousness, or will.

"RIGHT/LEFT
On the left are people who value equality, freedom of morals, secularism, defending the weak (even guilty ones), internationalism, leisure and rest (paid vacations, retirement at 60, the 35-hour workweek, etc.), compassion, and solidarity.
 On the right, there is a desire for individual success, merit, freedom of enterprise, religion, hierarchy, and responsibility. [...]"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

OUR FREEDOM IS NOT JUST A CAPACITY WE HAVE, BUT IS THE VERY MODE OF OUR EXISTENCE—A STATE OF BEING "UNSHIELDED" AND "UNSTILLED" THAT SEPARATES HUMANS FROM ALL OTHER BEINGS.
“Plant and beast, "in the venture of their dim delight," are held carefree in the Open. Their bodily character does not perplex them. By their drives, the living creatures are lulled into the Open. They too remain in danger, to be sure, but not in their nature. Plant and beast lie in the balance in such a way that the balance always settles into the repose of a secureness. The balance in which plant and beast are ventured does not yet reach into the realm of what is in essence and thus constantly unstilled. […]
Man, on the contrary, as the one who purposely asserts himself, is ventured into unshieldedness. In the hands of man who has been so ventured, the balance of danger is in essence unstilled. Self-willing man everywhere reckons with things and men as with objects. What is so reckoned becomes merchandise. Everything is constantly changed about into new orders. The parting against the pure draft establishes itself within the unstilled agitation of the constantly balancing balance. By its objectification of the world, the parting, contrary to its own intention, promotes inconstancy. Thus ventured into the unshielded, man moves within the medium of "businesses" and "exchanges." Self-assertive man lives by staking his will. He lives essentially by risking his nature in the vibration of money and the currency of values. As this constant trader and middleman, man is the "merchant." He weighs and measures constantly, yet does not know the real weight of things. Nor does he ever know what in himself is truly weighty and preponderant.”
(Martin Heidegger, Poetry, Language, Thought, 1971)

CONTARRY TO DESCARTES THAT POSITS A SPECIFIC KIND OF THINKING CONSCIOUSNESS AS THE ESSENCE OF BEING HUMAN, DAMASIO PROPOSES THE ALTERNATIVE VIEW  THAT OUR FUNDAMENTAL CHARACTERISTIC IS EMBODIED "BEING," AND THAT THINKING IS A PROPERTY THAT ARISES FROM THAT BEING.
DESCARTES’ ERROR
“It would not have been possible to present my side of this conversa­tion without invoking Descartes as an emblem for a collection of ideas on body, brain, and mind that in one way or another remain influential in Western sciences and humanities. My concern, as you have seen, is for both the dualist notion with which Descartes split the mind from brain and body (in its extreme version, it holds less sway) and for the modern variants of this notion: the idea, for instance, that mind and brain are related, but only in the sense that the mind is the software program run in a piece of computer hard­ware called brain; or that brain and body are related, but only in the sense that the former cannot survive without the life support of the latter. 
What, then, was Descartes' error? Or better still, which error of Descartes' do I mean to single out, unkindly and ungratefully? One might begin with a complaint, and reproach him for having per­suaded biologists to adopt, to this day, clockwork mechanics as a model for life processes. But perhaps that would not be quite fair and so one might continue with "I think therefore I am." The statement, perhaps the most famous in the history of philosophy, appears first in the fourth section of the Discourse on the Method (1637), in French ('Je pense donc je suis"); and then in the first part of the Principles of Philosophy (1644), in Latin ("Cogito ergo sum"). Taken literally, the statement illustrates precisely the opposite of what I believe to be true about the origins of mind and about the relation between mind and body. It suggests that thinking, and awareness of thinking, are the real substrates of being. And since we know that Descartes imagined thinking as an activity quite separate from the body, it does celebrate the separation of mind, the "thinking thing" (res cogitans), from the non thinking body, that which has extension and mechan­ical parts (res extensa). 
Yet long before the dawn of humanity, beings were beings. At some point in evolution, an elementary consciousness began. With that elementary consciousness came a simple mind; with greater com­plexity of mind came the possibility of thinking and, even later, of using language to communicate and organize thinking better. For us then, in the beginning it was being, and only later was it thinking. And for us now, as we come into the world and develop, we still begin with being, and only later do we think. We are, and then we think, and we think only inasmuch as we are, since thinking is indeed caused by the structures and operations of being. 
When we put Descartes' statement back where it belongs, we might wonder for a moment whether it might mean something different from what it has come to stand for. Might one read it instead as an acknowledgment of the superiority of conscious feeling and reasoning, without any firm commitment as to their origin, substance, or permanence? Might the statement also have served the clever purpose of accommodating religious pressures of which Descartes was keenly aware? The latter is a possibility, but there is no way of finding out for sure. (The inscription Descartes chose for his tombstone was a quote that he apparently used frequently: "Bene qui latuit, bene vixit," from Ovid's Tristia 3.4.25. Translation: "He who hid well, lived well." A cryptic disclaimer of dualism, perhaps?) As for the former, on balance, 1 suspect Descartes also meant precisely what he wrote. As the famous words first appear, Descartes is rejoic­ing with the discovery of a proposition so undeniably true that no amount of skepticism will shake it:
‘... and remarking that this truth "I think, therefore I am" was so certain and so assured that all the most extravagant supposi­tions brought forward by the sceptics were incapable of shaking it, I came to the conclusion that I would receive it without scruple as the first principle of the Philosophy for which I was seeking.’
Here Descartes was after a logical foundation for his philosophy, and the statement was not unlike Augustine's "Fallor ergo sum" (I am deceived therefore I am).5 But just a few lines below, Descartes clarifies the statement unequivocally:
‘From that I knew that I was a substance, the whole essence or nature of which is to think, and that for its existence there is no need of any place, nor does it depend on any material thing; so that this lime," that is to say, the soul by which I am what I am, is entirely distinct from body, and is even more easy to know than is the latter; and even if body were not, the soul would not cease to be what it is.’
This is Descartes' error: the abyssal separation between body and mind, between the sizable, dimensioned, mechanically operated, infinitely divisible body stuff, on the one hand, and the unsizable, undimensioned, un-pushpullable, nondivisible mind stuff; the sug­gestion that reasoning, and moral judgment, and the suffering that comes from physical pain or emotional upheaval might exist sepa­rately from the body. Specifically: the separation of the most refined operations of mind from the structure and operation of a biological organism.”
(Antonio Damasio, Descartes Error, 1994)

THE FREEDOM DESCRIBED BY LEVINAS IS NOT THE FREEDOM OF AN ARBITRARY WILL. IT IS A FREEDOM THAT FINDS ITSELF IN AN "IMPOSSIBILITY OF DESERTING ITS POST”, AN INFINITE RESPONSIBILITY. THIS IS A RADICAL RE-LINKING OF FREEDOM TO AN INESCAPABLE ETHICAL DEMAND. 
“Let us for the moment attend to the sense which the abstractness or nudity of a face which breaks into this order of the world involves, and the overwhelming of consciousness which corresponds to this "abstractness". Stripped of its very form, a face is paralyzed in its nudity. It is a distress. The nudity of a face is a denuding, and already a supplication in the straightforwardness that aims at me. But this supplication is an exigency; in it humility is joined with height. The ethical dimension of visitation is thereby indicated. A true representation remains a possibility of appearance; the world which strikes against thought can do nothing against free thought - which is able to refuse inwardly, to take refuge in itself, to remain precisely a free thought before the true, to return to itself, to reflect on itself and take itself to be the origin of what it receives, to master what precedes it through memory. While free thought thus remains the Same, a face imposes itself upon me without my being able to be deaf to its call or to forget it, that is, without my being able to stop holding myself responsible for its distress. Consciousness loses its first place. 
The presence of a face thus signifies an irrecusable order, a command, which puts a stop to the availability of consciousness. Consciousness is called into question by a face. Being called into question is not the same as becoming aware of this being called into question. The "absolutely other" is not reflected in consciousness. It resists it to the extent that even its resistance is not convertible into a content of consciousness. Visitation consists in overwhelming the very egoism of the I which supports this conversion. A face confounds the intentionality that aims at it. 
What is at stake here is the calling of consciousness into question, and not a consciousness of a calling into question. The I loses its sovereign self-coincidence, its identification, in which consciousness returns triumphantly to itself to rest on itself. Before the exigency of the other the I is expelled from this rest, and is not the already glorious consciousness of this exile. Any complacency would destroy the straightforwardness of the ethical movement. 
But the calling into question of this wild and naive freedom for itself, sure of its refuge in itself, is not reducible to a negative movement. The calling into question of oneself is in fact the welcome of the absolutely other. The epiphany of the absolutely other is a face, in which the other calls on me and signifies an order to me through his nudity, his denuding. His presence is a summons to answer. The I does not only become aware of this necessity to answer, as though it were an obligation or a duty about which it would have to come to a decision; it is in its very position wholly a responsibility or a diacony, as it is put in Isaiah, chapter 53. 
To be an I means then not to be able to escape responsibility, as though the whole edifice of creation rested on my shoulders. But the responsibility that empties the I of its imperialism and its egoism, even the egoism of salvation, does not transform it into a moment of the universal order; it confirms the uniqueness of the I. The uniqueness of the I is the fact that no one can answer for me. 
To discover such an orientation in the I is to identify the I with morality. The I before the other is infinitely responsible. The other who provokes this ethical movement in conciousness and puts out of order the good conscience of the Same coinciding with itself involves a surplus for which intentionality is not adequate. This is what desire is: to burn with another fire than need, which saturation extinguishes, to think beyond what one thinks. Because of this unassimilable surplus, because of this beyond^ we have called the relationship which links the I with the other the idea of infinity. 
The idea of infinity is a desire. It paradoxically consists in thinking more than what is thought and maintaining what is thought in this very excess relative to thought - in entering into a relationship with the ungraspable while guaranteeing its status of being ungraspable. Infinity is not a correlate of the idea of infinity, as though this idea were an intentionality that is fulfilled in its "object". The wonder of infinity in the finite is an overwhelming of intentionality, an overwhelming of that appetite for light which is in intentionality; unlike the saturation - in which intentionality subsides, infinity confounds its idea. The I in relationship with the infinite is an impossiblity of stopping its forward march, the impossibility of deserting its post (in Plato's words in the Phaedo); it is, literally, not to have time to turn back. It is to be not able to escape responsibility, to not have a hiding place of inwardness where one comes back into oneself, to march forward without concern for oneself. There is an increase of exigencies on oneself: the more I face my responsibilities the more I am responsible. The putting into question of consciousness and its entry into a conjuncture of relations which contrast with disclosure is a power made of "impotencies." 
Thus in the relationship with a face, in the ethical relationship, there is delineated the straightforwardness of an orientation, or sense. The consciousness of philosophers is essentially reflective. Or, at least, consciousness is grasped by philosophers in its moment of return which is taken for its very birth. Already in its spontaneous and prereflexive movements they take it to cast a glance back at its origin and measure the path crossed. That is where its initial essence would lie: it is a critique, a self-mastery, an analysis and decomposition of every meaning that overflows the self. Responsibility is to be sure neither blind, nor amnesiac; but across all the movements of thought in which it extends it is borne by an extreme urgency, or more exactly, coincides with it. What has just been described as a "lack of time to turn around" is not the accident of a clumsy or unhappy consciousness, "overtaken by events" or that "has trouble keeping up," but the utter rigor of an attitude without reflection, a primordial straightforwardness, a sense in being. "Where does this resistance of the unreflected to reflection come from?" Merleau-Ponty asked at Royaumont in April, 1957, in connection with problems that the Husserlian theory of phenomenological reduction poses. Our analysis of sense perhaps responds to this fundamental question, which Merleau-Ponty refused to resolve by simple recourse to the finitude of the subject, incapable of total reflection. "To turn to the truth with one's whole soul"72 - the Platonic recommendation is not limited to a pedagogy of good sense, preaching effort and sincerity. Does it not aim at the ultimate reticence, the most sly of all, that of a soul which, before the Good, persists in reflecting on itself, and thus arresting the movement unto the other? Is not the force of this "resistance of the unreflected to reflection" the will itself, prior and posterior to, alpha and omega of, every representation? And is not the will thus at bottom humility rather than will to power? Humility is not to be confused with an equivocal negation of oneself, already proud of its virtue, which, in reflection, it immediately recognizes in itself. This humility is that of him who does not "have time" to make a return upon himself and undertakes nothing to "negate" the oneself, save the very abnegation of the rectilinear movement of a work which goes infinitely to the other.
(Emmanuel Levinas, Collected Philosophical Papers, 1987)

FOR PLATO, TRUE FREEDOM IS "DOING WHAT ONE WILLS," WHICH PLATO DEFINES AS WHAT THE "WHOLE SELF DOES WHAT IT WILLS." THIS "WHOLE SELF" IS A SELF IN WHICH REASON, THE "SUPERIOR PART," IS IN CONTROL. 
“Nobody can prove that  his own life or his own form of happiness is better worth  having than another, for everybody is ultimately his  .own judge.  But, if there is to be a discussion in which,  as in this case, the arguer has practically prejudged the  question before he begins his argument, its interest for  us lies in observing the principle upon which he has  formed his judgment, and the canons of criticism which  he applies.  Here Plato begins by laying down the  principle upon which the comparison between these  different lives is to be made.  It must be made not  upon an external view but on a view which penetrates  to the inner life of the man, and which sees him, not  as he shows himself to the world, but stripped and bare;  or, as we may say, interpreting the method which Plato  actually applies, it must be made upon a complete view  which takes in the whole man. 
First of all Plato takes three of the principal forms  of well-being: freedom, wealth, and security from fear,  which answer in some degree to the ends which the  democratic, the oligarchic, and the timocratic characters  respectively set themselves to obtain.  He asks, from  the point of view of an intelligent and impartial outsider who has observed the different lives as they have  been described, Which man is really free, which is really  rich, which is really without fears-the most just or the  most unjust? The most important point in this passage  is the conception of freedom which it involves. It may  be said, no doubt, that the tyrannic man, being one who does exactly what he pleases, is the freest man, and  especially if circumstances let him develop to the full and  he becomes a tyrant, for he is then ex hypothesi autocratic and omnipotent. Plato asserts on the contrary that  he is an absolute slave, because if you look at his whole  soul you will see that he least of all men does what  he wishes.  This is a simple expression of Plato's conception of freedom of will.  Freedom is doing what one  wills, the freest man is he who most does what he wills,  and that means the man whose whole self does what it  wills.  Now in the tyrannic man nearly the whole self  is in abeyance ; it is enslaved to one shred or fragment  of human nature.  Similarly in the Gorgias,  Plato  declares that tyrants do nothing that they desire […]. Here 'what one desires' means the really  desirable […].  The  really desirable is that which is desirable to the real  or true self, and the real self means the whole self.  Throughout the moral philosophy of Plato and Aristotle  there runs the conception of an order not only of the  physical but of the moral world, to which we must  conform if we would be at our best, or, in other words,  if we would satisfy our nature: and along with this  goes the kindred idea that the higher nature is, so to  speak, the truth of the lower, that is that the lower  nature finds what it aims at in the satisfaction of the  higher.  Freedom, accordingly, or doing what one wills,  is not the power to satisfy any and every desire, but the  power to satisfy those desires in which the whole self  finds satisfaction.”
 (Richard Lewis Nettleship, Lectures on the Republic of Plato, 1901)

VASILY GROSSMAN ACKNOWLEDGES THE TERRIFYING POWER OF THE "EXTREME VIOLENCE OF TOTALITARIAN SOCIAL SYSTEMS" TO "PARALYZE THE HUMAN SPIRIT," WHICH MAKES HIS FINAL AFFIRMATION OF FREEDOM ALL THE MORE POWERFUL AND CONVINCING.
“Before slaughtering infected cattle, various preparatory measures have to be carried out: pits and trenches must be dug; the cattle must be transported to where they are to be slaughtered; instructions must be issued to qualified workers.
If the local population helps the authorities to convey the infected cattle to the slaughtering points and to catch beasts that have run away, they do this not out of hatred of cows and calves, but out of an instinct for self-preservation.
Similarly, when people are to be slaughtered en masse, the local population is not immediately gripped by a bloodthirsty hatred of the old men, women and children who are to be destroyed. It is necessary to prepare the population by means of a special campaign. And in this case it is not enough to rely merely on the instinct for self-preservation; it is necessary to stir up feelings of real hatred and revulsion.
It was in such an atmosphere that the Germans carried out the extermination of the Ukrainian and Byelorussian Jews. And at an earlier date, in the same regions, Stalin himself had mobilized the fury of the masses, whipping it up to the point of frenzy during the campaigns to liquidate the kulaks as a class and during the extermination of Trotskyist-Bukharinite degenerates and saboteurs.
Experience showed that such campaigns make the majority of the population obey every order of the authorities as though hypnotized. There is a particular minority which actively helps to create the atmosphere of these campaigns: ideological fanatics; people who take a bloodthirsty delight in the misfortunes of others; and people who want to settle personal scores, to steal a man's belongings or take over his flat or job. Most people, however, are horrified at mass murder, but they hide this not only from their families, but even from themselves. These are the people who filled the meeting-halls during the campaigns of destruction; however vast these halls or frequent these meetings, very few of them ever disturbed the quiet unanimity of the voting. Still fewer, of course, rather than turning away from the beseeching gaze of a dog suspected of rabies, dared to take the dog in and allow it to live in their houses. Nevertheless, this did happen.
The first half of the twentieth century may be seen as a time of great scientific discoveries, revolutions, immense social transformations and two World Wars. It will go down in history, however, as the time when – in accordance with philosophies of race and society – whole sections of the Jewish population were exterminated. Understandably, the present day remains discreetly silent about this.
One of the most astonishing human traits that came to light at this time was obedience. There were cases of huge queues being formed by people awaiting execution – and it was the victims themselves who regulated the movement of these queues. There were hot summer days when people had to wait from early morning until late at night; some mothers prudently provided themselves with bread and bottles of water for their children. Millions of innocent people, knowing that they would soon be arrested, said goodbye to their nearest and dearest in advance and prepared little bundles containing spare underwear and a towel. Millions of people lived in vast camps that had not only been built by prisoners but were even guarded by them.
And it wasn't merely tens of thousands, or hundreds of thousands, but hundreds of millions of people who were the obedient witnesses of this slaughter of the innocent. Nor were they merely obedient witnesses: when ordered to, they gave their support to this slaughter, voting in favor of it amid a hubbub of voices. There was something unexpected in the degree of their obedience.
There was, of course, resistance; there were acts of courage and determination on the part of those who had been condemned; there were uprisings; there were men who risked their own lives and the lives of their families in order to save the life of a stranger. But the obedience of the vast mass of people is undeniable.
What does this tell us? That a new trait has suddenly appeared in human nature? No, this obedience bears witness to a new force acting on human beings. The extreme violence of totalitarian social systems proved able to paralyze the human spirit throughout whole continents.
A man who has placed his soul in the service of Fascism declares an evil and dangerous slavery to be the only true good. Rather than overtly renouncing human feelings, he declares the crimes committed by Fascism to be the highest form of humanitarianism; he agrees to divide people up into the pure and worthy and the impure and unworthy.
The instinct for self-preservation is supported by the hypnotic power of world ideologies. These call people to carry out any sacrifice, to accept any means, in order to achieve the highest of ends: the future greatness of the motherland, world progress, the future happiness of mankind, of a nation, of a class.
One more force co-operated with the life-instinct and the power of great ideologies: terror at the limitless violence of a powerful State, terror at the way murder had become the basis of everyday life.
The violence of a totalitarian State is so great as to be no longer a means to an end; it becomes an object of mystical worship and adoration. How else can one explain the way certain intelligent, thinking Jews declared the slaughter of the Jews to be necessary for the happiness of mankind? That in view of this they were ready to take their own children to be executed – ready to carry out the sacrifice once demanded of Abraham? How else can one explain the case of a gifted, intelligent poet, himself a peasant by birth, who with sincere conviction wrote a long poem celebrating the terrible years of suffering undergone by the peasantry, years that had swallowed up his own father, an honest and simple-hearted laborer?
Another fact that allowed Fascism to gain power over men was their blindness. A man cannot believe that he is about to be destroyed. The optimism of people standing on the edge of the grave is astounding. The soil of hope – a hope that was senseless and sometimes dishonest and despicable – gave birth to a pathetic obedience that was often equally despicable.
The Warsaw Rising, the uprisings at Treblinka and Sobibor, the various mutinies of Brenners, were all born of hopelessness. But then utter hopelessness engenders not only resistance and uprisings but also a yearning to be executed as quickly as possible.
People argued over their place in the queue beside the blood-filled ditch while a mad, almost exultant voice shouted out: 'Don't be afraid, Jews. It's nothing terrible. Five minutes and it will all be over.'
Everything gave rise to obedience – both hope and hopelessness.
It is important to consider what a man must have suffered and endured in order to feel glad at the thought of his impending execution. It is especially important to consider this if one is inclined to moralize, to reproach the victims for their lack of resistance in conditions of which one has little conception.
Having established man's readiness to obey when confronted with limitless violence, we must go on to draw one further conclusion that is of importance for an understanding of man and his future.
Does human nature undergo a true change in the cauldron of totalitarian violence? Does man lose his innate yearning for freedom? The fate of both man and the totalitarian State depends on the answer to this question. If human nature does change, then the eternal and world-wide triumph of the dictatorial State is assured; if his yearning for freedom remains constant, then the totalitarian State is doomed.
The great Rising in the Warsaw ghetto, the uprisings in Treblinka and Sobibor; the vast partisan movement that flared up in dozens of countries enslaved by Hitler; the uprisings in Berlin in 1953, in Hungary in 1956, and in the labor-camps of Siberia and the Far East after Stalin's death; the riots at this time in Poland, the number of factories that went on strike and the student protests that broke out in many cities against the suppression of freedom of thought; all these bear witness to the indestructibility of man's yearning for freedom. This yearning was suppressed but it continued to exist. Man's fate may make him a slave, but his nature remains unchanged.
Man's innate yearning for freedom can be suppressed but never destroyed. Totalitarianism cannot renounce violence. If it does, it perishes. Eternal, ceaseless violence, overt or covert, is the basis of totalitarianism. Man does not renounce freedom voluntarily. This conclusion holds out hope for our time, hope for the future.”
(Vasily Grossman, Life And Fate, 1959)


E2.1.E.2. Freedom as a Necessary Condition for Moral Agency: Analyze the philosophical view that genuine moral responsibility presupposes the ability to choose freely between different courses of action.


"IMPERATIVE
It is a command expressed in the first person, not the opposite of freedom, but rather what freedom imposes on itself. Obeying a sovereign or God is not the same as obeying only oneself. Obeying a command means submitting, which is often necessary. To obey an imperative, however, is to govern oneself, and this is always necessary.
Since Kant, two types of imperatives have been distinguished: the hypothetical imperative and the categorical imperative.
 
The former is subject to a condition, usually the desired outcome. For example: "If you want your friends to be loyal to you, be loyal to them." Another example is, "If you want to avoid prison, be honest." These are merely rules of prudence or skill. They involve choosing appropriate means for a certain end, and are only valid if that end is pursued.
The categorical imperative, on the other hand, is unconditional. It requires action regardless of the end. For example: "Be loyal to your friends." Or, "Don't lie." These are moral imperatives that command absolutely; they have nothing to do with success or effectiveness in fulfilling one's duty. Thus, as Kant explains, anyone who wonders why they should tell the truth when testifying in court is already a wretch.
Hypothetical imperatives remain specific: they only apply to those who verify the condition, i.e., who aim at a particular goal (loyal friends, security, success, etc.). The categorical imperative, because it is unconditional and does not aim at any goal, is universal: it applies to all finite rational beings, as Kant says, including those who do not submit to it. It is universal in itself, insofar as reason states it and prescribes it to itself. This is what determines Kant's well-known and demanding formulation: “Act only according to that maxim through which you can at the same time will that it should become a universal law” (Groundwork..., II). It is obeying only oneself (autonomy) by freeing oneself from oneself (universality). Morality is valid for all only because it is valid for each individual (“alone, said Alain, universally”), and the only duty is to be free."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

"What is duty? Why do we put ourselves under moral obligations to others? 
According to Hume we have either natural obligations (because of the intrinsic goodness of the act - like feeding your children) or artificial ones (that we subject to for the greater good of the community - like driving on the right side of the road - it has good consequences). Both are kind of a burden and Hume thought all obligations could fit in one of these 2 categories.
David Owens thinks there are also the obligation we think are good for their own sake. Friendship for exemple is good for itself. Although friendship has a conventional side to it (would it not then qualify as an artificial obligation?), there is some intrinsic good in it, and it doesn't feel like a burden.
Promesse for Hume was mysterious, because before making one, you had no obligation to do so based on artificial conventions, and even after, there might not be any intrinsic good in keeping your promesse. Some philosophers classify promesse as a natural obligation  because the person your promessed to may now rely on it and you would them harm him by defaulting. However what if the person did not rely on your promesse and no harm would result in defaulting? Hume classified promesses as artificial obligations because keeping your promesse has beneficial consequences overall in society.
For David Owens, promessing gives you the power to control your own obligation and that of others and you do it out of taste for itself."
(David Owens on Duty in Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: http://philosophybites.com/2015/09/david-owens-on-duty.html

THE MONOTHEISTIC EXPLANATION FOR WHY EVIL AND SUFFERING EXIST IS TO ALLOW FOR HUMAN FREE WILL.
“The Battle of Good and Evil
Polytheism gave birth not merely to monotheist religions, but also to dualistic ones. Dualistic religions espouse the existence of two opposing powers: good and evil. Unlike monotheism, dualism believes that evil is an independent power, neither created by the good God, nor subordinate to it. Dualism explains that the entire universe is a battleground between these two forces, and that everything that happens in the world is part of the struggle.
Dualism is a very attractive world view because it has a short and simple answer to the famous Problem of Evil, one of the fundamental concerns of human thought. ‘Why is there evil in the world? Why is there suffering? Why do bad things happen to good people?’ Monotheists have to practice intellectual gymnastics to explain how an all-knowing, all-powerful and perfectly good God allows so much suffering in the world. One well-known explanation is that this is God’s way of allowing for human free will. Were there no evil, humans could not choose between good and evil, and hence there would be no free will. This, however, is a non-intuitive answer that immediately raises a host of new questions. Freedom of will allows humans to choose evil. Many indeed choose evil and, according to the standard monotheist account, this choice must bring divine punishment in its wake. If God knew in advance that a particular person would use her free will to choose evil, and that as a result she would be punished for this by eternal tortures in hell, why did God create her? Theologians have written countless books to answer such questions. Some find the answers convincing.
Some don’t. What’s undeniable is that monotheists have a hard time dealing with the Problem of Evil.
For dualists, it’s easy to explain evil. Bad things happen even to good people because the world is not governed single-handedly by a good God. There is an independent evil power loose in the world. The evil power does bad things.”
(Yuval Noah Harari, Sapiens, A Brief History of Humankind, 2011)

A NIHILISTIC REJECTION OF LIFE ("THE SPIRIT... THAT ENDLESSLY DENIES"), BORN FROM THE HORROR OF SELF-CONSCIOUS AWARENESS OF SUFFERING AND MORTALITY, CAN SERVE AS THE RATIONALE FOR CHOOSING EVIL.
The mythic “hostile brothers”—Spenta Mainyu and Angra Mainyu, Osiris and Seth,  Gilgamesh and Enkidu, Cain and Abel, Christ and Satan—are representative of two  eternal individual tendencies, twin “sons of god,” heroic and adversarial. The former  tendency, the archetypal savior, is the everlasting spirit of creation and transformation,  characterized eternally by the capacity to admit to the unknown and, therefore, to  progress toward “the kingdom of heaven.” The eternal adversary, by contrast, is  incarnation in practice, imagination and philosophy of the spirit of denial, eternal  rejection of the “redeeming unknown,” and the adoption of rigid self-identification.  
Myths of the “hostile brothers”—like those of the Zoroastrians—tend to emphasize the  role of free choice in determination of essential mode of being. Christ, for example (and  Gautama Buddha) are tempted constantly and potently toward evil, but choose to reject it.  
Angra Mainyu and Satan accept evil, by contrast, and revel in it (despite evidence that it  produces their own suffering). The choice of these spirits cannot be reduced to some  more essential aspect, such as the particular conditions of existence (which are identical,  anyway, for both “beings”) or the vagaries of intrinsic nature. It is voluntary willingness  to do what is known to be wrong, despite the capacity to understand and avoid such  action, that most particularly characterizes evil—the evil of spirit and man. So Milton’s  God can comment, on the degeneration of Satan and mankind:   
So will fall   
Hee and his faithless progeny: whose fault?   
Whose but his own? ingrate, he had of mee   
All he could have; I made him just and right,   
sufficient to have stood, though free to fall.

Refusal of the good is, I think, most effectively and frequently justified by reference to  the terrible affective consequences of (self)consciousness. This means that  comprehension of the vulnerability and mortality of man, and the suffering associated  with that vulnerability—apprehension of the ultimate cruelty and pointlessness of life— may be used as rationale for evil. Life is terrible, and appears, at some moments,  ultimately terrible: unfair, irrational, painful and meaningless. Interpreted in such a light,  existence itself may well appear as something reasonably eradicated. Goethe’s  Mephistopheles, “prince of lies,” defines his philosophy, in consequence, in the following  terms (in Part One of Faust):   
The spirit I, that endlessly denies.   
And rightly, too; for all that comes to birth   
Is fit for overthrow, as nothing worth;   
Wherefore the world were better sterilized;   
Thus all that’s here as Evil recognized
Is gain to me, and downfall, ruin, sin
The very element I prosper in.
He repeats this credo, in slightly elaborated form, in Part Two:
Gone, to sheer Nothing, past with null made one!
What matters our creative endless toil,
When, at a snatch, oblivion ends the coil?
“It is by-gone”—How shall this riddle run?
As good as if things never had begun,
Yet circle back, existence to possess:
I’d rather have Eternal Emptiness.
(Jordan Peterson, Maps of Meaning The Architecture of Belief, 1999)

CAN GOOD INTENTIONS ABSOLVE ONE OF THE HORRIFIC CONSEQUENCES OF ONE'S ACTIONS?
“When Tereza unexpectedly came to visit Tomas in Prague, he made love to her, as I pointed out in Part One, that very day, or rather, that very hour, but suddenly thereafter she became feverish. As she lay in his bed and he stood over her, he had the irrepressible feeling that she was a child who had been put in a bulrush basket and sent downstream to him. 
The image of the abandoned child had consequently become dear to him, and he often reflected on the ancient myths in which it occurred. It was apparently with this in mind that he picked up a translation of Sophocles' Oedipus. 
The story of Oedipus is well known: Abandoned as an infant, he was taken to King Polybus, who raised him. One day, when he had grown into a youth, he came upon a dignitary riding along a mountain path. A quarrel arose, and Oedipus killed the dignitary. Later he became the husband of Queen Jocasta and ruler of Thebes. Little did he know that the man he had killed in the mountains was his father and the woman with whom he slept his mother. In the meantime, fate visited a plague on his subjects and tortured them with great pestilences. When Oedipus realized that he himself was the cause of their suffering, he put out his own eyes and wandered blind away from Thebes.

Anyone who thinks that the Communist regimes of Central Europe are exclusively the work of criminals is overlooking a basic truth: the criminal regimes were made not by criminals but by enthusiasts convinced they had discovered the only road to paradise. They defended that road so valiantly that they were forced to execute many people. Later it became clear that there was no paradise, that the enthusiasts were therefore murderers. 
Then everyone took to shouting at the Communists: You're the ones responsible for our country's misfortunes (it had grown poor and desolate), for its loss of independence (it had fallen into the hands of the Russians), for its judicial murders!
And the accused responded: We didn't know! We were deceived! We were true believers! Deep in our hearts we are innocent! 
In the end, the dispute narrowed down to a single question: Did they really not know or were they merely making believe? 
Tomas followed the dispute closely (as did his ten million fellow Czechs) and was of the opinion that while there had definitely been Communists who were not completely unaware of the atrocities (they could not have been ignorant of the horrors that had been perpetrated and were still being perpetrated in postrevolutionary Russia), it was probable that the majority of the Communists had not in fact known of them.
But, he said to himself, whether they knew or didn't know is not the main issue; the main issue is whether a man is innocent because he didn't know. Is a fool on the throne relieved of all responsibility merely because he is a fool? 
Let us concede that a Czech public prosecutor in the early fifties who called for the death of an innocent man was deceived by the Russian secret police and the government of his own country. But now that we all know the accusations to have been absurd and the executed to have been innocent, how can that selfsame public prosecutor defend his purity of heart by beating himself on the chest and proclaiming, My conscience is clear! I didn't know! I was a believer! Isn't his "I didn't know! I was a believer!" at the very root of his irreparable guilt?”
 (Milan Kundera, The Unbearable Lightness of Being, 1984)

NIRVANA IS A SPACE OF MORAL POSSIBILITY, THE GATEWAY TO AN ETHICAL LIFE.  To behold and thus become aware of nirvana means consciously to affirm and valorize those moments when you see for yourself that you are free to think, speak, and act in ways that are not determined by reactivity.
”The ceasing (nirodha) is to be beheld (sacchikata).
[…] Here is the classical definition of “ceasing”:
This is the ceasing: the traceless fading away and ceasing of
that reactivity (tanha), the letting go and abandoning of it,
freedom and independence from it. […]

The first sense of nirvana is traditionally understood as a quasimystical experience in which an accomplished meditator achieves sufficient calm (samatha) and insight (vipassana) to bring his reactivity to a complete stop. But this interpretation makes nirvana accessible only to trained meditators, thus conflicting with the account of it as “immediate, clearly visible, inviting, uplifting, and personally sensed by the wise.” Moreover, Gotama’s conversation with the wanderer Sıvaka implies that one can become aware of nirvana whenever greed, hatred, and confusion are momentarily inactive—irrespective of whether one self-identifies as a Buddhist or practices meditation. [..]

To behold and thus become aware of nirvana means consciously to affirm and valorize those moments when you see for yourself that you are free to think, speak, and act in ways that are not determined by reactivity. Nirvana is a space of moral possibility, the gateway to an ethical life. This “dharma door” (as the Chinese call it) is always open, but is frequently blocked and hidden from view by the chimeras conjured by Mara. To become aware of this “clearing” in the jungle of reactivity and keep it in view is a task every bit as exacting and arduous as those of comprehending dukkha and letting go of tanha. […]

To behold nirvana is to realize that one is not beholden to the prompts of sensual desire, being, and ignorance. Yet the freedom enabled in this non-reactive space does not occur in a vacuum but within the context of “the six sense fields of a living body,” which are not empty at all but full of both anxiety and possibility. The challenge of “beholding what ceases” is to learn how to live in and from the perspective of such emptiness—the “abode,” as Gotama put it, “of the great person”—all the while engaging with a world that constantly and unpredictably impacts one’s senses, triggering cascades of reactivity.”
(Stephen Batchelor, After Buddhism, rethinking the dharma for a secular age, 2016)

“TODAY WE WOULD CALL [THE BUDDHA’S APPROACH TO ETHICS] “SITUATIONAL.”This is an ethics that starts by recognizing the complexity and uniqueness of every moral situation and recognizing, too, that no Torah-like book of rules is capable of providing a definitive, a priori solution. In facing a moral dilemma, one does not ask “What is the right thing to do?” as though the answer to the question already exists in an ideal metaphysical space, but rather “What is the most wise and loving thing to do in this specific instance?” For that question, no answer in the abstract is even conceivable.
When the Buddha founded his community of mendicants, there were no rules whatsoever. Only if mendicants committed specific deeds that led to specific consequences was a rule devised to prohibit such behavior. But toward the end of his life, Gotama told Ananda that after his death the community could “discard the minor rules.” All this suggests that the rules he formulated were responses to the particular social and historical context in which he lived. So when Jıvaka insisted that the mendicants be allowed to accept good-quality cloth, the Buddha instituted a rule—presumably on grounds of health. He also recognized that as times and situations changed, rules may become anachronistic or redundant and therefore no longer applicable.
That a situational ethics focuses on specific, unrepeatable dilemmas does not mean that it lacks guiding values.”
(Stephen Batchelor, After Buddhism, rethinking the dharma for a secular age, 2016)

 E2.1.D. The Negative Consequences of a Lack of Freedom

 E2.1.D.1. Psychological Distress and Learned Helplessness: Analyze the negative psychological impacts of feeling controlled or lacking agency, including increased stress, anxiety, depression, and the phenomenon of learned helplessness.

 E2.1.D.1.1. The Psychology of Imprisonment (Distress, Anxiety, and Trauma): the "psychological distress" that arises from "feeling controlled." The internal experience of being trapped, whether by physical walls, social pressure, or the "speechless horror" of trauma.

 E2.1.D.1.1.a.  Jorge Macchi_Pentagrama (Staff), 1993 - Pillow, pillowcase, ropes, springs, and nails

"Macchi studied piano as a teenager, during the years of Argentina's military dictatorship (1976-83). The five lines of this sculpture, formed by rope held taut by springs, could be read, as its title suggests, as a musical staff. But the staff is un-notated, suggesting an enforced silence or the inability to put something into language. It pins the soft form of a pillow - a site of intimacy -- against the wall, Macchi's work, like that of some of the other artists in this gallery, exposes the uncomfortable tensions between systems of order and the ways that bodies exceed them."
(Curatorship, MomA, NYC)

 E2.1.D.1.1.b. A POWERFUL AND DEVASTATING POEM BY MAYA ANGELOU RECOUNTS THE PSYCHOLOGICAL TRAUMA AND DISTRESS CAUSED BY AN ACT OF VIOLENCE AND CONTROL.
“MEN
When I was young, I used to
Watch behind the curtains
As men walked up and down
The street. Wino men, old men.
Young men sharp as mustard.
See them. Men are always
Going somewhere.
They knew I was there. Fifteen
Years old and starving for them.
Under my window, they would pause,
Their shoulders high like the
Breasts of a young girl,
Jacket tails slapping over
Those behinds,
Men.
One day they hold you in the
Palms of their hands, gentle, as if you
Were the last raw egg in the world. Then
They tighten up. Just a little. The
First squeeze is nice. A quick hug.
Soft into your defenselessness. A little
More. The hurt begins. Wrench out a
Smile that slides around the fear. When the
Air disappears,
Your mind pops, exploding fiercely, briefly,
Like the head of a kitchen match. Shattered.
It is your juice
That runs down their legs. Staining their shoes.
When the earth rights itself again, And taste tries to return to the tongue,
Your body has slammed shut. Forever.
No keys exist.
Then the window draws full upon
Your mind. There, just beyond
The sway of curtains, men walk.
Knowing something.
Going someplace.
But this time, you will simply
Stand and watch.
Maybe.”
(Maya Angelou)

 E2.1.D.1.1.c. IMPRISONED, KRYMOV FEELS HE IS "LOSING HIMSELF" AND HAS "BECOME ANOTHER BEING." THE MOST "APPALLING" PART IS RECOGNIZING HIMSELF IN HIS OPPRESSOR.
“In the stifling, log-walled cell he was overwhelmed by despair and fury: he was losing himself. He was the man who had shouted hoarsely as he ran to the aeroplane to meet his friend Georgiy Dimitrov, he was the man who had borne Clara Zetkin's coffin – and just now he had given a furtive glance to see whether or not a security officer would hit him a second time. He had led his men out of encirclement; they had called him 'Comrade Commissar'. And now a peasant with a tommy gun had looked at him – a Communist being beaten up and interrogated by another Communist – with squeamish contempt.
He had not yet taken in the full meaning of the words 'loss of freedom'… He had become another being. Everything in him had to change. He had lost his freedom…
He felt giddy… He would appeal to Shcherbakov, to the Central Committee! He would appeal to Molotov! He wouldn't rest until that scoundrel of a lieutenant-colonel had been shot. 'Yes – pick up that phone! Ring up Krasin! Stalin has heard my name. He knows who I am. Comrade Stalin once asked comrade Zhdanov: "Is that the same Krymov who used to work in the Comintern?" '
Then Krymov felt the quagmire beneath his feet: a dark, gluey, bottomless swamp was sucking him in. He had come up against something insuperable, something more powerful than the German Panzer divisions. He had lost his freedom.
Zhenya! Zhenya! Can you see me? Zhenya! Look at me – I'm in trouble, terrible trouble! I'm alone and abandoned. You too have abandoned me.
A degenerate had been beating him. His head span; his fingers were almost in spasm: he wanted to throw himself at the security officer.
Never had he felt such hatred towards the Tsarist police, the Mensheviks or even towards the SS officer he had once interrogated.
No, the man now trampling over him was not someone alien. Krymov could see himself in this officer, could recognize in him the same Krymov who as a boy had wept with happiness over those astonishing words of the Communist Manifesto: 'Workers of the World Unite!' And this feeling of recognition was appalling.
Darkness fell. Intermittently, the rumble of Stalingrad boomed through the close, evil air of the prison. Perhaps the Germans were going for Batyuk and Rodimtsev.
From time to time there were movements out in the corridor. The doors of the general cell – for deserters, traitors to the Motherland, looters and rapists – opened and closed. When the prisoners asked to go to the lavatory, the sentry would argue for a long time before opening the door.
Krymov himself had been put in the general cell after being brought over from Stalingrad. No one had paid any attention to the commissar with the red star still sewn on his sleeve: all the men cared about was whether he had any paper for rolling their dusty tobacco.
All they wanted was to be able to eat, smoke and carry out their natural functions.
Who had denounced him? What a torment it was: to know that he was innocent and yet to suffer from this chilling sense of irreparable guilt. Rodimtsev's conduit, the ruins of house 6/1, the White-Russian bogs, the Voronezh winter, the rivers they'd had to ford – everything light and joyful was lost forever.
How he wanted simply to go out onto the street, stroll around, crane his neck and look up at the sky… And then buy a newspaper, have a shave, write a letter to his brother. He wanted a cup of tea. He had to return a book he'd borrowed for the evening. He wanted to look at his watch, go to the bath-house, take a handkerchief out of his suitcase. But he couldn't do anything. He had lost his freedom.
Then he had been taken out into the corridor. The commandant had shouted at the guard:
'I told you in plain Russian! Why the hell did you go and put him in the general cell? And don't just stand there gaping! Do you want to be sent to the front line?'
When the commandant had gone, the guard had complained:
'It's always the same. The solitary cell's occupied. He told us to keep it for people sentenced to death. If I put you there, what can I do with the fellow who's already there?'
Soon Krymov saw the firing-squad taking the man out to be executed. His fair hair clung to the narrow, scrawny nape of his neck. He could have been anything from twenty years old to thirty-five.
Krymov was then transferred to the solitary cell. In the semi-darkness he made out a pot on the table. Next to it he could feel a hare molded from the soft inside of a loaf of bread. The condemned man must have just put it down – it was still soft. Only the hare's ears had had time to grow stale.
Krymov, his mouth hanging open, sat down on the plank-bed. He had too much on his mind to be able to sleep. Nor could he think. His temples were throbbing. He felt deafened. Everything was whirling around in his head. There was nothing he could catch hold of, no firm point from which to begin a line of thought.
During the night there was a commotion in the corridor. The guards called the corporal. There was a tramping of boots. The commandant – Krymov recognized his voice – said: 'To hell with that battalion commissar. Put him in the guard-room.' Then he added: 'What a story! I bet it'll get to the CO.'
The door of his cell opened and a soldier shouted: 'Out!' Krymov went out. In the corridor stood a bare-footed man in his underwear.
Krymov had seen many terrible things in his life, but nothing so terrible as this small, dirty yellow face. Its lips, wrinkles, and trembling cheeks were all crying; everything was crying except for the eyes; and so terrible was the expression in those eyes, it would have been better never even to have glimpsed them.
'Come on, come on!' said the guard.
When Krymov was in the guard-room, he learned what had happened.
'They keep threatening to send me to the front, but this place is a thousand times worse. Your nerves get worn to a frazzle… A soldier's to be executed for self-mutilation – he'd shot himself in the left hand through a loaf of bread. They shoot him, cover him over with earth – and during the night he comes to life again and finds his way back!'
The guard avoided addressing Krymov directly – so as not to have to choose between the polite and impolite forms of the second person.
'They make a hash of everything they set their hands to. It wears your nerves to a frazzle. Even a pig gets slaughtered better than that! What a mess! The ground's frozen – so they rake up some weeds, sprinkle them over him and off they go. And then he gets up. What do you expect? He couldn't have done that if he'd been buried according to the rule-book.'
Krymov – who had always answered questions, given explanations, set people back on the true path – was bewildered.
'But why did he come back here?'
The guard laughed.
'And now the sergeant-major wants him to be given some bread and tea while they sort out his papers. The head of the catering section's raising hell. How can they give him tea when they've already written him off? And why should the sergeant-major be allowed to bungle everything and then expect the catering department to bail him out?'
'What did you do before the war?' Krymov asked suddenly.
'I was a beekeeper on a State farm.'
'I see,' said Krymov. At that moment everything – both inside him and outside him – was equally incomprehensible.
At dawn Krymov was taken back to the solitary cell. The hare was still standing beside the pot; its skin was now hard and rough. Krymov could hear a wheedling voice in the general cell:
'Come on, comrade guard! Take me along for a piss.'
A reddish-brown sun was rising over the steppe. It was like a frozen beetroot with lumps of earth still clinging to it.
Soon afterwards Krymov was taken out and put in the back of a truck. A young lieutenant sat down beside him, the sergeant-major handed over his suitcase and the truck set off for the airfield, grinding and jolting over the frozen mud.
Krymov took a deep breath of cool, damp air. His heart filled with faith and light. The nightmare seemed to be over.”
(Vasily Grossman, Life And Fate, 1959)


 E2.1.D.1.1.d. LYDGATE, A PROUD MAN WITH "UNMIXED RESOLUTIONS OF INDEPENDENCE," FINDS HIMSELF IN A SITUATION WHERE EVERY AVAILABLE OPTION IS REPUGNANT. 
“And now, when the question of voting had come, this repulsive fact told
more strongly against Mr. Farebrother than it had done before. One
would know much better what to do if men’s characters were more
consistent, and especially if one’s friends were invariably fit for any
function they desired to undertake! Lydgate was convinced that if there
had been no valid objection to Mr. Farebrother, he would have voted for
him, whatever Bulstrode might have felt on the subject: he did not
intend to be a vassal of Bulstrode’s. On the other hand, there was
Tyke, a man entirely given to his clerical office, who was simply
curate at a chapel of ease in St. Peter’s parish, and had time for
extra duty. Nobody had anything to say against Mr. Tyke, except that
they could not bear him, and suspected him of cant. Really, from his
point of view, Bulstrode was thoroughly justified.

But whichever way Lydgate began to incline, there was something to make
him wince; and being a proud man, he was a little exasperated at being
obliged to wince. He did not like frustrating his own best purposes by
getting on bad terms with Bulstrode; he did not like voting against
Farebrother, and helping to deprive him of function and salary; and the
question occurred whether the additional forty pounds might not leave
the Vicar free from that ignoble care about winning at cards. Moreover,
Lydgate did not like the consciousness that in voting for Tyke he
should be voting on the side obviously convenient for himself. But
would the end really be his own convenience? Other people would say so,
and would allege that he was currying favor with Bulstrode for the sake
of making himself important and getting on in the world. What then? He
for his own part knew that if his personal prospects simply had been
concerned, he would not have cared a rotten nut for the banker’s
friendship or enmity. What he really cared for was a medium for his
work, a vehicle for his ideas; and after all, was he not bound to
prefer the object of getting a good hospital, where he could
demonstrate the specific distinctions of fever and test therapeutic
results, before anything else connected with this chaplaincy? For the
first time Lydgate was feeling the hampering threadlike pressure of
small social conditions, and their frustrating complexity. At the end
of his inward debate, when he set out for the hospital, his hope was
really in the chance that discussion might somehow give a new aspect to
the question, and make the scale dip so as to exclude the necessity for
voting. I think he trusted a little also to the energy which is
begotten by circumstances—some feeling rushing warmly and making
resolve easy, while debate in cool blood had only made it more
difficult. However it was, he did not distinctly say to himself on
which side he would vote; and all the while he was inwardly resenting
the subjection which had been forced upon him. It would have seemed
beforehand like a ridiculous piece of bad logic that he, with his
unmixed resolutions of independence and his select purposes, would find
himself at the very outset in the grasp of petty alternatives, each of
which was repugnant to him. In his student’s chambers, he had
prearranged his social action quite differently.”
(George Eliot, Middlemarch, 1871)

DOROTHEA BROOKE, DESPITE BEING IN A PRIVILEGED POSITION, EXPERIENCES HER LIFE AS A "MORAL IMPRISONMENT."
“She was glowing from her morning toilet as only healthful youth can
glow: there was gem-like brightness on her coiled hair and in her hazel
eyes; there was warm red life in her lips; her throat had a breathing
whiteness above the differing white of the fur which itself seemed to
wind about her neck and cling down her blue-gray pelisse with a
tenderness gathered from her own, a sentient commingled innocence which
kept its loveliness against the crystalline purity of the outdoor snow.
As she laid the cameo-cases on the table in the bow-window, she
unconsciously kept her hands on them, immediately absorbed in looking
out on the still, white enclosure which made her visible world.

Mr. Casaubon, who had risen early complaining of palpitation, was in
the library giving audience to his curate Mr. Tucker. By-and-by Celia
would come in her quality of bridesmaid as well as sister, and through
the next weeks there would be wedding visits received and given; all in
continuance of that transitional life understood to correspond with the
excitement of bridal felicity, and keeping up the sense of busy
ineffectiveness, as of a dream which the dreamer begins to suspect. The
duties of her married life, contemplated as so great beforehand, seemed
to be shrinking with the furniture and the white vapor-walled
landscape. The clear heights where she expected to walk in full
communion had become difficult to see even in her imagination; the
delicious repose of the soul on a complete superior had been shaken
into uneasy effort and alarmed with dim presentiment. When would the
days begin of that active wifely devotion which was to strengthen her
husband’s life and exalt her own? Never perhaps, as she had
preconceived them; but somehow—still somehow. In this solemnly pledged
union of her life, duty would present itself in some new form of
inspiration and give a new meaning to wifely love.

Meanwhile there was the snow and the low arch of dun vapor—there was
the stifling oppression of that gentlewoman’s world, where everything
was done for her and none asked for her aid—where the sense of
connection with a manifold pregnant existence had to be kept up
painfully as an inward vision, instead of coming from without in claims
that would have shaped her energies.— “What shall I do?” “Whatever you
please, my dear:” that had been her brief history since she had left
off learning morning lessons and practising silly rhythms on the hated
piano. Marriage, which was to bring guidance into worthy and imperative
occupation, had not yet freed her from the gentlewoman’s oppressive
liberty: it had not even filled her leisure with the ruminant joy of
unchecked tenderness. Her blooming full-pulsed youth stood there in a
moral imprisonment which made itself one with the chill, colorless,
narrowed landscape, with the shrunken furniture, the never-read books,
and the ghostly stag in a pale fantastic world that seemed to be
vanishing from the daylight.”
(George Eliot, Middlemarch, 1871)


 E2.1.D.1.1.e. Copy Y a t’il des choses que le langage ne peut pas dire? 
”SPEECHLESS HORROR
Our most surprising finding was a white spot in the left frontal lobe of the cortex, in a region called Broca’s area. In this case the change in color meant that there was a significant decrease in that part of the brain. Broca’s area is one of the speech centers of the brain, which is often affected in stroke patients when the blood supply to that region is cut off. Without a functioning Broca’s area, you cannot put your thoughts and feelings into words. Our scans showed that Broca’s area went offline whenever a flashback was triggered. In other words, we had visual proof that the effects of trauma are not necessarily different from—and can overlap with—the effects of physical lesions like strokes.
All trauma is preverbal. Shakespeare captures this state of speechless terror in Macbeth, after the murdered king’s body is discovered: “Oh horror! horror!horror! Tongue nor heart cannot conceive nor name thee! Confusion now hath made his masterpiece!” Under extreme conditions people may scream obscenities, call for their mothers, howl in terror, or simply shut down. Victims of assaults and accidents sit mute and frozen in emergency rooms; traumatized children “lose their tongues” and refuse to speak. Photographs of combat soldiers show hollow-eyed men staring mutely into a void.
Even years later traumatized people often have enormous difficulty telling other people what has happened to them. Their bodies reexperience terror, rage, and helplessness, as well as the impulse to fight or flee, but these feelings are almost impossible to articulate. Trauma by nature drives us to the edge of comprehension, cutting us off from language based on common experience or an imaginable past.
This doesn’t mean that people can’t talk about a tragedy that has befallen them. Sooner or later most survivors, like the veterans in chapter 1, come up with what many of them call their “cover story” that offers some explanation for their symptoms and behavior for public consumption. These stories, however, 

rarely capture the inner truth of the experience. It is enormously difficult to organize one’s traumatic experiences into a coherent account—a narrative with a beginning, a middle, and an end. Even a seasoned reporter like the famed CBS correspondent Ed Murrow struggled to convey the atrocities he saw when the Nazi concentration camp Buchenwald was liberated in 1945: “I pray you believe what I have said. I reported what I saw and heard, but only part of it. For most of it I have no words.”
When words fail, haunting images capture the experience and return as nightmares and flashbacks. In contrast to the deactivation of Broca’s area, another region, Brodmann’s area 19, lit up in our participants. This is a region in the visual cortex that registers images when they first enter the brain. We were surprised to see brain activation in this area so long after the original experience of the trauma. Under ordinary conditions raw images registered in area 19 are rapidly diffused to other brain areas that interpret the meaning of what has been seen. Once again, we were witnessing a brain region rekindled as if the trauma were actually occurring.
As we will see in chapter 12, which discusses memory, other unprocessed sense fragments of trauma, like sounds and smells and physical sensations, are also registered separately from the story itself. Similar sensations often trigger a flashback that brings them back into consciousness, apparently unmodified by the passage of time.”
(Bessel Van Der Kalk, The Body Keeps the Score, 2014)

 E2.1.D.1.1.f. COPY  E1.5. TRAUMA
BESSEL VAN DER KALK ARGUES THAT MODERN SCIENCE, PARTICULARLY NEUROSCIENCE, HAS REVEALED THAT TRAUMA IS A PHYSIOLOGICAL INJURY THAT CHANGES THE BRAIN, NOT A MORAL FAILING, WHICH OPENS UP NEW AVENUES FOR HEALING THAT COMBINE TOP-DOWN (TALKING), BOTTOM-UP  (BODILY EXPERIENCES), AND MEDICINAL APPROACHES.

“Trauma, by definition, is unbearable and intolerable. Most rape victims, combat soldiers, and children who have been molested become so upset when they think about what they experienced that they try to push it out of their minds, trying to act as if nothing happened, and move on. It takes tremendous energy to keep functioning while carrying the memory of terror, and the shame of utter weakness and vulnerability.

While we all want to move beyond trauma, the part of our brain that is devoted to ensuring our survival (deep below our rational brain) is not very good at denial. Long after a traumatic experience is over, it may be reactivated at the slightest hint of danger and mobilize disturbed brain circuits and secrete massive amounts of stress hormones. This precipitates unpleasant emotions intense physical sensations, and impulsive and aggressive actions. These posttraumatic reactions feel incomprehensible and overwhelming. Feeling out of control, survivors of trauma often begin to fear that they are damaged to the core and beyond redemption. […]

The birth of three new branches of science has led to an explosion of knowledge about the effects of psychological trauma, abuse, and neglect. Those new disciplines are neuroscience, the study of how the brain supports mental processes; developmental psychopathology, the study of the impact of adverse experiences on the development of mind and brain; and interpersonal neurobiology, the study of how our behavior influences the emotions, biology, and mind-sets of those around us.

Research from these new disciplines has revealed that trauma produces actual physiological changes, including a recalibration of the brain’s alarm system, an increase in stress hormone activity, and alterations in the system that filters relevant information from irrelevant. We now know that trauma compromises the brain area that communicates the physical, embodied feeling of being alive. These changes explain why traumatized individuals become hypervigilant to threat at the expense of spontaneously engaging in their day-to-day lives. They also help us understand why traumatized people so often keep repeating the same problems and have such trouble learning from experience. We now know that their behaviors are not the result of moral failings or signs of lack of willpower or bad character—they are caused by actual changes in the brain.

This vast increase in our knowledge about the basic processes that underlie trauma has also opened up new possibilities to palliate or even reverse the damage. We can now develop methods and experiences that utilize the brain’s own natural neuroplasticity to help survivors feel fully alive in the present and move on with their lives. There are fundamentally three avenues: 1) top down, by talking, (re-) connecting with others, and allowing ourselves to know and understand what is going on with us, while processing the memories of the trauma; 2) by taking medicines that shut down inappropriate alarm reactions, or by utilizing other technologies that change the way the brain organizes information, and 3) bottom up: by allowing the body to have experiences that deeply and viscerally contradict the helplessness, rage, or collapse that result from trauma. Which one of these is best for any particular survivor is an empirical question. Most people I have worked with require a combination.

This has been my life’s work. In this effort I have been supported by my colleagues and students at the Trauma Center, which I founded thirty years ago. Together we have treated thousands of traumatized children and adults: victims of child abuse, natural disasters, wars, accidents, and human trafficking; people who have suffered assaults by intimates and strangers. We have a long tradition of discussing all our patients in great depth at weekly treatment team meetings and carefully tracking how well different forms of treatment work for particular individuals. […]

The challenge is: How can people gain control over the residues of past trauma and return to being masters of their own ship? Talking, understanding, and human connections help, and drugs can dampen hyperactive alarm systems. But we will also see that the imprints from the past can be transformed by having physical experiences that directly contradict the helplessness, rage, and collapse that are part of trauma, and thereby regaining self-mastery. I have no preferred treatment modality, as no single approach fits everybody, but I practice all the forms of treatment that I discuss in this book. Each one of them can produce profound changes, depending on the nature of the particular problem and the makeup of the individual person.”
(Bessel Van Der Kalk, The Body Keeps the Score, 2014)

CHILD ABUSE: THE HIDDEN EPIDEMIC […]
“[The results of]  the monumental investigation of Adverse Childhood Experiences (now know at the ACE study), a collaboration between the CDC and Kaiser Permanente, with Robert Anda, MD, and Vincent Felitti, MD, as co–principal investigators:
More than fifty thousand Kaiser patients came through the Department of Preventive Medicine annually for a comprehensive evaluation, filling out an extensive medical questionnaire in the process. Felitti and Anda spent more than a year developing ten new questions covering carefully defined categories of adverse childhood experiences, including physical and sexual abuse, physical and emotional neglect, and family dysfunction, such as having had parents who were divorced, mentally ill, addicted, or in prison. They then asked 25,000 consecutive patients if they would be willing to provide information about childhood events; 17,421 said yes. Their responses were then compared with the detailed medical records that Kaiser kept on all patients.
The ACE study revealed that traumatic life experiences during childhood and adolescence are far more common than expected. The study respondents were mostly white, middle class, middle aged, well educated, and financially secure enough to have good medical insurance, and yet only one-third of the respondents reported no adverse childhood experiences.

- One out of ten individuals responded yes to the question “Did a parent or other adult in the household often or very often swear at you, insult you, or put you down?”
- More than a quarter responded yes to the questions “Did one of your parents often or very often push, grab, slap, or throw something at you?” and “Did one of your parents often or very often hit you so hard that you had marks or were injured?” In other words, more than a quarter of the U.S. population is likely to have been repeatedly physically abused as a child.
- To the questions “Did an adult or person at least 5 years older ever have you touch their body in a sexual way?” and “Did an adult or person at least 5 years older ever attempt oral, anal, or vaginal intercourse with you?” 28 percent of women and 16 percent of men responded affirmatively.
- One in eight people responded positively to the questions: “As a child, did you witness your mother sometimes, often, or very often pushed, grabbed, slapped, or had something thrown at her?” “As a child, did you witness your mother sometimes, often, or very often kicked, bitten, hit with a fist, or hit with something hard?”

Each yes answer was scored as one point, leading to a possible ACE score ranging from zero to ten. For example, a person who experienced frequent verbal abuse, who had an alcoholic mother, and whose parents divorced would have an ACE score of three. Of the two-thirds of respondents who reported an adverse experience, 87 percent scored two or more. One in six of all respondents had an ACE score of four or higher.
In short, Felitti and his team had found that adverse experiences are interrelated, even though they’re usually studied separately. People typically don’t grow up in a household where one brother is in prison but everything else is fine. They don’t live in families where their mother is regularly beaten but life is otherwise hunky-dory. Incidents of abuse are never stand-alone events. And for each additional adverse experience reported, the toll in later damage increases.
Felitti and his team found that the effects of childhood trauma first become evident in school. More than half of those with ACE scores of four or higher reported having learning or behavioral problems, compared with 3 percent of those with a score of zero. As the children matured, they didn’t “outgrow” the effects of their early experiences. As Felitti notes, “Traumatic experiences are often lost in time and concealed by shame, secrecy, and social taboo,” but the study revealed that the impact of trauma pervaded these patients’ adult lives. For example, high ACE scores turned out to correlate with higher workplace absenteeism, financial problems, and lower lifetime income.
When it came to personal suffering, the results were devastating. As the ACE score rises, chronic depression in adulthood also rises dramatically. For those with an ACE score of four or more, its prevalence is 66 percent in women and 35 percent in men, compared with an overall rate of 12 percent in those with an ACE score of zero. The likelihood of being on antidepressant medication or prescription painkillers also rose proportionally. As Felitti has pointed out, we may be treating today experiences that happened fifty years ago—at ever-increasing cost. Antidepressant drugs and painkillers constitute a significant portion of our rapidly rising national health-care expenditures. (Ironically, research has shown that depressed patients without prior histories of abuse or neglect tend to respond much better to antidepressants than patients with those backgrounds.)
Self-acknowledged suicide attempts rise exponentially with ACE scores. From a score of zero to a score of six there is about a 5,000 percent increased likelihood of suicide attempts. The more isolated and unprotected a person feels, the more death will feel like the only escape. When the media report an environmental link to a 30 percent increase in the risk of some cancer, it is headline news, yet these far more dramatic figures are overlooked.”
(Bessel Van Der Kalk, The Body Keeps the Score, 2014)

A_Alfredo Jaar_Six seconds_2000

THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF RELATING A TRAUMATIC EXPERIENCE
“In his work, Chilean artist, architect and filmmaker Alfredo Jaar questions the possibility of producing a work of art based on events distorted by their media coverage. Six Seconds is the latest piece in a project lasting more than six years devoted to the Rwandan genocide. "It is the image of a young girl seen from behind. This young girl had witnessed her father and mother being killed with machetes. I had arranged to meet her so she could tell me her story. But when she arrived, she changed her mind (...) As she turned around and walked out, I grabbed my camera and took a photo without really focusing, hence the blur. This blurred image represents my inability to recount this woman's experience, or the experience of Rwanda -the impossibility.”
(Curatorship: Musée de l’Orangerie, Paris)

 E2.1.D.1.2. The Phenomenon of Learned Helplessness: a state of paralysis and submission where a person, having learned that their actions are futile, is no longer able to act in their own self-interest, even when given the chance.

 E2.1.D.1.2.a. “STUCK IN FIGHT OR FLIGHT
What had happened to Marsha in the scanner gradually started to make sense. Thirteen years after her tragedy we had activated the sensations—the sounds and images from the accident—that were still stored in her memory. When these sensations came to the surface, they activated her alarm system, which caused her to react as if she were back in the hospital being told that her daughter had died. The passage of thirteen years was erased. Her sharply increased heart rate and blood pressure readings reflected her physiological state of frantic alarm.
Adrenaline is one of the hormones that are critical to help us fight back or flee in the face of danger. Increased adrenaline was responsible for our participants’ dramatic rise in heart rate and blood pressure while listening to their trauma narrative. Under normal conditions people react to a threat with a temporary increase in their stress hormones. As soon as the threat is over, the hormones dissipate and the body returns to normal. The stress hormones of traumatized people, in contrast, take much longer to return to baseline and spike quickly and disproportionately in response to mildly stressful stimuli. The insidious effects of constantly elevated stress hormones include memory and attention problems, irritability, and sleep disorders. They also contribute to many long-term health issues, depending on which body system is most vulnerable in a particular individual.
We now know that there is another possible response to threat, which our scans aren’t yet capable of measuring. Some people simply go into denial: Their bodies register the threat, but their conscious minds go on as if nothing has happened. However, even though the mind may learn to ignore the messages from the emotional brain, the alarm signals don’t stop. The emotional brain keeps working, and stress hormones keep sending signals to the muscles to tense for action or immobilize in collapse. The physical effects on the organs go on unabated until they demand notice when they are expressed as illness. Medications, drugs, and alcohol can also temporarily dull or obliterate unbearable sensations and feelings. But the body continues to keep the score.
We can interpret what happened to Marsha in the scanner from several different perspectives, each of which has implications for treatment. We can focus on the neurochemical and physiological disruptions that were so evident and make a case that she is suffering from a biochemical imbalance that is reactivated whenever she is reminded of her daughter’s death. We might then search for a drug or a combination of drugs that would damp down the reaction or, in the best case, restore her chemical equilibrium. Based on the results of our scans, some of my colleagues at MGH began investigating drugs that might make people less responsive to the effects of elevated adrenaline.
We can also make a strong case that Marsha is hypersensitized to her memories of the past and that the best treatment would be some form of desensitization.4 After repeatedly rehearsing the details of the trauma with a therapist, her biological responses might become muted, so that she could realize and remember that “that was then and this is now,” rather than reliving the experience over and over.
For a hundred years or more, every textbook of psychology and psychotherapy has advised that some method of talking about distressing feelings can resolve them. However, as we’ve seen, the experience of trauma itself gets in the way of being able to do that. No matter how much insight and understanding we develop, the rational brain is basically impotent to talk the emotional brain out of its own reality. I am continually impressed by how difficult it is for people who have gone through the unspeakable to convey the essence of their experience. It is so much easier for them to talk about what has been done to them—to tell a story of victimization and revenge—than to notice, feel, and put into words the reality of their internal experience.
Our scans had revealed how their dread persisted and could be triggered by multiple aspects of daily experience. They had not integrated their experience into the ongoing stream of their life. They continued to be “there” and did not know how to be “here”—fully alive in the present. […]

Traumatized people become stuck, stopped in their growth because they can’t integrate new experiences into their lives. I was very moved when the veterans of Patton’s army gave me a World War II army-issue watch for Christmas, but it was a sad memento of the year their lives had effectively stopped: 1944. Being traumatized means continuing to organize your life as if the trauma were still going on—unchanged and immutable—as every new encounter or event is contaminated by the past.
After trauma the world is experienced with a different nervous system. The survivor’s energy now becomes focused on suppressing inner chaos, at the expense of spontaneous involvement in their lives. These attempts to maintain control over unbearable physiological reactions can result in a whole range of physical symptoms, including fibromyalgia, chronic fatigue, and other autoimmune diseases. This explains why it is critical for trauma treatment to engage the entire organism, body, mind, and brain. […]

DISSOCIATION AND RELIVING
Dissociation is the essence of trauma. The overwhelming experience is split off and fragmented, so that the emotions, sounds, images, thoughts, and physical sensations related to the trauma take on a life of their own. The sensory fragments of memory intrude into the present, where they are literally relived. As long as the trauma is not resolved, the stress hormones that the body secretes 

to protect itself keep circulating, and the defensive movements and emotional responses keep getting replayed. Unlike Stan, however, many people may not be aware of the connection between their “crazy” feelings and reactions and the traumatic events that are being replayed. They have no idea why they respond to some minor irritation as if they were about to be annihilated.
Flashbacks and reliving are in some ways worse that the trauma itself. A traumatic event has a beginning and an end—at some point it is over. But for people with PTSD a flashback can occur at any time, whether they are awake or asleep. There is no way of knowing when it’s going to occur again or how long it will last. People who suffer from flashbacks often organize their lives around trying to protect against them. They may compulsively go to the gym to pump iron (but finding that they are never strong enough), numb themselves with drugs, or try to cultivate an illusory sense of control in highly dangerous situations (like motorcycle racing, bungee jumping, or working as an ambulance driver). Constantly fighting unseen dangers is exhausting and leaves them fatigued, depressed, and weary.
If elements of the trauma are replayed again and again, the accompanying stress hormones engrave those memories ever more deeply in the mind. Ordinary, day-to-day events become less and less compelling. Not being able to deeply take in what is going on around them makes it impossible to feel fully alive. It becomes harder to feel the joys and aggravations of ordinary life, harder to concentrate on the tasks at hand. Not being fully alive in the present keeps them more firmly imprisoned in the past.
Triggered responses manifest in various ways. Veterans may react to the slightest cue—like hitting a bump in the road or a seeing a kid playing in the street—as if they were in a war zone. They startle easily and become enraged or numb. Victims of childhood sexual abuse may anesthetize their sexuality and then feel intensely ashamed if they become excited by sensations or images that recall their molestation, even when those sensations are the natural pleasures associated with particular body parts. If trauma survivors are forced to discuss their experiences, one person’s blood pressure may increase while another responds with the beginnings of a migraine headache. Still others may shut down emotionally and not feel any obvious changes. However, in the lab we have no problem detecting their racing hearts and the stress hormones churning through their bodies.
These reactions are irrational and largely outside people’s control. Intense
and barely controllable urges and emotions make people feel crazy—and makes 

them feel they don’t belong to the human race. Feeling numb during birthday parties for your kids or in response to the death of loved ones makes people feel like monsters. As a result, shame becomes the dominant emotion and hiding the truth the central preoccupation.
They are rarely in touch with the origins of their alienation. That is where therapy comes in—is the beginning of bringing the emotions that were generated by trauma being able to feel, the capacity to observe oneself online. However, the bottom line is that the threat-perception system of the brain has changed, and people’s physical reactions are dictated by the imprint of the past.
The trauma that started “out there” is now played out on the battlefield of their own bodies, usually without a conscious connection between what happened back then and what is going on right now inside. The challenge is not so much learning to accept the terrible things that have happened but learning how to gain mastery over one’s internal sensations and emotions. Sensing, naming, and identifying what is going on inside is the first step to recovery. […]

LEARNING TO LIVE IN THE PRESENT
The challenge of trauma treatment is not only dealing with the past but, even more, enhancing the quality of day-to-day experience. One reason that traumatic memories become dominant in PTSD is that it’s so difficult to feel truly alive right now. When you can’t be fully here, you go to the places where you did feel alive—even if those places are filled with horror and misery.
Many treatment approaches for traumatic stress focus on desensitizing patients to their past, with the expectation that reexposure to their traumas will reduce emotional outbursts and flashbacks. I believe that this is based on a misunderstanding of what happens in traumatic stress. We must most of all help our patients to live fully and securely in the present. In order to do that, we need to help bring those brain structures that deserted them when they were overwhelmed by trauma back. Desensitization may make you less reactive, but if you cannot feel satisfaction in ordinary everyday things like taking a walk, cooking a meal, or playing with your kids, life will pass you by.”

(Bessel Van Der Kalk, The Body Keeps the Score, 2014)

“HEALING FROM TRAUMA: OWNING YOUR SELF […]
Trauma robs you of the feeling that you are in charge of yourself, of what I will call self-leadership in the chapters to come.1 The challenge of recovery is to reestablish ownership of your body and your mind—of your self. This means feeling free to know what you know and to feel what you feel without becoming overwhelmed, enraged, ashamed, or collapsed. For most people this involves (1) finding a way to become calm and focused, (2) learning to maintain that calm in response to images, thoughts, sounds, or physical sensations that remind you of the past, (3) finding a way to be fully alive in the present and engaged with the people around you, (4) not having to keep secrets from yourself, including secrets about the ways that you have managed to survive.
These goals are not steps to be achieved, one by one, in some fixed sequence. They overlap, and some may be more difficult than others, depending on individual circumstances. In each of the chapters that follow, I’ll talk about specific methods or approaches to accomplish them. I have tried to make these chapters useful both to trauma survivors and to the therapists who are treating them. People under temporary stress may also find them useful. I’ve used every one of these methods extensively to treat my patients, and I have also experienced them myself. Some people get better using just one of these methods, but most are helped by different approaches at different stages of their recovery.”
(Bessel Van Der Kalk, The Body Keeps the Score, 2014)

 E2.1.D.1.2.b. BESSEL VAN DER KALK RECOUNTS HIS INSIGHT, DERIVED FROM ANIMAL EXPERIMENTS ON **"LEARNED HELPLESSNESS,"** THAT SINCE TRAUMA PHYSIOLOGICALLY TRAPS VICTIMS IN A STATE WHERE THEY DON'T EVEN TRY TO ESCAPE, HEALING REQUIRES ACTIVE, PHYSICAL EXPERIENCES TO RESTORE A VISCERAL SENSE OF AGENCY.
“INESCAPABLE SHOCK

Preoccupied with so many lingering questions about traumatic stress, I became intrigued with the idea that the nascent field of neuroscience could provide some answers and started to attend the meetings of the American College of Neuropsychopharmacology (ACNP). In 1984 the ACNP offered many fascinating lectures about drug development, but it was not until a few hours before my scheduled flight back to Boston that I heard a presentation by Steven Maier of the University of Colorado, who had collaborated with Martin Seligman of the University of Pennsylvania. His topic was learned helplessness in animals. Maier and Seligman had repeatedly administered painful electric shocks to dogs who were trapped in locked cages. They called this condition “inescapable shock.” Being a dog lover, I realized that I could never have done such research myself, but I was curious about how this cruelty would affect the animals.

After administering several courses of electric shock, the researchers opened the doors of the cages and then shocked the dogs again. A group of control dogs who had never been shocked before immediately ran away, but the dogs who had earlier been subjected to inescapable shock made no attempt to flee, even when the door was wide open—they just lay there, whimpering and defecating. The mere opportunity to escape does not necessarily make traumatized animals, or people, take the road to freedom. Like Maier and Seligman’s dogs, many traumatized people simply give up. Rather than risk experimenting with new options they stay stuck in the fear they know.

I was riveted by Maier’s account. What they had done to these poor dogs was exactly what had happened to my traumatized human patients. They, too, had been exposed to somebody (or something) who had inflicted terrible harm on them—harm they had no way of escaping. I made a rapid mental review of the patients I had treated. Almost all had in some way been trapped or immobilized, unable to take action to stave off the inevitable. Their fight/flight response had been thwarted, and the result was either extreme agitation or collapse.

Maier and Seligman also found that traumatized dogs secreted much larger amounts of stress hormones than was normal. This supported what we were beginning to learn about the biological underpinnings of traumatic stress. A group of young researchers, among them Steve Southwick and John Krystal at Yale, Arieh Shalev at Hadassah Medical School in Jerusalem, Frank Putnam at the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), and Roger Pitman, later at Harvard, were all finding that traumatized people keep secreting large amounts of stress hormones long after the actual danger has passed, and Rachel Yehuda at Mount Sinai in New York confronted us with her seemingly paradoxical findings that the levels of the stress hormone cortisol are low in PTSD. Her discoveries only started to make sense when her research clarified that cortisol puts an end to the stress response by sending an all-safe signal, and that, in PTSD, the body’s stress hormones do, in fact, not return to baseline after the threat has passed.

Ideally our stress hormone system should provide a lightning-fast response to threat, but then quickly return us to equilibrium. In PTSD patients, however, the stress hormone system fails at this balancing act. Fight/flight/freeze signals continue after the danger is over, and, as in the case of the dogs, do not return to normal. Instead, the continued secretion of stress hormones is expressed as agitation and panic and, in the long term, wreaks havoc with their health.

I missed my plane that day because I had to talk with Steve Maier. His workshop offered clues not only about the underlying problems of my patients but also potential keys to their resolution. For example, he and Seligman had found that the only way to teach the traumatized dogs to get off the electric grids when the doors were open was to repeatedly drag them out of their cages so they could physically experience how they could get away. I wondered if we also could help my patients with their fundamental orientation that there was nothing they could do to defend themselves? Did my patients also need to have physical experiences to restore a visceral sense of control? What if they could be taught to physically move to escape a potentially threatening situation that was similar to the trauma in which they had been trapped and immobilized? As I will discuss in the treatment part 5 of this book, that was one of the conclusions I eventually reached.

Further animal studies involving mice, rats, cats, monkeys, and elephants brought more intriguing data. For example, when researchers played a loud, intrusive sound, mice that had been raised in a warm nest with plenty of food scurried home immediately. But another group, raised in a noisy nest with scarce food supplies, also ran for home, even after spending time in more pleasant surroundings.

Scared animals return home, regardless of whether home is safe or frightening. I thought about my patients with abusive families who kept going back to be hurt again. Are traumatized people condemned to seek refuge in what is familiar? If so, why, and is it possible to help them become attached to places and activities that are safe and pleasurable?”
(Bessel Van Der Kalk, The Body Keeps the Score, 2014)

 E2.1.D.1.2.c. “ADDICTED TO TRAUMA: THE PAIN OF PLEASURE AND THE PLEASURE OF PAIN
One of the things that struck my colleague Mark Greenberg and me when we ran therapy groups for Vietnam combat veterans was how, despite their feelings of horror and grief, many of them seemed to come to life when they talked about their helicopter crashes and their dying comrades. (Former New York Times correspondent Chris Hedges, who covered a number of brutal conflicts, entitled 

his book War Is a Force That Gives Us Meaning.) Many traumatized people seem to seek out experiences that would repel most of us, and patients often complain about a vague sense of emptiness and boredom when they are not angry, under duress, or involved in some dangerous activity.
My patient Julia was brutally raped at gunpoint in a hotel room at age sixteen. Shortly thereafter she got involved with a violent pimp who prostituted her. He regularly beat her up. She was repeatedly jailed for prostitution, but she always went back to her pimp. Finally her grandparents intervened and paid for an intense rehab program. After she successfully completed inpatient treatment, she started working as a receptionist and taking courses at a local college. In her sociology class she wrote a term paper about the liberating possibilities of prostitution, for which she read the memoirs of several famous prostitutes. She gradually dropped all her other courses. A brief relationship with a classmate quickly went sour—he bored her to tears, she said, and she was repelled by his boxer shorts. She then picked up an addict on the subway who first beat her up and then started to stalk her. She finally became motivated to return to treatment when she was once again severely beaten.
Freud had a term for such traumatic reenactments: “the compulsion to repeat.” He and many of his followers believed that reenactments were an unconscious attempt to get control over a painful situation and that they eventually could lead to mastery and resolution. There is no evidence for that theory—repetition leads only to further pain and self-hatred. In fact, even reliving the trauma repeatedly in therapy may reinforce preoccupation and fixation.
Mark Greenberg and I decided to learn more about attractors—the things that draw us, motivate us, and make us feel alive. Normally attractors are meant to make us feel better. So, why are so many people attracted to dangerous or painful situations? We eventually found a study that explained how activities that cause fear or pain can later become thrilling experiences. In the 1970s Richard Solomon of the University of Pennsylvania had shown that the body learns to adjust to all sorts of stimuli. We may get hooked on recreational drugs because they right away make us feel so good, but activities like sauna bathing, marathon running, or parachute jumping, which initially cause discomfort and even terror, can ultimately become very enjoyable. This gradual adjustment signals that a new chemical balance has been established within the body, so that marathon runners, say, get a sense of well-being and exhilaration from pushing their bodies to the limit.

At this point, just as with drug addiction, we start to crave the activity and experience withdrawal when it’s not available. In the long run people become more preoccupied with the pain of withdrawal than the activity itself. This theory could explain why some people hire someone to beat them, or burn themselves with cigarettes. or why they are only attracted to people who hurt them. Fear and aversion, in some perverse way, can be transformed into pleasure.
Solomon hypothesized that endorphins—the morphinelike chemicals that the brain secretes in response to stress—play a role in the paradoxical addictions he described. I thought of his theory again when my library habit led me to a paper titled “Pain in Men Wounded in Battle,” published in 1946. Having observed that 75 percent of severely wounded soldiers on the Italian front did not request morphine, a surgeon by the name of Henry K. Beecher speculated that “strong emotions can block pain.”
Were Beecher’s observations relevant to people with PTSD? Mark Greenberg, Roger Pitman, Scott Orr, and I decided to ask eight Vietnam combat veterans if they would be willing to take a standard pain test while they watched scenes from a number of movies. The first clip we showed was from Oliver Stone’s graphically violent Platoon (1986), and while it ran we measured how long the veterans could keep their right hands in a bucket of ice water. We then repeated this process with a peaceful (and long-forgotten) movie clip. Seven of the eight veterans kept their hands in the painfully cold water 30 percent longer during Platoon. We then calculated that the amount of analgesia produced by watching fifteen minutes of a combat movie was equivalent to that produced by being injected with eight milligrams of morphine, about the same dose a person would receive in an emergency room for crushing chest pain.
We concluded that Beecher’s speculation that “strong emotions can block pain” was the result of the release of morphinelike substances manufactured in the brain. This suggested that for many traumatized people, reexposure to stress might provide a similar relief from anxiety. It was an interesting experiment, but it did not fully explain why Julia kept going back to her violent pimp.”
(Bessel Van Der Kalk, The Body Keeps the Score, 2014)

 E2.1.D.1.2.d. TEREZA'S INABILITY TO SIMPLY SAY "NO" AND WALK AWAY FROM HER OWN EXECUTION, DESPITE BEING GIVEN THE OPPORTUNITY, IS A POWERFUL LITERARY ILLUSTRATION OF A STATE AKIN TO LEARNED HELPLESSNESS. HER PSYCHOLOGICAL CONDITIONING HAS RENDERED HER UNABLE TO ACT IN HER OWN SELF-PRESERVATION; SHE IS TRAPPED BY HER COMMITMENT TO ANOTHER PERSON. 
“Coming out at the foot of Petrin Hill, that great green mound rising up in the middle of Prague, she was surprised to find it devoid of people. This was strange, because at other times half of Prague seemed to be milling about. It made her anxious. But the hill was so quiet and the quiet so comforting that she yielded fully to its embrace. On her way up, she paused several times to look back: below her she saw the towers and bridges; the saints were shaking their fists and lifting their stone eyes to the clouds. It was the most beautiful city in the world.
At last she reached the top. Beyond the ice-cream and souvenir stands (none of which happened to be open) stretched a broad lawn spotted here and there with trees. She noticed several men on the lawn. The closer she came to them, the slower she walked. There were six in all. They were standing or strolling along at a leisurely pace like golfers looking over the course and weighing various clubs in their hands, trying to get into the proper frame of mind for a match.
She finally came near them. Of the six men, three were there to play the same role as she: they were unsettled; they seemed eager to ask all sorts of questions, but feared making nuisances of themselves and so held their tongues and merely looked about inquisitively.
The other three radiated condescending benevolence. One of them had a rifle in his hand. Spotting Tereza, he waved at her and said with a smile, "Yes, this is the place."
She gave a nod in reply, but still felt extremely anxious.
The man added: "To avoid an error, this was your choice, wasn t it?
It would have been easy to say, "No, no! It wasn't my choice at all!" but she could not imagine disappointing Tomas. What excuse, what apology could she find for going back home? And so she said, "Yes, of course. It was my choice."
The man with the rifle continued: "Let me explain why I wish to know. The only time we do this is
when we are certain that the people who come to us have chosen to die of their own accord. We consider it a service."
He gave her so quizzical a glance that she had to assure him once more: "No, no, don't worry. It was my choice." 
“Would you like to go first?" he asked.
Because she wanted to put off the execution as long as she could, she said, "No, please, no. If it's at all possible, I'd like to be last."
"As you please," he said, and went off to the others. Neither of his assistants was armed; their sole function was to attend to the people who were to die. They took them by the arms and walked them across the lawn. The grassy surface proved quite an expanse; it ran as far as the eye could see. The people to be executed were allowed to choose their own trees. They paused at each one and looked it over carefully, unable to make up their minds. Two of them eventually chose plane trees, but the third wandered on and on, no tree apparently striking him as worthy of his death. The assistant who held him by the arm guided him along gently and patiently until at last the man lost the courage to go on and stopped at a luxuriant maple. 
Then the assistants blindfolded all three men. 
And so three men, their eyes blindfolded, their heads turned to the sky, stood with their backs against three trees on the endless lawn. 
The man with the rifle took aim and fired. There was nothing to be heard but the singing of birds: the rifle was equipped with a silencing device. There was nothing to be seen but the collapse of the man who had been leaning against the maple.
Without taking a step, the man with the rifle turned in a different direction, and one of the other men silently crumpled. And seconds later (again the man with the rifle merely turned in place), the third man sank to the lawn.”
 (Milan Kundera, The Unbearable Lightness of Being, 1984)

 E2.1.D.1.2.e. AFTER YEARS OF IMPRISONMENT, DR. MANETTE HAS LOST THE CAPACITY FOR INDEPENDENT ACTION. He acts "in the submissive way of one long accustomed to obey under coercion," and his body "instinctively" expects the architecture of the prison.
“Mr. Lorry and Monsieur Defarge had made all ready for the journey, and
had brought with them, besides travelling cloaks and wrappers, bread and
meat, wine, and hot coffee. Monsieur Defarge put this provender, and the
lamp he carried, on the shoemaker’s bench (there was nothing else in the
garret but a pallet bed), and he and Mr. Lorry roused the captive, and
assisted him to his feet.

No human intelligence could have read the mysteries of his mind, in
the scared blank wonder of his face. Whether he knew what had happened,
whether he recollected what they had said to him, whether he knew that
he was free, were questions which no sagacity could have solved. They
tried speaking to him; but, he was so confused, and so very slow to
answer, that they took fright at his bewilderment, and agreed for
the time to tamper with him no more. He had a wild, lost manner of
occasionally clasping his head in his hands, that had not been seen
in him before; yet, he had some pleasure in the mere sound of his
daughter’s voice, and invariably turned to it when she spoke.

In the submissive way of one long accustomed to obey under coercion, he
ate and drank what they gave him to eat and drink, and put on the cloak
and other wrappings, that they gave him to wear. He readily responded to
his daughter’s drawing her arm through his, and took--and kept--her hand
in both his own.

They began to descend; Monsieur Defarge going first with the lamp, Mr.
Lorry closing the little procession. They had not traversed many steps
of the long main staircase when he stopped, and stared at the roof and
round at the walls.

“You remember the place, my father? You remember coming up here?”

“What did you say?”

But, before she could repeat the question, he murmured an answer as if
she had repeated it.

“Remember? No, I don’t remember. It was so very long ago.”

That he had no recollection whatever of his having been brought from his
prison to that house, was apparent to them. They heard him mutter,
“One Hundred and Five, North Tower;” and when he looked about him, it
evidently was for the strong fortress-walls which had long encompassed
him. On their reaching the courtyard he instinctively altered his
tread, as being in expectation of a drawbridge; and when there was
no drawbridge, and he saw the carriage waiting in the open street, he
dropped his daughter’s hand and clasped his head again.

No crowd was about the door; no people were discernible at any of the
many windows; not even a chance passerby was in the street. An unnatural
silence and desertion reigned there. Only one soul was to be seen, and
that was Madame Defarge--who leaned against the door-post, knitting, and
saw nothing.

The prisoner had got into a coach, and his daughter had followed
him, when Mr. Lorry’s feet were arrested on the step by his asking,
miserably, for his shoemaking tools and the unfinished shoes. Madame
Defarge immediately called to her husband that she would get them, and
went, knitting, out of the lamplight, through the courtyard. She quickly
brought them down and handed them in;--and immediately afterwards leaned
against the door-post, knitting, and saw nothing. […]
All through the cold and restless interval, until dawn, they once more
whispered in the ears of Mr. Jarvis Lorry--sitting opposite the buried
man who had been dug out, and wondering what subtle powers were for ever
lost to him, and what were capable of restoration--the old inquiry:
“I hope you care to be recalled to life?”
And the old answer:
“I can’t say.”
(Charles Dickens, A Tale of Two Cities, 1859)

 E2.1.D.1.3. The Social Cultivation of Helplessness: learned helplessness is not just the result of overt trauma (like war or prison) but can be taught and encouraged by social and cultural forces, leading to a state of "moral dependence."

 E2.1.D.1.3.a. “SOOTHING THE BRAIN […]

Prozac worked significantly better than the placebo for the patients from the Trauma Clinic. They slept more soundly; they had more control over their emotions and were less preoccupied with the past than those who received a sugar pill. Surprisingly, however, the Prozac had no effect at all on the combat veterans at the VA—their PTSD symptoms were unchanged. These results have held true for most subsequent pharmacological studies on veterans: While a few have shown modest improvements, most have not benefited at all. I have never been able to explain this, and I cannot accept the most common explanation: that 

receiving a pension or disability benefits prevents people from getting better. After all, the amygdala knows nothing of pensions—it just detects threats.
Nonetheless, medications such as Prozac and related drugs like Zoloft, Celexa, Cymbalta, and Paxil, have made a substantial contribution to the treatment of trauma-related disorders. In our Prozac study we used the Rorschach test to measure how traumatized people perceive their surroundings. These data gave us an important clue to how this class of drugs (formally known as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, or SSRIs) might work. Before taking Prozac these patients’ emotions controlled their reactions. I think of a Dutch patient, for example (not in the Prozac study) who came to see me for treatment for a childhood rape and who was convinced that I would rape her as soon as she heard my Dutch accent. Prozac made a radical difference: It gave PTSD patients a sense of perspective and helped them to gain considerable control over their impulses. Jeffrey Gray must have been right: When their serotonin levels rose, many of my patients became less reactive.

THE TRIUMPH OF PHARMACOLOGY
It did not take long for pharmacology to revolutionize psychiatry. Drugs gave doctors a greater sense of efficacy and provided a tool beyond talk therapy. Drugs also produced income and profits. Grants from the pharmaceutical industry provided us with laboratories filled with energetic graduate students and sophisticated instruments. Psychiatry departments, which had always been located in the basements of hospitals, started to move up, both in terms of location and prestige.
One symbol of this change occurred at MMHC, where in the early 1990s the hospital’s swimming pool was paved over to make space for a laboratory, and the indoor basketball court was carved up into cubicles for the new medication clinic. For decades doctors and patients had democratically shared the pleasures of splashing in the pool and passing balls down the court. I’d spent hours in the gym with patients back when I was a ward attendant. It was the one place where we all could restore a sense of physical well-being, an island in the midst of the misery we faced every day. Now it had become a place for patients to “get fixed.”
The drug revolution that started out with so much promise may in the end have done as much harm as good. The theory that mental illness is caused 

primarily by chemical imbalances in the brain that can be corrected by specific drugs has become broadly accepted, by the media and the public as well as by the medical profession. In many places drugs have displaced therapy and enabled patients to suppress their problems without addressing the underlying issues. Antidepressants can make all the difference in the world in helping with day-to-day functioning, and if it comes to a choice between taking a sleeping pill and drinking yourself into a stupor every night to get a few hours of sleep, there is no question which is preferable. For people who are exhausted from trying to make it on their own through yoga classes, workout routines, or simply toughing it out, medications often can bring life-saving relief. The SSRIs can be very helpful in making traumatized people less enslaved by their emotions, but they should only be considered adjuncts in their overall treatment.
After conducting numerous studies of medications for PTSD, I have come to realize that psychiatric medications have a serious downside, as they may deflect attention from dealing with the underlying issues. The brain-disease model takes control over people’s fate out of their own hands and puts doctors and insurance companies in charge of fixing their problems.
Over the past three decades psychiatric medications have become a mainstay in our culture, with dubious consequences. Consider the case of antidepressants. If they were indeed as effective as we have been led to believe, depression should by now have become a minor issue in our society. Instead, even as antidepressant use continues to increase, it has not made a dent in hospital admissions for depression. The number of people treated for depression has tripled over the past two decades, and one in ten Americans now take antidepressants. […]

ADAPTATION OR DISEASE?
The brain-disease model overlooks four fundamental truths: (1) our capacity to destroy one another is matched by our capacity to heal one another. Restoring relationships and community is central to restoring well-being; (2) language gives us the power to change ourselves and others by communicating our experiences, helping us to define what we know, and finding a common sense of meaning; (3) we have the ability to regulate our own physiology, including some of the so-called involuntary functions of the body and brain, through such basic 

activities as breathing, moving, and touching; and (4) we can change social conditions to create environments in which children and adults can feel safe and where they can thrive.
When we ignore these quintessential dimensions of humanity, we deprive people of ways to heal from trauma and restore their autonomy. Being a patient, rather than a participant in one’s healing process, separates suffering people from their community and alienates them from an inner sense of self. Given the limitations of drugs, I started to wonder if we could find more natural ways to help people deal with their post-traumatic responses.”
(Bessel Van Der Kalk, The Body Keeps the Score, 2014)

 E2.1.D.1.3.b. GREG LUKIANOFF ARGUES THAT TEACHING STUDENTS TO DISREGARD INTENTION WHILE EXPANDING WHAT IS CONSIDERED OFFENSIVE IS A COUNTERPRODUCTIVE PRACTICE THAT FOSTERS FEELINGS OF VICTIMIZATION, PERPETUAL ANGER, AND A HARMFUL EXTERNAL LOCUS OF CONTROL.
“It is crucial to teach incoming students to be thoughtful in their interactions with one another. A portion of what is derided as “political correctness” is just an effort to promote polite and respectful interactions by discouraging the use of terms that are reasonably taken to be demeaning. But if you teach students that intention doesn’t matter, and you also encourage students to find more things offensive (leading them to experience more negative impacts), and you also tell them that whoever says or does the things they find offensive are “aggressors” who have committed acts of bigotry against them, then you are probably fostering feelings of victimization, anger, and hopelessness in your students. They will come to see the world—and even their university—as a hostile place where things never seem to get better.
If someone wanted to create an environment of perpetual anger and intergroup conflict, this would be an effective way to do it. Teaching students to use the least generous interpretations possible is likely to engender precisely the feelings of marginalization and oppression that almost everyone wants to eliminate. And, to add injury to insult, this sort of environment is likely to foster an external locus of control. The concept of “locus of control” goes back to behaviorist days, when psychologists noted that animals (including people) could be trained to expect that they could get what they wanted through their own behavior (that is, some control over outcomes was “internal” to themselves). Conversely, animals could be trained to expect that nothing they did mattered (that is, all control of outcomes was “external” to themselves). A great deal of research shows that having an internal locus of control leads to greater health, happiness, effort expended, success in school, and success at work. An internal locus of control has even been found to make many kinds of adversity less painful.”
(Greg Lukianoff, The Coddling of the American Mind, 2018)

 E2.1.D.1.3.c. GREG LUKIANOFF ARGUES THAT THE RISE OF A "VICTIMHOOD CULTURE"—CHARACTERIZED BY A HIGH SENSITIVITY TO SLIGHTS AND A TENDENCY TO APPEAL TO THIRD PARTIES—IS REPLACING THE TRADITIONAL, SELF-RELIANT "DIGNITY CULTURE" AND FOSTERING A STATE OF "MORAL DEPENDENCE" WHERE INDIVIDUALS LOSE THE ABILITY TO RESOLVE THEIR OWN CONFLICTS.
“How to Foster Moral Dependency
In a prescient essay in 2014, two sociologists—Bradley Campbell and Jason Manning—explained where this new culture of vulnerability came from and how administrative actions helped it to grow.64 They called it “victimhood culture,” and they interpreted it as a new moral order that was in conflict with the older “dignity culture,” which is still dominant in most parts of the United States and other Western democracies.
In an optimally functioning dignity culture, people are assumed to have dignity and worth regardless of what others think of them, so they are not expected to react too strongly to minor slights. Of course, full dignity was at one time accorded only to adult, white men; the rights revolutions of the twentieth and twenty-first centuries did essential work to expand dignity to all. This is in contrast to the older “honor cultures,” in which men were so obsessed with guarding their reputations that they were expected to react violently to minor insults made against them or those close to them—perhaps with a challenge to a duel. In a dignity culture, however, dueling seems ridiculous. People are expected to have enough self-control to shrug off irritations, slights, and minor conflicts as they pursue their own projects. For larger conflicts or violations of one’s rights, there are reliable legal or administrative remedies, but it would be undignified to call for such help for small matters, which one should be able to resolve on one’s own. Perspective is a key element of a dignity culture; people don’t view disagreements, unintentional slights, or even direct insults as threats to their dignity that must always be met with a response.
For example, one clear sign of a dignity culture is that children learn some version of “Sticks and stones will break my bones, but words will never harm me.” That childhood saying is of course not literally true—people feel real pain as a result of words. (If no one felt hurt by words, the saying would never be needed.) But “sticks and stones” is a shield that children in a dignity culture use to dismiss an insult with contemptuous indifference, as if to say, “Go ahead and insult me. You cannot upset me. I really don’t care what you think.”
In 2013, Campbell and Manning began noticing the same changes on campus that Greg had been noticing—the interlocking set of new ideas about microaggressions, trigger warnings, and safe spaces. They noted that the emerging morality of victimhood culture was radically different from dignity culture. They defined a victimhood culture as having three distinct attributes: First, “individuals and groups display high sensitivity to slight”; second, they “have a tendency to handle conflicts through complaints to third parties”; and third, they “seek to cultivate an image of being victims who deserve assistance.”
Of special relevance to our concerns in this chapter is the second attribute. Campbell and Manning pointed out that the presence of administrators or legal authorities who can be persuaded to take one’s side and intervene is a prerequisite for the emergence of victimhood culture. They noted that when administrative remedies are easily available and there is no shame in calling on them, it can lead to a condition known as “moral dependence.” People come to rely on external authorities to resolve their problems, and, over time, “their willingness or ability to use other forms of conflict management may atrophy.”
This is the concern that Kipnis voiced when she said that overprotective policies make students more vulnerable instead of less, and that schools are creating a culture of vulnerability. This is the concern that Erika Christakis expressed when she wrote that “the growing tendency to cultivate vulnerability in students carries unacknowledged costs,” and asked students to talk to each other rather than relying on administrative interventions. And it’s the same concern about overprotection that prompted Lenore Skenazy to start the Free-Range Kids movement.
It is also the concern that Steven Horwitz raised (and we discussed at the end of chapter 9) about oversupervision impeding the development of the art of association. A university that encourages moral dependence is a university that is likely to experience chronic conflict, which may then lead to more demands for administrative remedies and protections, which may then lead to more moral dependence.”
(Greg Lukianoff, The Coddling of the American Mind, 2018)

 E2.1.D.2. Social Stagnation and Oppression: Discuss how the suppression of freedoms can stifle creativity, dissent, and social progress, leading to stagnant or oppressive societies.

 E2.1.D.2.1. The Mechanisms of Suppression: how a society's systems—whether political, social, or intellectual—can "stifle" the individual, either through overt control or through subtle, fragmenting "wounds."

 E2.1.D.2.1.a. TA NEHISI COATES DESCRIBES A "DOUBLE BIND" WHERE TWO DIFFERENT ASPECTS OF THE SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT SUPPRESS DIFFERENT KINDS OF FREEDOM:
•	The Streets: A world of violence that suppresses the freedom of physical safety and security of the body.
•	The Schools: A world of "rote discipline" that suppresses the freedom of intellectual curiosity and creativity.
“Before I could discover, before I could escape, I had to survive, and this could only mean a clash with the streets, by which I mean not just physical blocks, nor simply the people packed into them, but the array of lethal puzzles and strange perils that seem to rise up from the asphalt itself. The streets transform every ordinary day into a series of trick questions, and every incorrect answer risks a beat-down, a shooting, or a pregnancy. No one survives unscathed. And yet the heat that springs from the constant danger, from a lifestyle of near-death experience, is thrilling. This is what the rappers mean when they pronounce themselves addicted to “the streets” or in love with “the game.” I imagine they eel something akin to parachutists, rock climbers, BASE jumpers, and others who choose to live on the edge. Of course we chose nothing. And I have never believed the brothers who claim to “run,” much less “own,” the city. We did not design the streets. We do not fund them. We do not preserve them. But I was there, nevertheless, charged like all the others with the protection of my body.
The crews, the young men who’d transmuted their fear into rage, were the greatest danger. The crews walked the blocks of their neighborhood, loud and rude, because it was only through their loud rudeness that they might feel any sense of security and power. They would break your jaw, stomp your face, and shoot you down to feel that power, to revel in the might of their own bodies. And their wild reveling, their astonishing acts made their names ring out. Reps were made, atrocities recounted. And so in my Baltimore it was known that when Cherry Hill rolled through you rolled the other way, that North and Pulaski was not an intersection but a hurricane, leaving only splinters and shards in its wake. In that fashion, the security of these neighborhoods flowed downward and became the security of the bodies living there. You steered clear of Jo-Jo, for instance, because he was cousin to Keon, the don of Murphy Homes. In other cities, indeed in other Baltimores, the neighborhoods had other handles and the boys went by other names, but their mission did not change: prove the inviolability of their block, of their bodies, through their power to crack knees, ribs, and arms. This practice was so common that today you can approach any black person raised in the cities of that era and they can tell you which crew ran which hood in their city, and they can tell you the names of all the captains and all their cousins and offer an anthology of all their exploits.
To survive the neighborhoods and shield my body, I learned another language consisting of a basic complement of head nods and handshakes. I memorized a list of prohibited blocks. I learned the smell and feel of fighting weather. And I learned that “Shorty, can I see your bike?” was never a sincere question, and “Yo, you was messing with my cousin” was neither an earnest accusation nor a misunderstanding of the facts. These were the summonses that you answered with your left foot forward, your right foot back, your hands guarding your face, one slightly lower than the other, cocked like a hammer. Or they were answered by breaking out, ducking through alleys, cutting through backyards, then bounding through the door past your kid brother into your bedroom, pulling the tool out of your lambskin or from under your mattress or out of your Adidas shoebox, then calling up your own cousins (who really aren’t) and returning to that same block, on that same day, and to that same crew, hollering out, “Yeah, nigger, what’s up now?” I recall learning these laws clearer than I recall learning my colors and shapes, because these laws were essential to the security of my body.
I think of this as a great difference between us. You have some acquaintance with the old rules, but they are not as essential to you as they were to me. I am sure that you have had to deal with the occasional roughneck on the subway or in the park, but when I was about your age, each day, fully one-third of my brain was concerned with who I was walking to school with, our precise number, the manner of our walk, the number of times I smiled, who or what I smiled at, who offered a pound and who did not—all of which is to say that I practiced the culture of the streets, a culture concerned chiefly with securing the body. I do not long for those days. I have no desire to make you “tough” or “street,” perhaps because any “toughness” I garnered came reluctantly. I think I was always, somehow, aware of the price. I think I somehow knew that that third of my brain should have been concerned with more beautiful things. I think I felt that something out there, some force, nameless and vast, had robbed me of…what? Time? Experience? I think you know something of what that third could have done, and I think that is why you may feel the need for escape even more than I did. You have seen all the wonderful life up above the tree-line, yet you understand that there is no real distance between you and Trayvon Martin, and thus Trayvon Martin must terrify you in a way that he could never terrify me. You have seen so much more of all that is lost when they destroy your body.
The streets were not my only problem. If the streets shackled my right leg, the schools shackled my left. Fail to comprehend the streets and you gave up your body now. But fail to comprehend the schools and you gave up your body later. I suffered at the hands of both, but I resent the schools more. There was nothing sanctified about the laws of the streets—the laws were amoral and practical. You rolled with a posse to the party as sure as you wore boots in the snow, or raised an umbrella in the rain. These were rules aimed at something obvious—the great danger that haunted every visit to Shake & Bake, every bus ride downtown. But the laws of the schools were aimed at something distant and vague. What did it mean to, as our elders told us, “grow up and be somebody”? And what precisely did this have to do with an education rendered as rote discipline? To be educated in my Baltimore mostly meant always packing an extra number 2 pencil and working quietly. Educated children walked in single file on the right side of the hallway, raised their hands to use the lavatory, and carried the lavatory pass when en route. Educated children never offered excuses—certainly not childhood itself. The world had no time for the childhoods of black boys and girls. How could the schools? Algebra, Biology, and English were not subjects so much as opportunities to better discipline the body, to practice writing between the lines, copying the directions legibly, memorizing theorems extracted from the world they were created to represent. All of it felt so distant to me. I remember sitting in my seventh-grade French class and not having any idea why I was there. I did not know any French people, and nothing around me suggested I ever would. France was a rock rotating in another galaxy, around another sun, in another sky that I would never cross. Why, precisely, was I sitting in this classroom?”
(Ta Nehisi Coates, Between the World and Me, 2015)

 E2.1.D.2.1.b. SCHILLER ARGUES THAT THE VERY PROCESSES OF MODERN "CULTURE"—THE SPECIALIZATION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE DIVISION OF LABOR IN THE STATE—HAVE GIVEN "WOUNDS TO MODERN HUMANITY." 
“I do not overlook the advantages to which the present race, regarded as a unity and in the balance of the understanding, may lay claim over what is best in the ancient world; but it is obliged to engage in the contest as a compact mass, and measure itself as a whole against a whole. Who among the moderns could step forth, man against man, and strive with an Athenian for the prize of higher humanity.

Whence comes this disadvantageous relation of individuals coupled with great advantages of the race? Why could the individual Greek be qualified as the type of his time; and why can no modern dare to offer himself as such? Because all-uniting nature imparted its forms to the Greek, and an all-dividing understanding gives our forms to us.

It was culture itself that gave these wounds to modern humanity. The inner union of human nature was broken, and a destructive contest divided its harmonious forces directly; on the one hand, an enlarged experience and a more distinct thinking necessitated a sharper separation of the sciences, while, on the other hand, the more complicated machinery of states necessitated a stricter sundering of ranks and occupations. Intuitive and speculative understanding took up a hostile attitude in opposite fields, whose borders were guarded with jealousy and distrust; and by limiting its operation to a narrow sphere, men have made unto themselves a master who is wont not unfrequently to end by subduing and oppressing all the other faculties. Whilst on the one hand a luxuriant imagination creates ravages in the plantations that have cost the intelligence so much labor; on the other hand, a spirit of abstraction suffocates the fire that might have warmed the heart and inflamed the imagination.

This subversion, commenced by art and learning in the inner man, was carried out to fulness and finished by the spirit of innovation in government. It was, no doubt, reasonable to expect that the simple organization of the primitive republics should survive the quaintness of primitive manners and of the relations of antiquity. But, instead of rising to a higher and nobler degree of animal life, this organization degenerated into a common and coarse mechanism. The zoophyte condition of the Grecian states, where each individual enjoyed an independent life, and could, in cases of necessity, become a separate whole and unit in himself, gave way to an ingenious mechanism, when, from the splitting up into numberless parts, there results a mechanical life in the combination. Then there was a rupture between the state and the church, between laws and customs; enjoyment was separated from labor, the means from the end, the effort from the reward. Man himself, eternally chained down to a little fragment of the whole, only forms a kind of fragment; having nothing in his ears but the monotonous sound of the perpetually revolving wheel, he never develops the harmony of his being, and instead of imprinting the seal of humanity on his being, he ends by being nothing more than the living impress of the craft to which he devotes himself, of the science that he cultivates. This very partial and paltry relation, linking the isolated members to the whole, does not depend on forms that are given spontaneously; for how could a complicated machine, which shuns the light, confide itself to the free will of man? This relation is rather dictated, with a rigorous strictness, by a formulary in which the free intelligence of man is chained down. The dead letter takes the place of a living meaning, and a practised memory becomes a safer guide than genius and feeling.

If the community or state measures man by his function, only asking of its citizens memory, or the intelligence of a craftsman, or mechanical skill, we cannot be surprised that the other faculties of the mind are neglected for the exclusive culture of the one that brings in honor and profit. Such is the necessary result of an organization that is indifferent about character, only looking to acquirements, whilst in other cases it tolerates the thickest darkness, to favor a spirit of law and order; it must result if it wishes that individuals in the exercise of special aptitudes should gain in depth what they are permitted to lose in extension. We are aware, no doubt, that a powerful genius does not shut up its activity within the limits of its functions; but mediocre talents consume in the craft fallen to their lot the whole of their feeble energy; and if some of their energy is reserved for matters of preference, without prejudice to its functions, such a state of things at once bespeaks a spirit soaring above the vulgar. Moreover, it is rarely a recommendation in the eye of a state to have a capacity superior to your employment, or one of those noble intellectual cravings of a man of talent which contend in rivalry with the duties of office. The state is so jealous of the exclusive possession of its servants that it would prefer—nor can it be blamed in this—for functionaries to show their powers with the Venus of Cytherea rather than the Uranian Venus.”
(Friedrich Schiller, The Aesthetical Essays, 1875)

 E2.1.D.2.1.c. THE DESTRUCTION OF A FREE PRESS AND ITS CONSEQUENCES IN NAZI GERMANY.
“That the last three newspapers survived was due partly to the influence of the German Foreign Office, which wanted these internationally known journals as a kind of showpiece to impress the outside world. They gave a respectability to Nazi Germany and at the same time peddled its propaganda. With all newspapers in Germany being told what to publish and how to write the news and editorials, it was inevitable that a deadly conformity would come over the nation’s press. Even a people so regimented and so given to accepting authority became bored by the daily newspapers. Circulation declined even for the leading Nazi daily newspapers such as the morning Voelkischer Beobachter and the evening Der Angriff. And the total circulation of all journals fell off steeply as one paper after another went under or was taken over by Nazi publishers. In the first four years of the Third Reich the number of daily newspapers declined from 3,607 to 2,671. But the country’s loss of a free and varied press was the party’s gain—at least financially. Max Amann, Hitler’s top sergeant during the First World War and head of the Eher Verlag, the party’s publishing firm, became the financial dictator of the German press. As Reich Leader for the Press and president of the Press Chamber, he had the legal right to suppress any publication he pleased and the consequent power to buy it up for a song. In a short time the Eher Verlag became a gigantic publishing empire, probably the largest and most lucrative in the world.*Despite the drop in sales of many Nazi publications, the daily newspapers owned or controlled by the party or individual Nazis had two thirds of the total daily circulation of twenty-five million by the time of the outbreak of the second war. In an affidavit made at Nuremberg, Amann described how he operated: After the party came to power in 1933 … many of these concerns, such as the Ullstein House, which were owned or controlled by Jewish interests, or by political or religious interests hostile to the Nazi Party, found it expedient to sell their newspapers or assets to the Eher concern. There was no free market for the sale of such properties and the Eher Verlag was generally the only bidder. In this matter the Eher Verlag, together with publishing concerns owned or controlled by it, expanded into a monopoly of the newspaper publishing business in Germany … The party investment in these publishing enterprises became financially very successful. It is a true statement to say that the basic purpose of the Nazi press program was to eliminate all the press which was in opposition to the party.6 At one period in 1934 both Amann and Goebbels appealed to the obsequious editors to make their papers less monotonous. Amann said he deplored “the present far-reaching uniformity of the press, which is not a product of government measures and does not conform to the will of the government.” 
(William Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, A History of Nazi Germany, 2011)

THE CONSEQUENCES OF SUPPRESSING ACADEMIC AND INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM IN NAZI GERMANY.
“By 1932 the majority of students appeared to be enthusiastic for Hitler. It was surprising to some how many members of the university faculties knuckled under to the Nazification of higher learning after 1933. Though official figures put the number of professors and instructors dismissed during the first five years of the regime at 2,800—about one fourth of the total number—the proportion of those who lost their posts through defying National Socialism was, as Professor Wilhelm Roepke, himself dismissed from the University of Marburg in 1933, said, “exceedingly small.” Though small, there were names famous in the German academic world: Karl Jaspers, E. I. Gumbel, Theodor Litt, Karl Barth, Julius Ebbinghaus and dozens of others. Most of them emigrated, first to Switzerland, Holland and England and eventually to America. One of them, Professor Theodor Lessing, who had fled to Czechoslovakia, was tracked down by Nazi thugs and murdered in Marienbad on August 31, 1933. A large majority of professors, however, remained at their posts, and as early as the autumn of 1933 some 960 of them, led by such luminaries as Professor Sauerbruch, the surgeon, Heidegger, the existentialist philosopher, and Pinder, the art historian, took a public vow to support Hitler and the National Socialist regime. “It was a scene of prostitution,” Professor Roepke later wrote, “that has stained the honorable history of German learning.”8 And as Professor Julius Ebbinghaus, looking back over the shambles in 1945, said, “The German universities failed, while there was still time, to oppose publicly with all their power the destruction of knowledge and of the democratic state. They failed to keep the beacon of freedom and right burning during the night of tyranny.”9 The cost of such failure was great. After six years of Nazification the number of university students dropped by more than one half—from 127,920 to 58,325. The decline in enrollment at the institutes of technology, from which Germany got its scientists and engineers, was even greater— from 20,474 to 9,554. Academic standards fell dizzily. By 1937 there was not only a shortage of young men in the sciences and engineering but a decline in their qualifications. Long before the outbreak of the war the chemical industry, busily helping to further Nazi rearmament, was complaining through its organ, Die Chemische Industrie, that Germany was losing its leadership in chemistry. Not only the national economy but national defense itself was being jeopardized, it complained, and it blamed the shortage of young scientists and their mediocre caliber on the poor quality of the technical colleges.”
(William Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, A History of Nazi Germany, 2011)

THE WORKERS IN NAZI GERMANY WERE AKIN TO "MEDIEVAL SERFS" WHO WERE "BOUND TO THEIR PLACE OF LABOR" WITHIN A MODERN, INDUSTRIAL FORM OF SERFDOM.
“All the propagandists in the Third Reich from Hitler on down were accustomed to rant in their public speeches against the bourgeois and the capitalist and proclaim their solidarity with the worker. But a sober study of the official statistics, which perhaps few Germans bothered to make, revealed that the much maligned capitalists, not the workers, benefited most from Nazi policies. Finally, the take-home pay of the German worker shrank. Besides stiff income taxes, compulsory contributions to sickness, unemployment and disability insurance, and Labor Front dues, the manual worker—like everyone else in Nazi Germany—was constantly pressured to make increasingly large gifts to an assortment of Nazi charities, the chief of which was Winterhilfe (Winter Relief). Many a workman lost his job because he failed to contribute to Winterhilfe or because his contribution was deemed too small. Such failure was termed by one labor court, which upheld the dismissal of an employee without notice, “conduct hostile to the community of the people … to be most strongly condemned.” In the mid-Thirties it was estimated that taxes and contributions took from 15 to 35 per cent of a worker’s gross wage. Such a cut out of $6.95 a week did not leave a great deal for rent and food and clothing and recreation. As with the medieval serfs, the workers in Hitler’s Germany found themselves being more and more bound to their place of labor, though here it was not the employer who bound them but the State. We have seen how the peasant in the Third Reich was bound to his land by the Hereditary Farm Law. Likewise the agricultural laborer, by law, was attached to the land and forbidden to leave it for work in the city. In practice, it must be said, this was one Nazi law which was not obeyed; between 1933 and 1939 more than a million (1,300,000) farm workers migrated to jobs in industry and trade. But for industrial laborers the law was enforced. Various government decrees beginning with the law of May 15, 1934, severely restricted a worker’s freedom of movement from one job to another. After June 1935 the state employment offices were given exclusive control of employment; they determined who could be hired for what and where. The “workbook” was introduced in February 1935, and eventually no worker could be hired unless he possessed one. In it was kept a record of his skills and employment. The workbook not only provided the State and the employer with up-to-date data on every single employee in the nation but was used to tie a worker to his bench. If he desired to leave for other employment his employer could retain his workbook, which meant that he could not legally be employed elsewhere. Finally, on June 22, 1938, a "special decree issued by the Office of the Four-Year Plan instituted labor conscription. It obliged every German to work where the State assigned him. Workers who absented themselves from their jobs without a very good excuse were subject to fine and imprisonment. There was, it is obvious, another side to this coin. A worker thus conscripted could not be fired by his employer without the consent of the government employment office. He had job security, something he had rarely known during the Republic. Tied down by so many controls at wages little above the subsistence level, the German workers, like the Roman proletariat, were provided with circuses by their rulers to divert attention from their miserable state. “We had to divert the attention of the masses from material to moral values,” Dr. Ley once explained. “It is more important to feed the souls of men than their stomachs.” So he came up with an organization called Kraft durch Freude (“Strength through Joy”). This provided what can only be called regimented leisure. In a twentieth-century totalitarian dictatorship, as perhaps with older ones, it is deemed necessary to control not only the working hours but the leisure hours of the individual. This was what “Strength through Joy” did. In pre- Nazi days Germany had tens of thousands of clubs devoted to everything from chess and soccer to bird watching. Under the Nazis no organized social, sport or recreational group was allowed to function except under the control and direction of Kraft durch Freude. To the ordinary German in the Third Reich this official all-embracing recreational organization no doubt was better than nothing at all, if one could not be trusted to be left to one’s own devices. It provided members of the Labor Front, for instance, with dirt-cheap vacation trips on land and sea. Dr. Ley built two 25,000-ton ships, one of which he named after himself, and chartered ten others to handle ocean cruises for Kraft durch Freude. This writer once participated in such a cruise; though life aboard was organized by Nazi leaders to a point of excruciation (for him), the German workers seemed to have a good time. And at bargain rates! A cruise to Madeira, for instance, cost only $25, including rail fare to and from the German port, and other jaunts were equally inexpensive. Beaches on the sea and on lakes were taken over for thousands of summer vacationers—one at Ruegen on the Baltic, which was not completed by the time the war came, called for hotel accommodations for twenty thousand persons—and in winter special skiing excursions to the Bavarian Alps were organized at a cost of $11 a week, including carfare, room and board, rental of skis and lessons from a ski instructor.”
(William Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, A History of Nazi Germany, 2011)

THE WORKERS IN NAZI GERMANY WERE AKIN TO "MEDIEVAL SERFS" WHO WERE "BOUND TO THEIR PLACE OF LABOR" WITHIN A MODERN, INDUSTRIAL FORM OF SERFDOM (Continued).
“Swindled though he was in this instance and in many others, reduced, as we have seen, to a sort of industrial serfdom on subsistence wages, and less prone than any other segment of German society to subscribe to Nazism or to be taken in by its ceaseless propaganda, the German worker, it is only fair to say, did not appear to resent very bitterly his inferior status in the Third Reich. The great German war machine that hurtled over the Polish border at dawn on September 1, 1939, could never have been fashioned without the very considerable contribution that the German workman made to it. Regimented he was and sometimes terrorized, but so was everyone else— and centuries of regimentation had accustomed him, as it had all other Germans, to being told what to do. Though it is perhaps unwise to attempt to generalize about such things, this writer’s own impression of the workingman in Berlin and in the Ruhr was that while he was somewhat cynical about the promises of the regime he had no more hankering for revolt than anyone else in the Third Reich. Unorganized as he was and lacking leadership, what could he do? A workman often put that question to you. But the greatest cause of his acceptance of his role in Nazi Germany was, without any doubt at all, that he had a job again and the assurance that he would keep it. An observer who had known something about his precarious predicament during the Republic could understand why he did not seem to be desperately concerned with the loss of political freedom and even of his trade unions as long as he was employed full-time. In the past, for so many, for as many as six million men and their families, such rights of free men in Germany had been overshadowed, as he said, by the freedom to starve. In taking away that last freedom, Hitler assured himself of the support of the working class, probably the most skillful and industrious and disciplined in the Western world. It was a backing given not to his half-baked ideology or to his evil intentions, as such, but to what counted most: the production of goods for war.”
(William Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, A History of Nazi Germany, 2011)

 E2.1.D.2.2. The psychological, creative, and physical consequences of a world without meaningful freedom - Stagnation, Collapse, and the Loss of Purpose

 E2.1.D.2.2.a. THE FIGHT "AGAINST" VS. THE STRUGGLE "IN FAVOR":
The struggle to maintain one's individuality in the face of societal expectations can be energy-consuming. Fighting "against" only liberates us from something. However, enduring joy doesn't come from resistance alone, but from construction. We need to fight "in favor" of our essence - to strive to be "what we want to be" rather than just aiming "not to be what we don't want to be".

 E2.1.D.2.2.b. THE STORY OF THE ANASAZI SERVES AS A POWERFUL CASE STUDY TO SHOWS HOW INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL PRESSURES, WHEN NOT MANAGED SUCCESSFULLY, CAN LEAD TO A COMPLETE SOCIETAL BREAKDOWN.
“The last identified construction at Pueblo Bonito, dating from the decade after 1110, was from a wall of rooms enclosing the south side of the plaza, which had formerly been open to the outside. That suggests strife: people were evidently now visiting Pueblo Bonito not just to participate in its reli¬gious ceremonies and to receive orders, but also to make trouble. The last tree-ring-dated roof beam at Pueblo Bonito and at the nearby Great House of Chetro Ketl was cut in a.d. 1117, and the last beam anywhere in Chaco Canyon in a.d. 1170. Other Anasazi sites show more abundant evidence of strife, including signs of cannibalism, plus Kayenta Anasazi settlements at the tops of steep cliffs far from fields and water and understandable only as easily defended locations. At those southwestern sites that outlasted Chaco and survived until after a.d. 1250, warfare evidently became intense, as re¬flected in a proliferation of defensive walls and moats and towers, clustering of scattered small hamlets into larger hilltop fortresses, apparently deliber¬ately burned villages containing unburied bodies, skulls with cut marks caused by scalping, and skeletons with arrowheads inside the body cavity. That explosion of environmental and population problems in the form of civil unrest and warfare is a frequent theme in this book, both for past so¬cieties (the Easter Islanders, Mangarevans, Maya, and Tikopians) and for modern societies (Rwanda, Haiti, and others). 
The signs of warfare-related cannibalism among the Anasazi are an interesting story in themselves. While everyone acknowledges that canni¬balism may be practiced in emergencies by desperate people, such as the Donner Party trapped by snow at Donner Pass en route to California in the winter of 1846–47, or by starving Russians during the siege of Leningrad during World War II, the existence of non-emergency cannibalism is con¬troversial. In fact, it was reported in hundreds of non-European societies at the times when they were first contacted by Europeans within recent cen¬turies. The practice took two forms: eating either the bodies of enemies killed in war, or else eating one’s own relatives who had died of natural causes. New Guineans with whom I have worked over the past 40 years have matter-of-factly described their cannibalistic practices, have expressed dis¬gust at our own Western burial customs of burying relatives without doing them the honor of eating them, and one of my best New Guinean workers quit his job with me in 1965 in order to partake in the consumption of his recently deceased prospective son-in-law. There have also been many archaeological finds of ancient human bones in contexts suggestive of cannibalism.”
(Jared Diamond, Collapse, How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed, 2004)


 E2.1.D.2.2.c. VOLTAIRE BRILLIANTLY SATIRIZES A SOCIETY SO INTELLECTUALLY STAGNANT THAT ITS "SAGES" BELIEVE THE MOST EFFECTIVE RESPONSE TO A NATURAL DISASTER (AN EARTHQUAKE) IS A SUPERSTITIOUS, MURDEROUS RITUAL. 
“HOW THE PORTUGUESE MADE A BEAUTIFUL AUTO-DA-FÉ, TO PREVENT ANY FURTHER EARTHQUAKES; AND HOW CANDIDE WAS PUBLICLY WHIPPED.
After the earthquake had destroyed three-fourths of Lisbon, the sages of that country could think of no means more effectual to prevent utter ruin than to give the people a beautiful auto-da-fé; for it had been decided by the University of Coimbra, that the burning of a few people alive by a slow fire, and with great ceremony, is an infallible secret to hinder the earth from quaking.
In consequence hereof, they had seized on a Biscayner, convicted of having married his godmother, and on two Portuguese, for rejecting the bacon which larded a chicken they were eating; after dinner, they came and secured Dr. Pangloss, and his disciple Candide, the one for speaking his mind, the other for having listened with an air of approbation. They were conducted to separate apartments, extremely cold, as they were never incommoded by the sun. Eight days after they were dressed in san-benitos and their heads ornamented with paper mitres. The mitre and san-benito belonging to Candide were painted with reversed flames and with devils that had neither tails nor claws; but Pangloss's devils had claws and tails and the flames were upright.
They marched in procession thus habited and heard a very pathetic sermon, followed by fine church music. Candide was whipped in cadence while they were singing; the Biscayner, and the two men who had refused to eat bacon, were burnt; and Pangloss was hanged, though that was not the custom. The same day the earth sustained a most violent concussion.
Candide, terrified, amazed, desperate, all bloody, all palpitating, said to himself:
"If this is the best of possible worlds, what then are the others? Well, if I had been only whipped I could put up with it, for I experienced that among the Bulgarians; but oh, my dear Pangloss! thou greatest of philosophers, that I should have seen you hanged, without knowing for what! Oh, my dear Anabaptist, thou best of men, that thou should'st have been drowned in the very harbour! Oh, Miss Cunegonde, thou pearl of girls! that thou should'st have had thy belly ripped open!" 
(Voltaire, Candide, 1759)

 E2.1.D.3. The Erosion of Dignity and Self-Worth: Explore how the denial of freedom can undermine an individual's sense of dignity, self-respect, and intrinsic value.

 E2.1.D.3.1. THE CALF'S STORY IS AN EXTREME VERSION OF A BROADER THEME: HOW SYSTEMS OF CONTROL, EVEN IF "SUCCESSFUL" BY SOME METRICS, CAN LEAD TO A PROFOUND EROSION OF DIGNITY AND WORTH FOR THE INDIVIDUALS THEY ENCOMPASS.
“A modern calf in an industrial meat farm. Immediately after birth the calf is separated from its mother and locked inside a tiny cage not much bigger than the calf’s own body. There the calf spends its entire life – about four months on average. It never leaves its cage, nor is it allowed to play with other calves or even walk – all so that its muscles will not grow strong. Soft muscles mean a soft and juicy steak. The ﬁrst time the calf has a chance to walk, stretch its muscles and touch other calves is on its way to the slaughterhouse. In evolutionary terms, cattle represent one of the most successful animal species ever to exist. At the same time, they are some of the most miserable animals on the planet.
Yet from the viewpoint of the herd, rather than that of the shepherd, it’s hard to avoid the impression that for the vast majority of domesticated animals, the Agricultural Revolution was a terrible catastrophe. Their evolutionary ‘success’ is meaningless. A rare wild rhinoceros on the brink of extinction is probably more satisfied than a calf who spends its short life inside a tiny box, fattened to produce juicy steaks. The contented rhinoceros is no less content for being among the last of its kind. The numerical success of the calf’s species is little consolation for the suﬀering the individual endures.
This discrepancy between evolutionary success and individual suffering is perhaps the most important lesson we can draw from the Agricultural Revolution.
When we study the narrative of plants such as wheat and maize, maybe the purely evolutionary perspective makes sense. Yet in the case of animals such as cattle, sheep and Sapiens, each with a complex world of sensations and emotions, we have to consider how evolutionary success translates into individual experience. In the following chapters we will see time and again how a dramatic increase in the collective power and ostensible success of our species went hand in hand with much individual suﬀering.”
(Yuval Noah Harari, Sapiens, A Brief History of Humankind, 2011)

 E2.1.D.3.2. FOR TEREZA, THE DENIAL OF FREEDOM IS THE DENIAL OF HER UNIQUENESS. She fled her mother's world "where all bodies were equal" and came to Tomas "to make her body unique, irreplaceable." His betrayal, and the source of her psychic pain, is that he "had drawn an equal sign between her and the rest of them," thereby undermining her "intrinsic value."
“While she marched around the pool naked with a large group of other naked women, Tomas stood over them in a basket hanging from the pool's arched roof, shouting at them, making them sing and do kneebends. The moment one of them did a faulty kneebend, he would shoot her.
Let me return to this dream. Its horror did not begin with Tomas's first pistol shot; it was horrifying from the outset. Marching naked in formation with a group of naked women was for Tereza the quintessential image of horror. When she lived at home, her mother forbade her to lock the bathroom door. What she meant by her injunction was: Your body is just like all other bodies; you have no right to shame; you have no reason to hide something that exists in millions of identical copies. In her mother's world all bodies were the same and marched behind one another in formation. Since childhood, Tereza had seen nudity as a sign of concentration camp uniformity, a sign of humiliation.
There was yet another horror at the very beginning of the dream: all the women had to sing! Not only were their bodies identical, identically worthless, not only were their bodies mere resounding soulless mechanisms—the women rejoiced over it! Theirs was the joyful solidarity of the soulless. The women were pleased at having thrown off the ballast of the soul—that laughable conceit, that illusion of uniqueness—to become one like the next. Tereza sang with them, but did not rejoice. She sang because she was afraid that if she did not sing the women would kill her.
But what was the meaning of the fact that Tomas shot at them, toppling one after another into the pool, dead?
The women, overjoyed by their sameness, their lack of diversity, were, in fact, celebrating their imminent demise, which would render their sameness absolute. So Tomas's shots were merely the joyful climax to their morbid march. After every report of his pistol, they burst into joyous laughter, and as each corpse sank beneath the surface, they sang even louder.
But why was Tomas the one doing the shooting? And why was he out to shoot Tereza with the rest of them?
Because he was the one who sent Tereza to join them. That was what the dream was meant to tell Tomas, what Tereza was unable to tell him herself. She had come to him to escape her mother's world, a world where all bodies were equal. She had come to him to make her body unique, irreplaceable. But he, too, had drawn an equal sign between her and the rest of them: he kissed them all alike, stroked them alike, made no, absolutely no distinction between Tereza's body and the other bodies. He had sent her back into the world she tried to escape, sent her to march naked with the other naked women.
She would dream three series of dreams in succession: the first was of cats going berserk and referred to the sufferings she had gone through in her lifetime; the second was images of her execution and came in countless variations; the third was of her life after death, when humiliation turned into a never-ending state.
The dreams left nothing to be deciphered. The accusation they leveled at Tomas was so clear that his only reaction was to hang his head and stroke her hand without a word.
The dreams were eloquent, but they were also beautiful. That aspect seems to have escaped Freud in his theory of dreams. Dreaming is not merely an act of communication (or coded communication, if you like); it is also an aesthetic activity, a game of the imagination, a game that is a value in itself. Our dreams prove that to imagine—to dream about things that have not happened—is among mankind's deepest needs.
Herein lies the danger. If dreams were not beautiful, they would quickly be forgotten. But Tereza kept coming back to her dreams, running through them in her mind, turning them into legends. Tomas lived under the hypnotic spell cast by the excruciating beauty of Tereza's dreams.
"Dear Tereza, sweet Tereza, what am I losing you to?" he once said to her as they sat face to face in a wine cellar. "Every night you dream of death as if you really wished to quit this world. . . ."
It was day; reason and will power were back in place. A drop of red wine ran slowly down her glass as she answered. "There's nothing I can do about it, Tomas. Oh, I understand. I know you love me. I know your infidelities are no great tragedy ..."
She looked at him with love in her eyes, but she feared the night ahead, feared her dreams. Her life was split. Both day and night were competing for her.”
(Milan Kundera, The Unbearable Lightness of Being, 1984)

 E2.1.D.3.3. IN HIS STATE OF ALMOST TOTAL PHYSICAL UNFREEDOM, BRUNO FIGHTS TO PRESERVE THE LAST BASTION OF HIS SELF-WORTH IN A POWERFUL AND DIRECT ACT OF RESISTANCE AGAINST THE EROSION OF HIS DIGNITY.
“Danby, turning and opening the door a little more, said, ‘Just put the flowers quickly on the bed and go.’ He felt upset and confused by the arrival of the women, as if he were suddenly frightened of Bruno on their behalf. He ought to have warned them about Bruno’s appearance.
Diana pushed past into the room and then stood rigid. He caught the faint gasp of her breath. Lisa had come up close behind her shoulder, pushing back her yellow scarf. He saw their two juxtaposed faces with wide eyes staring, the light brown eyes, the dark brown eyes After a moment Diana leaned nervously forward and with an outstretched arm dropped the wrapped bundle of narcissus, like a very thin baby in swaddling clothes, on to the top of the bulging foot cage. It was like an official visit to a cenotaph. Only this tomb was not empty. Still facing towards the bed, with unfocused eyes, Diana was beginning to back towards the door, edging past Lisa who had stepped aside.
‘Who did you say these girls were?’ said Bruno. His unsteady voice had the hoarse gurgling note which belonged to the more confused days, but the strength and force of the question had a startling effect.
They’ve just brought you some flowers. They - ’
‘Who are they?’
‘Miles’s wife and sister-in-law.’
‘Miles’s wife and sister - ’
‘Sister-in-law. These two ladies are sisters.’
‘Sisters.’ The word as Bruno uttered it sounded heavy, uncanny, meaningless.
Diana had reached the door.
‘What do they want?’ said Bruno. He was still sitting bolt upright and motionless arid it was difficult to see where he was looking.
‘We came from Miles to say that he’s very sorry he upset you,’ said Lisa, speaking slowly in a low clear voice.
The big indented head moved slightly. ‘What?’
‘Miles says he’s sorry.’
Bruno was undoubtedly staring at Lisa. His face seemed to unravel a little, the mouth and eyes becoming more evident.
‘Who are you?’
‘I’m-’
‘I think that’ll do, that’s quite enough of a visit,’ said Danby.
‘You’ve had a lovely visit from two nice girls. Doesn’t happen every day, does it, Bruno? Bringing you flowers and all. But we mustn't overtire you, must we? Say good-bye now. Off we go.'
Since the entry of the two women into the bedroom Danby had felt an intense physical awkwardness almost amounting to sickness. Something about the juxtaposition was suddenly dreadful. Perhaps it was just the onrush of new pity, almost of shame, this glimpse of poor Bruno through unaccustomed eyes, a glimpse of the grey shabby jumbled room, the stained wallpaper and the soiled sheets, the monster-headed moribund old man imprisoned in the smelly twilit box. Danby was so used to Bruno. He saw a person there not pinned by time. But now he wanted to get the women outside and to get outside himself. He fumbled with the door-handle and put out a shielding ushering hand towards Diana.
‘Danby, for Christ’s sake shut up!’ They paused in the doorway. ‘Don’t talk to me as if I were a puling infant! Do you want them to think I’m senile? I’m still a rational being, so have the decency to address me as one You sit down here, you. Please ’ »
 (Iris Murdoch, Brunos Dream, 1968)

 E2.1.D.3.4. IN KAZUO ISHIGURO'S NEVER LET ME GO, THE CHARACTERS SEARCH FOR THEIR "POSSIBLES"—THE PEOPLE THEY WERE CLONED FROM. THIS QUEST IS A DESPERATE SEARCH FOR A MORE DIGNIFIED ORIGIN, FOR PROOF THAT THEY COME FROM "GOOD STOCK," WHICH THEY BELIEVE MIGHT OPEN UP NEW "POSSIBILITIES" FOR THEM. The failure of the quest to find a worthy "possible" for Ruth leads to a crisis of identity and a profound erosion of her sense of self-worth.
“"Well, I think we're agreed, aren't we? That isn't Ruth." She gave a small laugh and laid a hand on Ruth's shoulder. "I'm sorry. We're all sorry. But we can't blame Rodney really. It wasn't that wild a try. You've got to admit, when we saw her through those windows, it did look..." She trailed off, then touched Ruth on the shoulder again.
Ruth said nothing, but gave a little shrug, almost as if to shrug off the touch. She was squinting into the distance, at the sky rather than the water. I could tell she was upset, but someone who didn't know her well might well have supposed she was being thoughtful. […]
which fascinated and nagged and scared them: this notion of theirs that there were all kinds of possibilities open to us Hailsham students that weren't open to them. I remember thinking then how different they actually were, Chrissie and Rodney, from the three of us.
Then Tommy said: "I don't see what difference it makes. It was just a bit of fun we were having."
"A bit of fun for you maybe, Tommy, Ruth said coldly, still gazing straight ahead of her. "You wouldn't think so if it was your possible we'd been looking for.
"I think I would." Tommy said. "I don't see how it matters. Even if you found your possible, the actual model they got you from. Even then, I don't see what difference it makes to anything."
"Thank you for your profound contribution, Tommy," said Ruth.
"But I think Tommy's right," I said. "It's daft to assume you'll have the same sort of life as your model. I agree with Tommy. It's just a bit of fun. We shouldn't get so serious about it."
I too reached out and touched Ruth on the shoulder. I wanted her to feel the contrast to when Chrissie and Rodney had touched her, and I deliberately chose exactly the same spot. I expected some response, some signal that she accepted understanding from me and Tommy in a way she didn't from the veterans. But she gave me nothing, not even the shrug she'd given Chrissie.
Somewhere behind me I could hear Rodney pacing about, making noises to suggest he was getting chilly in the strong wind. "How about going to visit Martin now?" he said. "His flat's just over there, behind those houses."
Ruth suddenly sighed and turned to us. "To be honest," she said, "I knew all along it was stupid."
"Yeah," said Tommy, eagerly. "Just a bit of fun."
Ruth gave him an irritated look. "Tommy, please shut up with all this 'bit of fun' stuff. No one's listening." Then turning to Chrissie and Rodney she went on: "I didn't want to say when you first told me about this. But look, it was never on. They don't ever, ever, use people like that woman. Think about it. Why would she want to? We all know it, so why don't we all face it. We're not modelled from that sort..."
"Ruth," I cut in firmly. "Ruth, don't."
But she just carried on: "We all know it. We're modelled from trash. Junkies, prostitutes, winos, tramps. Convicts, maybe, just so long as they aren't psychos. That's what we come from. We all know it, so why don't we say it? A woman like that? Come on. Yeah, right, Tommy. A bit of fun. Let's have a bit of fun pretending. That other woman in there, her friend, the old one in the gallery. Art students, that's what she thought we were. Do you think she'd have talked to us like that if she'd known what we really were? What do you think she'd have said if we'd asked her? 'Excuse me, but do you think your friend was ever a clone model?' She'd have thrown us out. We know it, so we might as well just say it. If you want to look for possibles, if you want to do it properly, then you look in the gutter. You look in rubbish bins. Look down the toilet, that's where you'll find where we all came from."
(Kazuo Ishiguro, Never Let Me Go, 2005)

 E2.1.D.3.5. HOCHSCHILD ARGUES THAT EVEN AS FLIGHT ATTENDANTS ARE TAUGHT NEW EMOTIONAL SKILLS, THEIR OVERALL PROFESSIONAL AUTONOMY IS REMOVED. The "'mind' of the emotion worker... has moved upstairs in the hierarchy," and the worker is "restricted to implementing standard procedures." This is a direct denial of their freedom and professional judgment.
“The lessons in deep acting-acting "as if the cabin is your home" and "as if this unruly passenger has a traumatic past"-are themselves a new development in deskilling. The "mind" of the emotion worker, the source of the ideas about what mental moves are needed to settle down an "irate," has moved upstairs in the hierarchy so that the worker is restricted to implementing standard procedures. In the course of offering skills, trainers unwittingly contribute to a system of deskilling. The skills they offer do not subtract from the worker's autonomous control over when and how to apply them; as the point is made in training, "It will be up to you to decide how to handle any given problem on line." But the overall definition of the task is more rigid than it once was, and the worker's field of choice about what to do is greatly narrowed. Within the boundaries of the job, more and more actual subtasks are specified. Did the flight attendant hand out magazines? How many times? By the same token, the task to be accomplished is more clearly spelled out by superiors. How were the magazines handed out? With a smile? With a sincere smile? The fact that trainers work hard at making a tough job easier and at making travel generally more pleas-ant only makes this element of deskilling harder to see. The fact that their training manuals are prepared for them and that they are not themselves entirely free to "tell it like it is" only illustrates again how deskilling is the outcome of specialization and standardization.
Sensing this, most of the flight attendants I observed were concerned to establish that theirs was an honorable profession requiring a mastery of "real" skills. I was told repeatedly that there was a law school graduate in the incoming class at the Training Center and that a dentist, a librarian, and a botanist were serving on line. At the same time, they generally expressed frustration at the fact that their skills in rescue and safety procedures were given soft play (how many tickets can you sell by reminding passengers of death and dan-ger?) whereas their function as meal servers was high-lighted. As one flight attendant put it eloquently:
I have a little bit of pride in what I do. Of course I'm going to haul ass and try to do everything I conceivably can to get that breakfast for 135 people completed in forty minutes. That means that 135 people get meal trays, 135 people are supposed to have at least two beverages, 135 trays are collected and re-stowed. You can imagine how many seconds we have left to give to each passenger. But what kind of condition does that put me in when I finally reach the jump seat at the end of the flight, the time when a crash is relatively more likely? And do I even no-tice that man slumped over in his seat? That's really my job.
Thus because passengers see them - and are encouraged by company advertising to see them-as no more than glamorous waitresses, flight attendants usually resented the appearance of working at a low level of skills, and had to cope with this resentment. But the ways in which these two functions-managing rescue operations and serving food-are combined, and the relative priority given to each, cannot be influenced by the workers or even the trainers. Such things are determined by management.”
(Arlie Russell Hochschild, The managed heart, 2003)

 E2.1.D.3.6. A GROUP OF ADULTS IN A POSITION OF AUTHORITY UNDERMINE THE DIGNITY AND SELF-WORTH OF A CHILD, PIP, UNDER THE GUISE OF MORAL INSTRUCTION AT A CHRISTMAS DINNER.
““True, sir. Many a moral for the young,” returned Mr. Wopsle,—and I
knew he was going to lug me in, before he said it; “might be deduced
from that text.”

(“You listen to this,” said my sister to me, in a severe parenthesis.)

Joe gave me some more gravy.

“Swine,” pursued Mr. Wopsle, in his deepest voice, and pointing his
fork at my blushes, as if he were mentioning my Christian name,—“swine
were the companions of the prodigal. The gluttony of Swine is put
before us, as an example to the young.” (I thought this pretty well in
him who had been praising up the pork for being so plump and juicy.)
“What is detestable in a pig is more detestable in a boy.”

“Or girl,” suggested Mr. Hubble.

“Of course, or girl, Mr. Hubble,” assented Mr. Wopsle, rather
irritably, “but there is no girl present.”

“Besides,” said Mr. Pumblechook, turning sharp on me, “think what
you’ve got to be grateful for. If you’d been born a Squeaker—”

“He _was_, if ever a child was,” said my sister, most emphatically.

Joe gave me some more gravy.

“Well, but I mean a four-footed Squeaker,” said Mr. Pumblechook. “If
you had been born such, would you have been here now? Not you—”

“Unless in that form,” said Mr. Wopsle, nodding towards the dish.

“But I don’t mean in that form, sir,” returned Mr. Pumblechook, who had
an objection to being interrupted; “I mean, enjoying himself with his
elders and betters, and improving himself with their conversation, and
rolling in the lap of luxury. Would he have been doing that? No, he
wouldn’t. And what would have been your destination?” turning on me
again. “You would have been disposed of for so many shillings according
to the market price of the article, and Dunstable the butcher would
have come up to you as you lay in your straw, and he would have whipped
you under his left arm, and with his right he would have tucked up his
frock to get a penknife from out of his waistcoat-pocket, and he would
have shed your blood and had your life. No bringing up by hand then.
Not a bit of it!”

Joe offered me more gravy, which I was afraid to take.

“He was a world of trouble to you, ma’am,” said Mrs. Hubble,
commiserating my sister.

“Trouble?” echoed my sister; “trouble?” and then entered on a fearful
catalogue of all the illnesses I had been guilty of, and all the acts
of sleeplessness I had committed, and all the high places I had tumbled
from, and all the low places I had tumbled into, and all the injuries I
had done myself, and all the times she had wished me in my grave, and I
had contumaciously refused to go there.

I think the Romans must have aggravated one another very much, with
their noses. Perhaps, they became the restless people they were, in
consequence. Anyhow, Mr. Wopsle’s Roman nose so aggravated me, during
the recital of my misdemeanours, that I should have liked to pull it
until he howled. But, all I had endured up to this time was nothing in
comparison with the awful feelings that took possession of me when the
pause was broken which ensued upon my sister’s recital, and in which
pause everybody had looked at me (as I felt painfully conscious) with
indignation and abhorrence.

“Yet,” said Mr. Pumblechook, leading the company gently back to the
theme from which they had strayed, “Pork—regarded as biled—is rich,
too; ain’t it?”
(Charles Dickens, Great Expectations, 1861)

E2.1.C. The Social and Political Value Placed on Freedom

E2.1.C.1. Freedom as a Foundation of Justice and Rights: Analyze why societies often enshrine freedom as a fundamental right and a cornerstone of just legal and political systems.

E2.1.C.1.1. Freedom is not just a political status but is essential to our "uniqueness" as a species and the ultimate aim of our historical and biological development.

E2.1.C.1.1.a. "What are your thoughts on free speech? Do you think it is a right?
LORRAINE, BERLIN, GERMANY

For fuck's sake, enough of the God and Jesus bullshit!
JASON, LONDON, UK

Dear Lorraine and Jason,

We humans are subtle and chaotic creatures, full of ambiguities and contradictions, and it is this that makes up our distinctiveness. We are fully and necessarily different from each other, and even though we have the entirely human tendency to reduce each other to generalisations based on arbitrary categorisations of identity, such as race or religion or gender, we must resist as best we can, for it is uncharitable at best to deny any human their rightful individual sovereignty, their specialness. It is our distinctiveness that is the very thing that should be prized.

Each of us is an amalgam of all we have loved and lost and learned, our personal successes and failures, our particular regrets, and our singular joys – and part of that uniqueness is that we think in different ways. Not all of our thinking is right or fully formed, far from it, but there it is, regardless – that flawed and terrifying uniqueness of thought. So, it is little wonder that people adopt and signal a kind of protective groupthink, because our own true thoughts, at their most interesting, can be terrifying. In fact, humans are mostly distinct individuals thinking terrifying things.

I’m not so sure free speech is a right, but it is certainly a societal or cultural attainment, something we, as a community, can use to enliven, embolden and liberate the soul of our world, provided we are fortunate enough to live in a society that allows such a thing. To be able to speak freely is not only a benefit to oneself, by making us feel less alone, it is also a barometer of the health of our society, just as intolerance to opposing ideas indicates a feebleness or lack of confidence in one’s own thoughts and the ideas of our society. I support free speech, not so much because I think it is a right, but rather because it goes some way to validate our specialness. I am genuinely concerned by its alternative, the fearful flattening of ideas through the suppression of our individual natures, something that has become all too evident in almost every institution I can think of.

As so to Jesus, dear Jason. Jesus roamed the land expressing what were, at the time, considered dangerous and heretical ideas. He was literally the embodiment of the terrifying idea. He was followed around by a nervous coterie of muttering scribes and Pharisees whose purpose was to catch him out – expose not just His dangerous ideas, but to lay bare and persecute his uniqueness. They, of course, succeeded and Christ was cancelled upon the Cross. These impossible, dangerous ideas – to love your enemy, to love the poor, to forgive others – were terrifying and unconscionable and forbidden in His day, but became, in time, the better ideas that underpin the society in which many of us are lucky enough to live today. It is worth remembering that. I think we must be careful around our assumptions of what ideas we think are right and what ideas we think are wrong, and what we do with those ideas, because it is the terrifying idea – the shocking, offending, unique idea – that may just save the world.  

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave,  The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #197 / JUNE 2022)

E2.1.C.1.1.b. THE MAJOR CONCERN OF HISTORY IS THE PEOPLE'S ACCESS TO FREEDOM. Does history have meaning? Hegel proposes a philosophy of reconciliation, acknowledging contradiction. Injustice, death, and conflict are part of his philosophy, but these phenomena do not define the processes he studies. His thesis is that the genesis of reality has a future oriented toward overcoming contradictions and achieving reconciliation. In The Reason in History, Hegel defends the idea that history has meaning and is governed by reason. One can interpret the text beyond itself from the totality of Hegel's thought. In this interpretation, reason in history does not mean governance by an external authority. The autonomous subject that dominates history's objectivity is the people. The great task of history is to give the people access to freedom. However, history is not entirely rational. Rather, it is a stage in the free development of the people. He calls the completion of history (the end of history) “the absolute spirit,” which includes works of art, religious representations, and philosophical works. History belongs to the objective spirit and is therefore below the absolute spirit. Therefore, we should not expect to find complete reason in history, particularly since reason is divided among peoples with particular goals, each representing a finite principle. Peoples will clash and die. The history of peoples' mentalities and political institutions is merely a stage. History has a direction, which is progress. In this sense, Hegel is a man of the Enlightenment, like Condorcet, Kant, and Fichte, but in opposition to Rousseau, who sees the meaning of history as decadence. History has meaning because people have a desire for self-development and an aspiration for freedom, which are often confused. There are phases of relapse and irreconcilable conflicts—progress is not linear. Ultimately, however, reconciliation comes, albeit after a period of nonsense. Hegel believed he was witnessing the completion of history, which is not the end of history. According to an Aristotelian scheme, it is the attainment of the goal. However, when we realize ourselves adequately, we attain fulfillment and completion. At this stage, however, history does not put an end to its contradictions. Peoples continue to be mortal, and they will continue to wage war in an unjust society. The end of history is the post-ancient European world—nothing more—which discovers that all men are free. It is characterized by a constitutional monarchy based on the universal will of the people. In Hegel's eyes, this is a reconciled regime. What boundless optimism and enchanted vision of the present! However, he also argues that we cannot be happy in history because happiness is only possible in the absolute mind. The people's jealousy of great men is a symptom of history's finitude, which illustrates the people's relative reason that guides history. The great man reforms institutions. He is the embodiment of his people's unspoken aspirations. This insight is the key to his effectiveness, for if he were to defend a banner not shared by the people, he would be nothing more than an adventurer whose actions are doomed to failure. The actions of the great man succeed by bringing about the will of the people, even if he himself is doomed to failure. He is also interested because he wants to be happy. In an anti-Kantian position, which is a morality of intention, his inclination, which results from the realm of the senses, is nevertheless good. He will passionately defend his particular interest (usually to keep power for himself) against the general interest and will be overthrown even if he has been a catalyst for advancing history. Great men are not free from vice, but for Hegel, historical legitimacy does not lie on the side of virtue. It lies on the side of transgression. It is the moralizing valets who fail to see the historical greatness of great men (Nietzschean emphasis). Passion is the energy of the great man and his distinctive feature; great men are admirable but they can be petty. History works according to “a ruse of reason”: when the achievement of a goal is brought about by means of an instrument, which may be a great man or a sacrificed people (e.g., the Romans as intermediaries between the Greeks and the modern world). This is a dangerous concept that could justify oppression in the name of the smooth running of history." 
(Gilles Marmasse in the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on May 2, 2018)

Listen to the podcast in French:
https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/l-histoire-a-t-elle-un-sens-7114832

E2.1.C.1.1.c. MODERN LIBERAL SOCIETIES PLACE SUCH A HIGH VALUE ON FREEDOM BECAUSE THEY OPERATE UNDER THE BELIEF SYSTEM, OR "RELIGION.
“Theist religions focus on the worship of gods. Humanist religions worship humanity, or more correctly, Homo sapiens. Humanism is a belief that Homo sapiens has a unique and sacred nature, which is fundamentally different from the nature of all other animals and of all other phenomena. Humanists believe that the unique nature of Homo sapiens is the most important thing in the world, and it determines the meaning of everything that happens in the universe. The supreme good is the good of Homo sapiens. 
The rest of the world and all other beings exist solely for the beneﬁt of this species.
All humanists worship humanity, but they do not agree on its definition.
Humanism has split into three rival sects that fight over the exact definition of ‘humanity’, just as rival Christian sects fought over the exact definition of God.
Today, the most important humanist sect is liberal humanism, which believes that ‘humanity’ is a quality of individual humans, and that the liberty of individuals is therefore sacrosanct. According to liberals, the sacred nature of humanity resides within each and every individual Homo sapiens. The inner core of individual humans gives meaning to the world, and is the source for all ethical and political authority. If we encounter an ethical or political dilemma, we should look inside and listen to our inner voice – the voice of humanity. The chief commandments of liberal humanism are meant to protect the liberty of this inner voice against intrusion or harm. These commandments are collectively known as ‘human rights’.
This, for example, is why liberals object to torture and the death penalty. In early modern Europe, murderers were thought to violate and destabilize the cosmic order. To bring the cosmos back to balance, it was necessary to torture and publicly execute the criminal, so that everyone could see the order re-established.
Attending gruesome executions was a favorite pastime for Londoners and Parisians in the era of Shakespeare and Molière. In today’s Europe, murder is seen as a violation of the sacred nature of humanity. In order to restore order, present-day Europeans do not torture and execute criminals. Instead, they punish a murderer in what they see as the most ‘humane’ way possible, thus safeguarding and even rebuilding his human sanctity. By honoring the human nature of the murderer, everyone is reminded of the sanctity of humanity, and order is restored.
By defending the murderer, we right what the murderer has wronged.
Even though liberal humanism sanctifies humans, it does not deny the existence of God, and is, in fact, founded on monotheist beliefs. The liberal belief in the free and sacred nature of each individual is a direct legacy of the traditional Christian belief in free and eternal individual souls. Without recourse to eternal souls and a Creator God, it becomes embarrassingly di cult for liberals to explain what is so special about individual Sapiens.
Another important sect is socialist humanism. Socialists believe that ‘humanity’ is collective rather than individualistic. They hold as sacred not the inner voice of each individual, but the species Homo sapiens as a whole. Whereas liberal humanism seeks as much freedom as possible for individual humans, socialist humanism seeks equality between all humans. According to socialists, inequality is the worst blasphemy against the sanctity of humanity, because it privileges peripheral qualities of humans over their universal essence. For example, when the rich are privileged over the poor, it means that we value money more than the universal essence of all humans, which is the same for rich and poor alike.
Like liberal humanism, socialist humanism is built on monotheist foundations.
The idea that all humans are equal is a revamped version of the monotheist conviction that all souls are equal before God. The only humanist sect that has actually broken loose from traditional monotheism is evolutionary humanism, whose most famous representatives are the Nazis. What distinguished the Nazis from other humanist sects was a different definition of ‘humanity’, one deeply influenced by the theory of evolution. In contrast to other humanists, the Nazis believed that humankind is not something universal and eternal, but rather a mutable species that can evolve or degenerate. Man can evolve into superman, or degenerate into a subhuman.”
(Yuval Noah Harari, Sapiens, A Brief History of Humankind, 2011)

E2.1.C.1.1.d. BY SCIENTIFICALLY ESTABLISHING THE BIOLOGICAL UNITY OF HUMANKIND, DARWIN PROVIDES A CRUCIAL CORNERSTONE FOR ANY POLITICAL OR LEGAL SYSTEM BASED ON UNIVERSAL HUMAN RIGHTS. He argues that, from a biological perspective, there is no basis for treating different races as fundamentally different kinds of beings, which is a necessary premise for "equality before the law." 
“Our supposed naturalist having proceeded thus far in his investigation, would next enquire whether the races of men, when crossed, were in any degree sterile. He might consult the work (9. ‘On the Phenomena of Hybridity in the Genus Homo,’ Eng. translat., 1864.) of Professor Broca, a cautious and philosophical observer, and in this he would find good evidence that some races were quite fertile together, but evidence of an opposite nature in regard to other races. Thus it has been asserted that the native women of Australia and Tasmania rarely produce children to European men; the evidence, however, on this head has now been shewn to be almost valueless. The half-castes are killed by the pure blacks: and an account has lately been published of eleven half-caste youths murdered and burnt at the same time, whose remains were found by the police. (10. See the interesting letter by Mr. T.A. Murray, in the ‘Anthropological Review,’ April 1868, p. liii. In this letter Count Strzelecki’s statement that Australian women who have borne children to a white man, are afterwards sterile with their own race, is disproved. M. A. de Quatrefages has also collected (Revue des Cours Scientifiques, March, 1869, p. 239), much evidence that Australians and Europeans are not sterile when crossed.) Again, it has often been said that when mulattoes intermarry, they produce few children; on the other hand, Dr. Bachman, of Charleston (11. ‘An Examination of Prof. Agassiz’s Sketch of the Nat. Provinces of the Animal World,’ Charleston, 1855, p. 44.), positively asserts that he has known mulatto families which have intermarried for several generations, and have continued on an average as fertile as either pure whites or pure blacks. Enquiries formerly made by Sir C. Lyell on this subject led him, as he informs me, to the same conclusion. (12. Dr. Rohlfs writes to me that he found the mixed races in the Great Sahara, derived from Arabs, Berbers, and Negroes of three tribes, extraordinarily fertile. On the other hand, Mr. Winwood Reade informs me that the Negroes on the Gold Coast, though admiring white men and mulattoes, have a maxim that mulattoes should not intermarry, as the children are few and sickly. This belief, as Mr. Reade remarks, deserves attention, as white men have visited and resided on the Gold Coast for four hundred years, so that the natives have had ample time to gain knowledge through experience.) In the United States the census for the year 1854 included, according to Dr. Bachman, 405,751 mulattoes; and this number, considering all the circumstances of the case, seems small; but it may partly be accounted for by the degraded and anomalous position of the class, and by the profligacy of the women. A certain amount of absorption of mulattoes into negroes must always be in progress; and this would lead to an apparent diminution of the former. The inferior vitality of mulattoes is spoken of in a trustworthy work (13. ‘Military and Anthropological Statistics of American Soldiers,’ by B.A. Gould, 1869, p. 319.) as a well-known phenomenon; and this, although a different consideration from their lessened fertility, may perhaps be advanced as a proof of the specific distinctness of the parent races. No doubt both animal and vegetable hybrids, when produced from extremely distinct species, are liable to premature death; but the parents of mulattoes cannot be put under the category of extremely distinct species. The common Mule, so notorious for long life and vigour, and yet so sterile, shews how little necessary connection there is in hybrids between lessened fertility and vitality; other analogous cases could be cited. 
Even if it should hereafter be proved that all the races of men were perfectly fertile together, he who was inclined from other reasons to rank them as distinct species, might with justice argue that fertility and sterility are not safe criterions of specific distinctness. We know that these qualities are easily affected by changed conditions of life, or by close inter-breeding, and that they are governed by highly complex laws, for instance, that of the unequal fertility of converse crosses between the same two species. With forms which must be ranked as undoubted species, a perfect series exists from those which are absolutely sterile when crossed, to those which are almost or completely fertile. The degrees of sterility do not coincide strictly with the degrees of difference between the parents in external structure or habits of life. Man in many respects may be compared with those animals which have long been domesticated, and a large body of evidence can be advanced in favour of the Pallasian doctrine (14. The ‘Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,’ vol. ii. p. 109. I may here remind the reader that the sterility of species when crossed is not a specially-acquired quality, but, like the incapacity of certain trees to be grafted together, is incidental on other acquired differences. The nature of these differences is unknown, but they relate more especially to the reproductive system, and much less so to external structure or to ordinary differences in constitution. One important element in the sterility of crossed species apparently lies in one or both having been long habituated to fixed conditions; for we know that changed conditions have a special influence on the reproductive system, and we have good reason to believe (as before remarked) that the fluctuating conditions of domestication tend to eliminate that sterility which is so general with species, in a natural state, when crossed. It has elsewhere been shewn by me (ibid. vol. ii. p. 185, and ‘Origin of Species,’ 5th edit. p. 317), that the sterility of crossed species has not been acquired through natural selection: we can see that when two forms have already been rendered very sterile, it is scarcely possible that their sterility should be augmented by the preservation or survival of the more and more sterile individuals; for, as the sterility increases, fewer and fewer offspring will be produced from which to breed, and at last only single individuals will be produced at the rarest intervals. But there is even a higher grade of sterility than this. Both Gartner and Kolreuter have proved that in genera of plants, including many species, a series can be formed from species which, when crossed, yield fewer and fewer seeds, to species which never produce a single seed, but yet are affected by the pollen of the other species, as shewn by the swelling of the germen. It is here manifestly impossible to select the more sterile individuals, which have already ceased to yield seeds; so that the acme of sterility, when the germen alone is affected, cannot have been gained through selection. This acme, and no doubt the other grades of sterility, are the incidental results of certain unknown differences in the constitution of the reproductive system of the species which are crossed.), that domestication tends to eliminate the sterility which is so general a result of the crossing of species in a state of nature. From these several considerations, it may be justly urged that the perfect fertility of the intercrossed races of man, if established, would not absolutely preclude us from ranking them as distinct species.
Independently of fertility, the characters presented by the offspring from a cross have been thought to indicate whether or not the parent-forms ought to be ranked as species or varieties; but after carefully studying the evidence, I have come to the conclusion that no general rules of this kind can be trusted. The ordinary result of a cross is the production of a blended or intermediate form; but in certain cases some of the offspring take closely after one parent-form, and some after the other. This is especially apt to occur when the parents differ in characters which first appeared as sudden variations or monstrosities. (15. ‘The Variation of Animals,’ etc., vol. ii. p. 92.) I refer to this point, because Dr. Rohlfs informs me that he has frequently seen in Africa the offspring of negroes crossed with members of other races, either completely black or completely white, or rarely piebald. On the other hand, it is notorious that in America mulattoes commonly present an intermediate appearance.  
We have now seen that a naturalist might feel himself fully justified in ranking the races of man as distinct species; for he has found that they are distinguished by many differences in structure and constitution, some being of importance. These differences have, also, remained nearly constant for very long periods of time. Our naturalist will have been in some degree influenced by the enormous range of man, which is a great anomaly in the class of mammals, if mankind be viewed as a single species. He will have been struck with the distribution of the several so-called races, which accords with that of other undoubtedly distinct species of mammals. Finally, he might urge that the mutual fertility of all the races has not as yet been fully proved, and even if proved would not be an absolute proof of their specific identity.  
On the other side of the question, if our supposed naturalist were to enquire whether the forms of man keep distinct like ordinary species, when mingled together in large numbers in the same country, he would immediately discover that this was by no means the case. In Brazil he would behold an immense mongrel population of Negroes and Portuguese; in Chiloe, and other parts of South America, he would behold the whole population consisting of Indians and Spaniards blended in various degrees. (16. M. de Quatrefages has given (‘Anthropological Review,’ Jan. 1869, p. 22), an interesting account of the success and energy of the Paulistas in Brazil, who are a much crossed race of Portuguese and Indians, with a mixture of the blood of other races.) In many parts of the same continent he would meet with the most complex crosses between Negroes, Indians, and Europeans; and judging from the vegetable kingdom, such triple crosses afford the severest test of the mutual fertility of the parent forms. In one island of the Pacific he would find a small population of mingled Polynesian and English blood; and in the Fiji Archipelago a population of Polynesian and Negritos crossed in all degrees. Many analogous cases could be added; for instance, in Africa. Hence the races of man are not sufficiently distinct to inhabit the same country without fusion; and the absence of fusion affords the usual and best test of specific distinctness.”
(Charles Darwin, The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex, 1871)


E2.1.C.1.2. The individual "desire for freedom" is translated into a stable, collective society through a "mutual understanding" or "contract" necessary for a "good society," which is itself a prerequisite for a "good life."

E2.1.C.1.2.a. "CITIZENSHIP
The characteristics of a citizen, especially the rights and duties associated with citizenship. The first duty is to obey the law, which means accepting the role of citizen rather than sovereign. The first right is the ability to participate in the development of power or the struggles that lead to it (being a citizen, not a subject). In a city, there are two ways of being free in the political sense, and there can be no other way."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E2.1.C.1.2.b. FOR JOHN RAWLS, THE CENTRAL PROBLEM THAT ANY MODERN THEORY OF JUSTICE MUST SOLVE IS HOW TO RECONCILE THE COMPETING CLAIMS OF LIBERTY (WHICH HE LINKS TO THE TRADITION OF LOCKE) AND EQUALITY (WHICH HE LINKS TO THE TRADITION OF ROUSSEAU).
“Four Roles of Political Philosophy
1.1 . We begin by distinguishing four roles that political philosophy may have as part of a society's public political culture. Consider first its practical role arising from divisive political conflict and the need to settle the problem of order.
There are long periods in the history of any society during which certain basic questions lead to deep and sharp conflict and it seems difficult if not impossible to find any reasoned common ground for political agreement. To illustrate, one historical origin of liberalism is the Wars of Religion in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries following the Reformation; these divisions opened a long controversy about the right of resistance and liberty of conscience, which eventually led to the formulation and often reluctant acceptance of some form of the principle of toleration. The views in Locke's Letter on Toleration (1689) and Montesquieu's The Spirit of Laws (1748) have a long prehistory. Hobbes's Leviathan (1652)—surely the greatest work of political philosophy in English—is concerned with the problem of order during the turmoil of the English civil war; and so also is Locke's Second Treatise (also 1689). To illustrate in our own case how divisive conflict may lead to political philosophy, recall the extensive debates between Federalists and Anti-Federalists in 1787-88 over ratification of the Constitution, and how the question of the extension of slavery in the years before the Civil War called forth fundamental discussions of that institution and of the nature of the union between the states. 
We suppose, then, that one task of political philosophy—its practical role, let's say—is to focus on deeply disputed questions and to see whether, despite appearances, some underlying basis of philosophical and moral agreement can be uncovered. Or if such a basis of agreement cannot be found, perhaps the divergence of philosophical and moral opinion at the root of divisive political differences can at least be narrowed so that social cooperation on a footing of mutual respect among citizens can still be maintained.
To fix ideas, consider the conflict between the claims of liberty and the claims of equality in the tradition of democratic thought. Debates over the last two centuries or so make plain that there is no public agreement on how basic institutions are to be arranged so as to be most appropriate to the freedom and equality of democratic citizenship. There is a divide between the tradition derived from Locke, which stresses what Constant called "the liberties of the moderns"—freedom of thought and liberty of conscience, certain basic rights of the person and of property, and the rule of law—and the tradition derived from Rousseau, which stresses what Constant called "the liberties of the ancients"—the equal political liberties and the values of public life. This over stylized contrast brings out the depth of the conflict. This conflict is rooted not only in differences of social and economic interests but also in differences between general political, economic, and social theories about how institutions work, as well as in different views about the probable consequences of public policies. Here we focus on another root of the conflict: the different philosophical and moral doctrines that deal with how the competing claims of liberty and equality are to be understood, how they are to be ordered and weighed against each other, and how any particular way of ordering them is to be justified.
1.2 I note briefly three other roles of political philosophy which we consider further as we proceed. One is that political philosophy may contribute to how a people think of their political and social institutions as a whole, and their basic aims and purposes as a society with a history—a nation—as opposed to their aims and purposes as individuals, or as members of families and associations. Moreover, the members of any civilized society need a conception that enables them to understand themselves as members having a certain political status—in a democracy, that of equal citizenship—and how this status affects their relation to their social world.
This need political philosophy may try to answer, and this role I call that of orientation. The idea is that it belongs to reason and reflection (both theoretical and practical) to orient us in the (conceptual) space, say, of all possible ends, individual and associational, political and social. Political philosophy, as a work of reason, does this by specifying principles to identify reasonable and rational ends of those various kinds, and by showing how those ends can cohere within a well-articulated conception of a just and reasonable society. Such a conception may offer a unified framework within which proposed answers to divisive questions can be made consistent and the insights gained from different kinds of cases can be brought to bear on one another and extended to other cases.
1.3. A third role, stressed by Hegel in his Philosophy of Right (1821), is that of reconciliation: political philosophy may try to calm our frustration and rage against our society and its history by showing us the way in which its institutions, when properly understood from a philosophical point of view, are rational, and developed over time as they did to attain their present, rational form. This fits one of Hegel's well-known sayings: "When we look at the world rationally, the world looks rationally back." He seeks for us reconciliation—Versbhnung—that is, we are to accept and affirm our social world positively, not merely to be resigned to it. We shall be concerned with this role of political philosophy in several respects. Thus I believe that a democratic society is not and cannot be a community, where by a community I mean a body of persons united in affirming the same comprehensive, or partially comprehensive, doctrine. The fact of reasonable pluralism which characterizes a society with free institutions makes this impossible. This is the fact of profound and irreconcilable differences in citizens' reasonable comprehensive religious and philosophical conceptions of the world, and in their views of the moral and aesthetic values to be sought in human life. But this fact is not always easy to accept, and political philosophy may try to reconcile us to it by showing us the reason and indeed the political good and benefits of it.
Again, political society is not, and cannot be, an association. We do not enter it voluntarily. Rather we simply find ourselves in a particular political society at a certain moment of historical time. We might think our presence in it, our being here, is not free. In what sense, then, can citizens of a democracy be free? Or as we shall ask eventually, what is the outer limit of our freedom (§26)?
One can try to deal with this question by viewing political society in a certain way, namely, as a fair system of cooperation over time from one generation to the next, where those engaged in cooperation are viewed as free and equal citizens and normal cooperating members of society over a complete life. We then try to formulate principles of political justice such that if the basic structure of society—the main political and social institutions and the way they fit together as one scheme of cooperation—satisfies those principles, then we can say without pretense and fakery that citizens are indeed free and equal.
1.4. The fourth role is a variation of the previous one. We view political philosophy as realistically Utopian: that is, as probing the limits of practicable political possibility. Our hope for the future of our society rests on the belief that the social world allows at least a decent political order, so that a reasonably just, though not perfect, democratic regime is possible. So we ask: What would a just democratic society be like under reasonably favorable but still possible historical conditions, conditions allowed by the laws and tendencies of the social world? What ideals and principles would such a society try to realize given the circumstances of just ice in a democratic culture as we know them? These circumstances include the fact of reasonable pluralism. This condition is permanent as it persists indefinitely under free democratic institutions.
The fact of reasonable pluralism limits what is practicably possible under the conditions of our social world, as opposed to conditions in other historical ages when people are often said to have been united (though perhaps they never have been) in affirming one comprehensive conception.”
 (John Rawls, Justice as fairness, 1985)

JOHN RAWLS ARGUES THAT OUR POLITICAL EQUALITY IS NOT BASED ON ANY SPECIFIC TRAIT, BUT ON OUR SHARED POSSESSION OF THE "TWO MORAL POWERS" (A CAPACITY FOR A SENSE OF JUSTICE AND FOR A CONCEPTION OF THE GOOD). THIS EQUALITY IS WHAT GROUNDS OUR CLAIM TO THE "SAME BASIC RIGHTS, LIBERTIES, AND OPPORTUNITIES."
“In what sense are citizens regarded as equal persons? Let's say they are regarded as equal in that they are all regarded as having to the essential minimum degree the moral powers necessary to engage in social cooperation over a complete life and to take part in society as equal citizens. Having these powers to this degree we take as the basis of equality among citizens as persons (Theory, §77): that is, since we view society as a fair system of cooperation, the basis of equality is having to the requisite minimum degree the moral and other capacities that enable us to take part fully in the cooperative life of society. Thus the equality of citizens is modeled in the original position by the equality of their representatives: that is, by the fact that these representatives are symmetrically situated in that position and have equal rights in its procedure for reaching agreement.
I note that in taking the moral powers as the basis of equality we in effect distinguish between a political society and the many associations within it and across it. The latter are associations that cross political boundaries, such as churches and scientific societies. Some of these associations are communities: churches and scientific societies again illustrate this; but universities and other cultural institutions are also communities. The members of a community are united in pursuing certain shared values and ends (other than economic) that lead them to support the association and in part bind them to it. In justice as fairness a democratic political society has no such shared values and ends apart from those falling under or connected with the political conception of justice itself. The citizens of a well-ordered society affirm the constitution and its political values as realized in their institutions, and they share the end of giving one another justice, as society's arrangements require.
The significance of this distinction between a democratic society and the communities within it will become evident later and rests on a number of its special features. For example, we are born into society, and while we may be born into communities also, into religions and their distinctive cultures, only society with its political form of government and its law exercises coercive power. While we can leave communities voluntarily (the constitutional liberties guarantee this: apostasy is not a crime), there is a sense in which we cannot leave our political society voluntarily (§26). Also a community can reward or single out its members in proportion to their contribution to its shared values and ends; but a democratic society has no such shared values and ends (falling under the good) by which its citizens can be distinguished. All who can be fully cooperating members of political society count as equals and can be treated differently only as the public political conception of justice allows.
It is a serious error not to distinguish between the idea of a democratic political society and the idea of community. Of course, a democratic society is hospitable to many communities within it, and indeed tries to be a social world within which diversity can flourish in amity and concord; but it is not itself a community, nor can it be in view of the fact of reasonable pluralism. For that would require the oppressive use of government power which is incompatible with basic democratic liberties. From the start, then, we view a democratic society as a political society that excludes a confessional or an aristocratic state, not to mention a caste, slave, or a racist one. This exclusion is a consequence of taking the moral powers as the basis of political equality.
7.4. In what sense are citizens free? Here again we must keep in mind that justice as fairness is a political conception of justice for a democratic society. T h e relevant meaning of free persons is to be drawn from the political culture of such a society and may have little or no connection, for example, with freedom of the will as discussed in the philosophy of mind. Following up this idea, we say that citizens are regarded as free persons in two respects.
First, citizens are free in that they conceive of themselves and of one another as having the moral power to have a conception of the good. This is not to say that, as part of their political conception, they view themselves as inevitably tied to the pursuit of the particular conception of the good which they affirm at any given time. Rather, as citizens, they are seen as capable of revising and changing this conception on reasonable and rational grounds, and they may do this if they so desire. As free persons, citizens claim the right to view their persons as independent from and not identified with any particular conception of the good, or scheme of final ends. Given their moral power to form, to revise, and rationally to pursue a conception of the good, their public or legal identity as free persons is not affected by changes over time in their determinate conception of the good.
For example, when citizens convert from one religion to another, or no longer affirm an stablished religious faith, they do not cease to be, for questions of political just ice, the same persons they were before. There is no loss of what we may call their public, or legal, identity—their identity as a matter of basic law. In general, they still have the same basic rights and duties, they own the same property and can make the same claims as before, except insofar as these claims were connected with their previous religious affiliation. We can imagine a society (indeed history offers numerous examples) in which basic rights and recognized claims depend on religious affiliation and social class. Such a society has a different political conception of the person. It may not have a conception of citizenship at all; for this conception, as we are using it, goes with the conception of society as a fair system of cooperation for reciprocal advantage between free and equal citizens.
There is another sense of identity specified by reference to citizens' deeper aims and commitments. Let's call it their nonlegal or moral identity. Now citizens usually have both political and nonpolitical aims and commitments. Thus they affirm the values of political justice and want to see them embodied in political institutions and social policies. The y also work for the other nonpolitical values and ends of the associations to which they belong. These two aspects of their moral identity citizens must adjust and reconcile. It can happen that in their personal affairs, or in the internal life of their associations, citizens may regard their final ends and attachments very differently from the way the political conception supposes. They may have, and often do have at any given time, affections, devotions, and loyalties that they believe they would not, indeed could and should not, stand apart from and evaluate objectively. They may regard it as simply unthinkable to view themselves apart from certain religious, philosophical, and moral convictions, or from certain enduring attachments and loyalties. These two kinds of commitments and attachments—political and nonpolitical—specify moral identity and give shape to a person's way of life,
what one sees oneself as doing and trying to accomplish in the social world. If we suddenly lost them, we would be disoriented and unable to carry on. In fact, there would be, we might think, no point in carrying on. Our conceptions of the good may and often do change over time, however, usually slowly but sometimes rather suddenly. When these changes are sudden, we are particularly likely to say that we are no longer the same person. We know what this means: we refer to a profound and pervasive shift, or reversal, in our final ends and commitments; we refer to our different moral (which includes our religious) identity. On the road to Damascus Saul of Tarsus becomes Paul the Apostle. Yet such a conversion implies no change in our public or legal identity, nor in our personal identity as this concept is understood by some writers in the philosophy of mind. And in a well-ordered society supported by an overlapping consensus, citizens' (more general) political values and commitments, as part of their noninstitutional, or moral, identity are roughly the same.
7.5. A second respect in which citizens view themselves as free is that they regard themselves as self-authenticating sources of valid claims. That is, they regard themselves as being entitled to make claims on their institutions so as to advance their conceptions of the good (provided these conceptions fall within the range permitted by the public conception of justice). These claims citizens regard as having weight of their own apart from being derived from duties and obligations specified by a political conception of justice, for example, from duties and obligations owed to society. Claims that citizens regard as founded on duties and obligations based on their conception of the good and the moral doctrine they affirm in their own life are also, for our purposes here, to be counted as self-authenticating. Doing this is reasonable in a political conception of justice for a constitutional democracy, for provided the conceptions of the good and the moral doctrine citizens affirm are compatible with the public conception of justice, these duties and obligations are self-authenticating from a political point of view.
When we describe the way in which citizens regard themselves as free, we are relying on how citizens tend to think of themselves in a democratic society when questions of political justice arise. That this aspect belongs to a particular political conception is clear from the contrast with a different political conception in which the members of society are not viewed as self-authenticating sources of valid claims. In this case their claims have no weight except insofar as they can be derived from the duties and obligations owed to society, or from their ascribed roles in a social hierarchy justified by religious or aristocratic values.
To take an extreme case, slaves are human beings who are not counted as sources of claims, not even claims based on social duties or obligations, for slaves are not counted as capable of having duties or obligations. Laws that prohibit the abuse and maltreatment of slaves are not founded on claims made by slaves in their own behalf, but on claims originating either from slaveholders or from the general interests of society (which do not include the interests of slaves). Slaves are, so to speak, socially dead: they are not recognized as persons at all. This contrast with a political conception of justice that allows slavery makes clear why conceiving of citizens as free persons in virtue of their moral powers and their having a conception of the good goes with a particular political conception of the justice.”
 (John Rawls, Justice as fairness, 1985)

E2.1.C.1.2.c. RUSSELL ARGUES THAT "THE GOOD LIFE MUST BE LIVED IN A GOOD SOCIETY AND IS NOT FULLY POSSIBLE OTHERWISE." He argues that a just society cannot be based on a "limitation of sympathy," which he sees as the "fundamental defect of the aristocratic ideal."
“The good life, as we conceive it, demands a multitude of social conditions and cannot be realized without them. The good life, we said, is a life inspired by love and guided by knowledge. The knowledge required can only exist where governments or millionaires devote themselves to its discovery and diffusion. For example: the spread of cancer is alarming—what are we to do about it? At the moment, no one can answer the question for lack of knowledge; and the knowledge is not likely to emerge except through endowed research. Again: knowledge of science, history, literature, and art ought to be attainable by all who desire it; this requires elaborate arrangements on the part of public authorities and is not to be achieved by means of religious conversion. Then there is foreign trade, without which half the inhabitants of Great Britain would starve; and if we were starving very few of us would live the good life. It is needless to multiply examples. The important point is that, in all that differentiates between a good life and a bad one, the world is a unity, and the man who pretends to live independently is a conscious or unconscious parasite. 
The idea of individual salvation, with which the early Christians consoled themselves for their political subjection, becomes impossible as soon as we escape from a very narrow conception of the good life. In the orthodox Christian conception, the good life is the virtuous life, and virtue consists in obedience to the will of God, and the will of God is revealed to each individual through the voice of conscience. This whole conception is that of men subject to an alien despotism. The good life involves much besides virtue—intelligence, for instance. And conscience is a most fallacious guide, since it consists of vague reminiscences of precepts heard in early youth, so that it is never wiser than its possessor’s nurse or mother. To live a good life in the fullest sense a man must have a good education, friends, love, children (if he desires them), a sufficient income to keep him from want and grave anxiety, good health, and work which is not uninteresting. All these things, in varying degrees, depend upon the community and are helped or hindered by political events. The good life must be lived in a good society and is not fully possible otherwise. 
This is the fundamental defect of the aristocratic ideal. Certain good things, such as art and science and friendship, can flourish very well in an aristocratic society. They existed in Greece on a basis of slavery; they exist among ourselves on a basis of exploitation. But love, in the form of sympathy, or benevolence, cannot exist freely in an aristocratic society. The aristocrat has to persuade himself that the slave or proletarian or colored man is of inferior clay, and that his sufferings do not matter. At the present moment, polished English gentlemen flog Africans so severely that they die after hours of unspeakable anguish. Even if these gentlemen are well educated, artistic, and admirable conversationalists, I cannot admit that they are living the good life. Human nature imposes some limitation of sympathy, but nor such a degree as that. In a democratically-minded society, only a maniac would behave in this way. The limitation of sympathy involved in the aristocratic ideal is its condemnation. Salvation is an aristocratic ideal, because it is individualistic. For this reason also the idea of personal salvation, however interpreted and expanded, cannot serve for the definition of the good life. 
Another characteristic of salvation is that it results from a catastrophic change, like the conversion of St. Paul. Shelley’s poems afford an illustration of this conception applied to societies; the moment comes when everybody is converted, the “anarchs” fly, and “the world’s great age begins anew.” It may be said that a poet is an unimportant person whose ideas are of no consequence. But I am persuaded that a large proportion of revolutionary leaders have had ideas extremely like Shelley’s. They have thought that misery and cruelty and degradation were due to tyrants or priests or capitalists or Germans, and that if these sources of evil were overthrown there would be a general change of heart and we should all live happily ever after. Holding these beliefs, they have been willing to wage a “war to end war.” Comparatively fortunate were those who suffered defeat or death; those who had the misfortune to emerge victorious were reduced to cynicism and despair by the failure of all their glowing hopes. The ultimate source of these hopes was the Christian doctrine of catastrophic con¬ version as the road to salvation.”
(Bertrand Russell, Why I Am Not A Christian, 1927)

E2.1.C.1.2.d. A SYSTEM OF LAW AND CONVENTION IS NOT AN "UNNATURAL" OR ARBITRARY IMPOSITION. IT IS THE RESULT OF COLLECTIVE REASON AND EXPERIENCE OVER TIME; IT IS "WHAT MAN IN SOCIETY HAS DELIBERATELY JUDGED TO BE BEST." 
On the one hand it may be said, Members of a civilized community have contracted themselves out of certain original rights, and the existence of the community depends on the maintenance of that contract ; therefore a strong government, or at any rate the maintenance of some government, is necessary, and nothing can be allowed to violate existing law. On the other hand it may equally well be said, The present government depends only on tacit contract, and the people who entered into this contract are at liberty to dissolve it whenever they think fit. As Glaucon here applies it, the theory is used destructively and in a revolutionary interest, to show that justice is a matter of contract and convention only; and there is further a most important implication that all convention, and therefore all law, is a sort of artificial violence done to human nature.
The antithesis of nature and law or convention, which thus lies at the root of Glaucon's argument,  is one which was widely current in Plato's time.  Like  many other antitheses, it has different meanings in  different people's mouths, and it generally owes its  effectiveness to the fact of having no definite meaning  but confusing different views.  We first hear of it in the  history of philosophy as applied to physical nature.  Democritus distinguished the real constitution of the  physical world from those secondary qualities which  plainly are relative to human sensation (' hot ' and  'cold,' 'sweet' and 'bitter,' and the like), saying that  the former existed […] and the latter […]. And in  the various uses of the antithesis we can generally trace  a contrast between that which is radical and underived  and that which is acquired, or between that which is  permanent and universal and that which changes with  circumstances.  But no word is more ambiguous than  nature; and in applying the formula to human action  and feeling, some theorists have held that what is  'natural' in man is what he has most in common with  the rest of the animal world; some, at the opposite  extreme, think (as Plato and Aristotle emphatically did)  that human nature is properly that in man which most  distinguishes him from the rest of the animal world, the  'differentia' of man, not his 'genus.'  
In one sense everything that man does is natural to  him, law, morality, science, as much as anything else ;  his nature is all that he does.  When this antithesis  between law and nature is made, the antithesis is, so  co say, within man.  What then, it may be asked,  remembering all the time that we are within human  nature, is the ground upon which certain products of  human nature are distinguished as natural, and others  as conventional?  In the antithesis as it is here used  'conventional' appears to stand for that which depends  for its existence upon certain mutual understandings  which society necessarily employs.  Now, to speak of  these as conventional is to recognize the truth that the  existence of society does in the last resort depend on  a mutual understanding; all the institutions of the state  and of society are forms of mutual understanding, and,  as they are emphatically creations of man, there is no  reason why he should not dispense with them if he  wished.  If the theory of contract is understood in this  sense, it is not profitable to dismiss it by saying it is  unhistorical. That does not invalidate the fact, for it  is a fact, that society is based upon contract.  And we  may go on to say with equal truth that the existence of  society implies that the individual members of it agree  to sacrifice a part of their individuality, or to sacrifice  a part of their rights, if we call what a man can do  his rights.  Two people cannot live and work together  without surrendering something which they would do if  separate, for joint action is not the same as separate  action. But is there any point in representing the results  of this mutual understanding not only as conventional  but as merely conventional, contrasting them with some- thing natural which has a deeper authority?  What is  this something natural? What would man be naturally,  in this sense of the word?  The only answer to the question is that he would be himself minus everything  that he is by convention, and that means minus every- thing in him which the existence of society implies.  Such a 'natural' man does not exist, but that is the way  in which we should have to think of him. 
It appears, then, that while we may, in a true sense,  describe laws and institutions as 'conventional,' it does  not follow that they are therefore, in any true sense,  contrary to ' nature ' ; and that there is all the difference  in the world between saying that the institutions of  society are based on compact, and saying that therefore  they are unnatural or merely conventional.  How is it,  then, that the antithesis between natural and conventional  is so common and has such a strong hold on us, and what  do we mean by 'conventional ' when we use the word, as  we commonly do, with a bad signification?  When we  say an institution or custom is merely conventional, what  we really mean is that it has no right to exist, because  it has ceased to have the use which it once had.  A law  which has ceased to have any justification for its  existence is the best instance of what people have in  mind when they employ this antithesis. And the reason  why there are endless debates as to what is merely  conventional and what is not, is simply that people  have very different ideas as to when the real occasion  for a law or custom or institution has ceased to exist.  
While then Glaucon's theory, by which justice is set  down as a something conventional and contrary to  nature, contains the great truth that laws and customs  would not exist but for a mutual understanding, it  ignores the significance of this mutual understanding. For  not only is this understanding the work of man, it is  what man in society has deliberately judged to be best.
How has this deliberate judgment come to be passed? If it were true that to commit injustice with impunity is the real nature of man, there would have been no force to create society. The strongest motives are those which impel to action ; and it would be impossible to account for the existence of society at all, if injustice had a special claim to be called the natural tendency of human action.
Glaucon, in the second place, goes on to contend that, as a matter of fact, justice is always observed unwillingly; that is to say, that morality, public and private, is only maintained by force. Here again a very real and important fact is made the basis of a very false theory. The existence of society does imply force, which is exercised in various ways. In every civilized community the established order of things is ultimately backed by the force of the police and the army. There are a certain number of people who can only be kept from injuring society by force, and the law of the land can only exist if there is physical force in the background. But it is quite another thing to say that force and the fear of force, in that sense of the word, is what maintains morality in the community ; and it would be easy to show that, if the morality of a community really depended on force and on fear in the usual sense, it could not possibly continue to exist.”
(Richard Lewis Nettleship, Lectures on the Republic of Plato, 1901)

E2.1.C.1.2.e. Illustration: Parameters for the brain

"All traditional views are held with such tenacity, such almost ferocity, because they belong to the class of views induced, not by individual experience, still less by reason, but by collective, or, as it is sometimes called “herd,” suggestion. This used to be called “faith.” The belief so held may or may not be true; collective suggestion is not in the least necessarily collective hallucination. Mere collective suggestions — that is the interesting point — have the quality of obviousness; they do not issue from the individual, but seem imposed from outside, and ineluctable; they have all the inevitableness of instinctive opinion… Hence they are held with an intensity of emotion far beyond any reasoned conviction. To doubt them is felt to be at once idiocy and irreverence. Inquiry into their rational bases is naturally, and in a sense rightly, resented, because they are not rationally based, though they may be rationally supported. It is by convictions such as this that a society of the homogenous kind — a society based on and held together by uniformity — lives and thrives. To attack them is to cripple and endanger its inmost life. [...]
"We decline to be ourselves part of an undifferentiated mass; we refuse to deal with others in classes and masses… We are dissatisfied now not only with the herd-sanctions of religion, but with many of those later sanctities of law to which some even emancipated thinkers ascribe a sort of divinity. We feel the inherent savagery of law in that it treats individuals as masses… Yet all the time we know that we can, with spiritual safety, rebel only in so far as we are personally sensitive to the claims of other individual lives that touch our own. The old herd-problem remains of how to live together; and as the union grows closer and more intricate the chances of mutual hurt are greater, and the sensitiveness must grow keener. Others are safe from and with us only when their pain is our pain, their joy ours."
(Jane Ellen Harrison, Heresy and Humanity, found in Alpha and Omega)

E2.1.C.1.2.f. The spirit´s body

"Concerning the dominant current of thought that has prevailed in the West, from the Greeks to the rationalism of the modern age, via Descartes, one could say very schematically that what has singled it out and what, in many respects, has made its greatness - even if, for the last century, it has come under attack on the philosophical level - is its dualistic approach: a dualism based on the separation of spirit and matter, of subject and object.  All of humanity has benefited from this separation as a necessary step that allowed positive achievements: the affirmation of the object to be observed and analyzed led to the advent of logic and scientific thought; the affirmation of the subject, on the other hand, led to the elaboration of rights that protect its status, and foment effective freedom."
(François Cheng, Five Meditations on Beauty, 2006)

E2.1.C.1.2.g.  "CAN HUMANS ALSO BE GOD TO OTHER HUMANS?
This is indeed what Spinoza asserts (Book IV, Proposition 35, Scholium). Of course, insofar as men are prey to passions, they can be opposed to one another and destroy each other. But if they live under the guidance of reason, they perceive their own nature and recognize all that they share with their fellow men; they then understand how much they can help one another, to the point of forming a society. Kindness towards others, which Spinoza calls “piety,” is therefore not an act of devotion, compassion, or altruism, but a form of well-understood selfishness (as the Buddhist monk Matthieu Ricard often repeats today). “It is when each man seeks what is most useful to him that men are most useful to each other.”
Spinoza thus explicitly takes the opposite view to Hobbes, who a few years earlier had asserted that “man is a wolf to man” and that the Leviathan, the security state, should therefore be given all the means necessary to tame him. “Let the Satirists mock human affairs as much as they like,” advises Spinoza: have they not themselves proven their social nature by feeling the need to mock others? The Spinozist state will not be lax or angelic, and will play on emotions to punish and deter; but its anthropological foundation, based on utility rather than fear, paves the way for governance through incentives rather than coercion. The purpose of the City is therefore to bring about freedom. “To want to regulate everything by laws,” Spinoza explains in his Theological-Political Treatise, “is to irritate vices rather than correct them.”
But where does this mysterious reason come from? For this important question, I will give the floor to Gilles Deleuze in his commentary on Spinoza. A thinker of immanence, Spinoza rejects the traditional separation of the rational soul and sinful senses. On the contrary: adequate ideas, and therefore reason, stem from the perception of what we have in common, including the way we experience our bodies and express our feelings. Man is therefore not born reasonable, but becomes so through “an effort to select and organize good encounters, that is, encounters that inspire joyful passions.”
Through good encounters, we develop reason; through reason, we improve our life together."
(Gaspar Koenig, TimeToPhilo, January 17, 2019)

E2.1.C.1.2.h. “JEAN-JACQUES ROUSSEAU'S "SOCIAL CONTRACT": SHOULD WE SUBMIT TO THE GENERAL WILL?

The social contract is the act by which a people *is* a people (not "becomes a people"): it is an act of association, not submission. There is only one social contract—the one that establishes the state. The relationship with leaders who can be dismissed at any time is not contractual in nature.

Natural law is no longer the norm in political life; the people have replaced it with the general will. For Diderot, the general will is that of the species. Rousseau questions which person would be capable of setting aside their own particular interests to satisfy the supposed will of humanity. Rousseau wants to be more realistic: we must start from self-love and conceive of laws as they can actually be. The general will is that of the citizen in a well-ordered society—the will of each individual insofar as it aims at the common good. In a just state constituted by a uniform people, this is naturally expressed if the citizens are free.

However, there are many conditions that would limit the concept of the general will to the expression of a very small, homogeneous society with shared desires, relatively equal in material terms and especially equal in education. There must also be no "partial societies" (pressure groups, parties, etc.) so that everyone can express themselves according to their own views; otherwise there would not be "as many voters as there are people." What Rousseau does not consider is that deviations from this theoretical model will quickly turn the "general will" into an argument for totalitarian dictatorships. In this sense, Rousseau is the apostle of the freedom of the ancients—based on the model of ancient Greece—but can he adapt to modernity? Political modernity will introduce representative government, the separation of powers, and the charter of individual rights as safeguards. Montesquieu and Tocqueville are more modern because they advocate the subdivision of society into separate bodies, each representing their own interests, with the understanding that interests will necessarily clash because there is no single common good and that one part of society must not be allowed to oppress another.

However, Rousseau was extremely concerned about the safety of everyone in a just state; he did not believe that individuals could ever be sacrificed for the benefit of the whole. During the French Revolution, those like Robespierre who claimed to follow his thinking actually usurped it.

When citizens express the general will, they do so by asking themselves the question: "What is advantageous for the general good of the state to which I belong?" (general and not universal, as in Kant). The state must ensure that citizens are educated so that their individual wills evolve over time toward the general will.”
(Céline Spector in the program Les Chemins de la philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on April 15, 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/le-contrat-social-de-jean-jacques-rousseau-14-doit-se-plier-a-la-volonte-generale

John Trashkowsky, Justice, 2020

"JEAN-JACQUES ROUSSEAU'S SOCIAL CONTRACT: FROM THE MULTITUDE TO THE PEOPLE

In Hobbes's view, human beings escape the state of war by transferring their sovereignty to the sovereign, whose potential despotism will always be less terrible than the war of all against all. The people are bound together by a contract between its members, but the sovereign stands external to it and is not bound by the contract.

For Rousseau, there can be no "people" if they are subject to an authority that exercises power over them. All citizens participate in the general will.

If the people have successfully constituted themselves, there should be no grievances (such as those of the yellow vests). For Rousseau, equality and freedom are inseparable. Equality is not only a matter of rights—if one person's power subjugates another through their social position, freedom is lost. Above a certain level of inequality, freedom becomes impossible. If I must sell myself to survive, I am no longer free. True freedom means obeying only the law that the people have given themselves, hence the importance of the legislator.

The law agreed upon by the general will must allow us to live as freely as in the state of nature. "A man is free when he does not need to use the arms of another man to do what he wants" (J.J. Rousseau, *Emile*). This definition shows that even in the state of nature, people remain interdependent to some extent while still being free. I do what I want because I only want what I can do in the state of nature."
(Frédéric Brahami in the program Les Chemins de la philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on April 16, 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/le-contrat-social-de-jean-jacques-rousseau-24-de-la-multitude-au-peuple

E2.1.C.1.3. Once the social contract is established, societies create institutions and processes (legal and cultural) to actively protect freedom from being lost to arbitrary power or violence.

E2.1.C.1.3.a. A JUST SYSTEM IS ONE THAT ALLOWS THE "BATTLE FOR PREDOMINANCE" TO BE FOUGHT AS A "STRUGGLE BETWEEN 'BELIEFS'" RATHER THAN A PHYSICAL WAR.
“The clashes that commonly accompany establishment of a permanent affiliative relationship arise as a result of the incompatibility of (implicit and explicit) individual moral presumptions and propositions, in the interpersonal sphere (arise as a result of an interpersonal “war of implicit gods”). Such clashes may be resolved in a variety of manners. One partner may, through judicious application of physical or psychological punishment, render the other impotent, so to speak, and subordinate—permanently frustrated, miserable, anxious and hostile. The marriage may thus lose much of its value or may dissolve altogether. This does not constitute a “solution”—merely regression, in  the face of emergent anomaly, to the preexistent “single personality.” Alternatively, each  partner may determine to take “the other” into serious consideration, and rearrange  personal behavior (and emergent value) accordingly. This process will not occur without  capacity to engage in open conflict (to exchange often distressing information,  realistically speaking) or without the courage to voluntarily submit to the experience of  negative emotion [including anxiety, guilt and shame, as previously “unconscious”  (implicit) faults and insufficiencies come to light]. The mythic subjugation of the partners  in a marriage to the higher authority of Christ, the culture hero, ritually represented in the  Christian marriage ceremony, constitutes symbolic aid to this process.334   Voluntary subordination of the personal wishes of both individuals to the higher moral  order embodied in the action patterns of the Christian savior, for example, means implicit  agreement about the nature of transcendent principles that can be referred to when  mediation between incompatible desires and presuppositions becomes necessary. This  means that the “personality” constituted by the “mystical union” of both partners in the  marriage is supposed to approximate Christ—to stand as an entity superordinate to the  “less complete” individuals who compose the “married couple.” This process of  voluntary subordination “to a higher deity” parallels the extended transpersonal historical  process described in the Enuma elish, with regard to the ascendance of Marduk. Through  conflict (and cooperation), within the “container” of the marriage, new moralities are  created—new patterns of behavior (and assumption and expectation) manifested and  internally represented. This process may be guided to a healthy outcome through mutual  participation in community-sponsored religious ritual. Alternatively, individuals may  succeed, or fail, in isolation.   Motivational states compete for predominance in the present, in the purely subjective  and interpersonal spheres, and also compete across time. What is fear-provoking now  may be tolerated because it means less punishment (or less fear, or more pleasure, or  more hope) in the future, insofar as intelligence or custom can make that judgment;  similarly, the social group and the additional pressure it produces is tolerated because the  group constitutes the most effective currently imaginable solution to the problem of  adaptation. This group, the current embodiment of human custom, is the consequence of  a battle between various ways of being fought across generations.   Although the “battle for predominance” that characterizes exchange of morally  relevant information can easily be imagined as a war (and is often fought out in the guise  of genuine war), it is more frequently the case that it manifests itself as a struggle  between “beliefs.” In the latter case, it loss of faith, rather than life, that determines the  outcome of the battle. Human beings can substitute loss of faith for death partly because  they are capable of abstractly constructing their “territories” (making beliefs out of them)  and of abstractly abandoning those territories once they are no longer tenable. Animals,  less capable of abstraction, are also able to lose face, rather than life, although they “act  out” this loss, in behavioral routines, rather than in verbal or imagistic battles (rather than  through argument). It is the capacity to “symbolically capitulate” and to “symbolically  destroy” that in large part underlies the ability of individual animals to organize  themselves into social groups (which require a hierarchical organization) and to maintain and update those groups once established. Much the same can be said for human beings (who also engage in abstract war, at the procedural level, as well as in real war and argumentation). “
(Jordan Peterson, Maps of Meaning The Architecture of Belief, 1999)

E2.1.C.1.3.b. FRIEDRICH HAYEK IDENTIFIES THE GREAT AMERICAN CONTRIBUTION AS THE INVENTION OF MODERN CONSTITUTIONALISM. THIS IS DEFINED AS THE "APPLICATION OF THE PRINCIPLE OF LEGAL LIMITATION OF POWER... TO PARLIAMENT ITSELF." This is presented as the ultimate cornerstone of a just legal system, designed to protect individual liberty from any arbitrary power, even the power of a democratic majority.
“It is true that many of these admirable principles remained largely theory and that the state legislatures soon came as near to claiming omnipotence as the British Parliament had done. Indeed, “under most of the revolutionary constitutions the legislature was truly omnipotent and the executive correspondingly weak. Nearly all of these instruments conferred upon the former body practically unlimited power. In six constitutions there was nothing what-ever to prevent the legislature amending the constitution by ordinary legislative process.” Even where this was not so, the legislatures often highhandedly disregarded the text of the constitution and still more those unwritten rights of the citizens which these constitutions had been intended to protect. But the development of explicit safeguards against such abuses required time. The main lesson of the period of Confederation was that the mere writing down on paper of a constitution changed little unless explicit machinery was provided to enforce it.
Much is sometimes made of the fact that the American Constitution is the product of design and that, for the ﬁrst time in modern history, a people deliberately constructed the kind of government under which they wished to live. The Americans themselves were very conscious of the unique nature of their undertaking, and in a sense it is true that they were guided by a spirit of rationalism, a desire for deliberate construction and pragmatic procedure closer to what we have called the “French tradition” than to the “British.”35 This attitude was often strengthened by a general suspicion of tradition and an exuberant pride in the fact that the new structure was entirely of their own making. It was more justiﬁed here than in many similar instances, yet still essentially mistaken. It is remarkable how diﬀerent from any clearly foreseen structure is the frame of government which ultimately emerged, how much of the outcome was due to historical accident or the application of inherited principles to a new situation. What new discoveries the federal Constitution contained either resulted from the application of traditional principles to particular problems or emerged as only dimly perceived consequences of general ideas.
When the Federal Convention, charged “to render the constitution of the federal government more adequate to the exigencies of the Union,” met at Philadelphia in May, 1787, the leaders of the federalist movement found  themselves confronted by two problems. While everybody agreed that the powers of the confederation were insuﬃcient and must be strengthened, the main concern was still to limit the powers of government as such, and not the least motive in seeking reform was to curb the arrogation of powers by the state legislatures.36 The experience of the ﬁrst decade of independence had merely somewhat shifted the emphasis from protection against arbitrary government to the creation of one eﬀective common government. But it had also provided new grounds for suspecting the use of power by the state legislatures. It was scarcely foreseen that the solution of the ﬁrst problem would also provide the answer to the second and that the transference of some essential powers to a central government, while leaving the rest to the separate states, would also set an eﬀective limit on all government. Apparently it was from Madison that “came the idea that the problem of producing adequate safeguards for private rights and adequate powers for national government was in the end the same problem, inasmuch as a strengthened national government could be a make- weight against the swollen prerogatives of state legislatures.” Thus the great discovery was made of which Lord Acton later said: “Of all checks on democracy, federalism has been the most eﬃcacious and the most congenial. . . . The federal system limits and restrains the sovereign power by dividing it, and by assigning to Government only certain deﬁned rights. It is the only method of curbing not only the majority but the power of the whole people, and it aﬀords the strongest basis for a second chamber, which has been found essential security for freedom in every genuine democracy.”
The reason why a division of powers between diﬀerent authorities always reduces the power that anybody can exercise is not always understood. It is not merely that the separate authorities will, through mutual jealousy, prevent one another from exceeding their authority. More important is the fact that certain kinds of coercion require the joint and coordinated use of diﬀerent powers or the employment of several means, and, if these means are in separate hands, nobody can exercise those kinds of coercion. The most familiar illustration is provided by many kinds of economic control which can be eﬀective only if the authority exercising them can also control the movement of men and goods across the frontiers of its territory. If it lacks that power, though it has the power to control internal events, it cannot pursue policies which require the joint use of both. Federal government is thus in a very deﬁnite sense limited government.”
 (Friedrich Hayek, The Constitution of Liberty, 1960)

E2.1.C.1.3.c. WINNICOTT ANALYSES WHAT CONSTITUTES A JUST SOCIAL SYSTEM FOR DEALING WITH ITS MOST DAMAGED MEMBERS.
“Therapeutics and management 
 I now want to contrast the two extremes of management, the one being the foster home and the other the large institution. In the former, as I have said, the aim is truly therapeutic. It is hoped that the child will recover in the course of time from the deprivation which, without such management, would not only leave a scar but would actually leave crippling. If this is to happen, much more is needed than the child’s response to the new environment. 
 At ﬁrst the child is apt to make a quick response and those concerned are apt to think that their troubles are over. When the child gains conﬁdence, however, there follows a growing capacity for anger with the previous environmental failure. It is unlikely, of course, that what happens will exactly look like this, especially since the child is not conscious of the main revolutionary changes which are taking place. The foster parents will ﬁnd that they them-selves periodically become the target of the child’s hate. They will have to take over the anger which is beginning to be able to be felt and which belongs to the failure in the child’s own home. It is very important for foster parents to understand this, otherwise they get disheartened; and child care ofﬁcers must know about it, otherwise they will blame foster parents and believe the children’s stories about ill treatment and starvation. If the foster parents receive a visit from an ofﬁcer who is looking for signs of trouble, they may become over-anxious, and this makes them try to seduce the child into being friendly and happy, thus depriving the child of a most important part of recovery. 
 Sometimes a child will very cleverly bring about speciﬁc ill treatment, in an attempt to bring into the actual present a badness that can be met by hate; the cruel foster parent is then actually loved because of the relief that the child feels through transformation of ‘hate versus hate’ locked up within into hate meeting external hate now. Unfortunately at this point the foster parents are liable to become misunderstood in their social group. 
 There are ways out. For instance, some foster parents will be found to work on the rescue principle. For them the child’s parents were hopelessly bad, and they say so over and over again out loud to the child, and thus they divert the child’s hate from themselves. This method may work fairly well but it ignores the reality situation, and in any case disturbs something which is a feature in deprived children, that they tend to idealize their own home such as it is. No doubt it is more healthy when the foster parents can take the periodical waves of negative feeling and survive them, reaching each time to a new, more secure (because less idealized) relation to the child. 
 In contrast, the child in the big institution is  not  being managed with the aim of curing him of his illness. The aims are, ﬁrst, to provide housing and food and clothing for children who are neglected; second, to devise a type of management in which the children live in a state of order rather than chaos; and third, to keep as many of the children as possible from a clash with society until they must be let loose on the world somewhere about the age of sixteen. It is no good mixing things up and pretending that at this end of the scale an attempt is being made to create normal human beings. A strict management in such cases is essential, and if to this can be added some humanity so much the better. 
 It must be remembered that even in very strict communities, as long as there is consistency and fairness the children can discover humanity among them-selves, and they can even come to value the strictness because of the fact that it implies stability. Understanding men and women working this kind of system can ﬁnd ways of introducing more humane moments. Something can be done, for instance, by selecting suitable children for regular contacts with reliable aunt and uncle substitutes in the outside world. People can be found who will write on the child’s birthday, and who will ask the child home to tea three or four times a year. These are only examples but they show the sort of thing that can be done and that is done without disturbance of the strict setting in which the children live. It has to be remembered that if the strict setting is the basis, then it is disturbing to the children if this strict setting has exceptions and loopholes. If there has to be a strict setting, then let it be consistent, reliable, and fair, so that it can have positive value. Besides, there will always be those children who abuse privileges, and then the children who could use them will have to suffer. 
 In this type of large institution, for the sake of peace and quiet, the accent is put on management on behalf of society. Within this framework the children must lose their own individuality to a greater or lesser extent. (I am not ignoring the fact that in the intermediate institutions there is room for a gradual growth of the children who are healthy enough to grow, so that they become increasingly able to identify with society without loss of identity.) 
 There will still be some children who, because they are what I want to call mad (although one must not use such a word), are failures even if dictated to. For such children there must be the equivalent of the mental hospital which caters for adults, and I think we have not yet determined what is the best that society can do for these extreme cases. Such children are so ill that those who are looking after them easily recognize that when they begin to become anti-social this means that they are beginning to get better. 
 I conclude this section by referring to matters which are of great importance in a consideration of the needs of the deprived child.  
Importance of child’s early history 
 The ﬁrst of these very much concerns the child care worker, especially in her capacity of boarding out and of keeping a watchful eye on the new situation.
If I were a child care ofﬁcer, as soon as a child came into my care I would immediately want to collect together every particle of information that could be found about that child’s life up to the present moment. This is always urgent because the passage of every day makes it less easy for anyone to come by the essential facts. How distressing it was in the second world war, when the failures of the evacuation scheme were being dealt with, and there were children about whom one could never ﬁnd out anything! 
 We know how normal children sometimes say as they are going to bed, ‘What did I do today?’, and then the mother says, ‘You woke up at half past six, and you played with your teddy, singing nursery rhymes until we woke, and then you got up and went out into the garden, and then you had break-fast, and then . . .’, and so on, until the whole scheme of the day has been integrated from outside. The child has all the information there but likes to be helped to be aware of it all. This feels good and real and helps the child to distinguish reality from the dream and from imaginative play. The same thing writ large would be represented by the way the ordinary parent has of going over the past life of the child, including what the child only just remembers and also what the child does not know anything about. 
 The lack of this simple thing is a serious loss for the deprived child. At any rate there should be someone who has gathered together whatever is avail-able. In the very favourable case the child care ofﬁcer will be able to have a long interview with the actual mother, letting her gradually unfold the whole history from the moment of birth, even perhaps giving important details about her experiences during pregnancy and the experiences leading up to conception, which may or may not have determined much of her attitude to the child. Often, however, the worker will have to go here and there and everywhere to collect information; even the name of a friend that the child had in the institution before last may be valuable. There will follow the task of organizing a contact with the child, when the social worker gains the child’s conﬁdence. Some way may be found of letting the child know that here or in a ﬁ le in the ofﬁce of the children’s ofﬁcer there is the saga of the child’s life as lived hitherto. The child may not want to be told anything for the time being, but later on details may be needed. It is particularly the illegitimate and the child with a broken home who eventually need to be able to get to the facts — that is, if health is to be reached, and I assume that in the case of the fostered child the aim is to produce a healthy child. The child at the other extreme, managed by dictatorial methods in a large group, is less likely to become well enough to assimilate the truth about the past. 
 Because this is so, and because there is an acute shortage of workers, the start should be made at the more normal end. Even so, child care workers are likely to feel that, much as they would like to do this kind of thing, it is impossible because of their case load. My point is that child care workers must decide absolutely that they will not take more cases than they can manage. There is no half and half business about the care of children. It is a matter of dealing with a few children well and handing the others over to the large institution with dictatorial methods until society can manage some-thing better. Good work has to be personal, or it is cruel and tantalizing both to the child and to the child care worker.  The work is only worth doing if it is personal and if those who are doing the work are not overburdened . 
 It must be remembered that if child care workers accept too much work they will be bound to have failures, and eventually statisticians will come along and prove that the whole thing is wrong, and that the dictatorial methods are more effectual in providing factories with workers, and homes with domestic servants. “
(D W Winnicott, Deprivation and Delinquency, 1984)


E2.1.C.1.3.d. P_Cecil Beaton_Britain in 1940

"The rules of justice, such as prevail among individuals, are not entirely suspended among political societies. All princes pretend a regard to the rights of other princes; and some, no doubt, without hypocrisy. Alliances and treaties are every day made between independent states, which would only be so much waste of parchment, if they were not found by experience to have SOME influence and authority. But here is the difference between kingdoms and individuals. Human nature cannot by any means subsist, without the association of individuals; and that association never could have place, were no regard paid to the laws of equity and justice. Disorder, confusion, the war of all against all, are the necessary consequences of such a licentious conduct. But nations can subsist without intercourse. They may even subsist, in some degree, under a general war."
(David Hume, An enquiry concerning the principles of morals, 1751)

E2.1.C.1.3.e. A_Matteo Ghidoni, Gabriel Biselli, Luiz Solano_Sallottobuono_2019_(1) ; A_Matteo Ghidoni, Gabriel Biselli, Luiz Solano_Sallottobuono_2019_(2)

"In his Eloge des frontières (2012), Régis Debray explains [the reason for the resurgence of borders today] by the neglect of the virtues of borders, primarily as a vital necessity—quoting Valéry: “The most profound thing about man is his skin.” Secondly, a moral necessity: “How can we bring order to chaos? By drawing a line. By separating the outside from the inside.” Finally, a political necessity: it allows us to “preserve the uniqueness of a place and, through it, the singularity of a people.” Thus, although the border is not a wall – “the wall prohibits passage, the border regulates it” – forgetting its benefits causes an identity shift: the more uprooted we feel, the more we want to reconnect with our roots, even if they are exaggerated. “Border hypersensitivities will multiply, since fanaticism is a skin disease, a disease of friction.”
(Hocine Rahli, TimeToPhilo, 11/21/2019)

Read the full article in French: https://mailchi.mp/timetophilo/1989-2019-dun-mur-lautre?e=ee0250812e

E2.1.C.1.3.f. "JEAN-JACQUES ROUSSEAU'S "SOCIAL CONTRACT": WHO MAKES THE LAW?
The social contract arises from a paradox: the state can only be constituted by law emanating from the general will, but the people can only form a state if they have already achieved a certain maturity. Before association, its members have no capacity for the general will. The legislator must therefore provide the initial impetus, educating and shaping the people so they can recognize their general will and create laws.
See the role of the legislator as an impetus in Chapter 6 of Book II, "On the Law."
Rousseau's reflection—still relevant today—concerns the legitimacy of democracy, since its founding act is generally external to it and the "legislator" is never the ideal figure Rousseau imagined.
See the means by which the legislator can establish a people in Chapter 7 of Book II, "On the Legislator": altering the constitution of man to strengthen it, replacing man's natural powers with those of the social body. Rousseau presupposes the perfectibility with which human beings are endowed (in the second discourse on the origin of inequalities). It is in their nature to transform themselves—this is not violence, since the state of nature has already been lost. To denature man means nothing: man is defined as the animal that can be educated.
Rousseau does not characterize this new civil liberty, but is it possible to give liberty a purpose in advance? The legislator does not imprison minds; he produces liberty. Man then substitutes justice for instinct and reason for inclination. Rousseau is not an advocate of savage life! He is suspicious of the individual—whose particular viewpoint can turn into oppression—yet he also seeks out the individual, if only his own, with the Confessions and Reveries of a Solitary Walker. Is this tension due to the fact that he feels one is the condition of the other?"
(Franck Kausch in the program Les Chemins de la philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on April 17, 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French:  https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/le-contrat-social-de-jean-jacques-rousseau-34-qui-fait-la-loi

"JEAN-JACQUES ROUSSEAU'S THE SOCIAL CONTRACT: CAN SOMEONE BE FORCED TO BE FREE?
The idea of forcing citizens to be free should be understood as a defense of the law—closer to a constitution—that citizens have given themselves. This doesn't mean I can't critique the law to influence its reform. For Rousseau, law preserves freedom rather than constrains it. We must remember that when humans left the limited freedom of the state of nature, they gained a new freedom with three advantages:
1.	Political freedom to help define the general will and be subject only to it
2.	Civil liberty to enjoy physical protection, property rights, and the ability to do anything not prohibited by law
3.	Moral liberty, which emerges in civil society when we act through reasoned choice rather than instinct
Rousseau is not a naturalist who believes humans are inherently good. In the state of nature, humans simply obey appetite—including a reluctance to cause suffering, though not a spontaneous impulse to do good.
While Rousseau believes in the possibility of consensus and pays little attention to dissenting minorities, interpretations casting him as a precursor to totalitarianism are mistaken.
Often overlooked is the importance Rousseau places on direct citizen deliberation. This cannot be replaced by voting based on rigid, undebated opinions (like a referendum without prior discussion) or by delegating votes to representatives. The general will must be constructed dynamically and allowed to evolve. A "lazy" democracy disengaged from debate is no democracy at all.
Another key aspect of Rousseau's thought is the distinction between sovereignty and government—though modern democratic models often blur these spheres. For Rousseau, the general will and the law address only the broad principles that define the people. Government executes this vision through specific decrees. Current demands in France for participatory democracy on detailed issues contradict this vision. To motivate broad participation, debates must focus on fundamental values and choices. For Rousseau, exercising freedom creates an appetite for it—not just "assembly at the ballot box" for a simple yes-or-no vote without the deliberation needed to form the general will.
Is Rousseau's vision impossible to implement? Have we become too cowardly, complacent, and timid in contemporary democracies to reinvest in debate and break free from the voluntary servitude that has taken hold?”
(Bruno Bernardi in the program Les Chemins de la philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on April 18, 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/le-contrat-social-de-jean-jacques-rousseau-44-peut-forcer-quelquun-a-etre-libre

BENJAMIN CONSTANT MISSED ROUSSEAU'S CRUCIAL DISTINCTION BETWEEN SOVEREIGNTY AND GOVERNMENT AND HIS FUNDAMENTAL CONCERN FOR PROTECTING INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS
“Benjamin Constant's 1819 essay "De la liberté des anciens comparée à celle des modernes" (On the Liberty of the Ancients Compared with that of the Moderns) offers a narrow interpretation of Rousseau. Constant distinguishes between ancient liberty—which was collective—and modern liberty—which is individual—and classifies Rousseau as favoring tyranny:

"I propose to submit to you some distinctions that are still quite new between two kinds of liberty. One is the freedom whose exercise was so dear to the ancient peoples. It consisted in collectively but directly exercising several parts of the entire sovereignty: deliberating on war and peace, concluding treaties with foreigners, voting on laws, pronouncing judgments, and examining accounts. But at the same time that this was what the ancients called freedom, they accepted as compatible with this collective freedom the complete subjugation of the individual to the authority of the whole.

The other is the freedom that is particularly precious to modern nations. It is the right of each individual to be subject only to the law, to not be arrested, detained, put to death, or mistreated in any way by the arbitrary will of one or more individuals. It is the right of each individual to express their opinion, to choose their occupation, to dispose of their property, and even to abuse it. Failing to see these differences, well-intentioned men caused endless words to be spoken during our long and stormy revolution. They had drawn many of their theories from the works of two philosophers who themselves had no idea of the changes that two thousand years had brought about in the disposition of mankind. I may one day examine the system of the more illustrious of these philosophers, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, and I will show that by transporting to our modern times a range of social power and collective sovereignty that belonged to other centuries, this sublime genius, animated by the purest love of liberty, nevertheless provided fatal pretexts for more than one kind of tyranny."

However, Constant clearly misses Rousseau's distinction between matters of sovereignty and matters of government. For Rousseau, coercive measures would be those of a government that does not respect the will of the people—he never envisions a strong government. In Book II's chapter "Depends on sovereign power," Rousseau writes: "In addition to the public person, we must consider the persons who compose it and whose lives and liberty are naturally independent." This shows his concern with clearly distinguishing between the rights and duties of individuals—a movement that recalls, and precedes, human rights. For Rousseau, man cannot be reduced to his political status, and the government's task is to preserve the civil and political freedom of individuals (Book III).”
(Bruno Bernardi in the program Les Chemins de la philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on April 18, 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/le-contrat-social-de-jean-jacques-rousseau-44-peut-forcer-quelquun-a-etre-libre

E2.1.C.1.3.g. “THE PRINCIPLES OF HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF LAW
"The owl of Minerva takes flight only at dusk." Philosophy can never be prescriptive. The philosopher's task is normative, but it consists of formulating the immanent normativity not yet evident to contemporaries. The philosopher must grasp the spirit of a people so this spirit can better come into being. As Hegel said, "I am only the secretary of the world."
For Hegel, law guarantees freedom—and freedom is a process. We become subjects by sharing the objective spirit: the collective mentality and habits of a people. Hegel makes no distinction between institutional and political character and freedom on an individual level.
"What the subject is is the sum of its actions," as opposed to Kant's morality of intention. Moral subjectivity can only exist if oriented toward a social and political normative network. But is the law not enough? The state defuses the contradictions of civil society by imposing the norm of living together, including between classes or other differences that separate us. The state is between us, not above us. It is within us as a desire to live together.”
(Jean-François Kervégan in the program Les Chemins de la philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on May 3, 2018)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/quoi-hegel-quest-ce-quil-a-hegel-44-le-droit-cest-la-vie

E2.1.C.1.4. True justice only arises when the individual's freedom is "put into question" by its responsibility to the "Third Party."

E2.1.C.1.4.a. LEVINAS ARGUES THAT THE CONCEPT OF JUSTICE IS NOT AN ABSTRACT IDEAL BUT ARISE ONLY WITH THE APPEARANCE OF THE "THIRD PARTY." He posits that while a two-person relationship can resolve its issues through love and pardon, the introduction of a third person creates the social space where the problem of justice becomes necessary. 
“Between the conception in which the ego reaches the other in pure respect (based on sympathy and love) but is detached from the third party, and that which converts us to a singularization of the concept man, where an individual in the extension of that concept is subject to the legislation of an impersonal reason, there is a third way to understand the totality as a totality of egos which are without conceptual unity but in relationship with each other. 
It is requisite for this totality that a free being could have a hold on another free being. If the violation of one free being by another is injustice, the totality can be constituted only through injustice. But injustice could not occur in the society of love, where pardon annuls it. There is real, that is, unpardonable, injustice only with respect to a third party. The third party is the free being whom I can wrong by constraining his freedom. The totality is constituted through the other qua third party. 
Yet injustice involves a metaphysical paradox: it can only aim at a free being, which as such does not lay itself open to violence. What meaning then can freedom have, such that the third party, injustice, and totality are possible? 
Freedom presents itself, in the first analysis, in the shape of a will impervious to influence. In courage, by accepting death, the will finds its full independence. He who has accepted death refuses an alien will to the very end - unless the other desires that very death. The acceptance of death then does not enable one to put forth definitive resistance to the murderous will of another. The absolute disagreement with an alien will does not exclude the fulfillment of his intentions. The refusal of the other, the will resolved to die, thereby breaking every relationship with the exterior, cannot prevent its work from being inscribed in that alien accounting, which the will defies - and recognizes - by its supreme courage. The will, even in the extreme case where it resolves on death, is thus inscribed in the designs of an alien will. Its result puts the will at the mercy of an alien will. 
The will does not then hold on to all the meaning of its own willing. Though it be the free subject of this willing, it exists as the plaything of a fate which transcends it. Through its work it involves an unforeseeable signification which others give it when they put the work, detached from its author, into a new context. Fate does not precede that decision, but is posterior to it; fate is history. A will enters into history because it exists in separating itself from itself: in willing for itself, it finds that it has also willed for others. This alienation owes nothing to history; it institutes history, it is an ontological alienation. At the same time it is the first injustice. Because of this injustice, persons form, around works they quarrel over, a totality. To exist producing works from which the productive will absents itself constitutes the status of a being which, so to speak, does not keep its hands on all the meaning of its being. As a will productive of works, freedom, without being limited in its willing, enters into a history of which it is a plaything. The limitation of the will here is not within it (the will in man is as infinite as it is in God), does not lie in the willing of the will, but lies in its situation. In this situation in which a freedom, without in any way abdicating, nonetheless receives a meaning which remains alien to it, we recognize a created being. The multiplicity of egos is not an accident, but is the structure of creation. The possibility of injustice is the only possibility of limitation on freedom, and is the condition for a totality to take form. 
The evident injustice of that history lies in the possibility of depriving the will of its work. In each of its products, without dying completely, without entering obligingly into the history which historians, that is, the survivors, recount, it is separated from its work and becomes unrecognizable by its contemporaries. Every work is in this sense abortive. In this a work differs from expression, in which the other personally presents himself; a work presents its author in the absence of the author. It does not only present him inasmuch as it is his effect, but inasmuch as it is his possession. One has to take account of the worker when one takes over the work; one has to take it or purchase it from him. Through steel or gold, things among things, I then have power over the freedom of the other, while recognizing that freedom which qua freedom excludes any passivity through which the other's power could be taken hold of. The will productive of works is a freedom that betrays itself. Through this betrayal society, the totality made up of freedoms both maintained in their singularity and engaged in a totality, is possible. The ego's elationship with a totality is then essentially economic. "Earthly morality" is rightly suspicious of every relationship between beings which has not first been an economic relationship. The relationship between freedoms is in the last instance based on the ambiguity of the will, simultaneously being and having, a being which is in possession of itself and is exterior to its possession, but is caught up by it and betrays itself through it. 
That means that the ontological structure of the third party takes shape as a body: both as the will's "I can," lived body, and its vulnerability, physiological body. The simultaneity of these two moments, the "I can" turning into a thing, constitutes the mode of existence of the third party. His existence is health and illness. It is concretely revealed in suffering, which is incapable of overcoming itself inwardly, and from within is bent toward external mediation. The physician's practice, already from the time of the first meditations of the Greek sages, gives lie to the autarchy of the will. Before the physician the will divests itself of its "being for itself" in a strange acknowledgment of being a pure thing, and returns to the immediacy of nature. Injustice is not reducible to an offense against the will attacked in its dignity. The will is something one mistreats, violates, forces - to the point of making it forget its being for itself, making it feel the force that bends it as its own inclination. One can do anything with man. The will, by virtue of its essence exposed to violence, can be emancipated only by building a world in which it suppresses the occasions for betrayal. 
But the violence of the sword lets the will it seeks to dominate escape. True violence conserves the freedom it coerces. Gold is its instrument; violence is corruption. Without yet having recourse to justice, the way of peacetime violence, exploitation or slow death is substituted for the passion of war. 
The third party, apprehendable in his work, is both present and absent; his third person presence indicates exactly the simultaneity of this presence and this absence. He is delivered over to my power inasmuch as he is exterior to my grasp. He is accessible in injustice. And that is why injustice, which is both a recognition and a non-recognition, is possible, through gold which coerces and tempts, an instrument of guilt. The injustice by virtue of which the ego lives in a totality is always economic injustice.”
(Emmanuel Levinas, Collected Philosophical Papers, 1987)

FOR LEVINAS JUSTICE DID NOT COME INTO THE WORLD NATURALLY FROM THE "NORMAL PLAY OF INJUSTICE" THAT CHARACTERIZES ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL HISTORY. INSTEAD, JUSTICE AROSE “FROM THE OUTSIDE" AS AN ETHICAL EVENT: "SOMEONE [HAD] TO CALL ME TO ACCOUNT."
“If the totality begins in injustice (which is not ignorant of the other's freedom, but in economic transactions leads that freedom into betrayal), injustice is not ipso facto known as injustice. There exists in the very sphere of history a plane of innocent injustice, where evil is wrought in naivety. To hear justice cry out in the groaning of affliction - to hear the voice of conscience - it is not enough to be (rather, it is not a question of being) in relationship with a freedom, perceiving it in the other, since we already recognize that freedom in its transactions. This freedom is already presented to me when I buy up, pr exploit. For me to know my injustice, for me to catch sight of the possibility of justice, a new situation is required: someone has to call me to account. Justice does not result from the normal play of injustice. It comes from the outside, "through the door,"18 above the fray; it appears like a principle external to history. Even in the theories of justice which are forged in social conflicts, in which moral ideas seem to convey the needs of a society or of a class, appeal is nonetheless made to an ideal conscience, an ideal justice, in which an ultimate justification, and the right to elevate these quite relative needs to the status of an access to the absolute, is sought. As an expression of the objective relationships in society, these ideas must also satisfy a living consciousness which passes judgment on those objective relationships. The human world is a world in which one can judge history. It is not a necessarily rational world, but it is one where one can pass judgment. What is inhuman is to be judged without there being anyone that judges. 
To affirm man as a power to judge history is to affirm rationalism. Rationalism begins by denouncing the merely poetic thought which thinks without knowing what it thinks, or thinks as one dreams. It begins by reflection on oneself, which situates poetic thought with respect to an absolute. But the reflection cannot stop, since the positing of the reflective subject is just as poetic as that of the thinker who thinks objects, since all thought is poetic, a pure doing, without any bond with the principle, without a beginning. Questioning the position of the thinker ushers in psychoanalysis. Psychoanalysis is in its essence philosophical, the outcome of rationalism; it requires for reflection what reflection demanded for the thought that thinks naively. The non philosophical issue of psychoanalysis consists in a predilection for some fundamental, but elementary, fables - the libido, sadism, masochism, the Oedipus complex, repression of the origin, aggressivity - which, incomprehensibly, would alone be unequivocal, alone not translate (or mask or symbolize) a reality more profound than themselves, would be the terms of psychological intelligibility. That they have been collected from among the remnants of the most diverse civilizations and called myths adds nothing to their worth as clarifying ideas, and at most evinces a return to mythologies, astonishing when we recognize that forty centuries of monotheism had no other end in view than to liberate humanity from obsession with them. The petrifying effect of myths must all the same be distinguished from the assurance they are believed to give the understanding.”
(Emmanuel Levinas, Collected Philosophical Papers, 1987)

WHAT LEVINAS CALLS THE DOMINANT "PHILOSOPHY OF THE SAME" IN WESTERN THOUGHT IS THE TRADITION THAT HAS CONSISTENTLY DEFINED FREEDOM AS AUTONOMY, A PROJECT WHERE THE THINKING EGO "REMAINS THE SAME" BY CONQUERING AND ASSIMILATING EVERYTHING "OTHER." Within this tradition, "Reason, which reduces the other, is appropriation and power." Levinas argues that the freedom of the autonomous Western subject is ultimately realized as "a wealth," a form of possession and domination over the world.
This philosophical project reaches its limit when it is confronted not with things, but with the freedom of another person. The other person, by making me know that I am "unjust," breaks the self-satisfied "peace" of my autonomous freedom.
“Every philosophy is - to use Husserl’s neologism - an egology. And when Descartes comes to discern an acquiescence of the will in even the most rational truth, he not only explains the possibility of error, but sets up reason as an ego and truth as dependent on a movement that is free, and thus sovereign and justified.
This identification requires mediation. Whence a second characteristic of the philosophy of the same: its recourse to neuters. To understand the non-I access must be found through an entity, an abstract essence which is and is not. In it is dissolved the other's alterity. The foreign being, instead of maintaining itself in the inexpugnable fortress of its singularity, instead of facing, becomes a theme and an object. It fits under a concept already, or dissolves into relations. It falls into the network of a priori ideas, which I bring to bear, so as to capture it. To know is to surprise in the individual confronted, in this wounding stone, this upward plunging pine, this roaring lion, that by which it is not this very individual, this foreigner, that by which it is already betrayed and by which it gives the free will, vibrant in all certainty, hold over it, is grasped and conceived, enters into a concept. Cognition consists in grasping the individual, which alone exists, not in its singularity which does not count, but in its generality, of which alone there is science.
And here every power begins. The surrender of exterior things to human freedom through their generality does not only mean, in all innocence, their comprehension, but also their being taken in hand, their domestication, their possession. Only in possession does the I complete the identification of the diverse. To possess is, to be sure, to maintain the reality of this other one possessed, but to do so while suspending its independence. In a civilization which the philosophy of the same reflects, freedom is realized as a wealth. Reason, which reduces the other, is appropriation and power. 
But if things do not resist the ruses of thought, and confirm the philosophy of the same, without ever putting into question the freedom of the I, is this also true of men? Are they given to me as the things are? Do they not put into question my freedom? 
They can, to begin with, block it by opposing it with more than their force - their freedoms. They wage war. War is not a pure confrontation of forces; it can perhaps be defined as a relationship in which force does not alone enter into account, for the unforeseeable contingencies of freedom - skill, courage, and invention - count too. But in war the free will may fail without being put into question, without renouncing its rights and its revenge. Freedom is put into question by the other, and is revealed to be unjustified, only when it knows itself to be unjust. Its knowing itself to be unjust is not something added on to spontaneous and free consciousness, which would be present to itself and know itself to be, in addition, guilty. A new situation is created; consciousness's presence to itself acquires a different modality; its positions collapse. To put it just in formal terms, the same does not find again its priority over the other, it does not rest peaceably on itself, is no longer the principle. We shall endeavor to make these formulas more clear. And if the same does not peaceably rest on itself, philosophy does not seem to be indissolubly bound up with the adventure that includes every other in the same. 
We shall return to this shortly; let us first observe that this supremacy of the same over the other seems to be integrally maintained in the philosophy of Heidegger, the most renowned of our time. When Heidegger traces the way of access to each real singularity through Being, which is not a particular being nor a genus in which all the particulars would enter, but is rather the very act of being which the verb to be, and not the substantive, expresses (and which, with M. De Waelhens, we write with a capital "B"), he leads us to the singularity across a neuter which illuminates and commands thought, and renders intelligible. When he sees man possessed by freedom rather than possessing freedom, he puts over man a neuter term which illuminates freedom without putting it in question. And thus he is not destroying, but summing up a whole current of Western philosophy. 
The Dasein Heidegger puts in place of the soul, consciousness, or the ego, retains the structure of the same. Independence - autarchy - came to the Platonic soul (and to all its counterfeit versions) from its homeland, the world of Ideas; according to the Phaedo, the soul is related to that world, and consequently cannot encounter anything really foreign in it. Reason, the power to maintain oneself identical above the variations of becoming, formed the soul of this soul. Heidegger contests this dominant position for man, but leaves Dasein in the same, qua mortal. The possibility of being annihilated is in fact constitutive of Dasein, and thus maintains its ipseity. This nothingness is a death, is my death, my possibility (of impossibility), my power. No one can substitute himself for me to die. The supreme moment of resoluteness is solitary and personal. 
To be sure, for Heidegger man's freedom depends on the light of Being, and thus does not seem to be a principle. But that was also the case in classical idealism, where free will was considered the lowest form of freedom, and true freedom obeyed universal reason. The Heideggerian freedom is obedient, but obedience makes it arise and does not put it into question, does not reveal its injustice. Being, equivalent to the independence and extraneousness of realities, is equivalent to phosphorescence, light. It converts into intelligibility. The "mystery" essential to this "dark light" is a modality of this conversion. Independence ends in radiation. Being and Time, Heidegger's first and principal work, perhaps always maintained but one thesis: Being is inseparable from the comprehension of Being; Being already invokes subjectivity. But Being is not a being. It is a neuter which orders thought and beings, but which hardens the will instead of making it ashamed. The consciousness of his finitude does not come to man from the idea of infinity, that is, is not revealed as an imperfection,  does not refer to the Good, does not know itself to be wicked. Heideggerian philosophy precisely marks the apogee of a thought in which the finite does not refer to the infinite (prolonging certain tendencies of Kantian philosophy: the separation between the understanding and reason, diverse themes of transcendental dialectics), in which every deficiency is but weakness and every fault committed against oneself - the outcome of a long tradition of pride, heroism, domination, and cruelty. 
Heideggerian ontology subordinates the relation with the other to the relation with the neuter, Being, and it thus continues to exalt the will to power, whose legitimacy the other alone can unsettle, troubling good conscience. When Heidegger calls attention to the forgetting of Being, veiled by the diverse realities it illuminates, a forgetting for which the philosophy developed from Socrates on would be guilty, when he deplores the orientation of the intellect toward technology, he maintains a regime of power more inhuman than mechanism (and which perhaps does not have the same source as it; it is not sure that National Socialism arises from the mechanist reification of men, and that it does not rest on peasant enrootedness and a feudal adoration of subjugated men for the masters and lords who command them). This is an existence which takes itself to be natural, for whom its place in the sun, its ground, its site, orient all signification - a pagan existing. Being directs it building and cultivating, in the midst of a familiar landscape, on a maternal earth. 
Anonymous, neuter, it directs it, ethically indifferent, as a heroic freedom, foreign to all guilt with regard to the other. 
Indeed this earth-maternity determines the whole Western civilization of property, exploitation, political tyranny, and war. Heidegger does not discuss the pretechnological power of possession effected in the enrootedness of perception (which no one has described so brilliantly as he), in which the most abstract geometrical space is in the last analysis embedded, but which cannot find any place in the whole infinity of mathematical extension. The Heideggerian analyses of the world which in Being and Time were based on gear or fabricated things are in this philosophy borne by the vision of the lofty landscapes of nature, an impersonal fecundity, matrix of particular beings, inexhaustible matter of things. 
Heidegger does not only sum up a whole evolution of Western philosophy. He exalts it by showing in the most pathetic way its anti-religious essence become a religion in reverse. The lucid sobriety of those who call themselves friends of truth and enemies of opinion would then have a mysterious prolongation! In Heidegger atheism is a paganism, the presocratic texts anti-Scriptures. Heidegger shows in what intoxication the lucid sobriety of philosophers is steeped.
To conclude, the well-known theses of Heideggerian philosophy - the preeminence of Being over beings, of ontology over metaphysics - end up affirming a tradition in which the same dominates the other, in which freedom, even the freedom that is identical with reason, precedes justice. Does not justice consist in putting the obligation with regard to the other before obligations to oneself, in putting the other before the same?”
(Emmanuel Levinas, Collected Philosophical Papers, 1987)

E1.6.E.1.5_REF6_LIT.wE2.1.C.1.4.  ADRIENNE MAREE BROWN ON PLEASURE ACTIVISM: I WANT TO MAKE JUSTICE AND LIBERATION THE MOST PLEASURABLE EXPERIENCES THAT WE CAN HAVE

E2.1.C.1.4.b.  oakoak_street_art, Chifoumi between the giants

"Every day we hear it said that it would be good for us to have slaves, but to judge this properly, we must not consider whether it would be useful to the small, rich, and voluptuous part of each nation—no doubt it would be useful to them—but taking another point of view, I do not believe that any of its members would want to draw lots to decide who should be the free part of the nation and who should be the slave. Those who speak most in favor of slavery would hate it the most, and the most miserable men would hate it for themselves. The cry for slavery is therefore the cry of luxury and pleasure, not that of love for public happiness. Who can doubt that each man in particular would be very happy to be the master of the property, honor, and lives of others, and that all his passions would be aroused at first by this idea? In these matters, do you want to know if everyone's desires are legitimate? Examine the desires of all."
(Montesquieu, The Spirit of Laws, Chapter 15, 1748) - The decree abolishing slavery in France was not passed until February 4, 1794. It was not until 1848 that slavery was finally abolished in France and its colonies.

E2.1.C.1.4.c. "IS NATURE A SUBJECT OF LAW?
Some objections to environmental law include:
1. Only people have rights;
2. How can nature have rights if it has no duties?
3. The question of representation is not an argument (an infant or a person in a coma have rights even though they cannot appear in court);
4. Until now, the law has required litigants to be free and intelligent—yet the mentally ill have rights.
Extending rights to animals seems easier than extending them to other non-humans such as trees. To facilitate this step, we must move beyond the question of status and think about relationships. Michel Serres suggests that we think of our obligations in the form of a "natural contract" modeled on the "social contract"—a virtual, unsigned agreement. The social contract itself was never formally ratified; both are metaphysical contracts.
Modernity developed on the principle that scientists should not interfere with politics, and vice versa. Michel Serres believes that globalization is changing this.
He also suggests that science is a contract: a way of agreeing on the testimony of the object. Scientific truth is a contract between humans in which objects testify in person. It is another example of a contract in which non-humans are present. Experimentation is a matter of questions and answers, not of provoking reactions.
For Derrida, giving rights to non-humans such as ecosystems is not about giving rights to individual entities, but rather basing rights on the relationships of which humans are a part. If we defend nature, we do not attack humans caught up in damaged ecosystem relationships; we defend them too.

If politicians do nothing, we must call on the courage of judges to prevent "ecocides." But ecocide implies crime, and a crime must be intentional—yet today we face many unintended consequences. Our responsibility would then be an objective responsibility: a responsibility without guilt. It is a political responsibility that must change the law without punishing."

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/la-nature-est-elle-un-sujet-de-droit

E2.1.C.1.4.d. AD_They can listen before learning to read

Most parents want their own children to do well in life. What are the morally acceptable limits on the benefits we can confer on our own children? Adam Swift, who has recently published a book on this question co-written with Harry Brighouse, discusses this question.
For an egalitarian, parental partiality should be limited to the necessary familiar relationships goods that have been demonstrated to be good for the child´s development and for the satisfaction of parenthood (ex: reading bedtime stories). Above that limit, parents should volunteer to benefit other children with those goods. In that line, paying for private education or activities only available to the rich (horse-riding lessons, trips abroad, etc.) are unfair in a society where they are not available to all children.  
(Adam Swift on Parental Partiality) 

Listen to the episode: http://philosophybites.com/2014/10/adam-swift-on-parental-partiality.html

E2.1.C.2. Freedom and Social Progress: Explore the argument that societies that value and protect freedoms of thought, expression, and inquiry tend to be more innovative and experience greater social, scientific, and cultural advancement.

E2.1.C.2.1. Freedom as the Precondition for Advancement: progress—social, scientific, and cultural—is not an accident but the result of a society that allows freedom.

E2.1.C.2.1.a. HUMANITY'S UNIQUE ABILITY TO CREATE AND RAPIDLY CHANGE ITS SHARED MYTHS (STORIES, IDEOLOGIES, LAWS) IS WHAT POWERS THE FREEDOM TO CHANGE OUR COLLECTIVE MINDS.
"The ability to create an imagined reality out of words enabled large numbers of strangers to cooperate effectively. But it also did something more. Since large-scale human cooperation is based on myths, the way people cooperate can be altered by changing the myths – by telling different stories. Under the right circumstances myths can change rapidly. In 1789 the French population switched almost overnight from believing in the myth of the divine right of kings to believing in the myth of the sovereignty of the people. Consequently,ever since the Cognitive Revolution Homo sapiens has been able to revise its behaviour rapidly in accordance with changing needs. This opened a fast lane of cultural evolution, bypassing the traffic jams of genetic evolution. Speeding down this fast lane, Homo sapiens soon far outstripped all other human and animal species in its ability to cooperate.
The behaviour of other social animals is determined to a large extent by their genes. DNA is not an autocrat. Animal behaviour is also influenced by environmental factors and individual quirks. Nevertheless, in a given environment, animals of the same species will tend to behave in a similar way.
Significant changes in social behaviour cannot occur, in general, without genetic mutations. For example, common chimpanzees have a genetic tendency to live in hierarchical groups headed by an alpha male. Members of a closely related chimpanzee species, bonobos, usually live in more egalitarian groups dominated by female alliances. Female common chimpanzees cannot take lessons from their bonobo relatives and stage a feminist revolution. Male chimps cannot gather in a constitutional assembly to abolish the office of alpha male and declare that from here on out all chimps are to be treated as equals. Such dramatic changes in behaviour would occur only if something changed in the chimpanzees’ DNA.
For similar reasons, archaic humans did not initiate any revolutions. As far as we can tell, changes in social patterns, the invention of new technologies and the settlement of alien habitats resulted from genetic mutations and environmental pressures more than from cultural initiatives. This is why it took humans hundreds of thousands of years to make these steps. Two million years ago, genetic mutations resulted in the appearance of a new human species called Homo erectus.
Its emergence was accompanied by the development of a new stone tool technology, now recognised as a defining feature of this species. As long as Homo erectus did not undergo further genetic alterations, its stone tools remained roughly the same – for close to 2 million years!
In contrast, ever since the Cognitive Revolution, Sapiens have been able to change their behaviour quickly, transmitting new behaviours to future generations without any need of genetic or environmental change. As a prime example, consider the repeated appearance of childless elites, such as the Catholic priesthood, Buddhist monastic orders and Chinese eunuch bureaucracies. The existence of such elites goes against the most fundamental principles of natural selection, since these dominant members of society willingly give up procreation.
Whereas chimpanzee alpha males use their power to have sex with as many females as possible – and consequently sire a large proportion of their troop’s young – the Catholic alpha male abstains completely from sexual intercourse and childcare. This abstinence does not result from unique environmental conditions such as a severe lack of food or want of potential mates. Nor is it the result of some quirky genetic mutation. The Catholic Church has survived for centuries, not by passing on a ‘celibacy gene’ from one pope to the next, but by passing on the stories of the New Testament and of Catholic canon law.
In other words, while the behaviour patterns of archaic humans remained fixed for tens of thousands of years, Sapiens could transform their social structures, the nature of their interpersonal relations, their economic activities and a host of other behaviours within a decade or two. Consider a resident of Berlin, born in 1900 and living to the ripe age of one hundred. She spent her childhood in the Hohenzollern Empire of Wilhelm II; her adult years in the Weimar Republic, the Nazi Third Reich and Communist East Germany; and she died a citizen of a democratic and reunified Germany. She had managed to be a part of five very different sociopolitical systems, though her DNA remained exactly the same.
This was the key to Sapiens’ success. In a one-on-one brawl, a Neanderthal would probably have beaten a Sapiens. But in a conﬂict of hundreds, Neanderthals wouldn’t stand a chance."
(Yuval Noah Harari, Sapiens, A Brief History of Humankind, 2011)

E2.1.C.2.1.b. ACCORDING TO EDWARD HALLETT CARR, PROGRESS IS SOCIAL ACQUISITION—"THE TRANSMISSION OF ACQUIRED SKILLS FROM ONE GENERATION TO ANOTHER." THIS IS HOW SOCIETIES INNOVATE AND ADVANCE. Carr frames the entire historical process as a "slow progress" towards liberty.
“In 1920, when Bury wrote his book The Idea of Progress, a bleaker climate already prevailed, the blame for which he laid, in obedience to the current fashion, on ‘the doctrinaires who have established the present reign of terror in Russia’, though he still described progress as ‘the animating and controlling idea of western civilization’.8 Thereafter this note was silent. Nicholas I of Russia is said to have issued an order banning the word ‘progress': nowadays the philosophers and historians of western Europe, and even the United States, have come belatedly to agree with him. The hypothesis of progress has been refuted. The decline of the west has become so familiar a phrase that quotation marks are no longer required. But what, apart from all the shouting, has really happened ? By whom has this new current of opinion been formed ? The other day I was shocked to come across, I think, the only remark of Bertrand Russell I have ever seen which seemed to me to betray an acute sense of class: ‘There is, on the whole, much less liberty in the world now than there was a hundred years ago.’ I have no measuring-rod for liberty, and do not know how to balance the lesser liberty of few against the greater liberty of many. But on any standard of measurement I can only regard the statement as fantastically untrue. I am more attracted by one of those fascinating glimpses which Mr A. J. P. Taylor sometimes gives us into Oxford academic life. All this talk about the decline of civilization, he writes, ‘means only that university professors used to have domestic servants and now do their own washing- up’. Of course, for former domestic servants, washing-up by professors may be a symbol of progress. The loss of white supremacy in Africa, which worries Empire Loyalists, Africaner Republicans, and investors in gold and copper shares, may look like progress to others. I see no reason why, on this question of progress, I should ipsofacto prefer the verdict of the 1950s to that of the 1890s, the verdict of the English-speaking world to that of Russia, Asia, and Africa, or the verdict of the middle-class intellectual to that of the man in the street, who, according to Mr Macmillan, has never had it so good. Let us for the moment suspend judgment on the question whether we are living in a period of progress or of decline, and examine a little more closely what is implied in the concept of progress, what assumptions lie behind it, and how far these have become untenable. 
I should like, first of all, to dear up the muddle about progress and evolution. The thinkers of the Enlightenment adopted two apparently incompatible views. They sought to vindicate man’s place in the world of nature: die laws of history were equated with the laws of nature. On the other hand, they believed in progress. But what ground was there for treating nature as progressive, as constantly advancing towards a goal ? Hegel met the difficulty by sharply distinguishing history, which was progressive, from nature, which was not. The Darwinian revolution appeared to remove all embarrassments by equating evolution and progress: nature, like history, turned out after all to be progressive. But this opened the way to a much graver misunderstanding, by confusing biological inheritance, which is the source of evolution, with social acquisition, which is the source of progress in history. The distinction is familiar and obvious. Put a European infant in a Chinese family, and the child will grow up with a white skin, but speaking Chinese. Pigmentation is a biological inheritance, language a social acquisition transmitted by the agency of the human brain. Evolution by inheritance has to be measured in millennia or in millions of years; no measurable biological change is known to have occurred in man since the beginning of written history. Progress by acquisition can be measured in generations. The essence of man as a rational being is that he develops his potential capacities by accumulating the experience of past generations. Modem man is said to have no larger a brain, and no greater innate capacity of thought, than his ancestor 5000 years ago. But the effectiveness of his thinking has been multiplied many times by learning and incorporating in his experience the experience of the intervening generations. The transmission of acquired characteristics, which is rejected by biologists, is the very foundation of social progress. History is progress through the transmission of acquired skills from one generation to another. 
Secondly, we need not and should not conceive progress as having a finite beginning or end. The belief, popular less than fifty years ago, that civilization was invented in the Nile Valley in the fourth millennium B.C. is no more credible today than the chronology which placed the creation of the world in 4004 B.C. Civilization, the birth of which we may perhaps take as a starting-point for our hypothesis of progress, was surely not an invention, but an infinitely slow process of development, in which spectacular leaps probably occurred from time to time. We need not trouble ourselves with the question when progress - or civilization - began. The hypothesis of a finite end of progress has led to more serious misapprehension. Hegel has been rightly condemned for seeing the end of progress in the Prussian monarchy - apparently the result of an overstrained interpretation of his view of the impossibility of prediction. But Hegel’s aberration was capped by that eminent Victorian, Arnold of Rugby, who in his inaugural lecture as Regius Professor of Modern History in Oxford in 1841 thought that modem history would be the last stage in the history of mankind: ‘It appears to bear marks of the fullness of time, as if there would be no future history beyond it.’1 Marx’s prediction that the proletarian revolution would realize the ultimate aim of a classless society was logically and morally less vulnerable; but the presumption of an end of history has an eschatological ring more appropriate to the theologian than to the historian, and reverts to the fallacy of a goal outside history. No doubt a finite end has attractions for the human mind; and Acton's vision of the march of history as an unending progress towards liberty seems chilly and vague. But if the historian is to save his hypothesis of progress, I think he must be prepared to treat it as a process into which the demands and conditions of successive periods will put their own specific content. And this is what is meant by Acton's thesis that history is not only a record of progress but a 'progressive science', or, if you like, that history in both senses of the word -as the course of events and as the record of those events - is progressive. Let us recall Acton’s description of the advance of liberty in history: 
I It is by the combined efforts of the weak, made under compulsion, to resist the reign of force and constant wrong, that, in the rapid change but slow progress of four hundred years, liberty has been preserved, and secured, and extended, and finally understood.
History as the course of events was conceived by Acton as progress towards liberty, history as the record of those events as progress towards the understanding of liberty: the two processes advanced side by side.* The philosopher Bradley, writing in an age when analogies from evolution were fashionable, remarked dial 'for religious faith the end of evolution is presented as that which... is already evolved’.3 For the historian die end of progress is not already evolved. It is something still infinitely remote; and pointers towards it come in sight only as we advance. This does not diminish its importance. A compass is a valuable and indeed indispensable guide. But it is not a chart of the route. The content of history can be realized only as we experience it.”
(Edward Hallett Carr, What is History, 1961)

EDWARD HALLETT CARR TRACES A DIRECT LINE FROM THE RISE OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS (DESCARTES, ROUSSEAU) TO THE GREAT POLITICAL REVOLUTIONS (AMERICAN AND FRENCH). HE QUOTES LORD ACTON: "NEVER TILL THEN, HAD MEN SOUGHT LIBERTY, KNOWING WHAT THEY SOUGHT." The story is one of humanity moving from being subject to laws to asserting its right to make its own laws through the "exercise of the human reason."
“History begins when men begin to think of the passage of time in terms not of natural processes - the cycle of the seasons, the human life-span - but of a series of specific events in which men are consciously involved and which they can consciously influence. History, says Burckhardt, is ‘the break with nature caused by the awakening of consciousness. History is the long struggle of man, by the exercise of his reason, to understand his environment and to act upon it. But the modern period has broadened the struggle in a revolutionary way. Man now seeks to understand, and to act on, not only his environment but himself; and this has added, so to speak, a new dimension to reason, and a new dimension to history. The present age is the most historically-minded of all ages. Modem man is to an unprecedented degree self-conscious and therefore conscious of history. He peers eagerly back into the twilight out of which he has come, in the hope that its faint beams will illuminate the obscurity into which he is going; and, conversely, his aspirations and anxieties about the path that lies ahead quicken his insight into what lies behind. Past, present, and future are linked together in the endless chain of history. 
The change in the modem world which consisted in the development of man’s consciousness of himself may be said to begin with Descartes, who first established man's position as a being who can not only think, but think about his own thinking, who can observe himself in the act of observing, so that man is simultaneously the subject and the object of thought and observation. But the development did not become fully explicit till the latter part of the eighteenth century, when Rousseau opened up new depths of human self-understanding and self-conscious¬ ness, and gave man a new outlook on the world of nature and on traditional civilization. The French revolution, said de Tocqueville, was inspired by ‘the belief that what was wanted was to replace the complex of traditional customs governing the social order of the day by simple elementary rules deriving from the exercise of the human reason and from natural law’ . ‘Never till then,’ wrote Acton in one of his manuscript notes, ‘had men sought liberty, knowing what they sought.’ For Acton, as for Hegel, liberty and reason were never far apart. And with the French revolution was linked the American revolution. 
Four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth upon this continent a new nation, conceived in liberty, and to the proposition that all men are created equal. 
It was, as Lincoln’s words suggest, a unique event - the first occasion in history when men deliberately and consciously formed themselves into a nation, and then consciously and deliberately set out to mould other men into it. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries man had already become fully conscious of the world around him and of its laws. They were no longer the mysterious decrees of an inscrutable providence, but laws accessible to reason. But they were laws to which man was subject, and not laws of his own making. In the next stage man was to become fully conscious of his power over his environment and over himself, and of his right to make the laws under which he would live. 
The transition from the eighteenth century to the modem world was long and gradual. Its representative philosophers were Hegel and Marx, both of whom occupy an ambivalent position. Hegel is rooted in the idea of laws of providence converted into laws of reason. Hegel’s world spirit grasps providence firmly with one hand and reason with the other. He echoes Adam Smith. Individuals ‘gratify their own interests; but something more is thereby accomplished, which is latent in their action though not present in their consciousness’. Of the rational purpose of the world spirit he writes that men ‘in the very act of realizing it, make it the occasion of satisfying their desire, whose import is different from that purpose’. This is simply the harmony of interests translated into the language of German philosophy. Hegel’s equivalent for Smith’s ‘hidden hand' was the famous ‘cunning of reason’ which sets men to work to fulfil purposes of which they are not conscious. But Hegel was none the less the philosopher of the French revolution, the first philosopher to see the essence of reality in historical change and in the development of man’s consciousness of himself. Development in history meant development towards the concept of freedom. But, after 1815, the inspiration of the French revolution fizzled out in the doldrums of the Restoration. Hegel was politically too timid and, in his later years, too firmly entrenched in the Establishment of his day to introduce any concrete meaning into his metaphysical propositions. Herzen’s description of Hegel’s doctrines as ‘the algebra of revolution’ was singularly apt. Hegel provided the notation, but gave it no practical content. It was left for Marx to write the arithmetic into Hegel’s algebraical equations. 
A disciple both of Adam Smith and of Hegel, Marx started from the conception of a world ordered by rational laws of nature. Like Hegel, but this time in a practical and concrete form, he made the transition to the conception of a world ordered by laws evolving through a rational process in response to man’s revolutionary initiative. In Marx’s final synthesis history meant three things, which were inseparable one from another and formed a coherent and rational whole: the motion of events in accordance with objective, and primarily economic, laws; the corresponding development of thought through a dialectical process; and corresponding action, in the form of the class struggle, which reconciles and unites the theory and practice of revolution. What Marx offers is a synthesis of objective laws and of conscious action to translate them into practice, of what are sometimes (though misleadingly) called determinism and voluntarism. Marx constantly writes of laws to which men have hitherto been subject without being conscious of them: he more than once drew attention to what he called the ‘false consciousness' of those enmeshed in a capitalist economy and capitalist society: ‘the conceptions formed about the laws of production in the minds of the agents of production and circulation will differ widely from the real laws’. But one finds in Marx’s writings striking examples of calls for conscious revolutionary action. ‘Philosophers have only interpreted the world differently', ran the famous thesis on Feuerbach; ‘but the point is to change it.’ ‘The proletariat ’, declared the Communist Manifesto, ‘will use its political dominance to strip the bourgeoisie step by step of all capital, and concentrate all means of production in the hands of the state.’ And in The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, Marx spoke of ‘intellectual self-consciousness dissolving by a century-old process all traditional ideas. It was the proletariat which would dissolve the false consciousness of capitalist society, and introduce the true consciousness of the classless society. But the failure of the revolutions of 1848 was a serious and dramatic setback to developments which had seemed imminent when Marx began to work. The latter part of the nineteenth century passed in an atmosphere which was still predominantly one of prosperity and security. It was not till die turn of the century that we completed the transition to the contemporary period of history, in which the primary function of reason is no longer to understand objective laws governing die behaviour of man in society, but rather to reshape society, and the individuals who compose it, by conscious action. In Marx, ‘class', though not precisely defined, remains on the whole an objective conception to be established by economic analysis. In Lenin, the emphasis shifts from ‘class’ to ‘party’, which constitutes the vanguard ofthe class and infuses into it the necessary element of class-consciousness. In Marx, ‘ideology’ is a negative term - a product of the false consciousness of the capitalist order of society. In Lenin, ‘ideology’ becomes neutral or positive - a belief implanted by an elite of class-conscious leaders in a mass of potentially class-conscious workers. The moulding of class-consciousness is no longer an automatic process, but a job to be undertaken. 
The other great thinker who has added a fresh dimension to reason in our time is Freud. Freud remains today a somewhat enigmatic figure. He was by training and background a nineteenth-century liberal individualist, and accepted without question die common, but misleading, assumption of a fundamental antithesis between die individual and society. Freud, approaching man as a biological rather than as a social entity, tended to treat the social environment as something historically given rather than as something in constant process of creation and transformation by man himself. He has always been attacked by the Marxists for approaching what are really social problems from die standpoint of the individual, and condemned as a reactionary on that account; and this charge, which was valid only in part against Freud himself, has been much more fully justified by the current neo-Freudian school in the United States, which assumes that maladjustments are inherent in the individual, and not in the structure of society, and treats the adaptation of the individual to society as the essential function of psychology. The other popular charge against Freud, that he has extended the role of the irrational in human affairs, is totally false, and rests on a crude confusion between recognition of the irrational element in human behaviour and a cult of the irrational. That a cult of the irrational does exist in the English- speaking world today, mainly in the form of a depreciation of the achievements and potentialities of reason, is unfortunately true; it is part of the current wave of pessimism and ultra-conservatism, of which I will speak later. But this does not stem from Freud, who was an unqualified and rather primitive rationalist. What Freud did was to extend the range of our knowledge and understanding by opening up the unconscious roots of human behaviour to consciousness and to rational enquiry. This was an extension of the domain of reason, an increase in man’s power to understand and control himself and therefore his environment; and it represents a revolutionary and progressive achievement. In this respect, Freud complements, and does not contradict, the work of Marx. Freud belongs to the contemporary world, in the sense that, though he himself did not entirely escape from the conception of a fixed and invariable human nature, he provided tools for a deeper understanding of the roots of human behaviour and thus for its conscious modification through rational processes. 
For the historian Freud’s special significance is two-fold. In the first place, Freud has driven the last nail into the coffin of the ancient illusion that the motives from which men allege or believe themselves to have acted are in fact adequate to explain their action: this is a negative achievement of some importance, though the positive claim of some enthusiasts to throw light on the behaviour of the great men of history by the methods of psycho-analysis should be taken with a pinch of salt. The procedure of psycho-analysis rests on the cross-examination of the patient who is being investigated: you cannot cross-examine the dead. Secondly, Freud, reinforcing the work of Marx, has encouraged the historian to examine himself and his own position in history, the motives - perhaps hidden motives - which have guided his choice of theme or period and his selection and interpretation of the facts, the national and social background which has determined his angle of vision, the conception of the future which shapes his conception of the past. Since Marx and Freud wrote, the historian has no excuse to think of himself as a detached individual standing outside society and outside history. This is the age of self-consciousness: the historian can and should know what he is doing.”
(Edward Hallett Carr, What is History, 1961)

E2.1.C.2.1.c. HYPERION ARGUES THE ATHENIANS GREW GREAT BECAUSE THEY WERE "LESS DISTURBED IN EVERY RESPECT, FREER FROM VIOLENT INFLUENCE THAN ANY OTHER PEOPLE ON EARTH." THEY WERE "LEFT TO ITSELF, LIKE THE GROWING DIAMOND." From this fundamental condition grew art, religion, philosophy, and political freedom not as causes of the Athenians blossoming, as "flowers and fruits".
“We spoke together about the excellence of the ancient Athenians, how it arose, in what it consisted. 
One said it was the climate that made it; another: art and philosophy; a third: religion and polity.
‘Athenian art and religion, and philosophy and polity,’ I said, ‘are flowers and fruits of the tree, not the soil and the roots. You take the effects for the cause.
‘And anyone who tells me that this was all shaped by the climate should consider that we too still live in it.
‘Less disturbed in every respect, freer from violent influence than any other people on earth, so grew the people of the Athenians. No conqueror weakens them, no military fortune inebriates them, no alien cult dulls them, no hasty wisdom drives them to untimely ripeness.
Left to itself, like the growing diamond, such is their childhood. Almost nothing is heard of them up to the times of Pisistratus and Hipparchus. They took but little part in the Trojan War which, as in a hothouse, prematurely kindled and quickened most of the Greek peoples. — It’s not extraordinary fate that brings forth man. Great and colossal are the sons of such a mother, but beautiful beings, or, what is the same thing, men they never become, or not until late when the contrasts war with each other too harshly for them not to make peace in the end.
‘In exuberant vigour Lacedaemon rushes ahead of the Athenians and for this very reason would also have scattered and dissolved sooner, had not Lycurgus come and with his discipline contained its intemperate nature. And so from then on everything about the Spartan was acquired, all excellence achieved and bought through labour and self-conscious effort, and in as much as one can, in a certain sense, speak of the simplicity of the Spartans, yet it follows naturally that true childlike simplicity was wholly lacking amongst them. The Lacedaemonians breached too soon the order of instinct, they grew out of kind too soon, and so then, with them, discipline too had to begin too soon; for all discipline and art begins too soon where man’s nature hasn’t yet come to ripeness. Perfected nature must dwell in the human child before it enters school, so that the image of childhood may show it the way back from school to perfected nature.
‘The Spartans remained eternally a fragment; for whoever was never a finished child can hardly become a finished man. —
‘True, heaven and earth also did their part for the Athenians, as for all the Greeks, dispensing neither dearth nor abundance. The rays of heaven didn’t fall upon them like a rain of fire. The earth didn’t pamper and ravish them with caresses and lavish gifts as here and there the foolish mother otherwise may do.
‘And then there was the prodigious gesture of Theseus, the voluntary curtailment of his own monarchic power.
‘Oh! such a seed, thrown into the hearts of the people, must beget an ocean of golden grains, and visibly continues even late to burgeon and bear fruit amongst the Athenians.
‘Once again then! that the Athenians grew up so free from violent influence of any kind, on such moderate fare, this is what made them so excellent, and this alone could!
‘Leave man undisturbed from the cradle on! don’t drive him from the enclosing oneness of his being’s bud, out of his childhood’s tabernacle! don’t do too little lest he manage without you and so distinguish you from himself, don’t do too much lest he feel your power or his own and so distinguish you from himself, in short, don’t let man know until late that there are men, that there is something outside himself, for only in this way will he become man. But man is a god as soon as he’s man. And once he’s a god, then he’s beautiful.’
‘Strange!’ cried one of the friends.
‘You’ve never yet spoken so deeply from my soul,’ cried Diotima. ‘I owe it to you,’ I answered.
‘That’s how the Athenian was man,’ I continued, ‘that’s how he had to become man. Beautiful he came from the hands of nature, beautiful in body and soul, as the saying goes.
‘The first child of human, of divine beauty is art. In art divine man renews and repeats himself. He wants to feel himself, and so he confronts himself with his own beauty. Thus man gave himself his gods. For in the beginning man and his gods were one, when, unknown to itself, eternal beauty was. — I’m speaking mysteries, but they are. —
‘The first child of divine beauty is art. So it was with the Athenians. ‘Beauty’s second daughter is religion. Religion is love of beauty. The wise man loves beauty itself, infinite and all-embracing; the people love its children, the gods, who appear to them in multifarious forms. So it was too with the Athenians. And without such love of beauty, without such religion any state is a shrivelled skeleton without life and spirit, and all thought and deed a tree without a top, a column whose crown has been lopped off.
‘But that it was really the case with the Greeks, and especially the Athenians, that their art and their religion are the true children of eternal beauty — of perfected human nature — and could issue only from perfected human nature, that is clearly evident if one is only willing to consider with an unbiased eye the objects of their holy art and the religion with which they loved and honoured those objects. 
‘There are blunders and blemishes everywhere, and so here too. But one thing is certain withal: what one finds in the objects of their art is mostly ripened man. Here there’s not the pettiness, not the monstrousness of the Egyptians and Goths, here there’s human sense and human form. They sheer off less than others into the extremes of the supersensual and the sensual. Their gods stay more than others within the beautiful mean of man.
‘And as the object, so also the love. Not too servile and not all too familiar! —
‘From the Athenians’ beauty of spirit there followed too the necessary feeling for freedom.
‘The Egyptian bears without pain the despotism of arbitrary power, the son of the North without resentment the despotism of the law, legally enshrined injustice; for the Egyptian possesses from the womb an instinct for servility and idolatry; in the North they have too little faith in the pure free life of nature not to be superstitiously thralled to legality.
‘The Athenian can’t abide arbitrary power because his divine nature brooks no disturbance, he can’t abide legality everywhere because he has no need of it everywhere. Draco isn’t for him. He expects to be treated gently, and has every right to do so too.’
‘Fair enough!’ someone interjected, ‘that I understand, but how this poetic religious people should also come to be a philosophical one, that I don’t see.’
‘Without poetry,’ I said, ‘they would never even have been a philosophical people!’
‘What has philosophy,’ he responded, ‘what has the cold sublimity of that science to do with poetry?’
‘Poetry,’ I said, sure of my case, ‘is the beginning and end of that science. Like Minerva from Jupiter’s head it springs from the poetry of infinite divine being. And so too what is irreconcilable in it will finally flow together again in the mysterious wellspring of poetry.’ 
‘He’s a paradoxical fellow,’ cried Diotima, ‘yet I sense his meaning. You’re both digressing though. It’s Athens we’re talking about.’
‘The man,’ I began again, ‘who has not at least once in his life felt in himself full unsullied beauty, when the powers of his being played into one another like the colours of the rainbow, who has never come to know that only in hours of inspiration all is inmost concord, this man will not even become a philosophical sceptic, his spirit is not even fitted for tearing down, let alone for building up. For believe you me, the sceptic finds flaws and contradiction in all that is thought only because he knows the harmony of flawless beauty that never is thought. He disdains the dry crust that human reason proffers him well-meaningly only because he’s secretly feasting at the table of the gods.’
‘Dreamer!’ cried Diotima, ‘that’s why you too were a sceptic. But the Athenians!’
‘I was just coming to them,’ I said. ‘The mighty phrase of Heraclitus, εν διαϕερον εαυτω (the One differentiated in itself), could have been arrived at only by a Greek, for it is the essence of beauty and before that was found, there was no philosophy.
‘Now one could define, the whole was there. The flower had ripened, one could now dissect.
‘The moment of beauty had now been made known among men, it was there in life and spirit, infinite oneness was.
‘One could take it apart, divide it in the mind, think the divided together afresh, could so come more and more to know the essence of the highest and the best and turn that knowledge into laws for the manifold realms of the mind.
‘Do you see now why the Athenians in particular had also to be a philosophical people?
‘The Egyptian couldn’t. He who doesn’t live loving, and loved by, heaven and earth in equal measure, who doesn’t in this sense live at one with the element in which he moves, is by nature also not so at one with himself and cannot know eternal beauty, at least not so readily as a Greek.
‘Like a sumptuous despot the oriental clime prostrates its inhabitants with its power and its splendour, and before man has even learned to walk he must kneel, before he has learned to talk he must pray; before his heart has found its balance it must bow, and before the spirit is strong enough to bear flower and fruit, fate and nature sap from it all strength with searing heat. The Egyptian’s surrendered before he’s a whole, and so he knows nothing of the whole, nothing of beauty, and what he calls the highest is a veiled power, a ghastly enigma; the dumb dismal Isis is his alpha and omega, an empty infinity, and nought meaningful ever came out of that. Even the sublimest nothing begets nothing.
‘The North, by contrast, drives its nurslings into themselves too soon, and if the spirit of the fiery Egyptian, too wanderlusting, rushes out into the world, in the North the spirit prepares to return into itself before it’s even ready to fare forth.
‘In the North man must already have sense before even there’s any ripe feeling within him, he imputes to himself the guilt of all things before innocence even has come to its beautiful end; he must become rational, a self-conscious spirit, before he’s a man, a worldly-wise man before he’s a child; the harmony of whole human being, beauty, may not blossom and ripen in him before he’s developed and cultured. Mere understanding, mere reason are ever the kings of the North.
‘But from mere understanding there never came anything sensible, from mere reason never came anything rational.
‘Understanding without beauty of spirit is like a ministering menial who fashions the fence from rough timber, according to plans he’s been given, and nails together the posts that he’s hewn for the garden his master wants to make. The understanding’s whole business is work of necessity. By laying down rules it guards us from folly and wrongness; but being safe from folly and wrongness is not the pinnacle of human excellence.
‘Reason without beauty of spirit, beauty of heart, is like a slave-driver whom the master of the house has set over the servants; he knows as little as the servants what good is served by all the endless toil, and only shouts: ‘Get a move on,’ and is almost loath to see it happen, for in the end he’d have no more driving to do and his part would be played out.
‘From mere understanding comes no philosophy, for philosophy is more than only the limited perception of what is.
‘From mere reason comes no philosophy, for philosophy is more than the blind demand for never-ending progress in the unification and differentiation of whatever it can be applied to. 
‘But when the divine εν διαϕερον εαυτω, the ideal of beauty illumines striving reason, it doesn’t demand blindly, it knows why it demands and for what.
‘When, like a May morning into the artist’s workshop, the sun of the beautiful shines for the understanding in its activity, it’s true that it doesn’t rush forth and abandon its work of necessity, yet still it thinks fondly forward to the festal day when it will wander in the quickening light of spring.’”
(Friedrich Holderin, Hyperion, or the hermit in Greece, 1797)

E2.1.C.2.1.d. THE WORK OF JOËL MOKYR (2025 NOBEL PRIZE IN ECONOMICS) SHOWS THAT THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION WAS FIRST AND FOREMOST A “CULTURAL PHENOMENON” RESULTING FROM COMPETITION AND THE CONFRONTATION OF IDEAS AMONG FREE THINKERS IN 18TH-CENTURY EUROPE. Economic progress therefore has its origins in freedom of opinion... and even satire: “Irreverence is a key to progress,” writes Mokyr.

“Mokyr argues that the Industrial Revolution was not a result of contingent factors like imperialism or geography, but rather a unique outcome of a long evolutionary process in Western civilization. This process overcame two major obstacles common to other civilizations: resistance to disruptive innovations and cultural fatalism.

Mokyr's central thesis is that the Industrial Revolution was fundamentally a "cultural phenomenon" rooted in the intellectual and cultural changes of the Enlightenment. He emphasizes the importance of a "culture of progress" that emerged in 18th-century Europe, characterized by a belief in the possibility and desirability of material and social improvement. This culture fostered a spirit of inquiry, experimentation, and innovation that was essential for the technological breakthroughs of the Industrial Revolution.

He highlights the role of "free thinkers" and the "confrontation of ideas" in driving this cultural shift. Mokyr argues that the fragmentation of power in Europe, with its competing states, city-states, and independent institutions like universities and guilds, created a space for intellectual freedom and dissent. This environment allowed for the challenging of traditional beliefs and the emergence of new ideas.

In essence, Mokyr's argument is that the Industrial Revolution was not just about new machines and factories; it was about a new way of thinking. It was the product of a unique cultural environment that valued knowledge, reason, and innovation, and that empowered individuals to challenge the status quo and pursue new ideas.”
(Gemini, October 2025)

Read Joël Mokyr’s article, ‘The Holy Land of Industrialism’: rethinking the Industrial Revolution[:](https://www.eco.unicamp.br/images/arquivos/artigos/TD/TD386.pdf) https://www.thebritishacademy.ac.uk/documents/3393/JBA-9-p223-Mokyr.pdf

E2.1.C.2.2. How Freedom Creates Progress: free competition, creative representation, and even internal conflict are the engines of innovation.

E2.1.C.2.2.a. "The Death of Art"
For Hegel, art is dead—or, more accurately, it belongs to the past. He describes the birth of the museum at the end of the 18th century: Art no longer has a function in life. The museum marks the beginning of autonomous art, which carries its own purpose; therefore, art is also the optimal place for freedom, disconnected from the contingencies of life. Art carries its limitations within itself, and the aftermath of art is a higher form of consciousness of the absolute." [...] In its early stages, art still leaves an impression of mystery and secrecy. There comes a time when art is no longer enough because it does not represent its content in all its richness." Why should we go beyond the senses? For Hegel, the "absolute spirit" is mobilized by art, religion, and philosophy, while the "objective spirit" is mobilized by law. The creations of the absolute spirit remain valid throughout the ages, while the creations of the objective spirit, such as a state or a law, are contingent on their time and will be supplanted by others. Objective things are structurally at war because they try to maintain their existence. When we contemplate a work of art, however, we allow it to be. It leaves us free. Art is the past; it is absolute. Its pastness is now its mode of being, even if it still has a present. It summons and challenges us in the present. Don't all forms of art today have a relationship with museums? (Discussion on contemporary art and land art that only exists through cultural institutions in the form of photos, etc.) Even our relationship with music today is institutionalized. Hegel reminds us of how things were before the death of art. His philosophy of art deals with the construction of meaning and the performative effect of the sign. Another performative effect of the sign is death, which would not exist in our consciousness if we did not try to represent it. The same is true for life. An example of this is Egyptian funerary art: pyramids have no doors, which is a radical rejection of death. Hegel sees a progression in art from "symbolic art" to "classical art" and finally to "romantic art." Symbolic art is so named because there is a mismatch between the artifact and its meaning—a gap between the thing and the sign (e.g., an Egyptian pyramid). This distinction applies not only across time, but also across disciplines. Architecture, regardless of the era, is a symbolic art.
Classical art is based on the paradigm of the image, which is more related to painting. Unlike symbols, images are transparent and can be understood intuitively (e.g., Greek statues). Romantic art, or deictic art, refers to an object whose referent depends on the situation in which it is mentioned. For example, music can constitute meaning par excellence, but this is not its musical function. To understand music, one must know the technical theory of music. It is deictic because it is always in motion, eventful, and in the here and now. Poetry is also a deictic art. In this hierarchy, is there liberation from matter?
Hegel defines matter as a function of movement between time and space (an intuition of the theory of relativity?): Hegel has no illusions about the ontology of matter. It is rather the progress of the mind that interests Hegel—with the notion of teleology, although he does not claim to know this goal. For him, the absolute idea is the method. Philosophy does not claim to have easy answers." 
(Bruno Haas in the program Les Chemins de la Connaissance, broadcast on France Culture on April 30, 2018) 

Listen to the podcast in French:https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/quoi-hegel-quest-ce-quil-a-hegel-14-la-mort-de-lart

E2.1.C.2.2.b. THE IRRESOLVABLE CONFLICT BETWEEN FUNDAMENTAL VALUES LIKE "LIBERTY" AND "EQUALITY" IS WHAT FORCES A SOCIETY TO CONSTANTLY "THINK, REEVALUATE AND CRITICIZE."
“Ever since the French Revolution, people throughout the world have gradually come to see both equality and individual freedom as fundamental values. Yet the two values contradict each other. Equality can be ensured only by curtailing the freedoms of those who are better o . Guaranteeing that every individual will be free to do as he wishes inevitably short-changes equality. The entire political history of the world since 1789 can be seen as a series of attempts to reconcile this contradiction.
Anyone who has read a novel by Charles Dickens knows that the liberal regimes of nineteenth-century Europe gave priority to individual freedom even if it meant throwing insolvent poor families in prison and giving orphans little choice but to join schools for pickpockets. Anyone who has read a novel by Alexander Solzhenitsyn knows how Communisms egalitarian ideal produced brutal tyrannies that tried to control every aspect of daily life.
Contemporary American politics also revolve around this contradiction.
Democrats want a more equitable society, even if it means raising taxes to fund programs to help the poor, elderly and in rm. But that infringes on the freedom of individuals to spend their money as they wish. Why should the government force me to buy health insurance if I prefer sing the money to put my kids through college? Republicans, on the other hand, want to maximize individual freedom, even if it means that the income gap between rich and poor will grow wider and that many Americans will not be able to aﬀord health care.
Just as medieval culture did not manage to square chivalry with Christianity, so the modern world fails to square liberty with equality. But this is no defect. Such contradictions are an inseparable part of every human culture. In fact, they are
culture’s engines, responsible for the creativity and dynamism of our species. Just as when two clashing musical notes played together force a piece of music forward, so discord in our thoughts, ideas and values compel us to think, reevaluate and criticize. Consistency is the playground of dull minds.
If tensions, conflicts and irresolvable dilemmas are the spice of every culture, a human being who belongs to any particular culture must hold contradictory beliefs and be riven by incompatible values. It’s such an essential feature of any culture that it even has a name: cognitive dissonance. Cognitive dissonance is often considered a failure of the human psyche. In fact, it is a vital asset. Had people been unable to hold contradictory beliefs and values, it would probably have been impossible to establish and maintain any human culture.”
(Yuval Noah Harari, Sapiens, A Brief History of Humankind, 2011)

E2.1.C.2.2.c.REPRESENTING CREATIVE ACTION IN STORIES "ALLOWS EVERYONE TO BENEFIT FROM THE CREATIVE ACTION OF EVERYONE ELSE"
“Our cultures  (which we absorb as children, through the processes of imitation) consist primarily of  patterns of activity, undertaken in a social context. As parents are to children, cultures are  to adults: we do not know how the patterns we act out (or the concepts we utilize)  originated, or what precise “purposes” (what long-term “goals”) they currently serve.  Such patterns are in fact “emergent properties” of long-term social interactions.  Furthermore, we cannot describe such patterns well, abstractly (explicitly, semantically),  even though we duplicate them accurately (and unconsciously) in our behavior (and can  represent them, episodically, in our literary endeavors). We do not know why we do what  we do, or, to say the same thing, what it is that we are (all ideological theories to the  contrary). We watch ourselves, and wonder; our wonder takes the shape of the story or,  more fundamentally, the myth. Myths describing the known, explored territory, constitute  what we know about our knowing how, before we can state, explicitly, what it is that we  know how. Myth is, in part, the image of our adaptive action, as formulated by  imagination, before its explicit containment in abstract language; myth is the  intermediary between action and abstract linguistic representation of that action. Myth is  the distilled essence of the stories we tell ourselves about the patterns of our own  behavior, as they play themselves out in the social and impersonal worlds of experience.  We learn the story, which we do not understand (which is to say, cannot make explicit),  by watching. We represent the action patterns we encounter in action (that is ritual),  image and word: we act, then represent our behavior, ever more abstractly, ever more  explicitly, “consciously.”   The central features of our (socially determined) behavior thus become key  elements—characters—in our stories. The generation and constant refinement of these  stories, told and retold over centuries, allows us to determine ever more clearly just what  proper (and improper) behavior consists of, in an environment permanently characterized  by the interplay between security and unpredictability. We are extremely (uncontrollably)  imitative, overwhelmingly social and interminably exploratory. These characteristics  allow us to generate and communicate represented images, and, simultaneously, serve as  the focal point of inquiry for those images. Our capacity for creative action frees us,  constantly, from the ever-shifting demands of the “environment.” The ability to represent  creative action—to duplicate observed creativity in our own actions, and to represent that  creativity in detail and essence—allows everyone to benefit from the creative action of  everyone else (at least everyone with whom communication might conceivably take  place). The fact of our sociability ensures that our adaptive behaviors are structured with  the social community in mind, at least in the long run, and increases our chances of  exposure to creative intelligence. We observe others acting in a manner we find  admirable, and duplicate their actions. In this manner, we obtain the skills of others. Our  capacity for abstraction allows us to take our facility for imitation one step further,  however: we can learn to imitate not only the precise behaviors that constitute adaptation,  but the process by which those behaviors were generated. This means—we can learn not  only skill, but meta-skill (can learn to mimic the pattern of behavior that generates new  skills). It is the encapsulation of meta-skill in a story that makes that story great.”
(Jordan Peterson, Maps of Meaning The Architecture of Belief, 1999)


E2.1.C.2.2.d. THE "ARRIVAL OF WOMEN ON THE PUBLIC SCENE" IN THE 18TH CENTURY AND THE EMERGENCE OF A "NEW WOMAN" WHO WAS "MORE FREE IN [HER] HABITS." They contributed to sentiments, taste and the passions losing the negative aura of irrationality, being gradually reconquered by reason.
“At the end of the eighteenth century it was fashionable not to conceal the breasts, which were at times openly revealed above a band that supported them and emphasised the waistline. Parisian ladies organised salons and took part, in no secondary role, in the debates that were carried on therein, foreshadowing the Revolutionary Clubs but also following a fashion that had already begun in the previous century, with the conversations in the salons on the nature of love. It is indicative that the scene in Watteau's Embarkation for the Island of Cythera springs from the imaginary geography of the amorous passions represented, in seventeenth-century conversations, by a sort of map of the heart, the Carte du Tendre. Towards the end of the seventeenth century, in fact, such discussions had led to one of the first novels about love, the Princess of Cloves by Madame de La Fayette. This was followed in the eighteenth century by Moll Flanders (1722) by Daniel Defoe, Pamela (1742) by Samuel Richardson and La nouvelle Héloise (1761) by Jean-Jacques Rousseau. In eighteenth-century love novels Beauty was seen with the inner eye of the passions, prevalently in the form of the intimate diary: a literary form that already holds within it all of early Romanticism. But, above all, through these discussions the conviction began to gain ground—and this is the contribution of women to modern philosophy—that sentiments are not merely a perturbation of the mind, but express, together with reason and sensibility, a third faculty of humankind. 
Sentiments, taste and the passions therefore lost the negative aura of irrationality and, as they were gradually reconquered by reason, they played a leading role in the struggle against the dictatorship of reason itself. Sentiment was a reservoir into which Rousseau dipped in order to rebel against artificial and decadent modern Beauty, winning back for the eye and the heart the right to immerse themselves in the original, uncontaminated Beauty of nature, with a sense of nostalgia for the 'noble savage' and the spontaneous youth that had originally been in man but by Rousseau's day had been lost.”
(Umberto Eco, On Beauty, 2004)

E2.1.C.2.2.e. ACCORDING TO FRIEDRICH HAYEK, PROGRESS IS NOT A PLANNED, TOP-DOWN PROJECT, BUT A "SPONTANEOUS 'FORMATION'" THAT EMERGES FROM THE COMPETITIVE, TRIAL-AND-ERROR ACTIONS OF FREE INDIVIDUALS. THIS UNPLANNED ORDER IS THE ENGINE OF INNOVATION.
“It is through the mutually adjusted eﬀorts of many people that more knowledge is utilized than any one individual possesses or than it is possible to synthesize intellectually; and it is through such utilization of dispersed knowledge that achievements are made possible greater than any single mind can foresee. It is because freedom means the renunciation of direct control of individual eﬀorts that a free society can make use of so much more knowledge than the mind of the wisest ruler could comprehend.
From this foundation of the argument for liberty it follows that we shall not achieve its ends if we conﬁne liberty to the particular instances where we know it will do good. Freedom granted only when it is known beforehand that its eﬀects will be beneﬁcial is not freedom. If we knew how freedom would be used, the case for it would largely disappear. We shall never get the bene-ﬁ ts of freedom, never obtain those unforeseeable new developments for which it provides the opportunity, if it is not also granted where the uses made of it by some do not seem desirable. It is therefore no argument against individual freedom that it is frequently abused. Freedom necessarily means that many things will be done which we do not like. Our faith in freedom does not rest on the foreseeable results in particular circumstances but on the belief that it will, on balance, release more forces for the good than for the bad.
It also follows that the importance of our being free to do a particular thing has nothing to do with the question of whether we or the majority are ever likely to make use of that particular possibility. To grant no more freedom than all can exercise would be to misconceive its function completely. The freedom that will be used by only one man in a million may be more important to society and more beneﬁcial to the majority than any freedom that we all use.
It might even be said that the less likely the opportunity to make use of freedom to do a particular thing, the more precious it will be for society as a whole. The less likely the opportunity, the more serious will it be to miss it when it arises, for the experience that it oﬀers will be nearly unique. It is also prob-ably true that the majority are not directly interested in most of the important things that any one person should be free to do. It is because we do not know how individuals will use their freedom that it is so important. If it were other-wise, the results of freedom could also be achieved by the majority’s deciding what should be done by the individuals. But majority action is, of necessity, a better adaptation not merely to the particular circumstances of time and place but to some permanent feature of our environment. In such spontaneous “formations” is embodied a perception of the general laws that govern nature. With this cumulative embodiment of experience in tools and forms of action will emerge a growth of explicit knowledge, of formulated generic rules that can be communicated by language from person to person.
This process by which the new emerges is best understood in the intellectual sphere when the results are new ideas. It is the ﬁ eld in which most of us are aware at least of some of the individual steps of the process, where we necessarily know what is happening and thus generally recognize the necessity of freedom. Most scientists realize that we cannot plan the advance of knowledge, that in the voyage into the unknown—which is what research is—we are in great measure dependent on the vagaries of individual genius and of circumstance, and that scientiﬁc advance, like a new idea that will spring up in a single mind, will be the result of a combination of conceptions, habits, and circumstances brought to one person by society, the result as much of lucky accidents as of systematic eﬀort.
Because we are more aware that our advances in the intellectual sphere often spring from the unforeseen and undesigned, we tend to overstress the importance of freedom in this ﬁ eld and to ignore the importance of the freedom of doing things. But the freedom of research and belief and the freedom of speech and discussion, the importance of which is widely understood, are signiﬁcant only in the last stage of the process in which new truths are dis-covered. To extol the value of intellectual liberty at the expense of the value of the liberty of doing things would be like treating the crowning part of an ediﬁce as the whole. We have new ideas to discuss, diﬀerent views to adjust, because those ideas and views arise from the eﬀorts of individuals in ever new circumstances, who avail themselves in their concrete tasks of the new tools and forms of action they have learned.”
(Friedrich Hayek, The Constitution of Liberty, 1960)

E2.1.C.2.3. The Paradox of Freedom: When "Liberation" Leads to Anarchy - certain types of freedom (Romantic, anarchic) or the simplistic embrace of it (naïve diversity) can "undermine moral principles," destroy social cooperation, and lead to nihilism or tyranny, not progress.

E2.1.C.2.3.a. JORDAN PETERSON CHALLENGES THE NAIVE ASSUMPTION THAT SIMPLY PROMOTING "CULTURAL DIVERSITY"—A PRODUCT OF A FREE AND OPEN SOCIETY—IS AN AUTOMATIC GOOD. IT ARGUES THAT WITHOUT A DIFFICULT, PAINFUL, AND PERSONAL "WAR" OF INTEGRATION WITHIN THE INDIVIDUAL PSYCHE, IT IS MORE LIKELY TO PRODUCE "ANOMIE, NIHILISM AND CONSERVATIVE BACKLASH."
“It is neither reasonable nor possible to simply abandon a particular  culture, which is a pattern of general adaptation, just because someone else comes along  who does things a different way, whose actions are predicated on different assumptions.  
It is no simple matter to rebuild social relationships in the wake of new ideas. It is no  straightforward process, furthermore, to give up a goal, a central unifying and motivating  idea. Identification of an individual with a group means that individual psychological  stability is staked on maintenance of group welfare. If the group founders suddenly as a  consequence of external circumstance or internal strife, the individual is laid bare to the  world, his social context disappears, his reason for being vanishes, he is swallowed up by  the unbearable unknown, and he cannot easily survive. Nietzsche states:   In an age of disintegration that mixes races indiscriminately, human  beings have in their bodies the heritage of multiple origins, that is,  opposite, and often not merely opposite, drives and value standards that  fight each other and rarely permit each other any rest. Such human beings  of late cultures and refracted lights will on the average be weaker human  beings: their most profound desire is that the war they are should come to  an end.
Of course, the unstated conclusion to Nietzsche’s observation is that the war typifying the  person of “mixed race” (mixed culture, in more modern terminology) is the affectively  unpleasant precursor to the state of mind characterizing the more thoroughly integrated  individual, who has “won” the war. This “victor”—who has organized the currently  warring diverse cultural standpoints into a hierarchy, integrated once more—will be  stronger than his “unicultural” predecessor, as his behavior and values will be the  consequence of the more diverse and broader ranging union of heretofore separate  cultures. It is reasonable to presuppose that it was the “unconscious” consideration of the  potentially positive outcome of such mixing that led Nietzsche to the revelation of the  dawning future “superman.”392 It is not the mere existence of various previously  separated presuppositions in a single psyche that constitutes the postcontact victory,  however. This means that the simplistic promotion of “cultural diversity” as panacea is  likely to produce anomie, nihilism and conservative backlash. It is the molding of these  diverse beliefs into a single hierarchy that is precondition for the peaceful admixture of  all. This molding can only be accomplished by war conducted between paradoxical  elements, within the “postcontact” individual psyche. Such a war is so difficult—so  emotionally upsetting and cognitively challenging—that murder of the anomalous  “other” in the morally acceptable guise of traditional war frequently seems a comforting  alternative.   Fundamental threats can be posed very easily between groups of people. Most  concretely, foreign behaviors are threatening, unpredictable in particular, terrifying in  general—because essential beliefs, challenging beliefs, are most convincingly expressed  through actions:   
He became to us a reproof of our thoughts; "the very sight of him is a burden to us, because his manner of life is  unlike that of others, and his ways are strange. (Wisdom 2:14–15 RSV)   
A foreign man, a stranger, is threatening because he is not firmly fixed within a social  hierarchy, and may therefore behave unpredictably—with unpredictable consequences  for the social hierarchy. Signals of safety and threat vary, or may vary, between members  of different groups. Unpredictable means potentially dangerous. More abstractly, what  the stranger believes, specifically, threatens the integrated structure of historically  determined belief, in general. This does not present a problem, when his foreign actions  or ideas do not produce fundamental conflict—do not threaten key beliefs. When basic  concepts are threatened, however, the unbearable, terrible unknown once again rises up,  and once-firm ground begins to give way.   The Strange Idea   Increasing ability to abstract makes previous learning, established through nonabstract  means, increasingly modifiable—and increasingly vulnerable. In a way, this is the whole  point of abstraction, and the very capacity to learn. Words, deceptively simple and  harmless, are sufficient to create disruption and conflict, because Homo sapiens can  verbalize his beliefs. It could be said, therefore, with sufficient rationale that a new idea is  an abstract stranger (or, by the same logic, a natural disaster). It is for this reason that  the pen is mightier than the sword.  
 The process of increased abstraction allows for increasing self-understanding (self- consciousness)—at least in potential—and for the prediction of the behaviors of others  [which is a capacity integrally linked to the development of self-consciousness (how  would I behave in a situation like that?)]. In addition, abstraction eases communication of  morality (instruction in how to behave), by making it unnecessary to wait around to  watch until something important actually happens. The use of drama, for example— which is the representation of behavior, in behavior and image—allows us to watch the  interplay of issues of mortal consequence, without the actors or the observers actually  suffering that consequence.   The capacity to abstract has not come without price, however. The incautious,  imaginative (and resentful) can easily use their gift of socially constructed intelligence to  undermine moral principles that took eons to generate and that exist for valid but  invisible reasons. Such “invisible” principles can be subjected to facile criticism, by the  historically ignorant, once they take imagistic, written or spoken form. The consequence  of this “criticism” is the undermining of necessary faith, and the consequent dissolution  of interpersonal predictability, dysregulation of emotion, and generation of anomie,  aggression and ideological gullibility (as the naked psyche strives to clothe itself, once  again).”
(Jordan Peterson, Maps of Meaning The Architecture of Belief, 1999)

E2.1.C.2.3.b. FOR NASSIM NICHOLAS TALEB , THE SYSTEM LEARNS AND IMPROVES NOT BECAUSE INDIVIDUALS LEARN FROM THEIR MISTAKES, BUT BECAUSE THE SYSTEM ITSELF "LEARNS BY REMOVING PARTS." PROGRESS HAPPENS THROUGH A "FILTER OF INTERGENERATIONAL SELECTION" WHERE THOSE WHO MAKE CATASTROPHIC ERRORS ARE ELIMINATED.
“You will never fully convince someone that he is wrong; only reality can. 
Actually, to be precise, reality doesn’t care about winning arguments: survival is what matters. 
Learning isn’t quite what we teach inmates inside the high-security prisons called schools. In biology, learning is something that, through the filter of intergenerational selection, gets imprinted at the cellular level—skin in the game, I insist, is more filter than deterrence. Evolution can only happen if risk of extinction is present. Further, 
There is no evolution without skin in the game.
This last point is quite obvious, but I keep seeing academics with no skin in the game defend evolution while at the same time rejecting skin in the game and risk sharing. They refuse the notion of design by a creator who knows everything, while, at the same time, want to impose human design as if they knew all the consequences. In general, the more people worship the sacrosanct state (or, equivalently, large corporations), the more they hate skin in the game. The more they believe in their ability to forecast, the more they hate skin in the game. The more they wear suits and ties, the more they hate skin in the game.
Returning to our interventionistas, we saw that people don’t learn so much from their—and other people’s—mistakes; rather it is the system that learns by selecting those less prone to a certain class of mistakes and eliminating others.
Systems learn by removing parts, via negativa.
Many bad pilots, as we mentioned, are currently in the bottom of the Atlantic, many dangerous bad drivers are in the local quiet cemetery with nice walkways bordered by trees. Transportation didn’t get safer just because people learn from errors, but because the system does. The experience of the system is different from that of individuals; it is grounded in filtering.”
(Nassim Nicholas Taleb, Skin in the game, 2017)

E2.1.C.2.3.c. RUSSELL ARGUES THAT SOME FORMS OF INDIVIDUALISM ARE CONDUCIVE TO A FREE AND ADVANCING CIVILIZATION, WHILE OTHERS ARE ULTIMATELY DESTRUCTIVE.
“Early liberalism was a product of England and Holland, and had certain well-marked characteristics. It stood for religious toleration; it was Protestant, but of a latitudinarian rather than of a fanatical kind; it regarded the wars of religion as silly. It valued commerce and industry, and favoured the rising middle class rather than the monarchy and the aristocracy; it had immense respect for the rights of property, especially when accumulated by the labours of the individual possessor. The hereditary principle, though not rejected, was restricted in scope more than it had previously been; in particular, the divine right of kings was rejected in favour of the view that every community has a right, at any rate initially, to choose its own form of government. Implicitly, the tendency of early liberalism was towards democracy tempered by the rights of property. There was a belief—not at first wholly explicit—that all men are born equal, and that their subsequent inequality is a product of circumstances. This led to a great emphasis upon the importance of education as opposed to congenital characteristics. There was a certain bias against government, because governments almost everywhere were in the hands of kings or aristocracies, who seldom either understood or respected the needs of merchants, but this bias was held in check by the hope that the necessary understanding and respect would be won before long.
Early liberalism was optimistic, energetic, and philosophic, because it represented growing forces which appeared likely to become victorious without great difficulty, and to bring by their victory great benefits to mankind. It was opposed to everything medieval, both in philosophy and in politics, because medieval theories had been used to sanction the powers of Church and king, to justify persecution, and to obstruct the rise of science; but it was opposed equally to the then modern fanaticisms of Calvinists and Anabaptists. It wanted an end to political and theological strife, in order to liberate energies for the exciting enterprises of commerce and science, such as the East India Company and the Bank of England, the theory of gravitation and the discovery of the circulation of the blood. Throughout the Western world bigotry was giving place to enlightenment, the fear of Spanish power was ending, all classes were increasing in prosperity, and the highest hopes appeared to be warranted by the most sober judgment. For a hundred years, nothing occurred to dim these hopes; then, at last, they themselves generated the French Revolution, which led directly to Napoleon and thence to the Holy Alliance. After these events, liberalism had to acquire its second wind before the renewed optimism of the nineteenth century became possible.
Before embarking upon any detail, it will be well to consider the general pattern of the liberal movements from the seventeenth to the nineteenth century. This pattern is at first simple, but grows gradually more and more complex. The distinctive character of the whole movement is, in a certain wide sense, individualism; but this is a vague term until further defined. The philosophers of Greece, down to and including Aristotle, were not individualists in the sense in which I wish to use the term. They thought of a man as essentially a member of a community; Plato’s Republic, for example, is concerned to define the good community, not the good individual. With the loss of political liberty from the time of Alexander onwards, individualism developed, and was represented by the Cynics and Stoics. According to the Stoic philosophy, a man could live a good life in no matter what social circumstances. This was also the view of Christianity, especially before it acquired control of the State. But in the Middle Ages, while mystics kept alive the original individualistic trends in Christian ethics, the outlook of most men, including the majority of philosophers, was dominated by a firm synthesis of dogma, law, and custom, which caused men’s theoretical beliefs and practical morality to be controlled by a social institution, namely the Catholic Church : what was true and what was good was to be ascertained, not by solitary thought, but by the collective wisdom of Councils.
The first important breach in this system was made by Protestantism, which asserted that General Councils may err. To determine the truth thus became no longer a social but an individual enterprise. Since different individuals reached different conclusions, the result was strife, and theological decisions were sought, no longer in assemblies of bishops, but on the battle-field. Since neither party was able to extirpate the other, it became evident, in the end. that a method must be found of reconciling intellectual and ethical individualism with ordered social life. This was one of the main problems which early liberalism attempted to solve. 
Meanwhile individualism had penetrated into philosophy. Descartes' fundamental certainty, ‘I think, therefore I am', made the basis of knowledge different for each person, since for each the starting-point was his own existence, not that of other individuals or of the community. His emphasis upon the reliability of clear and distinct ideas tended in the same direction, since it is by introspection that we think we discover whether our ideas are clear and distinct. Most philosophy since Descartes has had this intellectually individualistic aspect in a greater or less degree.
There are, however, various forms of this general position, which have, in practice, very different consequences. The outlook of the typical scientific discoverer has perhaps the smallest dose of individualism. When he arrives at a new theory, he does so solely because it seems right to him; he does not bow to authority, for, if he did, he would continue to accept the theories of his predecessors. At the same time, his appeal is to generally received canons of truth, and he hopes to persuade other men, not by his authority, but by arguments which are convincing to them as individuals. In science, any clash between the individual and society is in essence transitory, since men of science, broadly speaking, all accept the same intellectual standards, and therefore debate and investigation usually produce agreement in the end. This, however, is a modem development; in the time of Galileo, the authority of Aristotle and the Church was still considered at least as cogent as the evidence of the senses. This shows how the element of individualism in scientific method, though not prominent, is nevertheless essential. Early liberalism was individualistic in intellectual matters, and also in economics, but was not emotionally or ethically self-assertive. This form of liberalism dominated the English eighteenth century, the founders of the American Constitution, and the French encyclopedists. During the French Revolution, it was represented by the more moderate parties, including the Girondins, but with their extermination it disappeared for a generation from French politics. In England, after the Napoleonic wars, it again became influential with the rise of the Benthamites and the Manchester School. Us greatest success has been in America, where, unhampered by feudalism and a State Church, it has been dominant from 1776 to the present day, or at any rate to 1933.
A new movement, which has gradually developed into the antithesis of liberalism, begins with Rousseau, and acquires strength from the romantic movement and the principle of nationality. In this movement, individualism is extended from the intellectual sphere to that of the passions, and the anarchic aspects of individualism are made explicit. The cult of the hero, as developed by Carlyle and Nietzsche, is typical of this philosophy. Various elements were combined in it. There was dislike of early industrialism, hatred of the ugliness that it produced, and revulsion against its cruelties. There was a nostalgia for the Middle Ages, which were idealized owing to hatred of the modem world. There was an attempt to combine championship of the fading privileges of Church and aristocracy with defence of wage-earners against the tyranny of manufacturers. There was vehement assertion of the right of rebellion in the name of nationalism, and of the splendour of war in defence of ‘liberty’. Byron was the poet of this movement; Fichte, Carlyle, and Nietzsche were its philosophers.
But since we cannot all have the career of heroic leaders, and cannot all make our individual will prevail, this philosophy, like all other forms of anarchism, inevitably leads, when adopted, to the despotic government of the most successful 'hero’. And when his tyranny is established, he will suppress in others the self-assertive ethic by which he has risen to power. This whole theory 0f life, therefore, is self-refuting, in the sense that its adoption in practice leads to the realization of something utterly different:' a dictatorial State in which the individual is severely repressed.”
 (Bertrand Russell, History Of Western Philosophy, 1945)

E2.1.C.2.3.d. RUSSELL ARGUES THAT THE ROMANTIC MOVEMENT, WHICH "AIMED AT LIBERATING HUMAN PERSONALITY FROM THE FETTERS OF SOCIAL CONVENTION" DID NOT LEAD TO SOCIAL PROGRESS BUT TO DESTRUCTIVE IDEOLOGIES.
“Revolt of solitary instincts against social bonds is the key to the philosophy, the politics, and the sentiments, not only of what is commonly called the romantic movement, but of its progeny down to the present day. Philosophy, under the influence of German idealism, became solipsistic, and self-development was proclaimed as the fundamental principle of ethics. As regards sentiment, there has to be a distasteful compromise between the search for isolation and the necessities of passion and economics. D. H. Lawrence’s story. The Man Who Loved Islands’, has a hero who disdained such compromise to a gradually increasing extent and at last died of hunger and cold, but in the enjoyment of complete isolation; but this degree of consistency has not been achieved by the writers who praise solitude. The comforts of civilized life are not obtainable by a hermit, and a man who wishes to write books or produce works of art must submit to the ministrations of others if he is to survive while he docs his work. In order to continue to feel solitary, he must be able to prevent those who serve him from impinging upon his ego, which is best accomplished if they are slaves. Passionate love, however, is a more difficult matter. So long as passionate lovers are regarded as in revolt against social trammels, they are admired; but in real life the love-relation itself quickly becomes a social trammel, and the partner in love comes to be hated, all the more vehemently if the love is strong enough to make the bond difficult to break. Hence love comes to be conceived as a battle, in which each is attempting to destroy the other by breaking through the protecting walls of his or her ego. This point of view has become familiar through the writings of Strindberg, and, still more, of D. H. Lawrence.
Not only passionate love, but every friendly relation to others, is only possible, to this way of feeling, in so far as the others can be regarded as a projection of one’s own Self. This is feasible if the others are blood-relations, and the more nearly they are related the more easily it is possible. Hence an emphasis on race, leading, as in the case of the Ptolemys, to endogamy. How this affected Byron, we know; Wagner suggests a similar sentiment in the love of Siegmund and Sieglinde. Nietzsche, though not scandalously, preferred his sister to all other women : ‘How strongly I feel,’ he writes to her, ‘in all that you say and do, that we belong to the same stock. You understand more of me than others do, because' we come of the same percentage. This fits in very well with my “philosophy”.
The principle of nationality, of which Byron was a protagonist, is an extension of the same ‘philosophy’. A nation is assumed to be a race, descended from common ancestors, and sharing some kind of ‘blood-consciousness. Mazzini, who constantly found fault with the English for their failure to appreciate Byron, conceived nations as possessed of a mystical individuality, and attributed to them the kind of anarchic greatness that other romantics sought in heroic men. Liberty, for nations, came to be regarded, not only by Mazzini, but by comparatively sober statesmen, as something absolute, which, in practice, made international co-operation impossible.
Belief in blood and race is naturally associated with anti-semitism. At the same time, the romantic outlook, partly because it is aristocratic, and partly because it prefers passion to calculation, has a vehement contempt for commerce and finance. It is thus led to proclaim an opposition to capitalism which is quite different from that of the socialist who represents the interest of the proletariat, since it is an opposition based on dislike of economic preoccupations, and strengthened by the suggestion that the capitalist world is governed by Jews. […]
The romantic movement, in its essence, aimed at liberating human personality from the fetters of social convention and social morality. In part, these fetters were a mere useless hindrance to desirable forms of activity, for every ancient community has developed rules of behaviour for which there is nothing to be said except that they are traditional. But egoistic passions, when once let loose, are not easily brought again into subjection to the needs of society. Christianity has succeeded, to some extent, in taming the Ego, but economic, political, and intellectual causes stimulated revolt against the Churches, and the romantic movement brought the revolt into the sphere of morals. By encouraging a new lawless Ego it made social co-operation impossible, and left its disciples faced with the alternative of anarchy or despotism. Egoism, at first, made men expect from others a parental tenderness; but when they discovered, with indignation, that others had their own Ego, the disappointed desire for tenderness turned to hatred and violence. Man is not a solitary animal, and so long as social life survives, self-realization cannot be the supreme principle of ethics.”
(Bertrand Russell, History Of Western Philosophy, 1945)

E2.1.C.3. The Desire for Self-Governance and Participation: Examine the human aspiration to have a voice in the decisions that affect their lives and communities, linking this to a desire for political freedom and self-determination.

"Jean-Jacques Rousseau's "The Social Contract": Must we submit to the general will?
The social contract is the act by which a people become a people. It is an act of association, not submission. There is only one social contract: the one that establishes the state. The relationship with leaders who can be removed at any time is not contractual.
Natural law is no longer the norm of political life. The people replace it with the general will. For Diderot, the general will is that of the species. However, Rousseau questions whether any man could separate himself from his particular interests to satisfy the supposed will of humanity. Rousseau wants to be more realistic. We must start with self-love and conceive of laws as they can be. In a well-ordered society, the general will is that of the citizen insofar as it aims at the common good. In a just state constituted by a uniform people, this will is naturally expressed if the citizens are free. However, there are many conditions that limit the concept of the general will to the expression of a small, homogeneous society with shared desires that is relatively equal in material terms and particularly in education. There must also be no "partial societies" (pressure groups, parties, etc.) so that everyone can express their own views. Otherwise, there would not be "as many voters as there are men." Rousseau did not foresee that deviations from his theoretical model would quickly transform the "general will" into an argument for totalitarian dictatorships. In this sense, Rousseau is the apostle of ancient freedom, based on the model of ancient Greece. But can this model be adapted to modernity? Political modernity introduced representative government, the separation of powers, and a charter of individual rights as safeguards. Montesquieu and Tocqueville are more modern in that they advocate dividing society into separate groups, each representing their own interests. They argue that interests will necessarily clash because there is no common good, and one part of society must not be allowed to oppress another.
However, Rousseau was extremely concerned about the security of everyone in a just state. He believed that individuals could never be sacrificed for the greater good. During the Revolution, Robespierre and others who claimed to follow Rousseau's thinking usurped it.
When citizens express the general will, they do so by asking themselves: "What is advantageous for the general good of the state to which I belong?" (General, not universal as in Kant). The state must ensure that citizens are educated so that their individual wills evolve towards the general will over time."
(Céline Spector in the program Les chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on April 15, 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/le-contrat-social-de-jean-jacques-rousseau-14-doit-se-plier-a-la-volonte-generale

"Jean-Jacques Rousseau's “Social Contract”: From the multitude to the people...
To escape the state of war, in Hobbes' view, human beings transfer their sovereignty to the sovereign, whose potential despotism will always be less terrible than the war of all against all. The people are bound together by a contract, but the sovereign is external to them and is not bound by the contract.
For Rousseau, there can be no “people” if they are subject to an authority that exercises power over them. All citizens of the people participate in the general will.
If the people have succeeded in forming themselves, there should be no grievances (such as those of the yellow vests). For Rousseau, equality and freedom are inseparable. Equality is not only a matter of law, because if the power of one person, due to their social position, subjugates another in practice, there is a loss of freedom: above a certain level of inequality, freedom is no longer possible. If I have to sell myself to survive, I am no longer free—to be free would be to obey only the law that the people have given themselves, hence the importance of the legislator. The law agreed upon by the general will must allow us to live as freely as in the state of nature: “A man is free when he does not need to use the arms of another man to do what he wants” (J.J. Rousseau, L'Émile) - we can see that this definition of freedom in the state of nature clearly shows that men are still interdependent to a certain extent, even if they are free. I do what I want because I only want what I can in the state of nature."
(Frédéric Brahami in the program Les chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on April 16, 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French:
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/le-contrat-social-de-jean-jacques-rousseau-24-de-la-multitude-au-peuple


"Jean-Jacques Rousseau's The Social Contract: Who makes the law?
The social contract arises from an ambiguity: The state can only be constituted by laws emanating from the general will. However, the people cannot form a state unless they have already achieved a certain level of maturity. Before association, its members have no inclination toward the general will. Therefore, it is the legislator who provides the initial impetus by educating and creating the people so they can become aware of their general will and make laws.
See the role of the legislator as an impetus in Chapter 6 of Book II, "Of the Law."
Rousseau's reflection on the legitimacy of democracy is still relevant today, since the founding act of democracy is generally external, and the "legislator" is never the ideal figure imagined by Rousseau.
 
Chapter 7 of Book II, "On the Legislator," discusses the means by which the legislator can establish a people, such as altering the constitution of man to strengthen it and depriving man of his natural powers to replace them with those of the social body. Note that Rousseau presupposes the perfectibility of human beings in the Second Discourse on the Origin of Inequality: it is in their nature to transform themselves. This is not violence since the state of nature has already been lost, and to denature man means nothing because man is defined as an animal that can be educated. Rousseau does not characterize this new civil liberty. Is it possible to give liberty a purpose in advance? The legislator does not impose a mindset; rather, he produces liberty. Then, man substitutes justice for his instincts and reason for his inclinations. Rousseau is not an apologist for savage life! He mistrusts the individual whose particular point of view can turn into oppression. On the other hand, he seeks the individual, if only himself, in Confessions and Reveries of a Solitary Walker. Is this conflict due to his belief that one is the condition of the other?"
(Frédéric Brahami in the program Les chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on April 17, 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French:
https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/qui-fait-la-loi-1431362

"Jean-Jacques Rousseau's "Social Contract": Can someone be forced to be free?
The idea of forcing citizens to be free should be understood as a defense of the law, which aligns more with a constitution. This does not mean that one cannot have reservations about or criticize the law in order to influence its adaptation or reform. According to Rousseau, the purpose of the law is to protect freedom, not restrict it. It must also be remembered that when human beings lost the limited freedom of the state of nature, they gained a new freedom offering three advantages:
1. Political freedom to contribute to the definition of the general will and to be subject only to it.
2. Civil freedom, which includes physical protection, protection of one's property, and the ability to do anything that is not prohibited by law.
3. Moral freedom, which arises in civil society because I act by the voluntary decision of reason and not under the impulse of instinct.
Rousseau is not a naturalist in the sense that he believes man is inherently good: in this state, man merely obeys his appetite, which includes a reluctance to cause others harm (but not an innate desire to help them).
Rousseau believed in the possibility of consensus and paid minimal attention to dissenting minorities. Yet, interpretations that portray him as a proponent of totalitarianism are mistaken.
 
Often ignored is the importance he placed on direct deliberation by citizens, which cannot be replaced by a vote based on rigid, undebated opinions (as in a referendum without prior debate) or by delegating the vote to representatives. The condition for the general will is that it be constructed dynamically and evolve. A "lazy" democracy disengaged from debate is not a democracy. Another aspect of Rousseau's thinking is his distinction between sovereignty and government. In a democratic model, however, the two spheres are confused. According to Rousseau, the general will and the law concern only the broad outlines that define the people. The government implements this vision by decree. Current demands for participatory democracy in France regarding specific issues contradict this vision. To encourage participation in the debate, it must be limited to fundamental values and options. According to Rousseau, it is the exercise of freedom that gives us a taste for it. It is not merely an "assembly at the ballot box" corresponding to a vote "for or against" without the deliberation necessary for forming the general will.

Is Rousseau's vision impossible to implement? Have contemporary democracies become too cowardly, complacent, and timid to reinvigorate debate and break free from voluntary servitude?"
(Bruno Bernardi in the program Les chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on April 18, 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French:
https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/peut-on-forcer-quelqu-un-a-etre-libre-5703732

"One example of a restricted reading of Rousseau is Benjamin Constant's "De la liberté des anciens comparée à celle des modernes" (On the Liberty of the Ancients Compared with That of the Moderns), published in 1819. In this work, Constant classifies Rousseau as favoring tyranny by distinguishing between the liberty of the ancients, which is collective, and that of the moderns, which is individual.
"I propose to submit to you some distinctions that are still quite new between two kinds of liberty." One is the liberty that was dear to the ancient peoples. It consisted of exercising several parts of the entire sovereignty collectively and directly. They deliberated on war and peace, concluded treaties of alliance with foreigners, voted on laws, passed judgments, and examined accounts. At the same time, the ancients admitted that this collective liberty was compatible with the complete subjection of the individual to the authority of the whole." 
Another, is particularly precious to modern nations. Each individual has the right to be subject only to the laws and to not be arrested, detained, put to death, or mistreated in any way by the arbitrary will of one or more individuals. Each individual has the right to express his opinion, choose his occupation, and dispose of his property as he sees fit. Failing to see these differences caused endless controversy during our long and stormy revolution, even among well-intentioned men. They drew many of their theories from the works of two philosophers who were unaware of the changes that two thousand years had brought about in the disposition of mankind. I will examine the system of the more illustrious of these philosophers, Jean-Jacques Rousseau. I will show that, by transporting an extent of social power and collective sovereignty belonging to other centuries to our modern times, this sublime genius, animated by the purest love of liberty, nevertheless provided disastrous pretexts for more than one kind of tyranny.
Benjamin Constant fails to see the distinction that Rousseau makes between matters of sovereignty and matters of government. Measures of coercion would be those of a government that does not respect the will of the people. Rousseau never conceives of a strong government. In the chapter "Depends on sovereign power" in Book II, he writes, "In addition to the public person, we must consider the persons who compose it and whose life and liberty are naturally independent." It is therefore necessary to distinguish clearly between the rights and duties of individuals, a concept that recalls and precedes that of human rights. For Rousseau, humans are not reduced to their political status, and the government's task is to preserve the civil and political freedom of individuals (Book III)."
(Bruno Bernardi in the program Les chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on April 18, 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French:
https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/peut-on-forcer-quelqu-un-a-etre-libre-5703732

BERTRAND RUSSELL ARGUES THAT DESPITE ITS "LIP-SERVICE TO DEMOCRACY," ROUSSEAU'S PHILOSOPHY "TEND[S] TO THE JUSTIFICATION OF THE TOTALITARIAN STATE." 
“Rousseau’s political theory is set forth in his Social Contract, published in 1762. This book is very different in character from most of his writing; it contains little sentimentality and much close intellectual reasoning. Its doctrines, though they pay lip-service to democracy, tend to the justification of the totalitarian State. But Geneva and antiquity combined to make him prefer the City State to large empires such as those of France and England. On the titlepage he calls himself 'citizen of Geneva’, and in his introductory sentences he says : ‘As I was born a citizen of a free State, and a member of the Sovereign, I feel that, however feeble the influence of my voice may have been on public affairs, the right of voting on them makes it my duty to study them.’ There are frequent laudatory references to Sparta, as it appears in Plutarch’s Life of Lycurgus. He says that democracy is best in small States, aristocracy in middle-sized ones, and monarchy in large ones. But it is to be understood that, in his opinion, small States are preferable, in part because they make democracy more practicable. When he speaks of democracy, he means, as the Greeks meant, direct participation of every citizen; representative government he calls ‘elective aristocracy’. Since the former is not possible in a large State, his praise of democracy always implies praise of the City State. This love of the City State is, in my opinion, not sufficiently emphasized in most accounts of Rousseau’s political philosophy.
Although the book as a whole is much less rhetorical than most of Rousseau’s writing, the first chapter opens with a very forceful piece of rhetoric : ‘Man is born free, and everywhere he is in chains. One man thinks himself the master of others, but remains more of a slave than they are.’ Liberty is the nominal goal of Rousseau’s thought, but in fact it is equality that he values, and that he seeks to secure even at the expense of liberty.
His conception of the Social Contract seems, at first, analogous to Locke’s, but soon shows itself more akin to that of Hobbes. In the development from the state of nature, there comes a time when individuals can no longer maintain themselves in primitive independence; it then becomes necessary to self-preservation that they should unite to form a society. But how can I pledge my liberty without harming my interests? The problem is to find a form of association which will defend and protect with the whole common force the person and goods of each associate, and in which each, while uniting himself with all. may still obey himself alone, and remain as free as before. This is the fundamental problem of which the Social Contract provides the solution.’
The Contract consists in 'the total alienation of each associate, together with all his rights, to the whole community; for, in the first place, as each gives himself absolutely, the conditions are the same for all; and this being so. no one has any interest in making them burdensome to others’. The alienation is to be without reserve. ‘If individuals retained certain rights, as there would be no common superior to decide between them and the public, each, being on one point his own judge, would ask to be so on all; the state of nature would thus continue, and the association would necessarily become inoperative or tyrannical.’
This implies a complete abrogation of liberty and a complete rejection of the doctrine of the rights of man. It is true that, in a later chapter, there is some softening of this theory. It is there said that, although the social contract gives the body politic absolute power over all its members, nevertheless human beings have natural rights as men. 'The sovereign cannot impose upon its subjects any fetters that are useless to the community, nor can it even wish to do so.’ But the sovereign is the sole judge of what is useful or useless to the community. It is clear that only a very feeble obstacle is thus opposed to collective tyranny. It should be observed that the 'sovereign’ means, in Rousseau, not the monarch or the government, but the community in its collective and legislative capacity.
The Social Contract can be stated in the following words. 'Each of us puts his person and all his power in common under the supreme direction of the general will, and, in our corporate capacity, we receive each member as an indivisible part of the whole.' This act of association creates a moral and collective body, which is called the ‘State’ when passive, the ‘Sovereign* when active, and a 'Power’ in relation to other bodies like itself. The conception of the 'general will’, which appears in the above wording of the Contract, plays a very important part in Rousseau's system. I shall have more to say about it shortly. It is argued that the Sovereign need give no guarantees to its subjects, for, since it is formed of the individuals who compose it, it can have no interest contrary to theirs. The Sovereign, merely by virtue of what it is, is always what it should be.’ This doctrine is misleading to the reader who does not note Rousseau's somewhat peculiar use of terms. The Sovereign is not the government, which. It is admitted, may be tyrannical; the Sovereign is a more or less metaphysical entity, not fully embodied in any of the visible organs of the State. Its impeccability, therefore, even if admitted, has not the practical consequences that it might be supposed to have.
The will of the Sovereign, which is always right, is the ‘general Will’. Each citizen, […], shares in the general will, but he may also, as an individual, have a particular will running counter to the general will. The Social Contract involves that whoever refuses to obey the general will shall be forced to do so. ‘This means nothing less than that he will be forced to be free.’
This conception of being ‘forced to be free’ is very metaphysical. The general will in the time of Galileo was certainly anti-Copernican; was Galileo ‘forced to be free’ when the Inquisition compelled him to recant? Is even a malefactor ‘forced to be free* when he is put in prison ? Think of Byron’s Corsair:
0’er the glad waters of the deep blue sea.
Our thoughts as boundless and’ our hearts as free.
Would this man be more ‘free’ in a dungeon? The odd thing is that Byron's noble pirates are a direct outcome of Rousseau, and yet, in the above passage, Rousseau forgets his romanticism and speaks like a sophistical policeman. Hegel, who owed much to Rousseau, adopted his misuse of the word ‘freedom’, and defined it has the right to obey the police, or something not very different. Rousseau has not that profound respect for private property that characterizes Locke and his disciples. ‘The State, in relation to its members, is master of all their goods.’ Nor does he believe in division of powers, as preached by Locke and Montesquieu. In this respect, however, as in some others, his later detailed discussions do not wholly agree with his earlier general principles. In Book III, chapter I, he says that the part of the Sovereign is limited to making laws, and that the executive, or government, is an intermediate body set up between the subjects and the Sovereign to secure their mutual correspondence. He goes on to say : ‘If the Sovereign desires to govern, or the magistrate to give laws, or if the subjects refuse to obey, disorder takes the place of regularity, and ... the State falls into despotism or anarchy.’ In this sentence, allowing for the difference of vocabulary, he seems to agree with Montesquieu.”
(Bertrand Russell, History Of Western Philosophy, 1945)

“The social coup d'état” 
In Marxist doctrine, parliamentary democracy is a usurpation of power by the elites. Only revolution, a “social coup d'état,” can restore social justice.
(Raphaël Enthoven, Chronicle broadcasy on Europe 1 on October, 11, 2017)

Listen to the chronicle in French on X: https://twitter.com/twitter/statuses/918004260205297665

Ai Weiwei_The artist s arm
Ai Weiwei_The artist s hand 1 &2
Ai Weiwei vit en dehors de Chine pour pouvoir librement critiquer le système.

Art:
- Ai Weiwei_The artist s arm
- Ai Weiwei_The artist s hand

zhang huan_monolito

Art:
- zhang huan_monolito

Jorge Mendez Blake_The Castle, 2007

Art:
- Jorge Mendez Blake_The Castle, 2007

Borna Sammak_Two Full Height Turnstiles Stuck In Each Other, 2016

Art:
- Borna Sammak_Two Full Height Turnstiles Stuck In Each Other, 2016

Stefan Visan_untitled [rose]

Art:
- Stefan Visan_untitled [rose]

Bac philo 2019 (3/3) - La loi est-elle un obstacle à ma liberté ?
La loi peut-être vue comme un obstacle à MA liberté (payer des impôts, les contraintes du code de la route), pourtant, c'est la loi qui est la condition de NOS libertés. Bien sûr, il ne suffit pas d'obeir à la loi pour être libre: Il faut que la loi soit le produit de ma liberté - il faut que je puisse participer de son élaboration/évolution. Dans ce cas al loi n'est plus une contrainte qui vient de l'extérieur, mais un produit auquel je participe de l'intérieur.
Dans le chapitre V du "Malaise dans la civilisation", Freud montre que le bonheur renverrait à la satisfaction de toutes nos pulsion, et qu'à l'inverse la vie en société suppose une mise de côté de ces pulsions. Il étudie notamment le commandement biblique "tu aimeras ton prochain comme toi-même" auquel la société nous demande de nous conformer; le problème, c'est que notre amour du prochain va à l'encontre de notre façon humaine d'aimer. Nous voulons avoir des raisons d'aimer, choisir ceux que nous aimons - la loi est donc contre-nature. L'individu doit toujours se défaire de quelque chose pour vivre en société, et de ce fait va toujours en vouloir aux autres de l'avoir forcé à renoncer à son propre désir - le malaise est constitutif à la société.
Dans le Gargantua, Rabelais nous propose la possibilité de vivre sans loi dans l'épisode de l'Abbaye de Thelème. La devise de l'abbaye est : « Fais ce que voudras ». Les hommes et les femmes qui y demeurent vivent en harmonie - mais cela suppose une grande sagesse pour que n'advienne jamais de conflits interpersonnels et qu'aucun gouvernement ne soit nécessaire - une sagesse utopique. Les conditions de possibilité d'une vie en société sans loi ne seront jamais remplies.
Pour Hobbes, la loi et la vie en société permettent à l'homme d'échanger "une liberté entière mais stérile" (l'homme seul ne peut pas grand chose), pour une liberté limitée mais garantie. Pour Rousseau, la liberté naturelle doit laisser place à la liberté civile (limitée par al volonté générale) qui remplace le droit du premier occupant ou du plus fort par le droit à la propriété. Daans l'ordre de progression vers une plus grande liberté, Rousseau considère la troisième sorte de liberté: la liberté morale. C'est celle d'obéir aux lois que l'on s'est donné: on voit bien que celle-ci n'est plus un obstacle à MA liberté, qui me confère une puissance réelle d'agir.
La meilleure manière de ne pas faire de la loi un obstacle est de la connaître, de la comprendre - et si on ne l'accèpte pas dans ses termes - d'avoir la possibilité de pouvoir participer à sa ré-écriture ou à sa mise-à-jour.
Tags: LES CHEMINS DE LA PHILOSOPHIE  par Adèle Van Reeth

"Est-il possible cependant d’échapper à la simple discipline, sans enfreindre la loi ni mettre en danger nos compatriotes ? C’est ce que suggère Hegel, en montrant qu’il est possible de faire de la règle une liberté. Selon lui, en respectant le droit je participe de la vie éthique de l’État et je me rends libre.
 
Afin de mieux comprendre, rappelons que, aux yeux de ce grand penseur de l’État moderne, nos principes moraux butent toujours sur la réalité des mœurs d’une société donnée. Le devoir individuel, même s’il prend la forme de bonne action et qu’il ne se limite pas à des intentions, ne suffit pas.
 
Le philosophe le rappelle dans ses Principes de la philosophie du droit, l’émancipation individuelle n’a de sens que dans un contexte social. Inversement, une société viable ne se contente pas d’édicter des règles abstraites ; elle offre la possibilité de se reconnaître dans des principes communs. C’est en se reconnaissant dans cette « vie éthique » que l’individu accomplit réellement sa liberté, qu’il s’émancipe en conciliant la morale et le droit."
(Cédric Enjalbert, Philsoophie Magazine, dans |TimeTo Philo, 26/03/2020)
