E2.2. Do We Have the Choice to Be Free?

E2.2.A.The Subjective Experience of Freedom: A Fundamental Feeling

E2.2.A.1. The Feeling of Agency: Develop the idea that we perceive ourselves as the authors of our actions. Explain how the awareness of choosing, deliberating, and willing forms our immediate experience of freedom.

E2.2.A.1.1. The Central Paradox of Agency: the contradiction between our internal "feeling" of being a free author and the external world's principle of causality.

E2.2.A.1.1.a.  A_Troika London_The shape of a circle in the mind of a square_ 2020_3m x 3m x 3m, poplar plywood_(1) ; A_Troika London_The shape of a circle in the mind of a square_ 2020_3m x 3m x 3m, poplar plywood_(2) ; A_Troika London_The shape of a circle in the mind of a square_ 2020_3m x 3m x 3m, poplar plywood_(3)

"WHAT IS FREEDOM?
To raise the question, what is freedom? seems to be a hopeless enterprise. It is as though age-old contradictions and antinomies were lying in wait to force the mind into dilemmas of logical impossibility so that, depending which horn of the dilemma you are holding on to, it becomes as impossible to conceive of freedom or its opposite as it is to realize the notion of a square circle. In its simplest form, the difficulty may be summed up as the contradiction between our consciousness and conscience, telling us that we are free and hence responsible, and our everyday experience in the outer world, in which we orient ourselves according to the principle of causality. In all practical and especially in political matters we hold human freedom to be a self-evident truth, and it is upon this axiomatic assumption that laws are laid down in human communities, that decisions are taken, that judgments are passed. In all fields of scientific and theoretical endeavor, on the contrary, we proceed according to the no less self-evident truth of nihil ex nihilo, of nihil sine causa, that is, on the assumption that even “our own lives are, in the last analysis, subject to causation” and that if there should be an ultimately free ego in ourselves, it certainly never makes its unequivocal appearance in the phenomenal world, and therefore can never become the subject of theoretical ascertainment. Hence freedom turns out to be a mirage the moment psychology looks into what is supposedly its innermost domain; for “the part which force plays in nature, as the cause of motion, has its counterpart in the mental sphere in motive as the cause of conduct.”1 It is true that the test of causality—the predictability of effect if all causes are known—cannot be applied to the realm of human affairs; but this practical unpredictability is no test of freedom, it signifies merely that we are in no position ever to know all causes which come into play, and this partly because of the sheer number of factors involved, but also because human motives, as distinguished from natural forces, are still hidden from all onlookers, from inspection by our fellow men as well as from introspection. [...]"
(Hannah Arendt, Between past and future, 1961)

E2.2.A.1.2. Conceptualizing the "Author": who or what we mean when we say "we" are the authors of our actions.

E2.2.A.1.2.a. "In the variedly stimulating 1976 volume The Identities of Persons (public library), philosopher Amélie Rorty (May 20, 1932–September 18, 2020) considers the five layers of personhood, rooted in literature but extensible to life.

[Characters, Figures, Selves, Individuals, Presences]

[Characters]
Characters, Rorty points out, don’t have identity crises because they aren’t expected to have a core unity beneath their assemblage of traits. What defines them is which of these traits become manifested, and this warrants the question of social context.

[Figures]
After characters come figures, which Rorty describes as “characters writ large,” “defined by their place in an unfolding drama.” Figures are allegorical archetypes — rather their being defined by their vocations or social roles, their traits originate in ancient stories.

[Persons]
This shift from self-discovery to active choice, to locus of agency, brings us to the person. [Central to the concept of the person — unlike the character and the figure — is the idea of free will, which springs from our capacity for making choices and implies the responsibility for those choices. [...] Central to the concept of the person — unlike the character and the figure — is the idea of free will, which springs from our capacity for making choices and implies the responsibility for those choices. [...] This very capacity, Rorty argues, is what defines personhood. But unlike the powers of characters, which exist on a spectrum, personhood is a binary notion — because it arises from responsibility, and in any given instance we are either liable or not, there are no degrees in personhood.

[Selves]
Echoing philosopher Martha Nussbaum’s ideas on the relationship between property-ownership, agency, and victimhood, Rorty considers the role of property in the conception of the self and its identity-crises in the face of alienation. [...] Alongside property, the other essential component of the self is the faculty of memory, which, as Oliver Sacks has memorably demonstrated, is the seedbed of what makes us who we are to ourselves.

[Individuals]
Out of this necessity to reconcile the ownership of experience with the capacity for choice arises the level of the individual. [...] Therein lies Rorty’s most important point — the integrity of our identity requires a locus of agency that is honored by the collective but cultivated in solitude.

[Presence]
And yet there is a level of personhood that exists even above the individual — one that represents our highest mode of being, beyond the ego’s ambitions and preoccupations — the level of presence.


Depending on which of these we adopt, Rorty argues, we become radically different entities, with different powers and proprieties, different notions of success and failure, different freedoms and liabilities, different expectations of and relations to one another, and most of all a different orientation toward ourselves in the emotional, intellectual, and social spaces we inhabit.

And yet we ought to be able to interpolate between these various modalities of being: "Worldliness consists of [the] ability to enact, with grace and aplomb, a great variety of roles"."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2016/03/02/amelie-rorty-the-identities-of-persons/

E2.2.A.1.2.a.i. "Humans are just the sort of organisms that interpret and modify their agency through their conception of themselves. This is a complicated biological fact about us. [...]
Characters are delineated; their traits are sketched; they are not presumed to be strictly unified. They appear in novels by Dickens, not those by Kafka. Figures appear in cautionary tales, exemplary novels and hagiography. They present narratives of types of lives to be imitated. Selves are possessors of their properties. Individuals are centers of integrity; their rights are inalienable. Presences are descendants of souls; they are evoked rather than presented, to be found in novels by Dostoyevsky, not those by Jane Austen. [...]

Worldliness consists of [the] ability to enact, with grace and aplomb, a great variety of roles [...]"
(Amélie Rorty, The Identities of Persons, 1976)

E2.2.A.1.2.a.ii. "[Characters]
Since the elements out of which characters are composed are repeatable and their configurations can be reproduced, a society of characters is in principle a society of repeatable and indeed replaceable individuals.  [...]
To know what sort of character a person is, is to know what sort of life is best suited to bring out his potentialities and functions… Not all characters are suited to the same sorts of lives: there is no ideal type for them all… If one tries to force the life of a bargainer on the character of a philosopher, one is likely to encounter trouble, sorrow, and the sort of evil that comes from mismatching life and temperament. Characters formed within one society and living in circumstances where their dispositions are no longer needed — characters in time of great social change — are likely to be tragic. Their virtues lie useless or even foiled; they are no longer recognized for what they are; their motives and actions are misunderstood. The magnanimous man in a petty bourgeois society is seen as a vain fool; the energetic and industrious man in a society that prizes elegance above energy is seen as a bustling boor; the meditative person in an expansive society is seen as melancholic… Two individuals of the same character will fare differently in different polities, not because their characters will change through their experiences (though different aspects will become dominant or recessive) but simply because a good fit of character and society can conduce to well-being and happiness, while a bad fit produces misery and rejection. [...]


To be a character” is to maintain a few qualities, nourish them to excess until they dominate and dictate all others. A character is delineated and thus generally delimited. To “have character” is to have reliable qualities, to hold tightly to them through the temptations to swerve and change. A person of character is neither bribed nor corrupted; he stands fast, is steadfast. […]

Because characters are public persons, even their private lives can have universal form, general significance. The dramatic character, writ large, can represent for everyman what only later came to be thought of as the inner life of some; it can portray the myth, the conflicts, reversals and discoveries of each person, each polis."
(Amélie Rorty, The Identities of Persons, 1976)

E2.2.A.1.2.a.iii. "[Figures]
A figure is neither formed by nor owns experiences: his figurative identity shapes the significances of the events in his life. […]

Individuals who regard themselves as figures watch the unfolding of their lives following the patterns of their archetypes… They form the narratives of their lives and make their choices according to the pattern…

In contrast with the wholly external perspective on characters, the concept of a figure introduces the germ of what will become a distinction between the inner and the outer person. An individual’s perspective on his model, his idealized real figure, is originally externally presented, but it becomes internalized, becomes the internal model of self-representation."
(Amélie Rorty, The Identities of Persons, 1976)

E2.2.A.1.2.a.iv. "[Persons]
A person’s roles and his place in the narrative devolve from the choices that place him in a structural system related to others. The person thus comes to stand behind his roles, to select them and to be judged by his choices and his capacities to act out his personae in a total structure that is the unfolding of his drama.

The idea of a person is the idea of a unified center of choice and action, the unit of legal and theological responsibility. Having chosen, a person acts, and so is actionable, liable. It is in the idea of action that the legal and the theatrical sources of the concept of person come together. [...]

If judgment summarizes a life … then that life must have a unified location. Since they choose from their natures or are chosen by their stories, neither characters nor figures need be equipped with a will, not to mention a free will… The actions of characters and figures do no emerge from the exercise of a single faculty of power: there is no need for a single source of responsibility… Persons are required to unify the capacity for choice with the capacities for action. [...]

It is the intentions, the capacities for choice rather than the total configuration of traits which defines the person. Here the stage is set for identity crises, for wondering who one really is, behind the multifold variety of actions and roles. And the search for that core person is not a matter of curiosity; it is a search for the principles by which choices are to be made."
(Amélie Rorty, The Identities of Persons, 1976)

E2.2.A.1.2.a.v. "[Selves]
The two strands that were fused in the concept of person diverge again: When we focus on persons as sources of decisions, the ultimate locus of responsibility, the unity of thought and action, we must come to think of them as souls and minds. When we think of them as possessors of rights and powers, we come to think of them as selves. It is not until each of these has been transformed into the concept of individuality that the two strands are woven together again. […]

When a society has changed so that individuals acquire their rights by virtue of their powers, rather than having their powers defined by their rights, the concept of person has been transformed to a concept of self… The quality of an individual self is determined by his qualities: they are his capital, to invest well or foolishly. [...]

Because persons are primary agents of principle, their integrity requires freedom; because they are judged liable, their powers must be autonomous. But when this criterion for personhood is carried to its logical extreme, the scope of agency moves inward, away from social dramas, to the choices of the soul, or to the operations of the mind. […]

From character as structured dispositions, we come to soul as pure agency, unfathomable, inexpressible. [...]

Judgments of persons are moral; judgments of souls are theological; judgments of selves are economic and political. Societies of persons are constructed to assure the rights of choice and action; they emerge from a contract of agents; societies of selves are also formed to protect and guarantee the rights of their members. But when the members of a society achieve their rights by virtue of their possessions, the protection of rights requires the protection of property, even though in principle everyone is equally entitled to the fruits of his labors and protection under law. […]

The concerns of selves are their interests; their obligations are the duties with which they are taxed or charged. The grammar and the semantics of selfhood reveal the possessive forms. Whatever will come to be regarded as crucial property, or the means to it, will be regarded as the focus of rights; the alienation of property becomes an attack on the integrity if not actually the preservation of the self. [...]

The conscious possession of experiences [is] the final criterion of identity. The continuity of the self is established by memory; disputes about the validity of memory reports will hang on whether the claimant had as hers the original experience. Puzzles about identity will be described as puzzles about whether it is possible to transfer, or to alienate memory (that is, the retention of one’s own experience) without destroying the self. [...]

There is difficulty in describing the core possessor, the owner of experiences who is not herself any set of them. One can speak of characters as sets of traits without looking for a center; but it is more difficult to think of bundles of properties without an owner, especially when the older idea of the person as an agent and decision-maker is still implicit. It is presumed that the self as an owner is also endowed with capabilities to choose and to act."
(Amélie Rorty, The Identities of Persons, 1976)

E2.2.A.1.2.a.vi. "[Individuals]
From the tensions in the definition of the alienable properties of selves, and from the corruptions in societies of selves — the divergence of practice from ideological commitments — comes the invention of individuality. It begins with conscience and ends with consciousness.

Unlike characters and figures, individuals actively resist typing: they represent the universal mind of rational beings, or the unique private voice. Individuals are indivisible entities… Invented as a preserve of integrity, an autonomous ens, an individual transcends and resists what is binding and oppressive in society and does so from an original natural position. Although in its inception, individuality revives the idea of person, the rights of persons are formulated in society, while the rights of individuals are demanded of society. The contrast between the inner and outer person becomes the contrast between the individual and the social mask, between nature and culture.

A society of individuals is quite different from one composed of selves. Individuals contract to assure the basic rights to the development of moral and intellectual gifts, as well as legal protection of self and property. Because a society of individuals is composed of indivisible autonomous units, from whose natures — their minds and conscience — come the principles of justice, their rights are not property; they cannot be exchanged, bartered. Their rights and their qualities are their very essence, inalienable. [...]

Being an individual requires having a room of one’s own, not because it is one’s possession, but because only there, in solitude, away from the pressure of others, can one develop the features and styles that differentiate one’s own being from others. Integrity comes to be associated with difference; this idea, always implicit in individuality, of preserving one’s right against the encroachment of others within one’s own society, emerges as dominant… Conscientious consciousness is then the transparent eye that illuminates the substance of social life."
(Amélie Rorty, The Identities of Persons, 1976)

E2.2.A.1.2.a.vii. "[Presence]
Presences [are] the return of the unchartable soul… They are a mode of attending, being present to [one’s] experiences, without dominating or controlling them. […]

Understanding other conceptions of persons puts one on the way of being them; but understanding presences — if indeed there is understanding of them to be had — does not put one any closer to being one. It cannot be achieved by imitation, willing, practice, or a good education. It is a mode of identity invented precisely to go beyond of achievement and willfulness."
(Amélie Rorty, The Identities of Persons, 1976)

E2.2.A.1.2.b. "This freedom which we take for granted in all political theory and which even those who praise tyranny must still take into account is the very opposite of “inner freedom,” the inward space into which men may escape from external coercion and feel free. This inner feeling remains without outer manifestations and hence is by definition politically irrelevant. Whatever its legitimacy may be, and however eloquently it may have been described in late antiquity, it is historically a late phenomenon, and it was originally the result of an estrangement from the world in which worldly experiences were transformed into experiences within one’s own self. The experiences of inner freedom are derivative in that they always presuppose a retreat from the world, where freedom was denied, into an inwardness to which no other has access. The inward space where the self is sheltered against the world must not be mistaken for the heart or the mind, both of which exist and function only in interrelationship with the world. Not the heart and not the mind, but inwardness as a place of absolute freedom within one’s own self was discovered in late antiquity by those who had no place of their own in the world and hence lacked a worldly condition which, from early antiquity to almost the middle of the nineteenth century, was unanimously held to be a prerequisite for freedom.
The derivative character of this inner freedom, or of the theory that “the appropriate region of human liberty” is the “inward domain of consciousness,” appears more clearly if we go back to its origins. Not the modern individual with his desire to unfold, to develop, and to expand, with his justified fear lest society get the better of his individuality, with his emphatic insistence “on the importance of genius” and originality, but the popular and popularizing sectarians of late antiquity, who have hardly more in common with philosophy than the name, are representative in this respect. Thus the most persuasive arguments for the absolute superiority of inner freedom can still be found in an essay of Epictetus, who begins by stating that free is he who lives as he wishes, a definition which oddly echoes a sentence from Aristotle’s Politics in which the statement “Freedom means the doing what a man likes” is put in the mouths of those who do not know what freedom is. Epictetus then goes on to show that a man is free if he limits himself to what is in his power, if he does not reach into a realm where he can be hindered. The “science of living” consists in knowing how to distinguish between the alien world over which man has no power and the self of which he may dispose as he sees fit."
(Hannah Arendt, Between past and future, 1961)

"Historically it is interesting to note that the appearance of the problem of freedom in Augustine’s philosophy was thus preceded by the conscious attempt to divorce the notion of freedom from politics, to arrive at a formulation through which one may be a slave in the world and still be free. Conceptually, however, Epictetus’s freedom, which consists in being free from one’s own desires, is no more than a reversal of the current ancient political notions; and the political background against which this whole body of popular philosophy was formulated, the obvious decline of freedom in the late Roman Empire, manifests itself still quite clearly in the role which such notions as power, domination, and property play in it. According to ancient understanding, man could liberate himself from necessity only through power over other men, and he could be free only if he owned a place, a home in the world. Epictetus transposed these worldly relationships into relationships within man’s own self, whereby he discovered that no power is so absolute as that which man yields over himself, and that the inward space where man struggles and subdues himself is more entirely his own, namely, more securely shielded from outside interference, than any worldly home could ever be.
Hence, in spite of the great influence the concept of an inner, nonpolitical freedom has exerted upon the tradition of thought, it seems safe to say that man would know nothing of inner freedom if he had not first experienced a condition of being free as a worldly tangible reality. We first become aware of freedom or its opposite in our intercourse with others, not in the intercourse with ourselves. Before it became an attribute of thought or a quality of the will, freedom was understood to be the free man’s status, which enabled him to move, to get away from home, to go out into the world and meet other people in deed and word. This freedom clearly was preceded by liberation: in order to be free, man must have liberated himself from the necessities of life. But the status of freedom did not follow automatically upon the act of liberation. Freedom needed, in addition to mere liberation, the company of other men who were in the same state, and it needed a common public space to meet them—a politically organized world, in other words, into which each of the free men could insert himself by word and deed. [...]"
(Hannah Arendt, Between past and future, 1961)

"Yet it is precisely this coincidence of politics and freedom which we cannot take for granted in the light of our present political experience. The rise of totalitarianism, its claim to having subordinated all spheres of life to the demands of politics and its consistent nonrecognition of civil rights, above all the rights of privacy and the right to freedom from politics, makes us doubt not only the coincidence of politics and freedom but their very compatibility. We are inclined to believe that freedom begins where politics ends, because we have seen that freedom has disappeared when so-called political considerations overruled everything else. Was not the liberal credo, “The less politics the more freedom,” right after all? Is it not true that the smaller the space occupied by the political, the larger the domain left to freedom? Indeed, do we not rightly measure the extent of freedom in any given community by the free scope it grants to apparently nonpolitical activities, free economic enterprise or freedom of teaching, of religion, of cultural and intellectual activities? Is it not true, as we all somehow believe, that politics is compatible with freedom only because and insofar as it guarantees a possible freedom from politics? [...]

Thus not only we, who have reasons of our own to distrust politics for the sake of freedom, but the entire modern age has separated freedom and politics. [...]

Despite the enormous weight of this tradition and despite the perhaps even more telling urgency of our own experiences, both pressing into the same direction of a divorce of freedom from politics, I think the reader may believe he has read only an old truism when I said that the raison d’être of politics is freedom and that this freedom is primarily experienced in action. In the following I shall do no more than reflect on this old truism. [...]"
(Hannah Arendt, Between past and future, 1961)

"For the history of the problem of freedom, Christian tradition has indeed become the decisive factor. We almost automatically equate freedom with free will, that is, with a faculty virtually unknown to classical antiquity. For will, as Christianity discovered it, had so little in common with the wellknown capacities to desire, to intend, and to aim at, that it claimed attention only after it had come into conflict with them. If freedom were actually nothing but a phenomenon of the will, we would have to conclude that the ancients did not know freedom. This, of course, is absurd, but if one wished to assert it he could argue what I have mentioned before, namely, that the idea of freedom played no role in philosophy prior to Augustine. The reason for this striking fact is that, in Greek as well as Roman antiquity, freedom was an exclusively political concept, indeed the quintessence of the citystate and of citizenship. Our philosophical tradition of political thought, beginning with Parmenides and Plato, was founded explicitly in opposition to this polis and its citizenship. The way of life chosen by the philosopher was understood in opposition to [...] the political way of life.
Freedom, therefore, the very center of politics as the Greeks understood it, was an idea which almost by definition could not enter the framework of Greek philosophy. Only when the early Christians, and especially Paul, discovered a kind of freedom which had no relation to politics, could the concept of freedom enter the history of philosophy. Freedom became one of the chief problems of philosophy when it was experienced as something occurring in the intercourse between me and myself, and outside of the intercourse between men. Free will and freedom became synonymous notions, and the presence of freedom was experienced in complete solitude, “where no man might hinder the hot contention wherein I had engaged with myself,” the deadly conflict which took place in the “inner dwelling” of the soul and the dark “chamber of the heart.”"
(Hannah Arendt, Between past and future, 1961)

E2.2.A.1.3. The "Relish of Freedom": The Lived Experience of Agency

E2.2.A.1.3.a. "It gives me pleasure to recall a conversation of the olden time between one of the favorites of Xerxes, the great king of Persia, and two Lacedaemonians. When Xerxes equipped his great army to conquer Greece, he sent his ambassadors into the Greek cities to ask for water and earth. That was the procedure the Persians adopted in summoning the cities to surrender. Neither to Athens nor to Sparta, however, did he dispatch such messengers, because those who had been sent there by Darius his father had been thrown, by the Athenians and Spartans, some into ditches and others into wells, with the invitation to help themselves freely there to water and soil to take back to their prince. Those Greeks could not permit even the slightest suggestion of encroachment upon their liberty. The Spartans suspected, nevertheless, that they had incurred the wrath of the gods by their action, and especially the wrath of Talthybios, the god of the heralds; in order to appease him they decided to send Xerxes two of their citizens in atonement for the cruel death inflicted upon the ambassadors of his father. Two Spartans, one named Sperte and the other Bulis, volunteered to offer themselves as a sacrifice. So they departed, and on the way they came to the palace of the Persian named Hydarnes, lieutenant of the king in all the Asiatic cities situated on the sea coasts. He received them with great honor, feasted them, and then, speaking of one thing and another, he asked them why they refused so obdurately his king’s friendship. “Consider well, O Spartans,” said he, “and realize by my example that the king knows how to honor those who are worthy, and believe that if you were his men he would do the same for you; if you belonged to him and he had known you, there is not one among you who might not be the lord of some Greek city.”
“By such words, Hydarnes, you give us no good counsel,” replied the Lacedaemonians, “because you have experienced merely the advantage of which you speak; you do not know the privilege we enjoy. You have the honor of the king’s favor; but you know nothing about liberty, what relish it has and how sweet it is. For if you had any knowledge of it, you yourself would advise us to defend it, not with lance and shield, but with our very teeth and nails.”
Only Spartans could give such an answer, and surely both of them spoke as they had been trained. It was impossible for the Persian to regret liberty, not having known it, nor for the Lacedaemonians to find subjection acceptable after having enjoyed freedom."
(La Boétie, The discourse of voluntary servitude, 1577)

E2.2.A.1.3.b.  WHAT FREEDOM FEELS LIKE TO SOMEONE WHO HAS BEEN DEPRIVED OF IT. 
“He had his boat-cloak on him, and looked, as I have said, a natural
part of the scene. It was remarkable (but perhaps the wretched life he
had led accounted for it) that he was the least anxious of any of us.
He was not indifferent, for he told me that he hoped to live to see his
gentleman one of the best of gentlemen in a foreign country; he was not
disposed to be passive or resigned, as I understood it; but he had no
notion of meeting danger half way. When it came upon him, he confronted
it, but it must come before he troubled himself.

“If you knowed, dear boy,” he said to me, “what it is to sit here
alonger my dear boy and have my smoke, arter having been day by day
betwixt four walls, you’d envy me. But you don’t know what it is.”

“I think I know the delights of freedom,” I answered.

“Ah,” said he, shaking his head gravely. “But you don’t know it equal
to me. You must have been under lock and key, dear boy, to know it
equal to me,—but I ain’t a-going to be low.”

It occurred to me as inconsistent, that, for any mastering idea, he
should have endangered his freedom, and even his life. But I reflected
that perhaps freedom without danger was too much apart from all the
habit of his existence to be to him what it would be to another man. I
was not far out, since he said, after smoking a little:—

“You see, dear boy, when I was over yonder, t’other side the world, I
was always a looking to this side; and it come flat to be there, for
all I was a growing rich. Everybody knowed Magwitch, and Magwitch could
come, and Magwitch could go, and nobody’s head would be troubled about
him. They ain’t so easy concerning me here, dear boy,—wouldn’t be,
leastwise, if they knowed where I was.”

“If all goes well,” said I, “you will be perfectly free and safe again
within a few hours.”

“Well,” he returned, drawing a long breath, “I hope so.”

“And think so?”

He dipped his hand in the water over the boat’s gunwale, and said,
smiling with that softened air upon him which was not new to me:—

“Ay, I s’pose I think so, dear boy. We’d be puzzled to be more quiet
and easy-going than we are at present. But—it’s a flowing so soft and
pleasant through the water, p’raps, as makes me think it—I was a
thinking through my smoke just then, that we can no more see to the
bottom of the next few hours than we can see to the bottom of this
river what I catches hold of. Nor yet we can’t no more hold their tide
than I can hold this. And it’s run through my fingers and gone, you
see!” holding up his dripping hand.

“But for your face I should think you were a little despondent,” said
I.

“Not a bit on it, dear boy! It comes of flowing on so quiet, and of
that there rippling at the boat’s head making a sort of a Sunday tune.
Maybe I’m a growing a trifle old besides.”

He put his pipe back in his mouth with an undisturbed expression of
face, and sat as composed and contented as if we were already out of
England. Yet he was as submissive to a word of advice as if he had been
in constant terror; for, when we ran ashore to get some bottles of beer
into the boat, and he was stepping out, I hinted that I thought he
would be safest where he was, and he said. “Do you, dear boy?” and
quietly sat down again.”
(Charles Dickens, Great Expectations, 1861)

E2.2.A.1.3.c. IN PLAY, WE CAN "THUMB OUR NOSES" AT TIME, "RE-ESTABLISH EQUALITY BEFORE FATE," AND BE "WHAT IN LIFE WE COULD NOT... BE."
“It is true that even the most strenuous and dangerous play is by definition not work, i.e., does not produce commodities. Where it does, it "goes professional." But this fact, from the start, makes the comparison of adult and child's play somewhat senseless; for the adult is a commodity-producing and commodity-exchanging animal, whereas the child is only preparing to become one. To the working adult, play is re-creation. It permits a periodical stepping out from those forms of defined limitation which are his reality.
Take gravity: to juggle, to jump, or to climb adds unused dimensions to the awareness of our body. Play here gives a sense of divine leeway, of excess space.
Take time: in trifling, in dallying, we lazily thumb our noses at this, our slave-driver. Where every minute counts, playfulness vanishes. This puts competitive sports on the borderline of play: they seem to make concessions to the pressure of space and time, only to defeat this very pressure by a fraction of a yard or of a second.
Take fate and causality, which have determined who and what we are, and where. In games of chance we re-establish equality before fate, and secure a virgin chance to every player willing to observe a few rules which, if compared with the rules of reality, seem arbitrary and senseless. Yet they are magically convincing, like the reality of a dream, and they demand absolute compliance. Let a player forget that such play must remain his free choice, let him become possessed by the demon of gambling, and playful-ness vanishes again. He is a gambler, not a player.
Take social reality, and our defined cubicles in it. In play-acting we can be what in life we could not or would not be. But as the play-actor begins to believe in his impersonation he comes closer to a state of hysteria, if not worse; while if he tries, for purposes of gain, to make others believe in his "role" he becomes an impostor.
Take our bodily drives. The bulk of the nation's advertising effort exploits our wish to play with necessity, to make us believe, for example, that to inhale and to eat are not pleasurable necessities, but a fanciful game with ever new and sensuous nuances. Where the need for these nuances becomes compulsive, it creates a general state of mild addiction and gluttony, which ceases to transmit a sense of abundance and, in fact, produces an undercurrent of discontent.
Last but not least, in love life we describe as sex play the random activities preceding the final act, which permit the partners to choose body part, art, intensity, and tempo ("what, and with which, and to whom," as the limerick has it). Sex play ends when the final act begins, narrowing choice and giving rein to "nature." Where one of the preparatory random acts becomes compelling enough to completely replace the final act, playfulness vanishes and perversion or inhibition-begins.
This list of playful situations in a variety of human endeavors indicates the narrow area within which our ego can feel superior to the confinement of space and time and to the definitiveness of social reality-free from the compulsions of conscience and from impulsions of irrationality. Only within these limitations, then, can man feel at one with his ego; no wonder he feels "only human when he plays." But this presupposes one more most decisive condition: he must play rarely and work most of the time. He must have a defined role in society. Playboys and gamblers are both envied and resented by the working man. We like to see them ex-posed or ridiculed, or we put them to worse than work by forcing them to live in luxurious cages.
The playing child, then, poses a problem: whoever does not work shall not play. Therefore, to be tolerant of the child's play the adult must invent theories which show either that childhood play is really work or that it does not count. The most popular theory and the easiest on the observer is that the child is nobody yet, and that the nonsense of his play reflects it. Scientists have tried to find other explanation for the freaks of childish play by considering them representative of the fact that childhood is neither here nor there. According to Spencer, play uses up surplus energy in the young of a number of mammalians who do not need to feed or protect themselves because their parents do it for them. However, Spencer noticed that wherever circumstances permit play, tendencies are "simulated" which are "unusually ready to act, unusually ready to have their correlative feelings aroused." Early psychoanalysis added to this the "cathartic" theory, according to which play has a definite function in the growing being in that it permits him to work off past emotions and to find imaginary relief for past frustrations.”
(Erik Erikson, Childhood And Society, 1950)

E1.6.B.3.6_REF3_LIT.wXXX

E2.2.A.2. Moral Responsibility: Argue that our moral system relies on the presupposition of freedom. How could we be held responsible for our actions if we didn't have the ability to choose?

RESPONSIBILITY [...] 
"Being responsible," I said, "means being able and obliged to answer for one's actions." Therefore, it means acknowledging one's power, even in failure, and accepting the consequences. Only very young children and the insane are exempt from this. Perhaps that says it all: Responsibility is the price we pay for freedom."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

C S LEWIS ARGUES THAT FOR ANY SPECIFIC FAILING, "SOME DEGREE OF OBEDIENCE WHICH YOU AND I HAVE FAILED TO ATTAIN... IS CERTAINLY POSSIBLE." 
“Many schools of thought encourage us to shift the responsibility for our behaviour from our own shoulders to some inherent necessity in the nature of human life, and thus, indirectly, to the Creator. Popular forms of this view are the evolutionary doctrine that what we call badness is an unavoidable legacy from our animal ancestors, or the idealistic doctrine that it is merely a result of our being finite. Now Christianity, if I have understood the Pauline epistles, does admit that perfect obedience to the moral law, which we find written in our hearts and perceive to be necessary even on the biological level, is not in fact possible to men. This would raise a real difficulty about our responsibility if perfect obedience had any practical relation at all to the lives of most of us. Some degree of obedience which you and I have failed to attain in the last twenty-four hours is certainly possible. The ultimate problem must not be used as one more means of evasion. Most of us are less urgently concerned with the Pauline question than with William Law’s simple statement : “ if you will here stop and ask yourselves why you are not as pious as the primitive Christians were, your own heart will tell you, that it is neither through ignorance nor inability, but purely because you never thoroughly intended it.”
 (C S Lewis, The problem of pain, 1940)

C S LEWIS PROVIDES THE CORE CHRISTIAN THEOLOGICAL ARGUMENT, KNOWN AS THE "FREE WILL DEFENSE," FOR WHY HUMAN BEINGS, AND NOT GOD, ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE EXISTENCE OF EVIL AND SUFFERING IN THE WORLD. The central thesis is that man's current fallen state is a result of "the abuse of his free will."
“THE FALL OF MAN
To obey is the proper office of a rational soul. (Montaigne II, xii)
The Christian answer to the question proposed in the last chapter is contained in the doctrine of the Fall. According to that doctrine, man is now a horror to God and to himself and a creature ill-adapted to the universe not because God made him so but because he has made himself so by the abuse of his free will. To my mind this is the sole function of the doctrine. It exists to guard against two sub-Christian theories of the origin of evil—Monism, according to which God Himself, being “ above good and evil ”, produces impartially the effects to .which we give those two names, and Dualism, according to which God produces good, while some equal and independent Power produces evil. Against both these views Christianity asserts that God is good ; that He made all things good and for the sake of their goodness ; that one of the good things He made, namely, the free will of rational creatures, by its very nature included the possibility of evil; and that creatures, availing themselves of this possibility, have become evil. Now this function—which is the only one I allow to the doctrine of the Fall—must, be distinguished from two other functions which it is sometimes, perhaps, represented as performing, but which I reject. In the first place, I do not think the doctrine answers the question “ Was it better for God to create than not to create ? ” That is a question I have already declined. Since I believe God to be good, I am sure that, if the question has a meaning, the answer must be Yes. But I doubt whether the question has any meaning : and even if it has, I am sure that the answer cannot be attained by the sort of value-judgements which men can –significantly make. In the second place, I do not think the doctrine of the Fall can be used to show that it is “ just ”, in terms of retributive justice, to punish individuals for the faults of their remote ancestors. Some forms of the doctrine seem to involve this ; but I question whether any of them, as understood by its exponents really meant it. The Fathers may sometimes say that we are punished for Adam’s sin : but they much more often say that we sinned “ in Adam " may be impossible to find out what they meant by this, or we may decide that what they meant was erroneous. But I do not think we can dismiss their way of talking as a mere “idiom”. Wisely, or foolishly, they believed that we were really—and not imply by legal fiction—involved in Adam’s action. The attempt to formulate this belief by saying that we were “ in Adam in a physical sense—Adam being the first vehicle of the “immortal germ plasm”—may be unacceptable : but it is, of course, a further question whether the belief itself is merely a confusion or a real insight into spiritual realities beyond our normal grasp. At the moment, however, this question does not arise ; for, as I have said I have no intention of arguing that the aescent to modem man of inabilities contracted by his remote ancestors is a specimen of retributive justice. For me it is rather a specimen of those things necessarily involved in the creation of a stable world which we considered in Chapter II. It would, no doubt, have been possible for God to remove by miracle the results of the first sin ever committed by a human being; but this would not have been much good unless He was prepared to remove the results of the second sin, and of the third, and so on forever. If the miracles ceased, then sooner or later we might have reached our present lamentable situation: if they did not, then a world, thus continually underpropped and corrected by Divine interference, would have been a world in which nothing important ever depended on human choice, and in which choice itself would soon cease from the certainty that one of the apparent alternatives before you Should lead to no results and was therefore not really an alternative. As- we saw, the chess player’s freedom to play chess depends on the rigidity of the squares and the moves.”
(C S Lewis, The problem of pain, 1940)

LEWIS'S THESIS IS THAT THE ORIGIN OF EVIL IS NOT GOD, BUT THE "ACT OF SELF-WILL ON THE PART OF THE CREATURE," THE "ABUSE OF HIS FREE WILL." 
“As a young man wants a regular allowance from his father which he can count on as his own, within which he makes his own plans (and rightly, for his father is after all a fellow creature) so they desired to be on their own, to take care for their own future, to plan for pleasure and for security, to have a meum from which, no doubt, they would pay some reasonable tribute to God in the way of time, attention, and love, but which nevertheless-, was theirs not His. They wanted, as we say, to “ call their souls their own ”. But that means to live a lie, for our souls are not, in fact, our own. They wanted some comer in the universe of which they could say to God, “ This is our business, not yours.” But there is no such comer. They wanted to be nouns, but they were, and eternally must be, mere adjectives. We have no idea in what particular act, or series of acts, the self-contradictory, impossible wish found expression. For all I can see, it might have concerned the literal eating of a fruit, but the question is of no consequence.
This act of; self-will on the part of the creature, which constitutes an utter falseness to its true creaturely position, is the only sin that can be conceived as the Fall. For the difficulty about the first sin is that it must be very heinous, or its consequences would not be so terrible, and yet it must be something which a being free from the temptations of fallen man could conceivably have committed. The turning from God to self fulfills both conditions. It is a sin possible even to Paradisal man, because the mere existence of a self—-the mere feet that we call it “ me ”—includes, from the first, the danger of self-idolatry. Since I am I, I must make an act of self-surrender, however small or however easy, in living to God rather than to myself. This is, if you like, the “ weak spot ” in the very nature of creation, the risk which God apparently thinks worth taking. But the sin was very heinous, because the self which Paradisal man had to surrender contained no natural recalcitrancy to being surrendered. His data, so to speak, were a psychophysical organism wholly subject to the will and a will wholly disposed, though not compelled, to turn to God. The self-surrender which he practiced before the Fall meant no struggle but only the delicious overcoming of an infinitesimal self-adherence which delighted to be overcome—of which we see a dim analogy in the rapturous mutual self-surrenders of lovers even now. He had, therefore, no temptation (in our sense) to choose the self—no passion or inclination obstinately inclining that way—nothing but the bare fact that the self was himself.
Up to Aat moment Ae human spirit had been in full control of Ae human organism. It doubtless expected that it would retain this control when it had ceased to obey God. But its authority over the organism was a delegated authority which it lost when it ceased to be God’s delegate. Having cut itself off, as fer as it could, from the source of its being, it had cut itself off from Ae source of power. For when we say of created beings that A rules B this must mean Aat God rules B through A. I doubt whether it would have been intrinsically possible for God to continue to rule the organism through the hitman spirit when the human spirit was in revolt against Him. At any rate He did not. He began to rule the organism in a more external way, not by the laws of spirit, but by those of nature.^ Thus the organs, no longer governed by man’s will, fell under the control of ordinary biochemical laws and suffered whatever the inter-workings of those laws might bring about in the way of pain, senility and death. And desires began to come up into the mind of man, not as his reason chose, but just as the biochemical and environmental facts happened to cause them. And the mind itself fell under the psychological laws of association and the like which God had made to rule the psychology of the higher anthropoids. And the will, caught in the tidal wave of mere nature, had no resource but to force back some of the new thoughts and desires by main strength, and these uneasy rebels became the subconscious as we now know it. The process was not, I conceive, comparable to mere deterioration as it may now occur in a human individual ; it was a loss of status as a species. What man lost by the Fall was his original specific nature. “ Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.” The total organism which had been taken up into his spiritual life was allowed to fall back into the merely natural condition from which, at his making, it had been raised—just as, far earlier in the story of creation, God had raised vegetable life to become the vehicle of animality, and chemical process to be the vehicle of vegetation, and physical process to be the vehicle of chemical. Thus human spirit from being the master of human nature became a mere lodger in its own house, or even a prisoner ; rational consciousness became what it now is—a fitful spot-light resting on a small part of the cerebral motions. But this limitation of the spirit’s powers was a lesser evil than the corruption of the spirit itself. It had turned from God and become its own idol, so that though it could still turn back to God,^ it could do so only by painful effort, and its inclination was self-ward. Hence pride and ambition, the desire to be lovely in its own eyes and to depress and humiliate all rivals, envy, and restless search for more, and still more, security, were now the attitudes that came easiest to it. It was not only a weak king over its own nature, but a bad one: it sent down into the psycho-physical organism desires far worse than the organism sent up in to it. This condition was transmitted by heredity to all later generations, for it was not simply what biologists call an acquired variation ; it was the emergence of a new kind of man—a new species, never made by God, had sinned itself into existence. The change which man had undergone was not parallel to the development of a new organ or a new habit ; it was a radical alteration of his constitution, a disturbance of the relation between his component parts, and an internal perversion of one of them.
God might have arrested this process by miracle: but this—to speak in somewhat irreverent metaphor—would have been to decline the problem which God had set Himself when He created the world, the problem of expressing His goodness through the total drama of a world containing free agents, in spite of, and by means of, their rebellion against Him. The symbol of a drama, a symphony, or a dance, is here useful to correct a certain absurdity which may arise if we talk too much of God planning and creating the world process for good and of that good being frustrated by the free will of the creatures. This may raise the ridiculous idea that the Fall took God by surprise and upset His plan, or else—more ridiculously still, that God planned the whole thing for conditions which, He well knew, were never going to be realised. In fact, of course, God saw the crucifixion in the act of creating the first nebula. The world is a dance in which good, descending from God, is disturbed by evil arising from the creatures, and the resulting conflict is resolved by God’s own assumption of the suffering nature which evil produces. The doctrine of the free Fall asserts that the evil which thus makes the fuel or raw material for the second and more complex kind of good is not God’s contribution but man’s. This does not mean that if man had remained innocent God could not then have contrived an equally splendid symphonic whole—supposing that we insist on asking such questions. But it must always be remembered that when we talk of what might have happened, of contingencies outside the whole actuality, we do not really know what we are talking about. There are no times or places outside the existing universe in which all this “ could happen ” or “could have happened”. I think the most significant way of stating the real freedom of man is
to say that if there are other rational species than man, existing in some other part of the actual universe, then it is not necessary to suppose that they also have fallen.
Our present condition, then, is explained by the fact that we are members of a spoiled species. I do not mean that our sufferings are a punishment for being what we cannot now help being nor that we are morally responsible for the rebellion of a remote ancestor. If, none the less, I call our present condition one of original Sin, and not merely one of original misfortune, that is because our actual religious experience does not allow us to regard it in any other way.”
(C S Lewis, The problem of pain, 1940)

THE UNFREEDOM OF GUILT - ADAM SMITH ARGUES THAT EVEN IF A PERSON COULD BE CERTAIN OF NEVER BEING DISCOVERED BY OTHERS OR PUNISHED BY GOD, THEY COULD NOT ESCAPE THE INNER TORMENT OF THEIR OWN JUDGMENT.
“The man who has broke through all those measures of
conduct, which can alone render him agreeable to mankind, tho’ he should
have the most perfect assurance that what he had done was for ever to be
concealed from every human eye, it is all to no purpose. When he looks
back upon it, and views it in the light in which the impartial spectator
would view it, he finds that he can enter into none of the motives which
influenced it. He is abashed and confounded at the thoughts of it, and
necessarily feels a very high degree of that shame which he would be
exposed to, if his actions should ever come to be generally known. His
imagination, in this case too, anticipates the contempt and derision
from which nothing saves him but the ignorance of those he lives with.
He still feels that he is the natural object of these sentiments, and
still trembles at the thought of what he would suffer if they were ever
actually exerted against him. But if what he had been guilty of was not
merely one of those improprieties which are the objects of simple
disapprobation, but one of those enormous crimes which excite
detestation and resentment, he could never think of it, as long as he
had any sensibility left, without feeling all the agony of horror and
remorse; and though he could be assured that no man was ever to know it,
and could even bring himself to believe that there was no God to revenge
it, he would still feel enough of both these sentiments to embitter the
whole of his life: He would still regard himself as the natural object
of the hatred and indignation of all his fellow-creatures; and if his
heart was not grown callous by the habit of crimes, he could not think
without terror and astonishment even of the manner in which mankind
would look upon him, of what would be the expression of their
countenance and of their eyes, if the dreadful truth should ever come to
be known. These natural pangs of an affrighted conscience are the
dæmons, the avenging furies which in this life haunt the guilty, which
allow them neither quiet nor repose, which often drive them to despair
and distraction, from which no assurance of secrecy can protect them,
from which no principles of irreligion can entirely deliver them, and
from which nothing can free them but the vilest and most abject of all
states, a complete insensibility of honour and infamy, to vice and
virtue. Men of the most detestable characters, who, in the execution of
the most dreadful crimes, had taken their measures so coolly as to avoid
even the suspicion of guilt, have sometimes been driven, by the horror
of their situation, to discover of their own accord, what no human
sagacity could ever have investigated. By acknowledging their guilt, by
submitting themselves to the resentment of their offended citizens, and
by thus satiating that vengeance of which they were sensible that they
were become the proper objects, they hoped by their death to reconcile
themselves, at least in their own imagination, to the natural sentiments
of mankind, to be able to consider themselves as less worthy of hatred
and resentment, to atone in some measure for their crimes, and, if
possible, to die in peace and with the forgiveness of all their
fellow-creatures. Compared to what they felt before the discovery, even
the thought of this, it seems, was happiness.
(Adam Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments, 1777)

E2.2.A.3. The Limits of Introspection: Introduce nuance to this perspective by pointing out that the feeling of freedom isn't absolute proof. Cognitive biases or unconscious determinisms could influence our perception.

IS TOMAS’ CHOICE A NOBLE ACT TO PROTECT TEREZA, OR IS IT A MANIFESTATION OF A DEEPER, SELF-DESTRUCTIVE PATTERN? The "black intoxication" he feels suggests that his motives are not as pure or clear as a simple, rational choice would imply.
“As if rewarding him for his decision, the editor said, "That was a fine piece you wrote about Oedipus."
Handing him a pen, his son added, "Some ideas have the force of a bomb exploding."
Although the editor's words of praise pleased him, his son's metaphor struck him as forced and out of place. "Unfortunately, I was the only casualty," he said. "Thanks to those ideas, I can no longer operate on my patients." 
It sounded cold, almost hostile. 
Apparently hoping to counteract the discordant note, the editor said, by way of apology, "But think of all the people your article helped!" 
From childhood, Tomas had associated the words "helping people" with one thing and one thing only: medicine. How could an article help people? What were these two trying to make him swallow, reducing his whole life to a single small idea about Oedipus or even less: to a single primitive "no!" in the face of the regime. 
"Maybe it helped people, maybe it didn't," he said (in a voice still cold, though he probably did not realize it), "but as a surgeon I know I saved a few lives."
Another silence set in. Tomas's son broke it. "Ideas can save lives, too."
Watching his own mouth in the boy's face, Tomas thought How strange to see one's own lips stammer.
"You know the best thing about what you wrote?" the boy went on, and Tomas could see the effort it cost him to speak. "Your refusal to compromise. Your clear-cut sense of what's good and what's evil, something we're beginning to lose. We have no idea anymore what it means to feel guilty. The Communists have the excuse that Stalin misled them. Murderers have the excuse that their mothers didn't love them. And suddenly you come out and say: there is no excuse. No one could be more innocent, in his soul and conscience, than Oedipus. And yet he punished himself when he saw what he had done."
Tomas tore his eyes away from his son's mouth and tried to focus on the editor. He was irritated and felt like arguing with them. "But it's all a misunderstanding! The border between good and evil is terribly fuzzy. I wasn't out to punish anyone, either. Punishing people who don't know what they've done is barbaric. The myth of Oedipus is a beautiful one, but treating it like this. . ." He had more to say, but suddenly he remembered that the place might be bugged. He had not the slightest ambition to be quoted by historians of centuries to come. He was simply afraid of being quoted by the police. Wasn't that what they wanted from him, after all? A condemnation of the article? He did not like the idea of feeding it to them from his own lips. Besides, he knew that anything anyone in the country said could be broadcast over the radio at any time. He held his tongue. 
"I wonder what's made you change your mind," said the editor.
"What I wonder is what made me write the thing in the first place," said Tomas, and just then he remembered: She had landed at his bedside like a child sent downstream in a bulrush basket. Yes, that was why he had picked up the book and gone back to the stories of Romulus, Moses, and Oedipus. And now she was with him again. He saw her pressing the crow wrapped in red to her breast.
The image of her brought him peace. It seemed to tell him that Tereza was alive, that she was with him in the same city, and that nothing else counted.
This time, the editor broke the silence. "I understand. I don't like the idea of punishment, either. After all," he added, smiling, "we don't call for punishment to be inflicted; we call for it to cease."
"I know," said Tomas. In the next few moments he would do something possibly noble but certainly, and totally, useless (because it would not help the political prisoners) and unpleasant to himself (because it took place under conditions the two of them had imposed on him).
"It's your duty to sign," his son added, almost pleading.
Duty? His son reminding him of his duty? That was the worst word anyone could have used on him!
Once more, the image of Tereza appeared before his eyes, Tereza holding the crow in her arms. Then he remembered that she had been accosted by an undercover agent the day before. Her hands had started trembling again. She had aged. She was all that mattered to him. She, born of six fortuities, she, the blossom sprung from the chief surgeon's sciatica, she, the reverse side of all his "Es muss sein!"—she was the only thing he cared about.
Why even think about whether to sign or not? There was only one criterion for all his decisions: he must do nothing that could harm her. Tomas could not save political prisoners, but he could make Tereza happy. He could not really succeed in doing even that. But if he signed the petition, he could be fairly certain that she would have more frequent visits from undercover agents, and that her hands would tremble more and more.
"It is much more important to dig a half-buried crow out of the ground," he said, "than to send petitions to a president."
He knew that his words were incomprehensible, but enjoyed them all the more for it. He felt a sudden, unexpected intoxication come over him. It was the same black intoxication he had felt when he solemnly announced to his wife that he no longer wished to see her or his son. It was the same black intoxication he had felt when he sent off the letter that meant the end of his career in medicine. He was not at all sure he was doing the right thing, but he was sure he was doing what he wanted to do. 
"I'm sorry," he said, "but I'm not going to sign."
(Milan Kundera, The Unbearable Lightness of Being, 1984)

IS TOMAS’ CHOICE A NOBLE ACT TO PROTECT TEREZA, OR IS IT A MANIFESTATION OF A DEEPER, SELF-DESTRUCTIVE PATTERN? The "black intoxication" he feels suggests that his motives are not as pure or clear as a simple, rational choice would imply (Continued).
“Several days later he read about the petition in the papers.
There was not a word, of course, about its being a politely worded plea for the release of political prisoners. None of the papers cited a single sentence from the short text. Instead, they went on at great length and in vague, menacing terms about an anti-state proclamation meant to lay the foundation for a new campaign against socialism. They also listed all the signatories, accompanying each of their names with slanderous attacks that gave Tomas gooseflesh. 
Not that it was unexpected. The fact that any public undertaking (meeting, petition, street gathering) not organized by the Communist Party was automatically considered illegal and endangered all the participants was common knowledge. But it may have made him sorrier he had not signed the petition.
Why hadn't he signed? He could no longer quite remember what had prompted his decision.
And once more I see him the way he appeared to me at the very beginning of the novel: standing at the window and staring across the courtyard at the walls opposite.
This is the image from which he was born. As I have pointed out before, characters are not born like people, of woman; they are born of a situation, a sentence, a metaphor containing in a nutshell a basic human possibility that the author thinks no one else has discovered or said something essential about. But isn't it true that an author can write only about himself? Staring impotently across a courtyard, at a loss for what to do; hearing the pertinacious rumbling of one's own stomach during a moment of love; betraying, yet lacking the will to abandon the glamorous path of betrayal; raising one's fist with the crowds in the Grand March; displaying one's wit before hidden microphones—I have known all these situations, I have experienced them myself, yet none of them has given rise to the person my curriculum vitae and I represent. The characters in my novels are my own unrealized possibilities. That is why I am equally fond of them all and equally horrified by them. Each one has crossed a border that I myself have circumvented. 
It is that crossed border (the border beyond which my own "I" ends) which attracts me most. For beyond that border begins the secret the novel asks about. The novel is not the author's confession; it is an investigation of human life in the trap the world has become. But enough. Let us return to Tomas.
Alone in his flat, he stared across the courtyard at the dirty walls of the building opposite. He missed the tall, stooped man with the big chin and the man's friends, whom he did not know, who were not even members of his circle. He felt as though he had just met a beautiful woman on a railway platform, and before he could say anything to her, she had stepped into a sleeping car on its way to Istanbul or Lisbon. 
Then he tried again to think through what he should have done. Even though he did his best to put aside everything belonging to the realm of the emotions (the admiration he had for the editor and the irritation his son caused him), he was still not sure whether he ought to have signed the text they gave him.
Is it right to raise one's voice when others are being silenced? Yes.
On the other hand, why did the papers devote so much space to the petition? After all, the press (totally manipulated by the state) could have kept it quiet and no one would have been the wiser. If they publicized the petition, then the petition played into the rulers' hands! It was manna from heaven, the perfect start and justification for a new wave of persecution.
What then should he have done? Sign or not?
Another way of formulating the question is, Is it better to shout and thereby hasten the end, or to keep silent and gain thereby a slower death?
Is there any answer to these questions?
And again he thought the thought we already know: Human life occurs only once, and the reason we cannot determine which of our decisions are good and which bad is that in a given situation we can make only one decision; we are not granted a second, third, or fourth life in which to compare various decisions.
History is similar to individual lives in this respect. There is only one history of the Czechs. One day it will come to an end as surely as Tomas's life, never to be repeated.
In 1618, the Czech estates took courage and vented their ire on the emperor reigning in Vienna by pitching two of his high officials out of a window in the Prague Castle. Their defiance led to the Thirty Years War, which in turn led to the almost complete destruction of the Czech nation. Should the Czechs have shown more caution than courage? The answer may seem simple; it is not.
Three hundred and twenty years later, after the Munich Conference of 1938, the entire world decided to sacrifice the Czechs' country to Hitler. Should the Czechs have tried to stand up to a power eight times their size? In contrast to 1618, they opted for caution. Their capitulation led to the Second World War, which in turn led to the forfeit of their nation's freedom for many decades or even centuries. Should they have shown more courage than caution? What should they have done?
If Czech history could be repeated, we should of course find it desirable to test the other possibility each time and compare the results. Without such an experiment, all considerations of this kind remain a game of hypotheses.
Einmal ist keinmal. What happens but once might as well not have happened at all. The history of the Czechs will not be repeated, nor will the history of Europe. The history of the Czechs and of Europe is a pair of sketches from the pen of mankind's fateful inexperience. History is as light as individual human life, unbearably light, light as a feather, as dust swirling into the air, as whatever will no longer exist tomorrow.
Once more, and with a nostalgia akin to love, Tomas thought of the tall, stooped editor. That man acted as though history were a finished picture rather than a sketch. He acted as though everything he did were to be repeated endlessly, to return eternally, without the slightest doubt about his actions. He was convinced he was right, and for him that was a sign not of narrowmindedness but of virtue. Yes, that man lived in a history different from Tomas's: a history that was not (or did not realize it was) a sketch.”
(Milan Kundera, The Unbearable Lightness of Being, 1984)

SARTRE ARGUES THAT IN OUR EVERYDAY, UNREFLECTIVE STATE, WE ARE NOT AWARE OF OUR OWN PSYCHIC STATES; WE ARE SIMPLY ABSORBED IN A WORLD THAT APPEARS TO DEMAND CERTAIN ACTIONS. THIS DEMONSTRATES THE PROFOUND LIMITS OF OUR EVERYDAY SELF-AWARENESS.
“The "Psychic" is given solely to a special category of cognitive acts – the acts of the reflective For-itself. On the unreflective plane, in fact, the For-itself is its own possibilities in the non-thetic mode; and since its possibilities are possible presences to the world beyond the given state of the world, what is revealed thetically but non-thematically across these possibilities is a state of the world synthetically bound with the given state. Consequently the modifications to be imposed on the world are given thetically in present things as objective potentialities which have to realize themselves by borrowing our body as the instrument of their realization. It is thus that the maa who is angry sees on the face of his opponent the objective quality of asking for a punch in the nose. Hence we have such expressions as "itching to be spanked" or "asking for trouble." Our body here is like a medium in a trance. Through it must be realized a certain potentiality of things (a beverage-about-to-be-drunk, aid-about-to-be-brought, dangerous-animal-about-to-be-killed, etc.), and reflection arising in the midst of all these apprehends the ontological relation of the For-itself to its possibilities but as an object. Thus the act rises as the virtual object of the reflective consciousness. It is then impossible for me at the same time and on the same level to be conscious of Pierre and of my friendship for him; these two existences are always separated by the breadth of the For-itself. And this For-itself is a hidden reality; in the case of consciousness not-reflected-on, the For-itself is but nonthetically, and it is effaced before the object in the world and its potentialities. In the case of the reflective upsurge the for-itself is surpassed toward the virtual object which the reflective has to be. Only a pure reflective consciousness can discover the For-itself reflected-on in its reality. We use the term Psyche for the organized totality of these virtual and transcendent existents which form a permanent cortege for impure reflection and which are the natural object of psychological research.”
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

SARTRE ADDS NUANCE TO A SIMPLE UNDERSTANDING OF SELF-KNOWLEDGE. HE CHALLENGES THE IDEA THAT WE CAN JUST "LOOK INSIDE" AND KNOW OURSELVES FOR THE OBJECTS OF OUR INTROSPECTION ARE NOT SIMPLE DATA BUT COMPLEX CONSTRUCTS THAT CAN BE EASILY MISUNDERSTOOD.
“Actually this inner cohesion of the psyche is nothing other than the unity of being of the For-itself hypostasized in the in-itself. A hate has no parts; it is not a sum of attitudes and of states of consciousness, but it gives itself through the attitudes and states of consciousness as the temporal unity-without parts-of their appearances. But the unity of being in the For-itself is explained by the ekstatic character of its being; it has to be in full spontaneity what it will be. The psychic, on the contrary, "is-made-to-be." This means that it is by itself incapable of determining itself in existence. It is sustained in the face of the reflective by a sort of inertia; and psychologists have often insisted on its "pathological" character. It is in this sense that Descartes can speak of the "passions of the souL" Although the psychic is not on the same plane of being as the existents of the world, this inertia enables the psychic to be apprehended as related to these existents. A love is given as "aroused" by the loved object. Consequently the total cohesion of the psychic form becomes unintelligible since it does not have to be this cohesion, since it is not its own synthesis, since its unity has the character of a given. To the extent that a hatred is a given succession of "nows," all completely formed and inert, we find in it the germ of an infinite divisibility. And yet this divisibility is disguised, denied in so far as the psychic is the objectivation of the ontological unity of the For-itself. Hence there is a sort of magic cohesion between the successive "nows" of the hatred, which give themselves as parts only in order later to deny their exteriority.
The ambiguity is brought to light in Bergson's theory of the consciousness which endures and which is a "multiplicity of interpenetration." What Bergson is touching on here is the psychic state, not consciousness conceived as For-itself. Actually what is the meaning of "interpenetration?" On the theory of divisibility, it cannot be absence. If there is to be interpenetration, it is necessary that there be parts which interpenetrate each other. But these parts, which theoretically ought to fall back into their isolation, flow one into the other by a magic and totally unexplained cohesion; and this total fusion at present defies analysis. Bergson does not dream of establishing this property of the psychic On an absolute structure of the For-itself. He establishes it as a given, a simple "intuition" which reveals to him that the psychic is an interiorized multiplicity. Its character as something inert, as a passive datum is accentuated by the fact that it exists without being for a consciousness, either thetic or nonthetic. It is without consciousness (of) being since a natural attitude man completely fails to recognize it and has to have recourse to intuition in order to apprehend it. Thus an object in the world is able to exist without being seen and to reveal itself after the event when we have forged the necessary instruments to disclose it. The characteristics of psychic duration for Bergson are a pure contingent fact of experience; they are so because we find them so-that is all. Thus psychic temporality is an inert datum, closely akin to Bergson's duration, which undergoes its intimate cohesion without effecting it, which is perpetually temporalized without temporalizing itself, in which the irrational and magic interpenetration of elements that are not united by an ekstatic relation of being can be compared only to sympathetic magic acting from a distance-an interpenetration which hides a multiplicity of already formed "nows." These characteristics do not result from any error on the part of psychologists or from a lack of knowledge; they are constitutive of psychic temporality, which is the hypostasis of original temporality. The absolute unity of the psychic is indeed the projection of the ontological, ekstatic unity of the for-itself. But since this projection is made in the in-itself which is what it is in the distanceless proximity of self-identity, the ekstatic unity parcels itself out in an infinity of "nows" which are what they are and which, precisely for this reason, tend to isolate themselves in their self-identity. Thus participating simultaneously in the in-itself and in the for-itself, psychic temporality conceals a contradiction which is never overcome. This should not surprise us. Since psychic temporality is the product of impure reflection, it is natural that it is made-to-be what it is not and that it is not what it is made-to-be.”
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

“TIME IS NOT A RIVER BUT A SEA

Time is not a river but a sea,
Holding all that was and is to be.
It is the mind that moves across the story,
Racing with the wind upon its glory,
Tracing through the will one's destiny.
Years shimmer in their drowned eternity.

The problem is, of course, identity,
Having the impression we are free.
Remember that the Earth does not seem round.
Each eve the sun sinks slowly towards the ground,
Even as we choose to take our tea.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E2.2.B. Determinisms: Forces That Seem to Deny Choice

E2.2.B.1. Natural Determinisms: Explore arguments from the sciences (biology, neuroscience) that highlight the influence of our genes, our brains, and our instincts on our behaviors.

E2.2.B.1.1. The physical and historical foundations of determinism

E2.2.B.1.1.a. THE "BLOCK UNIVERSE" THEORY VIEWS THE ENTIRE HISTORY OF THE UNIVERSE—PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE—AS EXISTING "ONCE AND FOR ALL, FROZEN IN A SINGLE FOUR-DIMENSIONAL BLOCK." In this scenario, the structure of spacetime itself, as understood by physics, implies a deterministic reality.
“Spacetime is sometimes referred to as the ‘block universe’, because within it the whole of physical reality — past, present and future — is laid out once and for all, frozen in a single four-dimensional block. Relative to spacetime, nothing ever moves. What we call ‘moments’ are certain slices through spacetime, and when the contents of such slices are different from one  another, we call it change or motion through space.
As I have said, we think of the flow of time in connection with causes and effects. We think of causes as preceding their effects; we imagine the moving present arriving at causes before it arrives at their effects, and we imagine the effects flowing forwards with the present moment. Philosophically, the most important cause-and-effect processes are our conscious decisions and the consequent actions. The common-sense view is that we have free will: that we are sometimes in a position to affect future events (such as the motion of our own bodies) in any one of several possible ways, and to choose which shall occur; whereas, in contrast, we are never in a position to affect the past at all. (I shall discuss free will in Chapter 13.) The past is fixed; the future is open. To many philosophers, the flow of time is the process in which the open future becomes, moment by moment, the fixed past. Others say that the alternative events at each moment in the future are possibilities, and the flow of time is the process by which, moment by moment, one of these possibilities becomes actual (so that, according to those people, the future does not exist at all until the flow of time hits it and turns it into the past). But if the future really is open (and it is!), then that can have nothing to do with the flow of time, for there is no flow of time. In spacetime physics (which is, effectively, all pre-quantum physics, starting with Newton) the future is not open. It is there, with definite, fixed contents, just like the past and present. If a particular moment in spacetime were ‘open’ (in any sense) it would necessarily remain open when it became the  present and the past, for moments cannot change.
 Subjectively, the future of a given observer may be said to be ‘open from that observer’s point of view’ because one cannot measure or observe one’s own future. But openness in that subjective sense does not allow choices. If you have a ticket for last week’s lottery, but have not yet found out whether you have won, the outcome is still open from your point of view, even though objectively it is fixed. But, subjectively or objectively, you cannot change it. No causes which have not already affected it can do so any longer. The common-sense theory of free will says that last week, while you still had a choice whether to buy a ticket or not, the future was still objectively open, and you really could have chosen any of two or more options. But that is incompatible with spacetime. So according to spacetime physics, the openness of the future is an illusion, and therefore causation and free will can be no more than illusions as well. We need, and cling to, the belief that the future can be affected by present events, and especially by our choices; but perhaps that is just our way of coping with the fact that we do not know the future. In reality, we make no choices. Even as we think we are considering a choice, its outcome is already there, on the appropriate slice of spacetime, unchangeable like everything else in spacetime, and impervious to our deliberations. It seems that those deliberations themselves are unchangeable and already in existence at their allotted moments before we  ever know of them.
To be an ‘effect’ of some cause means to be affected by that cause — to be changed by it. Thus when spacetime physics denies the reality of the flow of time, it logically cannot accommodate the common-sense notions of cause and effect either. For in the block universe nothing is changeable: one part of spacetime can no more change another than one part of a fixed three-
 dimensional object can change another.
It so happens that all fundamental theories in the era of spacetime physics had the property that given everything that happens before a given moment, the laws of physics determine what happens at all subsequent moments. The property of snapshots being determined by other snapshots is called determinism. In Newtonian physics, for instance, if at any moment one knows the positions and velocities of all the masses in an isolated system, such as the solar system, one can in principle calculate (predict) where those masses will be at all times thereafter. One can also in principle  calculate (retrodict) where those masses were at all previous times.
The laws of physics that determine one snapshot from another are the ‘glue’ that holds the snapshots together as a spacetime. Let us imagine ourselves, magically and impossibly, outside spacetime (and therefore in an external time of our own, independent of that within spacetime). Let us slice spacetime into snapshots of space at each moment as perceived by a particular observer within spacetime, then shuffle the snapshots and glue them together again in a new order. Could we tell, from the outside, that this is not the real spacetime? Almost certainly. For one thing, in the shuffled spacetime physical processes would not be continuous. Objects would instantaneously cease to exist at one point and reappear at another. Second, and more important, the laws of physics would no longer hold. At least, the real laws of physics would no longer hold. There would exist a different set of laws that took the shuffling into account, explicitly or implicitly,  and correctly described the shuffled spacetime.
So to us, the difference between the shuffled spacetime and the real one would be gross. But what about the inhabitants? Could they tell the difference? We are getting dangerously close to nonsense here — the familiar nonsense of the common-sense theory of time. But bear with me and we shall skirt around the nonsense. Of course the inhabitants could not tell the difference. If they could, they would. They would, for instance, comment on the existence of discontinuities in their world, and publish scientific papers about them — that is, if they could survive in the shuffled spacetime at all. But from our magical vantage-point we can see that they do survive, and so do their scientific papers. We can read those papers, and see that they still contain only observations of the original spacetime. All records within the spacetime of physical events, including those in the memories and perceptions of conscious observers, are identical to those in the original spacetime. We have only shuffled the snapshots, not changed them internally, so the inhabitants still perceive them in the original order.
Thus in terms of real physics — physics as perceived by the spacetime’s inhabitants — all this slicing up and re-gluing of spacetime is meaningless. Not only the shuffled spacetime, but even the collection of unglued-together snapshots, is physically identical to the original spacetime. We picture all the snapshots glued together in the right order because this represents the relationships between them that are determined by the laws of physics. A picture of them glued together in a different order would represent the same physical events — the same history — but would somewhat misrepresent the relationships between those events. So the snapshots have an intrinsic order, defined by their contents and by the real laws of physics. Any one of the snapshots, together with the laws of physics, not only determines what all the others are, it determines their order, and it determines its own place in the sequence. In other words, each snapshot has a ‘time stamp’ encoded in  its physical contents.
That is how it must be if the concept of time is to be freed of the error of invoking an overarching framework of time that is external to physical reality. The time stamp of a snapshot is the reading on some natural clock that exists within that universe. In some snapshots — the ones containing human civilization, for example — there are actual clocks. In others there are physical variables — such as the chemical composition of the Sun, or of all the matter in space — which can be considered as clocks because they take definite, distinct values on different snapshots, at least over a certain region of spacetime. We can standardize and calibrate them to agree with one  another where they overlap.
We can reconstitute the spacetime by using the intrinsic order determined by the laws of physics. We start with any of the snapshots. Then we calculate what the immediately preceding and following snapshots should look like, and we locate those snapshots from the remaining collection and glue them on either side of the original snapshot. Repeating the process builds up the whole spacetime. These calculations are too complex to perform in real life, but they are legitimate in a thought experiment in which we imagine ourselves to be detached from the real, physical world. (Also, strictly speaking, in pre-quantum physics there would be a continuous infinity of snapshots, so the process just described would have to be replaced by a limiting process in which the spacetime is assembled in an infinite number of  steps; but the principle is the same.)
The predictability of one event from another does not imply that those events are cause and effect. For example, the theory of electrodynamics says that all electrons carry the same charge. Therefore, using that theory we can —and frequently do — predict the outcome of a measurement on one electron from the outcome of a measurement on another. But neither outcome was caused by the other. In fact, as far as we know, the value of the charge on an electron was not caused by any physical process. Perhaps it is ‘caused’ by the laws of physics themselves (though the laws of physics as we currently know them do not predict the charge on the electron; they merely say that all electrons have the same charge). But in any case, here is an example of events (outcomes of measurements on electrons) that are predictable from one another, but make no causal contribution to one another.”
(David Deutsch, The Fabric of Reality, 1996)

“THE BLOCK UNIVERSE: A LEADING BUT CONTESTED VIEW OF TIME IN PHYSICS
The "Block Universe" model, which posits that past, present, and future all exist simultaneously and are equally real, remains a leading and influential theory within the scientific community, particularly in the realm of theoretical physics. However, it is far from a universally accepted consensus, and a significant portion of the community remains unconvinced, advocating for alternative models of time.
At the heart of the Block Universe's prominence is its seamless integration with Albert Einstein's theory of general relativity. In this framework, spacetime is a unified four-dimensional manifold, and the "now" is a relative concept, dependent on the observer's frame of reference. This relativistic perspective naturally lends itself to the idea of a pre-existing "block" of spacetime, where all events are laid out. Prominent physicists like Sean Carroll have argued that the Block Universe is the most straightforward and economical interpretation of the laws of physics as we currently understand them.
However, the theory faces staunch opposition and is the subject of a vigorous and ongoing debate. A key criticism revolves around its apparent conflict with our intuitive and deeply ingrained experience of the passage of time and the open nature of the future. Critics, such as physicist Lee Smolin, argue for a dynamic view of time, where the future is not yet determined and the present moment represents a genuine process of becoming. These alternative views often seek to reconcile the fundamental laws of physics with our everyday perception of a flowing time.
the Block Universe is not a fringe theory. It is a cornerstone of discussion in the philosophy of physics and is defended by a substantial number of theoretical physicists. This support is largely due to its mathematical elegance and consistency with general relativity.
Interestingly, a 2020 survey among professional philosophers conducted by PhilPapers found that "eternalism" – the philosophical view that corresponds to the Block Universe model – is the most popular theory of time. While not a direct measure of physicists' views, this indicates that the underlying concepts of the Block Universe hold significant weight in related academic disciplines.”
(Gemini, July 10, 2025)

DEUTSCH ARGUES THAT THE MULTIVERSE SCENARIO AS A WHOLE IS "DETERMINED JUST AS RIGIDLY AS IN CLASSICAL SPACETIME." However, from the perspective of any single observer within this system, the future is fundamentally unpredictable because the observer constantly "differentiates" into multiple copies, each experiencing a different outcome.
“In spacetime physics, any snapshot is determined by any other. As I have said, in the multiverse that is in general not so. Typically, the state of one group of identical snapshots (such as the ones in which the coin is ‘spinning’) determines the state of an equal number of differing snapshots (such as the ‘heads’ and ‘tails’ ones). Because of the time-reversibility property of the laws of quantum physics, the overall, multi-valued state of the latter group also determines the state of the former. However, in some regions of the multiverse, and in some places in space, the snapshots of some physical objects do fall, for a period, into chains, each of whose members determines all the others to a good approximation. Successive snapshots of the solar system would be the standard example. In such regions, classical physical laws are a good approximation to the quantum ones. In those regions and places, the multiverse does indeed look as […] a collection of spacetimes, and at that level of approximation the quantum concept of time reduces to the classical one. One can distinguish approximately between ‘different times’ and ‘different universes’, and time is approximately a sequence of moments. But that approximation always breaks down if one examines the snapshots in more detail, or looks  far forwards or backwards in time, or far afield in the multiverse.
All experimental results currently available to us are compatible with the approximation that time is a sequence of moments. We do not expect that approximation to break down in any foreseeable terrestrial experiment, but theory tells us that it must break down badly in certain types of physical process. The first is the beginning of the universe, the Big Bang. According to classical physics, time began at a moment when space was infinitely dense and occupied only a single point, and before that there were no moments. According to quantum physics (as best we can tell), the snapshots very near the Big Bang are not in any particular order. The sequential property of time does not begin at the Big Bang, but at some later time. In the nature of things, it does not make sense to ask how much later. But we can say that the earliest moments which are, to a good approximation, sequential occur roughly when classical physics would extrapolate that the  Big Bang had happened 10 –43 seconds (the Planck time) earlier.
A second and similar sort of breakdown of the sequence of time is thought to occur in the interiors of black holes, and at the final recollapse of the universe (the ‘Big Crunch’), if there is one. In both cases matter is compressed to infinite density according to classical physics, just as at the Big Bang, and the resulting gravitational forces tear the fabric of spacetime  apart.
By the way, if you have ever wondered what happened before the Big Bang, or what will happen after the Big Crunch, you can stop wondering now. Why is it hard to accept that there are no moments before the Big Bang or after the Big Crunch, so that nothing happens, or exists, there? Because it is hard to imagine time coming to a halt, or starting up. But then, time does not have to come to a halt or start up, for it does not move at all. The multiverse does not ‘come into existence’ or ‘cease to exist’; those terms presuppose the flow of time. It is only imagining the flow of time that makes us wonder what  happened ‘before’ or ‘after’ the whole of reality.
Thirdly, it is thought that on a sub-microscopic scale quantum effects again warp and tear the fabric of spacetime, and that closed loops of time — in effect, tiny time machines — exist on that scale. As we shall see in the next chapter, this sort of breakdown of the sequence of time is also physically possible on a large scale, and it is an open question whether it occurs near  such objects as rotating black holes.
Thus, although we cannot yet detect any of these effects, our best theories already tell us that spacetime physics is never an exact description of reality. However good an approximation it is, time in reality must be fundamentally different from the linear sequence which common sense supposes. Nevertheless, everything in the multiverse is determined just as rigidly as in classical spacetime. Remove one snapshot, and the remaining ones determine it exactly. Remove most snapshots, and the few remaining ones may still determine everything that was removed, just as they do in spacetime. The difference is only that, unlike spacetime, the multiverse does not consist of the mutually determining layers I have called super-snapshots, which could serve as ‘moments’ of the multiverse. It is a complex, multi- dimensional jigsaw puzzle.
In this jigsaw-puzzle multiverse, which neither consists of a sequence of moments nor permits a flow of time, the common-sense concept of cause and effect makes perfect sense. The problem that we found with causation in spacetime was that it is a property of variants of the causes and effects, as well as of the causes and effects themselves. Since those variants existed only in our imagination, and not in spacetime, we ran up against the physical meaning-lessness of drawing substantive conclusions from the imagined properties of non-existent (‘counter-factual’) physical processes. But in the multiverse variants do exist, in different proportions, and they obey definite, deterministic laws. Given these laws, it is an objective fact which events make a difference to the occurrence of which other events. Suppose that there is a group of snapshots, not necessarily identical, but all sharing the property X. Suppose that, given the existence of this group, the laws of physics determine that there exists another group of snapshots with property Y. One of the conditions for X to be a cause of Y has then been met. The other condition has to do with variants. Consider the variants of the first group that do not have the property X. If, from the existence of these, the existence of some of the Y snapshots is still determined, then X was not a cause of Y: for Y would have happened even without X. But if, from the group of non-X variants, only the existence of non-Y variants is determined,  then X was a cause of Y.
There is nothing in this definition of cause and effect that logically requires causes to precede their effects, and it could be that in very exotic situations, such as very close to the Big Bang or inside black holes, they do not. In everyday experience, however, causes always precede their effects, and this is because — at least in our vicinity in the multiverse — the number of distinct types of snapshot tends to increase rapidly with time, and hardly ever decreases. This property is related to the second law of thermodynamics, which states that ordered energy, such as chemical or gravitational potential energy, may be converted entirely into disordered energy, i.e. heat, but never vice versa. Heat is microscopically random motion. In multiverse terms, this means many microscopically different states of motion in different universes. For example, in successive snapshots of the coin at ordinary magnifications, it seems that the setting-down process converts a group of identical ‘predictably heads’ snapshots into a group of identical ‘heads’ snapshots. But during that process the energy of the coin’s motion is converted into heat, so at magnifications large enough to see individual molecules the latter group of snapshots are not identical at all. They all agree that the coin is in the ‘heads’ position, but they show its molecules, and those of the surrounding air and of the surface on which it lands, in many different configurations. Admittedly, the initial ‘predictably heads’ snapshots are not microscopically identical either, because some heat is present there too, but the production of heat in the process means that these snapshots are very much less diverse than the later ones. So each homogeneous group of ‘predictably heads’ snapshots determines the existence of — and therefore causes — vast numbers of microscopically different ‘heads’ snapshots. But no single ‘heads’ snapshot by itself determines the existence of any ‘predictably heads’ snapshots, and so is not  a cause of them.
The conversion, relative to any observer, of possibilities into actualities — of an open future into a fixed past — also makes sense in this framework. Consider the coin-tossing example again. Before the coin toss, the future is open from the point of view of an observer, in the sense that it is still possible that either outcome, ‘heads’ or ‘tails’, will be observed by that observer. From that observer’s point of view both outcomes are possibilities, even though objectively they are both actualities. After the coin has settled, the copies of the observer have differentiated into two groups. Each observer has observed, and remembers, only one outcome of the coin toss. Thus the outcome, once it is in the past of any observer, has become single-valued and actual for every copy of the observer, even though from the  multiverse point of view it is just as two-valued as ever.
Let me sum up the elements of the quantum concept of time. Time is not a sequence of moments, nor does it flow. Yet our intuitions about the properties of time are broadly true. Certain events are indeed causes and effects of one another. Relative to an observer, the future is indeed open and the past fixed, and possibilities do indeed become actualities. The reason why our traditional theories of time are nonsense is that they try to express these true intuitions within the framework of a false classical physics. In quantum physics they make sense, because time was a quantum concept all along. We exist in multiple versions, in universes called
‘moments’. Each version of us is not directly aware of the others, but has evidence of their existence because physical laws link the contents of different universes. It is tempting to suppose that the moment of which we are aware is the only real one, or is at least a little more real than the others. But that is just solipsism. All moments are physically real. The whole of the  multiverse is physically real. Nothing else is.”
(David Deutsch, The Fabric of Reality, 1996)

E2.2.B.1.1.b. BERTRAND RUSSELL SUGGESTS THAT THE GREEK BELIEF IN FATE "WAS ONE OF THE SOURCES FROM WHICH SCIENCE DERIVED THE BELIEF IN NATURAL LAW."
“Primitive religion, everywhere, was tribal rather than personal. Certain rites were performed, which were intended, by sympathetic magic, to further the interests of the tribe, especially in respect of fertility, vegetable, animal, and human. The winter solstice was a time when the sun had to be encouraged not to go on diminishing in strength; spring and harvest also called for appropriate ceremonies. These were often such as to generate a great collective excitement, in which individuals lost their sense of separateness and felt themselves at one with the whole tribe. All over the world, at a certain stage of religious evolution, sacred animals and human beings were ceremonially killed and eaten. In different regions, this stage occurred at very different dates. Human sacrifice usually lasted longer than the sacrificial eating of human victims; in Greece it was not yet extinct at the beginning of historical times. Fertility rites without such cruel aspects were common throughout Greece; the Eleusinian mysteries, in particular, were essentially agricultural in their symbolism.
It must be admitted that religion, in Homer, is not very religious. The gods are completely human, differing from men only in being immortal and possessed of superhuman powers. Morally, there is nothing to be said for them, and it is difficult to see how they can have inspired much awe. In some passages, supposed to be late, they are treated with Voltairean irreverence. Such genuine religious feeling as is to be found in Homer is less concerned with the gods of Olympus than with more shadowy beings such as Fate or Necessity or Destiny, to whom even Zeus is subject. Fate exercised a great influence on all Greek thought, and perhaps was one of the sources from which science derived the belief in natural law. The Homeric gods were the gods of a conquering aristocracy, not the useful fertility gods of those who actually tilled the soil. As Gilbert Murray says.
The gods of most nations claim to have created the world. The Olympians make no such claim. The most they ever did was to conquer it. . . . And when they have conquered their kingdoms, what do they do? Do they attend to the government? Do they promote agriculture? Do they practise trades and industries? Not a bit of it. Why should they do any honest work? They find it easier to live on the revenues and blast with thunderbolts the people who do not pay. They are conquering chieftains, royal buccaneers. They fight, and feast, and play, and make music; they drink deep, and roar with laughter at the lame smith who waits on them. They are never afraid, except of their own king. They never tell lies, except in love and war.
Homer’s human heroes, equally, are not very well behaved. The leading family is the House of Pelops, but it did not succeed in setting a pattern of happy family life. 'Tantalos, the Asiatic founder of the dynasty, began its career by a direct offence against the gods; some said, by trying to cheat them into eating human flesh, that of his own son Pelops. Pelops, having been miraculously restored to life, offended in his turn. He won his famous chariot-race against Oinomaos, king of Pisa, by the connivance of the latter’s charioteer, Myrtilos, and then got rid of his confederate, whom he had promised to reward, by flinging him into the sea. The curse descended to his sons, Atreus and Thyestes, in the form of what the Greeks called ate, a strong if not actually irresistible impulse to crime. Thyestes corrupted his brother’s wife and thereby managed to steal the "luck” of the family, the famous golden-fleeced ram. Atreus in turn secured his brother’s banishment, and recalling him under pretext of a reconciliation, feasted him on the flesh of his own children. The curse was now inherited by Atreus’ son Agamemnon, who offended Artemis by killing a sacred stag, sacrificed his own daughter Iphigenia to appease the goddess and obtain a safe passage to Troy for his fleet, and was in turn murdered by his faithless wife Klytaimnestra and her paramour Aigisthos, a surviving son of Thyestes. Orestes, Agamemnon’s son, in turn avenged his father by killing his mother and Aigisthos.
Homer as a finished achievement was a product of Ionia, i.e. of a part of Hellenic Asia Minor and the adjacent islands. Some time during the sixth century at latest, the Homeric poems became fixed in their present form. It was also during this century that Greek science and philosophy and mathematics began. At the same lime events of fundamental importance were happening in other parts of the world. Confucius, Buddha, and Zoroaster, if they existed, probably belong to the same century.^ In the middle of the century the Persian Empire was established by Cyrus; towards its close the Greek cities of Ionia, to which the Persians had allowed a limited autonomy, made a fruitless rebellion, which was put down by Darius, and their best men became exiles. Several of the philosophers of this period were refugees, who wandered from city to city in the still unenslaved parts of the Hellenic world, spreading the civilization that, until then, had been mainly confined to Ionia.”
(Bertrand Russell, History Of Western Philosophy, 1945)

E2.2.B.1.2. The evolutionary elueprint (Genes & Instincts)

E2.2.B.1.2.a. CHARLES DARWIN PROPOSES THAT HUMAN EMOTIONAL EXPRESSIONS ARE NOT UNIQUE TO HUMANS BUT ARE PRODUCTS OF OUR EVOLUTIONARY HISTORY.
"All the authors who have written on Expression, with the exception of Mr. Spencer—the great expounder of the principle of Evolution—appear to have been firmly convinced that species, man of course included, came into existence in their present condition. Sir C. Bell, being thus convinced, maintains that many of our facial muscles are “purely instrumental in expression;” or are “a special provision” for this sole object. But the simple fact that the anthropoid apes possess the same facial muscles as we do, renders it very improbable that these muscles in our case serve exclusively for expression; for no one, I presume, would be inclined to admit that monkeys have been endowed with special muscles solely for exhibiting their hideous grimaces. Distinct uses, independently of expression, can indeed be assigned with much probability for almost all the facial muscles.
Sir C. Bell evidently wished to draw as broad a distinction as possible between man and the lower animals; and he consequently asserts that with “the lower creatures there is no expression but what may be referred, more or less plainly, to their acts of volition or necessary instincts.” He further maintains that their faces “seem chiefly capable of expressing rage and fear.” But man himself cannot express love and humility by external signs, so plainly as does a dog, when with drooping ears, hanging lips, flexuous body, and wagging tail, he meets his beloved master. Nor can these movements in the dog be explained by acts of volition or necessary instincts, any more than the beaming eyes and smiling cheeks of a man when he meets an old friend. If Sir C. Bell had been questioned about the expression of affection in the dog, he would no doubt have answered that this animal had been created with special instincts, adapting him for association with man, and that all further enquiry on the subject was superfluous.
Although Gratiolet emphatically denies that any muscle has been developed solely for the sake of expression, he seems never to have reflected on the principle of evolution. He apparently looks at each species as a separate creation. So it is with the other writers on Expression. For instance, Dr. Duchenne, after speaking of the movements of the limbs, refers to those which give expression to the face, and remarks: “Le créateur n’a donc pas eu à se préoccuper ici des besoins de la mécanique; il a pu, selon sa sagesse, ou—que l’on me pardonne cette manière de parler—par une divine fantaisie, mettre en action tel ou tel muscle, un seul ou plusieurs muscles à la fois, lorsqu’il a voulu que les signes caractéristiques des passions, même les plus fugaces, fussent écrits passagèrement sur la face de l’homme.
Ce langage de la physionomie une fois créé, il lui a suffi, pour le rendre universel et immuable, de donner à tout être  humain la faculté instinctive d’exprimer toujours ses sendments par la  contraction des mêmes muscles.”
Many writers consider the whole subject of Expression as inexplicable. Thus the illustrious physiologist Müller, says, “The completely different expression of the features in different passions shows that, according to the kind of feeling excited, entirely different groups of the fibres of the facial nerve are acted on. Of the cause of this we are quite ignorant.”
No doubt as long as man and all other animals are viewed as independent creations, an effectual stop is put to our natural desire to investigate as far as possible the causes of Expression. By this doctrine, anything and everything can be equally well explained; and it has proved as pernicious with respect to Expression as to every other branch of natural history. With mankind some expressions, such as the bristling of the hair under the influence of extreme terror, or the uncovering of the teeth under that of furious rage, can hardly be understood, except on the belief that man once existed in a much lower and animal-like condition. The community of certain expressions in distinct though allied species, as in the movements of the same facial muscles during laughter by man and by various monkeys, is rendered somewhat more intelligible, if we believe in their descent from a common progenitor. He who admits on general grounds that the structure and habits of all animals have been gradually evolved, will look at the whole subject of Expression in a new and interesting light.
The study of Expression is difficult, owing to the movements being often extremely slight, and of a fleeting nature. A difference may be clearly perceived, and yet it may be impossible, at least I have found it so, to state in what the difference consists. When we witness any deep emotion, our sympathy is so strongly excited, that close observation is forgotten or rendered almost impossible; of which fact I have had many curious proofs. Our imagination is another and still more serious source of error; for if from the nature of the circumstances we expect to see any expression, we readily imagine its presence.
Notwithstanding Dr. Duchenne’s great experience, he for a long time fancied, as he states, that several muscles contracted under certain emotions, whereas he ultimately convinced himself that the movement was confined to a single muscle.
In order to acquire as good a foundation as possible, and to ascertain, independently of common opinion, how far particular movements of the features and gestures are really expressive of certain states of the mind, I have found the following means the most serviceable. In the first place, to observe infants; for they exhibit many emotions, as Sir C. Bell remarks, “with extraordinary force;” whereas, in after life, some of our expressions “cease to have the pure and simple source from which they spring in infancy.”
(Charles Darwin, The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals, 1872)

DARWIN PROPOSES TWO CLEAR MECHANISMS FOR NATURAL DETERMINISM OF INSTINCTS AND REFLEX ACTIONS:
•	Inherited Habit: He argues that many reflexes were originally conscious, voluntary actions that, through long habit, became automatic and then passed down through inheritance.
•	Natural Selection: He argues that existing instincts can then be modified by natural selection over time to serve new purposes.
“In most of the foregoing cases, we can understand how the associated movements were acquired through habit; but with some individuals, certain strange gestures or tricks have arisen in association with certain states of the mind, owing to wholly inexplicable causes, and are undoubtedly inherited. I have elsewhere given one instance from my own observation of an extraordinary and complex gesture, associated with pleasurable feelings, which was transmitted from a father to his daughter, as well as some other analogous facts. Another curious instance of an odd inherited movement, associated with the wish to obtain an object, will be given in the course of this volume.  
There are other actions which are commonly performed under certain circumstances, independently of habit, and which seem to be due to imitation or some sort of sympathy. Thus persons cutting anything with a pair of scissors may be seen to move their jaws simultaneously with the blades of the scissors. Children learning to write often twist about their tongues as their fingers move, in a ridiculous fashion. When a public singer suddenly becomes a little hoarse, many of those present may be heard, as I have been assured by a gentleman on whom I can rely, to clear their throats; but here habit probably comes into play, as we clear our own throats under similar circumstances. I have also been told that at leaping matches, as the performer makes his spring, many of the spectators, generally men and boys, move their feet; but here again habit probably comes into play, for it is very doubtful whether women would thus act.  
Reflex actions
Reflex actions, in the strict sense of the term, are due to the excitement of a peripheral nerve, which transmits its influence to certain nerve-cells, and these in their turn excite certain muscles or glands into action; and all this may take place without any sensation or consciousness on our part, though often thus accompanied. As many reflex actions are highly expressive, the subject must here be noticed at some little length. We shall also see that some of them graduate into, and can hardly be distinguished from actions which have arisen through habit? Coughing and sneezing are familiar instances of reflex actions. With infants the first act of respiration is often a sneeze, although this requires the coordinated movement of numerous muscles. Respiration is partly voluntary, but mainly reflex, and is performed in the most natural and best manner without the interference of the will. A vast number of complex movements are reflex. As good an instance as can be given is the often-quoted one of a decapitated frog, which cannot of course feel, and cannot consciously perform, any movement. Yet if a drop of acid be placed on the lower surface of the thigh of a frog in this state, it will rub off the drop with the upper surface of the foot of the same leg. If this foot be cut off, it cannot thus act. “After some fruitless efforts, therefore, it gives up trying in that way, seems restless, as though, says Pflüger, it was seeking some other way, and at last it makes use of the foot of the other leg and succeeds in rubbing off the acid. Notably we have here not merely contractions of muscles, but combined and harmonized contractions in due sequence for a special purpose. These are actions that have all the appearance of being guided by intelligence and instigated by will in an animal, the recognized organ of whose intelligence and will has been removed.”
We see the difference between reflex and voluntary movements in very young children not being able to perform, as I am informed by Sir Henry Holland, certain acts somewhat analogous to those of sneezing and coughing, namely, in their not being able to blow their noses (_i.e._ to compress the nose and blow violently through the passage), and in their not being able to clear their throats of phlegm. They have to learn to perform these acts, yet they are performed by us, when a little older, almost as easily as reflex actions. Sneezing and coughing, however, can be controlled by the will only partially or not at all; whilst the clearing the throat and blowing the nose are completely under our command. 
 When we are conscious of the presence of an irritating particle in our nostrils or windpipe—that is, when the same sensory nerve-cells are excited, as in the case of sneezing and coughing—we can voluntarily expel the particle by forcibly driving air through these passages; but we cannot do this with nearly the same force, rapidity, and precision, as by a reflex action. In this latter case the sensory nerve-cells apparently excite the motor nerve-cells without any waste of power by first communicating with the cerebral hemispheres—the seat of our consciousness and volition. In all cases there seems to exist a profound antagonism between the same movements, as directed by the will and by a reflex stimulant, in the force with which they are performed and in the facility with which they are excited. As Claude Bernard asserts, “L’influence du cerveau tend donc à entraver les mouvements réflexes, à limiter leur force et leur étendue.”
 The conscious wish to perform a reflex action sometimes stops or interrupts its performance, though the proper sensory nerves may be stimulated. For instance, many years ago I laid a small wager with a dozen young men that they would not sneeze if they took snuff, although they all declared that they invariably did so; accordingly they all took a pinch, but from wishing much to succeed, not one sneezed, though their eyes watered, and all, without exception, had to pay me the wager. Sir H. Holland remarksthat attention paid to the act of swallowing interferes with the proper movements; from which it probably follows, at least in part, that some persons find it so difficult to swallow a pill.  
Another familiar instance of a reflex action is the involuntary closing of the eyelids when the surface of the eye is touched. A similar winking movement is caused when a blow is directed towards the face; but this is an habitual and not a strictly reflex action, as the stimulus is conveyed through the mind and not by the excitement of a peripheral nerve. The whole body and head are generally at the same time drawn suddenly backwards. These latter movements, however, can be prevented, if the danger does not appear to the imagination imminent; but our reason telling us that there is no danger does not suffice. I may mention a trifling fact, illustrating this point, and which at the time amused me. I put my face close to the thick glass-plate in front of a puff-adder in the Zoological Gardens, with the firm determination of not starting back if the snake struck at me; but, as soon as the blow was struck, my resolution went for nothing, and I jumped a yard or two backwards with astonishing rapidity. My will and reason were powerless against the imagination of a danger which had never been experienced. 
The violence of a start seems to depend partly on the vividness of the imagination, and partly on the condition, either habitual or temporary, of the nervous system. He who will attend to the starting of his horse, when tired and fresh, will perceive how perfect is the gradation from a mere glance at some unexpected object, with a momentary doubt whether it is dangerous, to a jump so rapid and violent, that the animal probably could not voluntarily whirl round in so rapid a manner. The nervous system of a fresh and highly-fed horse sends its order to the motory system so quickly, that no time is allowed for him to consider whether or not the danger is real. After one violent start, when he is excited and the blood flows freely through his brain, he is very apt to start again; and so it is, as I have noticed, with young infants.  
A start from a sudden noise, when the stimulus is conveyed through the auditory nerves, is always accompanied in grown-up persons by the winking of the eyelids. I observed, however, that though my infants started at sudden sounds, when under a fortnight old, they certainly did not always wink their eyes, and I believe never did so. The start of an older infant apparently represents a vague catching hold of something to prevent falling. I shook a pasteboard box close before the eyes of one of my infants, when 114 days old, and it did not in the least wink; but when I put a few comfits into the box, holding it in the same position as before, and rattled them, the child blinked its eyes violently every time, and started a little. It was obviously impossible that a carefully-guarded infant could have learnt by experience that a rattling sound near its eyes indicated danger to them. But such experience will have been slowly gained at a later age during a long series of generations; and from what we know of inheritance, there is nothing improbable in the transmission of a habit to the offspring at an earlier age than that at which it was first acquired by the parents.  
From the foregoing remarks it seems probable that some actions, which were at first performed consciously, have become through habit and association converted into reflex actions, and are now so firmly fixed and inherited, that they are performed, even when not of the least use, as often as the same causes arise, which originally excited them in us through the volition. In such cases the sensory nerve-cells excite the motor cells, without first communicating with those cells on which our consciousness and volition depend. It is probable that sneezing and coughing were originally acquired by the habit of expelling, as violently as possible, any irritating particle from the sensitive air-passages. As far as time is concerned, there has been more than enough for these habits to have become innate or converted into reflex actions; for they are common to most or all of the higher quadrupeds, and must therefore have been first acquired at a very remote period. Why the act of clearing the throat is not a reflex action, and has to be learnt by our children, I cannot pretend to say; but we can see why blowing the nose on a handkerchief has to be learnt. 
It is scarcely credible that the movements of a headless frog, when it wipes off a drop of acid or other object from its thigh, and which movements are so well coordinated for a special purpose, were not at first performed voluntarily, being afterwards rendered easy through long-continued habit so as at last to be performed unconsciously, or independently of the cerebral hemispheres.  
So again it appears probable that starting was originally acquired by the habit of jumping away as quickly as possible from danger, whenever any of our senses gave us warning. Starting, as we have seen, is accompanied by the blinking of the eyelids so as to protect the eyes, the most tender and sensitive organs of the body; and it is, I believe, always accompanied by a sudden and forcible inspiration, which is the natural preparation for any violent effort. But when a man or horse starts, his heart beats wildly against his ribs, and here it may be truly said we have an organ which has never been under the control of the will, partaking in the general reflex movements of the body. To this point, however, I shall return in a future chapter.  
The contraction of the iris, when the retina is stimulated by a bright light, is another instance of a movement, which it appears cannot possibly have been at first voluntarily performed and then fixed by habit; for the iris is not known to be under the conscious control of the will in any animal. In such cases some explanation, quite distinct from habit, will have to be discovered. The radiation of nerve-force from strongly-excited nerve-cells to other connected cells, as in the case of a bright light on the retina causing a sneeze, may perhaps aid us in understanding how some reflex actions originated. A radiation of nerve-force of this kind, if it caused a movement tending to lessen the primary irritation, as in the case of the contraction of the iris preventing too much light from falling on the retina, might afterwards have been taken advantage of and modified for this special purpose.  
It further deserves notice that reflex actions are in all probability liable to slight variations, as are all corporeal structures and instincts; and any variations which were beneficial and of sufficient importance, would tend to be preserved and inherited. Thus reflex actions, when once gained for one purpose, might afterwards be modified independently of the will or habit, so as to serve for some distinct purpose. Such cases would be parallel with those which, as we have every reason to believe, have occurred with many instincts; for although some instincts have been developed simply through long-continued and inherited habit, other highly complex ones have been developed through the preservation of variations of pre-existing instincts—that is, through natural selection.
I have discussed at some little length, though as I am well aware, in a very imperfect manner, the acquirement of reflex actions, because they are often brought into play in connection with movements expressive of our emotions; and it was necessary to show that at least some of them might have been first acquired through the will in order to satisfy a desire, or to relieve a disagreeable sensation.  
Associated habitual movements in the lower animals.
I have already given in the case of Man several instances of movements associated with various states of the mind or body, which are now purposeless, but which were originally of use, and are still of use under certain circumstances. As this subject is very important for us, I will here give a considerable number of analogous facts, with reference to animals; although many of them are of a very trifling nature. My object is to show that certain movements were originally performed for a definite end, and that, under nearly the same circumstances, they are still pertinaciously performed through habit when not of the least use. That the tendency in most of the following cases is inherited, we may infer from such actions being performed in the same manner by all the individuals, young and old, of the same species. We shall also see that they are excited by the most diversified, often circuitous, and sometimes mistaken associations.  
Dogs, when they wish to go to sleep on a carpet or other hard surface, generally turn round and round and scratch the ground with their fore-paws in a senseless manner, as if they intended to trample down the grass and scoop out a hollow, as no doubt their wild parents did, when they lived on open grassy plains or in the woods. Jackals, fennecs, and other allied animals in the Zoological Gardens, treat their straw in this manner; but it is a rather odd circumstance that the keepers, after observing for some months, have never seen the wolves thus behave. A semi-idiotic dog—and an animal in this condition would be particularly liable to follow a senseless habit—was observed by a friend to turn completely round on a carpet thirteen times before going to sleep.  
Many carnivorous animals, as they crawl towards their prey and prepare to rush or spring on it, lower their heads and crouch, partly, as it would appear, to hide themselves, and partly to get ready for their rush; and this habit in an exaggerated form has become hereditary in our pointers and setters. Now I have noticed scores of times that when two strange dogs meet on an open road, the one which first sees the other, though at the distance of one or two hundred yards, after the first glance always lowers its bead, generally crouches a little, or even lies down; that is, he takes the proper attitude for concealing himself and for making a rush or spring although the road is quite open and the distance great. Again, dogs of all kinds when intently watching and slowly approaching their prey, frequently keep one of their fore-legs doubled up for a long time, ready for the next cautious step; and this is eminently characteristic of the pointer. But from habit they behave in exactly the same manner whenever their attention is aroused. I have seen a dog at the foot of a high wall, listening attentively to a sound on the opposite side, with one leg doubled up; and in this case there could have been no intention of making a cautious approach.”
(Charles Darwin, The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals, 1872)

DARWIN SHOWS HOW A COMBINATION OF DIRECT PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS, INHERITED HABIT, CONSCIOUS ASSOCIATION, AND FINALLY, NATURAL SELECTION CAN WORK TOGETHER TO PRODUCE A COMPLEX, SEEMINGLY PURPOSEFUL BEHAVIOR LIKE A THREAT DISPLAY.
“From these facts it is manifest that the erection of the dermal appendages is a reflex action, independent of the will; and this action must be looked at, when, occurring under the influence of anger or fear, not as a power acquired for the sake of some advantage, but as an incidental result, at least to a large extent, of the sensorium being affected. The result, in as far as it is incidental, may be compared with the profuse sweating from an agony of pain or terror. Nevertheless, it is remarkable how slight an excitement often suffices to cause the hair to become erect; as when two dogs pretend to fight together in play. We have, also, seen in a large number of animals, belonging to widely distinct classes, that the erection of the hair or feathers is almost always accompanied by various voluntary movements—by threatening gestures, opening the mouth, uncovering the teeth, spreading out of the wings and tail by birds, and by the utterance of harsh sounds; and the purpose of these voluntary movements is unmistakable. Therefore it seems hardly credible that the co-ordinated erection of the dermal appendages, by which the animal is made to appear larger and more terrible to its enemies or rivals, should be altogether an incidental and purposeless result of the disturbance of the sensorium. This seems almost as incredible as that the erection by the hedgehog of its spines, or of the quills by the porcupine, or of the ornamental plumes by many birds during their courtship, should all be purposeless actions.  
We here encounter a great difficulty. How can the contraction of the unstriped and involuntary arrectores pili have been co-ordinated with that of various voluntary muscles for the same special purpose? If we could believe that the arrectores primordially had been voluntary muscles, and had since lost their stripes and become involuntary, the case would be comparatively simple. I am not, however, aware that there is any evidence in favour of this view; although the reversed transition would not have presented any great difficulty, as the voluntary muscles are in an unstriped condition in the embryos of the higher animals, and in the larvae of some crustaceans. Moreover in the deeper layers of the skin of adult birds, the muscular network is, according to Leydig, in a transitional condition; the fibres exhibiting only indications of transverse striation.  
Another explanation seems possible. We may admit that originally the arrectores pili were slightly acted on in a direct manner, under the influence of rage and terror, by the disturbance of the nervous system; as is undoubtedly the case with our so-called _goose-skin_ before a fever-fit. Animals have been repeatedly excited by rage and terror during many generations; and consequently the direct effects of the disturbed nervous system on the dermal appendages will almost certainly have been increased through habit and through the tendency of nerve-force to pass readily along accustomed channels. We shall find this view of the force of habit strikingly confirmed in a future chapter, where it will be shown that the hair of the insane is affected in an extraordinary manner, owing to their repeated accesses of fury and terror. As soon as with animals the power of erection had thus been strengthened or increased, they must often have seen the hairs or feathers erected in rival and enraged males, and the bulk of their bodies thus increased. In this case it appears possible that they might have wished to make themselves appear larger and more terrible to their enemies, by voluntarily assuming a threatening attitude and uttering harsh cries; such attitudes and utterances after a time becoming through habit instinctive. In this manner actions performed by the contraction of voluntary muscles might have been combined for the same special purpose with those effected by involuntary muscles. It is even possible that animals, when excited and dimly conscious of some change in the state of their hair, might act on it by repeated exertions of their attention and will; for we have reason to believe that the will is able to influence in an obscure manner the action of some unstriped or involuntary muscles, as in the period of the peristaltic movements of the intestines, and in the contraction of the bladder. Nor must we overlook the part which variation and natural selection may have played; for the males which succeeded in making themselves appear the most terrible to their rivals, or to their other enemies, if not of overwhelming power, will on an average have left more offspring to inherit their characteristic qualities, whatever these may be and however first acquired, than have other males. “
(Charles Darwin, The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals, 1872)

DARWIN EXPLAIN CRYING NOT AS A VOLUNTARY ACT OF THE SOUL, BUT AS A COMPLEX, INHERITED, AND INSTINCTUAL BEHAVIOR ROOTED IN OUR PHYSIOLOGY. 
“With one of my own infants, from his eighth day and for some time afterwards, I often observed that the first sign of a screaming-fit, when it could be observed coming on gradually, was a little frown, owing to the contraction of the corrugators of the brows; the capillaries of the naked head and face becoming at the same time reddened with blood. As soon as the screaming-fit actually began, all the muscles round the eyes were strongly contracted, and the mouth widely opened in the manner above described; so that at this early period the features assumed the same form as at a more advanced age.  
Dr. Piderit lays great stress on the contraction of certain muscles which draw down the nose and narrow the nostrils, as eminently characteristic of a crying expression. The depressores anguli oris, as we have just seen, are usually contracted at the same time, and they indirectly tend, according to Dr. Duchenne, to act in this same manner on the nose. With children having bad colds a similar pinched appearance of the nose may be noticed, which is at least partly due, as remarked to me by Dr. Langstaff, to their constant snuffling, and the consequent pressure of the atmosphere on the two sides. The purpose of this contraction of the nostrils by children having bad colds, or whilst crying, seems to be to check the downward flow of the mucus and tears, and to prevent these fluids spreading over the upper lip.  
After a prolonged and severe screaming-fit, the scalp, face, and eyes are reddened, owing to the return of the blood from the head having been impeded by the violent expiratory efforts; but the redness of the stimulated eyes is chiefly due to the copious effusion of tears. The various muscles of the face which have been strongly contracted, still twitch a little, and the upper lip is still slightly drawn up or everted, with the corners of the mouth still a little drawn downwards. I have myself felt, and have observed in other grown-up persons, that when tears are restrained with difficulty, as in reading a pathetic story, it is almost impossible to prevent the various muscles. which with young children are brought into strong action during their screaming-fits, from slightly twitching or trembling.  
Infants whilst young do not shed tears or weep, as is well known to nurses and medical men. This circumstance is not exclusively due to the lacrymal glands being as yet incapable of secreting tears. I first noticed this fact from having accidentally brushed with the cuff of my coat the open eye of one of my infants, when seventy-seven days old, causing this eye to water freely; and though the child screamed violently, the other eye remained dry, or was only slightly suffused with tears. A similar slight effusion occurred ten days previously in both eyes during a screaming-fit. The tears did not run over the eyelids and roll down the cheeks of this child, whilst screaming badly, when 122 days old. This first happened 17 days later, at the age of 139 days. A few other children have been observed for me, and the period of free weeping appears to be very variable. In one case, the eyes became slightly suffused at the age of only 20 days; in another, at 62 days. With two other children, the tears did not run down the face at the ages of 84 and 110 days; but in a third child they did run down at the age of 104 days. In one instance, as I was positively assured, tears ran down at the unusually early age of 42 days. It would appear as if the lacrymal glands required some practice in the individual before they are easily excited into action, in somewhat the same manner as various inherited consensual movements and tastes require some exercise before they are fixed and perfected. This is all the more likely with a habit like weeping, which must have been acquired since the period when man branched off from the common progenitor of the genus Homo and of the non-weeping anthropomorphous apes.”
(Charles Darwin, The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals, 1872)

THE FREE, WILLED CHOICES OF OUR ANCESTORS HAVE, OVER VAST STRETCHES OF EVOLUTIONARY TIME, BECOME THE DETERMINED, UNWILLED INSTINCTS THAT SHAPE OUR BEHAVIOR TODAY.
“That the chief expressive actions, exhibited by man and by the lower animals, are now innate or inherited,—that is, have not been learnt by the individual,—is admitted by everyone. So little has learning or imitation to do with several of them that they are from the earliest days and throughout life quite beyond our control; for instance, the relaxation of the arteries of the skin in blushing, and the increased action of the heart in anger. We may see children, only two or three years old, and even those born blind, blushing from shame; and the naked scalp of a very young infant reddens from passion. Infants scream from pain directly after birth, and all their features then assume the same form as during subsequent years. These facts alone suffice to show that many of our most important expressions have not been learnt; but it is remarkable that some, which are certainly innate, require practice in the individual, before they are performed in a full and perfect manner; for instance, weeping and laughing. The inheritance of most of our expressive actions explains the fact that those born blind display them, as I hear from the Rev. R. H. Blair, equally well with those gifted with eyesight. We can thus also understand the fact that the young and the old of widely different races, both with man and animals, express the same state of mind by the same movements.  
We are so familiar with the fact of young and old animals displaying their feelings in the same manner, that we hardly perceive how remarkable it is that a young puppy should wag its tail when pleased, depress its ears and uncover its canine teeth when pretending to be savage, just like an old dog; or that a kitten should arch its little back and erect its hair when frightened and angry, like an old cat. When, however, we turn to less common gestures in ourselves, which we are accustomed to look at as artificial or conventional,—such as shrugging the shoulders, as a sign of impotence, or the raising the arms with open hands and extended fingers, as a sign of wonder,—we feel perhaps too much surprise at finding that they are innate. That these and some other gestures are inherited, we may infer from their being performed by very young children, by those born blind, and by the most widely distinct races of man. We should also bear in mind that new and highly peculiar tricks, in association with certain states of the mind, are known to have arisen in certain individuals, and to have been afterwards transmitted to their offspring, in some cases, for more than one generation.
Certain other gestures, which seem to us so natural that we might easily imagine that they were innate, apparently have been learnt like the words of a language. This seems to be the case with the joining of the uplifted hands, and the turning up of the eyes, in prayer. So it is with kissing as a mark of affection; but this is innate, in so far as it depends on the pleasure derived from contact with a beloved person. The evidence with respect to the inheritance of nodding and shaking the head, as signs of affirmation and negation, is doubtful; for they are not universal, yet seem too general to have been independently acquired by all the individuals of so many races.  
We will now consider how far the will and consciousness have come into play in the development of the various movements of expression. As far as we can judge, only a few expressive movements, such as those just referred to, are learnt by each individual; that is, were consciously and voluntarily performed during the early years of life for some definite object, or in imitation of others, and then became habitual. The far greater number of the movements of expression, and all the more important ones, are, as we have seen, innate or inherited; and such cannot be said to depend on the will of the individual. Nevertheless, all those included under our first principle were at first voluntarily performed for a definite object,—namely, to escape some danger, to relieve some distress, or to gratify some desire. For instance, there can hardly be a doubt that the animals which fight with their teeth, have acquired the habit of drawing back their ears closely to their heads, when feeling savage, from their progenitors having voluntarily acted in this manner in order to protect their ears from being torn by their antagonists; for those animals which do not fight with their teeth do not thus express a savage state of mind. We may infer as highly probable that we ourselves have acquired the habit of contracting the muscles round the eyes, whilst crying gently, that is, without the utterance of any loud sound, from our progenitors, especially during infancy, having experienced, during the act of screaming, an uncomfortable sensation in their eyeballs. Again, some highly expressive movements result from the endeavour to cheek or prevent other expressive movements; thus the obliquity of the eyebrows and the drawing down of the corners of the mouth follow from the endeavour to prevent a screaming-fit from coming on, or to cheek it after it has come on. Here it is obvious that the consciousness and will must at first have come into play; not that we are conscious in these or in other such cases what muscles are brought into action, any more than when we perform the most ordinary voluntary movements. 
With respect to the expressive movements due to the principle of antithesis, it is clear that the will has intervened, though in a remote and indirect manner. So again with the movements coming under our third principle; these, in as far as they are influenced by nerve-force readily passing along habitual channels, have been determined by former and repeated exertions of the will. The effects indirectly due to this latter agency are often combined in a complex manner, through the force of habit and association, with those directly resulting from the excitement of the cerebro-spinal system. This seems to be the case with the increased action of the heart under the influence of any strong emotion. When an animal erects its hair, assumes a threatening attitude, and utters fierce sounds, in order to terrify an enemy, we see a curious combination of movements which were originally voluntary with those that are involuntary. It is, however, possible that even strictly involuntary actions, such as the erection of the hair, may have been affected by the mysterious power of the will.  
Some expressive movements may have arisen spontaneously, in association with certain states of the mind, like the tricks lately referred to, and afterwards been inherited. But I know of no evidence rendering this view probable.  
The power of communication between the members of the same tribe by means of language has been of paramount importance in the development of man; and the force of language is much aided by the expressive movements of the face and body. We perceive this at once when we converse on an important subject with any person whose face is concealed. Nevertheless there are no grounds, as far as I can discover, for believing that any muscle has been developed or even modified exclusively for the sake of expression. The vocal and other sound-producing organs, by which various expressive noises are produced, seem to form a partial exception; but I have elsewhere attempted to show that these organs were first developed for sexual purposes, in order that one sex might call or charm the other. Nor can I discover grounds for believing that any inherited movement, which now serves as a means of expression, was at first voluntarily and consciously performed for this special purpose,—like some of the gestures and the finger-language used by the deaf and dumb. On the contrary, every true or inherited movement of expression seems to have had some natural and independent origin. But when once acquired, such movements may be voluntarily and consciously employed as a means of communication. Even infants, if carefully attended to, find out at a very early age that their screaming brings relief, and they soon voluntarily practise it. We may frequently see a person voluntarily raising his eyebrows to express surprise, or smiling to express pretended satisfaction and acquiescence. A man often wishes to make certain gestures conspicuous or demonstrative, and will raise his extended arms with widely opened fingers above his head, to show astonishment, or lift his shoulders to his ears, to show that he cannot or will not do something. The tendency to such movements will be strengthened or increased by their being thus voluntarily and repeatedly performed; and the effects may be inherited. 
It is perhaps worth consideration whether movements at first used only by one or a few individuals to express a certain state of mind may not sometimes have spread to others, and ultimately have become universal, through the power of conscious and unconscious imitation. That there exists in man a strong tendency to imitation, independently of the conscious will, is certain. This is exhibited in the most extraordinary manner in certain brain diseases, especially at the commencement of inflammatory softening of the brain, and has been called the “echo sign.” Patients thus affected imitate, without understanding every absurd gesture which is made, and every word which is uttered near them, even in a foreign language. In the case of animals, the jackal and wolf have learnt under confinement to imitate the barking of the dog. How the barking of the dog, which serves to express various emotions and desires, and which is so remarkable from having been acquired since the animal was domesticated, and from being inherited in different degrees by different breeds, was first learnt we do not know; but may we not suspect that imitation has had something to do with its acquisition, owing to dogs having long lived in strict association with so loquacious an animal as man?  
In the course of the foregoing remarks and throughout this volume, I have often felt much difficulty about the proper application of the terms, will, consciousness, and intention. Actions, which were at first voluntary, soon became habitual, and at last hereditary, and may then be performed even in opposition to the will. Although they often reveal the state of the mind, this result was not at first either intended or expected. Even such words as that “certain movements serve as a means of expression,” are apt to mislead, as they imply that this was their primary purpose or object. This, however, seems rarely or never to have been the case; the movements having been at first either of some direct use, or the indirect effect of the excited state of the sensorium. An infant may scream either intentionally or instinctively to show that it wants food; but it has no wish or intention to draw its features into the peculiar form which so plainly indicates misery; yet some of the most characteristic expressions exhibited by man are derived from the act of screaming, as has been explained.
Although most of our expressive actions are innate or instinctive, as is admitted by everyone, it is a different question whether we have any instinctive power of recognizing them. This has generally been assumed to be the case; but the assumption has been strongly controverted by M. Lemoine. Monkeys soon learn to distinguish, not only the tones of voice of their masters, but the expression of their faces, as is asserted by a careful observer.  Dogs well know the difference between caressing and threatening gestures or tones; and they seem to recognize a compassionate tone. But as far as I can make out, after repeated trials, they do not understand any movement confined to the features, excepting a smile or laugh; and this they appear, at least in some cases, to recognize. This limited amount of knowledge has probably been gained, both by monkeys and dogs, through their associating harsh or kind treatment with our actions; and the knowledge certainly is not instinctive. Children, no doubt, would soon learn the movements of expression in their elders in the same manner as animals learn those of man. Moreover, when a child cries or laughs, he knows in a general manner what he is doing and what he feels; so that a very small exertion of reason would tell him what crying or laughing meant in others. But the question is, do our children acquire their knowledge of expression solely by experience through the power of association and reason?”
(Charles Darwin, The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals, 1872)

 
DARWIN ARGUES THAT OUR ENTIRE BEING—OUR PHYSICAL FRAME, OUR "MENTAL FACULTIES," AND OUR RACIAL DIVERSITY—IS THE PRODUCT OF A LONG, DETERMINISTIC EVOLUTIONARY PROCESS GOVERNED BY A MULTI-FACTORIAL SYSTEM OF NATURAL LAWS (NATURAL SELECTION, SEXUAL SELECTION, USE AND DISUSE, ETC.).
“The main conclusion here arrived at, and now held by many naturalists who are well competent to form a sound judgment, is that man is descended from some less highly organised form. The grounds upon which this conclusion rests will never be shaken, for the close similarity between man and the lower animals in embryonic development, as well as in innumerable points of structure and constitution, both of high and of the most trifling importance,—the rudiments which he retains, and the abnormal reversions to which he is occasionally liable,—are facts which cannot be disputed. They have long been known, but until recently they told us nothing with respect to the origin of man. Now when viewed by the light of our knowledge of the whole organic world, their meaning is unmistakable. The great principle of evolution stands up clear and firm, when these groups or facts are considered in connection with others, such as the mutual affinities of the members of the same group, their geographical distribution in past and present times, and their geological succession. It is incredible that all these facts should speak falsely. He who is not content to look, like a savage, at the phenomena of nature as disconnected, cannot any longer believe that man is the work of a separate act of creation. He will be forced to admit that the close resemblance of the embryo of man to that, for instance, of a dog—the construction of his skull, limbs and whole frame on the same plan with that of other mammals, independently of the uses to which the parts may be put—the occasional re-appearance of various structures, for instance of several muscles, which man does not normally possess, but which are common to the Quadrumana—and a crowd of analogous facts—all point in the plainest manner to the conclusion that man is the co-descendant with other mammals of a common progenitor.  
We have seen that man incessantly presents individual differences in all parts of his body and in his mental faculties. These differences or variations seem to be induced by the same general causes, and to obey the same laws as with the lower animals. In both cases similar laws of inheritance prevail. Man tends to increase at a greater rate than his means of subsistence; consequently he is occasionally subjected to a severe struggle for existence, and natural selection will have effected whatever lies within its scope. A succession of strongly-marked variations of a similar nature is by no means requisite; slight fluctuating differences in the individual suffice for the work of natural selection; not that we have any reason to suppose that in the same species, all parts of the organisation tend to vary to the same degree. We may feel assured that the inherited effects of the long-continued use or disuse of parts will have done much in the same direction with natural selection. Modifications formerly of importance, though no longer of any special use, are long-inherited. When one part is modified, other parts change through the principle of correlation, of which we have instances in many curious cases of correlated monstrosities. Something may be attributed to the direct and definite action of the surrounding conditions of life, such as abundant food, heat or moisture; and lastly, many characters of slight physiological importance, some indeed of considerable importance, have been gained through sexual selection. 
No doubt man, as well as every other animal, presents structures, which seem to our limited knowledge, not to be now of any service to him, nor to have been so formerly, either for the general conditions of life, or in the relations of one sex to the other. Such structures cannot be accounted for by any form of selection, or by the inherited effects of the use and disuse of parts. We know, however, that many strange and strongly-marked peculiarities of structure occasionally appear in our domesticated productions, and if their unknown causes were to act more uniformly, they would probably become common to all the individuals of the species. We may hope hereafter to understand something about the causes of such occasional modifications, especially through the study of monstrosities: hence the labours of experimentalists, such as those of M. Camille Dareste, are full of promise for the future. In general we can only say that the cause of each slight variation and of each monstrosity lies much more in the constitution of the organism, than in the nature of the surrounding conditions; though new and changed conditions certainly play an important part in exciting organic changes of many kinds.  
Through the means just specified, aided perhaps by others as yet undiscovered, man has been raised to his present state. But since he attained to the rank of manhood, he has diverged into distinct races, or as they may be more fitly called, sub-species. Some of these, such as the Negro and European, are so distinct that, if specimens had been brought to a naturalist without any further information, they would undoubtedly have been considered by him as good and true species. Nevertheless all the races agree in so many unimportant details of structure and in so many mental peculiarities that these can be accounted for only by inheritance from a common progenitor; and a progenitor thus characterised would probably deserve to rank as man.  
It must not be supposed that the divergence of each race from the other races, and of all from a common stock, can be traced back to any one pair of progenitors. On the contrary, at every stage in the process of modification, all the individuals which were in any way better fitted for their conditions of life, though in different degrees, would have survived in greater numbers than the less well-fitted. The process would have been like that followed by man, when he does not intentionally select particular individuals, but breeds from all the superior individuals, and neglects the inferior. He thus slowly but surely modifies his stock, and unconsciously forms a new strain. So with respect to modifications acquired independently of selection, and due to variations arising from the nature of the organism and the action of the surrounding conditions, or from changed habits of life, no single pair will have been modified much more than the other pairs inhabiting the same country, for all will have been continually blended through free intercrossing.”
(Charles Darwin, The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex, 1871)

FOR DARWIN, THE "NERVOUS SYSTEM" AND THE "MIND" HAVE BEEN A PRIMARY ENGINE OF EVOLUTION. HE ARGUES THAT A VAST ARRAY OF PHYSICAL AND MENTAL QUALITIES—FROM WEAPONS AND STRENGTH TO MUSICAL ORGANS AND BRILLIANT COLORS—HAVE BEEN GAINED THROUGH THE "EXERTION OF CHOICE, THE INFLUENCE OF LOVE AND JEALOUSY, AND THE APPRECIATION OF THE BEAUTIFUL." This is a revolutionary argument that places our psychology and instincts at the very center of the deterministic process that created us. 
“I am aware that the conclusions arrived at in this work will be denounced by some as highly irreligious; but he who denounces them is bound to shew why it is more irreligious to explain the origin of man as a distinct species by descent from some lower form, through the laws of variation and natural selection, than to explain the birth of the individual through the laws of ordinary reproduction. The birth both of the species and of the individual are equally parts of that grand sequence of events, which our minds refuse to accept as the result of blind chance. The understanding revolts at such a conclusion, whether or not we are able to believe that every slight variation of structure,—the union of each pair in marriage, the dissemination of each seed,—and other such events, have all been ordained for some special purpose.  
Sexual selection has been treated at great length in this work; for, as I have attempted to shew, it has played an important part in the history of the organic world. I am aware that much remains doubtful, but I have endeavoured to give a fair view of the whole case. In the lower divisions of the animal kingdom, sexual selection seems to have done nothing: such animals are often affixed for life to the same spot, or have the sexes combined in the same individual, or what is still more important, their perceptive and intellectual faculties are not sufficiently advanced to allow of the feelings of love and jealousy, or of the exertion of choice. When, however, we come to the Arthropoda and Vertebrata, even to the lowest classes in these two great Sub-Kingdoms, sexual selection has effected much.  
In the several great classes of the animal kingdom,—in mammals, birds, reptiles, fishes, insects, and even crustaceans,—the differences between the sexes follow nearly the same rules. The males are almost always the wooers; and they alone are armed with special weapons for fighting with their rivals. They are generally stronger and larger than the females, and are endowed with the requisite qualities of courage and pugnacity. They are provided, either exclusively or in a much higher degree than the females, with organs for vocal or instrumental music, and with odoriferous glands. They are ornamented with infinitely diversified appendages, and with the most brilliant or conspicuous colours, often arranged in elegant patterns, whilst the females are unadorned. When the sexes differ in more important structures, it is the male which is provided with special sense-organs for discovering the female, with locomotive organs for reaching her, and often with prehensile organs for holding her. These various structures for charming or securing the female are often developed in the male during only part of the year, namely the breeding-season. They have in many cases been more or less transferred to the females; and in the latter case they often appear in her as mere rudiments. They are lost or never gained by the males after emasculation. Generally they are not developed in the male during early youth, but appear a short time before the age for reproduction. Hence in most cases the young of both sexes resemble each other; and the female somewhat resembles her young offspring throughout life. In almost every great class a few anomalous cases occur, where there has been an almost complete transposition of the characters proper to the two sexes; the females assuming characters which properly belong to the males. This surprising uniformity in the laws regulating the differences between the sexes in so many and such widely separated classes, is intelligible if we admit the action of one common cause, namely sexual selection. […]
Bearing in mind these facts, and the marked results of man’s unconscious selection, when applied to domesticated animals and cultivated plants, it seems to me almost certain that if the individuals of one sex were during a long series of generations to prefer pairing with certain individuals of the other sex, characterised in some peculiar manner, the offspring would slowly but surely become modified in this same manner. I have not attempted to conceal that, excepting when the males are more numerous than the females, or when polygamy prevails, it is doubtful how the more attractive males succeed in leaving a large number of offspring to inherit their superiority in ornaments or other charms than the less attractive males; but I have shewn that this would probably follow from the females,—especially the more vigorous ones, which would be the first to breed,—preferring not only the more attractive but at the same time the more vigorous and victorious males.  
Although we have some positive evidence that birds appreciate bright and beautiful objects, as with the bower-birds of Australia, and although they certainly appreciate the power of song, yet I fully admit that it is astonishing that the females of many birds and some mammals should be endowed with sufficient taste to appreciate ornaments, which we have reason to attribute to sexual selection; and this is even more astonishing in the case of reptiles, fish, and insects. But we really know little about the minds of the lower animals. It cannot be supposed, for instance, that male birds of paradise or peacocks should take such pains in erecting, spreading, and vibrating their beautiful plumes before the females for no purpose. We should remember the fact given on excellent authority in a former chapter, that several peahens, when debarred from an admired male, remained widows during a whole season rather than pair with another bird. 
Nevertheless I know of no fact in natural history more wonderful than that the female Argus pheasant should appreciate the exquisite shading of the ball-and-socket ornaments and the elegant patterns on the wing-feather of the male. He who thinks that the male was created as he now exists must admit that the great plumes, which prevent the wings from being used for flight, and which are displayed during courtship and at no other time in a manner quite peculiar to this one species, were given to him as an ornament. If so, he must likewise admit that the female was created and endowed with the capacity of appreciating such ornaments. I differ only in the conviction that the male Argus pheasant acquired his beauty gradually, through the preference of the females during many generations for the more highly ornamented males; the aesthetic capacity of the females having been advanced through exercise or habit, just as our own taste is gradually improved. In the male through the fortunate chance of a few feathers being left unchanged, we can distinctly trace how simple spots with a little fulvous shading on one side may have been developed by small steps into the wonderful ball-and-socket ornaments; and it is probable that they were actually thus developed. 
Everyone who admits the principle of evolution, and yet feels great difficulty in admitting that female mammals, birds, reptiles, and fish, could have acquired the high taste implied by the beauty of the males, and which generally coincides with our own standard, should reflect that the nerve-cells of the brain in the highest as well as in the lowest members of the Vertebrate series, are derived from those of the common progenitor of this great Kingdom. For we can thus see how it has come to pass that certain mental faculties, in various and widely distinct groups of animals, have been developed in nearly the same manner and to nearly the same degree.  The reader who has taken the trouble to go through the several chapters devoted to sexual selection, will be able to judge how far the conclusions at which I have arrived are supported by sufficient evidence. If he accepts these conclusions he may, I think, safely extend them to mankind; but it would be superfluous here to repeat what I have so lately said on the manner in which sexual selection apparently has acted on man, both on the male and female side, causing the two sexes to differ in body and mind, and the several races to differ from each other in various characters, as well as from their ancient and lowly-organised progenitors.  He who admits the principle of sexual selection will be led to the remarkable conclusion that the nervous system not only regulates most of the existing functions of the body, but has indirectly influenced the progressive development of various bodily structures and of certain mental qualities. Courage, pugnacity, perseverance, strength and size of body, weapons of all kinds, musical organs, both vocal and instrumental, bright colours and ornamental appendages, have all been indirectly gained by the one sex or the other, through the exertion of choice, the influence of love and jealousy, and the appreciation of the beautiful in sound, colour or form; and these powers of the mind manifestly depend on the development of the brain.”
(Charles Darwin, The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex, 1871)

E2.2.B.1.2.b. FOR THE VAST MAJORITY OF HUMAN HISTORY, OUR PSYCHOLOGICAL TRAITS WERE SHAPED BY THE PRESSURES OF A FORAGER LIFESTYLE. THESE TRAITS, ENCODED IN OUR "GENES, OUR BRAINS, AND OUR INSTINCTS," PERSIST TODAY.
"TO UNDERSTAND OUR NATURE, HISTORY and psychology, we must get inside the heads of our hunter-gatherer ancestors. For nearly the entire history of our species, Sapiens lived as foragers. The past 200 years, during which ever increasing numbers of Sapiens have obtained their daily bread as urban labourers and o ce workers, and the preceding 10,000 years, during which most Sapiens lived as farmers and herders, are the blink of an eye compared to the tens of thousands of years during which our ancestors hunted and gathered.
The flourishing field of evolutionary psychology argues that many of our present-day social and psychological characteristics were shaped during this long pre-agricultural era. Even today, scholars in this field claim, our brains and minds are adapted to a life of hunting and gathering. Our eating habits, our conﬂicts and our sexuality are all the result of the way our hunter-gatherer minds interact with our current post-industrial environment, with its mega-cities, aeroplanes, telephones and computers. This environment gives us more material resources and longer lives than those enjoyed by any previous generation, but it often makes us feel alienated, depressed and pressured. To understand why, evolutionary psychologists argue, we need to delve into the hunter-gatherer world that shaped us, the world that we subconsciously still inhabit."
(Yuval Noah Harari, Sapiens, A Brief History of Humankind, 2011)

E2.2.B.1.2.c.  GENES ARE REPLICATORS CONTAINING NOT JUST LOW-LEVEL CHEMICAL INSTRUCTIONS, BUT ALSO THE HIGH-LEVEL INSTRUCTIONS FOR BUILDING AN ORGANISM AND FOR PROGRAMMING ITS INSTINCTUAL BEHAVIORS ("WHEN AND HOW IT SHOULD HUNT, EAT, MATE, FIGHT OR RUN AWAY"). 
“Typically, a gene is chemically ‘switched on’ in certain cells of the body, and then instructs those cells to manufacture the corresponding protein. For example, the hormone insulin, which controls blood sugar levels in vertebrates, is such a protein. The gene for manufacturing it is present in almost every cell of the body, but it is switched on only in certain specialized cells in the pancreas, and then only when it is needed. At the molecular level, this is all that any gene can program its cellular computer to do: manufacture a certain chemical. But genes succeed in being replicators because these low-level chemical programs add up, through layer upon layer of complex control and feedback, to sophisticated high-level instructions. Jointly, the insulin gene and the genes involved in switching it on and off amount to a complete program for the regulation of sugar in the  bloodstream.
Similarly, there are genes which contain specific instructions for how and when they and other genes are to be copied, and instructions for the manufacture of further organisms of the same species, including the molecular computers which will execute all these instructions again in the next generation. There are also instructions for how the organism as a whole should respond to stimuli — for instance, when and how it should hunt, eat,  mate, fight or run away. And so on.
A gene can function as a replicator only in certain environments. By analogy with an ecological ‘niche’ (the set of environments in which an organism can survive and reproduce), I shall also use the term niche for the set of all possible environments which a given replicator would cause to make copies of it. The niche of an insulin gene includes environments where the gene is located in the nucleus of a cell in the company of certain other genes, and the cell itself is appropriately located within a functioning organism, in a habitat suitable for sustaining the organism’s life and reproduction. But there are also other environments — such as biotechnology laboratories in which bacteria are genetically altered so as to incorporate the gene — which likewise copy the insulin gene. Those environments are also part of the gene’s niche, as are an infinity of other possible environments that are very  different from those in which the gene evolved.
Not everything that can be copied is a replicator. A replicator causes its environment to copy it: that is, it contributes causally to its own copying. (My terminology differs slightly from that used by Dawkins. Anything that is copied, for whatever reason, he calls a replicator. What I call a replicator he would call an active replicator.) What it means in general to contribute causally to something is an issue to which I shall return, but what I mean here is that the presence and specific physical form of the replicator makes a difference to whether copying takes place or not. In other words, the replicator is copied if it is present, but if it were replaced by almost any other object, even a rather similar one, that object would not be copied. For example, the insulin gene causes only one small step in the enormously complicated process of its own replication (that process being the whole life cycle of the organism). But the overwhelming majority of variants of that gene would not instruct cells to manufacture a chemical that could do the job of insulin. If the insulin genes in an individual organism’s cells were replaced by slightly different molecules, that organism would die (unless it were kept alive by other means), and would therefore fail to have offspring, and those molecules would not be copied. So whether copying takes place or not is exquisitely sensitive to the physical form of the insulin gene. The presence of the gene in us proper form and location makes a difference to whether copying takes place, which makes it a replicator, though there are countless  other causes contributing to its replication as well.”
(David Deutsch, The Fabric of Reality, 1996)

E2.2.B.1.2.d. AN UNDERSTANDING OF DARWINISM IS ESSENTIAL FOR ANY MODERN DISCUSSION OF HUMAN NATURE. Russell points out that Darwin's mechanism for evolution was an extension of the "biological economics" of Malthus. This shows how a theory of natural determinism was itself influenced by, and in turn profoundly influenced, social and political thought.
“The romantic form of revolt is very different from the rationalist form, though both are derived from the French Revolution and the philosophers who immediately preceded it. The romantic form is to be seen in Byron in an unphilosophical dress, but in Schopenhauer and Nietzsche it has learnt the language of philosophy. It tends to emphasize the will at the expense of the intellect, to be impatient of chains of reasoning, and to glorify violence of certain kinds. In practical politics it is important as an ally of nationalism. In tendency, if not always in fact, it is definitely hostile to what is commonly called reason, and tends to be anti-scientific. Some of its most extreme forms are to be found among Russian anarchists, but in Russia it was the rationalist form of revolt that finally prevailed. It was Germany, always more susceptible to romanticism than any other country, that provided a governmental outlet for the antirational philosophy of naked will.
So far, the philosophies that we have been considering have had an inspiration which was traditional, literary, or political. But there were two other sources of philosophical opinion, namely science and machine production. The second of these began its theoretical influence with Marx, and has grown gradually more important ever since. The first has been important since the seventeenth century, but took new forms during the nineteenth century.
What Galileo and Newton were to the seventeenth century, Darwin was to the nineteenth. Darwin's theory had two parts. On the one hand, there was the doctrine of evolution, which maintained that the different forms of life had developed gradually from a common ancestry. This doctrine, which is now generally accepted, was not new. It had been maintained by Lamarck and by Darwin’s grandfather Erasmus, not to mention Anaximander. Darwin supplied an immense mass of evidence for the doctrine, and in the second part of his theory believed himself to have discovered the cause of evolution. He thus gave to the doctrine a popularity and a scientific force which it had not previously possessed, but he by no means originated it.
The second part of Darwin’s theory was the struggle for existence and the survival of the fittest. All animals and plants multiply faster than nature can provide for them; therefore in each generation many perish before the age for reproducing themselves. What determines which will survive? To some extent, no doubt, sheer luck, but there is another cause of more importance. Animals and plants are, as a rule, not exactly like their parents, but differ slightly by excess or defect in every measurable characteristic. In a given environment, members of the same species compete for survival, and those best adapted to the environment have the best chance. Therefore among chance variations those that are favourable will preponderate among adults in each generation. Thus from age to age deer run more swiftly, cats stalk their prey more silently, and giraffes' necks become longer. Given enough time, this mechanism, so Darwin contended, could account for the whole long development from the protozoa to homo sapiens.
This part of Darwin's theory has been much disputed, and is regarded by most biologists as subject to many important qualifications. That, however, is not what most concerns the historian of nineteenth-century ideas. From the historical point of view, what is interesting is Darwin’s extension to the whole of life of the economics that characterized the philosophical radicals. The motive force of evolution, according to him, is a kind of biological economics in a world of free competition. It was Malthus's doctrine of population, extended to the world of animals and plants, that suggested to Darwin the struggle for existence and the survival of the fittest as the source of evolution.
Darwin himself was a liberal, but his theories had consequences in some degree inimical to traditional liberalism. The doctrine that all men are born equal, and that the differences between adults are due wholly to education, was incompatible with his emphasis on congenital differences between members of the same species. If, as Lamarck held, and as Darwin himself was willing to concede up to a point, acquired characteristics were inherited, this opposition to such views as those of Helvetius could have been somewhat softened; but it has appeared that only congenital characteristics are inherited, apart from certain not very important exceptions. Thus the congenital differences between men acquire fundamental importance.
There is a further consequence of the theory of evolution, which is independent of the particular mechanism suggested by Darwin. If men and animals have a common ancestry, and if men developed by such slow stages that there were creatures which we should not know whether to classify as human or not, the question arises : at what stage in evolution did men, or their semi-human ancestors, begin to be all equal? Would Tithecanthropus erectus, if he had been properly educated, have done work as good as Newton’s? Would the Piltdown Man have written Shakespeare’s poetry if there had been anybody to convict him of poaching? A resolute egalitarian who answers these questions in the afl5rmative will find himself forced to regard apes as the equals of human beings. And why stop with apes? I do not see how he is to resist an argument in favour of Votes for Oysters. An adherent of evolution should maintain that not only the doctrine of the equality of all men, but also that of the rights of man, must be condemned as unbiological, since it makes too emphatic a distinction between men and other animals.
There is, however, another aspect of liberalism which was greatly strengthened by the doctrine of evolution, namely the belief in progress. So long as the state of the world allowed optimism, evolution was welcomed by liberals, both on this ground and because it gave new arguments against orthodox theology. Marx himself, though his doctrines are in some respects pre-Darwinian, wished to dedicate his book to Darwin.
The prestige of biology caused men whose thinking was influenced by science to apply biological rather than mechanistic categories to the world. Everything was supposed to be evolving, and it was easy to imagine an immanent goal. In spite of Darwin, many men considered that evolution justified a belief in cosmic purpose. The conception of organism came to be thought the key to both scientific and philosophical explanations of natural laws, and the atomic thinking of the eighteenth century came to be regarded as out of date. This point of view has at last influenced even theoretical physics. In politics it leads naturally to emphasis upon the community as opposed to the individual. This is in harmony with the growing power of the State; also with nationalism, which can appeal to the Darwinian doctrine of survival of the fittest applied, not to individuals, but to nations. But here we are passing into the region of extra-scientific views suggested to a large public by scientific doctrines imperfectly understood.”
(Bertrand Russell, History Of Western Philosophy, 1945)

E2.2.B.1.2.e. "DARWINISM
[...] It is a way of explaining order through disorder and apparent meaning through chance." [...]
Some will see an invisible hand at work here. Some will see an invisible hand at work here. But it seems more like a paradoxical lottery where the winners hit the jackpot. If they have a metaphysics, how can they not believe in God? It elevates the lottery to the level of a religion. Fortunately, Darwinism dissuades us from this common superstition of winners. Nature never chooses; individuals simply pass on their genes, more or less effectively and abundantly, according to their abilities. This creates a kind of selection through death and reproduction, which is nothing more than a game of chance (of genes and mutations) regulated by necessity (the struggle for life and the elimination of the least fit). Darwinism leads to atheism: "Nature plays dice; therefore, it is not God"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E2.2.B.1.2.f. KROPOTKIN PROPOSES AN ALTERNATIVE DETERMINISTIC MECHANISM FOR EVOLUTION. He argues that new species are formed not primarily through a head-to-head "competition" for resources, but through "migration... forming new habits... and taking to new sorts of food" as a way to avoid competition. This is still a naturalistic and deterministic process, but one with profoundly different implications.
“If
we start from the supposition that a given area is stocked with animals to its fullest capacity, and that a keen competition for
the sheer means of existence is consequently going on between all the inhabitants -- each animal being compelled to fight against
all its congeners in order to get its daily food -- then the appearance of a new and successful variety would certainly mean in many cases (though not always) the appearance of individuals which are enabled to seize more than their fair share of the means of existence; and the result would be that those
individuals would starve both the parental form which does not possess the new variation and the intermediate forms which do not possess it in the same degree. It may be that at the outset, Darwin understood the appearance of new varieties under this aspect; at least, the frequent use of the word "extermination" conveys such an impression. But both he and Wallace knew Nature too well not to perceive that this is by no means the only
possible and necessary course of affairs.
    If the physical and the biological conditions of a given
area, the extension of the area occupied by a given species, and the habits of all the members of the latter remained unchanged --then the sudden appearance of a new variety might mean the starving out and the extermination of all the individuals which were not endowed in a sufficient degree with the new feature by which the new variety is characterized. But such a combination of conditions is precisely what we do not see in Nature. Each species is continually tending to enlarge its abode; migration to new abodes is the rule with the slow snail, as with the swift
bird; physical changes are continually going on in every given area; and new varieties among animals consist in an immense number of cases-perhaps in the majority -- not in the growth of new weapons for snatching the food from the mouth of its congeners -- food is only one out of a hundred of various conditions of existence -- but, as Wallace himself shows in a charming paragraph on the "divergence of characters" (Darwinism, p. 107), in forming new habits, moving to new abodes, and taking to new sorts of food. In all such cases there will be no extermination, even no competition -- the new adaptation being a relief from competition, if it ever existed; and yet there will
be, after a time, an absence of intermediate links, in
consequence of a mere survival of those which are best fitted for the new conditions -- as surely as under the hypothesis of extermination of the parental form. It hardly need be added that
if we admit, with Spencer, all the Lamarckians, and Darwin himself, the modifying influence of the surroundings upon the species, there remains still less necessity for the extermination
of the intermediate forms.
  The importance of migration and of the consequent isolation
of groups of animals, for the origin of new varieties and
ultimately of new species, which was indicated by Moritz Wagner, was fully recognized by Darwin himself. Consequent researches have only accentuated the importance of this factor, and they have shown how the largeness of the area occupied by a given species -- which Darwin considered with full reason so important for the appearance of new varieties -- can be combined with the isolation of parts of the species, in consequence of local geological changes, or of local barriers. It would be impossible
to enter here into the discussion of this wide question, but a
few remarks will do to illustrate the combined action of these agencies. It is known that portions of a given species will often take to a new sort of food. The squirrels, for instance, when
there is a scarcity of cones in the larch forests, remove to the
fir-tree forests, and this change of food has certain well-known physiological effects on the squirrels. If this change of habits does not last -- if next year the cones are again plentiful in
the dark larch woods -- no new variety of squirrels will
evidently arise from this cause. But if part of the wide area occupied by the squirrels begins to have its physical characters altered -- in consequence of, let us say, a milder climate or desiccation, which both bring about an increase of the pine forests in proportion to the larch woods -- and if some other conditions concur to induce the squirrels to dwell on the
outskirts of the desiccating region -- we shall have then a new variety, i.e. an incipient new species of squirrels, without
there having been anything that would deserve the name of extermination among the squirrels. A larger proportion of squirrels of the new, better adapted variety would survive every year, and the intermediate links would die in the course of time, without having been starved out by Malthusian competitors. This is exactly what we see going on during the great physical changes which are accomplished over large areas in Central Asia, owing to the desiccation which is going on there since the glacial period.
    To take another example, it has been proved by geologists that the present wild horse (Equus Przewalski) has slowly been evolved during the later parts of the Tertiary and the Quaternary period, but that during this succession of ages its ancestors
were not confined to some given, limited area of the globe. They wandered over both the Old and New World, returning, in all probability, after a time to the pastures which they had, in the course of their migrations, formerly left.(36*) Consequently, if
we do not find now, in Asia, all the intermediate links between the present wild horse and its Asiatic Post-Tertiary ancestors, this does not mean at all that the intermediate links have been exterminated. No such extermination has ever taken place. No exceptional mortality may even have occurred among the ancestral species: the individuals which belonged to intermediate varieties and species have died in the usual course of events -- often amidst plentiful food, and their remains were buried all over the globe.
    In short, if we carefully consider this matter, and,
carefully re-read what Darwin himself wrote upon this subject, we see that if the word "extermination" be used at all in connection with transitional varieties, it must be used in its metaphoric sense. As to "competition," this expression, too, is continually used by Darwin (see, for instance, the paragraph "On Extinction") as an image, or as a way-of-speaking, rather than with the intention of conveying the idea of a real competition between two portions of the same species for the means of existence. At any rate, the absence of intermediate forms is no argument in favour of it.
    In reality, the chief argument in favour of a keen
competition for the means of existence continually going on within every animal species is -- to use Professor Geddes' expression -- the "arithmetical argument" borrowed from Malthus.
    But this argument does not prove it at all. We might as well take a number of villages in South-East Russia, the inhabitants of which enjoy plenty of food, but have no sanitary accommodation of any kind; and seeing that for the last eighty years the
birth-rate was sixty in the thousand, while the population is now what it was eighty years ago, we might conclude that there has been a terrible competition between the inhabitants. But the
truth is that from year to year the population remained
stationary, for the simple reason that one-third of the new-born
died before reaching their sixth month of life; one-half died
within the next four years, and out of each hundred born, only seventeen or so reached the age of twenty. The new-comers went away before having grown to be competitors. It is evident that if such is the case with men, it is still more the case with
animals. In the feathered world the destruction of the eggs goes
on on such a tremendous scale that eggs are the chief food of several species in the early summer; not to, say a word of the storms, the inundations which destroy nests by the million in America, and the sudden changes of weather which are fatal to the young mammals. Each storm, each inundation, each visit of a rat
to a bird's nest, each sudden change of temperature, take away those competitors which appear so terrible in theory.”
(Peter Kropotkin, Mutual Aid - A Factor of Evolution, 1902)

E2.2.B.1.3. The biological machinery (The Brain & Body)

E2.2.B.1.3.a. DAMASIO DESCRIBES A SYSTEM OF DRIVES AND INSTINCTS THAT ARE "INNATE" AND EVOLUTIONARILY STABLE. These forces operate automatically to ensure our survival, either by directly generating behavior or by creating physiological states (emotions, feelings) that lead to behavior.
“To avoid destruction by predators or adverse environmental conditions, there are neural circuits for drives and instincts that cause, for example, fight or flight behaviors. Still other circuits control drives and instincts that help ensure the continua­tion of the individual's genes (through sexual behavior or care of kin). Numerous other specific circuits and drives might be mentioned, among them those related to the organism's seeking an ideal amount of light or darkness, heat or coolness, according to time of day or ambient temperature. 
In general, drives and instincts operate either by generating a particular behavior directly or by inducing physiological states that lead individuals to behave in a particular way, mindlessly or not. Virtually all the behaviors ensuing from drives and instincts contrib­ute to survival either directly, by performing a life-saving action, or indirectly, by propitiating conditions advantageous to survival or reducing the influence of potentially harmful conditions. Emotions and feelings, which are central to the view of rationality I am propos­ing, are a powerful manifestation of drives and instincts, part and parcel of their workings. 
It would not be advantageous to allow the dispositions controlling basic biological processes to change much. A significant change would bring with it the risk of major malfunction in varied organ systems and the prospect of a disease state or even death. This is not to deny that we can willfully influence the behaviors that usually are driven by those innate neural patterns. We can hold our breath as we swim underwater, for a stretch; we can decide to go on a prolonged fast; we can influence our heart rate, easily, and even alter our systemic blood pressure, not so easily. But in none of these instances is there evidence that dispositions change. What changes is one component or another of the ensuing behavioral pattern, which we succeed in inhibiting in a number of ways, be it through muscular force (holding our breath by contracting the upper airway and rib cage) or sheer willpower. Nor is it to deny that the innate patterns can be modulated in their firing-made more likely to fire or not-by neural signals from other brain regions, or by chemical signals, such as hormones and neuropeptides, brought to them in the bloodstream or through axons. In fact, many neurons throughout the brain have receptors for hormones, such as those from the reproductive, adre­nal, and thyroid glands. Both early development and regular opera­tion of those circuitries are influenced by such signaling. 
Some of the basic regulatory mechanisms operate at covert level and are never directly knowable to the individual inside whom they operate. You do not know the state of the various circulating hor­mones, potassium ions, or the number of red blood cells in your body unless you assay it. But slightly more complex regulatory mecha­nisms, involving overt behaviors, let you know about their existence, indirectly, when they drive you to perform (or not) in a particular way. These are called instincts.”
(Antonio Damasio, Descartes Error, 1994)

DAMASIO DESCRIBES INTERNAL CHEMICALS IN THE HUMAN BODY AS "CONCEALED AND UNDETAINABLE FORCES THAT MAY OVERPOWER ONE'S WILL." 
“TRISTAN, ISOLDE, AND THE LOVE POTI ON
Remember the story of Tristan and Isolde? The plot revolves around a transformation in the relation between the two protagonists. Isolde asks her maid, Brangane, to prepare a death potion, but instead Brangane prepares a "love potion," which both Tristan and Isolde drink, not knowing what it is supposed to produce. The mysterious drink unleashes the deepest possible passion in them, and draws them to each other in a rapture that nothing can break-not even the fact that each of them on their own is wretchedly betraying the benevolent King Mark. Richard Wagner captured the force of the lovers' bond in perhaps the most exalted and desperate love passages in the history of music, in his opera Tristan und Isolde. One has to wonder why he was attracted to this story, and why millions have, for more than a century, communed with his rendition of it. 
The answer to the first question is that the composition celebrated a very real and similar passion in Wagner's life. Wagner and Mathilde Wesendonk had fallen in love, entirely against their soundest judg­ment, when one considers that she was the wife of his generous benefactor and that he was already married. Wagner did have a sense for the concealed and undetainable forces that may overpower one's will and which, for lack of more suitable explanations, have been attributed to magic or to destiny. 
The answer to the second question is more tantalizing. There are indeed potions in our own bodies and brains, capable of forcing on us behaviors that we may or may not be unable to suppress by strong resolution. A key example is the chemical substance oxytocin. 5 In the case of mammals, humans included, it is manufactured both in the brain (in the supraoptic and parvoventral nuclei of the hypothal amus} and in the body (in the ovary or in the testes). It can be released by the brain in order to participate, for instance, directly or by interposed hormones, in the regulation of metabolism; or it can be released by the body, during childbirth, sexual stimulation of genitals or nipples, or orgasm, when it acts not only on the body itself (by relaxing muscles during childbirth, for instance), but also in the brain. What it can do there is nothing short of the effect of legendary elixirs. In general, it influences a whole range of grooming, locomo­tion, sexual, and maternal behaviors. More important, for my story, it facilitates social interactions and induces bonding between mating partners. A good example comes from Thomas Insel's studies on the prairie vole, a rodent with gorgeous fur. After their lightning court­ship and a first day of repeated and intense copulation, the male and female remain inseparable till death does them part. The male actually acquires a sour disposition toward any creature other than his beloved and is usually quite helpful around the nest. Such bonding is not only a charming adaptation but a most advantageous one, in many species, since it keeps together those who must rear the offspring, and it also helps with other aspects of social organization. Humans certainly use many of oxytocin's effects all the time, al­though they have learned to avoid, under certain circumstances, those effects which may or may not be ultimately good. Remember that the love potion was not good for Wagner's Tristan and Isolde. Three hours later, not counting the intermissions, they die a deso­late death. 
To the neurobiology of sex, about which a lot is currently known, we can now add the beginnings of the neurobiology of attachment, and, armed with both, throw a bit more light on that complex set of mental states and behaviors we call love.”
(Antonio Damasio, Descartes Error, 1994)

BY ARGUING AGAINST THE TRADITIONAL CARTESIAN SEPARATION OF "PURE REASON" FROM THE "ANIMAL SPIRITS" OF THE BODY, DAMASIO MAKES A POWERFUL CASE FOR A NATURAL DETERMINISM THAT IS FAR MORE PERVASIVE THAN WE MIGHT THINK. 
“The terms reasoning and deciding usually imply that the decider has knowledge (a) about the situation which calls for a decision, (b) about different options of action (responses), and (c) about consequences of each of those options (outcomes) immediately and at future epochs. Knowledge, which exists in memory under dispo­sitional representation form, can be made accessible to con­sciousness in both nonlanguage and language versions, virtually simultaneously. 
The terms reasoning and deciding also usually imply that the decider possesses some logical strategy for producing valid in­ferences on the basis of which an appropriate response option is selected, and that the support processes required for reasoning are in place. Among the latter, attention and working memory are usu­ally mentioned, but not a whisper is ever heard about emotion or feeling, and next to nothing is ever heard about the mechanism by which a diverse repertoire of options is generated for selection. 
From the above accounts of reasoning and deciding, it appears that not all biological processes which culminate in a response selection belong in the scope of reasoning and deciding as outlined above. The following illustrations help make the point. 
For the first illustration, consider what happens when the level of your blood sugar drops and neurons in your hypothalamus detect the decline. There is a situation calling for action; there is physiological "know-how" as inscribed in the dispositional representations of the hypothalamus; and, inscribed in a neural circuit, there is a "strategy" to select a response consisting of instituting a hunger state which will eventually drive you to eat. But the process involves no overt knowledge, no explicit display of options and consequences, and no conscious mechanism of inference, up to the point when you be­come aware of being hungry. 
For my second illustration, consider what happens when we move away briskly to avoid a falling object. There is a situation which calls for prompt action (e.g., falling object); there are options for action  (to duck or not) and each has a different consequence. However, in order to select the response, we use neither conscious (explicit) knowledge nor a conscious reasoning strategy. The requisite knowl­edge was once conscious, when we first learned that falling objects may hurt us and that avoiding them or stopping them is better than being hit. But experience with such scenarios as we grew up made our brains solidly pair the provoking stimulus with the most advan­tageous response. The "strategy" for response selection now consists of activating the strong link between stimulus and response, such that the implementation of the response comes automatically and rapidly, without effort or deliberation, although one can willfully try to preempt it. 
The third illustration pulls together a variety of examples clustered in two groups. One group includes choosing a career; deciding whom to marry or befriend; deciding whether or not to fly when there ate impending thunderstorms; deciding whom to vote for or how to invest one's savings; deciding whether to forgive a person who has done you wrong or, if you happen to be a state governor, commute the sentence of the convict now on death row. For most individuals, the other group of examples would also include the reasoning that goes with building a new engine, or designing a building, or solving a mathematical problem, composing a musical piece or writing a book, or judging whether a proposed new law accords with or violates the spirit or letter of a constitutional amendment. 
All examples in the third illustration rely on the supposedly clear process of deriving logical consequences from assumed premises, the business of making reliable inferences which, unencumbered by passion, allows us to choose the best possible option, leading to the best possible outcome, given the worst possible problem. It is thus not difficult to separate the third illustration from the former two. In all examples of the third illustration, the stimulus situations have more parts to them; the response options are more numerous; their respective consequences have more ramifications and those conse­quences are often different, immediately and in the future, thus posing conflicts between possible advantages and disadvantages over varied time frames. Complexity and uncertainty loom so large that reliable predictions are not easy to come by. Just as importantly, a great number of those myriad options and outcomes must appear in consciousness for a management strategy to be engaged. To make a final response selection you must apply reasoning and that involves holding a great many facts in your mind, tallying results of hypotheti­cal actions and matching them against intermediate and ultimate goals, all of which requires a method, some type of game plan among several you rehearsed on countless occasions in the past. 
Based on the blatant differences between the third illustration and the former two, it is not surprising to discover that people generally assume that one and the other have entirely unrelated mechanisms, mentally and neurally, so separate indeed that Des­cartes placed one outside the body, as a hallmark of the human spirit, while the other remained inside, the hallmark of animal spirits; so separate that one stands for clarity of thought, deductive compe­tence, algorithmicity, while the other connotes murkiness and the less disciplined life of the passions. 
But if the nature of the examples in the third illustration differs markedly from the first two, it is also true that the examples within it are not all of the same kind. Granted that all require reason in the most common use of the term, some are closer to the person and social environment of the decider than others. Deciding on whom you will love or forgive, making career choices, or choosing an investment are in the immediate personal and social domain; solving Fermat's last theorem or ruling on the constitutionality of a piece oflegislation are more removed from the personal core (though one can imagine exceptions). The former align themselves readily with the notions of rationality and practical reason; the latter fall more easily in the general sense of reason, theoretical reason, and even pure reason. 
The intriguing notion is that in spite of the manifest differences among the examples and in spite of their apparent clustering by do­main and level of complexity, there may well be a common thread running through all of them in the form of a shared neurobiological core.”
(Antonio Damasio, Descartes Error, 1994)

BY STATING THAT THE MIND'S FIRST AND MOST FUNDAMENTAL REPRESENTATIONS HAD TO BE OF THE "BODY PROPER IN OPERATION," DAMASIO MAKES A POWERFUL CASE THAT OUR CONSCIOUSNESS IS NOT A FREE-FLOATING ENTITY BUT IS INEXTRICABLY LINKED TO AND DETERMINED BY OUR PHYSICAL, BIOLOGICAL NATURE. 
“The primacy of the body as a theme applies to evolution: from simple to complex, for millions of years, brains have been first about the organism that owns them. To a lesser extent it applies also to the development of each of us as individuals so that at our beginning, there were first representations of the body proper, and only later were there representations related to the outside world; and to an even smaller but not negligible extent, to the now, as we construct the mind of the moment. 
Making mind arise out of an organism rather than out of a disem­bodied brain is compatible with a number of assumptions. 
First, when brains complex enough to generate not just motor responses (actions) but also mental responses (images in the mind) were selected in evolution, it was probably because those mental responses enhanced organism survival by one or all of the following means: a greater appreciation of external circumstances (for in­stance, perceiving more details about an object, locating it more accurately in space, and so on); a refinement of motor responses (hitting a target with greater precision); and a prediction of future consequences by way of imagining scenarios and planning actions conducive to achieving the best imagined scenarios. 
Second, since minded survival was aimed at the survival of the whole organism, the primordial representations of the minding brain had to concern the body proper, in terms of its structure and func­tional states, including the external and internal actions with which the organism responded to the environment. It would not have been possible to regulate and protect the organism without representing its anatomy and physiology in both basic and current detail. 
Developing a mind, which really means developing representations of which one can be made conscious as images, gave organisms a new way to adapt to circumstances of the environment that could not have been foreseen in the genome. The basis for that adaptability probably began by constructing images of the body proper in operation, namely images of the body as it responded to the environment externally (say, using a limb) and internally (regulating the state of viscera).
If ensuring survival of the body proper is what the brain first evolved for, then, when minded brains appeared, they began by minding the body. And to ensure body survival as effectively as possible, nature, I suggest, stumbled on a highly effective solution: representing the outside world in terms of the modifications it causes in the body proper, that is, representing the environment by modifying the primordial representations of the body proper whenever an interaction between organism and environment takes place.”
(Antonio Damasio, Descartes Error, 1994)

DAMASIO ARGUES THAT THE "BIOLOGICALLY PRESCRIBED SENSE OF PAIN" AND "PLEASURE" ARE THE FUNDAMENTAL "LEVERS" THAT GUIDE ALL LIFE, FROM BASIC INSTINCTS TO OUR MOST COMPLEX CULTURAL STRATEGIES. These are presented as innate, genetically instructed dispositions.
“In some species, nonhuman and even non primate, in which memory, reasoning, and creativity are limited, there are, nonetheless, man­ifestations of complex social behavior whose neural control must be innate. Insects-ants and bees in particular-offer dramatic exam­ples of social cooperation that might easily put to blame the United Nations General Assembly, most any day. Closer to home, mammals abound in such manifestations, and the behaviors of wolves, dol­phins, and vampire bats, among other species, even suggest an ethical structure. It is apparent that humans possess some of those same innate mechanisms, and that such mechanisms are the likely basis for some ethical structures used by humans. The most elabo­rate social conventions and ethical structures by which we live, however, must have arisen culturally and been transmitted likewise. If that is the case, one may wonder, what was the trigger for the cultural development of such strategies? It is likely that they evolved as a means to cope with the suffering experienced by individuals whose capacity to remember the past and anticipate the future had attained a remarkable development. In other words, the strategies evolved in individuals able to realize that their survival was threat­ened or that the quality of their post-survival life could be bettered. Such strategies could have evolved only in the few species whose brains were structured to permit the following: First, a large capacity to memorize categories of objects and events, and to memorize unique objects and events, that is, to establish dispositional repre­sentations of entities and events at the level of categories and at unique level. Second, a large capacity for manipulating the compo­nents of those memorized representations and fashioning new crea­tions by means of novel combinations. The most immediately useful variety of those creations consisted of imagined scenarios, the antic­ipation of outcomes of actions, the formulation of future plans, and the design of new goals that can enhance survival. Third, a large capacity to memorize the new creations described above, that is, the anticipated outcomes, the new plans, and the new goals. I call those memorized creations "memories of the future."
If enhanced knowledge of the experienced past and the antici­pated future was the reason why social strategies had to be created to cope with suffering, we still must explain why suffering arose in the first place. And for that we must consider the biologically prescribed sense of pain as well as its opposite, pleasure. The curious thing is, of course, that the biological mechanisms behind what we now call pain and pleasure were also an important reason why the innate instruments of survival were selected and combined the way they were, in evolution, when there was no individual suffering or reason. This may simply mean that the same simple device, applied to systems with very different orders of complexity and in different circumstances, leads to different but related results. The immune system, the hypothalamus, the ventromedial frontal cortices, and the Bill of Rights have the same root cause. 
Pain and pleasure are the levers the organism requires for instinc­tual and acquired strategies to operate efficiently. In all probability they were also the levers that controlled the development of so­cial decision-making strategies. When many individuals, in social groups, experienced the painful consequences of psychological, so­cial, and natural phenomena, it was possible to develop intellectual and cultural strategies for coping with the experience of pain and perhaps reducing it. 
Pain and pleasure occur when we become conscious of body-state profiles that clearly deviate from the base range. The configuration of stimuli and of brain-activity patterns perceived as pain or pleasure are set a priori in the brain structure. They occur because circuits fire in a particular way, and those circuits exist because they were instructed genetically to form themselves in a particular way. Al­though our reactions to pain and pleasure can be modified by educa­tion, they are a prime example of mental phenomena that depend on the activation of innate dispositions.”
(Antonio Damasio, Descartes Error, 1994)

E2.2.B.1.3.b. I_Myrian Wares Lede_Brain-Energy for Quanta Magazine

“HOW MUCH ENERGY DOES IT TAKE TO THINK?

Studies of neural metabolism reveal our brain’s effort to keep us alive and the evolutionary constraints that sculpted our most complex organ. […]

**The Cost of a Predictive Engine**
The human brain is incredibly expensive to run. At roughly 2% of body weight, the organ gorges on 20% of our body’s energetic resources. “It’s hugely metabolically demanding,” Jamadar said. For infants, that number is closer to 50%. […]
A brain performing active tasks consumes just 5% more energy compared to a resting brain. When we are engaged in an effortful, goal-directed task, such as studying a bus schedule in a new city, neuronal firing rates increase in the relevant brain regions or networks — in that example, visual and language processing regions. This accounts for that extra 5%; the remaining 95% goes to the brain’s base metabolic load. […]
Maintaining what are known as membrane potentials — stable voltages across a neuron’s membrane that ensure that the cell is primed to fire when called upon — is known to account for at least half of the brain’s total energy budget. […]
Most of the brain’s base metabolic load goes toward prediction. To achieve its homeostatic goals, the brain needs to always be planning for what comes next — building a sophisticated model of the environment and how changes might affect the body’s biological systems. Prediction, rather than reaction, […]allows the brain to dole out resources to the body efficiently.

**The Brain’s Evolutionary Constraints**

A 5% increased energy demand during active thought may not sound like much, but in the context of the entire body and the energy-hungry brain, it can add up. And when you consider the strict energetic constraints our ancestors had to deal with, weariness at the end of a taxing day suddenly makes a lot more sense.

“The reason you are fatigued, just like you are fatigued after physical activity, isn’t because you don’t have the calories to pay for it,” said [Zahid Padamsey(opens a new tab)](https://vivo.weill.cornell.edu/display/cwid-zap4003), a neuroscientist at Weill Cornell Medicine-Qatar, who was not involved in the new research. “It is because we have evolved to be very stingy systems. … We evolved in energy-poor environments, so we hate exerting energy.”

The modern world, in which calories are relatively abundant for many people, contrasts starkly with the conditions of scarcity that *Homo sapiens* evolved in. That 5% increase in burn rate, over 20 days of persistent, active, task-related focus, can amount to a whole day’s worth of cognitive energy. If food is hard to come by, it could mean the difference between life and death.

“This can be substantial over time if you don’t cap the burn rate, so I think it is largely a relic of our evolutionary heritage,” Padamsey said. In fact, the brain has built-in systems to prevent overexertion. “You’re going to activate fatigue mechanisms that prevent further burn rates,” he said. […]”
(Conor Feehly, Quanta Magazine, June 4, 2025)

Read the full article: https://www.quantamagazine.org/how-much-energy-does-it-take-to-think-20250604/?mc_cid=1c51370671&mc_eid=de38e9b771

E2.2.B.1.3.c. CHOMSKY'S ARGUMENT GOES BEYOND SIMPLE GENETICS TO PROBE THE VERY NATURE OF EVOLUTION. HE ARGUES FOR THE EXISTENCE OF DEEP, AS-YET-UNKNOWN "LAWS" THAT "VASTLY RESTRICT THE REALIZABLE POSSIBILITIES" OF BIOLOGICAL FORMS. 
“What seems to me important in ethology is its attempt to explore the innate properties that determine how knowledge is acquired and the character of this knowledge. Returning to this theme, we must consider a further question: how did the human mind come to acquire the innate structure that we are led to attribute to it? Not too surprisingly, Lorenz takes the position that this is simply a matter of natural selection. Peirce offers a rather different speculation, arguing that “nature fecundates the mind of man with ideas which, when these ideas grow up, will resemble their father, Nature.” Man is “provided with certain natural beliefs that are true” because “certain uniformities . . . prevail throughout the universe, and the reasoning mind is [it]self a product of this universe. These same laws are thus, by logical necessity, incorporated in his own being.” Here, it seems clear that Peirce’s argument is entirely without force and that it offers little improvement over the preestablished harmony that it was presumably intended to replace. The fact that the mind is a product of natural laws does not imply that it is equipped to understand these laws or to arrive at them by “abduction.” There would be no difﬁculty in designing a device (say, programing a computer) that is a product of natural law, but that, given data, will arrive at any arbitrary absurd theory to “explain” these data.
In fact, the processes by which the human mind achieved its present stage of complexity and its particular form of innate organization are a total mystery, as much so as the analogous questions about the physical or mental organization of any other complex organism. It is perfectly safe to attribute this development to “natural selection,” so long as we realize that there is no substance to this assertion, that it amounts to nothing more than a belief that there is some naturalistic explanation for these phenomena. The problem of accounting for evolutionary development is, in some ways, rather like that of explaining successful abduction. The laws that determine possible successful mutation and the nature of complex organisms are as unknown as the laws that determine the choice of hypotheses. With no knowledge of the laws that determine the organization and structure of complex biological systems, it is just as senseless to ask what the “probability” is for the human mind to have reached its present state as it is to inquire into the “probability” that a particular physical theory will be devised. And, as we have noted, it is idle to speculate about laws of learning until we have some indication of what kind of knowledge is attainable – in the case of language, some indication of the constraints on the set of potential grammars.
In studying the evolution of mind, we cannot guess to what extent there are physically possible alternatives to, say, transformational generative grammar, for an organism meeting certain other physical conditions characteristic of humans. Conceivably, there are none – or very few – in which case talk about evolution of the language capacity is beside the point. The vacuity of such speculation, however, has no bearing one way or another on those aspects of the problem of mind that can be sensibly pursued. It seems to me that these aspects are, for the moment, the problems illustrated in the case of language by the study of the nature, the use, and the acquisition of linguistic competence.”
(Noam Chomsky, Language and Mind, 1968)

CHOMSKY DEFENDS HIS THEORY OF AN "INNATE REPRESENTATION OF UNIVERSAL GRAMMAR." HE EXPLICITLY FRAMES THIS AS A MATTER OF "GENETIC ENDOWMENT," THAT SHAPES OUR COGNITIVE ABILITIES AND BEHAVIOR.
“Consider the alternative approach that Putnam suggests to the problem of language acquisition. He argues that instead of postulating an innate schematism one should attempt to account for this achievement in terms of “general multipurpose learning strategies.” It is these that must be innate, not general conditions on the form of the knowledge that is acquired. Evidently, this is an empirical issue. It would be sheer dogmatism to assert of either of these proposals (or of some particular combination of them) that it must be correct. Putnam is convinced, on what grounds he does not say, that the innate basis for the acquisition of language must be identical with that for acquiring any other form of knowledge, that there is nothing “special” about the acquisition of language. A nondogmatic approach to this problem can be pursued, through the investigation of speciﬁc areas of human competence, such as language, followed by the attempt to devise a hypothesis that will account for the development of such competence. If we discover that the same “learning strategies” are involved in a variety of cases, and that these sufﬁce to account for the acquired competence, then we will have good reason to believe that Putnam’s empirical hypothesis is correct. If, on the other hand, we discover that different innate systems (whether involving schemata or heuristics) have to be postulated, then we will have good reason to believe that an adequate theory of mind will incorporate separate “faculties,” each with unique or partially unique properties. I cannot see how one can resolutely insist on one or the other conclusion in the light of the evidence now available to us. But one thing is quite clear: Putnam has no justiﬁcation for his ﬁnal conclusion, that “invoking ‘Innateness’ only postpones the problem of learning; it does not solve it.”12 Invoking an innate representation of universal grammar does solve the problem of learning (at least partially), in this case, if in fact it is true that this is the basis (or part of the basis) for language acquisition, as it well may be. If, on the other hand, there exist general learning strategies that account for the acquisition of grammatical knowledge, then postulation of an innate representation of universal grammar will not “postpone” the problem of learning, but will rather offer an incorrect solution to this problem. The issue is an empirical one of truth or falsity, not a methodological one of stages of investigation. At the moment, the only concrete proposal that is at all plausible, in my opinion, is the one sketched above. When some “general learning strategy” is suggested, we can look into the relative adequacy of these alternatives, on empirical grounds.”
(Noam Chomsky, Language and Mind, 1968)

CHOMSKY’S CORE ARGUMENT IS THAT BOTH INDIVIDUAL DEVELOPMENT (LIKE LANGUAGE ACQUISITION) AND THE EVOLUTION OF SPECIES ARE NOT INFINITELY PLASTIC PROCESSES. THEY ARE POWERFULLY CONSTRAINED AND CHANNELED BY INNATE, STRUCTURAL "DEVELOPMENTAL CONSTRAINTS." 
“Two basic problems arise when we consider the origins of the faculty of language and its role in the sudden emergence of the human intellectual capacity: ﬁrst, the core semantics of minimal meaning-bearing elements, including the simplest of them; and second, the principles that allow unbounded combinations of symbols, hierarchically organized, which provide the means for use of language in its many aspects. By the same token, the core theory of language – universal grammar, UG – must provide, ﬁrst, a structured inventory of possible lexical items that are related to or perhaps identical with the concepts that are the elements of the “cognoscitive powers” and second, means to construct from these lexical items the inﬁnite variety of internal structures that enter into thought, interpretation, planning, and other human mental acts, and are sometimes externalized, a secondary process if the speculations just reviewed turn out to be correct. On the ﬁrst problem, the apparently human-speciﬁc conceptual–lexical apparatus, there is insightful work on relational notions linked to syntactic structures and on the partially mind-internal objects that appear to play a critical role (events, propositions, etc.). But there is little beyond descriptive remarks on the core referential apparatus that is used to talk about the world. The second problem has been central to linguistic research for a half-century, with a long history before in different terms.
The biolinguistic approach adopted from the outset the point of view that cognitive neuroscientist R. G. Gallistel calls “the norm in neuroscience” today, the “modular view of learning”: the conclusion that in all animals, learning is based on specialized mechanisms, “instincts to learn” in speciﬁc ways. He suggests that we think of these mechanisms as “organs within the brain,” achieving states in which they perform speciﬁc kinds of computation. Apart from “extremely hostile environments,” they change states under the triggering and shaping effect of external factors, more or less reﬂexively, and in accordance with internal design. That is the “process of learning,” though “growth” might be a more appropriate term, avoiding misleading connotations of the term “learning.” One might relate these ideas to Gallistel’s encyclopedic work on organization of motion, based on “structural constraints” that set “limits on the kinds of solutions an animal will come up with in a learning situation.”
The modular view of learning of course does not entail that the components of the module are unique to it: at some level, everyone assumes that they are not – the cell, for example. The question of the level of organization at which unique properties emerge remains a basic question from a biological point of view, as it was at the 1974 conference. Gallistel’s observations recall the concept of “canalization” introduced into evolutionary and developmental biology by C. H. Waddington sixty years ago, referring to processes “adjusted so as to bring about one deﬁnite end result regardless of minor variations in conditions during the course of the reaction,” thus ensuring “the production of the normal, that is optimal type in the face of the unavoidable hazards of existence.” That seems to be a fair description of the growth of language in the individual. A core problem of the study of the faculty of language is to discover the mechanisms that limit outcomes to “optimal types.”
It has been recognized since the origins of modern biology that organism-external developmental constraints and architectural-structural principles enter not only into the growth of organisms but also their evolution. In a classic contemporary paper, Maynard Smith and associates trace the post-Darwinian version back to Thomas Huxley, who was struck by the fact that there appear to be “predetermined lines of modiﬁcation” that lead natural selection to “produce varieties of a limited number and kind” for every species. They review a variety of such constraints in the organic world and describe how “limitations on phenotypic variability” are “caused by the structure, character, composition, or dynamics of the developmental system.” They also point out that such “developmental constraints undoubtedly play a signiﬁcant role in evolution” though there is yet “little agreement on their importance as compared with selection, drift, and other such factors in shaping evolutionary history.” At about the same time, Jacob wrote that “the rules controlling embryonic development,” almost entirely unknown, interact with other physical factors to “restrict possible changes of structures and functions” in evolutionary development, providing “architectural constraints” that “limit adaptive scope and channel evolutionary patterns,” to quote a recent review. The best-known of the ﬁgures who devoted much of their work to these topics are D’Arcy Thompson and Alan Turing, who took a very strong view on the central role of such factors in biology. In recent years, such considerations have been adduced for a wide range of problems of development and evolution, from cell division in bacteria to optimization of structure and function of cortical networks, even to proposals that organisms have “the best of all possible brains,” as argued by computational neuroscientist Chris Cherniak. The problems are the border of inquiry, but their signiﬁcance is not controversial.
Assuming that the faculty of language has the general properties of other biological systems, we should, therefore, be seeking three factors that enter into the growth of language in the individual:
(1) Genetic factors, apparently near uniform for the species, the topic of UG. The genetic endowment interprets part of the environment as linguistic experience, a nontrivial task that the infant carries out reﬂexively, and determines the general course of the development of the language faculty to the languages attained.
(2) Experience, which leads to variation, within a fairly narrow range, as in the case of other subsystems of the human capacity and the organism generally.
(3) Principles not speciﬁc to the faculty of language.
The third factor includes principles of structural architecture that restrict out comes, including principles of efﬁcient computation, which would be expected to be of particular signiﬁcance for computational systems such as language, determining the general character of attainable languages.
One can trace interest in this third factor back to the Galilean intuition that “nature is perfect,” from the tides to the ﬂight of birds, and that it is the task of the scientist to discover in just what sense this is true. Newton’s conﬁdence that Nature must be “very simple” reﬂects the same intuition. However obscure it may be, that intuition about what Ernst Haeckel called nature’s “drive for the beautiful” (“Sinn fuer das Schoene”) has been a guiding theme of modern science ever since its modern origins.
Biologists have tended to think differently about the objects of their inquiry, adopting Jacob’s image of nature as a tinkerer, which does the best it can with materials at hand – often a pretty poor job, as human intelligence seems to be intent on demonstrating about itself. British geneticist Gabriel Dover captures the prevailing view when he concludes that “biology is a strange and messy business and ‘perfection’ is the last word one would use to describe how organisms work, particularly for anything produced by natural selection” –though produced only in part by natural selection, as he emphasizes, and as every biologist knows, and to an extent that cannot be quantiﬁed by available tools. These expectations make good sense for systems with a long and complex evolutionary history, with plenty of accidents, lingering effects of evolutionary history that lead to nonoptimal solutions of problems, and so on. But the logic does not apply to relatively sudden emergence, which might very well lead to systems that are unlike the complex outcomes of millions of years of Jacobian “bricolage,” perhaps more like snowﬂakes, or phyllotaxis, or cell division into spheres rather than cubes, or polyhedra as construction materials, or much else that is found in the natural world. The minimalist program is motivated by the suspicion that something like that may indeed be true for human language, and I think recent work has given some reason to believe that language is in many respects an optimal solution to conditions it must satisfy, far more so than could have been anticipated a few years ago.”
(Noam Chomsky, Language and Mind, 1968)

CHOMSKY'S "LANGUAGE AND MIND" (1968): A 21ST-CENTURY SCIENTIFIC AUDIT
“More than half a century after Noam Chomsky's seminal work, "Language and Mind," his ideas continue to provoke and shape our understanding of language, the mind, and human nature. An examination of key passages from the 1968 text reveals a fascinating picture: some of Chomsky's core assertions have been powerfully vindicated and integrated into modern science, while others remain as debatable as ever, or have been superseded by new evidence and theoretical frameworks.
The extracts present three core arguments: that biological development is channeled by deep, restrictive "laws"; that language is an innate, genetically endowed faculty, not a product of general learning; and that the evolution of this faculty is mysterious, likely sudden, and not well-explained by natural selection alone.
In Accordance with Current General Understanding
Chomsky's broad insistence on a biological, innate foundation for human cognition, particularly language, has proven remarkably prescient. Several of his key ideas are now foundational to various scientific disciplines.
1. The Innate Basis of Language Acquisition ("Genetic Endowment"): Chomsky's argument that humans possess an innate, genetically determined predisposition for language is now overwhelmingly supported. The idea that a child is not a "blank slate" but comes equipped with a kind of "instinct to learn" is a cornerstone of modern linguistics, cognitive science, and developmental psychology.
* Current Evidence: Research in genetics has identified genes, such as FOXP2, that are not "language genes" but are crucial for the development of speech and language, underscoring a genetic component. The predictable stages of language acquisition across all cultures, the ability of children to generate novel sentences they've never heard (the "poverty of the stimulus" argument), and the existence of a critical period for language learning all point to a hardwired biological program. Neuroscience has further identified specific brain networks that are consistently associated with language processing, which mature along a predictable developmental timeline.
2. The Importance of Developmental Constraints ("Deep Laws"): Chomsky's assertion that evolution is not infinitely plastic but is channeled by inherent "developmental constraints" is a central tenet of the modern field of evolutionary developmental biology (evo-devo). His critique that simply invoking "natural selection" is insufficient without understanding these constraints is a view widely shared today.
* Current Evidence: Scientists now recognize that the "realizable possibilities" of biological forms are indeed "vastly restricted." The laws of physics, chemistry, and the principles of self-organization play a crucial role. For example, the way cells divide or the physical properties of proteins limit the possible evolutionary pathways an organism can take. This aligns with Chomsky's invocation of figures like D'Arcy Thompson and Alan Turing, who emphasized the role of physical and mathematical principles in determining biological form. Today, evolution is seen as a process where natural selection acts on the possibilities offered up by these developmental and physical constraints.
3. The Modularity of Mind ("Separate Faculties"): The view that the mind is not a single, general-purpose processor but has specialized systems, or "modules," for different tasks (the "modular view of learning") has gained significant traction, particularly in cognitive neuroscience. Chomsky's defense of a distinct language faculty, separate from other cognitive abilities, is a prime example of this modular approach.
* Current Evidence: While the degree of modularity is still debated, evidence from brain imaging and studies of patients with brain damage supports the idea of specialized neural circuits for functions like language, facial recognition, and spatial navigation. While these modules are interconnected and interact, the notion of domain-specific "organs within the brain," as Gallistel puts it in the extract, is a mainstream concept.
Debatable or Divergent Points
Despite the validation of his foundational ideas, many of Chomsky's more specific claims from 1968 are now subjects of intense scientific debate or have been challenged by subsequent research.5
1. The Nature of "Universal Grammar" (UG): The specific formulation of an innate "Universal Grammar" as a rich, detailed set of grammatical principles shared by all languages is highly contentious. While the innate capacity for language is accepted, the existence of a universal, built-in grammar is not.
* Current Debate: Many linguists point to the vast diversity of the world's 7,000+ languages to argue that there are very few, if any, non-trivial grammatical rules that are truly universal. The rise of usage-based and cultural evolution models of language suggests that much of grammatical structure emerges from the need to communicate effectively and is passed down culturally, rather than being encoded in the genes. It is crucial to note that Chomsky's own thinking has evolved significantly since 1968. His later "Minimalist Program" hypothesizes a much simpler innate component, perhaps only the computational operation he calls "Merge" (the ability to recursively combine elements), which is a far cry from the more elaborate UG of the 1960s.
2. The Dismissal of Natural Selection and the "Mystery" of Language Evolution: Chomsky's 1968 characterization of language evolution as a "total mystery" and his assertion that attributing it to natural selection has "no substance" is now largely outdated. While immense challenges remain, the past 50 years have seen an explosion of research into language origins.
* Current Research: Fields like paleoanthropology, comparative genomics, and computational modeling have provided significant, albeit incomplete, insights. The fossil record offers clues about the vocal tract and brain evolution in human ancestors. Genetic studies are beginning to trace the timeline of human migrations and the genes that may have been under selection for cognitive traits. While Chomsky is right that we cannot know the "probability" of the mind evolving, scientists now actively model the gradual emergence of linguistic features through both biological and cultural evolution. The idea of a "protolanguage"—a simpler, precursor communication system—is a widely discussed intermediate step, contrasting with Chomsky's preferred "sudden emergence" hypothesis.
3. The "Sudden Emergence" and "Optimal Solution" Hypotheses: The suggestion that the language faculty emerged suddenly, perhaps through a single mutation, and that it may be an "optimal" system, runs counter to the prevailing view in evolutionary biology.
* Current Consensus: Most evolutionary biologists favor a gradualist perspective, where complex systems like language evolve through the accumulation of many small changes over long periods. The image of evolution as a "tinkerer" (as described by François Jacob), which cobbles together solutions from pre-existing parts, is still the dominant metaphor. While "sudden" events can occur in evolution, the idea of a single event creating a system as complex as the language faculty is considered highly improbable. Similarly, the notion of "perfection" or "optimality" is viewed with skepticism by most biologists, who see organisms as bundles of compromises and trade-offs shaped by a messy evolutionary history, not as perfectly engineered machines.
In conclusion, Chomsky's 1968 arguments acted as a powerful catalyst. His fundamental insistence on a biological and innate basis for the unique cognitive abilities of humans set the agenda for decades of fruitful research.7 While the scientific community has since developed a more nuanced, and in many ways different, understanding of the specifics—particularly regarding the mechanisms of evolution and the precise nature of the innate endowment for language—the core vision he articulated in "Language and Mind" has undeniably become a vital and enduring part of the scientific landscape.”
(Gemini, July 1, 2025)

E2.2.B.1.3.d. We realized that our thinking is imprisoned by language and symbols. We cannot access our thoughts or objects without language.

Art:
- Luis Camnitzer_Image constructed with words arranged in a sequence to form a sentence - Sentence forming an image that looks like a sentence, 1973

"We philosophize in 'language.' This theme has been thoroughly explored in modern philosophy, and I don't claim to understand it better than Brice Parain, Merleau-Ponty, or Heidegger. I would simply like to compile some notes on the subject here. I will begin by quoting a passage from Merleau-Ponty:

"I am reading Descartes's Second Meditation. It is indeed me that is being discussed, but not my idea of myself or Descartes', but rather the idea of a thinking person. Following the meaning of the words and the connection between ideas, I conclude that since I think, I am; however, this is a Cogito based solely on my word. I have only grasped my thoughts and my existence through language. The true formula of this cogito would be: "We think, therefore we are." Language is marvelous in that it makes itself forgotten. I follow the lines on the paper with my eyes, but once I am caught up in what they mean, I no longer see them. The expression fades away before what is expressed. This is why its mediating role can go unnoticed and why Descartes does not mention it anywhere. [...]

As Brice Parain said: "It is not the object that gives meaning to the sign, but the sign that forces us to imagine an object of its meaning." In both cases, this amounts to saying that language itself gives us the illusion of being a system of signs that mediates between our thoughts and objects. We discover this illusion when we realize that we cannot access our thoughts or objects without language.
 Therefore, it is by encountering the limits of language that the philosopher realizes he is engaged in philosophy "in" language and that language imposes itself on him as an insurmountable structure. One such limit is the impossibility of positing an absolute beginning to philosophical reflection or achieving an absolutely complete analysis or deduction.
Therefore, it is by encountering the limits of language that the philosopher realizes he is engaged in philosophy "in" language and that language presents itself as an insurmountable structure. One such limit is the impossibility of positing an absolute beginning to philosophical reflection or achieving an absolutely complete analysis or deduction. In his treatise "De l'esprit géométrique," Pascal clarifies this point: "Thus, by pushing the search further and further, we necessarily arrive at primitive words that cannot be defined and principles so clear that we can find no clearer ones to serve as proof. From this, it appears that humans are naturally and immutably unable to treat any science with absolute completeness." Pascal's admission is serious and, in my opinion, indisputable. It forces us to recognize that all philosophy must ultimately be based on common notions—objects of ennoematic definitions, as the Stoics would say—which seem clear only insofar as they remain confused and indeterminate. This helps us understand why Wittgenstein resigned himself to proposing only a vague and somewhat inaccurate notion of "language game." In a work such as Spinoza's Ethics, which claims to progress geometrically, the first lines introduce the terms "cause," "essence," "existence," "nature," "thing," "genus," "body," and "thought" without defining them. Even terms that are expressly defined, such as "substance," retain something obscure and a potential multiplicity of meanings that allows them to be used. [...]

To be able to match each word with a distinct idea, one would have to be "outside language." W.F. Ott explains, "This conception of language (as a system of signs) is based on the naive idea that there are things in and of themselves, and that language's only purpose is to designate them, fix them in memory, and communicate them to others." But, in reality, things only exist for spoken thought.

Language does not designate them; rather, they appear in it. Therefore, the listener does not perceive a sign that refers to a thing, but rather perceives the thing itself because language is merely the mode through which things present themselves. There is a significant difference between a word and a sign. In reality, language "says nothing but itself," and "its meaning is not separable from it" (1).
We must recognize that language imposes itself on the philosopher as an insurmountable structure, and we encounter an original phenomenon, as Wittgenstein says. As Goethe said, the highest point man can reach is amazement at the original phenomenon: "Nothing higher can be granted to him, and he must not seek further; this is his limit." From there, however, many things can be understood.
 

We philosophize in "a" language simply because we think in language. We often forget this, too. We are like the French diplomat Wittgenstein discusses who claimed that it is a peculiarity of the French language that words are found in the order in which they are thought (§ 336). In fact, the order of thought is relative to a linguistic system. Different languages constitute systems that predetermine the forms and categories through which individuals communicate with others, analyze the world—noticing or neglecting certain aspects of the universe—and ultimately construct their own self-awareness. [...]"

Note: (1) Merleau-Ponty, The Phenomenology of Perception, p. 219. His entire chapter on "The Body as Expression and Speech" describes language as an original phenomenon excellently.
(Pierre Hadot, Wittgenstein and the Limits of Language, 2004–2014)

"One might expect the question, "What can be the result of such a philosophy?" Wittgenstein himself answered this question in his book Philosophical Investigations: "The results of philosophy consist of discovering some simple nonsense and the bumps that understanding has encountered when colliding with the limits of language. These bumps tell us the value of this discovery" (§119).
Then there is the question of 'authentic discovery,' which 'enables me to interrupt the act of philosophizing whenever I want. It brings philosophy to rest so that it is no longer plagued by questions that call it into question" (§133).
 
Neither the Tractatus nor the Philosophical Investigations are didactic works. They reveal certain attitudes, not true propositions. If one wanted to apply a concept that encompasses them both, it could be called "wisdom." Who would doubt that philosophy has to do not only with knowledge and the theory of science but also with wisdom?"
(Gottfried Gabriel, Logic as Literature? Remarks on the Significance of Literary Form in Wittgenstein, 1978 — translation by Pierre Hadot, Chantal Collet, and Marie-Dominique Richard).

"Detachment [...]
As such, detachment is not imbued with nostalgia for another world. It does not convert to another reality. The distance it takes from the world opens up a space that is not transcendence. It does not call for escape but rather an expansion of this world. Freeing oneself from the assigned use of things is enough to escape the confinement of their determined purpose. [...]
What knowledge does detachment actually give access to? What is detached knowledge? It cannot be defined by its object or method but by its mode of apprehension and disposition of mind. It is broad and spacious, and therefore at ease, as Zhuangzi (Chap. 2, Guo, p. 51) says. It is not "exiguous" or "petty," nor narrow-minded or burdened by distinctions. Thus, this liberated knowledge suddenly ignites through speech, while the other, nitpicking kind is verbose. In this latter kind of knowledge, and therefore of confined life, people remain asleep as if awake. They are in continuous intermingling with the outside world, which keeps them in constant struggle. Thus, they are "indolent," "concealed," or "secret," and constantly in "anxiety," not to mention "anguish." At the stage of this narrow knowledge, one constantly triggers judgments for or against "like the spring of a crossbow"; then, one remains attached to one's "victory" as conspirators to their "oath." This knowledge, fired like an arrow and striking out reactively, is the opposite of detached knowledge, which has no concern for retaliation. The commentator explains that this is what philosophical debate illustrates: each school (the Mohists and the Confucians) constantly affirms what the other denies and denies what the other affirms. Each becomes entrenched and bogged down, "sealed" and absorbing its energy until it is exhausted, its mind finding itself at death's door with nothing left to bring it back to the light. The most diverse emotions and attitudes follow one another endlessly within us as we are trapped in this narrowness. This occurs as naturally as "music comes out of a hollow tube" or "vapors cause mold and fungi to grow." We remain unable to understand the great renewal of the world taking place before our eyes. [...]
(François Jullien, A Second Life, 2017).

“Taoism” has made this its trademark, which can only be paradoxical, but logically serves as its preferred rhetorical expression. One cannot evolve this detached life within language, which itself distinguishes and determines, except by immediately eliminating from it that which distinguishes and determines: by immediately removing from what we say that is positive, that which makes it positive; by immediately removing from what we have just said, that which is its consequence. In other words, we systematically remove from speech, at the same time as we speak and utter, what such speech, in uttering, simultaneously borders, delimits, and limits. Thus, “we speak without speaking.” [...]: we do not confide in the silence of the ineffable, or confine ourselves to it (the classic, apophatic way of referring to what would be the transcendence of another world); but we immediately remove, in speaking, what this saying has of “said”; what every utterance has of “posing” and imposing. Thus, it is said of this detached life that we “go about our business without being busy” [...]: we keep ourselves occupied, but without allowing ourselves to be caught up in the busyness of our occupations; we “evolve,” in other words, in a “busy idleness” [...]. The same is true of relationships with others: one forms bonds, but without allowing oneself to be bound [...]—that is, by guarding against the dependence that the relationship itself would establish. Or, in this unencumbered life, one knows how to “savour without savouring” [...]. That is to say, one knows how to experience the flavor of the world (one has not left the realm of the senses), but by liberating the flavor from what is exclusive and adherent to it: by embracing its “blandness,” which cannot be divided between rival flavors and is therefore infinitely open to savoring.
 
In the eyes of the world, those who attain this unencumbered life by distancing themselves from ordinary life confined to the world, but without becoming subservient to any other world, will inevitably appear “eccentric” (ji ren [...] in the Zhuangzi). [...]"
(François Jullien, A Second Life, 2017)

"Civilization, comprising all the achievements of art and science, technology and industry, is the result of man’s invention and manipulation of symbols — of words, letters, numbers, formulas and concepts, and of such social institutions as universally accepted clocks and rulers, scales and timetables, schedules and laws. By these means, we measure, predict, and control the behavior of the human and natural worlds — and with such startling apparent success that the trick goes to our heads. All too easily, we confuse the world as we symbolize it with the world as it is. [...]
Money is a way of measuring wealth but is not wealth in itself. A chest of gold coins or a fat wallet of bills is of no use whatsoever to a wrecked sailor alone on a raft. He needs real wealth, in the form of a fishing rod, a compass, an outboard motor with gas, and a female companion. But this ingrained and archaic confusion of money with wealth is now the main reason we are not going ahead full tilt with the development of our technological genius for the production of more than adequate food, clothing, housing, and utilities for every person on earth. [...]
It is not going to be at all easy to explain this to the world at large, because mankind has existed for perhaps one million years with relative material scarcity, and it is now roughly a mere one hundred years since the beginning of the industrial revolution. As it was once very difficult to persuade people that the earth is round and that it is in orbit around the sun, or to make it clear that the universe exists in a curved space-time continuum, it may be just as hard to get it through to “common sense” that the virtues of making and saving money are obsolete. [...]
I am trying to make the deadly serious point that, as of today, an economic utopia is not wishful thinking but, in some substantial degree, the necessary alternative to self-destruction.
The moral challenge and the grim problem we face is that the life of affluence and pleasure requires exact discipline and high imagination. [...]
A leisure economy will provide opportunity to develop the frustrated craftsman, painter, sculptor, poet, composer, yachtsman, explorer, or potter that is in us all — if only we could earn a living that way. Certainly, there will be a plethora of bad and indifferent productions from so many unleashed amateurs, but the general long-term effect should be a tremendous enrichment of the quality and variety of fine art, music, food, furniture, clothing, gardens, and even homes — created largely on a do-it-yourself basis."
(Alan Watts, Wealth Versus Money, Does It Matter? Essays on Man’s Relation to Materiality, 1970)

Illustration :
- quietbritishaccent_The best things in life are free

Art :
- Joseph Kilibansky_Reflections of Truth

"It is an oversimplification to say that this is the result of business valuing profit rather than product, for no one should be expected to do business without the incentive of profit. The actual trouble is that profit is identified entirely with money, as distinct from the real profit of living with dignity and elegance in beautiful surroundings…
To try to correct this irresponsibility by passing laws (e.g., against absentee ownership) would be wide of the point, for most of the law has as little relation to life as money to wealth. On the contrary, problems of this kind are aggravated rather than solved by the paperwork of politics and law. What is necessary is at once simpler and more difficult: only that financiers, bankers, and stockholders must turn themselves into real people and ask themselves exactly what they want out of life — in the realization that this strictly practical and hard–nosed question might lead to far more delightful styles of living than those they now pursue. Quite simply and literally, they must come to their senses — for their own personal profit and pleasure. [...]
Coming to our senses must, above all, be the experience of our own existence as living organisms rather than “personalities,” like characters in a play or a novel acting out some artificial plot in which the persons are simply masks for a conflict of abstract ideas or principles. Man as an organism is to the world outside like a whirlpool is to a river: man and world are a single natural process, but we are behaving as if we were invaders and plunderers in a foreign territory. For when the individual is defined and felt as the separate personality or ego, he remains unaware that his actual body is a dancing pattern of energy that simply does not happen by itself. It happens only in concert with myriads of other patterns — called animals, plants, insects, bacteria, minerals, liquids, and gases. The definition of a person and the normal feeling of “I” do not effectively include these relationships. You say, “I came into this world.” You didn’t; you came out of it, as a branch from a tree."

Didn't Lacan confine man to the sphere of language? Didn't he confine him behind what he called "the wall of language," thereby preventing him from finding a foothold beyond or within the system of signifiers? Didn't he deprive him of a firm and constant hold capable of ensuring the value of truth? It should be noted that, contrary to a naive but common belief, words do not designate things, but rather, concepts that change with fashions and pass with time. Furthermore, according to a formula often repeated by Lacan, the signifier signifies only for another signifier. This occurs according to a set of relationships or reciprocal implications that continue indefinitely without ever arriving at a meaning that has its own inherent significance. The symbolic order is incapable of grasping meaning on its own. This would require a leap that breaks through the 'wall of language' and escapes the refrain of empty words in order to come into the presence of the being that gives meaning. This would break the vicious circle of words that merely delegate meaning without ever grasping it. One might argue that a formal system can establish simple truths, such as two plus two equals four. This sums up what we believe when we no longer believe in anything. However, this supposed truth is devoid of real content since, when transposed into a binary number system, 2 + 2 = 4 becomes 10 + 10 = 100. Can't we see that we're merely playing with signs of pure convention? Only the relationship remains when truth claims to be absolute and not relative. We would rather say that such relationships are accurate; that is, they conform to the rules that define the syntax of a particular structure. However, they cannot claim to be true. [...] The desire to escape empty speech and find meaningful speech can be seen in children's questions. Asking "why" and "why why" endlessly without finding an answer, the child, driven by a desire for truth, presses the adult to give meaning and step outside the game of signifiers rather than relaying references endlessly. "As soon as the child knows how to busy himself with signifiers," Lacan remarks, "he enters into this dimension that leads him to ask his parents the most inconvenient questions, which, as everyone knows, cause the greatest confusion and, in truth, almost necessarily lead to impotent answers. What is running? What is stomping? What is a fool?" What is this moment of questioning about? If not the subject's distancing from the use of the signifier itself and their inability to grasp that words designate something so close to us?"
(Jacques Darriulat, Lacan: Listening to Madness, IV — Truth, 2019)

Read the full article in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Lacan/Ecouterlafolie/Ecouterlafolie4.html

"Toni Morrison said, “Language can be a real battlefield, a place of oppression but also of resistance.”
Morrison helps us understand that language is one of the most devastating forms of violence. She came to this realization while reading the work of Victor Klemperer, a German linguist who was forced to live in hiding after Hitler came to power. Klemperer kept a secret diary in which he detailed how Nazi language—spoken by everyone from Goebbels to the man on the street, from Gestapo officials to the Jews themselves—prevented people from recognizing the evil at work. Klemperer notes that 'words can be like tiny doses of arsenic; you swallow them without noticing, they seem to have no effect, and then, after a while, the toxic effect sets in.' The issue is not knowing others but classifying and identifying them, thereby denying who they really are. However, we are blind to this problem because we believe language is a neutral tool of communication. Yet, language is a battlefield and a place of resistance. Paying attention to words is a political responsibility. We do not think independently of the words that condition our way of thinking. It is the responsibility of philosophy to remind us of this."
(Fabrice Midal in the program "3 minutes to become human again," broadcast on France Culture on August 9, 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French:
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/3-minutes-de-philosophie-pour-redevenir-humain/toni-morrison

Scene from Hayao Miyazaki's film My Neighbor Totoro, 1988:
When they open the door to the garden, the two girls discover that the seed Totoro gave them—to thank them for the umbrella they gave him in the rain—has grown into a giant tree overnight. They exclaim, “It wasn't a dream! It was a dream that wasn't a dream!” 
As in Lacan's work, dreams can be the truth of the world that seeps through the cracks of consciousness. Miyazaki's cinema is like augmented reality, where the world appears to us in its true texture when we break the conventions of reality constructed by language.

Watch the bus scene on YouTube: https://youtu.be/nqAxRJhUT3k?si=8LCABr34g5I6ZAWq

E2.2.B.1.4. The human response: Freedom as struggle against the biological necessity of our bodies.

E2.2.B.1.4.a. ACCORDING TO HANNAH ARENDT, HUMAN FREEDOM IS ACHIEVED THROUGH AN AWARENESS OF OUR SUBMISSION TO NECESSITY AND CONSTANT EFFORTS TO FREE OURSELVES FROM IT, THOUGH THESE EFFORTS ARE NEVER PERFECT.
"T H E I N S T R U M E N T S O F WO R K A N D T H E D I V I S I O N OF L A B O R
Unfortunately, it seems to be in the nature of the conditions of life as it has been given to man that the only possible advantage of the fertility of human labor power lies in its ability to procure the necessities of life for more than one man or one family. Labor's products, the products of man's metabolism with nature, do not stay in the world long enough to become a part of it, and the laboring activity itself, concentrated exclusively on life and its maintenance, is oblivious of the world to the point of worldlessness. The animal laborans, driven by the needs of its body, does not use this body freely as homo faber uses his hands, his primordial tools, which is why Plato suggested that laborers and slaves were not only subject to necessity and incapable of freedom but also unable to rule the "animal" part within them. A mass society of laborers, such as Marx had in mind when he spoke of "socialized mankind," consists of worldless specimens of the species mankind, whether they are household slaves, driven into their predicament by the violence of others, or free, performing their functions willingly.

This worldlessness of the animal laborans, to be sure, is entirely different from the active flight from the publicity of the world which we found inherent in the activity of "good works." The animal laborans does not flee the world but is ejected from it in so far as he is imprisoned in the privacy of his own body, caught in the fulfilment of needs in which nobody can share and which nobody can fully communicate. The fact that slavery and banishment into the household was, by and large, the social condition of all laborers prior to the modern age is primarily due to the human condition itself; life, which for all other animal species is the very essence of their being, becomes a burden to man because of his innate "repugnance to futility." This burden is all the heavier since none of the so-called "loftier desires" has the same urgency, is actually forced upon man by necessity, as the elementary needs of life. Slavery became the social condition of the laboring classes because it was felt that it was the natural condition of life itself. Omnis vita servitium est.

The burden of biological life, weighing down and consuming the specifically human life-span between birth and death, can be eliminated only by the use of servants, and the chief function of ancient slaves was rather to carry the burden of consumption in the household than to produce for society at large. The reason why slave labor could play such an enormous role in ancient societies and why its wastefulness and unproductivity were not discovered is that the ancient city-state was primarily a "consumption center," unlike medieval cities which were chiefly production centers. The price for the elimination of life's burden from the shoulders of all citizens was enormous and by no means consisted only in the violent injustice of forcing one part of humanity into the darkness of pain and necessity. Since this darkness is natural, inherent in the human condition—only the act of violence, when one group of men tries to rid itself of the shackles binding all of us to pain and necessity, is man-made—the price for absolute freedom from necessity is, in a sense, life itself, or rather the substitution of vicarious life for real life.[...]

On its most elementary level the "toil and trouble" of obtaining and the pleasures of "incorporating" the necessities of life are so closely bound together in the biological life cycle, whose recurrent rhythm conditions human life in its unique and unilinear movement, that the perfect elimination of the pain and effort of labor would not only rob biological life of its most natural pleasures but deprive the specifically human life of its very liveliness and vitality. The human condition is such that pain and effort are not just symptoms which can be removed without changing life itself; they are rather the modes in which life itself, together with the necessity to which it is bound, makes itself felt. For mortals, the "easy life of the gods" would be a lifeless life. [...]

It is true that the enormous improvement in our labor tools—the mute robots with which homo faber has come to the help of the animal laborans, as distinguished from the human, speaking instruments (the instrumentum vocale, as the slaves in ancient households were called) whom the man of action had to rule and oppress when he wanted to liberate the animal laborans from its bondage—has made the twofold labor of life, the effort of its sustenance and the pain of giving birth, easier and less painful than it has ever been. This, of course, has not eliminated compulsion from the laboring activity or the condition of being subject to need and necessity from human life. But, in distinction from slave society, where the "curse" of necessity remained a vivid reality because the life of a slave testified daily to the fact that "life is slavery," this condition is no longer fully manifest and its lack of appearance has made it much more difficult to notice and remember. The danger here is obvious. Man cannot be free if he does not know that he is subject to necessity, because his freedom is always won in his never wholly successful attempts to liberate himself from necessity. And while it may be true that his strongest impulse toward this liberation comes from his "repugnance to futility," it is also likely that the impulse may grow weaker as this "futility" appears easier, as it requires less effort. For it is still probable that the enormous changes of the industrial revolution behind us and the even greater changes of the atomic revolution before us will remain changes of the world, and not changes in the basic condition of human life on earth. [...]"
(Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition, 1954)

E2.2.B.1.4.b. "[The] transversal line making death necessary at the microscopic and macroscopic scales of living things conflicts with a second voluntary scientific line, a concept of death culminating as an accidental event in the transhumanist promise of immortality. In the work of bioinformatics researcher, biogerontologist, and promoter of SENS, the project ‘Strategies for Engineered Negligible Senescence’, Aubrey de Grey writes of the contemporary desire to reduce death to something external to living things. SENS identifies seven causes of aging, and refuses to treat metabolism or pathologies of aging, but promises to act directly on cellular damage caused by aging, with illnesses only considered consequences of this damage. This project is the very sign of a contemporary biological engineering replacing medical science and concerned with transforming a living body internally by caring for it, not against that which is done to it, but rather against that which it is. [...] 
By maintaining our body through the use of medications, going to extremes by obsessionally combating senescence, humanity makes obsolete the idea that death could exist in itself. [...]
Modern humanity is relieved through medicine and the biology of a fast-approaching death, but pays the price for it. Humanity takes up a historical responsibility vis-à-vis their own mortality, and makes death something against which they think can be active, something for which they feel responsible, since they think they are able to change it or slow it down. But can one live by attaching an excessive value to life? Insofar as one removes the possibility of dying naturally of old age, it is rational to fear that an accidental death could become intolerable in view of a death that one ought to be capable of postponing continuously." 
(Tristan Garcia, Form and Object, A Treatise On Things, 2011)

E2.2.B.1.4.c. SARTRE DEFINES THE BODY NOT AS AN OBJECT WE POSSESS, BUT AS OUR "FACTICITY"—THE CONTINGENT, UN-CHOSEN, "TOTALLY UNJUSTIFIABLE" FORM THAT OUR EXISTENCE TAKES.
“This absolutely necessary and totally unjustifiable order of the things of the world, this order which is myself in so far as I am neither the foundation of my being nor the foundation of a particular being-this order is the body as it is on the level of the for-itself. In this sense we could define the body as the contingent form which is assumed by the necessity of my contingency. The body is nothing other than the for-itself; it is not an in-itself in the for-itself, for in that case it would solidify everything. But it is the fact that the for-itself is not its own foundation, and this fact is expressed by the necessity of existing as an engaged, contingent being among other contingent beings. As such the body is not distinct from the situation of the for-itself since for the for-itself, to exist and to be situated are one and the same; on the other hand the body is identified with the whole world inasmuch as the world is the total situation of the for-itself and the measure of its existence.
But a situation is not a pure contingent given. Quite the contrary, it is revealed only to the extent that the for-itself surpasses it toward itself. Consequently the body-for-itself is never a given which I can know. It is there everywhere as the surpassed; it exists only in so far as I escape it by nihilating myself. The body is what I nihilate. It is the in-itself which is surpassed by the nihilating for-itself and which reapprehends the for-itself in this very surpassing. It is the fact that I am my own motivation without being my own foundation, the fact that I am nothing without having to be what I am and yet in so far as I have to be what I am, I am without having to be. In one sense therefore the body is a necessary characteristic of the for-itself; it is not true that the body is the product of an arbitrary decision on the part of a demiurge nor that the union of soul and body is the contingent bringing together of two substances radically distinct. On the contrary, the very nature of the for-itself demands that it be body; that is, that, its nihilating escape from being should be made in the form of an engagement in the world. Yet in another sense the body manifests my contingency; we can even say that it is only this contingency. The Cartesian rationalists were right in being struck with this characteristic; in fact it represents the individualization of my engagement in the world. And Plato was not wrong either in taking the body as that which individualizes the soul.
Yet it would be in vain to suppose that the soul can detach itself from this individualization by separating itself from the body at death or by pure thought, for the soul is the body inasmuch
as the for-itself is its own individualization.”
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

ACCORDING TO SARTRE, FREEDOM IS THE CONSTANT ACT OF "SURPASSING" OR "NIHILATING" THE BODY-AS-FACTICITY TOWARD A FUTURE POSSIBILITY.
“We are now able to define our body's nature-for-us. The preceding observations have allowed us to conclude that the body is perpetually the surpassed. The body as a sensible center of reference is that beyond which I am in so far as I am immediately present to the glass or to the table or to the distant tree which I perceive. Perception, in fact, can be accomplished only at the very place where the object is perceived and without distance. But at the same time it unfolds the distances, and that in relation to which the perceived object indicates its distance as an absolute property of its being is the body. Similarly as an instrumental center of instrumental complexes the body can be only the surpassed; it is that which I surpass toward a new combination of complexes and which I shall perpetually have to surpass whatever may be the instrumental combination at which I arrive; for every combination from the moment that my surpassing fixes it in its being indicates the body as the center of reference for its own fixed immobility. Thus the body, since it is surpassed, is the Past. It is the immediate presence to the For-itself of "sensible" things in so far' as this presence indicates a center of reference a:nd is already surpassed either toward the appearance of a new this or toward a new combination of instrumental-things. In each project of the For-itself, in each perception the body is there; it is the immediate Past in so far as it still touches on the Present which flees it. This means that it is at once a point of view and a point of departure-a point of view, a point of departure which I am and which at the same time I surpass toward what I have to be.
This point of view which is perpetually surpassed and which is perpetually reborn at the heart of the surpassing, this point 'of departure which J do not cease to leave and which is myself remaining behind me-this is the necessity of my contingency. It is doubly necessary. First it is necessary because it is the continual reapprehension of the For-itself by the In-itself and the ontological fact that the For-itself can be only as the being which is not its own foundation. To have a body is to be the foundation of one’s own nothingness and not to be the foundation of one's being; I am my body to the extent that I am; I am not my body to the extent that J am not what I am. It is by my nihilation that I escape it. But I do not thereby make an object of it, for what I am is what I perpetually escape. The body is necessary again as the obstacle to be surpassed in order to be in the world; that is, the obstacle which I am to myself.”
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

E2.2.B.1.4.d. "We know we have it, but what is it for? Neuroscientist Chris Frith discusses the point of consciousness with Nigel Warburton.

Consciousness is the only mental activity that we can share with others.
The purpose of consciousness would be to reflect on our actions and thoughts:
1. We are not certain about the content of various conscious experiences; by discussing them with others we develop more accurate versions of what we perceived. So our conscious experiences are malleable constructions - stories that we elaborate after the facts.
2. Consciousness is necessary for freewill and regrets. Consciousness could be the key faculty that enabled us to evolve into a collaborative species thanks to freewill.
3. In experiments in which people are convinced that they do not have freewill a higher proportion behave as free riders, which proves that we a) either do possess freewill or b) at least that the belief we have in freewill is key to a collaborative society."
(Chris Frith on The Point of Consciousness in Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: 
http://philosophybites.com/2017/02/chris-frith-on-what-is-the-point-of-consciousness-.html

E2.2.B.1.4.f. "CHOICE
It is an act of will that focuses on one object rather than another. This implies, unless one blindly trusts chance, a preference, an evaluation, or a desire. ('To choose' has the same Indo-European origin as the Latin gustare). Is this choice free? Yes, insofar as it depends on us. No, precisely because it depends on us. All choices presuppose a subject who chooses and acknowledges that they do not always get to choose. Try to imagine being someone else. No choice is absolutely free. If it were, we would no longer be able to choose"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E2.2.B.1.4.g.  Illustration: Sanglier

WHEN WE GIVE IN TO ANGER, " WE TRANSFORM OURSELVES INTO THE KIND OF BEING WHO IS SATISFIED WITH CRUDE AND LESS WELL ADAPTED SOLUTIONS"—THE OPPOSITE OF REALIZATION.
"Anger is certainly neither an instinct nor a habit nor a reasoned calculation. It is an abrupt solution of a conflict, a way of cutting the Gordian Knot. And we certainly come back to Janet's distinction between superior behavior and inferior or derived behavior. Only, this distinction now takes on its full meaning: it is we who put ourselves into a state of complete inferiority, because on this very low level our needs are fewer; we are satisfied, and with less expense. Being unable, in the state of high tension, to find the delicate and precise solution of a problem we act upon ourselves, we lower ourselves, and we transform ourselves into the kind of being who is satisfied with crude and less well adapted solutions (for example, taring up the paper which gives the statement of the problem). Thus, anger appears here as an escape; the subject in anger resembles a man who, lacking the power to undo the knots of the ropes which bind him, twists and squirms about in his bonds. And the behavior of "anger," less well adapted to the problem than the superior and impossible behavior which would resolve it, is, however, precisely and perfectly adapted to the need of breaking the tension, of shaking off that leaden cloak which weighs on our shoulders. »
(Jean-Paul Sartre, The emotions outline of a theory, 1938)

E2.2.B.1.4.h. According to Kant, freedom is rooted in a tendency toward evil: subordinating morality to our desires and personal interests. In this sense, evil is a reversal of the moral order—a perversion. It acts like a force that gives a system a negative value. Thus, "man is made of crooked wood."
Evil renders us deaf to the moral law. Yet, when we commit an evil act, we know it is wrong (since, for Kant, the moral law consists of categorical imperatives). It is voluntary servitude because, by breaking the moral law, we diminish human dignity and, consequently, human power.

E2.2.B.1.4.i.  AS CONFLICTED HUMANS WE CANNOT HELP BUT ENGAGE SELF-INTERESTED WANTS AND AVERSIONS IN ORDER TO OVERCOME SELF-INTERESTED WANTS AND AVERSIONS.
”Santideva, in his Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, declares that vanquishing afflictions (Sanskritklesa; Palikilesa) such as greed and hatred will be his “sole obsession,” that he bears a “strong grudge” against them and will “meet them in battle.” Then he realizes that he might be contradicting himself: he seems to have endorsed resorting to certain afflictions (obsession, aggressive confrontation, grudge bearing) as a means to overcome others. But “afflictions such as these,” he reflects, “destroy afflictions and are not to be relinquished.”
I admire Santideva’s honesty in acknowledging the presence of paradox, struggle, and conflict at the heart of dharma practice. Logically, it might appear contradictory to “crave the end of craving” or “hate the hatred inside me,” but in practice this is what we find ourselves doing once we embark on such a path. We may disguise what we are doing with various semantic tricks—by saying “aspire to” rather than “crave,” or “renounce” rather than “hate”—but Santideva admits the blunt truth: that as conflicted humans we cannot help but engage self-interested wants and aversions in order to overcome self-interested wants and aversions. The parable of the snake is making much the same point. The “venom” that the Buddha extracts from the “cobra” has to be just the right homeopathic dose of want, aversion, and self-interest to motivate a person to undertake the fourfold task. Too small a  dose would risk leaving the patient listless and complacent; too large a dose might inflate the patient’s ego and prevent the patient from ex-periencing “the good for the sake of which (the patient) learned the dharma.”
(Stephen Batchelor, After Buddhism, rethinking the dharma for a secular age, 2016)

E2.2.B.2. Social and Cultural Determinisms: Analyze how our upbringing, our social environment, norms, and cultural values shape our desires, beliefs, and actions.

E2.2.B.2.1. The Mechanisms of Socialization (How Culture Shapes the Self): how an individual's "upbringing" and "social environment" actively install cultural values, shaping the self from the outside in, often from birth.

E2.2.B.2.1.a. "The framework appears as an authority that provides me with points of reference by transforming my experiences into organised actions, giving them coherence, direction and meaning. Superimposed on my activity, it enables me to categorise it. Therefore, the framework partly determines what I feel, but more profoundly, it determines what I am willing to accept within myself."
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond Wisdom, How to Live, 2023)

E1.6.B.2.7.d_REF1_PH.wXXXXX

E2.2.B.2.1.b.  CANDIDE, LISTENS TO HIS TUTOR, PANGLOSS, "WITH ALL THE GOOD FAITH OF HIS AGE AND CHARACTER," UNCRITICALLY ABSORBING HIS ENTIRE PHILOSOPHICAL SYSTEM.
“Pangloss was professor of metaphysico-theologico-cosmolo-nigology. He proved admirably that there is no effect without a cause, and that, in this best of all possible worlds, the Baron's castle was the most magnificent of castles, and his lady the best of all possible Baronesses.
"It is demonstrable," said he, "that things cannot be otherwise than as they are; for all being created for an end, all is necessarily for the best end. Observe, that the nose has been formed to bear spectacles--thus we have spectacles. Legs are visibly designed for stockings--and we have stockings. Stones were made to be hewn, and to construct castles--therefore my lord has a magnificent castle; for the greatest baron in the province ought to be the best lodged. Pigs were made to be eaten--therefore we eat pork all the year round. Consequently they who assert that all is well have said a foolish thing, they should have said all is for the best."
Candide listened attentively and believed innocently; for he thought Miss Cunegonde extremely beautiful, though he never had the courage to tell her so. He concluded that after the happiness of being born of Baron of Thunder-ten-Tronckh, the second degree of happiness was to be Miss Cunegonde, the third that of seeing her every day, and the fourth that of hearing Master  Pangloss, the greatest philosopher of the whole province, and consequently of the whole world.
(Voltaire, Candide, 1759)

E2.2.B.2.1.c. HÖLDERLIN LOCATES FREEDOM IN THE PRE-SOCIAL CONDITION OF THE CHILD, BEFORE IT HAS BEEN SOCIALIZED: "THE FORCE OF LAW AND FATE CAN’T TOUCH IT; IN THE CHILD ALONE IS FREEDOM."
“I thank you for asking me to tell you about myself, for making me remember former times.
That’s what really drove me back to Greece, wanting to live nearer to the playground of my youth.
As into quickening sleep the labourer, so my beleaguered being often sinks into the arms of the innocent past.
Peace of childhood! heavenly peace! how often do I still stand before you in loving contemplation, and think to grasp you! Yet we can only conceive of that which once was bad and has been made good again; of childhood, innocence we can have no conception.
When I was still a tranquil child, knowing nought of all that is around us, was I not then more than I am now, after all the heart’s travail and all the mind’s toiling and striving?
Yes! a divine being is the child as long as it’s not been dipped in the chameleon colours of men.
It’s wholly what it is and that’s why it’s so beautiful. 
The force of law and fate can’t touch it; in the child alone is freedom. In the child is peace; it’s not yet at variance with itself. Richness is in the child; it’s still to know its heart, the penury of life. It is immortal, for it knows nothing of death. 
But this men cannot bear. That which is divine must become like one of them, must learn that they too are there, and before nature expels the child from its paradise, men cajole and drag it out onto the ground of the curse, that it may, like them, grind away its life in the sweat of its face.
But the time of awakening is beautiful too, if only we’re not woken out of season.
Oh, they are hallowed days in which our heart first tests its wings, when full of quick and fervent growth we stand there in the glorious world, like the young plant when it unfolds to the morning sun and stretches up its slender arms towards the endless heaven.
How I felt impelled to roam amongst the mountains and along the shore! oh, how I often sat with throbbing heart upon the heights of Tinos, and gazed after the falcons and the cranes, and the doughty sprightly ships as they shrank below the horizon! ‘Down there!’ I thought, ‘down there you too one day will wander,’ and I felt like one who, parched with heat, plunges into the cooling pool and splashes the spumy waters on his brow.
Sighing I’d then turn back towards my home. ‘If only my school years were over,’ I often thought.
Dear boy! They’re far from over yet.
That in man’s youth he thinks the goal so near! That is the most beautiful of all illusions with which nature helps our weakness.
And often when I lay amongst the flowers and basked in the soft spring sunlight, and looked up into the bright blue that embraced the warm earth, when I sat under the elms and willows, in the womb of the mountain, after a quickening shower, when the branches still quivered from the caresses of heaven and golden clouds moved above the dripping woods, or when full of peaceful spirit the evening star rose with those ancient youths, the other heroes of the heavens, and I watched as the life within them propelled itself through the aether in eternal effortless order, and the peace of the world enfolded and elated me, so that I roused and listened, not knowing what came over me — ‘do you love me, good father in heaven!’ I’d then silently ask, and felt so blissful and sure his answer in my heart.
O you whom I’d invoke as if you were above the stars, whom I called creator of heaven and earth, amiable idol of my childhood, you won’t be angry I’ve forgotten you! — Why is the world not so wanting as to make one seek an entity outside it?2
Oh, if she’s the daughter of a father, glorious nature, is the daughter’s heart not his heart? her inmost self, is it not He? But do I possess it then? do I know it then?
It’s as if I saw, but then again I take fright, as if it were my own image I’d seen, it’s as if I felt him, the spirit of the world, like the warm hand of a friend, but I awake and think it’s my own fingers I’ve been holding.”
(Friedrich Holderin, Hyperion, or the hermit in Greece, 1797)

E2.2.B.2.1.d. FOR PLATO THE HUMAN SOUL IS ESSENTIALLY AN IMITATIVE THING... IT NATURALLY ASSIMILATES ITSELF TO ITS SURROUNDINGS.
“[Plato] has fixed  his attention on one function of the greatest importance  in the state, that of defence, and he has told us that those  who are to discharge this function must be men in whose  nature the two higher elements are strongly developed.  His next question accordingly is, how such a character  ought to be trained, and he proceeds to consider the  education which will fit it most fully for the highest  functions in the state.  Nature […] and nurture […] are the two things which go to make up human  character.  Neither will do without the other; you  cannot create the required nature, but you can by  nurture do everything short of that ; and without the  proper nurture the best nature is as likely to turn out ill  as to turn out well.  
Plato's general view of education is most forcibly expressed in Book VII.  Its object is there said to be  co tum the eye, which the soul already possesses, to the  light.  The principle which Plato conveys by this metaphor is that the whole function of education is not to put  knowledge into the soul, but to bring out the best things  that are latent in the soul, and to do so by directing it  to the right objects.  How is this to be done?  First,  by surrounding the soul with objects which embody  those ideas and characteristics which are to be developed  in it.  The method Plato advocates depends upon the  theory that the human soul is essentially an imitative  thing, that is, that it naturally assimilates itself to its  surroundings.  His belief in the overwhelming importance to the soul of the surroundings in which it grows  up is most forcibly put in Book VI, where he represents  the human soul as a living organism, and says that, just  as a plant when sown in the ground develops according  to the soil and the atmosphere it lives in, so it is with  the soul. The soul, he considers, is indestructible, but,  though ill-nurture cannot entirely destroy it, it may very  nearly do so. The problem of education, then, is to give  it the right surroundings. The chief way in which its  surroundings affect it is, Plato thinks, through its tendency  to become like the things it is accustomed to ; it is, he  says, impossible to be constantly with a thing you admire  without becoming like it ; and so, in the system of  education which he first describes, nothing is said of  direct teaching; the whole system consists in surrounding  the soul with objects like what it is to be, that it may  live in a healthy atmosphere.  The first and most  obvious instance of this imitative tendency is the force  with which the example of other men acts upon us; hence the importance of accustoming the soul to think about great men and to have a worthy conception of the gods it worships. But the same thing is revealed in another aspect when we come to consider the effect of art, for the soul, Plato thinks, assimilates beauty from contemplating it ; and a third aspect of the same fact will be found when he deals with the education of science. The soul, then, adapts itself to its environment, and it is all-important what the environment is.”
(Richard Lewis Nettleship, Lectures on the Republic of Plato, 1901)

FOR PLATO, PUBLIC OPINION CORRUPTS THOSE WHO MIGHT BE SOCIETY’S NOBLEST MEMBERS, TURNING POTENTIAL BENEFACTORS INTO "DESTROYERS".
“Let us  ask what is the environment into which our supposed  philosophic soul is born.  It is born into an atmosphere  of public opinion which meets it in the assembly, the  law-courts, the theatre, the army-everywhere where  men are gathered together.  This public opinion is  invincible and irresponsible ; no individual soul can  assert its own independence of it except by some super- human gift of nature ; it is the source of law; practically  it is the great educator, and there is no other education  worth talking about.  Public opinion is the one great  sophist, and those poor amateurs whom public opinion  represents as corrupting the youth, merely repeat and  formulate the dictates of the very society that thus stigmatizes them.  Here Plato's tone towards the sophists is  one of contemptuous pity; they are simply bear-leaders of  the people. The people, symbolized before by the owner  of the ship, is here described, with less good nature, but  with no actual dislike, as a great and strong beast who  lets himself be handled by his keepers provided they  study his whims and do all they can to humour him. 
The so-called leaders of opinion, then, only formulate  op1mon.  They have no knowledge of the things they  speak of; and though they talk of good and bad, just  and unjust, these are no more to them than names for  the likes and dislikes of the multitude. And the multitude can never be philosophers, but will tend to be  distrustful of philosophic principles, and hostile to them.  Born into this atmosphere, what is likely to become of  the philosophic nature with all its gifts?  The passage in which Plato answers this question (494)  is supposed to refer to Alcibiades. He certainly seems  to be speaking of some actual man; and we know that  it was made a reproach to Socrates that Alcibiades and  others among his most distinguished friends turned out  badly.  Suppose, says Socrates, after describing a man  born into Athenian society with every gift of nature  and of fortune, that someone goes to the man so gifted  or surrounded, and tells him the truth, 'that he has not  got wisdom, that he needs it, and that to win wisdom  a man must be:! a slave under the burden of that task ' :  what will happen? If at first he shows a disposition to  listen, the leaders of society will at once be up in arms,  and set in motion every means to destroy the influence  of the one man who could save him ; they want to use  him for their own ends. This is the way in which men  of a nature which ought to make them the benefactors  of mankind generally become its destroyers.  Society,  partly unconsciously and partly deliberately, corrupts  those who might be its noblest members.”
(Richard Lewis Nettleship, Lectures on the Republic of Plato, 1901)

E2.2.B.2.1.e.  ARLIE RUSSELL HOCHSCHILD PROVIDES A POWERFUL SOCIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS OF HOW DIFFERENT STYLES OF UPBRINGING—THE "POSITIONAL CONTROL SYSTEM" (TYPICALLY WORKING-CLASS) VERSUS THE "PERSONAL CONTROL SYSTEM" (TYPICALLY MIDDLE-CLASS)—ACT AS A DETERMINISTIC FORCE, SHAPING CHILDREN FOR DIFFERENT ROLES IN THE MODERN ECONOMY.
“THE FAMILY: TRAINING GROUND FOR THE TRANSMUTATION
What a person does at work may bear an uncanny resemblance to the "job description" of being the child of such a worker at home. Big emotion workers tend to raise little ones. Mothers and fathers teach children letters and numbers and manners and a world view, but they also teach them which zone of the self will later be addressed by rules of work. As research on this topic suggests, working-class parents prepare the child to be controlled more by rules that apply to overt behavior whereas middle-class parents prepare them to be governed more by rules that apply to feelings.
From his study of British middle-class and working-class families, the sociolinguist Basil Bernstein draws a distinction between two types of "family control system," the positional and the personal.
In the positional control system, clear and formal rules determine who gets to decide what and who gets to do what. The right to make rules is based on formal attributes, such as age, sex, and parenthood. A "positional family" is not necessarily authoritarian or emotionally cold; it simply bases authority on impersonally assigned status and not on per-sonal feelings. Positional appeals, therefore, are appeals to impersonally assigned status. For example, to her son who keeps saying he wants to play with a doll, a mother might appeal to sex status: "Little boys don't play with dolls, dolls are for your sister; here, take the drum instead."
In the personal control system, what matters far more than formal status is the feelings of parent and child. Par-ents back up their appeals by such statements as "because it would mean a lot to me" or "because I'm very tired." Appeals are also aimed at the child's feelings. A mother using per-sonal control in the situation above might say: "Why do you want to play with the doll? They're so boring. Why not play with the drum?" In positional families, control works against the child's will. In personal families, control works through that will. Thus a child who says "I don't want to kiss grandpa-why must I kiss him always?" will be answered in different ways. Positional: "Children kiss their grandpa," and "He's not well-I don't want any of your nonsense." Per-sonal: "I know you don't like kissing Grandpa, but he's un-well and he's very fond of you."
In the personal family, Bernstein notes, the child appears to have a choice. If the child questions a rule invoked by the parent, the situation is further explained and the alternatives more clearly elaborated. Given the situation and the explanation, the child chooses to observe the rule. But in the positional family, the child is told to act according to a rule, and any questioning of it is answered by an appeal to immutable status: "Why? Because I'm your mother, and I say so." The personal child is persuaded to choose the right course of action and persuaded to see and feel about it in the right way. The positional child is told what to do and asked to accept the legitimacy of the order. Working-class families are generally more positional, Bernstein says, and middle-class families more personal.
Similarly, Melvin Kohn in his Class and Conformity (1977) finds middle-class parents more likely to sanction what they later infer to be a child's feeling and intent whereas working-class parents are more likely to sanction behavior itself. A middle-class mother is far more likely to punish her son for losing his temper than for engaging in wild and disruptive physical play. His loss of temper, not his wild play, is what is intolerable."
The middle-class child seems to be especially subject to three messages. The first is that the feelings of superiors are important. Feeling is tied to power and authority because it is the reason adults often give for the decisions they make. The child grows sensitive to feeling and learns to read it well. The second is that a child's own feelings are important. Feelings are worth paying attention to and can be honored as reasons for doing or not doing something. The middle-class child's own sense of power is tied more closely to feeling than to external display.t The third is that feelings are meant to be managed-monitored, sanctioned, and con-trolled. Thus when Timmy spills ink on the new rug, he will be punished less for damaging the rug than for doing it in anger. His transgression lies in not managing his anger.
It seems, then, that middle-class children are more likely to be asked to shape their feelings according to the rules they are made aware of. At the very least, they learn that it is important to know how to manage feeling. In a sense, the true middle-class lesson may be set forth not in Benjamin Spock's Baby and Child Care but in Constantin Stanislavski's An Actor Prepares (1948)-for it is through the art of deep acting that we make feelings into instruments we can use.
In reviewing this research on the family, I have frequently used the terms "middle-class child" and "working-class child," but I do not mean to suggest that one is trained to do emotional labor and the other is not. Middle-class parents whose jobs do not involve public contact may train their children to accept positional authority, and lower-class parents whose jobs do involve public contact may train their children to accept personal authority. More precisely, the class messages that parents pass on to their children may be roughly as follows. Middle class: "Your feelings count be-cause you are (or will be) considered important by others." Lower class: "Your feelings don't count because you aren't (or won't be) considered important by others."
Cutting across the class messages may be other messages about emotional labor. The two main ones would be as follows. "Learn to manage your feelings, and learn to attune yourself to feeling rules because doing this well will get you places" (emotional-labor occupations). And "Learn to man-age your behavior because that is all the company will ask of you" (nonemotional-labor occupations). Upper-class par-ents doing emotional labor may combine the messages "Your feelings are important" and "Learn to manage them well" whereas lower-class emotional laborers may stress only the "Manage them well." Conversely, upper-class parents who do not specialize in emotional labor may emphasize "Your feelings matter" without stressing "Manage them well." And lower-class parents doing physical or technical work may see no relevance in either message.
How feelings are dealt with in families may be deter-mined not so much by social class as by the overall design of emotional labor, which is itself only loosely related to social class. Further, in our society the personal control system ex tends far beyond the family; it operates, for example, in schools that stress the development of autonomy and emotional control and in jobs that call for a capacity to forge useful relationships.
If jobs that call for emotional labor grow and expand with the spread of automation and the decline of unskilled labor-as some analysts believe they will-this general social track may spread much further across other social classes. If this happens, the emotional system itself-emotion work, feeling rules, and social exchange, as they come into play in a "personal control system"-will grow in importance as a way through which people are persuaded and controlled both on the job and off. If, on the other hand, automation and the decline of unskilled labor leads to a decline in emotional labor, as machines replace the personal delivery of services, then this general social track may come to be replaced by another that trains people to be controlled in more imper-sonal ways.
The transmutation of emotional life-the move from the private realm to the public realm, the trend toward standardization and commercialization of emotive offerings-al-ready fans out across the whole class system. Commercial conventions of feeling are being recycled back into individual private lives; emotional life now appears under new management. Talking at dinner about encounters with an irate customer or watching the moves of host and participant on television giveaway programs opens the family home to a larger world of feeling rules. We learn what to expect outside, and we prepare.
In the United States, this public culture is not simply public; it is commercial. Thus the relation between private emo commercial and commercial spheres. The home is no longer a sanctuary from abuses of the profit motive. Yet the marketplace is not without images of the home. The atmosphere of the private living room, which a young flight attendant is asked to recall as she works in the airplane cabin, has already borrowed some of the elements of that cabin. The principles of commerce that govern exchanges in the cabin are sup-posed to be softened by the analogy to a private home, a home remote from commerce. But for a quarter of a century now, private relations between friends and kin have been the basis for living room "parties" at which kitchenware, cosmetics, or (more recently) "sex-aids" are sold. Similarly, to build a market for air travel, the airlines use the idea of a private family and the feelings one would have there. Air-line training strategists borrow from the home the idea of a place where that sort of borrowing doesn't go on. Yet in a culture like ours, it does.
Thus it is in the family that we assess our ties to the public culture and search out ways in which we may be monitored there. It is in the family-that private refuge, that haven in a heartless world-that some children first see commercial purposes at close hand and prepare for the call from central casting that will let them display their skills on a larger stage.”
(Arlie Russell Hochschild, The managed heart, 2003)

E2.2.B.2.1.f.  ERIKSON ARGUES AGAINST A STATIC VIEW OF UPBRINGING AND INSTEAD PROPOSES THAT "BABIES CONTROL AND BRING UP THEIR FAMILIES AS MUCH AS THEY ARE CONTROLLED BY THEM." This shows how the process of being shaped by one's social environment is a complex and dynamic feedback loop.
“In order to determine more concretely what kinds of forces are operative in a given clinical situation, it may be more profitable to ask what it is that we are called upon to accomplish. Maybe by clarifying our function in the situation we can come to grips with the forces which we are trying to understand. I would say it is our task to re-establish a mutuality of functioning between the child patient and his parents so that instead of a number of fruitless, painful, and destructive attempts at controlling one another, a mutual regulation is established which restores self-control in both child and parent.
The prescription betrays the diagnosis. In growing up together, the family in question have lost a certain mutual regulation as a group. As a consequence each family member has some-how lost the self-control appropriate to his age and status in the family. Instead of controlling himself and of serving the mutual regulation of the group, each member has searched for and found substitute controls, areas of autonomy which exclude the others: the parents in hectic work and social life, the children in the only area of seemingly absolute autonomy that is theirs, their bodies. Autoerotism is an important weapon in this guerrilla warfare in that it gives the child seeming independence from the lost mutuality with others. Such self-absorbed autonomy, however, dissembles the true condition. For in seemingly enjoying the pleasures of his body zones, the child is using organ modes in hostile fantasies of controlling others by total usurpation, whether with a sadistic or a masochistic emphasis. Only this twist, this being turned against the self or against others, causes the organ to be-come a vehicle of aggression in the more usual, the more hostile sense. Before this happens, organ modes are naïve-i.e., pre hostile-patterns of going at things, modes of approach, modes of seeking relationships: this is what ad-gression means before it becomes aggression.
Parents who are faced with the development of a number of children must constantly live up to a challenge. They must develop with them. We distort the situation if we abstract it in such a way that we consider the parent as "having" such and such a personality when the child is born and then, remaining static, im-pinging upon a poor little thing. For this weak and changing little being moves the whole family along. Babies control and bring up their families as much as they are controlled by them; in fact, we may say that the family brings up a baby by being brought up by him. Whatever reaction patterns are given biologically and whatever schedule is predetermined developmentally must be considered to be a series of potentialities for changing patterns of mutual regulation.
It will seem to some that I am abandoning this point of view as I now proceed to review the whole field of what Freud called pregenital stages and erotogenic zones in childhood and attempt to build a bridge from clinical experience to observations on societies. For I will again speak of biologically given potentialities which develop with the child's organism. I do not think that psychoanalysis can remain a workable system of inquiry without its basic biological formulations, much as they may need recon-sideration.
For semantic and conceptual reasons, then, the next section will be the most difficult one for the reader and for myself. I have indicated where we stand on this side of the shore, the clinical one; now a bridge must be begun, the contemplated end of which on the other shore cannot be visible to the reader as yet.
To make the job easier for myself I shall, as I go along, recon-struct the final version of a chart of pregenitality which I first presented over a decade ago. Perhaps this will make it easier for the reader, too. Charts, to paraphrase Lincoln, are the kind of thing which help the kind of people who are helped by that kind of thing. To give the reader the fullest opportunity to be his own kind, I shall try to write this chapter in such a way that what is understandable at all can be understood with or without the chart. By "understood" I mean that the reader will be able to check his knowledge and vocabulary against my way of phrasing the problem. This chapter is the book's skeleton, not its meat. Meat is more entertaining in a number of ways; but to understand the wisdom of things, we must first study their bones, dry and hard as they may seem.
What kind of events do we wish to chart? How "normative" (in the statistical sense) are these events, how indicative and predictive are our charts?
Let us consider a little boy's normative behavior before a mirror as studied by Gesell. The examiner, intent on studying the child's "perceptual, prehensory, and adaptive behavior" at age 56 weeks, raises ("with a moderately decisive maneuver") a curtain from a full-length mirror before which the child has been placed. It is noted that the naked little boy alternately regards his own image and that of the examiner, as he leans forward, slaps the mirror, assumes a kneeling posture, moves to and from the mirror, "contacts mirror with mouth," withdraws, etc. Let us assume that sometime during this procedure his penis becomes erect. This sexual behavior, while by no means abnormal, has nothing to do with the sequence to be photographed as normative. Such behavior was not invited to the test; it has, as it were, crashed a good, clean party. It seems out of place for cultural reasons because up to the time when zoologists entered the field of human sexuality. we did not experiment with sexuality. It seems out of place for systematic reasons because such sexual behavior happens, but not on schedule. In a given situation it may happen; it may not: it is not "normative." However, if it does happen and this at an in opportune moment-i.e., when somebody in the vicinity (mother, attendant) thinks it should not happen-then it may, or may not, elicit from that somebody a drastic reaction which might consist merely in a rare and bewildering change of voice or a general diffused attitude. This may or may not happen in relation to a person or at a time of the life cycle that would give the event decisive importance for the child's relation to himself, to sex, to the world. If it does, it may take a psychoanalyst many months of re-construction in which no normative charts will be of help. For this item of behavior concerns an area of the body richly endowed with nerve endings and elaborately supplied with con-notations by the reactions of the environment. What we must try to chart, then, is the approximate sequence of stages when the nervous excitability as well as the co-ordination of the organs in question and the selective reactivity of significant people in the environment are apt to produce decisive encounters.”
(Erik Erikson, Childhood And Society, 1950)

ERIKSON SHOWS THAT WHAT IS MOST "NATURAL" TO HUMANS IS OUR ABSOLUTE DEPENDENCE ON THE "ACQUIRED" CULTURE INTO WHICH WE ARE BORN.
“To begin once more with what may appear to be a biological beginning: When we say that animals have "instincts," we mean that at least the lower forms have relatively inborn, relatively early, ready-to-use ways of interacting with a segment of nature as part of which they have survived. These patterns vary widely from species to species, but within one species they are highly in-flexible; animals can learn little. Here we think of the swallows from England who were imported to New Zealand by homesick ex-Englishmen. When winter came they all flew south and never returned, for their instincts pointed southward, not warmward. Let us remember that our domesticated animals and our pets, whom we so easily think of as the measure of the animal world, are highly selected and bred creatures who learn to serve our practical and emotional needs as they are taken care of by us. What they learn from us does not improve their chances of surviving in any segment of nature or in any co-operation with their own kind. In this context we do not ask what an individual animal can learn, but what a species can teach its young from generation to generation.
In the higher forms of animals we observe a division of instinct (a term here used in analogy to "division of labor"). Here it is the mutual regulation of instinctive contact seeking in the young and of instinctive contact giving in the parent which completes adaptive functioning in the young. It has been observed, for ex-ample, that certain mammals can learn to defecate only by having the rectum licked by the mother animal.
We could assume that human childhood and human child training are merely the highest form of such instinctive reciprocity. However, the drives man is born with are not instincts; nor are his mother's complementary drives instinctive in nature. Neither carry in themselves the patterns of completion, of self-preservation, of interaction with any segment of nature; tradition and conscience must organize them.
As an animal, man is nothing. It is meaningless to speak of a human child as if it were an animal in the process of domestication; or of his instincts as set patterns encroached upon or molded by the autocratic environment. Man's "inborn instincts" are drive fragments to be assembled, given meaning, and organized during a prolonged childhood by methods of child training and schooling which vary from culture to culture and are determined by tradition. In this lies his chance as an organism, as a member of a society, as an individual. In this also lies his limitation. For while the animal survives where his segment of nature remains predictable enough to fit his inborn patterns of instinctive response or where these responses contain the elements for necessary mutation, man survives only where traditional child training pro-vides him with a conscience which will guide him without crushing him and which is firm and flexible enough to fit the vicissitudes of his historical era. To accomplish this, child training utilizes the vague instinctual (sexual and aggressive) forces which energize instinctive patterns and which in man, just because of his minimal instinctive equipment, are highly mobile and extraordinarily plastic.
Here we merely wish to gain an initial understanding of the timetable and the systematic relationship of the organ modes of pregenitality which establish the basic orientation that an organ-ism or its parts can have to another organism and its parts and to the world of things. A being with organs can take things or an-other being into itself; it can retain them or let them out; or it can enter them. Beings with organs can also perform such modal acts with another being's parts. The human child during its long childhood learns these modes of physical approach and with them the modalities of social life. He learns to exist in space and time as he learns to be an organism in the space-time of his culture. Every part function thus learned is based on some integration of all the organ modes with one another and with the world image of their culture.”
(Erik Erikson, Childhood And Society, 1950)

ERIK ERIKSON COMMENTS ON HOW INSTITUTIONS THEMSELVES EVOLVE. IN THEIR HEALTHY PHASE, THEY SUPPORT THE DEVELOPMENTAL NEEDS OF INDIVIDUALS. In their decadent phase, they turn to "ruthlessly exploit[ing] the infantile anxieties which they at first alleviated" in order to maintain their own power. 
“WITH THE attempt at formulating integrity as the mature quality accrued from all the ego stages and libidinal phases, the scope of a book on childhood and society seems to have been overstepped-and with it, the range of psychoanalytic child psychology as now formulated. For psychoanalysis has consistently described the vicissitudes of instincts and of the ego only up to adolescence, at which time rational genitality was expected to absorb infantile conflicts or irrational fixation to preserve them for repeat performances under manifold disguises. The main recurrent theme thus concerned the shadow of frustration which falls from child-hood on the individual's later life-and on his society. In this book we suggest that, to understand either childhood or society, we must expand our scope to include the study of the way in which societies lighten the inescapable conflicts of childhood with a promise of some security, identity, and integrity. In thus reinforcing the values of the ego, societies create the only condition under which human growth is possible.
Successive civilizations, while exploiting appropriate syndromes of infantile fears, can also be shown to raise the corresponding infantile ego value to highest collective endeavor. A religion, for example, may organize the nuclear conflict of sense of trust versus sense of evil, collectively cultivating trust in the form of faith and exploiting the sense of evil in the form of sin. Such an organization may have its era in history when it reinforces this particular ego value with a collective power capable of creating civilizations and of providing for the participation of its followers in one form of human integrity. That organizations have a knack for outliving their historical ascendancy is another matter. As other ego values (Le., autonomy) become the nuclei of collective endeavors, older organizations may increasingly depend on a ruth-less exploitation of infantile fears. A church may have to take refuge in a system of indoctrination intended to convince people of the inescapable reality of a particular kind of evil in order to be able to announce that it alone possesses the key for the only door to salvation.
The history of societies records the rise and fall of upper classes, elites, and priesthoods which in their aristocratic aspirations cultivated one or the other of the ego values, giving true comfort and providing true progress, but which for the sake of the survival of their own petty hierarchies learned to exploit the infantile anxieties which they at first alleviated. Kings who, when great, were heroes in the drama of patriarchy have protected themselves and their rule by relying on the taboo against patricide. Feudal systems, which at their best are models for the apportioning of responsibility among leaders and led, have maintained themselves by threatening anarchy and loss of face to dissidents. Political systems have thrived on the provocation of manifold and morbid doubt; economic systems on the guilty hesitation to initiate change. Yet political, economic, and technical elites, wherever they have accepted the obligation to perfect a new style of living at a logical point in history, have provided men with a high sense of identity and have inspired them to reach new levels of civilization. All in all, one may conclude that the price in concomitant misery has been too high; but this is a matter for purely philosophical deliberation.
These are impressions. I do not have the knowledge necessary to approach in any systematic fashion the relationship between ego qualities, social institutions, and historical eras. But it seems to me that just as there is a basic affinity of the problem of basic trust to the institution of religion, the problem of autonomy is reflected in basic political organization and that of initiative in the economic order. Similarly, industry is related to technology; identity to social stratification; intimacy to relationship patterns; generativity to education, art, and science; and integrity, finally, to philosophy. I can pursue here only one specific direction suggested and confirmed by my own observations, especially on children. I have focused on the problem of ego identity and on its anchoring in a cultural identity because I believe it to be that part of the ego which at the end of adolescence integrates the infantile ego stages and neutralizes the autocracy of the infantile superego. It is the only inner arrangement which prevents the superego's permanent alliance with the unreconstructed remnants of latent infantile rage.
I know very well that this shift in conceptual emphasis is dictated by historical accident-ie., by the revolutions that are taking place in our lifetime, affecting our personal fortunes as well as the symptoms presented and the unconscious demands made on us by our patients. To condense it into a formula: the patient of today suffers most under the problem of what he should believe in and who he should-or, indeed, might be or become; while the patient of early psychoanalysis suffered most under inhibitions which prevented him from being what and who he thought he knew he was. In this country especially, adult patients and the parents of prospective child patients hope to find in the psycho-analytic system a refuge from the discontinuities of existence, a regression and a return to a more patriarchal one-to-one relation-ship.
As early as 1908 Freud pointed to the origin of the neuroses of his time, in the double standard for the two sexes and the excessive demands made by upper-class pretenses on the wives and mothers in his urban environment. He acknowledged, as partially relevant, the damaging influence of rapid changes in social role suffered by individuals who moved from the country to the city or who climbed from the middle to the upper class. In all of this, how-ever, he discerned as the mainspring of psychopathology a deep upset in the individual's sexual economy owing to the manifold hypocrisies and sexual repressions imposed on him.
To worthy subjects suffering from these arbitrary standards Freud offered the psychoanalytic method, a form of radical self-enlightenment, which soon burst the bounds of narrow historical determination. For with it he found, in the depth of the inhibited individuals of his time, residues of and analogies to the taboos and conventions of all times. Beyond explaining the symptoms characteristic of its own period, it uncovered a timeless elite of brood-ing neurotics, successive versions of King Oedipus, Prince Ham-let, and the Brothers Karamazov, and it determined to manage the spectacle of their tragic conflicts within a private method of self-enlightenment. Making their peace with the complexes emanating from the daemonic Id, they would thereby gain not only health, but also a victory for reason and individuation.
The history of civilization will record that Freud, in attempting to meet the demands of his neurological practice, inadvertently crowned that revolution in human consciousness which in antiquity had lifted the tragic individual from the anonymous chorus of the archaic world and which had made self-conscious man the "measure of all things." The scientific inquiry which had then been directed toward "all things" was redirected by Freud to include human consciousness itself: we shall return, in the conclusion, to the dilemma caused by this re-application of the spirit of inquiry to its own organ and origin. In the meantime, the thematic affinity of the basic Freudian neuroses to the themes of Greek tragedy are obvious, in terminology as well as in spirit.”
(Erik Erikson, Childhood And Society, 1950)

E2.2.B.2.1.g. LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN IS NOT JUST ARGUING THAT OUR DESIRES OR BELIEFS ARE SHAPED BY OUR ENVIRONMENT; HE IS ARGUING THAT OUR VERY ABILITY TO REASON, UNDERSTAND, AND FOLLOW RULES IS NOT AN ACT OF PURE, INDIVIDUAL INTELLECT, but is determined by our "upbringing" (the training we receive) and our shared "social environment" (what he famously calls a "form of life").
“144. What do I mean when I say “the pupil’s capacity to learn may come to an end here”? Do I say this from my own experience? Of course not. (Even if I have had such experience.) Then what am I doing with that proposition? Well, I should like you to say: “Yes, it’s true, you can imagine that too, that might happen too!”—But was I trying to draw someone’s attention to the fact that he is capable of imagining that?-I wanted to put that picture before him, and his 
acceptance of the picture consists in his now being inclined to regard a given case differently: that is, to compare it with this rather than that set of pictures. I have changed his way of looking at things. (Indian mathematicians: “Look at this.”) 
145. Suppose the pupil now writes the series o to 9 to our satisfaction.—And this will only be the case when he is often successful, not if he does it right once in a hundred attempts. Now I continue the series and draw his attention to the recurrence of the first series in the units; and then to its recurrence in the tens. (Which only means that I use particular emphases, underline figures, write them one under another in such-and-such ways, and similar things.)—And now at some point he continues the series independently—or he does not.—But why do you say that? so much is obvious!—Of course; I only wished to say: the effect of any further explanation depends on his reaction. 
Now, however, let us suppose that after some efforts on the teacher’s part he continues the series correctly, that is, as we do it. So now we can say he has mastered the system.—But how far need he continue the series for us to have the right to say that? Clearly you cannot state a limit here.”
(Ludwig Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations, 1953)

E2.2.B.2.1.h. LISA FELDMAN BARRETT REFUTES THE CLASSICAL VIEW OF EMOTIONS AS UNIVERSAL, INNATE REFLEXES WITH BIOLOGICAL FINGERPRINTS, ARGUING INSTEAD FOR A THEORY OF "CONSTRUCTED EMOTION" WHERE THE BRAIN ACTIVELY BUILDS EMOTIONAL EXPERIENCES FROM MORE BASIC PARTS BASED ON ONE'S CULTURE AND ENVIRONMENT.
“The classical view of emotion holds that we have many such emotion circuits in our brains, and each is said to cause a distinct set of changes, that is, a fingerprint. Perhaps an annoying coworker triggers your “anger neurons,” so your blood pressure rises; you scowl, yell, and feel the heat of fury. Or an alarming news story triggers your “fear neurons,” so your heart races; you freeze and feel a flash of dread. Because we experience anger, happiness, surprise, and other emotions as clear and identifiable states of being, it seems reasonable to assume that each emotion has a defining underlying pattern in the brain and body. Our emotions, according to the classical view, are artifacts of evolution, having long ago been advantageous for survival, and are now a fixed component of our biological nature. As such, they are universal: people of every age, in every culture, in every part of the world should experience sadness more or less as you do — and more or less as did our hominin ancestors who roamed the African savanna a million years ago. I say “more or less” because no one believes that faces, bodies, and brain activity look exactly the same each time someone is sad. Your heart rate and breathing and blood flow won’t always change by the same amount. Your brow might fur-row slightly less by chance or by custom. Emotions are thus thought to be a kind of brute reflex, very often at odds with our rationality. The primitive part of your brain wants you to tell your boss he’s an idiot, but your deliberative side knows that doing so would get you fired, so you restrain yourself. This kind of internal battle between emotion and reason is one of the great narratives of Western civilization. It helps define you as human. Without rationality, you are merely an emotional beast. This view of emotions has been around for millennia in various forms. Plato believed a version of it. So did Hippocrates, Aristotle, the Buddha, René Descartes, Sigmund Freud, and Charles Darwin. Today, prominent thinkers such as Steven Pinker, Paul Ekman, and the Dalai Lama also offer up descriptions of emotions rooted in the classical view. The classical view is found in virtually every introductory college textbook on psychology, and in most magazine and newspaper articles that discuss emotion. Pre-schools throughout America hang posters displaying the smiles, frowns, and pouts that are supposed to be the universal language of the face for recognizing emotions. Facebook even commissioned a set of emoticons in-spired by Darwin’s writings. The classical view is also entrenched in our culture. Television shows like Lie to Me and Daredevil are predicated on the assumption that your inner-most feelings are exposed by your heart rate or facial movements. Sesame Street teaches children that emotions are distinct things inside us seeking expression in the face and body, as does the Pixar movie Inside Out. Companies like Affectiva and Realeyes offer to help businesses detect their cu-tomers’ feelings through “emotion analytics.” In the NBA draft, the Milwaukee Bucks evaluate a player’s “psychological, character and personality issues” and assess “team chemistry” from facial expressions. And for several decades, the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) based some of its advanced agent training on the classical view. More significantly, the classical view of emotion is embedded in our social institutions. The American legal system assumes that emotions are part of an inherent animal nature and cause us to perform foolish and even vio-lent acts unless we control them with our rational thoughts. In medicine, researchers study the health effects of anger, supposing that there is a single pattern of changes in the body that goes by that name. People suffering from a variety of mental illnesses, including children and adults diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder, are taught how to recognize facial configurations for specific emotions, ostensibly to help them communicate and relate to others. And yet . . . despite the distinguished intellectual pedigree of the classical view of emotion, and despite its immense influence in our culture and society, there is abundant scientific evidence that this view cannot possibly be true. Even after a century of effort, scientific research has not revealed a consistent, physical fingerprint for even a single emotion. When scientists attach electrodes to a person’s face and measure how facial muscles actually move during the experience of an emotion, they find tremendous variety, not uniformity. They find the same variety — the same absence of finger-prints — when they study the body and the brain. You can experience an-ger with or without a spike in blood pressure. You can experience fear with or without an amygdala, the brain region historically tagged as the home of fear. To be sure, hundreds of experiments offer some evidence for the classical view. But hundreds more cast that evidence into doubt. The only reasonable scientific conclusion, in my opinion, is that emotions are not what we typically think they are. So what are they, really? When scientists set aside the classical view and just look at the data, a radically different explanation for emotion comes to light. In short, we find that your emotions are not built-in but made from more basic parts. They are not universal but vary from culture to culture. They are not triggered; you create them. They emerge as a combination of the physical properties of your body, a flexible brain that wires itself to whatever environment it develops in, and your culture and upbringing, which provide that environment. Emotions are real, but not in the objective sense that molecules or neurons are real. They are real in the same sense that money is real — that is, hardly an illusion, but a product of hu-man agreement. […] The classical view of emotion remains compelling, despite the evidence against it, precisely because it’s intuitive. The classical view also provides reassuring answers to deep, fundamental questions like: Where do you come from, evolutionarily speaking? Are you responsible for your actions when you get emotional? Do your experiences accurately reveal the world outside you? The theory of constructed emotion answers such questions differently. It’s a different theory of human nature that helps you see yourself and others in a new and more scientifically justified light. The theory of constructed emotion might not fit the way you typically experience emotion and, in fact, may well violate your deepest beliefs about how the mind works, where humans come from, and why we act and feel as we do. But the theory consistently predicts and explains the scientific evidence on emotion, including plenty of evidence that the classical view struggles to make sense of.”
(Lisa Feldman Barrett, How Emotions Are Made - The Secret Life of the Brain, 2017)

LISA FELDMAN BARRETT REFUTES THE CLASSICAL VIEW OF EMOTIONS AS UNIVERSAL, INNATE REFLEXES WITH BIOLOGICAL FINGERPRINTS, ARGUING INSTEAD FOR A THEORY OF "CONSTRUCTED EMOTION" WHERE THE BRAIN ACTIVELY BUILDS EMOTIONAL EXPERIENCES FROM MORE BASIC PARTS BASED ON ONE'S CULTURE AND ENVIRONMENT (continued)
"I’m not the first person to propose that emotions are made. The theory of constructed emotion belongs to a broader scientific tradition called construction, which holds that your experiences and behaviors are created in the moment by biological processes within your brain and body. Construction is based on a very old set of ideas that date back to Ancient Greece, when the philosopher Heraclitus famously wrote, “No man ever steps in the same river twice,” because only a mind perceives an ever-changing river as a distinct body of water. Today, constructionism spans many topics including memory, perception, mental illness, and, of course, emotion.
A constructionist approach to emotion has a couple of core ideas. One idea is that an emotion category such as anger or disgust does not have a fingerprint. One instance of anger need not look or feel like another, nor will it be caused by the same neurons. Variation is the norm. Your range of angers is not necessarily the same as mine, although if we were raised in similar circumstances, we will likely have some overlap.
Another core idea is that the emotions you experience and perceive are not an inevitable consequence of your genes. What’s inevitable is that you’ll have some kinds of concepts for making sense of sensory input from your body in the world because, as we learn in chapter 5, your brain has wiring for this purpose. Even single-celled animals can make sense of changes in their environment. But particular concepts like “Anger” and “Disgust” are not genetically predetermined. Your familiar emotion concepts are built-in only because you grew up in a particular social context where those emotion concepts are meaningful and useful, and your brain applies them out-side your awareness to construct your experiences. Heart rate changes are inevitable; their emotional meaning is not. Other cultures can and do make other kinds of meaning from the same sensory input.
The theory of constructed emotion incorporates ideas from several flavors of construction. One flavor, called social construction, studies the role of social values and interests in determining how we perceive and act in the world. An example would be whether or not Pluto is a planet, which is a decision not based in astrophysics but in culture. Spherical rocks in space are objectively real and come in various sizes, but the idea of a “Planet,” representing a particular combination of features of interest, is made up by people. Each of us understands the world in a way that is useful but not necessarily true in some absolute, objective sense. Where emotion is concerned, social construction theories ask how feelings and perceptions are influenced by our social roles or beliefs. For example, my perceptions are influenced by the fact that I am a woman, a mother, an atheist who is culturally Jewish, and a rather pale person living in a country that once enslaved people for having more melanin in their skin than I do. Social construction tends to ignore biology, however, as irrelevant to emotion. Instead, the theories suggest that emotions are triggered differently depending on your so-cial role. Social constructionist theories, then, are primarily concerned with social circumstances in the world outside you, without considering how those circumstances affect the brain’s wiring.
Another flavor of construction, known as psychological construction, turns this focus inward. It proposes that your perceptions, thoughts, and feelings are themselves constructed from more basic parts. Some nineteenth-century philosophers viewed the mind like a big chemistry set, combining simpler sensations into thoughts and emotions the way that atoms combine to make molecules. Others saw the mind as a set of all-purpose parts, like Lego blocks, that contribute to various mental states like cognitions and emotions. William James proposed that our incredibly varied emotional experiences are constructed from common ingredients. “Emotional brain processes,” he wrote, “not only resemble the ordinary sensorial brain-processes, but in very truth are nothing but such processes variously combined.” In the 1960s, the psychologists Stanley Schachter and Jerome Singer famously injected test subjects with adrenaline  —  without the subjects’ knowledge  —  and saw them experience this mysterious arousal as anger or euphoria, depending on the context surrounding them. In all these views, an instance of anger or elation does not reveal its causal mechanisms  —  a marked contrast to the classical view, where each emotion has a dedicated mechanism in the brain, and the same word (e.g., “sadness”) names the mechanism and its product. In recent years, a new generation of scientists has been crafting psychological construction-based theories for under-standing emotions and how they work. Not every theory agrees on every assumption, but together they assert that emotions are made, not triggered; emotions are highly variable, without fingerprints; and emotions are not, in principle, distinct from cognitions and perceptions.”
(Lisa Feldman Barrett, How Emotions Are Made - The Secret Life of the Brain, 2017)

LISA FELDMAN BARRETT ARGUES THAT EMOTIONS ARE NOT REACTIONS FROM DEDICATED BRAIN CENTERS, BUT ARE CONSTRUCTED WHEN THE BRAIN MAKES MEANING OF THE INTENSE BODILY SENSATIONS (INTEROCEPTION) THAT ARISE FROM ITS CORE PREDICTIVE MISSION OF MANAGING YOUR BODY BUDGET.
“Your brain is always predicting, and its most important mission is predicting your body’s energy needs, so you can stay alive and well. These crucial predictions, and their associated prediction error, turn out to be a key ingredient for making emotions. For hundreds of years, scholars believed that emotional “reactions” were caused by certain brain regions. As you’ll now discover, those brain regions do the opposite of what everyone expected, helping to make emotion in a way that overturns centuries of scientific be-lief. And once again, the story begins with movement — not the large-scale movements of a baseball game, but the inner motion of your body. Any movement of your body is accompanied by movement in your body. When you shift position quickly to catch a baseball, you have to breathe more deeply. To escape from a poisonous snake, your heart pumps blood faster through dilated blood vessels to rush glucose to your muscles, which increases your heart rate and changes your blood pressure. Your brain rep-resents the sensations that result from this inner motion; this representation, you may remember, is called interoception. Your inner-body movements, and their interoceptive consequences, occur every moment of your life. Your brain must keep your heart beating and your blood pumping and your lungs breathing and your glucose metabolizing even when you are not playing sports or fleeing from a snake, even when you are sleeping or resting. Interoception is therefore continuous, just as the mechanics of hearing and vision are always operating, even when you aren’t actively listening or looking at anything in particular. From your brain’s point of view, locked inside the skull, your body is just another part of the world that it must explain. Your pumping heart, your expanding lungs, and your changing temperature and metabolism send sensory input to your brain that is noisy and ambiguous. A single interoceptive cue, such as a dull ache in your abdomen, could mean a stomachache, hunger, tension, an overly tight belt, or a hundred other causes. Your brain must explain bodily sensations to make them meaningful, and its major tool for doing so is prediction. So, your brain models the world from the perspective of someone with your body. Just as your brain predicts the sights, smells, sounds, touches, and tastes from the world in relation to the movements of your head and limbs, it also predicts the sensory consequences of movements inside your body. Most of the time, you’re unaware of the miniature maelstrom of movement inside you. (When’s the last time you thought, “Hmm, my liver seems to be producing a lot of bile today”?) Of course, there are times when you directly feel a headache, a full stomach, or your heart pounding in your chest. But your nervous system isn’t built for you to experience these sensations with precision, which is fortunate, because otherwise they’d over-whelm your attention.” Usually, you experience interoception only in general terms: those simple feelings of pleasure, displeasure, arousal, or calmness that I mentioned earlier. Sometimes, however, you experience moments of intense interoceptive sensations as emotions. That is a key element of the theory of constructed emotion. In every waking moment, your brain gives your sensations meaning. Some of those sensations are interoceptive sensations, and the resulting meaning can be an instance of emotion. […]
Your body-budgeting regions play a vital role in keeping you alive. Each time your brain moves any part of your body, inside or out, it spends some of its energy resources: the stuff it uses to run your organs, your metabolism, and your immune system. You replenish your body’s resources by eating, drinking, and sleeping, and you reduce your body’s spending by relaxing with loved ones, even having sex. To manage all of this spending and replenishing, your brain must constantly predict your body’s energy needs, like a budget for your body. Just as a company has a finance department that tracks deposits and withdrawals and moves money between accounts, so its overall budget stays in balance, your brain has circuitry that is largely responsible for your body budget. That circuitry is within your interoceptive network. Your body-budgeting regions make predictions to estimate the re-sources to keep you alive and flourishing, using past experience as a guide. Why is this relevant to emotion? Because every brain region that’s claimed to be a home of emotion in humans is a body-budgeting region within the interoceptive network. These regions, however, don’t react in emotion. They don’t react at all. They predict, intrinsically, to regulate your body budget. They issue predictions for sights, sounds, thoughts, memories, imagination, and, yes, emotions. The idea of an emotional brain region is an illusion caused by the outdated belief in a reactive brain. Neuroscientists understand this today, but the message hasn’t trickled down to many psychologists, psychiatrists, sociologists, economists, and others who study emotion. Whenever your brain predicts a movement, whether it’s getting out of bed in the morning or taking a sip of coffee, your body-budgeting regions adjust your budget. When your brain predicts that your body will need a quick burst of energy, these regions instruct the adrenal gland in your kidneys to release the hormone cortisol. People call cortisol a “stress hormone,” but this is a mistake. Cortisol is released whenever you need a surge of energy, which happens to include the times when you are stressed. Its main purpose is to flood the bloodstream with glucose to provide immediate energy to cells, allowing, for example, muscle cells to stretch and contract so you can run. Your body-budgeting regions also make you breathe more deeply to get more oxygen into your bloodstream and dilate your arteries to get that oxygen to your muscles more quickly so your body can move. All of this internal motion is accompanied by interoceptive sensations, though you are not wired to experience them precisely. So, your interoceptive net-work controls your body, budgets your energy resources, and represents your internal sensations, all at the same time. Withdrawals from your body’s budget don’t require actual physical movement. Suppose you see your boss, teacher, or baseball coach walking toward you. You believe that she judges everything you say and do. Even though no physical movement seems called for, your brain predicts that your body needs energy and makes a budget withdrawal, releasing cortisol and flooding glucose into your bloodstream. You also have a surge in interoceptive sensations. Stop and think about this for a minute. Someone merely walks toward you while you are standing still, and your brain predicts that you need fuel! In this manner, any event that significantly impacts your body budget becomes personally meaningful to you. […] Every person you encounter, every prediction you make, every idea you imagine, and every sight, sound, taste, touch, and smell that you fail to anticipate all have budgetary consequences and corresponding interoceptive predictions. Your brain must contend with this continuous, ever-changing flow of interoceptive sensations from the predictions that keep you alive.
Sometimes you’re aware of them, and other times you’re not, but they are always part of your brain’s model of the world. They are, as I’ve said, the scientific basis for simple feelings of pleasure, displeasure, arousal, and calm-ness that you experience every day. For some, the flow is like the trickle of a tranquil brook. For others, it’s like a raging river. Sometimes the sensations are transformed into emotions, but as you will now learn, even when they’re only in the background, they influence what you do, what you think, and what you perceive.” 
(Lisa Feldman Barrett, How Emotions Are Made - The Secret Life of the Brain, 2017)

LISA FELDMAN BARRETT ARGUES THAT OUR INTERNAL SENSE OF THE BODY'S BUDGET (INTEROCEPTION) IS NOT A BACKGROUND FEELING BUT THE PRIMARY DRIVER OF ALL EXPERIENCE, PLACING AFFECT IN THE DRIVER'S SEAT TO SHAPE OUR PERCEPTIONS, GUIDE OUR DECISIONS, AND ULTIMATELY CONSTRUCT OUR PERSONAL REALITY.
“Your interoceptive network doesn’t just help determine how you feel. Its body-budgeting regions are some of the most powerful and well-connected predictors in your entire brain. These regions are loud and bossy, like a mostly deaf scientist with a big megaphone. They launch predictions for vision, hearing, and your other senses; your primary sensory regions, which don’t issue predictions of their own, are wired to listen.
Let me show you what this means. You might think that in everyday life, the things you see and hear influence what you feel, but it’s mostly the other way around: that what you feel alters your sight and hearing. Interoception in the moment is more influential to perception, and how you act, than the outside world is.
You might believe that you are a rational creature, weighing the pros and cons before deciding how to act, but the structure of your cortex makes this an implausible fiction. Your brain is wired to listen to your body budget. Affect is in the driver’s seat and rationality is a passenger. It doesn’t matter whether you’re choosing between two snacks, two job offers, two investments, or two heart surgeons  —  your everyday decisions are driven by a loudmouthed, mostly deaf scientist who views the world through affect-colored glasses.
Antonio Damasio, in his bestseller Descartes’ Error, observes that a mind requires passion (what we would call affect) for wisdom. He documents that people with damage to their interoceptive network, particularly in one key body-budgeting region, have impaired decision-making. Robbed of the capacity to generate interoceptive predictions, Damasio’s patients were rudderless. Our new knowledge of brain anatomy now compels us to go one step further. Affect is not just necessary for wisdom; it’s also irrevocably woven into the fabric of every decision. […]

Right now, as your brain makes meaning from these words, it is predicting changes in your body budget. Every thought, memory, perception, or emotion that you construct includes something about the state of your body: a little piece of interoception. A visual prediction, for example, doesn’t just answer the question, “What did I see last time I was in this situation?” It answers, “What did I see last time I was in this situation when my body was in this state?” Any change in affect you feel while reading these words  —  more or less pleasant, or more or less calm  — is a result of those interoceptive predictions. Affect is your brain’s best guess about the state of your body budget.
Interoception is also one of the most important ingredients in what you experience as reality. If you didn’t have interoception, the physical world would be meaningless noise to you. Consider this: Your interceptive predictions, which produce your feelings of affect, determine what you care about in the moment  —  your affective niche. From the perspective of your brain, anything in your affective niche could potentially influence your body bud-get, and nothing else in the universe matters. That means, in effect, that you construct the environment in which you live. You might think about your en-vironment as existing in the outside world, separate from yourself, but that’s a myth. You (and other creatures) do not simply find yourself in an environment and either adapt or die. You construct your environment  —  your reality  —  by virtue of what sensory input from the physical environment your brain selects; it admits some as information and ignores some as noise. And this selection is intimately linked to interoception. Your brain expands its predictive repertoire to include anything that might impact your body bud-get, in order to meet your body’s metabolic demands. This is why affect is a property of consciousness.
Interoception, as a fundamental part of the predictive process, is a key ingredient of emotion. However, interoception alone cannot explain emotion. An emotion category like anger or sadness is far more complex than a simple feeling of unpleasantness and arousal.”
(Lisa Feldman Barrett, How Emotions Are Made - The Secret Life of the Brain, 2017)

E2.2.B.2.1.i. “FEEDBAK LOOPS […]
A feedback loop is a process in which the output of a system also acts as an input to the system, helping to refine and improve the system over time. It’s like a conversation in which each reply helps to shape the next question and answer, making the discussion better and more focused.
Once you start looking for feedback loops, you see them all over the place, giving you insight into why people and systems react the way they do. For example, much of human behavior is driven by incentives. We want to take actions that lead to us getting something good or avoiding something bad on a range of timescales. The incentives we create for ourselves and other people are a form of feedback, leading to loops that reinforce or discourage certain behaviors. […]

We are, by nature, selfish. We value ourselves above all other humans. Smith illustrates his point by suggesting that the news that your little finger must be amputated would likely be more stressing than the news of the deaths of a huge number of strangers overseas. Yet despite our inherent selfishness, the majority of people the majority of the time are cooperative and kind to one another.
Smith believed our interactions with others are responsible for our wellestablished reciprocity. He saw others’ responses to our behavior as feedback guiding how we act in the future. To do something selfish usually warrants a disapproving reaction. To do something selfless usually merits an approving one. […]

We want to minimize, as much as possible, making a choice today that creates a negative reinforcing feedback loop down the road. So, we consider the future incentives a decision will create.
A classic example of today’s solution inadvertently creating a reinforcing feedback loop of future problems is paying off kidnappers. The immediate problem is someone being kidnapped and a ransom being demanded. If you have the resources to meet the kidnappers’ demands, you might want to pay the money right away. You save a life and solve the problem.
However, your response communicates to the kidnappers that you will meet their demands. You thus create an incentive for them to kidnap again, as well as signal to other would-be kidnappers that there is money to be made. By paying a ransom, you create a powerful reinforcing feedback loop that causes more problems in the future. […]

Influencing Behavior at the Margins
Not everyone is likely to change their behavior in response to pressures, such as social or economic changes, at the same intensity and rate. Some people need more convincing; others need more time. […]
Criminal law has to work at the margins in terms of deterring unwanted behavior. This means any additional (incremental) crime must be met with appropriate punishment. For example, if a criminal “faces execution for the crime he already has committed, he pays no additional price for adding a murder to it.” We don’t want thieves to get a death sentence, or there would be no incentive for them not to kill people in the course of their thievery. Farnsworth explains, “The designers of criminal penalties have to worry about preserving marginal deterrence—scaling penalties so that there is always something more to fear by doing a little worse.” In essence, this creates a balancing feedback loop that responds with appropriate consequences depending on the severity of the crime.
One of the issues as systems get larger is that there are more margins on which to adjust behavior. Adjusting a feedback loop in an attempt to balance it may create an undesirable reinforcing feedback loop somewhere else. For example, if you make it more difficult for people to consume sugary drinks in public, do you then force them into consuming in private indoor spaces? If you do, there is the danger that consuming sugary drinks in the home could lead to increased consumption with fewer judgmental eyes around. It could also normalize the behavior for children in the household, leading to another generation of sugary drink consumers. […]

Dealing with Information Cascades
Information cascades happen when people make decisions based on the observations or actions of others, which often leads to a convergence of behavior. Many investors selling a particular stock might trigger a cascade in which others sell the same stock, not because of something being wrong with the company but rather because others are selling. Or consider social media virality. A small number of people rapidly liking a post makes the algorithm show the post to more people, who, seeing everyone else liking it, engage with it as well—often without evaluating the content.
Information cascades are a reinforcing feedback loop. They can be evaluated as either positive or negative, depending on the information they communicate. Information cascades occur because we rarely have perfect information, and in many situations, especially in situations of uncertainty, we look to others to determine what we ought to do. […]
Farnsworth writes, “Ignorance and uncertainty are the best soil for a cascade; people rely on what others think when they have no strong knowledge of their own, and the fragility of the consensus that results makes it easily disrupted by shocks.” Thus two common legal solutions for dealing with a negative information cascade are laws that require public disclosure of information and prosecuting in certain high-profile situations to make a visible example.
Sometimes having more easily available and accurate information can interrupt a cascade. Think of the disclosure of financial information for publicly traded companies. Not only does the prosecution of high-profile cases act as a deterrent, but the publicity involved often provides more information about the legal territory. The prosecution of Al Capone for tax evasion probably did a lot to educate people about their basic tax responsibilities.
Ultimately these types of actions by the courts are “meant to send signals stronger than the ones people get by watching each other.” And it is those signals that interrupt the reinforcing feedback loop of an information cascade. […]

Building trust
Complex societies require trust among members to function. Look at how much trust we place in the other drivers on the road every time we get into a car. We trust that they will stop at red lights and stay in their lane. We are vigilant for the occasional mistake, but we drive as if other drivers will obey the same rules and quickly notice when they don’t. We place trust everywhere—from the people of our children’s school system to those who work in our food and safety systems. For relationships without direct interaction, the law facilitates trust. Farnsworth writes, “Law often amounts to a substitute for trust in situations too complex or dispersed for trust to arise.” […]

Feedback loops are one of the key mechanisms that provide the information we use to make trust-based decisions. What happened before in your interaction with a person provides feedback that may cause you to modify your behavior, as does someone’s reputation.
The loop of information is the basis for the classic strategy of the Prisoner’s Dilemma, tit for tat. In a repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma, the best solution, based on experiments conducted by Robert Axelrod, is to cooperate first, and then in subsequent rounds, to do what the other player did in the previous round. You start off trusting, and more important, you create a feedback loop that says you are capable of and willing to trust.”
(Shane Parrish, The Great Mental Models, Systems and Mathematics, Vol 3, 2021)

E2.2.B.2.2. The Content of Our Chains (The "Imagined Realities" We Inhabit): beyond the family, the larger forces of economics, class, language, history, and ideology that define our reality.

E2.2.B.2.2.a. DANS LA SOCIETE MODERNE, LE TRAVAILLEUR N’EST PLUS ASSUJETTI A AUCUNE VIOLENCE NI A AUCUNE DOMINATION, IL EST CONTRAINT PAR LA NECESSITE DIRECTE INHERENTE A LA VIE ELLE-MEME. La nécessité a donc ici pris la place de la violence, et la question subsiste de savoir s’il est plus facile de s’opposer à la contrainte de la violence ou à la contrainte de la nécessité.
"L’époque moderne, qui a considéré avec une détermination plus grande que jamais auparavant la politique comme un simple moyen de conserver et d’encourager la vie de la société et qui s’est par conséquent efforcée de limiter les compétences du politique au strict nécessaire, a imaginé non sans raison qu’elle serait mieux préparée que tous les siècles précédents au problème de la violence. Elle a effectivement réussi à exclure en pratique l’élément de la violence et à faire complètement disparaître la domination directe de l’homme sur l’homme de la sphère sans cesse élargie de la vie sociale. L’émancipation des classes laborieuses et des femmes, c’est-à-dire des deux catégories humaines qui étaient soumises à la violence au cours de toute l’histoire prémoderne, montre très clairement le point culminant de cette évolution. 

Nous laisserons dans un premier temps en suspens la question de savoir si cette diminution de la violence dans la vie sociale doit être mise sur le même plan qu’un gain de liberté. Au sens de la tradition politique, le fait de ne pas être libre reçoit en tout cas une double détermination. Il consiste tout d’abord à être subordonné à la violence d’un autre, mais également, et tout aussi originellement, à être soumis à la nécessité brute de la vie. L’activité qui répond à la contrainte à laquelle la vie elle-même nous oblige à nous procurer le nécessaire est le travail. Dans toutes les sociétés prémodernes, on pouvait se libérer de ce travail en contraignant d’autres hommes à travailler pour soi, c’est-à-dire en recourant à la violence et à la domination. Dans la société moderne, le travailleur n’est plus assujetti à aucune violence ni à aucune domination, il est contraint par la nécessité directe inhérente à la vie elle-même. La nécessité a donc ici pris la place de la violence, et la question subsiste de savoir s’il est plus facile de s’opposer à la contrainte de la violence ou à la contrainte de la nécessité. En outre, le développement tout entier de la société passe dans un premier temps, c’est-à-dire jusqu’au moment où l’automation élimine effectivement le travail, par la transformation uniforme de tous ses membres en « travailleurs », c’est-à-dire en hommes dont l’activité, quelle qu’elle soit, sert tout d’abord à produire ce qui est nécessaire à la vie. Même en ce sens, le fait d’éloigner la violence de la vie en société n’a pour l’instant pas d’autre conséquence que l’octroyer à la nécessité, à laquelle la vie contraint tout le monde, un espace incomparablement plus grand qu’auparavant. La vie de la société est effectivement dominée par la nécessité et non par la liberté, et ce n’est pas un hasard si le concept de nécessité est devenu si prédominant dans toutes les philosophies modernes de l’histoire au sein desquelles précisément la pensée moderne s’est orientée de façon philosophique en cherchant à parvenir à la conscience de soi. "
(Hannah Arendt, Qu'est ce que la politique?, 1958)

ALL SERIOUS ACTIVITIES, IRRESPECTIVE OF THEIR FRUITS, ARE CALLED LABOR, AND EVERY ACTIVITY WHICH IS NOT NECESSARY EITHER FOR THE LIFE OF THE INDIVIDUAL OR FOR THE LIFE PROCESS OF SOCIETY IS SUBSUMED UNDER PLAYFULNESS.
"A C O N S U M E R S ' S O C I E T Y
It is frequently said that we live in a consumers' society, and since, as we saw, labor and consumption are but two stages of the same process, imposed upon man by the necessity of life, this is only another way of saying that we live in a society of laborers. This society did not come about through the emancipation of the laboring classes but by the emancipation of the laboring activity itself, which preceded by centuries the political emancipation of laborers. The point is not that for the first time in history laborers were admitted and given equal rights in the public realm, but that we have almost succeeded in leveling all human activities to the common denominator of securing the necessities of life and providing for their abundance. Whatever we do, we are supposed to do for the sake of "making a living"; such is the verdict of society, and the number of people, especially in the professions who might challenge it, has decreased rapidly. The only exception society is willing to grant is the artist, who, strictly speaking, is the only "worker" left in a laboring society. The same trend to level down all serious activities to the status of making a living is manifest in present-day labor theories, which almost unanimously define labor as the opposite of play. As a result, all serious activities, irrespective of their fruits, are called labor, and every activity which is not necessary either for the life of the individual or for the life process of society is subsumed under playfulness. (1) . In these theories, which by echoing the current estimate of a laboring society on the theoretical level sharpen it and drive it into its inherent extreme, not even the "work" of the artist is left; it is dissolved into play and has lost its worldly meaning. The playfulness of the artist is felt to fulfil the same function in the laboring life process of society as the playing of tennis or the pursuit of a hobby fulfils in the life of the individual. The emancipation of labor has not resulted in an equality of this activity with the other activities of the vita activa, but in its almost undisputed predominance. From the standpoint of "making a living," every activity unconnected with labor becomes a "hobby." [...]

Notes:
(1) Although this labor-play category appears at first glance to be so general as to be meaningless, it is characteristic in another respect: the real opposite underlying it is the opposition of necessity and freedom, and it is indeed remarkable to see how plausible it is for modern thinking to consider playfulness to be the source of freedom. Aside from this generalization, the modern idealizations of labor may be said to fall roughly into the following categories: (1) Labor is a means to attain a higher end. This is generally the Catholic position, which has the great merit of not being able to escape from reality altogether, so that the intimate connections between labor and life and between labor and pain are usually at least mentioned. One outstanding representative is Jacques Leclercq of Louvain, especially his discussion of labor and property in Lemons de droit naturel (1946), Vol. IV, Part 2. (2) Labor is an act of shaping in which "a given structure is transformed into another, higher structure." This is the central thesis of the famous work by Otto Lipmann, Grundriss der Arbeitswissensckaft (1926). (3) Labor in a laboring society is pure pleasure or "can be made fully as satisfying as leisure-time activities" (see Glen W. Cleeton, Making Work Human [1949]). This position is taken today by Corrado Gini in his Ecconomica Lavorista (1954), who considers the United States to be a "laboring society" (societh lavorista) where "labor is a pleasure and where all men want to labor." (For a summary of his position in German see Zeitschrift fur die gesamte Staatswissensckaft, CIX [1953] and CX [1954].) This theory, incidentally, is less new than it seems. It was first formulated by F. Nitti ("Le travail humain et ses lois," Revue Internationale de sociologie [1895]), who even then maintained that the "idea that labor is painful is a psychological rather than a physiological fact," so that pain will disappear in a society where everybody works. (4) Labor, finally, is man's confirmation of himself against nature, which is brought under his domination through labor. This is the assumption which underlies—explicitly or implicitly—the new, especially French trend of a humanism of labor. Its best-known representative is Georges Friedmann. After all these theories and academic discussions, it is rather refreshing to learn that a large majority of workers, if asked "why does man work?" answer simply "in order to be able to live" or "to make money" (see Helmut Schelsky, Arbeiterjugend Gestern und Heute [1955], whose publications are remarkably free of prejudices and idealizations)."
(Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition, 1958)

COPY Toute violence est-ell sans raison?

"THE EMANCIPATION OF LABOR AND THE CONCOMITANT EMANCIPATION OF THE LABORING CLASSES FROM OPPRESSION AND EXPLOITATION CERTAINLY MEANT PROGRESS IN THE DIRECTION OF NON-VIOLENCE. IT IS MUCH LESS CERTAIN THAT IT WAS ALSO PROGRESS IN THE DIRECTION OF FREEDOM. No man exerted violence, except the violence used in torture, can match the natural force with which necessity itself compels. It is for this reason that the Greeks derived their word for torture from necessity, calling it anagkai, and not from bia, used for violence as exerted by man over man, just as this is the reason for the historical fact that throughout occidental antiquity torture, the "necessity no man can withstand," could be applied only to slaves, who were subject to necessity anyhow.(1) It was the arts of violence, the arts of war, piracy, and ultimately absolute rule, which brought the defeated into the services of the victors and thereby held necessity in abeyance for the longer period of recorded history. The modern age, much more markedly than Christianity, has brought about—together with its glorification of labor—a tremendous degradation in the estimation of these arts and a less great but not less important actual decrease in the use of the instruments of violence in human affairs generally. The elevation of labor and the necessity inherent in the laboring metabolism with nature appear to be intimately connected with the downgrading of all activities which either spring directly from violence, as the use of force in human relations, or harbor an element of violence within themselves, which, as we shall see, is the case for all workmanship. It is as though the growing elimination of violence throughout the modern age almost automatically opened the doors for the re-entry of necessity on its most elementary level. What already happened once in our history, in the centuries of the declining Roman Empire, may be happening again. Even then, labor became an occupation of the free classes, "only to bring to them the obligations of the servile classes. (2)"

Notes:
(1) The current modern explanation of this custom which was characteristic of the whole of Greek and Latin antiquity—that its origin is to be found in "the belief that the slave is unable to tell the truth except on the rack" (Barrow, op. dt., p. 31)—is quite erroneous. The belief, on the contrary, is that nobody can invent a lie under torture: "On croyait recueillir la voix meme de la nature dans les cris de la douleur. Plus la douleur penetrait avant, plus intime et plus vrai sembla etre ce temoignage de la chair et du sang" (Wallon, op. cit., I, 325). Ancient psychology was much more aware than we are of the element of freedom, of free invention, in telling lies. The "necessities" of torture were supposed to destroy this freedom and therefore could not be applied to free citizens.

(2)  Wallon, op. cit., Ill, 265. Wallon shows brilliantly how the late Stoic generalization that all men are slaves rested on the development of the Roman Empire, where the old freedom was gradually abolished by the imperial government, so that eventually nobody was free and everybody had his master. The turning point is when first Caligula and then Trajan consented to being called dominus, a word formerly used only for the master of the household. The so called slave morality of late antiquity and its assumption that no real difference existed between the life of a slave and that of a free man had a very realistic background. Now the slave could indeed tell his master: Nobody is free, everybody has a master. In the words of Wallon: "Les condamnes aux mines ont pour confreres, a un moindre degre de peine, les condamnes aux moulins, aux boulangeries, aux relais publics, a tout autre travail faisant l'objet d'une corporation particuliere" (p. 216). "C'est Ie droit de l'esclavage qui gouverne maintenant le citoyen; et nous avons retrouve toute la legislation propre aux esclaves dans les reglements qui concernent sa personne, sa famille ou ses biens" (pp. 219-20)."
(Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition, 1958)

E2.2.B.2.2.b. "As I was wandering through the many subtle and crude moralities that have been dominant or that still dominate over the face of the earth, I found certain traits regularly recurring together and linked to each other. In the end, two basic types became apparent to me and a fundamental distinction leapt out. There is a master morality and a slave morality; – I will immediately add that in all higher and more mixed cultures, attempts to negotiate between these moralities also appear, although more frequently the two are confused and there are mutual misunderstandings. In fact, you
sometimes find them sharply juxtaposed – inside the same person even, within a single soul. Moral value distinctions have arisen within either a dominating type that, with a feeling of well-being, was conscious of the difference between itself and those who were dominated – or alternatively, these distinctions arose among the dominated people themselves, the slaves and dependants of every rank. In the first case, when dominating people determine the concept of “good,” it is the elevated, proud states of soul that are perceived as distinctive and as determining rank order. The noble person separates himself off from creatures in which the opposite of such elevated, proud states is expressed: he despises them. It is immediately apparent that, in this first type of morality, the contrast
between “good” and “bad” amounts to one between “noble” and “despicable” (the contrast between “good” and “evil ” has a different lineage). People who were cowardly, apprehensive, and petty, people who thought narrowly in terms of utility – these were the ones despised. But the same can be said about distrustful people with their uneasy glances, about grovelers, about dog-like types of people who let themselves be mistreated, about begging flatterers and, above all, about liars: – it is a basic belief of aristocrats that base peoples are liars.“We who are truthful” – that is what the nobility of ancient Greece called themselves. It is obvious that moral expressions everywhere were first applied to people and then, only later and derivatively, to actions (which is why it is a tremendous mistake when historians of morality take their point of departure from questions such as “why do acts of pity get praised?”). The noble type of person feels that he determines value, he does not need anyone’s approval, he judges that “what is harmful to me is harmful in itself,” he knows that he is the one who gives honor to things in the first place, he creates values. He honors everything he sees in himself: this sort of morality is self-glorifying. In the foreground, there is the feeling of fullness, of power that wants to overflow, the happiness associated with a high state of tension, the consciousness of a wealth that wants to make gifts and give away. The noble person helps the unfortunate too, although not (or hardly ever) out of pity, but rather more out of an impulse generated by the over-abundance
of power. In honoring himself, the noble man honors the powerful as well as those who have power over themselves, who know how to speak and be silent, who joyfully exercise severity and harshness over themselves, and have respect for all forms of severity and harshness. “Wotan has put a hard heart in my breast,” reads a line from an old Scandinavian saga: this rightly comes from the soul of a proud Viking. This sort of a man is even proud of not being made for pity: which is why the hero of the saga adds, by way of warning, “If your heart is not hard when you are young, it will never be hard.” The noble and brave types of people who think this way are the furthest removed from a morality that sees precisely pity, actions for others, and desinteressement as emblematic of morality. A faith in yourself, pride in yourself, and a fundamental hostility and irony with respect to “selflessness” belong to a noble morality just as certainly as does a slight disdain and caution towards sympathetic feelings and “warm hearts.” – The powerful are the ones who know how to honor; it is their art, their realm of invention. A profound reverence for age and origins – the whole notion of justice is based on this double reverence –, a faith and a prejudice in favor of forefathers and against future generations is typical of the morality of the powerful. And when, conversely, people
with “modern ideas” believe almost instinctively in “progress” and “the future,” and show a decreasing respect for age, this gives sufficient evidence of the ignoble origin of these “ideas.” But, most of all, the morality of dominating types is foreign and painful to contemporary taste due to its stern axiom that people have duties only towards their own kind; that when it comes to creatures of a lower rank, to everything alien, people are allowed to act as they see fit or “from the heart,” and in any event, “beyond good and evil” –: things like pity might have a place here. The capacity and duty to experience extended gratitude and vengefulness – both only among your own kind –, subtlety in retaliation, refinement in concepts of friendship, a certain need to have enemies (as flue holes, as it were, for the affects of jealousy, irascibility, arrogance, – basically, in order to be a good friend ): all these are characteristic features of noble morality which, as I have suggested, is not the morality of “modern ideas,” and this makes it difficult for us to relate to, and also difficult for us to dig it up and lay it open. – It is different with the second type of morality, slave morality. What if people who were violated, oppressed, suffering, unfree, exhausted, and unsure of themselves were to moralize: what type of moral valuations would they have? A pessimistic suspicion of the whole condition of humanity would probably find expression, perhaps a condemnation of humanity along with its condition. The slave’s gaze resents the virtues of the powerful. It is skeptical and distrustful, it has a subtle mistrust of all the “good” that is honored there –, it wants to convince itself that even happiness is not genuine there. Conversely, qualities that serve to alleviate existence for suffering people are pulled out and flooded with light: pity, the obliging, helpful hand, the warm heart, patience, industriousness, humility, and friendliness receive full honors here –, since these are the most useful qualities and practically the only way of holding up under the pressure of existence. Slave morality is essentially a morality of utility. Here we have the point of origin for that famous opposition
between “good” and “evil.” Evil is perceived as something powerful and dangerous; it is felt to contain a certain awesome quality, a subtlety and strength that block any incipient contempt. According to the slave morality then, “evil” inspires fear; but according to the master morality, it is “good ” that inspires and wants to inspire fear, while the “bad” man is seen as contemptible. The opposition comes to a head when, following the logic of slave morality, a hint of contempt (however slight and well disposed) finally comes to be associated with even its idea of “good,” because within the terms of slave morality, the good man must always be unthreatening: he is good-natured, easy to deceive,maybe a bit stupid, un bonhomme. Wherever slave morality holds sway, language shows a tendency for the words “good” and “stupid” to come closer together. – A final fundamental distinction: the desire for freedom, the instinct for happiness, and subtleties in the feeling of freedom necessarily belong to slave morals and morality, just as an artistry and enthusiasm in respect and devotion are invariant symptoms of an aristocratic mode of thinking and valuing. – This clearly shows why love as passion (our European specialty)must have had a purely noble descent: it is known to have been invented in the knightly poetry of Provence, by those magnificent, inventive men of the “gai saber.” Europe is indebted to these men for so many things, almost for itself."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil, Aphorism 260, 1886)

E2.2.B.2.2.c.  "Now, if you are willing to listen to my answer and the perhaps extravagant surmise that it involves, it seems to me as if the subtlety and strength of consciousness always were proportionate
to a man's (or animal's) capacity for communication, and as if this capacity in turn were proportionate to the need for communication. But this last point is not to be understood as if the individual human being who happens to be a master in Communicating and making understandable his needs must also be most dependent on others in his needs. But it does seem
to me as if it were that way when we consider whole races and chains of generations: Where need and distress have forced men for a long time to communicate and to understand each
other quickly and subtly, the ultimate result is an excess of this strength and art of communication-as it were, a capacity that has gradually been accumulated and now waits for an heir who
might squander it. (Those who are called artists are these heirs; so are orators, preachers, writers--all of them people who always come at the end of a long chain, "late born" every one of
them in the best sense of that word and, as I have said, by their nature squanderers).

Supposing that this observation is correct, I may now proceed to the surmise that consciousness has developed only under the pressure of the need for communication; that from the start it was needed and useful only between human beings (particularly between those who commanded and those who obeyed); and that it also developed only in proportion to the degree of this utility. Consciousness is really only a net of communication between human being: it is only as such that it had to develop; a solitary human being who lived like a beast of prey would not have needed it. That our actions. thoughts, feelings. and movements enter our own consciousness--at least a part of them-that is the result of a "must" that for a terribly long time lorded it over man. As the most endangered animal, he needed help and protection. he needed his peers, he had to learn to express his distress and to make himself understood; and for all of this he needed "consciousness" first of all. he needed to "know" himself what distressed him. he needed to "know" how he felt. he needed to "know" what he thought. For. to say it once more: Man, like every living being, thinks continually without knowing it; the thinking that rises to consciousness is only the smallest part of all this-the most superficial and worst part-for only this conscious thinking takes the form of words, which is to say signs of communication. and this fact uncovers the origin of consciousness.

In brief, the development of language and the development of consciousness (not of reason but merely of the way reason enters consciousness) go hand in hand. Add to this that not only language serves as a bridge between human beings but also a mien, a pressure, a gesture. The emergence of our sense impressions into our own consciousness, the ability to fix them and, as it were, exhibit them externally, increased proportionately with the need to communicate them to others by means of signs. The human being inventing signs is at the same time the human being who becomes ever more keenly conscious of himself. It was only as a social animal that man acquired self-consciousness-which he is sti1l in the process of doing, more and more.

My idea is, as you see, that consciousness does not realty belong to man's individual existence but rather to his social or herd nature; that, as follows from this, it has developed subtlety only insofar as this is required by social or herd utility. Consequently, given the best will in the world to understand ourselves as individually as possible, "to know ourselves," each of us will always succeed in becoming conscious only of what is not individual but "'average." Our thoughts themselves are continually governed by the character of consciousness-by the "genius of the species'" that commands it-and translated back into the perspective of the herd. Fundamentally, all our actions are altogether incomparably personal, unique. and infinitely individual; there is no doubt of that. But as soon as we translate them into consciousness they no longer seem to be.

This is the essence of phenomenalism and perspectivism as I understand them: Owing to the nature of animal consciousness. the world of which we can become conscious is only a surface and sign-world. a world that is made common and meaner; whatever becomes conscious becomes by the same token shallow. thin. relatively stupid, general, sign, herd signal; all becoming conscious involves a great and thorough corruption, falsification. reduction to superficialities. and generalization. Ultimately, the growth of consciousness becomes a danger; and anyone who lives among the most conscious Europeans even knows that it is a disease.

You will guess that it is not the opposition of subject and object that concerns me here: This distinction I leave to the epistemologists who have become entangled in the snares of grammar (the metaphysics of the people). It is even less the opposition of "thing-in-itself" and appearance; for we do not "know" nearly enough to be entitled to any such distinction. We simply lack any organ for knowledge, for "truth": we "know" (or believe or imagine) just as much as may be useful in the interests of the human herd. the species; and even what is here called "utility" is ultimately also a mere belief. something imaginary, and perhaps precisely that most calamitous stupidity of which we shall perish some day."
(Nietzsche,The Gay Science, Aphorism 354, 1887)

E2.2.B.2.2.d. "In “The Nature of Collective Thought,” Bohm proposes that a “pool of knowledge” — both tacit and overt — has accumulated throughout human evolution. It is this pool of knowledge, says Bohm, that gives rise to much of our perception of the world, the meanings we assign to events, and indeed our very sense of individuality. Such knowledge, or thought, moves independent of any individual, or even any particular culture — very much like a virus. From this perspective, our attempts to solve our problems through highly personalized analysis, or by attributing malignant qualities to “other” groups or individuals, are of limited validity. [...]"
(Lee Nichol Jemez Springs, Foreword  to David Bohm's On dialogue, 1996)

Cybèle Varela, De tudo aquilo que pode ser [A glimpse of all that can be] I, II & III, 1967
"3 THE NATURE OF COLLECTIVE THOUGHT [...]
The real crisis is not in these events which are confronting us, like wars and crime and drugs and economic chaos and pollution; it's really in the thought which is making it — all the time. [...]
The kind of thought that's going on all around us begins to take over in every one of us, without our even noticing it. It's spreading like a virus and each one of us is nourishing that virus. Do we have a kind of immune system that stops it ? The only way to stop it is to recognize it, to acknowledge it, to see what it is. [...]
We may imagine that the source of the problem is that somebody "over there" is thinking these wrong thoughts or that a lot of people are. But the source of the problem is much deeper. It is that something is going wrong in the whole process of thought, which is collective, which belongs to all of us. [...]

Further, in our language we have a distinction between "thinking" and "thought." "Thinking" implies the present tense — some activity going on which may include critical sensitivity to what can go wrong. Also there may be new ideas, and perhaps occasionally perception of some kind inside. "Thought" is the past participle of that. We have the idea that after we have been thinking something, it just evaporates. But thinking doesn't disappear. It goes somehow into the brain and leaves something — a trace — which becomes thought. And thought then acts automatically. So thought is the response from memory from the past, from what has been done. Thus we have thinking and thought. We also have the word "feeling." Its present tense suggests the active present, that the feeling is directly in contact with reality. But it might be useful to introduce the word "felt," to say there are "feelings" and "felts." That is, "felts" are feelings which have been recorded. A traumatic experience in the past can make you feel very uncomfortable when remembered. Nostalgic feelings are also from the past. A lot of the feelings that come up are really from the past, they're "felts." But if they are just a recording being replayed, they don't have as much significance as if they were a response to the present immediate situation.
It's really very important to see that our culture gives us a wrong lead about thoughts and felts. It constantly tends to imply that they could be separated and that one could control the other. But thoughts and felts are one process; they are not two. They both come from the memory; in the memory they are probably all mixed. Memory also affects the physical body. It affects the sensations. You can produce states of stress in the body from memory of states of stress. Therefore, when memory acts you cannot separate the intellectual function, the emotional function, the chemical function, the muscular function-because this tacit knowledge is also a kind of memory — they're all there." 
(David Bohm, On dialogue, 1996)

Art:
- Cybèle Varela_De tudo aquilo que pode ser I, II & III, 1967

E2.2.B.2.2.e. "Let us therefore admit that all those things to which he is trained and accustomed seem natural to man and that only that is truly native to him which he receives with his primitive, untrained individuality. Thus custom becomes the first reason for voluntary servitude. Men are like handsome race horses who first bite the bit and later like it, and rearing under the saddle a while soon learn to enjoy displaying their harness and prance proudly beneath their trappings. Similarly men will grow accustomed to the idea that they have always been in subjection, that their fathers lived in the same way; they will think they are obliged to suffer this evil, and will persuade themselves by example and imitation of others, finally investing those who order them around with proprietary rights, based on the idea that it has always been that way."
(La Boétie, The discourse of voluntary servitude, 1577)

E2.2.B.2.2.f. "3 THE NATURE OF COLLECTIVE THOUGHT [...]
The real crisis is not in these events which are confronting us, like wars and crime and drugs and economic chaos and pollution; it's really in the thought which is making it — all the time. [...]
The kind of thought that's going on all around us begins to take over in every one of us, without our even noticing it. It's spreading like a virus and each one of us is nourishing that virus. Do we have a kind of immune system that stops it ? The only way to stop it is to recognize it, to acknowledge it, to see what it is. [...]
We may imagine that the source of the problem is that somebody "over there" is thinking these wrong thoughts or that a lot of people are. But the source of the problem is much deeper. It is that something is going wrong in the whole process of thought, which is collective, which belongs to all of us. [...]

Further, in our language we have a distinction between "thinking" and "thought." "Thinking" implies the present tense — some activity going on which may include critical sensitivity to what can go wrong. Also there may be new ideas, and perhaps occasionally perception of some kind inside. "Thought" is the past participle of that. We have the idea that after we have been thinking something, it just evaporates. But thinking doesn't disappear. It goes somehow into the brain and leaves something — a trace — which becomes thought. And thought then acts automatically. So thought is the response from memory from the past, from what has been done. Thus we have thinking and thought. We also have the word "feeling." Its present tense suggests the active present, that the feeling is directly in contact with reality. But it might be useful to introduce the word "felt," to say there are "feelings" and "felts." That is, "felts" are feelings which have been recorded. A traumatic experience in the past can make you feel very uncomfortable when remembered. Nostalgic feelings are also from the past. A lot of the feelings that come up are really from the past, they're "felts." But if they are just a recording being replayed, they don't have as much significance as if they were a response to the present immediate situation.
It's really very important to see that our culture gives us a wrong lead about thoughts and felts. It constantly tends to imply that they could be separated and that one could control the other. But thoughts and felts are one process; they are not two. They both come from the memory; in the memory they are probably all mixed. Memory also affects the physical body. It affects the sensations. You can produce states of stress in the body from memory of states of stress. Therefore, when memory acts you cannot separate the intellectual function, the emotional function, the chemical function, the muscular function-because this tacit knowledge is also a kind of memory — they're all there." 
(David Bohm, On dialogue, 1996)

Art:
- Cybèle Varela_De tudo aquilo que pode ser I, II & III, 1967

E2.2.B.2.2.g.  Could every aspect of reality exist only in relation to viewpoints on it? Is everything about us socially constructed rather than given?
Human behavior is shaped by labeling so if you have been called by a category your own world view and that of others towards you will be confined to the label. People are often motivated to join the debate because of some political objective to escape the subordination that derives from categorization. Activists can argue their condition is not socially constructed because they want to give legitimacy to their particular social identity. By the other token, you see people using construction to engage in liberation politics like Simone de Beauvoir showing the social construction of what is a woman has oppressed them and constrained their liberty. We find that some categories as gender have been approached both ways, but for others like race, most parties believe is intrinsic. 
Some philosophers from the continental tradition (Nietzsche, Foucault) are the most intent on defending that practically everything is socially constructed. Regarding scientific knowledge it is much harder to advocate for social construction, but we find socially motivated reasons for how scientific research budgets are allocated and how we give identity to discoveries (classification schemes of species for example).
But "Man is not a measure of all things", we are answerable to the reality of the world. Adopting a relativist position that everything is contingent on something else dos not mean that anything goes. To shift our theoretical vocabulary can lead to new insights even in science.
(Jesse Prinz on Is Everything Socially Constructed? in Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the podcast :
https://philosophybites.com/2015/09/jesse-prinz-on-is-everything-socially-constructed.html

E2.2.B.2.2.h. THE VALUES WE HOLD AS "SELF-EVIDENT"—EQUALITY, LIBERTY, AND RIGHTS—ARE NOT OBJECTIVE BIOLOGICAL FACTS BUT ARE POWERFUL "MYTHS" OR "IMAGINED REALITIES.
“It is easy for us to accept that the division of people into
‘superiors’ and commoners’ is a figment of the imagination. Yet the idea that all humans are equal is also a myth. In what sense do all humans equal one another? Is there any objective reality, outside the human imagination, in which we are truly equal? Are all humans equal to one another biologically? Let us try to translate the most famous line of the American Declaration of Independence into biological terms: We hold these truths to be self-evident, that al men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights, that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
According to the science of biology, people were not created’. They have evolved.
And they certainly did not evolve to be ‘equal’. The idea of equality is inextricably intertwined with the idea of creation. The Americans got the idea of equality from Christianity, which argues that every person has a divinely created soul, and that all souls are equal before God. However, if we do not believe in the Christian myths about God, creation and souls, what does it mean that all people are
‘equal’? Evolution is based on difference, not on equality. Every person carries a somewhat different genetic code, and is exposed from birth to different environmental influences. This leads to the development of different qualities that carry with them different chances of survival. ‘Created equal’ should therefore be translated into ‘evolved differently’.
Just as people were never created, neither, according to the science of biology, is there a ‘Creator’ who ‘endows’ them with anything. There is only a blind evolutionary process, devoid of any purpose, leading to the birth of individuals.
‘Endowed by their creator’ should be translated simply into ‘born.
Equally, there are no such things as rights in biology. There are only organs, abilities and characteristics. Birds fly not because they have a right to fly, but because they have wings. And it’s not true that these organs, abilities and characteristics are ‘unalienable’. Many of them undergo constant mutations, and may well be completely lost over time. The ostrich is a bird that lost its ability to ﬂy. So ‘unalienable rights’ should be translated into ‘mutable characteristics’.
And what are the characteristics that evolved in humans? ‘Life’, certainly. But
‘liberty’? There is no such thing in biology. Just like equality, rights and limited liability companies, liberty is something that people invented and that exists only in their imagination. From a biological viewpoint, it is meaningless to say that humans in democratic societies are free, whereas humans in dictatorships are unfree. And what about
‘happiness’? So far biological research has failed to come up with a clear definition of happiness or a way to measure it objectively. Most biological studies acknowledge only the existence of pleasure, which is more easily defined and measured. So ‘life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness’ should be translated into ‘life and the pursuit of pleasure’.
So here is that line from the American Declaration of Independence translated into biological terms:
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that al men evolved differently, that they are born with certain mutable characteristics, and that among these are life and the pursuit of pleasure.
Advocates of equality and human rights may be outraged by this line of reasoning.
Their response is likely to be, ‘We know that people are not equal biologically!
But if we believe that we are all equal in essence, it will enable us to create a stable and prosperous society.’ I have no argument with that. This is exactly what I mean by
‘imagined order’. We believe in a particular order not because it is objectively true, but because believing in it enables us to cooperate effectively and forge a better society. Imagined orders are not evil conspiracies or useless
mirages. Rather, they are the only way large numbers of humans can cooperate effectively. Bear in mind, though, that Hammurabi might have defended his principle of hierarchy using the same logic: ‘I know that superiors, commoners and slaves are not inherently different kinds of people. But if we believe that they are, it will enable us to create a stable and prosperous society.’”
(Yuval Noah Harari, Sapiens, A Brief History of Humankind, 2011)

E2.2.B.2.2.i.  HOW ABSTRACT AND SEEMINGLY INTELLECTUAL IDEAS CAN CREATE THE CULTURAL SOIL IN WHICH A TOTALITARIAN IDEOLOGY COULD LATER GROW, THEREBY DETERMINING THE BELIEFS AND ACTIONS OF MILLIONS.
“Hitler was not entirely wrong in saying that to understand Nazism one must first know Wagner. Wagner had known, and been influenced by, first Schopenhauer and then Nietzsche, though the latter quarreled with him because he thought his operas, especially Parsifal, showed too much Christian renunciation. In the course of his long and stormy life, Wagner came into contact with two other men, one a Frenchman, the other an Englishman, who are important to this history not so much for the impression they made on him, though in one case it was considerable, as for their effect on the German mind, which they helped to direct toward the coming of the Third Reich. These individuals were Count Joseph Arthur de Gobineau, a French diplomat and man of letters, and Houston Stewart Chamberlain, one of the strangest Englishmen who ever lived. Neither man, be it said at once, was a mountebank. Both were men of immense erudition, deep culture and wide experience of travel. Yet both concocted racial doctrines so spurious that no people, not even their own, took them seriously with the single exception of the Germans. To the Nazis their questionable theories became gospel. It is probably no exaggeration to say, as I have heard more than one follower of Hitler say, that Chamberlain was the spiritual founder of the Third Reich. This singular Englishman, who came to see in the Germans the master race, the hope of the future, worshiped Richard Wagner, one of whose daughters he eventually married; he venerated first Wilhelm II and finally Hitler and was the mentor of both. At the end of a fantastic life he could hail the Austrian corporal—and this long before Hitler came to power or had any prospect of it—as a being sent by God to lead the German people out of the wilderness. Hitler, not unnaturally, regarded Chamberlain as a prophet, as indeed he turned out to be. What was it in the teaching of these two men that inoculated the Germans with a madness on the question of race and German destiny? Gobineau’s chief contribution was a four-volume work which was published in Paris between 1853 and 1855, entitled Essai sur l’Inégalité des Races Humaines (Essay on the Inequality of the Human Races).”
(William Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, A History of Nazi Germany, 2011)

HOW ABSTRACT AND SEEMINGLY INTELLECTUAL IDEAS CAN CREATE THE CULTURAL SOIL IN WHICH A TOTALITARIAN IDEOLOGY COULD LATER GROW, THEREBY DETERMINING THE BELIEFS AND ACTIONS OF MILLIONS (Continued).
“Tt was on the Third Reich, which did not arrive until six years after [Chamberlain's] death but whose coming he foresaw, that this Englishman’s influence was the greatest. His racial theories and his burning sense of the destiny of the Germans and Germany were taken over by the Nazis, who acclaimed him as one of their prophets. During the Hitler regime books, pamphlets and articles poured from the presses extolling the “spiritual founder” of National Socialist Germany. Rosenberg, as one of Hitler’s mentors, often tried to impart his enthusiasm for the English philosopher to the Fuehrer. It is likely that Hitler first learned of Chamberlain’s writings before he left Vienna, for they were popular among the Pan-German and anti-Semitic groups whose literature he devoured so avidly in those early days. Probably too he read some of Chamberlain’s chauvinistic articles during the war. In Mein Kampf he expresses the regret that Chamberlain’s observations were not more heeded during the Second Reich. Chamberlain was one of the first intellectuals in Germany to see a great future for Hitler—and new opportunities for the Germans if they followed him. Hitler had met him in Bayreuth in 1923, and though ill, half paralyzed, and disillusioned by Germany’s defeat and the fall of the Hohenzollern Empire—the collapse of all his hopes and prophecies!—Chamberlain was swept off his feet by the eloquent young Austrian. “You have mighty things to do,” he wrote Hitler on the following day, “… My faith in Germanism had not wavered an instant, though my hope—I confess—was at a low ebb. With one stroke you have transformed the state of my soul. That in the hour of her deepest need Germany gives birth to a Hitler proves her vitality; as do the influences that emanate from him; for these two things—personality and influence—belong together … May God protect you!” This was at a time when Adolf Hitler, with his Charlie Chaplin mustache, his rowdy manners and his violent, outlandish extremism, was still considered a joke by most Germans. He had few followers then. But the hypnotic magnetism of his personality worked like a charm on the aging, ill philosopher and renewed his faith in the people he had chosen to join and exalt. Chamberlain became a member of the budding Nazi Party and so far as his health would permit began to write for its obscure publications. One of his articles, published in 1924, hailed Hitler, who was then in jail, as destined by God to lead the German people. Destiny had beckoned Wilhelm II, but he had failed; now there was Adolf Hitler. This remarkable Englishman’s seventieth birthday, on September 5, 1925, was celebrated with five columns of encomiums in the Nazi Voelkischer Beobachter, which hailed his Foundations as the “gospel of the Nazi movement,” and he went to his grave sixteen months later—on January 11, 1927—with high hope that all he had preached and prophesied would yet come true under the divine guidance of this new German Messiah. Aside from a prince representing Wilhelm II, who could not return to German soil, Hitler was the only public figure at Chamberlain’s funeral. In reporting the death of the Englishman the Voelkischer Beobachter said that the German people had lost “one of the great armorers whose weapons have not yet found in our day their fullest use.” Not the half-paralyzed old man, dying, not even Hitler, nor anyone else in Germany, could have foreseen in that bleak January month of 1927, when the fortunes of the Nazi Party were at their lowest ebb, how soon, how very soon, those weapons which the transplanted Englishman had forged would be put to their fullest use, and with what fearful consequences. Yet Adolf Hitler had a mystical sense of his personal mission on earth in those days, and even before. “From millions of men … one man must step forward,” he wrote in Mein Kampf (the italics are his), “who with apodictic force will form granite principles from the wavering idea-world of the broad masses and take up the struggle for their sole correctness, until from the shifting waves of a free thought-world there will arise a brazen cliff of solid unity in faith and will.” He left no doubt in the minds of readers that he already considered himself that one man. Mein Kampf is sprinkled with little essays on the role of the genius who is picked by Providence to lead a great people, even though they may not at first understand him or recognize his worth.”
(William Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, A History of Nazi Germany, 2011)

E2.2.B.2.2.j. THE "STORIES" AND BEHAVIORAL PATTERNS OF OUR CULTURE ARE WHAT SHAPE US INTO SOCIAL BEINGS.
" Procedural knowledge, generated in the course of heroic behavior, is not organized and integrated within the group and the individual as a consequence of simple accumulation. Procedure “a,” appropriate in situation one, and procedure “b,” appropriate in situation two, may clash in mutual violent opposition in situation three. Under such conditions intrapsychic or interpersonal conflict necessarily emerges. When such antagonism arises, moral revaluation becomes necessary. As a consequence of such revaluation, behavioral options are brutally rank-ordered, or, less frequently, entire moral systems are devastated, reorganized and replaced. This organization and reorganization occurs as a consequence of “war,” in its concrete, abstract, intrapsychic and interpersonal variants. In the most basic case, an individual is rendered subject to an intolerable conflict, as a consequence of the perceived (affective) incompatibility of two or more apprehended outcomes of a given behavioral procedure. In the purely intrapsychic sphere, such conflict often emerges when attainment of what is desired presently necessarily interferes with attainment of what is desired (or avoidance of what is feared) in the future. Permanent satisfactory resolution of such conflict (between temptation and “moral purity,” for example) requires the construction of an abstract moral system, powerful enough to allow what an occurrence signifies for the future to govern reaction  to what it signifies now. Even that construction, however, is necessarily incomplete when  considered only as an “intrapsychic” phenomena. The individual, once capable of  coherently integrating competing motivational demands in the private sphere, nonetheless  remains destined for conflict with the other, in the course of the inevitable  transformations of personal experience. This means that the person who has come to  terms with him- or herself—at least in principle—is still subject to the affective  dysregulation inevitably produced by interpersonal interaction. It is also the case that  such subjugation is actually indicative of insufficient “intrapsychic” organization, as  many basic “needs” can only be satisfied through the cooperation of others.   
The problems posed by the “future self,” whose still-potential existence has to be  taken into account and used to govern action in the present, are very similar to those  posed by the existence of others, whose affective responses are equally hypothetical (as  they cannot be experienced directly, but only inferred). The properly socialized  individual has been trained to grant this “abstract other” (future self and other person)  ontological status equivalent to the experienced self, however—has been trained to use  the existence of that other as a guide to “proper action and interpretation” in the present.  
This means that for the social being all individual actions come to be evaluated with  regard to their likely current and future consequences, for the self and for the others likely  affected. Such evaluation may take place directly—that is, as a matter of “conscious  deliberation”; alternatively, the well-socialized individual may act “as if” he or she  thought the matter through, by remaining in well-trodden moral pathways (which have  been established under the cumulative historical pressure produced by the necessity of  maintaining intrapsychic and social order). The more implicit information extant in the  latter case is “placed there” as a consequence of the exchange of emotional information,  attendant upon given action patterns, in the potential absence of explicit rationale:  someone is informed by subtle scornful gesture, for example, that a given (theoretically  pleasurable and even evidently harmless) behavior is “just not done,” which means that it  is regarded by custom as harmful, to the self and others, in some manner not easily  observed but still important. It is such arbitrary rules that constitute the implicit  information coded in societal structure—information not necessarily placed there by  rational means, not necessarily “comprehended” in any declarative sense; but information  that is nonetheless transmissible and representable as a consequence of extended-term  pattern recognition and analysis.   
The “stories” by which individuals live (which comprise their schemas of  interpretation, which guide their actions, which regulate their emotions) are therefore  emergent structures shaped by the necessity of organizing competing internal biological  demands, over variable spans of time, in the presence of others, faced with the same fate.  This similarity of demand (constrained by physiological structure) and context  (constrained by social reality) produces similarity of response. It is this similarity of  response, in turn, that is at the base of the emergent “shared moral viewpoint” that  accounts for cross-cultural similarity in myth. This means, by the way, that such “shared  viewpoints” refer to something real, at least insofar as emergent properties are granted  reality (and most of the things that we regard without question as real are precisely such  emergent properties). “
(Jordan Peterson, Maps of Meaning The Architecture of Belief, 1999)

E2.2.B.2.2.k.  DEMOGRAPHIC TRENDS SERVE AS A LARGE-SCALE "NATURAL" OR BIOLOGICAL CONTEXT WITHIN WHICH ALL SOCIAL AND HISTORICAL EVENTS UNFOLD. 
“The Stages of Demographic Growth
I return now to the examination of global population growth. If the rhythm of demographic growth observed between 1700 and 2012 (0.8 percent per year on average) had started in antiquity and continued ever since, the world’s population would have been multiplied by nearly 100,000 between 0 and 1700. Given that the population in 1700 is estimated to have been approximately 600 million, we would have to assume a ridiculously small global population at the time of Christ’s birth (fewer than ten thousand people). Even a growth rate of 0.2 percent, extended over 1700 years, would imply a global population of only 20 million in year 0, whereas the best available information suggests that the figure was actually greater than 200 million, with 50 million living in the Roman Empire alone. Regardless of any flaws that may exist in the historical sources and global population estimates for these two dates, there is not a shadow of a doubt that the average demographic growth rate between 0 and 1700 was less than 0.2 percent and almost certainly less than 0.1 percent.
Contrary to a widely held belief, this Malthusian regime of very low growth was not one of complete demographic stagnation. The rate of growth was admittedly quite slow, and the cumulative growth of several generations was often wiped out in a few years by epidemic and famine. Still, world population seems to have increased by a quarter between 0 and 1000, then by a half between 1000 and 1500, and by half again between 1500 and 1700, during which the demographic growth rate was close to 0.2 percent. The acceleration of growth was most likely a very gradual process, which proceeded hand in hand with growth in medical knowledge and sanitary improvements, that is to say, extremely slowly.
Demographic growth accelerated considerably after 1700, with average growth rates on the order of 0.4 percent per year in the eighteenth century and 0.6 percent in the nineteenth. Europe (including its American offshoot) experienced its most rapid demographic growth between 1700 and 1913, only to see the process reverse in the twentieth century: the rate of growth of the European population fell by half, to 0.4 percent, in the period 1913–2012, compared with 0.8 percent between 1820 and 1913. Here we see the phenomenon known as the demographic transition: the continual increase in life expectancy is no longer enough to compensate for the falling birth rate, and the pace of population growth slowly reverts to a lower level.
In Asia and Africa, however, the birth rate remained high far longer than in Europe, so that demographic growth in the twentieth century reached vertiginous heights: 1.5–2 percent per year, which translates into a fivefold or more increase in the population over the course of a century. Egypt had a population of slightly more than 10 million at the turn of the twentieth century but now numbers more than 80 million. Nigeria and Pakistan each had scarcely more than 20 million people, but today each has more than 160 million.
It is interesting to note that the growth rates of 1.5–2 percent a year attained by Asia and Africa in the twentieth century are roughly the same as those observed in America in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries (see Table 2.3). The United States thus went from a population of less than 3 million in 1780 to 100 million in 1910 and more than 300 million in 2010, or more than a hundredfold increase in just over two centuries, as mentioned earlier. The crucial difference, obviously, is that the demographic growth of the New World was largely due to immigration from other continents, especially Europe, whereas the 1.5–2 percent growth in Asia and Africa is due entirely to natural increase (the surplus of births over deaths).
As a consequence of this demographic acceleration, global population growth reached the record level of 1.4 percent in the twentieth century, compared with 0.4–0.6 percent in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
It is important to understand that we are just emerging from this period of open-ended demographic acceleration. Between 1970 and 1990, global population was still growing 1.8 percent annually, almost as high as the absolute historical record of 1.9 percent achieved in the period 1950–1970. For the period 1990–2012, the average rate is still 1.3 percent, which is extremely high.”
(Thomas Piketty, Capital in the twenty-first century, 2013)

E2.2.B.2.2.l. "Quand on a plus le choix, un choix n'est pas un choix."
(La chroniqeu de Raphael Enthoven, diffusée sur Europe 1 le 07/02/2018)

Listen to the chronicle in French: https://x.com/Europe1/status/961150176596512768

E2.2.B.2.2.m. Dans La règles du jeu de Jean Renoir les personnages ne savent plus ce qu’ils désirent tant est immense le poids de la société.

La régle du jeu sociale supplante leur pensés et les vide de leur identité et de leur capacité de s’émouvoir. La société en fait des machines comme celles que collectionne le mari de Christine

La seule relation d’amitié est celle de Christine et d’Octave qui remonte á l’enfance, illustrant que le jeu de la société dénature toutes les autres relations.

Le jeu de la société oblige l’homme á s’évaluer á travers le regard des autres, comme Octave qui voulait être chef d’orchestre pour que tous l’admirent et qui ayant échoué juge qu’il a raté sa vie.

E2.2.B.2.2.n.  FOER ARGUES THAT THE DEVELOPMENT OF EXTERNAL MEMORY TECHNOLOGIES—FROM WRITING ON CAVE WALLS TO DIGITAL MEDIA—HAS FUNDAMENTALLY RESHAPED HUMAN CONSCIOUSNESS AND OUR ENTIRE SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT. 
“Physiologically, we are virtually identical to our ancestors who painted images of bison on the walls of the Lascaux cave in France, among the earliest cultural artifacts to have survived to the present day. Our brains are no larger or more sophisticated than theirs. If one of their babies were to be dropped into the arms of an adoptive parent in twenty-first-century New York, the child would likely grow up indistinguishable from his or her peers.
All that differentiates us from them is our memories. Not the memories that reside in our own brains, for the child born today enters the world just as much a blank slate as the child born thirty thousand years ago, but rather the memories that are stored outside ourselves—in books, photographs, museums, and these days in digital media. Once upon a time, memory was at the root of all culture, but over the last thirty millennia since humans began painting their memories on cave walls, we’ve gradually supplanted our own natural memory with a vast superstructure of external memory aids—a process that has sped up exponentially in recent years. Imagine waking up tomorrow and discovering that all the world’s ink had become invisible and all our bytes had disappeared. Our world would immediately crumble. Literature, music, law, politics, science, math: Our culture is an edifice built of externalized memories.
If memory is our means of preserving that which we consider most valuable, it is also painfully linked to our own transience. When we die, our memories die with us. In a sense, the elaborate system of externalized memory we’ve created is a way of fending off mortality. It allows ideas to be efficiently passed across time and space, and for one idea to build on another to a degree not possible when a thought has to be passed from brain to brain in order to be sustained.
The externalization of memory not only changed how people think; it also led to a profound shift in the very notion of what it means to be intelligent. Internal memory became devalued. Erudition evolved from possessing information internally to knowing how and where to find it in the labyrinthine world of external memory. It’s a telling statement that pretty much the only place where you’ll find people still training their memories is at the World Memory Championship and the dozen national memory contests held around the globe. What was once a cornerstone of Western culture is now at best a curiosity. But as our culture has transformed from one that was fundamentally based on internal memories to one that is fundamentally based on memories stored outside the brain, what are the implications for ourselves and for our society? What we’ve gained is indisputable. But what have we traded away? What does it mean that we’ve lost our memory?”
(Joshua Foer, Moonwalking with Einstein, 2011)

E2.2.B.2.2.o. FOR ADAM SMITH, OUR CHARACTER, OUR VIRTUES, AND OUR VERY EMOTIONAL EXPRESSIONS ARE NOT UNIVERSAL, BUT ARE PROFOUNDLY SHAPED BY OUR "SITUATION." 
“The objects with which men in the different professions and states of
life are conversant, being very different, and habituating them to very
different passions, naturally form in them very different characters and
manners. We expect in each rank and procession, a degree of those
manners, which, experience has taught us, belong to it. But as in each
species of things, we are particularly pleased with the middle
conformation, which in every part and feature agrees most exactly with
the general standard which nature seems to have established for things
of that kind; so in each rank, or, if I may say so, in each species of
men, we are particularly pleased, if they have neither too much, nor too
little of the character which usually accompanies their particular
condition and situation. A man, we say, should look like his trade and
profession; yet the pedantry of every profession is disagreeable. The
different periods of life have, for the same reason, different manners
assigned to them. We expect in old age, that gravity and sedateness
which its infirmities, its long experience, and its worn-out sensibility
seem to render both natural and respectable; and we lay our account to
find in youth that sensibility, that gaiety and sprightly vivacity which
experience teaches us to expect from the lively impressions that all
interesting objects are apt to make upon the tender and unpractised
senses of that early period of life. Each of those two ages, however,
may easily have too much of these peculiarities which belong to it. The
flirting levity of youth, and the immoveable insensibility of old age,
are equally disagreeable. The young, according to the common saying, are
most agreeable when in their behaviour there is something of the manners
of the old, and the old, when they retain something of the gaiety of the
young. Either of them, however, may easily have too much of the manners
of the other. The extreme coldness, and dull formality, which are
pardoned in old age, make youth ridiculous. The levity, the
carelessness, and the vanity, which are indulged in youth, render old
age contemptible.

The peculiar character and manners which we are led by custom to
appropriate to each rank and profession, have sometimes perhaps a
propriety independent of custom; and are what we should approve of for
their own sakes, if we took into consideration all the different
circumstances which naturally affect those in each different state of
life. The propriety of a person’s behaviour, depends not upon its
suitableness to any one circumstance of his situation, but to all the
circumstances, which, when we bring his case home to ourselves we feel,
should naturally call upon his attention. If he appears to be so much
occupied by any one of them, as entirely to neglect the rest, we
disapprove of his conduct, as something which we cannot entirely go
along with, because not properly adjusted to all the circumstances of
his situation: yet, perhaps, the emotion he expresses for the object
which principally interests him, does not exceed what we should entirely
sympathize with, and approve of, in one whose attention was not required
by any other thing. A parent in private life might, upon the loss of an
only son, express without blame, a degree of grief and tenderness, which
would be unpardonable in a general at the head of an army, when glory,
and the public safety demanded so great a part of his attention. As
different objects ought, upon common occasions, to occupy the attention
of men of different professions, so different passions ought, naturally
to become habitual to them; and when we bring home to ourselves their
situation in this particular respect, we must be sensible, that every
occurrence should naturally affect them more or less, according as the
emotion which it excites, coincides or disagrees with the fixt habit and
temper of their minds. We cannot expect the same sensibility to the gay
pleasures and amusements of life in a clergyman which we lay our account
with in an officer. The man whose peculiar occupation it is to keep the
world in mind of that awful futurity which awaits them, who is to
announce what may be the fatal consequences of every deviation from the
rules of duty, and who is himself to set the example of the most exact
conformity, seems to be the messenger of tidings, which cannot, in
propriety, be delivered either with levity or indifference. His mind is
supposed to be continually occupied with what is too grand and solemn,
to leave any room for the impressions of those frivolous objects, which
fill up the attention of the dissipated and the gay. We readily feel
therefore, that, independent of custom, there is a propriety in the
manners which custom has allotted to this profession; and that nothing
can be more suitable to the character of a clergyman, than that grave,
that austere and abstracted severity, which we are habituated to expect
in his behaviour. These reflections are so very obvious, that there is
scarce any man so inconsiderate, as not, at some time, to have made
them, and to have accounted to himself in this manner for his
approbation of the usual character of this order.

The foundation of the customary character of some other professions is
not so obvious, and our approbation of it is founded entirely in habit,
without being either confirmed, or enlivened by any reflections of this
kind. We are led by custom, for example, to annex the character of
gaiety, levity, and sprightly freedom, as well as of some degree of
dissipation, to the military profession: yet, if we were to consider
what mood or tone of temper would be most suitable to this situation, we
should be apt to determine, perhaps, that the most serious and
thoughtful turn of mind, would best become those whose lives are
continually exposed to uncommon danger; and who should therefore be more
constantly occupied with the thoughts of death and its consequences than
other men. It is this very circumstance, however, which is not
improbably the occasion why the contrary turn of mind prevails so much
among men of this profession. It requires so great an effort to conquer
the fear of death, when we survey it with steadiness and attention, that
those who are constantly exposed to it, find it easier to turn away
their thoughts from it altogether, to wrap themselves up in careless
security and indifference, and to plunge themselves, for this purpose,
into every sort of amusement and dissipation. A camp is not the element
of a thoughtful or a melancholy man: persons of that cast, indeed, are
often abundantly determined, and are capable, by a great effort, of
going on with inflexible resolution to the most unavoidable death. But
to be exposed to continual, though less imminent danger, to be obliged
to exert, for a long time, a degree of this effort, exhausts and
depresses the mind, and renders it incapable of all happiness and
enjoyment. The gay and careless, who have occasion to make no effort at
all, who fairly resolve never to look before them, but to lose in
continual pleasures and amusements, all anxiety about their situation,
more easily support such circumstances. Whenever, by any peculiar
circumstances, an officer has no reason to lay his account with being
exposed to any uncommon danger, he is very apt to lose the gaiety and
dissipated thoughtlessness of his character. The captain of a city guard
is commonly as sober, careful, and penurious an animal as the rest of
his fellow-citizens. A long peace is, for the same reason, very apt to
diminish the difference between the civil and the military character.
The ordinary situation, however, of men of this profession, renders
gaiety, and a degree of dissipation, so much their usual character; and
custom has, in our imagination, so strongly connected this character
with this state of life, that we are very apt to despise any man, whose
peculiar humour or situation, renders him incapable of acquiring it. We
laugh at the grave and careful faces of a city guard, which, so little
resemble those of their profession. They themselves seem often to be
ashamed of the regularity of their own manners, and, not to be out of
the fashion of their trade, are fond of affecting that levity, which is
by no means natural to them. Whatever is the deportment which we have
been accustomed to see in a respectable order of men, it comes to be so
associated in our imagination with that order, that whenever we see the
one, we lay our account that we are to meet with the other, and when
disappointed, miss something which we expected to find. We are
embarrassed, and put to a stand, and know not how to address ourselves
to a character, which plainly affects to be of a different species from
those with which we should have been disposed to class it.

The different situations of different ages and countries, are apt, in
the same manner, to give different characters to the generality of those
who live in them, and their sentiments concerning the particular degree
of each quality, that is either blameable, or praise-worthy, vary
according to that degree, which is usual in their own country, and in
their own times. That degree of politeness, which would be highly
esteemed, perhaps, would be thought effeminate adulation, in Russia,
would be regarded as rudeness and barbarism at the court of France. That
degree of order and frugality, which, in a Polish nobleman, would be
considered as excessive parsimony, would be regarded as extravagance in
a citizen of Amsterdam. Every age and country look upon that degree of
each quality, which is commonly to be met with in those who are esteemed
among themselves, as the golden mean of that particular talent or
virtue. And as this varies, according as their different circumstances
render different qualities more or less habitual to them, their
sentiments concerning the exact propriety of character and behaviour
vary accordingly.

Among civilized nations, the virtues which are founded upon humanity,
are more cultivated than those which are founded upon self-denial and
the command of the passions. Among rude and barbarous nations, it is
quite otherwise, the virtues of self-denial are more cultivated than
those of humanity. The general security and happiness which prevail in
ages of civility and politeness afford little exercise to the contempt
of danger, to patience in enduring labour, hunger, and pain. Poverty may
easily be avoided, and the contempt of it therefore, almost ceases to be
a virtue. The abstinence from pleasure, becomes less necessary, and the
mind is more at liberty to unbend itself, and to indulge its natural
inclinations in all those particular respects.

Among savages and barbarians it is quite otherwise. Every savage
undergoes a sort of Spartan discipline, and by the necessity of his
situation is inured to every sort of hardship. He is in continual
danger: He is often exposed to the greatest extremities of hunger, and
frequently dies of pure want. His circumstances not only habituate him
to every sort of distress, but teach him to give way to none of the
passions which that distress is apt to excite. He can expect from his
countrymen no sympathy or indulgence for such weakness. Before we can
feel much for others, we must in some measure be at ease ourselves. If
our own misery pinches us very severely, we have no leisure to attend to
that of our neighbour: And all savages are too much occupied with their
own wants and necessities, to give much attention to those of another
person. A savage, therefore, whatever be the nature of his distress,
expects no sympathy from those about him, and disdains, upon that
account, to expose himself, by allowing the least weakness to escape
him. His passions, how furious and violent soever, are never permitted
to disturb the serenity of his countenance or the composure of his
conduct and behaviour. The savages in North America, we are told, assume
upon all occasions the greatest indifference, and would think themselves
degraded if they should ever appear in any respect to be overcome,
either by love, or grief, or resentment. Their magnanimity and
self-command, in this respect, are almost beyond the conception of
Europeans. In a country in which all men are upon a level, with regard
to rank and fortune, it might be expected that the mutual inclinations
of the two parties should be the only thing considered in marriages, and
should be indulged without any sort of controul. This, however, is the
country in which all marriages, without exception, are made up by the
parents, and in which a young man would think himself disgraced for
ever, if he shewed the least preference of one woman above another, or
did not express the most complete indifference, both about the time
when, and the person to whom he was to be married. The weakness of love,
which is so much indulged in ages of humanity and politeness, is
regarded among savages as the most unpardonable effeminacy. Even after
the marriage the two parties seem to be ashamed of a connexion which is
founded upon so sordid a necessity. They do not live together. They see
one another by stealth only. They both continue to dwell in the houses
of their respective fathers, and the open cohabitation of the two sexes,
which is permitted without blame in all other countries, is here
considered as the most indecent and unmanly sensuality. Nor is it only
over this agreeable passion that they exert this absolute self-command.
They often bear in the sight of all their countrymen with injuries,
reproach, and the grossest insults with the appearance of the greatest
insensibility, and without expressing the smallest resentment. When a
savage is made prisoner of war, and receives, as is usual, the sentence
of death from his conquerors, he hears it without expressing any
emotion, and afterwards submits to the most dreadful torments, without
ever bemoaning himself, or discovering any other passion but contempt of
his enemies. While he is hung by the shoulders over a slow fire, he
derides his tormentors, and tells them with how much more ingenuity, he
himself had tormented such of their countrymen as had fallen into his
hands. After he has been scorched and burnt, and lacerated in all the
most tender and sensible parts of his body for several hours together,
he is often allowed, in order to prolong his misery, a short respite,
and is taken down from the stake: he employs this interval in talking
upon all indifferent subjects, inquires after the news of the country,
and seems indifferent about nothing but his own situation. The
spectators express the same insensibility; the sight of so horrible an
object seems to make no impression upon them; they scarce look at the
prisoner, except when they lend a hand to torment him. At other times
they smoke tobacco, and amuse themselves with any common object, as if
no such matter was going on. Every savage is said to prepare himself
from his earliest youth for this dreadful end. He composes, for this
purpose, what they call the song of death, a song which he is to sing
when he has fallen into the hands of his enemies, and is expiring under
the tortures which they inflict upon him. It consists of insults upon
his tormentors, and expresses the highest contempt of death and pain. He
sings this song upon all extraordinary occasions, when he goes out to
war, when he meets his enemies in the field, or whenever he has a mind
to show that he has familiarised his imagination to the most dreadful
misfortunes, and that no human event can daunt his resolution, or alter
his purpose. The same contempt of death and torture prevails among all
other savage nations. There is not a negro from the coast of Africa who
does not, in this respect, possess a degree of magnanimity which the
soul of his sordid master is too often scarce capable of conceiving.
Fortune never exerted more cruelly her empire over mankind, than when
she subjected those nations of heroes to the refuse of the jails of
Europe, to wretches who possess the virtues neither of the countries
which they come from, nor of those which they go to, and whose levity,
brutality, and baseness, so justly expose them to the contempt of the
vanquished.

This heroic and unconquerable firmness, which the custom and education
of his country demand of every savage, is not required of those who are
brought up to live in civilized societies. If these last complain when
they are in pain, if they grieve when they are in distress, if they
allow themselves either to be overcome by love, or to be discomposed by
anger, they are easily pardoned. Such weaknesses are not apprehended to
affect the essential parts of their character. As long as they do not
allow themselves to be transported to do any thing contrary to justice
or humanity, they lose but little reputation, though the serenity of
their countenance or the composure of their discourse and behaviour
should be somewhat ruffled and disturbed. A humane and polished people,
who have more sensibility to the passions of others, can more readily
enter into an animated and passionate behaviour, and can more easily
pardon some little excess. The person principally concerned is sensible
of this; and being assured of the equity of his judges, indulges himself
in stronger expressions of passion, and is less afraid of exposing
himself to their contempt by the violence of his emotions. We can
venture to express more emotion in the presence of a friend than in that
of a stranger, because we expect more indulgence from the one than from
the other. And in the same manner the rules of decorum among civilized
nations, admit of a more animated behaviour, than is approved of among
barbarians. The first converse together with the openness of friends;
the second with the reserve of strangers. The emotion and vivacity with
which the French and the Italians, the two most polished nations upon
the continent, express themselves on occasions that are at all
interesting, surprise at first those strangers who happen to be
travelling among them, and who, having been educated among a people of
duller sensibility, cannot enter into this passionate behaviour, of
which they have never seen any example in their own country. A young
French nobleman will weep in the presence of the whole court upon being
refused a regiment. An Italian, says the abbot Dû Bos, expresses more
emotion on being condemned in a fine of twenty shillings, than an
Englishman on receiving the sentence of death. Cicero, in the times of
the highest Roman politeness, could, without degrading himself, weep
with all the bitterness of sorrow in the sight of the whole senate and
the whole people; as it is evident he must have done in the end of
almost every oration. The orators of the earlier and ruder ages of Rome
could not probably, consistent with the manners of the times, have
expressed themselves with so much emotion. It would have been regarded,
I suppose, as a violation of nature and propriety in the Scipios, in the
Leliuses, and in the elder Cato, to have exposed so much tenderness to
the view of the public. Those ancient warriors could express themselves,
with order, gravity, and good judgment; but are said to have been
strangers to that sublime and passionate eloquence which was first
introduced into Rome, not many years before the birth of Cicero, by the
two Gracchi, by Crassus, and by Sulpitius. This animated eloquence,
which has been long practiced, with or without success, both in France
and Italy, is but just beginning to be introduced into England. So wide
is the difference between the degrees of self-command which are required
in civilized and in barbarous nations, and by such different standards
do they judge of the propriety of behaviour.

This difference gives occasion to many others that are not less
essential. A polished people being accustomed to give way, in some
measure, to the movements of nature, become frank, open, and sincere.
Barbarians, on the contrary, being obliged to smother and conceal the
appearance of every passion, necessarily acquire the habits of falsehood
and dissimulation. It is observed by all those who have been conversant
with savage nations, whether in Asia, Africa, or America, that they are
all equally impenetrable, and that, when they have a mind to conceal the
truth, no examination is capable of drawing it from them. They cannot be
trepanned by the most artful questions. The torture itself is incapable
of making them confess any thing which they have no mind to tell. The
passions of a savage too, though they never express themselves by any
outward emotion, but lie concealed in the breast of the sufferer, are,
notwithstanding, all mounted to the highest pitch of fury. Though he
seldom shows any symptoms of anger, yet his vengeance, when he comes to
give way to it, is always sanguinary and dreadful. The least affront
drives him to despair. His countenance and discourse indeed are still
sober and composed, and express nothing but the most perfect
tranquillity of mind: But his actions are often the most furious and
violent. Among the North-Americans it is not uncommon for persons of the
tenderest age and more fearful sex to drown themselves upon receiving
only a slight reprimand from their mothers, and this too without
expressing any passions or saying any thing, except, _you shall no
longer have a daughter_. In civilized nations the passions of men are
not commonly so furious or so desperate. They are often clamorous and
noisy, but are seldom very hurtful; and seem frequently to aim at no
other satisfaction, but that of convincing the spectator, that they are
in the right to be so much moved, and of procuring his sympathy and
approbation.

All these effects of custom and fashion, however, upon the moral
sentiments of mankind, are inconsiderable in comparison of those which
they give occasion to in some other cases; and it is not concerning the
general style of character and behaviour, that those principles produce
the greatest perversion of judgment, but concerning the propriety or
impropriety of particular usages.

The different manners which custom teaches us to approve of in the
different professions and states of life, do not concern things of the
greatest importance. We expect truth and justice from an old man as well
as from a young, from a clergyman as well as from an officer; and it is
in matters of small moment only that we look for the distinguishing
marks of their respective characters. With regard to these too, there is
often some unobserved circumstance which, if it was attended to, would
show us, that, independent of custom, there was a propriety in the
character which custom had taught us to allot to each profession. We
cannot complain, therefore, in this case, that the perversion of natural
sentiment is very great. Though the manners of different nations require
different degrees of the same quality, in the character which they think
worthy of esteem, yet the worst that can be said to happen even here, is
that the duties of one virtue are sometimes extended so as to encroach a
little upon the precincts of some other. The rustic hospitality that is
in fashion among the Poles encroaches, perhaps, a little upon œconomy
and good order; and the frugality that is esteemed in Holland, upon
generosity and good-fellowship. The hardiness demanded of savages
diminishes their humanity; and, perhaps, the delicate sensibility
required in civilized nations sometimes destroys the masculine firmness
of the character. In general, the style of manners which takes place in
any nation, may commonly upon the whole be said to be that which is most
suitable to its situation. Hardiness is the character most suitable to
the circumstances of a savage; sensibility to those of one who lives in
a very civilized society. Even here, therefore, we cannot complain that
the moral sentiments of men are very grossly perverted.”
(Adam Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments, 1777)

E2.2.B.2.2.p. GREG LUKIANOFF PROVIDES A  CRITIQUE OF A SPECIFIC MODERN CULTURAL TREND: THE RISE OF "SAFETYISM." HE SHOWS HOW A NEW SET OF CULTURAL VALUES AND NORMS REGARDING "EMOTIONAL SAFETY" IS SHAPING THE UPBRINGING AND SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT OF A GENERATION, WITH PROFOUND AND OFTEN NEGATIVE DETERMINISTIC EFFECTS.
“Antifragility
No one has done a better job of explaining the harm of avoiding stressors, risks, and small doses of pain than Nassim Nicholas Taleb, the Lebanese-born statistician, stock trader, and polymath who is now a professor of risk engineering at New York University. In his 2007 best seller, The Black Swan, Taleb argued that most of us think about risk in the wrong way. In complex systems, it is virtually inevitable that unforeseen problems will arise, yet we persist in trying to calculate risk based on past experiences. Life has a way of creating completely unexpected events—events Taleb likens to the appearance of a black swan when, based on your past experience, you assumed that all swans were white. (Taleb was one of the few who predicted the global financial crisis of 2008, based on the financial system’s vulnerability to “black swan” events.)
In his later book Antifragile, Taleb explains how systems and people can survive the inevitable black swans of life and, like the immune system, grow stronger in response. Taleb asks us to distinguish three kinds of things. Some, like china teacups, are fragile: they break easily and cannot heal themselves, so you must handle them gently and keep them away from toddlers. Other things are resilient: they can withstand shocks. Parents usually give their toddlers plastic cups precisely because plastic can survive repeated falls to the floor, although the cups do not benefit from such falls. But Taleb asks us to look beyond the overused word “resilience” and recognize that some things are antifragile. Many of the important systems in our economic and political life are like our immune systems: they require stressors and challenges in order to learn, adapt, and grow. Systems that are antifragile become rigid, weak, and inefficient when nothing challenges them or pushes them to respond vigorously. He notes that muscles, bones, and children are antifragile:
‘Just as spending a month in bed . . . leads to muscle atrophy, complex systems are weakened, even killed, when deprived of stressors. Much of our modern, structured, world has been harming us with top-down policies and contraptions . . . which do precisely this: an insult to the antifragility of systems. This is the tragedy of modernity: as with neurotically overprotective parents, those trying to help are often hurting us the most.’
Taleb opens the book with a poetic image that should speak to all parents. He notes that wind extinguishes a candle but energizes a fire. He advises us not to be like candles and not to turn our children into candles: “You want to be the fire and wish for the wind.”
The foolishness of overprotection is apparent as soon as you understand the concept of antifragility. Given that risks and stressors are natural, unavoidable parts of life, parents and teachers should be helping kids develop their innate abilities to grow and learn from such experiences. There’s an old saying: “Prepare the child for the road, not the road for the child.” But these days, we seem to be doing precisely the opposite: we’re trying to clear away anything that might upset children, not realizing that in doing so, we’re repeating the peanut-allergy mistake. If we protect children from various classes of potentially upsetting experiences, we make it far more likely that those children will be unable to cope with such events when they leave our protective umbrella. The modern obsession with protecting young people from “feeling unsafe” is, we believe, one of the (several) causes of the rapid rise in rates of adolescent depression, anxiety, and suicide, which we’ll explore in chapter 7.
The Rise of Safetyism
In the twentieth century, the word “safety” generally meant physical safety. A great triumph of the late part of that century was that the United States became physically safer for children. As a result of class action lawsuits, efforts by investigative journalists and consumer advocates (such as Ralph Nader and his exposé of the auto industry, Unsafe at Any Speed), and common sense, dangerous products and practices became less prevalent. Between 1978 and 1985, all fifty states passed laws making the use of car seats mandatory for children. Homes and day care centers were childproofed;choking hazards and sharp objects were removed. As a result, death rates for children have plummeted. This is, of course, a very good thing, although in some other ways, the focus on physical safety may have gone too far. (The Alison Gopnik essay quoted above was titled
“Should We Let Toddlers Play With Saws and Knives?” Her answer was: maybe.) 
But gradually, in the twenty-first century, on some college campuses, the meaning of “safety” underwent a process of “concept creep” and expanded to include “emotional safety.” As an example, in 2014, Oberlin College posted guidelines for faculty, urging them to use trigger warnings to “show students that you care about their safety.” The rest of the memo makes it clear that what the college was really telling its faculty was: show students that you care about their feelings. You can see the conflation of safety and feelings in another part of the memo, which urged faculty to use each student’s preferred gender pronoun (for example, “zhe” or “they” for students who don’t want to be referred to as “he” or “she”), not because this was respectful or appropriately sensitive but because a professor who uses an incorrect pronoun “prevents or impairs their safety in a classroom.” If students have been told that they can request gender-neutral pronouns and then a professor fails to use one, students may be disappointed or upset. But are these students unsafe? Are students in any danger in the classroom if a professor uses the wrong pronoun? Professors should indeed be mindful of their students’ feelings, but how might it change Oberlin students—and the nature of class discussions—when the community is told repeatedly that they should judge the speech of others in terms of safety and danger?
To understand how an Oberlin administrator could have used the word “safety,” we turn to an article published in 2016 by the Australian psychologist Nick Haslam, titled “Concept Creep: Psychology’s Expanding Concepts of Harm and Pathology.”16 Haslam examined a variety of key concepts in clinical and social psychology—including abuse, bullying, trauma, and prejudice—to determine how their usage had changed since the 1980s. He found that their scope had expanded in two directions: the concepts had crept “downward,” to apply to less severe situations, and “outward,” to encompass new but conceptually related phenomena.
Take the word “trauma.” In the early versions of the primary manual of psychiatry, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), psychiatrists used the word “trauma” only to describe a physical agent causing physical damage, as in the case of what we now call traumatic brain injury. In the 1980 revision, however, the manual (DSM III) recognized “post-traumatic stress disorder” as a mental disorder—the first type of traumatic injury that isn’t physical. PTSD is caused by an extraordinary and terrifying experience, and the criteria for a traumatic event that warrants a diagnosis of PTSD were (and are) strict: to qualify, an event would have to “evoke significant symptoms of distress in almost everyone” and be “outside the range of usual human experience.” The DSM III emphasized that the event was not based on a subjective standard. It had to be something that would cause most people to have a severe reaction. War, rape, and torture were included in this category. Divorce and simple bereavement (as in the death of a spouse due to natural causes), on the other hand, were not, because they are normal parts of life, even if unexpected. These experiences are sad and painful, but pain is not the same thing as trauma. People in these situations that don’t fall into the “trauma” category might benefit from counseling, but they generally recover from such losses without any therapeutic interventions. In fact, even most people who do have traumatic experiences recover completely without intervention.
By the early 2000s, however, the concept of “trauma” within parts of the therapeutic community had crept down so far that it included anything “experienced by an individual as physically or emotionally harmful . . . with lasting adverse effects on the individual’s functioning and mental, physical, social, emotional, or spiritual well-being.” The subjective experience of “harm” became definitional in assessing trauma. As a result, the word “trauma” became much more widely used, not just by mental health professionals but by their clients and patients—including an increasing number of college students.
As with trauma, a key change for most of the concepts Haslam examined was the shift to a subjective standard. It was not for anyone else to decide what counted as trauma, bullying, or abuse; if it felt like that to you, trust your feelings. If a person reported that an event was traumatic (or bullying or abusive), his or her subjective assessment was increasingly taken as sufficient evidence. And if a rapidly growing number of students have been diagnosed with a mental disorder (as we’ll see in chapter 7), then there is a rapidly growing need for the campus community to protect them.”
(Greg Lukianoff, The Coddling of the American Mind, 2018)

E2.2.B.2.2.q. HYDE SHOWS THAT OUR SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT DETERMINES HOW WE TREAT THINGS, ESPECIALLY HUMAN LIFE. HE SHOWS HOW LEGAL SYSTEMS (THE UNIFORM ANATOMICAL GIFT ACT) AND CULTURAL PRACTICES SURROUNDING ORGAN DONATION, MARRIAGE, AND ADOPTION ALL REFLECT A DEEP-SEATED CULTURAL VALUE: THAT HUMAN LIFE, WHEN TRANSFERRED, MUST BE TREATED AS A GIFT, NOT A COMMODITY. 
“Property,” by one old definition, is a “right of action.” To possess, enjoy, to use, to destroy, to sell, to rent, to give or bequeath, to improve, to pollute—all of these are actions, and a thing (or a person) becomes a “property” whenever someone has “in it” the right of any such action. There is no property without an actor, then, and in this sense property is an expression of the human will in things (and in other people).
The definition is a broad one, but it allows us to make the distinctions necessary to a discussion of cases in which human beings become property of one kind or another. A rather odd problem that arose with the advent of organ transplants will illustrate the particular distinction we need at the moment. It used to be the case that when a person died the law recognized no property rights in the body. Growing out of a religious sense of the sacredness of the body, this legal formula was intended to make it clear that the executors of an estate could not make the body of the deceased into an item of commerce to be bought, sold, or used to pay debts. It even used to be the case that a man could not direct the manner of his own burial and expect the courts to back him up, because his body, not being property, was not a part of his estate. As soon as it became possible to transplant an organ from the dead to the living, however, it became clear that the sense of “property rights” being used here was too vague. The law justly restrained the right to sell, but what of the right to bestow?
In response to just this question, every state in the Union has recently adopted what is known as the Uniform Anatomical Gift Act, a law that recognizes the right of an adult to bequeath all or part of his body in the event of his death. It vests that right primarily in the person himself, of course, but in special cases it extends the right of bestowal to other people. In the case of minor children the right of bestowal lies with the parents, who may now legally donate the body of a child who has died or been killed.
Our ability to transplant body organs raises ethical questions—and has therefore required legal clarification— because with it comes the understanding that while the body from which an organ is removed may be dead, the organ itself is not. Transactions that involve life itself seem to constitute the primary case in which we feel called upon to distinguish the right of bestowal from the right of sale. The rules of gift exchange are such that what is treated as a gift retains or even increases its liveliness, and most cultures, when forced to decide, therefore classify human life as a gift (which explains why the most significant work on gift exchange outside of anthropology has focused on matters of medical policy and ethics). If human life itself must become an item of commerce, transferred from person to person or house to house, then it must be gift property and the “rights of action” must be those that appertain to gifts, not to commodities.
With this distinction in mind we may return to the problem of the woman given in marriage, beginning, as I say, at the beginning. Not only do most cultures classify human life as a gift, but they take in particular the life of a newborn child to be a gift that has been bestowed upon its parents. (Bestowed by whom? By the gods, by the earth, by the spirits of the recently dead, by the tree near the water hole which is known to make women pregnant—however the local story has it.) The recipients of this gift are its custodians so long as the child is dependent upon them, and they may, under special circumstances, exercise their right of bestowal. The child whose body organs are given away when it dies is one instance, albeit an unusual one; the young woman whose father gives her in marriage is a second. A third example again distinguishes the right of sale from the right of bestowal: our laws prohibit parents from selling their children, but they grant them the right to give a child up for adoption. There are special restrictions and guidelines under which a child is given away, of course, but they only serve to emphasize once again our feeling that if a child’s life must be transferred from one family to another, it must be a gift. There are many cultures in which all children are given away in the normal course of events, being raised by the family of a paternal aunt, for example, and not by their biological parents. In these cases a child is just one of many gifts that pass among kin.”
(Lewis Hyde, The gift creativity and the artist in the modern world, 2007)

E2.2.B.2.2.r.  SUSAN CAIN TRACES HOW 19TH-CENTURY AMERICAN CAPITALISM TRANSFORMED THE CONCEPT OF FAILURE FROM A SIMPLE MISFORTUNE INTO A PERSONAL CHARACTER FLAW, CREATING THE "LOSER" AS A "NATIONAL BOGEYMAN" AND FOSTERING A CULTURE OF ENFORCED POSITIVITY—FROM THE NEW THOUGHT MOVEMENT TO THE MODERN "PROSPERITY GOSPEL"—TO AVOID THIS STIGMA. 
“Historically, the United States has seen itself as the land of abundant resources, the frontier of limitless self-invention, the nation whose streets were paved with gold (or so dreamed the immigrants who ventured here).
Yet America has buried its bitter stories under the sweetness of this vision. Our alt-history includes the Declaration of Independence, a document written under penalty of treason and most of whose signatories lost “their lives, loved ones, and fortunes in the war,” as Barbara Ehrenreich puts it in her book Bright-Sided: How the Relentless Promotion of Positive Thinking Has Undermined America. It includes the obliteration of Native American life and cultures. It’s drenched in the blood and cries of slavery, our great national tragedy and sin: oceans of tears whose waves still wash our shores. This alt-history sweeps through the Civil War, which produced a scale of death that the United States hasn’t seen before or since, according to Harvard historian Drew Gilpin Faust: The fatality rate was six times that of World War II, or about six million dead, in current population terms. Add to these horrors the multitudes of immigrants fleeing famine and genocide, crossing the seas to make their homes here, often with an unspoken pact never to speak of their pasts.
And all of this the generations carry forward, into their psyches, into their families, into the body politic. If recent advances in epigenetics are any indication (as we’ll see in chapter  9), some may have passed down these experiences through the expression of their DNA, too, the cellular memory of ancient traumas encoded confusingly in American-born babies bred for optimism and cheer.
Our tyranny of positivity stems, in part, from underappreciated historical roots. The original dominant American culture, established by the white settlers who arrived in New England, reflected the tenets of Calvinism, a religion in which heaven existed, but only for those predestined for it. Hell was a terrifying place, abundant descriptions of which gave many children chronic nightmares. The doctrine of predestination meant that there wasn’t much you could do to escape your assignment of either heaven or hell. But what you could do was show, by virtue of your ceaseless labor, that you were destined for the former. To do this, you had to till the land, clean the kitchen, and never seek pleasure for its own sake. There was no place for sorrow or joy—there was only the need to show that you were one of the winners, with a one-way ticket to heaven.
Calvinism seemed to loosen its grip on American culture during the nineteenth century, the era of commercial expansion. Instead of an empty frontier that early settlers had viewed as “a hideous and desolate wilderness, full of wild beasts and wild men,” as an early settler named William Bradford put it, Americans looked out their windows and began to see roads and railways. “Why should we grope among the dry bones of the past?” Ralph Waldo Emerson asked in 1849. “The sun shines today also. There is more wool and flax in the field. There are new lands, new men, new thoughts.”
But Calvinism was replaced by the new national religion of business, in which you were predestined not for heaven or hell but for earthly success or failure. This was, as the writer Maria Fish put it in a review of Scott Sandage’s fascinating book, Born Losers: A History of Failure in America, a “reconfiguration of the doctrine of predestination,” with success as the holy grail, and the tycoon as high priest and alpha role model. To “be a man” increasingly meant to be a businessman. Farmers “must be extensively engaged in buying or selling,” warned the North American Review in 1820, and “conversant with many commercial transactions.” A man who failed to do this “will be a great loser.”
This word—loser—had been part of the English language for hundreds of years, but now it carried new meaning. In the sixteenth century, it simply meant “one who suffers loss.” But by nineteenth-century America, according to Sandage, the “loser” acquired a stink. It became something you were, while others were not. It came to mean, according to the Online Etymology Dictionary, a “hapless person, one who habitually fails to win.” Another person’s misfortunes should elicit compassion—as we saw in chapter 1, the very meaning of the word compassion is “to suffer with” someone. But the term loser now evoked not empathy but contempt. Loss became a condition to avoid, by relentlessly cultivating the mindset and behaviors of a winner.
One problem with tying inner worth to outer fortune was the elusive nature of commercial success. Even if you were fortunate enough to find the grail of prosperity, could you keep it? This was the century of boom-and-bust capitalism. Each economic expansion minted a new crop of successful businessmen who were ruined overnight during the panics of 1819, 1837, 1857, and 1873. Many despaired; some died by suicide. And through all this, a question started to preoccupy the culture. When someone went bankrupt, whose fault was it? The economic system? A poor business decision? Bad luck? Or could loss and heartache be traced to some mysterious flaw in the soul of each ruined businessman?
Increasingly, failure was attributed to such flaws of the soul. Some “have failed, from causes beyond the control of human power,” one lawmaker noted in 1822, but “this latter class must be comparatively small.” The “loser” became, in Sandage’s words, a “national bogeyman.” Emerson, in his 1842 journal, recorded the proverb that “nobody fails who ought not to fail. There is always a reason, in the man, for his good or bad fortune, and so in making money.” Similarly, “Failures that arise from inevitable misfortune alone are not so numerous as they are generally supposed to be,” declared a Boston lecturer in 1846. “In most cases, insolvency is caused by mistakes that originate in personal character.”
If the question of who was a winner and who a loser was answered by looking “in the man,” then it followed that we’d start to seek the characteristics that would predict wealth and victory. We’d try to acquire the positive and vigorous affect of a winner. 
Enter the New Thought movement, which initially focused on the mind’s power to cure illness but, later in the century, to generate worldly success. The movement replaced the Calvinistic ethos of the Pilgrims with the belief in a forgiving deity and a universe of goodness in which people could heal and thrive—by adopting a relentlessly positive outlook. Even the great psychologist William James, who had the skepticism of a scientist and regarded the movement as “moonstruck with optimism,” still noted its “healthy-mindedness” and exclaimed, in his seminal 1902 book, The Varieties of Religious Experience, that because of New Thought, “cheerfulness has been restored to countless homes.”
James also observed the movement’s banishment of sorrow: “One hears of the ‘Gospel of Relaxation,’ ” he wrote, “of the ‘Don’t Worry Movement,’ of people who repeat to themselves ‘Youth, health, vigor!’ when dressing in the morning as their motto for the day. Complaints of the weather are getting to be forbidden in many households and more and more people are recognizing it to be bad form to speak of disagreeable sensations, or to make much of the ordinary inconveniences and ailments of life.”
Children were also trained in mandatory cheer. In 1908, the organization that would become the Boy Scouts trained its charges to “look for the bright side of life. Cheerfully do tasks that come your way.” Children were warned to disguise sadness: “You should force yourself to smile at once and then whistle a tune, and you will be all right. A scout goes about with a smile on and whistling. It cheers him and cheers other people, especially in time of danger, for he keeps it up then all the same.”
But these attitudes applied most urgently to the pursuit of wealth. A 1910 ad for a correspondence self-help course showed a round-shouldered “loser,” the copy asking: “Are you a Misfit?” Other ads depicted winners: “The go-ahead man buys Kuppenheimer Clothes.” By the 1930s, self-help books such as Think and Grow Rich by Napoleon Hill became massive bestsellers, eventually selling millions of copies. In his mega-bestselling The Power of Positive Thinking, Norman Vincent Peale advised readers that “whenever a negative thought concerning your personal powers comes to mind, deliberately voice a positive thought to cancel it out.”
These notions persisted even through the 1929 stock market crash and the Great Depression. In 1933, unemployment was at 24.9 percent; almost 20,000 businesses had failed and 4,004 banks had closed. And still, the idea that failure came from “in[side] the man” held firm. A 1929 headline: LOSER IN STREET CHOOSES SUICIDE. A 1937 article about a suicide by carbon monoxide–filled car: “Reilly left a note saying he had been ‘a failure in life.’ ” A psychiatrist, recalling his middle-class patients of the era: “Everybody, more or less, blamed himself for his delinquency or lack of talent or bad luck. There was an acceptance that it was your own fault, a kind of shame about your own personal failure.”
By 1955, the word loser had become a feature of adolescent slang, pop culture, and scholarly study. Losers soon appeared in the form of comic strip characters like Charlie Brown, antiheroes like Willy Loman, and performers like Woody Allen. Sociologists and journalists, from David Riesman to William Whyte, Jr., wrote bestselling books about them. Musicians sang of them in hit songs, from Frank Sinatra’s “Here’s to the Losers” to the Beatles’ “I’m a Loser,” and, more recently, Beck’s blunt version: “I’m a loser baby, so why don’t you kill me?” Charles Schulz once said that his Peanuts characters represented different aspects of himself. 
Philosophical Linus, crabby Lucy, insouciant Snoopy…and melancholic Charlie Brown, who was the heart of it all, the center of the strip, yet the one we could never admit to being. “I didn’t realize how many Charlie Browns there were in the world,” Schulz said. “I thought I was the only one.”
Today, the division of society into winners and losers is starker than ever. As the journalist Neal Gabler wrote in Salon in 2017, “America is deeply divided between those who are considered (and consider themselves) winners, and those who…are considered by the winners to be losers. Losers are cultural pariahs—the American equivalent of India’s untouchables….You have to be a winner to have any respect, including self-respect.” The “prosperity gospel,” without ever mentioning the word Calvinism, holds that wealth is bestowed by God upon the worthy, and withdrawn from the undeserving. This “gospel” was endorsed by 17 percent of Christians surveyed by Time magazine in 2006, while 61 percent agreed that God wants people to be prosperous. Conversely, use of the term loser has skyrocketed since the 1960s, according to the Google Books Ngram Viewer. Reverence for winners and contempt for losers famously shaped the worldview of former president Donald Trump, as when he recast the war hero John McCain as a loser because he’d been a POW in Vietnam. Many on both sides of the political divide recoiled from this statement, but Trump was instinctually tapping into our cultural legacy.”
(Susan Cain, Bittersweet, 2022)

E2.2.B.2.2.s. RUSSELL ARGUES THAT MARX'S PHILOSOPHY WAS A PRODUCT OF ITS TIME AND WAS DRIVEN BY AN "EMOTIONAL BASIS" AND AN UN-EXAMINED "READINESS TO BELIEVE IN PROGRESS," DESPITE ITS CLAIMS TO PURE SCIENTIFIC OBJECTIVITY. “
“Marx’s philosophy of history Is a blend of Hegel and British economics. Like Hegel, he thinks that the world develops according to a dialectical formula, but he totally disagrees with Hegel as to the motive force of this development. Hegel believed in a mystical entity called ‘Spirit*, which causes human history to develop according to the stages of the dialectic as set forth in Hegel’s Logic. Why Spirit has to go through these stages is not clear. One is tempted to suppose that Spirit is trying to understand Hegel, and at each stage rashly objectifies what it has been reading. Marx’s dialectic has none of this quality except a certain inevitableness. For Marx, matter, not spirit, is the driving force. But it is a matter in the peculiar sense that we have been considering, not the wholly dehumanized matter of the atomists. This means that, for Marx, the driving force is really man's relation to matter, of which the most important part is his mode of production. In this way Marx’s materialism, in practice, becomes economics.
The politics, religion, philosophy, and art of any epoch in human history are, according to Marx, an outcome of its methods of production, and, to a lesser extent, of distribution. I think he would not maintain that this applies to all the niceties of culture, but only to its broad outlines. The doctrine is called the ‘materialist conception of history’. This is a very important thesis; in particular, it concerns the historian of philosophy. I do not myself accept the thesis as it stands, but I think that it contains very important elements of truth, and I am aware that it has influenced my own views of philosophical development as set forth in the present work. Let us, to begin with, consider the history of philosophy in relation to Marx’s doctrine.
Subjectively, every philosopher appears to himself to be engaged in the pursuit of something which may be called ‘truth’. Philosophers may differ as to the definition of ‘truth’, but at any rate it is something objective, something which, in some sense, everybody ought to accept. No man would engage in the pursuit of philosophy ii he thought that all philosophy is merely an expression of irrational bias. But every philosopher will agree that many other philosophers have been actuated by bias, and have had extrarational reasons, of which they were usually unconscious, for many of their opinions. Marx, like the rest, believes in the truth of his own doctrines; he does not regard them as nothing but an expression of the feelings natural to a rebellious middle-class German Jew in the middle of the nineteenth century. What can be said about this conflict between the subjective and objective views of a philosophy?
We may say, in a broad way, that Greek philosophy down to Aristotle expresses the mentality appropriate to the City State; that Stoicism is appropriate to a cosmopolitan despotism; that scholastic philosophy is an intellectual expression of the Church as an organization; that philosophy since Descartes, or at any rate since Locke, tends to embody the prejudices of the commercial middle class; and that Marxism and Fascism arc philosophies appropriate to the modem industrial State. This, I think, is both true and important. I think, however, that Marx is wrong in two respects. First, the social circumstances of which account must be taken are quite as much political as economic; they have to do with power, of which wealth is only one form. Second, social causation largely ceases to apply as soon as a problem becomes detailed and technical. The first of these objections I have set forth in my book Tower, and I shall therefore say no more about it. The second more intimately concerns the history of philosophy, and I will give some examples of its scope.
Take, first, the problem of universals. This problem was first discussed by Plato, then by Aristotle, by the Schoolmen, by the British empiricists, and by the most modern logicians. It would be absurd to deny that bias has influenced the opinions of philosophers on this question. Plato was influenced by Parmenides and Orphism; he wanted an eternal world, and could not believe in the ultimate reality of the temporal flux. Aristotle was more empirical, and had no dislike of the every-day world. Thorough-going empiricists in modem times have a bias which is the opposite of Plato's: they find the thought of a super-sensible world unpleasant, and are willing to go to great lengths to avoid having to believe in it. But these opposing kinds of bias arc perennial, and have only a somewhat remote connection with the social system. It is said that love of the eternal is characteristic of a leisure class, which lives on the labour of others. I doubt if this is true. Epictetus and Spinoza were not gentlemen of leisure. It might be urged on the contrary, that the conception of heaven as a place where nothing is done is that of weary toilers who want nothing but rest. Such argumentation can be carried on indefinitely, and leads nowhere.
On the other hand, when we come to the detail of the controversy about universal, we find that each side can invent arguments which the other side will admit to be valid. Some of Aristotle’s criticisms of Plato on this question have been almost universally accepted. In quite recent times, although no decision has been reached, a new technique has been developed, and many incidental problems have been solved. It is not irrational to hope that, before very long, a definite agreement may be reached by logicians on this question.
Take, as a second example, the ontological argument. This, as we have seen, was invented by Anselm, rejected by Thomas Aquinas, accepted by Descartes, refuted by Kant, and reinstated by Hegel. I think it may be said quite decisively that, as a result of analysis of the concept ‘existence’, modern logic has proved this argument invalid. This is not a matter of temperament or of the social system; it is a purely technical matter. The refutation of the argument affords, of course, no ground for supposing its conclusion, namely the existence of God, to be untrue; if it did, we cannot suppose that Thomas Aquinas would have rejected the argument. Or take the question of materialism. This is a word which is capable of many meanings; we have seen that Marx radically altered its significance. The heated controversies as to its truth or falsehood have largely depended, for their continued vitality, upon avoidance of definition. When the term is defined, it will be found that, according to some possible definitions, materialism is demonstrably false; according to certain others, it may be true, though there is no positive reason to think so; while according to yet other definitions there are some reasons in its favour, though these reasons are not conclusive All this, again, depends upon technical considerations, and has nothing to do with the social system.
The truth of the matter is really fairly simple. What is conventionally called ‘philosophy* consists of two very different elements. Oh the one hand there are questions which are scientific or logical; these arc amenable to methods as to which there is general agreement. On the other hand, there are questions of passionate interest to large numbers of people, as to which there is no solid evidence either way. Among the latter are practical questions as to which it is impossible to remain aloof. When there is a war, I must support my own country or come into painful conflict both with friends and with the authorities. At many times there has been no middle course between supporting and opposing the official religion. For one reason or another, we all find it impossible to maintain an attitude of skeptical detachment on many issues as to which pure reason is silent. A ‘philosophy', in a very usual sense of the word, is an organic whole of such extra-rational decisions. It is in regard to ‘philosophy’ in this sense that Marx’s contention is largely true. But even in this sense a philosophy is determined by other social causes as well as by those that are economic. War, especially, has its share in historical causation; and victory in war docs not always go to the side with the greatest economic resources.
Marx fitted his philosophy of history into a mould suggested by Hegelian dialectic, but in fact there was only one triad that concerned him: feudalism, represented by the landowner; capitalism, represented by the industrial employer; and Socialism, represented by the wage-earner. Hegel thought of nations as the vehicles of dialectic movement; Marx substituted classes. He disclaimed always all ethical or humanitarian reasons for preferring Socialism or taking the side of the wage-earner; he maintained, not that this side was ethically better, but that it was the side taken by the dialectic it. its wholly deterministic movement. He might have said that he did not advocate Socialism, but only prophesied it. This, however, would not have been wholly true. He undoubtedly believed every dialectical movement to be, in some impersonal sense, a progress, and he certainly held that Socialism, once established, would minister to human happiness more than either feudalism or capitalism have done. These beliefs, though they must have controlled his life, remained largely in the background so far as his writings are concerned. Occasionally, however, he abandons calm prophecy for vigorous exhortation to rebellion, and the emotional basis of his ostensibly scientific prognostications is implicit in all he wrote. Considered purely as a philosopher, Marx has grave shortcomings. He is too practical, too much wrapped up in the problems of his time. His purview is confined to this planet, and, within this planet, to Man. Since Copernicus, it has been evident that Man has not the cosmic importance which he formerly arrogated to himself. No man who has failed to assimilate this fact has a right to call his philosophy scientific.”
(Bertrand Russell, History Of Western Philosophy, 1945)

E2.2.B.2.2.t. EDWARD HALLETT CARR’S CENTRAL THESIS IS THAT HISTORY CANNOT BE UNDERSTOOD AS MERELY THE SUM OF INDIVIDUAL INTENTIONS. IT ARGUES THAT INDIVIDUALS ARE PART OF MASS SOCIAL FORCES AND THAT THEIR ACTIONS LEAD TO LARGE-SCALE OUTCOMES THAT NO SINGLE PERSON WILLED. 
“The two remarks which I have to make on this question have nothing to do with any abstract view of history, and are based on purely empirical observation. 
The first is that history is to a considerable extent a matter of numbers. Carlyle was responsible for the unfortunate assertion that ‘history is the biography of great men’. But listen to him at his most eloquent and in his greatest historical work: 
Hunger and nakedness and nightmare oppression lying heavy on twenty-five million hearts: this, not the wounded vanities or contradicted philosophies of philosophical advocates, rich shop¬ keepers, rural noblesse, was the prime mover in the French revolution; as the like will be in all such revolutions, in all countries.
Or, as Lenin said: 'Politics begin where the masses are; not where there are thousands, but where there are millions, that is where serious politics begin.’ Carlyle's and Lenin’s millions were millions of individuals: there was nothing impersonal about them. Discussions of this question sometimes confuse anonymity with impersonality. People do not cease to be people, or individuals individuals, because we do not know their names. Mr Eliot's 'vast, impersonal forces' were the individuals whom Clarendon, bolder and franker conservative, calls ‘dirty people ofn o name’. These nameless millions were individuals acting more or less unconsciously,, together, and constituting a social force. The historian will not in ordinary circumstances need to take cognizance of single discontented peasant or discontented village. But millions of discontented peasants in thousands of villages are a factor which no historian will ignore. The reasons which deter Jones from getting married do not interest the historian unless the same reasons also deter thousands of other individuals of Jones’s generation, and bring about a substantial fall in a marriage-rate: in that event, they may well be historically significant. Nor need we be perturbed by the platitude that movements are started by minorities. All effective movements have few leaders and a multitude of followers; but this does not mean that the multitude is not essential to their success. Numbers count in history. 
My second observation is even better attested. Writers of many different schools of thought have concurred in remarking that the actions of individual human beings often have results which were not intended or desired by the actors or indeed by any other individual. The Christian believes that the individual, acting consciously for his own often selfish ends, is the unconscious agent of God’s purpose. Mandeville’s 'private vices - public benefits’ was an early and deliberately paradoxical ex¬ pression of this discovery. Adam Smith's hidden hand and Hegel’s 'cunning of reason', which sets individuals to work for it and to serve its purposes, though the individuals believe themselves to be fulfilling their own personal desires, are too familiar to require quotation. ‘In the social production of their means of production,’ wrote Mane in the preface to his Critique of Political Economy, ‘human beings enter into definite and necessary relations which are independent of their will.’ ‘Man lives consciously for himself,' wrote Tolstoy in War and Peace, echoing Adam Smith, 'but is an unconscious instrument in the attainment of the historic universal aims of humanity.' And here, to round off this anthology, which is already long enough, is Professor Butterfield: ‘There is something in the nature of historical events which twists the course of history in a direction that no man ever intended.’ Since 1914, after a hundred years of only minor local wars, we have had two major world wars. It would not be a plausible explanation of this phenomenon to maintain that more individuals wanted war, or fewer wanted peace, in the first half of the twentieth century than in the last three quarters of the nineteenth. It is difficult to believe that any individual willed or desired die great economic depression of the 1930s. Yet it was indubitably brought about by the actions of individuals, each consciously pursuing some totally different aim. Nor does the diagnosis of a discrepancy between the intentions of the individual and the results of his action always have to wait for the retrospective historian. 'He does not mean to go to war,’ wrote Lodge of Woodrow Wilson in March 1917, 'but I think he will be carried away by events.’ It defies all the evidence, to suggest that history can be written on the basis of explanations in terms of human intentions n or of accounts of their motives given by the actors themselves, of why ‘in their own estimation, they acted as they did ’. The farts of history are indeed facts about individuals, but not about actions of individuals performed in isolation, and not about the motives, real or imaginary, from which individuals suppose themselves to have acted. They are farts about the relations of individuals to one another in society and about the social forces which produce from the actions of individuals results often at variance with, and sometimes opposite to, die results which they themselves intended.”
(Edward Hallett Carr, What is History, 1961)

E2.2.B.2.2.u. RUSSELL COMMENTS ON WHAT IS PERHAPS HISTORY'S MOST FAMOUS EXAMPLE OF A SOCIETY WHERE THE INDIVIDUAL IS ALMOST COMPLETELY A PRODUCT OF THEIR SOCIAL AND CULTURAL SYSTEM. THE LIFE OF A SPARTAN CITIZEN IS DETERMINED FROM THE MOMENT OF BIRTH. 
“At some time during the eighth century b.c. the Spartans conquered the neighbouring country of Messenia, and reduced most of its inhabitants to the condition of helots. There had been a lack of Lebensraum in Sparta, but the new territory, for a time, removed this source of discontent.
Lots were for the common run of Spartans; the aristocracy had estates of their own, whereas the lots were portions of common land assigned by the State. The free inhabitants of other parts of Laconia, called ‘perioeci’, had no share of political power.
The sole business of a Spartan citizen was war, to which he was trained from birth. Sickly children were exposed after inspection by the heads of the tribe; only those judged vigorous were allowed to be reared. Up to the age of twenty, all the boys were trained in one big school; the purpose of the training was to make them hardy, indifferent to pain, and submissive to discipline. There was no nonsense about cultural or scientific education; the sole aim was to produce good soldiers, wholly devoted to the State.
At the age of twenty, actual military service began. Marriage was permitted to anyone over the age of twenty, but until the age of thirty a man had to live in the ‘men's house', and had to manage his marriage as if it were an illicit and secret affair. After thirty, he was a full-fledged citizen. Every citizen belonged to a mess, and dined with the other members; he had to make a contribution in kind from the produce of his lot. It was the theory of the State that no Spartan citizen should be destitute, and none should be rich. Each was expected to live on the produce of his lot, which he could not alienate except by free gift. None was allowed to own gold or silver, and the money was made of iron. Spartan simplicity became proverbial.
The position of women in Sparta was peculiar. They were not secluded, like respectable women elsewhere in Greece. Girls went through the same physical training as was given to boys; what is more remarkable, boys and girls did their gymnastics together, all being naked. It was desired (I quote Plutarch's Lycurgus in North’s translation) : 
that the maidens should harden their bodies with exercise of running, wrestling, throwing the bar, and casting the dart, to the end that the fruit wherewith they might be afterwards conceived, taking nourishment of a strong and lusty body, should shoot out and spread the better : and that they by gathering strength thus by exercises, should more easily away with the pains of child bearing.. . . And though the maidens did show themselves thus naked openly, yet was there no dishonesty seen nor offered, but all this sport was full of play and toys, without any youthful part or wantonness.
Men who would not marry were made ‘infamous by law', and compelled, even in the coldest weather, to walk up and down naked outside the place where the young people were doing their exercises and dances.
Women were not allowed to exhibit any emotion not profitable to the State. They might display contempt for a coward, and would be praised if he were their son; but they might not show grief if their new-born child was condemned to death as a weakling, or if their sons were killed in battle. They were considered, by other Greeks, exceptionally chaste; at the same time, a childless married woman would raise no objection if the State ordered her to find out
whether some other man would be more successful than her husband in begetting citizens. Children were encouraged by legislation.
According to Aristotle, the father of three sons was exempt from military service, and the father of four from all the burdens of the State.
The constitution of Sparta was complicated. There were two kings, belonging to two different families, and succeeding by heredity. One or other of the kings commanded the army in time of war, but in time of peace their powers were limited. At communal feasts they got twice as much to eat as anyone else, and there was general mourning when one of them died. They were members of the Council of Elders, a body consisting of thirty men (including the kings); the other twenty-eight must be over sixty, and were chosen for life by the whole body of the citizens, but only from aristocratic families. The Council tried criminal cases, and prepared matters which were to come before the Assembly. This body (the Assembly) consisted of all the citizens; it could not initiate anything, but could vote yes or no to any proposal brought before it. No law could be enacted without its consent. But its consent, though necessary, was not sufficient; the elders and magistrates must proclaim the decision before it became valid.
In addition to the kings, the Council of Elders, and the Assembly, there was a fourth branch of the government, peculiar to Sparta. This was the five ephors. These were chosen out of the whole body of the citizens, by a method which Aristotle says was ‘too childish’, and which Bury says was virtually by lot. They were a ‘democratic’ element in the constitution, apparently intended to balance the kings. Every month the kings swore to uphold the constitution, and the ephors then swore to uphold the kings so long as they remained true to their oath. When either king went on a warlike expedition, two ephors accompanied him to watch his behaviour. The ephors were the supreme civil court, but over the kings they had criminal jurisdiction.
The Spartan constitution was supposed, in later antiquity, to have been due to a legislator named Lycurgus, who was said to have promulgated his laws in 885 b.c. In fact, the Spartan system grew up gradually, and Lycurgus was a mythical person, originally a god. His name meant Volf-repeller', and his origin was Arcadian. Sparta aroused among the other Greeks an admiration which is to us somewhat surprising. Originally, it had been much less different from other Greek cities than it became later; in early days it produced poets and artists as good as those elsewhere. But about the seventh century b.c., or perhaps even later, its constitution (falsely attributed to Lycurgus) crystallized into the form we have been considering; everything else was sacrificed to success in war, and Sparta ceased to have any part whatever in what Greece contributed to the civilization of the world. To us, the Spartan State appears as a model, in miniature, of the State that the Nazis would establish if victorious. To the Greeks it seemed otherwise. As Bury says:
A stranger from Athens or Miletus in the fifth century visiting the straggling villages which formed her unwalled unpretentious city must have had a feeling of being transported into an age long past, when men were braver, better and simpler, unspoiled by wealth, undisturbed by ideas. To a philosopher, like Plato, speculating in political science, the Spartan State seemed the nearest approach to the ideal. The ordinary Greek looked upon it as a structure of severe and simple beauty, a Dorian city stately as a Dorian temple, far nobler than his own abode but not so comfortable to dwell in.
One reason for the admiration felt for Sparta by other Greeks was it stability. All other Greek cities had revolutions, but the Spartan constitution remained unchanged for centuries, except for a gradual increase in the powers of the ephors, which occurred by legal means, without violence.
It cannot be denied that, for a long period, the Spartans were successful in their main purpose, the creation of a race of invincible warriors. The battle of Thermopylae (480 b.c.), though technically a defeat, is perhaps the best example of their valour. Thermopylac was a narrow pass through the mountains, where it was hoped that the Persian army could be held. Three hundred Spartans, with auxiliaries, repulsed all frontal attacks. But at last the Persians discovered a detour through the hills, and succeeded in attacking the Greeks on both sides at once. Every single Spartan was killed at his post. Two men had been absent on sick leave, suffering from a disease of the eyes amounting almost to temporary blindness. One of them insisted on being led by his helot to the battle, where he perished; the other, Aristodemus, decided that he was too ill to fight, and remained absent. When he returned to Sparta, no one would speak to him; he was called 'the coward Aristodemus. A year later, he wiped out his disgrace by dying bravely at the battle of Plataea, where the Spartans were victorious.
After the war, the Spartans erected a memorial on the battlefield of Thermopylae, saying only: ‘Stranger, tell the Lacedaemonians that we lie here, in obedience to their orders.
For a long time, the Spartans proved themselves invincible on land. They retained their supremacy until the year 371 b.c., when they were defeated by the Thebans at the battle of Leuctra. This was the end of their military greatness.
Apart from war, the reality of Sparta was never quite the same as the theory. Herodotus, who lived at its great period, remarks, surprisingly, that no Spartan could resist a bribe. This was in spite of the fact that contempt for riches and love of the simple life was one of the main things inculcated in Spartan education. We are told that the Spartan women were chaste, yet it happened several times that a reputed heir to the kingship was set aside on the ground of not being the son of his mother’s husband. We are told that the Spartans were inflexibly patriotic, yet the king Pausanias, the victor of Plataea, ended as a traitor in the pay of Xerxes. Apart from such flagrant matters, the policy of Sparta was always petty and provincial. When Athens liberated the Greeks of Asia Minor and the adjacent islands from the Persians, Sparta held aloof; so long as the Peloponnesus was deemed safe, the fate of other Greeks was a matter of indifference. Every attempt at a confederation of the Hellenic world was defeated by Spartan particularism.”
(Bertrand Russell, History Of Western Philosophy, 1945)

RUSSELL COMMENTS ON WHAT IS PERHAPS HISTORY'S MOST FAMOUS EXAMPLE OF A SOCIETY WHERE THE INDIVIDUAL IS ALMOST COMPLETELY A PRODUCT OF THEIR SOCIAL AND CULTURAL SYSTEM. THE LIFE OF A SPARTAN CITIZEN IS DETERMINED FROM THE MOMENT OF BIRTH. (Continued)
“Aristotle, who lived after the downfall of Sparta, gives a very hostile account of its constitution. What he says is so different from what other people say that it is difficult to believe he is speaking of the same place, e.g. ‘The legislator wanted to make the whole State hardy and temperate, and he has carried out his intention in the case of men, but he has neglected the women, who live in every sort of intemperance and luxury. The consequence is that in such a State wealth is too highly valued, especially if the citizens fall under the dominion of their wives, after the manner of most warlike races. . . . Even in regard to courage, which is of no use in daily life, and is needed only in war, the influence of the Lacedaemonian women has been most mischievous. . . . This license of the Lacedaemonian women existed from the earliest times, and was only what might be expected. For . . . when Lycurgus, as tradition says, wanted to bring the women under his laws, they resisted, and he gave up the attempt.
He goes on to accuse Spartans of avarice, which he attributes to the unequal distribution of property. Although lots cannot be sold, he says, they can be given or bequeathed. Two-fifths of all the land, he adds, belongs to women. The consequence is a great diminution in the number of citizens : it is said that once there were ten thousand, but at the time of the defeat by Thebes there were less than one thousand.
Aristotle criticizes every point of the Spartan constitution. He Says that the ephors are often very poor, and therefore easy to bribe; and their power is so great that even kings are compelled to court them, so that the constitution has been turned into a democracy. The ephors, we are told, have too much licence, and live in a manner contrary to the spirit of the constitution, while the strictness in relation to ordinary citizens is so intolerable that they take refuge in the secret illegal indulgence of sensual pleasures, Aristotle wrote when Sparta was decadent, but on some points he expressly says that the evil he is mentioning has existed from early times. His tone is so dry and realistic that it is difficult to disbelieve him, and it is in line with all modem experience of the results of excessive severity in the laws. But it was not Aristotle's Sparta that persisted in men's imagination; it was the mythical Sparta of Plutarch and the philosophic idealization of Sparta in Plato's Republic, Century after century, young men read these works, and were fired with the ambition to become Lycurguses or philosopher-kings. The resulting union of idealism and love of power has led men astray over and over again, and is still doing so in the present day.
The myth of Sparta, for medieval and modern readers, was mainly fixed by Plutarch. When he wrote, Sparta belonged to the romantic past; its great period was as far removed from his time as Columbus is from ours. What he says must be treated with great caution by the historian of institutions, but to the historian of myth it is of the utmost importance. Greece has influenced the world, always, through its effect on men's imaginations, ideals, and hopes, not directly through political power. Rome made roads which largely still survive, and laws which are the source of many modern legal codes, but it was the armies of Rome that made these things important. The Greeks, though admirable fighters, made few conquests, because they expended their military fury mainly on each other. It was left to the semi-barbarian Alexander to spread Hellenism throughout the Near East, and to make Greek the literary language in Egypt and Syria and the inland parts of Asia Minor. The Greeks could never have accomplished this task, not for lack of military force, but owing to their incapacity for political cohesion. The political vehicles of Hellenism have always been non-Hellenic; but it was the Greek genius that so inspired alien nations as to cause them to spread the culture of those whom they had conquered.
What is important to the historian of the world is not the petty wars between Greek cities, or the sordid squabbles for party ascendancy, but the memories retained by mankind when the brief episode was ended—like the recollection of a brilliant sunrise in the Alps, while the mountaineer struggles through an arduous day of wind and snow. These memories, as they gradually faded, left in men’s minds the images of certain peaks that had shone with peculiar brightness in the early light, keeping alive the knowledge that behind the clouds a splendour still survived, and might at any moment become manifest. Of these, Plato was the most important in early Christianity, Aristotle in the medieval Church; but when, after the Renaissance, men began to value political freedom, it was above all to Plutarch that they turned. He influenced profoundly the English and French liberals of the eighteenth century, and the founders of the United States; he influenced the romantic movement in Germany, and has continued, mainly by indirect channels, to influence German thought down to the present day. In some ways his influence was good, in some bad; as regards Lycurgus and Sparta, it was bad. What he has to say about Lycurgus is important, and I shall give a brief account of it, even at the cost of some repetition. Lycurgus—so Plutarch says—having resolved to give laws to Sparta, travelled widely in order to study different institutions. He liked the laws of Crete, which were 'very straight and severe’ but disliked those of Ionia, where there were 'superfluities and vanities'. In Egypt he learned the advantage of separating the soldiers from the rest of the people, and afterwards, having returned from his travels, ‘brought the practice of it into Sparta : where setting the merchants, artificers, and labourers everyone a part by themselves, he did establish a noble Commonwealth'. He made an equal division of lands among all the citizens of Sparta in order to 'banish out of the city all insolvency, envy, covetousness, and deliciousness, and also all riches and poverty. He forbade gold and silver money, allowing only iron coinage, of so little value that ‘to lay up thereof the value of ten minas, it would have occupied a whole cellar in a house’. By this means he banished 'all superfluous and unprofitable sciences, since there was not enough money to pay their practitioners; and by the same law he made all external commerce impossible. Rhetoricians, panders, and jewellers, not liking the iron money, avoided Sparta. He next ordained that all the citizens should cat together, and all should have the same food.
Lycurgus, like other reformers, thought the education of children ‘the chiefest and greatest matter, that a reformer of laws should establish’; and like all who aim chiefly at military power, he was anxious to keep up the birth rate. The ‘plays, sports, and dances the maids did naked before young men, were provocations to draw and allure the young men to marry: not as persuaded by geometrical reasons, as saith Plato, but brought to it by liking, and of very love’. The habit of treating a marriage, for the first few years, as if it were a clandestine affair, ‘continued in both parties a still burning love, and a new desire of the one to the other’—such, at least, is the opinion of Plutarch. He goes on to explain that a man was not thought ill of if, being old and having a young wife, he allowed a younger man to have children by her. ‘It was lawful also for an honest man that loved another man’s wife ... to intreat her husband to suffer him to lie with her, and that he might also plough in that lusty ground, and cast abroad the seed of well-favored children’. There was to be no foolish jealousy, for ‘Lycurgus did not like that children should be private to any men, but that they should be common to the common weal: by which reason he would also, that such as should become citizens should not be begotten of every man, but of the most honest men only.’ He goes on to explain that this is the principle that farmers apply to their live-stock.
When a child was born, the father brought him before the elders of his family to be examined : if he was healthy, he was given back to the father to be reared; if not, he was thrown into a deep pit of water. Children, from the first, were subjected to a severe hardening process, in some respects good—for example, they were not put in swaddling clothes. At the age of seven, boys were taken away from home and put in a boarding school, where they were divided into companies, each under the orders of one of their number, chosen for sense and courage. ‘Touching learning they had as much as served their turn : for the rest of their time they spent in learning how to obey, to away with pain, to endure labour, to overcome still in fight/ They played naked together most of the time; after twelve years old, they wore no coats; they were always ‘nasty and sluttish’, and they never bathed except on certain days in the year. They slept on beds of straw, which in winter they mixed with thistle. They were taught to steal, and were punished if caught—not for stealing, but for stupidity.
Homosexual love, male if not female, was a recognized custom in Sparta, and had an acknowledged part in the education of adolescent boys. A boy’s lover suffered credit or discredit by the boys actions; Plutarch states that once, when a boy cried out because he was hurt in fighting, his lover was fined for the boy’s cowardice. There was little liberty at any stage in the life of a Spartan.
Their discipline and order of life continued still, after they were full grown men. For it was not lawful for any man to live as he listed, but they were within their city, as if they had been in a
camp, where every man knoweth what allowance he hath to live withal, and what business he hath else to do in his calling. To be short, they were all of this mind, that they were not born to serve themselves, but to serve their country. . . . One of the best and happiest things which Lycurgus ever brought into his city, was the great rest and leisure which he made his citizens to have, only forbidding them that they should not profess any vile or base      occupation : and they needed not also to be careful to get great riches, in a place where goods were nothing profitable nor esteemed. For the Helots, which were bond men made by the wars, did till their grounds, and yielded them a certain revenue every year.
Plutarch goes on to tell a story of an Athenian condemned for idleness, upon hearing of which a Spartan exclaimed: ‘show me the man condemned for living nobly and like a gentleman.’ Lycurgus (Plutarch continues) ‘did accustom his citizens so, that they neither would nor could live alone, but were in manner as men incorporated one with another, and were always in company together, as the bees be about their master bce Spartans were not allowed to travel, nor were foreigners admitted to Sparta, except on business; for it was feared that alien customs would corrupt Lacedaemonian virtue.
Plutarch relates the law that allowed Spartans to kill helots whenever they felt so disposed, but refuses to believe that anything so abominable can have been due to Lycurgus. ‘For I cannot be persuaded, that ever Lycurgus invented, or instituted so wicked and mischievous an act, as that kind of ordinance was: because I imagine his nature was gentle and merciful, by the clemency and justice we see he used in all his other doings/ Except in this matter Plutarch has nothing but praise for the constitution of Sparta.”
(Bertrand Russell, History Of Western Philosophy, 1945)

E2.2.B.2.3. Voluntary Servitude (The Internalized Framework): where the social framework is so deeply internalized that we are unaware of our own bondage and mistake cultural norms for personal desires.

E2.2.B.2.3.a. A_François Jacob_Conduite [Conducting]_2020

"Liberation has been exclusively applied to liberation from outside forces; by the middle class from feudalism, by the working class from capitalism, by the peoples in Africa and Asia from imperialism. [...]
This is the case in Western democracy, where political liberation hides the fact of dependency in many disguises… Man can be a slave even without being put in chains… The outer chains have simply been put inside of man. The desires and thoughts that the suggestion apparatus of society fills him with, chain him more thoroughly than outer chains. This is so because man can at least be aware of outer chains but be unaware of inner chains, carrying them with the illusion that he is free. He can try to overthrow the outer chains, but how can he rid himself of chains of whose existence he is unaware?
Any attempt to overcome the possibly fatal crisis of the industrialized part of the world, and perhaps of the human race, must begin with the understanding of the nature of both outer and inner chains; it must be based on the liberation of man in the classic, humanist sense as well as in the modern, political and social sense… The only realistic aim is total liberation, a goal that may well be called radical (or revolutionary) humanism. [...]
If “well-being” — [defined as] functioning well as a person, not as an instrument — is the supreme goal of one’s efforts, two specific ways stand out that lead to the attainment of this goal: Breaking through one’s narcissism and breaking through the property structure of one’s existence."
(Erich Fromm, The Art of Being, 1989)

E2.2.B.2.3.b. "Reflecting on this agony, which is now almost over, I found myself replaying the events of my brief visit a few days earlier with Simon in what is now the black ghetto of Baltimore, which I had already visited thirteen years earlier. This agony was foreshadowed a century ago by a visionary artist who could never have imagined, even in his worst nightmares, the current scale of the process.
Deep within the streets, which were hemmed in by tall, dark buildings, I saw hundreds of men and women who appeared idle. They wandered aimlessly; most were bloated and shapeless. They were almost unable to walk. They wore brightly colored nylon clothes with advertising logos across their chests and backs. They wore baseball caps and shiny sneakers. Many carried huge stereo radios on their shoulders and blasted music onto the sidewalk, creating a hellish cacophony. Others slumped on the steps of buildings, staring blankly ahead. There was not the slightest glimmer of mischief, defiance, or rebellion in their eyes. They were the same people I had seen a decade earlier: dignified, beautiful, proud of their culture, and joyful despite their precarious existence. Now, they stuffed themselves with hot dogs and popcorn, washing it all down with Coca-Cola from paper cups with straws sticking out of crushed ice. Many were clearly dazed by the drugs openly passed around. They were fat, stuffed with drugs, food, and cheap music. In truth, they were destroyed—their souls and former integrity were gone. I then understood the pragmatic tactic employed here to solve the problem of the black working class: create sweet-smelling ghettos where those who had once presumed to preserve their differences—deemed too indecent—were insidiously acculturated.
I was reminded of a passage by Pasolini that I had noted down many years earlier in Écrits Corsaires:

The fever of consumption is obedience to an unspoken order. Everyone feels the anxiety of being degraded by being like everyone else when consuming, being happy, or being "free" because that is the unspoken order everyone has received and must obey if they feel different. In this age of tolerance, difference is more frightening than ever. Equality has not been achieved; rather, it is a "false equality received as a gift."
(Denis Grozdanovitch, Dreamers and Swimmers, or Pleasure Among Difficulties, 2005)

E2.2.B.2.3.c. It's called reading. It's how people install new software into their brains ; Giorgio de Chirico, Le cerveau de l'enfant, 1914

“INFLUENCES 
In youth one’s appetite, both for raw experience and for books, is uncontrolled. Where there is excessive hunger, and not appetite, there must be vital reason for it. It is blatantly obvious that our present way of life does not offer proper nourishment. If it did I am certain we would read less, work less, strive less. We would not need substitutes, we would not accept vicarious modes of existence. This applies to all realms: food, sex, travel, religion, adventure. We get off to a bad start. We travel the broad highway with one foot in the grave. We have no definite goal or purpose, nor the freedom of being without goal or purpose. We are, most of us, sleepwalkers, and we die without ever opening our eyes. 

If people enjoyed deeply everything they read there would be no excuse for talking this way. But they read as they live - aimlessly, haphazardly, feebly and flickeringly. If they are already asleep, then whatever they read only plunges them into a deeper sleep. If they are merely lethargic, they become more lethargic. If they are idlers, they become worse idlers. And so on. 

Only the man who is wide awake is capable of enjoying a book, of extracting from it what is vital. Such a man enjoys whatever comes into his experience, and, unless I am horribly mistaken, makes no distinction between the experiences offered through reading and the manifold  experiences of everyday life. The man who thoroughly enjoys what he reads or does, or even what he says, or simply what he dreams or imagines, profits to the full. The man who seeks to profit, through one form of discipline or another, deceives himself: It is because I am so firmly convinced of this that I abhor the issuance of lists of books for those who are about to enter life. The advantages to be derived from this sort of self-education are even more dubious, to my way of thinking, than the supposed advantages to be obtained from ordinary methods of education. Most of the books given on such lists cannot begin to be understood and appreciated until one has lived and thought for himself: Sooner or later the whole kit and caboodle has to be regurgitated."
(Henry Miller, The books in my life, New Direction books, p.121-136, 1969)

E2.2.B.2.3.d. "It's easy to get caught up in activities and what life offers. You work harder and harder to climb the ladder of success, only to discover that it's leaning against the wrong wall".
(Stephen Covey).

E2.2.B.2.3.e. “THE SUM-TOTAL OF CONSCIENCE.—The sum-total of our conscience is all that has regularly been demanded of us, without reason, in the days of our childhood, by people whom we respected or feared. From conscience comes that feeling of obligation (“This I must do, this omit”) which does not ask, Why must I?—In all cases where a thing is done with “because” and “why,” man acts without conscience, but not necessarily on that account against conscience.—The belief in authority is the source of conscience; which is therefore not the voice of God in the heart of man, but the voice of some men in man.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human III, Aphorism 52, 1878)

E2.2.B.2.3.f. Dans la caverne dy mythe de Platon, les hommes sont dans une servitude volontaire. Ils assistent à la projection des images des idées de l’extérieur et entendent les paroles de ceux qui sont dehors réverbérées par les paroies. Il prennent les images externes, inclue l’ombre d’eux-même pour la réalité et ils s’attribuent le vacarme des paroles extérieures comme leur propre parole.

Cette image vaut encore aujourd'hui dans notre société où tant de gens ont tendance à s’approprier l’opinion  et les idées toutes faites comme leur propre discours.

L’analogie de la caverne est éminemment politique car ceux qui projettent les images et imposent leur discours aux enchaînés sont ceux qui sont maîtres de la parole - les tyrans.

E2.2.B.2.3.g. "This method tyrants use of stultifying their subjects cannot be more clearly observed than in what Cyrus did with the Lydians after he had taken Sardis, their chief city, and had at his mercy the captured Croesus, their fabulously rich king. When news was brought to him that the people of Sardis had rebelled, it would have been easy for him to reduce them by force; but being unwilling either to sack such a fine city or to maintain an army there to police it, he thought of an unusual expedient for reducing it. He established in it brothels, taverns, and public games, and issued the proclamation that the inhabitants were to enjoy them. He found this type of garrison so effective that he never again had to draw the sword against the Lydians. These wretched people enjoyed themselves inventing all kinds of games, so that the Latins have derived the word from them, and what we call pastimes they call ludi, as if they meant to say Lydi. [...]
It is indeed the nature of the populace, whose density is always greater in the cities, to be suspicious toward one who has their welfare at heart, and gullible toward one who fools them. [...]
Roman tyrants invented a further refinement. They often provided the city wards with feasts to cajole the rabble, always more readily tempted by the pleasure of eating than by anything else. The most intelligent and understanding amongst them would not have quit his soup bowl to recover the liberty of the Republic of Plato. Tyrants would distribute largess, a bushel of wheat, a gallon of wine, and a sesterce: and then everybody would shamelessly cry, “Long live the King!” The fools did not realize that they were merely recovering a portion of their own property, and that their ruler could not have given them what they were receiving without having first taken it from them. [...]"
(La Boétie, The discourse of voluntary servitude, 1546)

E2.2.B.2.3.h. "YOU WANTED A MIRROR. PEOPLE WANT NOTHING BUT MIRRORS AROUND THEM."
"Wait. This is terribly important. Dominique, you've never said, not once, what you thought. Not about anything. You've never expressed a desire. Not of any kind."
"What's wrong about that?"
"But it's...it's like death. You're not real. You're only a body. Look, Dominique, you don't know it, I'll try to explain. You understand what death is? When a body can't move any more, when it has no...no will, no meaning. You understand? Nothing. The absolute nothing. Well, your body moves--but that's all. The other, the thing inside you, your--oh, don't misunderstand me, I'm not talking religion, but there's no other word for it, so I'll say: your soul--your soul doesn't exist. No will, no meaning. There's no real you any more."
"What's the real me?" she asked. For the first time, she looked attentive; not compassionate; but, at least, attentive.
"What's the real anyone?" he said, encouraged. "It's not just the body. It's...it's the soul."
"What is the soul?"
"It's--you. The thing inside you."
"The thing that thinks and values and makes decisions?"
"Yes! Yes, that's it. And the thing that feels. You've--you've given it up."
"So there are two things that one can't give up: One's thoughts and one's desires?"
"Yes! Oh, you do understand! So you see, you're like a corpse to everybody around you. A kind of walking death. That's worse than any active crime. It's..."
"Negation?"
"Yes. Just blank negation. You're not here. You've never been here. If you'd tell me that the curtains in this room are ghastly and if you'd rip them off and put up some you like--something of you would be real, here, in this room. But you never have. You've never told the cook what dessert you liked for dinner. You're not here, Dominique. You're not alive. Where's your I?"
"Where's yours, Peter?" she asked quietly.
He sat still, his eyes wide. She knew that his thoughts, in this moment, were clear and immediate like visual perception, that the act of thinking was an act of seeing a procession of years behind him.
"It's not true," he said at last, his voice hollow. "It's not true."
"What is not true?"
"What you said."
"I've said nothing. I asked you a question."
His eyes were begging her to speak, to deny. She rose, stood before him, and the taut erectness of her body was a sign of life, the life he had missed and begged for, a positive quality of purpose, but the quality of a judge.
"You're beginning to see, aren't you, Peter? Shall I make it clearer. You've never wanted me to be real. You never wanted anyone to be. But you didn't want to show it. You wanted an act to help your act--a beautiful, complicated act, all twists, trimmings and words. All words. You didn't like what I said about Vincent Knowlton. You liked it when I said the same thing under cover of virtuous sentiments. You didn't want me to believe. You only wanted me to convince you that I believed. My real soul, Peter? It's real only when it's independent--you've discovered that, haven't you? It's real only when it chooses curtains and desserts--you're right about that--curtains, desserts and religions, Peter, and the shapes of buildings. But you've never wanted that. You wanted a mirror. People want nothing but mirrors around them. To reflect them while they're reflecting too. You know, like the senseless infinity you get from two mirrors facing each other across a narrow passage. Usually in the more vulgar kind of hotels. Reflections of reflections and echoes of echoes. No beginning and no end. No center and no purpose. I gave you what you wanted. I became what you are, what your friends are, what most of humanity is so busy being--only with the trimmings. I didn't go around spouting book reviews to hide my emptiness of judgment--I said I had no judgment. I didn't borrow designs to hide my creative impotence--I created nothing. I didn't say that equality is a noble conception and unity the chief goal of mankind--I just agreed with everybody. You call it death, Peter? That kind of death--I've imposed it on you and on everyone around us. But you--you haven't done that. People are comfortable with you, they like you, they enjoy your presence. You've spared them the blank death. Because you've imposed it--on yourself."
(Ayn Rand, The fountainhead,1943)

E2.2.B.2.3.i. SANCHO PANZA'S FAMILY HAVING BEEN ELEVATED FROM PEASANTS TO A GOVERNOR'S FAMILY, THEIR DESIRES IMMEDIATELY SHIFT TO THE TRAPPINGS OF THEIR NEW STATUS.
“To this the page replied, “As to Señor Sancho Panza’s being a governor there is no doubt whatever; but whether it is an island or not that he governs, with that I have nothing to do; suffice it that it is a town of more than a thousand inhabitants; with regard to the acorns I may tell you my lady the duchess is so unpretending and unassuming that, not to speak of sending to beg for acorns from a peasant woman, she has been known to send to ask for the loan of a comb from one of her neighbours; for I would have your worships know that the ladies of Aragon, though they are just as illustrious, are not so punctilious and haughty as the Castilian ladies; they treat people with greater familiarity.”
In the middle of this conversation Sanchica came in with her skirt full of eggs, and said she to the page, “Tell me, señor, does my father wear trunk-hose since he has been governor?”
“I have not noticed,” said the page; “but no doubt he wears them.”
“Ah! my God!” said Sanchica, “what a sight it must be to see my father in tights! Isn’t it odd that ever since I was born I have had a longing to see my father in trunk-hose?”
“As things go you will see that if you live,” said the page; “by God he is in the way to take the road with a sunshade if the government only lasts him two months more.”
The curate and the bachelor could see plainly enough that the page spoke in a waggish vein; but the fineness of the coral beads, and the hunting suit that Sancho sent (for Teresa had already shown it to them) did away with the impression; and they could not help laughing at Sanchica’s wish, and still more when Teresa said, “Señor curate, look about if there’s anybody here going to Madrid or Toledo, to buy me a hooped petticoat, a proper fashionable one of the best quality; for indeed and indeed I must do honour to my husband’s government as well as I can; nay, if I am put to it and have to, I’ll go to Court and set a coach like all the world; for she who has a governor for her husband may very well have one and keep one.”
“And why not, mother!” said Sanchica; “would to God it were to-day instead of to-morrow, even though they were to say when they saw me seated in the coach with my mother, ‘See that rubbish, that garlic-stuffed fellow’s daughter, how she goes stretched at her ease in a coach as if she was a she-pope!’ But let them tramp through the mud, and let me go in my coach with my feet off the ground. Bad luck to backbiters all over the world; ‘let me go warm and the people may laugh.’ Do I say right, mother?”
“To be sure you do, my child,” said Teresa; “and all this good luck, and even more, my good Sancho foretold me; and thou wilt see, my daughter, he won’t stop till he has made me a countess; for to make a beginning is everything in luck; and as I have heard thy good father say many a time (for besides being thy father he’s the father of proverbs too), ‘When they offer thee a heifer, run with a halter; when they offer thee a government, take it; when they would give thee a county, seize it; when they say, “Here, here!” to thee with something good, swallow it.’ Oh no! go to sleep, and don’t answer the strokes of good fortune and the lucky chances that are knocking at the door of your house!” “And what do I care,” added Sanchica, “whether anybody says when he sees me holding my head up, ‘The dog saw himself in hempen breeches,’ and the rest of it?”
Hearing this the curate said, “I do believe that all this family of the Panzas are born with a sackful of proverbs in their insides, every one of them; I never saw one of them that does not pour them out at all times and on all occasions.”
“That is true,” said the page, “for Señor Governor Sancho utters them at every turn; and though a great many of them are not to the purpose, still they amuse one, and my lady the duchess and the duke praise them highly.”
“Then you still maintain that all this about Sancho’s government is true, señor,” said the bachelor, “and that there actually is a duchess who sends him presents and writes to him? Because we, although we have handled the present and read the letters, don’t believe it and suspect it to be something in the line of our fellow-townsman Don Quixote, who fancies that everything is done by enchantment; and for this reason I am almost ready to say that I’d like to touch and feel your worship to see whether you are a mere ambassador of the imagination or a man of flesh and blood.”
“All I know, sirs,” replied the page, “is that I am a real ambassador, and that Señor Sancho Panza is governor as a matter of fact, and that my lord and lady the duke and duchess can give, and have given him this same government, and that I have heard the said Sancho Panza bears himself very stoutly therein; whether there be any enchantment in all this or not, it is for your worships to settle between you; for that’s all I know by the oath I swear, and that is by the life of my parents whom I have still alive, and love dearly.”
(Miguel de Cervantes, The History of Don Quixote, Vol 2, 1615)

E2.2.B.2.3.j. IN KAZUO ISHIGURO'S NEVER LET ME GO, THE CONTROL EXERTED OVER THE CHILDREN IS NOT PRIMARILY PHYSICAL (THOUGH BOUNDARIES EXIST). The most powerful force is an internalized fear of the "outside," which is created and reinforced by their own culture. “
“I'm not sure for how long the "secret quard" business carried on. When Ruth and I discussed it while I was caring for her down in Dover, she claimed it had been just a matter of two or three weeks-but that was almost certainly wrong. She was probably embarrassed about it and so the whole thing had shrunk in her memory. My guess is that it went on for about nine months, a year even, around when we were seven, going on eight.
I was never sure if Ruth had actually invented the secret guard herself, but there was no doubt she was the leader. There were between six and ten of us, the figure changing whenever Ruth allowed in a new member or expelled someone. We believed Miss Geraldine was the best guardian in Hailsham, and we worked on presents to give her-a large sheet with pressed flowers glued over it comes to mind. But our main reason for existing, of course, was to protect her.
By the time I joined the guard, Ruth and the others had already known for ages about the plot to kidnap Miss Geraldine. We were never quite sure who was behind it. We sometimes suspected certain of the Senior boys, sometimes boys in our own year. There was a guardian we didn't like much-a Miss Eileen-who we thought for a while might be the brains behind it. We didn't know when the abduction would take place, but one thing we felt convinced about was that the woods would come into it.
The woods were at the top of the hill that rose behind Hailsham House. All we could see really was a dark fringe of trees, but I certainly wasn't the only one of my age to feel their presence day and night. When it got bad, it was like they cast a shadow over the whole of Hailsham; all you had to do was turn your head or move towards a window and there they'd be, looming in the distance. Safest was the front of the main house, because you couldn't see them from any of the windows. Even so, you never really got away from them.
There were all kinds of horrible stories about the woods. Once, not so long before we all got to Hailsham, a boy had had a big row with his friends and run off beyond the Hailsham boundaries. His body had been found two days later, up in those woods, tied to a tree with the hands and feet chopped off. Another rumour had it that a girl's ghost wandered through those trees. She'd been a Hailsham student until one day she'd climbed over a fence just to see what it was like outside. This was a long time before us, when the guardians were much stricter, cruel even, and when she tried to get back in, she wasn't allowed. She kept hanging around outside the fences, pleading to be let back in, but no one let her. Eventually, she'd gone off somewhere out there, something had happened and she'd died. But her ghost was always wandering about the woods, gazing over Hailsham, pining to be let back in.
The quardians always insisted these stories were nonsense. But then the older students would tell us that was exactly what the guardians had told them when they were younger, and that we'd be told the ghastly truth soon enough, just as they were.
The woods played on our imaginations the most after dark, In our dorms as we were trying to fall asleep. You almost thought then you could hear the wind rustling the branches, and talking about it seemed to only make things worse. I remember one night, when we were furious with Marge K.-she'd done something really embarrassing to us during the day-we chose to punish her by hauling her out of bed, holding her face against the window pane and ordering her to look up at the woods. At first she kept her eyes screwed shut, but we twisted her arms and forced open her eyelids until she saw the distant outline against the moonlit sky, and that was enough to ensure for her a sobbing night of terror.
I'm not saying we necessarily went around the whole time at that age Worrying about the woods. I for one could go weeks hardly thinking about them, and there were even days when a defiant surge of courage would make me think: "How could we believe rubbish like that?" But then all it took would be one little thing-someone retelling one of those stories, a scary passage in a book, even just a chance remark reminding you of the Woods-and that would mean another period of being under that shadow.”
(Kazuo Ishiguro, Never Let Me Go, 2005)

IN NEVER LET ME GO, KAZUO ISHIGURO ILLUSTRATES HOW A CONTROLLED AND ISOLATED UPBRINGING (THE HAILSHAM SCHOOL) LIMITS THE VERY CAPACITY OF ITS STUDENTS TO IMAGINE A FREE FUTURE FOR THEMSELVES. 
“The other thing that made me doubtful about all this had to do with the actual description given by Chrissie and Rodney: their picture of a woman working in a nice glass-fronted office. To me, at the time, this seemed just too close a match to what we then knew to be Ruth's "dream future."
I suppose it was mainly us newcomers who talked about "dream futures" that winter, though a number of veterans did too. Some older ones-especially those who'd started their training-would sigh quietly and leave the room when this sort of talk began, but for a long time we didn't even notice this happening. I'm not sure what was going on in our heads during those discussions. We probably knew they couldn't be serious, but then again, I'm sure we didn't regard them as fantasy either. Maybe once Hailsham was behind us, it was possible, just for that half year or so, before all the talk of becoming carers, before the driving lessons, all those other things, it was possible to forget for whole stretches of time who we really were; to forget what the guardians had told us; to forget Miss Lucy's outburst that rainy afternoon at the pavilion, as well as all those theories we'd developed amongst ourselves over the years. It couldn't last, of course, but like I say, just for those few months, we somehow managed to live in this cosy state of suspension in which we could ponder our lives without the usual boundaries. Looking back now, it feels like we spent ages in that steamed-up kitchen after breakfast, or huddled around half-dead fires in the small hours, lost in conversation about our plans for the future.
Mind you, none of us pushed it too far. I don't remember anyone saying they were going to be a movie star or anything like that. The talk was more likely to be about becoming a postman or working on a farm. Quite a few students wanted to be drivers of one sort or other, and often, when the conversation went this way, some veterans would begin comparing particular scenic routes they'd travelled, favourite roadside cafés, difficult roundabouts, that sort of thing. Today, of course, I'd be able to talk the lot of them under the table on those topics. Back then, though, I used to just listen, not saying a thing, drinking in their talk. Sometimes, if it was late, I'd close my eyes and nestle against the arm of a sofa-or of a boy, if it was during one of those brief phases I was officially "with" someone-and drift in and out of sleep, letting images of the roads move through my head.
Anyway, to get back to my point, when this sort of talk was going on, it was often veterans around. She'd been talking about offices right from the start of the winter, but when it really took on life, when it became her "dream future," was after that morning she and I walked into the village. […]
But a few evenings later, when several of us were sitting around a fire in the farmhouse, Ruth began telling us about the sert of office she'd ideally work in, and I immediately recognised it. She went into all the details-the plants, the gleaming equipment, the chairs with their swivels and castors-and it was so vivid everyone let her talk uninterrupted for ages. I was watching her closely, but it never seemed to occur to her I might make the connection-maybe she'd even forgotten herself where the image had come from. She even talked at one point about how the people in her office would all be "dynamic, go-ahead types," and I remembered clearly those same words written in big letters across the top of the advert: "Are you the dynamic, go-ahead type?"-something like that. Of course, I didn't say anything. In fact, listening to her, I even started wondering if maybe it was all feasible: if one day we might all of us move into a place like that and carry on our lives together.

Chrissie and Rodney were there that night, of course, hanging onto every word. And then for days afterwards, Chrissie kept trying to get Ruth to talk some more about it. I'd pass them sitting together in the corner of a room and Chrissie would be asking: "Are you sure you wouldn't put each other off, working all together in a place like that?" just to get Ruth going on it again.
The point about Chrissie-and this applied to a lot of the veterans-was that for all her slightly patronising manner towards us when we'd first arrived, she was awestruck about our being from Hailsham. It took me a long time to realise this. Take the business about Ruth's office: Chrissie would never herself have talked about working in any office, never mind one like that. But because Ruth was from Hailsham, somehow the whole notion came within the realms of the possible. That's how Chrissie saw it, and I suppose Ruth did say a few things every now and then to encourage the idea that, sure enough, in some mysterious way, a separate set of rules applied to us Hailsham students. I never heard Ruth actually lie to veterans; it was more to do with not denying certain things, implying others. There were occasions when I could have brought the whole thing down over her head. But if Ruth was sometimes embarrassed, catching my eye in the middle of some story or other, she seemed confident I wouldn't give her away. And of course, I didn't.
So that was the background to Chrissie and Rodney's claim to have seen Ruth's "possible," and you can maybe see now why I was wary about it. I wasn't keen on Ruth going with them to Norfolk, though I couldn't really say why. And once it became clear she was completely set on going, I told her I'd come too. At first, she didn't seem too delighted, and there was even a hint that she wouldn't let Tommy come with her either. In the end, though, we all went, the five of us: Chrissie, Rodney, Ruth, Tommy and me.”
(Kazuo Ishiguro, Never Let Me Go, 2005)

E2.2.B.2.4. Rebelling Against the Framework (The Quest for Liberation)

E2.2.B.2.4.a.  "THINKING OUTSIDE THE FRAMEWORK [...]

The main difficulty we encounter here is that the frame itself does not include the path to the exit; this belongs to a different logical level. The concept of 'level' or 'logical type' was developed by Bertrand Russell. However, rather than burdening my argument with scholarly considerations, I will simply refer to the very telling example of games.

You can't win a game by making a particular move that is part of the game. Children interrupt the game by saying 'time' and raising their finger. After this signal, the game is suspended, but this new situation has been achieved through a gesture and a word that are of a different order to the game itself. What is true for games is also true for all frameworks, especially the ones we are discussing here. The example of addiction clearly shows this: just as a framework cannot include what is outside it, solutions considered by alcoholics are incapable of solving the problem because they are an extension of it and share its horizon of possibilities. [...]

A renowned scientist once confided in Chögyam Trungpa about an existential problem he was struggling with. 'I'm hesitating,' he said, essentially. 'I've tried everything. I don't know what to do.' “What if you did nothing?” Trungpa replied. Doing nothing was the only option he hadn't considered. This meant interrupting the rationalisations, abandoning all attempts and accepting that the situation would remain open and the outcome uncertain. Fabrice Midal insists on this nothingness. ‘Give yourself a break,’ he writes. ‘Abandon your intentions and your plans...’ But doing nothing is difficult in our Western lives. The chain of actions and tasks builds itself, extending infinitely and sometimes vertiginously. Of course, it has its raison d'être, but when it is interrupted, a void emerges. This 'nothing', won through hard struggle, is not nothing. By suspending all 'something', it takes its place and lodges itself, so to speak, in the same space. If, as Heidegger says, a world is a set of references, then this creates a crack in the sphere in which we are enclosed, eventually allowing access to a new psychological space. [...]

UNFRAMING

However, there are other ways to achieve this, such as the methods employed by Palo Alto therapists. In order to break down the framework within which the patient is struggling, they first encourage them to abandon the solutions they have tried so far. This creates a void that the patient has never experienced before, enabling them to consider actions of a different nature. [...]

The patient is asked, under certain conditions, to reveal what they are hiding or to confront their fears. They are given the task of doing the very thing they are struggling against, and this changes its status from a personal struggle to an imposed duty. There are many other things, often paradoxical and almost always disconcerting. [...]

The Palo Alto therapists' interventions, with their paradoxical nature, resemble a well-known Zen exercise: the koan. I will return to this later. They are often humorous and suggest that the most fitting response to human folly is folly itself. Writers of the 17th century saw this clearly with their usual insight: "Sometimes accidents happen in life," wrote La Rochefoucauld, "from which one must be a little mad to escape." One thinks of Pascal, La Bruyère, Baltasar Gracián and, above all, Molière, whose breathtaking finale in The Imaginary Invalid sees only a burlesque initiation in macaronic Latin — collective delirium — cure the protagonist of his illness, which he does not have. To cure himself of this absence of illness, he must become a doctor himself, since doctors know nothing. Centuries later, Chögyam Trungpa would unknowingly echo Molière in identifying what he termed 'mad wisdom' as the defining feature of spiritual experience.

However, stepping outside the box can also be achieved in less spectacular ways. Talking about it or describing it places us in an external position simply through the effect of language, as we saw in the example of the disrupted business lunch. Marie-Agnès Douillet, a hypnotherapist, told me that in her practice, she does not try to destroy the framework, but rather to expand it until it encompasses everything, ceasing to be a framework in the process."
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond wisdom, How to live?, 2023)

E2.2.B.2.4.b. HOW COULD I EXPAND FREELY, HOW COULD I BE THE UNMITIGATED, UNQUALIFIED, UNCONSCIONABLE “COWPERIST” I WANTED TO BE, WHEN I HAD ALL ROUND ME THE CLASS-DISTINCTIONS, THE CLASS-PREJUDICES, the back-bitings, the obsequiousnesses, the superciliousnesses, the superiorities, the perpetual psychic question, “Is he a gentleman? Has he been to a decent school?”
"Not since those years when I was eight and nine at Dorchester, [did I ] realize[d] to the full limit, my identity, my native peculiarities, my cherished manias, my sweet superstitions. Yes, I have had, in “up-state” New York, what is seldom allowed to mortal man upon this earth—I have had the full unhindered swing of my personality. I expect it is for no other reason than to get this very “swing” that so many of us individualistic Englishmen leave the island, whose bones are in our bones, and settle down in such far-off alien spots. We carry our ways with us, our turns of speech, our traditional routine, our rock-bound prejudices. We are all so eccentric that penned up close together we lack space wheren to expand. And so we sail away, to have our fling among less crowded, less furiously egoistic, less obstinate, less self-righteous, less adventurous natives! 

How could I expand freely, how could I be the unmitigated, unqualified, unconscionable “Cowperist” I wanted to be, when I had all round me the class-distinctions, the class-prejudices, the back-bitings, the obsequiousnesses, the superciliousnesses, the superiorities, the perpetual psychic question, “Is he a gentleman? Has he been to a decent school?”

It must have been a considerable moment in my youthful life for instance, when hidden once behind the laurel-hedge above the road to the station we heard Mr. Phelips say to some guest at Montacute House: “Yes, that’s the Vicarage; Powys is the name; a very good family.” 

But here in these hills, with an “aura” around me of Mohawk chiefs, as formidable as any Owen Glendower, these hard-working descendants of old Dutch “Patroons” and old German and English settlers take me at my face value. I don’t need to hide behind any un-mortar’d wall, or any criss-cross fence, to learn what my status is among such as eat bread upon the earth. I am a man. In the city I confess I fall below that  level, and become a “guy.” But here in “up-state” New York I feel I can say, even as the Lord of Hosts said to his questioner, “I am that I am.” [...] "
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934)

E2.2.B.2.4.c. A_Alexander Calder_Southern cross_1963 /Alexander Calder/ ; A_Alexander Calder_Southern cross_1963 - CUR /Alexander Calder/ ; I_Alexander Calder_Southern cross, Reference ; 
"To look at human life with the eyes of a stranger, as if I had suddenly been projected out of space—as indeed in a sense I had—into this particular society, was the attitude which I sought to assume as my final spiritual refuge; for this and this only could offer me a real escape from all the teasing frets and fevers, all the worrying envies and jealousies and competitions and comparisons, of the ambitions of the world.” 
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934)

E2.2.B.2.4.d. A_Lene Adler Petersen_The things, Your history, Free yourself from the things_1976_(1) /Lene Adler Petersen/ ; A_Lene Adler Petersen_The things, Your history, Free yourself from the things_1976_(2) /Lene Adler Petersen/ ; A_Lene Adler Petersen_The things, Your history, Free yourself from the things_1976_(3) /Lene Adler Petersen/ ; A_Lene Adler Petersen_The things, Your history, Free yourself from the things_1976_(4) /Lene Adler Petersen/ ; A_Lene Adler Petersen_The things, Your history, Free yourself from the things_1976_(5) /Lene Adler Petersen/ ;  A_Eugène Delacroix_La liberté guidant le peuple_1830 /Eugène Delacroix/
"This installation is based on the French artist Eugène Delacroix's famous 'Liberty Leading the People'. The barricade consists of ordinary, domestic household goods. These are everyday things and consumer goods bearing the marks of regular use. But the many things are also part of a larger narrative, as elements that reflect social, material and political patterns of life. And the artist's own body takes up position on the top of the barricade as a symbol of freedom, ready to march out of the domestic sphere into the public space."
(National Gallery of Denmark)

E2.2.B.2.4.e. A_Victor Vasarely_Man_1943 /Victor Vasarely/

"The West [...] tries to prove that we must choose between "being" and "not being." Conversely, the East considers this distinction to be temporary and seeks proof, without obsession, that we can overcome the problem of 'being' and 'not being.' Added to this symmetry is another fundamental difference. In the West, reaching the truth—paradise—is a collective adventure. At the end of time, the Lord's chosen ones will find themselves in the famous club that expelled Adam. The rules are now known to all. Those who are readmitted know why; they have done good. As for the others, the door is closed to them forever because they have done evil. A new club awaits them: Hell. In Buddhism, cleansing karma is an individual journey of an illusory self that, through successive rebirths, tends toward its own eradication. There are no clubs with the good on one side and the bad on the other. No heaven, no hell. There is no going back to square one; destiny is the adventure of fading away. 

The West is torn between "too late" and "too early": "too late" because paradise is lost forever and "too early" because the apocalypse is still far off. It is a prisoner of time, caught between a past where it has been and a future where it will be. Between the two, that is to say, the present, it does not exist. Having lost its "being," it is a slave to the world. This prison has been the theater of history—the violent attempt of a frantic quest for freedom, associated with the search for being.The only solution is action. The thickness of the family album proves it. Act to hasten the apocalypse. Impose theories designed to force happiness over the centuries with feverish obstinacy. Seek certainties measured by pseudosciences. We know the result. Or else, pursue the fantasy of the new man through genetic engineering, the latest avatar. Let's be clear: This new man is merely nostalgia for humanity, a vague and painful dream of a human condition that has never been experienced. The refusal to give us access to being is a "metaphysical catastrophe." This refusal, however, weighs heavily on the future of the species."
(Pierre de Roo, Mécaniques du destin, 2001)

E2.2.B.2.4.f. A_Vincent van Gogh_Self Portrait with Bandaged Ear and Pipe_1889

"Given that he only cut off his left ear once and cooked one hand in his entire life, we can talk about Van Gogh's good mental health.
In a world where people eat cooked vaginas in green sauce or the flayed genitals of newborn babies,
As if plucked from their mothers' wombs!
This is not a metaphor, but a fact repeated and cultivated abundantly and daily throughout the world.
As delusional as this statement may seem, this is how life continues today. In its old atmosphere of debauchery, anarchy, disorder, delirium, chaos, chronic madness, bourgeois inertia, and psychic abnormality—for it is not man, but the world, that has become abnormal—of deliberate dishonesty, blatant hypocrisy, and filthy contempt for anything that shows race,
demands for an order based entirely on the fulfillment of primitive injustice,
Organized crime is finally the norm.
Things are going badly because the sick conscience has a vital interest in remaining sick at this moment.
A deranged society invented psychiatry to defend itself from superior minds whose powers of divination bothered it. [...]
Van Gogh was not mad, but his paintings were like will-o'-the-wisps and atomic bombs. Alongside all the other paintings rampant at the time, they were capable of seriously disturbing the conformism of the Second Empire bourgeoisie and the henchmen of Thiers, Gambetta, Félix Faure, and Napoleon III.
Van Gogh's paintings do not attack a certain conformism of morals, but rather, the conformism of institutions themselves. Even external nature, with its climates, tides, and equinox storms, can no longer maintain the same gravity after Van Gogh's time on earth. [...]

What is a true madman? A madman is someone who has chosen to be socially ostracised rather than abandon a higher idea of human honor. [...]

Where, then, is the place of the human self in this delirium?
Throughout his life, Van Gogh searched for his own with strange energy and determination.
He did not commit suicide in a fit of madness or because he was unable to achieve it.
On the contrary, he had just achieved it.

He discovered who he was when society punished him for tearing himself away from it.
committed suicide.
This happened to Van Gogh as it always does during a party, mass, absolution, or other rite of consecration, possession, succubation, or incubation.
So it entered his body.
This society
absolved,
consecrated,
sanctified
and possessed.
It erased the supernatural consciousness he had just acquired. Like a flood of black crows in the fibers of his inner tree,
They submerged him with a final surge.
Taking his place,
killed him.
"For the anatomical logic of modern man is to never be able to live or think of living except as a possessed being"
(Antonin Artaud, Van Gogh, the Man Suicided by Society, 1947)

E2.2.B.2.4.g. A_dwnyc_In a society that profits from your self doubt, liking yourself is a rebellious act ; Fabrice Hyber (P.O.F n°2, Deep Narcissus, 1991)


Narcissus is not guilty. Let's narcissize the world!
Upon rereading the great texts that have explored the myth of Narcissus, I discovered that until recently, the term "narcissism" never referred to egocentric self-absorption. Rather, it referred to a life force and a profound innocence that demands respect and recognition. So why, in the past twenty years, has this myth become so distorted that we no longer understand it? Believing that Narcissus represents fault, isolation, and selfishness means being profoundly ignorant of our more than 2,000-year-old heritage. It also means closing ourselves off from the forces we need most. What do we all need today? We need to establish healthy relationships with ourselves at a time when we are constantly reduced to pieces of data and cogs in administrative machines. So many people are stigmatized for their differences and uniqueness. People are accused of narcissism when they are actually victims of a new form of violence. People who reveal themselves on social media, for example, are accused of narcissism when they are actually being manipulated by powerful forces that use algorithms to track their every move. Therefore, we should say the opposite: the totalitarian project of transparency being implemented today is de-narcissizing people, depriving them of the ability to be themselves.So, let's stop saying that everyone on Facebook is narcissistic. Instead, let's acknowledge that we are all de-narcissized by the way the internet's powers manipulate us, turning us into sets of data that can be exploited at will. Narcissism is condemned today because the uniqueness of human beings no longer has a place in our world. In fact, it is an obstacle to the managerial order. It's important to realize that we no longer live in the same world and that the de-narcissization of our time doesn't come through repression or prohibitions. Rather, it comes from our exploitation of ourselves. This is a singular and disconcerting phenomenon that explains the emergence of new pathologies, such as burnout and chronic fatigue. Wanting to do well and not let down my colleagues and the people who depend on me, I push myself to the point of collapse. Instead of realizing that I am a victim of a mad system, that my only fault was trying too hard, I feel responsible and guilty. I feel like I didn't exploit myself enough, didn't manage my emotions well enough, and didn't control my stress enough. We are blind to the ideological violence and sacrificial moralism instilled in us by these injunctions. They seem normal to us.


What happened? In the name of efficiency, the new normative economy has deprived everyone of responsibility for their work. We are living in an age of panic and hysteria. It's not about being efficient, but rather, about conforming to a new form of hysterical pressure. The goal is not to work better, but rather, to become increasingly immersed in protocols that dictate our every move and action. In other words, everyone is stripped of responsibility, and the meaning of work is minimized. The effort required seems empty and pointless. I am just a cog in a machine, and my work is a burden. By seeking to rationalize it to the extreme, we have dehumanized work. This phenomenon, which our usual political representations fail to capture, lies at the heart of all current economic models. I defend Narcissus to shed light on a situation we find so difficult to identify. We are all victims of regulatory densification. The exponential growth of legislation creates situations that are impossible to navigate because no one can know all the laws. However, the most worrying phenomenon is not that. It lies in the extension of norms—one might even say in their interference and hegemony. This normalization aims for continuous, exponential uniformity and standardization. Between 1957 and 1967, the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) produced 664 standards. Today, there are nearly 20,000 standards, covering all professional fields. This practice involves setting numerical targets for actions to be taken and quantitatively measuring the results, even in areas where one would least expect it: justice, medicine, and education. This shift from law to standard is significant; it indicates the disaster that threatens us. Law aims to be universal. It is addressed to everyone and is therefore an expression of the human community it serves. 
The norm aims to govern each specific case, transforming each of us into atomized agents and gradually destroying the sense of political community. After all, there is no longer anything in common, only specific cases to be managed. I therefore ask: Are we a society of overly narcissistic people or a society of people who sacrifice not for real principles but for standards? Our challenge is to rediscover the depth that the poet Rainer Maria Rilke gave to the word. "Unhappy is he who turns away from his depths and wants to find himself elsewhere. The day comes, however, when he returns to himself—and then he finds the hearth of his heart extinguished, full of cold ashes." We must take the time to rediscover and cultivate this depth. The deepest and most necessary meaning of happiness is that my activity, limited to pure mechanical efficiency and a simple force of execution, no longer gives me the opportunity to fulfill myself. Everyone knows this, even if it has become taboo to talk about it. Deep down, everyone wants their work to be useful to society and others. The extreme standardization we are currently experiencing leads us to live far from ourselves. When someone is experiencing great difficulty, helping them with a few compliments or inviting them to enjoy the moment is not enough—they need to be able to connect with their inner resources, which they are currently disconnected from.
(Fabrice Midal, "Narcisse, accused bu not guilty: Let's Narcissize the World!" broadcast on France Culture on August 26, 2018)

Listen to the podcast in French:
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/narcisse-accuse-non-coupable/narcissisons-le-monde

E2.2.B.2.4.h. [EN] Luciano Garbati, Medusa with the head of Perseus & Benvenuto Cellini, Perseus with the head of Medusa
"An inversion of the centuries-old myth and a symbol of triumph for victims of sexual assault: according to the myth, Medusa was raped by Poseidon. As punishment, the goddess Athena turned her wrath on Medusa, transforming her hair into snakes. Later, Perseus beheaded that « monster » and became « a hero ». In this artwork, the artist reverses the roles of the classic 16th century bronze by Benvenuto Cellini, ‘Perseus with the head of Medusa’, imagining the story from Medusa’s perspective, revealing the woman and the victim behind the « monster » and denouncing that the myth had communicated to women for millennia that if they are raped, it's their fault."
(Cotard Island)

Art:
- Luciano Garbati, Medusa with the head of Perseus & Benvenuto Cellini, Perseus with the head of Medusa

E2.2.B.2.4.i. WINNICOTT REJECTS BOTH THE IDEA THAT MORALITY IS SIMPLY IMPOSED AND THAT IT IS PURELY INNATE. HE ARGUES THAT THE INNATE, "PERSONAL DEVELOPMENTAL TENDENCY" CAN ONLY COME TO FRUITION THROUGH THE "SUBTLE INTERPLAY" WITH THE SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT.
“THE ABSENCE OF A SENSE OF GUILT   
 (A talk prepared for the Devon and Exeter Association for Mental Health, 10 December, 1966) 
 There is no need for me to describe the conventional idea of right and wrong. In an environment (mother, family, home, cultural group, school, etc.) this is good, that is not good. Children ﬁ t in their own ideas so as to comply, or else they rebel and hold the opposite view in some or other respect. Gradually this state of affairs is altered because complexity makes nonsense of it or else the child becomes mature in respect of having established a sense of self, and a right to have a personal view of everything. The mature child still likes or needs to be able to check up against the accepted code, even if only to know how things stand as between him or her and the community. This is a permanent feature, characteristic even of mature adults. 
 The question arises early in this sort of discussion – how far is the moral code taught and how far is it innate? In practical language, do you wait for your child to use a pot, or do you ﬁ ght incontinence from the word go? The answer to this sort of question needs to involve the enquirer in a study of the very subtle interplay, in the developing child’s life, of the inherited or personal developmental tendency, or the maturational process, and of the facilitating environment represented by human beings who adapt to the child’s needs, and who in a human way fail to adapt. 
 In making such a study we soon come across the existence of two schools of thought. At the extremes they are very different, irreconcilable in fact:
(a)	We cannot risk it. How do we know there are innate factors in the devel oping child tending towards the arrival in the child of a sense of right and wrong? The risk is too great. We must plant a moral code in the virgin soil, and do so before the individual child is old enough to resist what we do. Then, with luck, the morality we have adopted as ‘revealed’ will appear in all those who are not endowed with too much of some-thing which could be called original sin.
At the other extreme there is this point of view:
(b)	The only morality that counts is what comes from the individual. Afte all, the ‘revealed’ morality of the other extreme group was built up over the centuries, or millennia, by thousands of generations of individuals, helped on by a few prophets. It is better to wait and wait, till by natural processes each child comes to have a sense of right and wrong that is personal. It is not behaviour that matters but the feelings of right and wrong that a child may have apart from compliance.
There is no need for us to try to bring together the protagonists of these two extreme points of view. Better if we try to keep them separated so that they do not meet and ﬁght. They can never come to terms with each other. 
 I like to think that there is a way of life that starts from the assumption that morality that is linked with compliance has little ultimate value, and that it is the individual child’s own sense of right and wrong that we hope to ﬁnd developing along with everything else that develops because of the inherited processes leading towards all kinds of growth, and starting from this assumption recognizes the difﬁculties and sets out to study these and to learn how to meet these difﬁculties both in theory and in practice. 
 In banal practical terms, a mother may ﬁnd that two of her infants become naturally dry – how convenient! The third, however, just goes on and on wetting and messing, and causing her backache. When she thinks about her third child she may ﬁnd herself thinking twice about innate morality, and wondering how to switch over to demanding compliance without destroying the third child’s soul. 
 In this third way of looking at things we need to take into full consideration the following facts:
(1)	The absolute dependence of the infant at the start, this quickly becoming near-absolute, then relative – the tendency being towards independence. It will be seen that here is a very heavy leaning on the capacity of the mothers (parents, etc.) who cannot ever be better than human (perfection has no meaning), who must have differing attitudes to the various children, and who are themselves changing all the time because of their own growth, their own emotional experiences, their own private lives that they are living or temporarily setting aside for the sake of this one baby.  
(2)	Each child is different from the one before and the one after in the sense that what is inherited is personal. Even identical twins are not identical in inherited tendencies, though perhaps similar. In this way experiences in the narrow ﬁ eld of the infant–mother relationship are speciﬁc, not general, and this without any notice being taken of the abnormalities.
(3)	There are abnormalities in varying degree – circumstances favour the early experiences in one case, and in another there occur impingements that produce crude reactions. Perhaps our mother with just the ﬁrst two babies made no signiﬁcant technical slips, but with the third failed (she slipped and nearly broke her wrist, and had to attend to this before she answered her baby’s subtle communication indicating a need which she would naturally meet if not for the moment concerned with her own troubles – quite beyond the ken of the baby). She and the third baby may have settled down into a pattern of technique which if verbalized would be, ‘OK, I can trust you as I did earlier on, provided I claim your acceptance of my right to postpone compliance in regard to cleanliness’. Mothers and parents are all the time doing successful psychotherapy in respect of their inevitable failures of techniques and the effects of these failures on the line of life of each infant. We who are looking on are apt to say ‘you are “spoiling” your child, you know’. In this way we offer reproof just as the public reproves the psychotherapist who allows a measure of freedom to a child in the therapy hour, or we even reprove those who try to understand antisocial behaviour when, surely, we ought to be stamping on it.
If we look at fairly normal examples of children growing up in the setting of fairly reliable human relationships we can proﬁtably study the way in which a sense of right and wrong develops in each child. The subject is immensely complex, but we are no longer at sea. Or we already know our lighthouses. 
 Just as Freud pointed out the value of the concept of the superego, as an area in the mind, much inﬂuenced by introjected parent ﬁgures, so Melanie Klein developed the concept of early superego formations that appear even in the infant mind, and that are relatively independent of the introjections of parents. Naturally there cannot be independence of parental  attitudes ; this can be veriﬁed every time you see a baby reaching out for some object, and checking the impulse in order to ﬁrst assess the mother’s attitude. This may be mad (she thinks that everything that is green may contain arsenic) or sane (the saucepan contains boiling water). For a time, till the baby starts to become a scientist, it all has to be quite bewildering. Happy is the baby whose mother is at any rate consistent. 
 I have tried to give a résumé of Melanie Klein’s concept of the Depressive Position  1   (which is important in this context though badly named) and I cannot go over this ground again here. But I would say that as a baby or small child becomes at times a whole thing, a unit, an integrate, someone who could say ‘I am’ (if words were available) so there comes about a state of affairs by which there is a sense of personal responsibility, and when in relationships the child has impulses and ideas that are destructive (such as, I love you, I eat you) then there is a clear and natural beginning of a personal sense of guilt. As Freud said somewhere, the sense of guilt enables the individual to  be  wicked. In the pattern the child has the impulse, perhaps bites (or eats a biscuit) and has the idea of eating the object (let us say mother’s breast) and then feels guilty. Oh dear how awful I am! Out of this comes the urge to be constructive. 
 If the child’s sense of guilt is absent in the pattern, then the child does not get so far as allowing the impulse. Fear is there instead, and the child is inhibited in respect of the whole of the feeling that naturally builds round this impulse. 
 I come here to the absence of a sense of guilt. Working backwards from what Melanie Klein called the Depressive Position, which is an achievement of healthy development, I come to the baby whose experience has not enabled such a state of affairs to come about.
  (1)    The unreliability of the mother ﬁgure makes constructive effort futile, so that guilt sense becomes intolerable, and the child is driven back on inhibition, or loss of the impulse which is in fact part of primitive loving. 
  (2)	 Worse, the early experiences have not enabled the innate process towards integration to have effect, so that there is no unit and no total responsibility felt for anything. Impulses and ideas arise and affect behaviour, but it can never be said: this baby had the impulse to eat the breast (keeping artiﬁcially to this limited ﬁ eld for illustrative purposes).
It is difﬁcult for me to know how to dig more deeply into my subject here and now, in the limited time available. I would like to draw your attention to the special case of the child affected by the antisocial tendency, perhaps in process of becoming a delinquent. It is here especially that we get told: this boy or girl has no moral sense – no clinical sense of guilt. But we refute this idea because we do not ﬁnd it to be true when we have a chance to make a psychiatric investigation of the child, especially at the stage before secondary gains have taken hold. There is this stage before the arrival of secondary gains, when the child needs help and feels mad because of being compelled from within to steal, to destroy.
In fact, the pattern is that
things went well enough for the child;
  (b)	 something disturbed this;
  (c)	 the child was taxed beyond capacity (ego defences broke down);
  (d)	 the child reorganized on the basis of a new pattern of ego defence, inferior in quality;
  (e)	 the child begins to become hopeful again and organizes antisocial acts in hope, hope of compelling society to go back with him or her to the position where things went wrong, and to acknowledge the fact;
  (f )   if this is done (either by a period of spoiling or directly in a psychiatric interview) then the child can reach back to the period before the moment of deprivation and rediscover the good object and the good human controlling environment which by existing originally enabled him or her to experience impulses, including destructive ones.    
It will be seen that (f), the last of these stages, is difﬁcult to do. But the principle must ﬁ rst be understood and accepted. And in fact any parent with several children knows how over and over again this mending by the employment of special and temporary adaptive techniques does actually take place and is successful. 
 However difﬁcult we ﬁnd the application of these ideas we do need to abandon absolutely the theory that children can be born innately amoral. This means nothing in terms of the study of the individual developing along the lines of the inherited maturational processes all the time intertwined with the operation of the facilitating environment.”
(D.W. Winnicott, Deprivation and Delinquency, 1984)

WINNICOTT ARGUES THAT A CHILD "NEEDS TO BE CONSCIOUS OF A FRAMEWORK IF HE IS TO FEEL FREE." THE CHILD WHOSE HOME FAILS HIM AND FINDS HIMSELF "FREE" FROM THIS FRAMEWORK DOES NOT ENJOY IT; HE "BECOMES ANXIOUS." 
“In an ordinary family, a man and woman, husband and wife, take joint responsibility for their children. Babies are born, mother (supported by father) brings each child along, studying the personality of each, coping with each one’s personal problem as it affects society in its smallest unit, the family and the home. 
 What is the normal child like? Does he just eat and grow and smile sweetly? No, that is not what he is like. A normal child, if he has conﬁdence in father and mother, pulls out all the stops. In the course of time he tries out his power to disrupt, to destroy, to frighten, to wear down, to waste, to wangle, and to appropriate. Everything that takes people to the courts (or to the asylums, for that matter) has its normal equivalent in infancy and early child-hood, in the relation of the child to his own home. If the home can stand up to all the child can do to disrupt it, he settles down to play; but business ﬁrst, the tests must be made, and especially so if there is some doubt as to the stability of the parental set-up and the home (by which I mean so much more than house). At ﬁrst the child needs to be conscious of a framework if he is to feel free, and if he is to be able to play, to draw his own pictures, to be an irresponsible child. 
 Why should this be? The fact is that the early stages of emotional development are full of potential conﬂict and disruption. The relation to external reality is not yet ﬁrmly rooted; the personality is not yet well integrated; primitive love has a destructive aim, and the small child has not yet learned to tolerate and cope with instincts. He can come to manage these things, and more, if his surroundings are stable and personal. At the start he absolutely needs to live in a circle of love and strength (with consequent tolerance) if he is not to be too fearful of his own thoughts and of his imaginings to make progress in his emotional development. 
 Now what happens if the home fails a child before he has got the idea of a framework as part of his own nature? The popular idea is that, ﬁnding himself ‘free’ he proceeds to enjoy himself. This is far from the truth. Finding the framework of his life broken, he no longer feels free. He becomes anxious, and if he has hope he proceeds to look for a framework elsewhere than at home. The child whose home fails to give a feeling of security looks outside his home for the four walls; he still has hope, and he looks to grandparents, uncles and aunts, friends of the family, school. He seeks an external stability without which he may go mad. Provided at the proper time, this stability might have grown into the child like the bones in his body, so that gradually in the course of the ﬁrst months and years of his life he would have passed on to independence from dependence and a need to be managed. Often a child gets from relations and school what he missed in his own actual home. 
 The antisocial child is merely looking a little farther aﬁeld, looking to society instead of to his own family or school to provide the stability he needs if he is to pass through the early and quite essential stages of his emotional growth. 
 I put it this way. When a child steals sugar he is looking for the good mother, his own, from whom he has a right to take what sweetness is there. In fact this sweetness is his, for he invented her and her sweetness out of his own capacity to love, out of his own primary creativity, whatever that is. He is also looking for his father, one might say, who will protect mother from his attacks on her, attacks made in the exercise of primitive love. When a child steals outside his own home he is still looking for his mother, but he is seeking with more sense of frustration, and increasingly needing to ﬁnd at the same time the paternal authority that can and will put a limit to the actual effect of his impulsive behaviour, and to the acting out of the ideas that come to him when he is in a state of excitement. In full-blown delinquency it is difﬁcult for us as observers, because what meets us is the child’s acute need for the strict father, who will protect mother when she is found. The strict father that the child evokes may also be loving, but he must ﬁrst be strict and strong. Only when the strict and strong father ﬁgure is in evidence can the child regain his primitive love impulses, his sense of guilt, and his wish to mend. Unless he gets into trouble, the delinquent can only become progressively more and more inhibited in love, and consequently more and more depressed and depersonalised, and eventually unable to feel the reality of things at all, except the reality of violence. 
 Delinquency indicates that some hope remains. You will see that it is not  necessarily  an illness of the child when he behaves antisocially, and antisocial behaviour is at times no more than an S.O. S. for control by strong, loving, conﬁdent people. Most delinquents are to some extent ill, however, and the word illness becomes appropriate through the fact that in many cases the sense of security did not come into the child’s life early enough to be incorporated into his beliefs. While under strong management, an antisocial child may seem to be all right; but give him freedom and he soon feels the threat of madness. So he offends against society (without knowing what he is doing) in order to reestablish control from outside. 
 The normal child, helped in the initial stages by his own home, grows a capacity to control himself. He develops what is sometimes called an ‘internal environment’, with a tendency to ﬁnd good surroundings. The antisocial, ill child, not having had the chance to grow a good ‘internal environment’, absolutely needs control from without if he is to be happy at all, and if he is to be able to play or work. In between these two extremes of normal and antisocial ill children are children who can still achieve a belief in stability if a continuous experience of control by loving persons can be given them over a period of years. A child of 6 or 7 stands a much better chance of getting help in this way than one of 10 or 11.
In the war many of us had experience of just this belated provision of a stable environment for children deprived of home life, in the hostels for evacuated children, especially for those who were difﬁcult to billet. These have been under the Ministry of Health. In the war years, children with antisocial tendencies were treated as ill. I am glad to say these hostels are not all closing down now, and they have been transferred to the care of the Ministry of Education. These hostels do prophylactic work for the Home Ofﬁce. They can treat delinquency  as an illness  the more easily because most of the children have not yet come before the Juvenile Courts. Here, surely, is the place for the treatment of delinquency as an illness of the individual, and here, surely, is the place for research, and opportunity to gain experience. We all know the ﬁ ne work done in some approved schools, but the fact that most of the children in them have been convicted in a court makes for difﬁculty. 
 In these hostels, sometimes called boarding-homes for maladjusted children, there is an opportunity for those who see antisocial behaviour as the S.O. S. of an ill child to play their part, and so to learn. Each hostel or group of hostels under the Ministry of Health in wartime had a committee of management, and in the group with which I was connected the lay committee really interested itself in, and took responsibility for, the details of the hostel work. Surely many magistrates could be elected to such committees, and so get into close contact with the actual management of children who have not yet come before the Juvenile Courts. It is not enough to visit approved schools or hostels, or to hear people talking. The only interesting way is to take some responsibility, even if indirectly, by intelligently supporting those who manage boys and girls who tend towards antisocial behaviour. 
 In such hostels for the so-called maladjusted one is free to work with a therapeutic aim, and this makes a lot of difference. Failures will eventually come to the courts, but successes become citizens. 
 Of course, the work done in these small and properly staffed hostels is done by the wardens. These wardens have to start as the right kind, but they need education and opportunities for discussing their work as they go along, and also they need someone in between them and that impersonal thing called a ministry. In the scheme I knew, this was the job of the psychiatric social worker and the psychiatrist. These in turn needed a committee which could grow with the scheme, and proﬁt from experience. It is on this sort of committee that a magistrate could proﬁtably serve. 
 Now to return to the theme of children deprived of home life. Apart from being neglected (in which case they reach the Juvenile Courts as delinquents) they can be dealt with in two ways. They can be given personal psycho-therapy, or they can be provided with a strong stable environment with personal care and love, and gradually increasing doses of freedom. As a matter of fact, without this latter the former (personal psychotherapy) is not likely to succeed. And with the provision of a suitable home-substitute, psycho-therapy may become unnecessary, which is fortunate because it is practically never available. It will be years before properly-trained psychoanalysts are available even in moderate numbers for giving the personal treatments that are so urgently needed in many cases. 
 Personal psychotherapy is directed towards enabling the child to complete his or her emotional development. This means many things, including establishing a good capacity for feeling the reality of real things, both external and internal, and establishing the integration of the individual personality. Full emotional development means this and more. After these primitive things, there follow the ﬁrst feelings of concern and guilt, and the early impulses to make reparation. And in the family itself there are the ﬁrst triangular situations, and all the complex interpersonal relationships that belong to life at home. 
 Further, if this all goes well, and if the child becomes able to manage himself and his relationship to grown-ups and to other children, he still has to begin dealing with complications, such as a mother who is depressed, a father with maniacal episodes, a brother with a cruel streak, a sister with ﬁts. The more we think of these things the more we understand why infants and little children absolutely need the background of their own family, and if possible a stability of physical surroundings as well; and from such considerations we see that children deprived of home life must either be provided with something personal and stable when they are yet young enough to make use of it to some extent, or else they must force us later to provide stability in the shape of an approved school, or, in the last resort, four walls in the shape of a prison cell.”
(D.W. Winnicott, Deprivation and Delinquency, 1984)

WINNICOTT OFFERS A RADICAL AND COMPASSIONATE REDEFINITION OF DELINQUENCY. IT IS NOT AN EVIL ACT OF FREE WILL, BUT A DETERMINED, COMPULSIVE BEHAVIOR. Most profoundly, Winnicott argues that the antisocial act is not a sign of hopelessness, but is an "expression of hope"—an unconscious, compulsive attempt by the child to force the environment to acknowledge and repair the original deprivation. 
“NATURE OF ANTISOCIAL TENDENCY 
 The antisocial tendency  is not a diagnosis.  It does not compare directly with other diagnostic terms such as neurosis and psychosis. The antisocial tendency may be found in a normal individual, or in one that is neurotic or psychotic. 
 For the sake of simplicity I will refer only to children, but the antisocial tendency may be found at all ages. The various terms in use in Great Britain may be brought together in the following way: 
 A child becomes a  deprived child  when deprived of certain essential features of home life. Some degree of what might be called the ‘deprived complex’ becomes manifest.  Antisocial behaviour  will be manifest at home or in a wider sphere. On account of  the antisocial tendency  the child may eventually need to be  deemed maladjusted,  and to receive treatment in a  hostel for maladjusted children,  or may be brought before the courts as  beyond control.  The child, now  a delinquent,  may then become  a probationer  under a court order, or may be sent to  an approved school.  If the home ceases to function in an important respect the child may be taken over by the Children’s Committee (under the Children Act, 1948) and be given  ‘care and protection’.  If possible a foster home will be found. Should these measures fail the young adult may be said to have become a  psychopath  and may be sent by the courts to a  Borstal  or to prison. There may be an established tendency to repeat crimes for which we use the term  recidivism .
All this makes no comment on the individual’s psychiatric diagnosis.
The antisocial tendency is characterized by an  element in it which compels the environment to be important.  The patient through unconscious drives compels someone to attend to management. It is the task of the therapist to become involved in this the patient’s unconscious drive, and the work is done by the therapist in terms of management, tolerance, and understanding. 
  The antisocial tendency implies hope.  Lack of hope is the basic feature of the deprived child who, of course, is not all the time being antisocial. In the period of hope the child manifests an antisocial tendency. This may be awkward for society, and for you if it is your bicycle that is stolen, but those who are not personally involved can see the hope that underlies the compulsion to steal. Perhaps one of the reasons why we tend to leave the therapy of the delinquent to others is that we dislike being stolen from? 
 The understanding that the antisocial act is an expression of hope is vital in the treatment of children who show the antisocial tendency. Over and over again one sees the moment of hope wasted, or withered, because of mismanagement or intolerance. This is another way of saying that the treatment of the antisocial tendency is not psychoanalysis but management, a going to meet and match the moment of hope. 
 There is a direct relationship between the antisocial tendency and deprivation. This has long been known by specialists in the ﬁ eld, but it is largely due to John Bowlby that there is now a widespread recognition of the relationship that exists between the antisocial tendency in individuals and emotional deprivation, typically in the period of late infancy and the early toddler stage, round about the age of one and two years. 
 When there is an antisocial tendency  there has been a true deprivation  (not a simple privation); that is to say, there has been a loss of something good that has been positive in the child’s experience up to a certain date,  and that has been withdrawn; the withdrawal has extended over a period of time longer than that over which the child can keep the memory of the experience alive. The comprehensive statement of deprivation is one that includes both the early and the late, both the pinpoint trauma and the sustained traumatic condition and also both the near-normal and the clearly abnormal.”
(D.W. Winnicott, Deprivation and Delinquency, 1984)

E2.2.B.2.4.j. A_FoundationClass Collective, Anwar Al Atrash_Red Carpet_2019-2022_(1) ; A_FoundationClass Collective, Anwar Al Atrash_Red Carpet_2019-2022_(2)

“LINE
Drawing one’s
useful, the need
is clear.
It’s not a real
threshold,
just an idea,
or else
nothing means.
There are lines to stay
behind: ropes
with latches
officials undo
to let some pass.
The dip in the center
suggests
you could step right over
but either
haven’t yet or won’t.”
(Lia Purpura, It shouldn’t have been beautiful, 2015)

E2.2.B.3. Psychological Determinisms: Address the impact of our personal history, past experiences, and our	 unconscious on our present choices.

E2.2.B.3.1. The Past as an Active Force: our "personal history" and "past experiences" are not static memories but active, often compulsive, forces that shape our present.

E2.2.B.3.1.a. THE CONCEPT OF FREEDOM BECAME A MAJOR PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEM WHEN IT WAS EXPERIENCED AS SOMETHING OCCURRING WITHIN THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ONESELF AND ONESELF, RATHER THAN IN RELATIONSHIPS WITH OTHERS.
"Classical antiquity was by no means inexperienced in the phenomena of solitude; it knew well enough that solitary man is no longer one but two-in one, that an intercourse between me and myself begins the moment the intercourse between me and my fellow men has been interrupted for no matter what reason. In addition to this dualism which is the existential condition of thought, classical philosophy since Plato had insisted on a dualism between soul and body whereby the human faculty of motion had been assigned to the soul, which was supposed to move the body as well as itself, and it was still within the range of Platonic thought to interpret this faculty as a rulership of the soul over the body. Yet the Augustinian solitude of “hot contention” within the soul itself was utterly unknown, for the fight in which he had become engaged was not between reason and passion, [...]  that is, between two different human faculties, but it was a conflict within the will itself. And this duality within the self-same faculty had been known as the characteristic of thought, as the dialogue which I hold with myself. In other words, the two-in-one of solitude which sets the thought process into motion has the exactly opposite effect on the will: it paralyzes and locks it within itself; willing in solitude is always velle and nolle, to will and not to will at the same time.


The paralyzing effect the will seems to have upon itself comes all the more surprisingly as its very essence obviously is to command and be obeyed. Hence it appears to be a “monstrosity” that man may command himself and not be obeyed, a monstrosity which can be explained only by the simultaneous presence of an I-will and an I-will-not. This, however, is already an interpretation by Augustine; the historical fact is that the phenomenon of the will originally manifested itself in the experience that what I would, I do not; that there is such a thing as I-will-and-cannot. What was unknown to antiquity was not that there is a possible. I-know-but-I-will-not, but that I-will and I-can are not the same—non hoc est velle, quod posse. For the I-will-and-I-can was of course very familiar to the ancients. We need only remember how much Plato insisted that only those who knew how to rule themselves had the right to rule others and be freed from the obligation of obedience. And it is true that self-control has remained one of the specifically political virtues, if only because it is an outstanding phenomenon of virtuosity where I-will and I-can must be so well attuned that they practically coincide.

Had ancient philosophy known of a possible conflict between what I and what I will, it would certainly have understood the phenomenon of freedom as an inherent quality of the I-can, or it might conceivably have defined it as the coincidence of I-will and I-can; it certainly would not have thought of it as an attribute of the I-will or I-would. This assertion is no empty speculation; even the Euripidean conflict between reason and, both simultaneously present in the soul, is a relatively late phenomenon. More typical, and in our context more relevant, was the conviction that passion may blind men’s reason but that once reason has succeeded in making itself heard there is no passion left to prevent man from doing what he knows is right. This conviction still underlies Socrates’ teaching that virtue is a kind of knowledge, and our amazement that anybody could ever have thought that virtue was “rational,” that it could be learned and taught, arises from our acquaintance with a will which is broken in itself, which wills and wills-not at the same time, much rather than from any superior insight in the alleged powerlessness of reason.

In other words, will, will-power, and will-to-power are for us almost identical notions; the seat of power is to us the faculty of the will as known and experienced by man in his intercourse with himself. And for the sake of this will-power we have emasculated not only our reasoning and cognitive faculties but other more “practical” faculties as well. But is it not plain even to us that, in the words of Pindar, “this is the greatest grief: to stand with his feet outside the right and the beautiful one knows [forced away], by necessity”? The necessity which prevents me from doing what I know and will may arise from the world, or from my own body, or from an insufficiency of talents, gifts, and qualities which are bestowed upon man by birth and over which he has hardly more power than he has over other circumstances; all these factors, the psychological ones not excluded, condition the person from the outside as far as the I-will and the I-know, that is, the ego itself, are concerned; the power that meets these circumstances, that liberates, as it were, willing and knowing from their bondage to necessity is the I-can. Only where the I-will and the I-can coincide does freedom come to pass. [...]

I chose the example of self-control because to us this is clearly a phenomenon of will and of will-power. The Greeks, more than any other people, have reflected on moderation and the necessity to tame the steeds of the soul, and yet they never became aware of the will as a distinct faculty, separate from other human capacities. Historically, men first discovered the will when they experienced its impotence and not its power, when they said with Paul: “For to will is present with me; but how to perform that which is good I find not.” It is the same will of which Augustine complained that it seemed “no monstrousness [for it] partly to will, partly to nill”; and although he points out that this is “a disease of the mind,” he also admits that this disease is, as it were, natural for a mind possessed of a will: “For the will commands that there be a will, it commands not something else but itself. . . . Were the will entire, it would not even command itself to be, because it would already be.” In other words, if man has a will at all, it must always appear as though there were two wills present in the same man, fighting with each other for power over his mind. Hence, the will is both powerful and impotent, free and unfree. [...]"
(Hannah Arendt, Between Past and Future, 1961)

"Those who say [choice] is appetite or anger or wish or a kind of opinion do not seem to be right. For choice is not common to irrational creatures as well, but appetite and anger are. Again, the incontinent man acts with appetite, but not with choice; while the continent man on the contrary acts with choice, but not with appetite. Again, appetite is contrary to choice, but not appetite to appetite. Again, appetite relates to the pleas-ant and the painful, choice neither to the painful nor to the pleasant.
Still less is it anger, for acts due to anger are thought to be less than any others objects of choice.
But neither is it wish, though it seems near to it, for choice cannot relate to impossibles, and if any one said he chose them he would be thought silly; but there may be a wish even for impossibles, e.g., for immortality. And wish may relate to things that could in no way be brought about by one's own efforts, e.g., that a particular actor or ath-lete should win in a competition; but no one chooses such things, but only the things that he thinks could be brought about by his own efforts. Again, wish relates rather to the end, choice to the means, for instance, we wish to be healthy, but we choose the acts which will make us healthy, and we wish to be happy and say we do, but we cannot well say we choose to be so; for, in general, choice seems to relate to the things that are in our own power.
For this reason, too, it cannot be opinion; for opinion is thought to relate to all kinds of things, no less to eternal things and impossible things than to things in our own power, and it is distinguished by its falsity or truth, not by its badness or goodness, while choice is distin-guished rather by these.
Now with opinion in general perhaps no one even says it is identi-cal. But it is not identical even with any kind of opinion; for by choosing what is good or bad we are men of a certain character, which we are not by holding certain opinions. And we choose to get or avoid something good or bad, but we have opinions about what a thing is or whom it is good for or how it is good for him; we can hardly be said to opine to get or avoid anything. And choice is praised for being related to the right object rather than for being rightly related to it, opinion for being truly related to its object. And we choose what we best know to be good, but we opine what we do not quite know, and it is not the same people that are thought to make the best choices and to have the best opinions, but some are thought to have fairly good opinions, but by reason of vice to choose what they should not. If opinion precedes choice or accompanies it, that makes no difference; for it is not this that we are considering, but whether it is identical with some kind of opinion.
What, then, or what kind of thing is it, since it is none of the things we have mentioned? It seems to be voluntary, but not all that is volun-tary to be an object of choice. Is it, then, what has been decided on by previous deliberation? At any rate choice involves a rational principle and thought. Even the name seems to suggest that it is what is chosen before other things."
(Aristote, L’Éthique à Nicomaque)

E2.2.B.3.1.b. "Johnson observed, that the force of our early habits was so great, that though reason approved, nay, though our senses relished a different course, almost every man returned to them. I do not believe there is any observation upon human nature better founded than this ; and, in many cases, it is a very painful truth ; for where early habits have been mean and wretched, the joy and elevation resulting from better modes of life must be damped by the gloomy consciousness of being under an almost inevitable doom to sink back into a situation which we recollect with disgust. It surely may be prevented, by constant attention and unremitting exertion to establish contrary habits of superiour efficacy."
(Boswell’s Life of Johnson, revised third edition 1799, first published in 1791)

E2.2.B.3.1.c. TEREZA'S PRESENT ACTIONS AND FEELINGS OF GUILT TO HER "PERSONAL HISTORY" ARE LINKED TO HER MOTHER'S CONSTANT REMINDER THAT "BEING A MOTHER MEANT SACRIFICING EVERYTHING".
“Tereza tried to see herself through her body. That is why, from girlhood on, she would stand before the mirror so often. And because she was afraid her mother would catch her at it, every peek into the mirror had a tinge of secret vice.
It was not vanity that drew her to the mirror; it was amazement at seeing her own "I." She forgot she was looking at the instrument panel of her body mechanisms; she thought she saw her soul shining through the features of her face. She forgot that the nose was merely the nozzle of a hose that took oxygen to the lungs; she saw it as the true expression of her nature.
Staring at herself for long stretches of time, she was occasionally upset at the sight of her mother's features in her face. She would stare all the more doggedly at her image in an attempt to wish them away and keep only what was hers alone. Each time she succeeded was a time of intoxication: her soul would rise to the surface of her body like a crew charging up from the bowels of a ship, spreading out over the deck, waving at the sky and singing in jubilation.
She took after her mother, and not only physically. I sometimes have the feeling that her entire life was merely a continuation of her mother's, much as the course of a ball on the billiard table is merely the continuation of the player's arm movement.
Indeed, was she not the principal culprit determining her mother's fate? She, the absurd encounter of the sperm of the most manly of men and the egg of the most beautiful of women? Yes, it was in that fateful second, which was named Tereza, that the botched long-distance race, her mother's life, had begun. 
Tereza's mother never stopped reminding her that being a mother meant sacrificing everything. Her words had the ring of truth, backed as they were by the experience of a woman who had lost everything because of her child. Tereza would listen and believe that being a mother was the highest value in life and that being a mother was a great sacrifice. If a mother was Sacrifice personified, then a daughter was Guilt, with no possibility of redress.
Of course, Tereza did not know the story of the night when her mother whispered "Be careful" into the ear of her father. Her guilty conscience was as vague as original sin. But she did what she could to rid herself of it. Her mother took her out of school at the age of fifteen, and Tereza went to work as a waitress, handing over all her earnings. She was willing to do anything to gain her mother's love. She ran the household, took care of her siblings, and spent all day Sunday cleaning house and doing the family wash.
It was a pity, because she was the brightest in her class. She yearned for something higher, but in the small town there was nothing higher for her. Whenever she did the clothes, she kept a book next to the tub. As she turned the pages, the wash water dripped all over them.
At home, there was no such thing as shame. Her mother marched about the flat in her underwear, sometimes braless and sometimes, on summer days, stark naked. Her stepfather did not walk about naked, but he did go into the bathroom every time Tereza was in the bath. Once she locked herself in and her mother was furious. "Who do you think you are, anyway? Do you think he's going to bite off a piece of your beauty?"
(This confrontation shows clearly that hatred for her daughter outweighed suspicion of her husband.
Her daughter's guilt was infinite and included the husband's infidelities. Tereza's desire to be emancipated and insist on her rights—like the right to lock herself in the bathroom—was more objectionable to Tereza's mother than the possibility of her husband's taking a prurient interest in Tereza.)”
(Milan Kundera, The Unbearable Lightness of Being, 1984)

E2.2.B.3.1.d. FOR ERIK ERIKSON, IT IS THE "INDIVIDUAL’S UNCONSCIOUS DETERMINATION NEVER TO MEET HIS CHILDHOOD ANXIETY FACE TO FACE AGAIN" THAT DRIVES OUR IRRATIONALITY AND MAKES US PROJECT OUR INNER FEARS ONTO THE OUTER WORLD. These private, "latent infantile panics" are the very things that are exploited by "shrewd leaders, cliques, and pressure groups" to manipulate populations in the political sphere.
“To reconcile historical and psychological methodologies, we must first learn to deal with the fact that psychologies and psychologists are subject to historical laws and that historians and historical records are subject to those of psychology. Having learned in clinical work that the individual is apt to develop an amnesia concerning his most formative experiences in childhood, we are also forced to recognize a universal blind spot in the makers and interpreters of history: they ignore the fateful function of childhood in the fabric of society. Historians and philosophers recognize a "female principle" in the world, but not the fact that man is born and reared by women. They debate principles of formal education, but neglect the fateful dawn of individual consciousness. They forever insist on a mirage of progress where man's (the male's) logic will lead to reason, order, and peace, while each step toward this mirage brings a new alignment of principles which lead to war, and worse. Moralistic man and rationalizing man continues to identify himself with abstractions of himself, but refuses to see how he became what he really is and how, as an emotional and political being, he undoes with infantile compulsions and impulsions what his thought has invented and what his hands have built. All of this has its psychological basis-namely, the individual's unconscious determination never to meet his childhood anxiety face to face again, and his superstitious ap-prehension lest a glance at the infantile origins of his thoughts and schemes may destroy his single-minded stamina. He therefore prefers enlightenment away from himself; which is why the best minds have often been least aware of themselves.
But may it not be merely superstition that makes man turn away from his latent anxiety as if from the head of a Medusa? May it not be that man, at this stage of the game, must and can expand his tolerant awareness to his latent anxieties and to the infantile origins of his preconceptions and apprehensions?
Every adult, whether he is a follower or a leader, a member of a mass or of an elite, was once a child. He was once small. A sense of smallness forms a substratum in his mind, ineradicably. His triumphs will be measured against this smallness, his defeats will substantiate it. The questions as to who is bigger and who can do or not do this or that, and to whom these questions fill the adult's inner life far beyond the necessities and the desirabilities which he understands and for which he plans.
Every society consists of men in the process of developing from children into parents. To assure continuity of tradition, society must early prepare for parenthood in its children; and it must take care of the unavoidable remnants of infantility in its adults. This is a large order, especially since a society needs many beings who can follow, a few who can lead, and some who can do both, alternately or in different areas of life.

Man's childhood learning, which develops his highly specialized brain-eye-hand co-ordination and all the intrinsic mechanisms of reflection and planning, is characterized by prolonged dependence. Only thus does man develop conscience, that dependence on himself which will make him, in turn, dependable; and only when thoroughly dependable in a number of fundamental values (truth, justice, etc.) can he become independent and teach and develop tradition. But this dependability offers a problem because of its very origin in childhood, and because of the forces employed in its development. We have discussed the retardation of sexual development and its concentration on and deflection from the family; and we have discussed the importance of early patterns of aggressive approach (organ modes) for the development of social modalities. Both of these developments force early ideals into an association with the images left behind by infantile tension and rage.
Thus the immature origin of his conscience endangers man's maturity and his works: infantile fear accompanies him through life. This we, the psychoanalysts, are attempting to correct in individual cases; this we try to explain and to conceptualize, be-cause there is no universal cure-only, maybe, an alleviation by gradual insight for the fact that each generation must develop out of its childhood and, overcoming its particular brand of child-hood, must develop a new brand, potentially promising, potentially dangerous.
Mark Twain, probably in one of his depressed moods, called man "the immodest animal," the only creature who knows that he is naked, or, as we would put it, the creature with a self-conscious sexuality. Here Mark Twain failed to mention the redeeming human specialty in which he himself specialized: humor, the ability at rare moments to play with and to reflect fearlessly on the strange customs and institutions by which man must find self-realization. But the fact remains that the human being in early childhood learns to consider one or the other aspect of bodily function as evil, shameful, or unsafe. There is no culture which does not use a combination of these devils to develop, by way of counterpoint, its own style of faith, pride, certainty, and initiative. Thus there remains in man's sense of achievement the suspicion of its infantile roots; and since his earliest sense of reality was learned by the painful testing of inner and outer goodnesses and badnesses, man remains ready to expect from some enemy, force, or event in the outer world that which, in fact, endangers him from within: from his own angry drives, from his own sense of smallness, and from his own split inner world. Thus he is always irrationally ready to fear invasion by vast and vague forces which are other than himself; strangling encirclement by everything that is not safely clarified as allied; and devastating loss of face before all-surrounding, mocking audiences. These, not the animal's fears, characterize human anxiety, and this in personal affairs as well as in world affairs.
In conclusion I shall summarize at least some of the basic fears.
But first let me hope that I have succeeded in indicating my reco-nition of the obvious namely, that the existence of power spheres, of spheres of influence, jurisdiction, and possession, and, above all, of spheres of exploitation, are matters pertaining to the social process and are not in themselves to be explained as originating in infantile anxiety: they are the expression of the geographic-historical reality in which we exist. The problem to be elucidated is that of the extent to which man is apt to project on political and eco-nomic necessity those fears, apprehensions, and urges which are derived from the arsenal of infantile anxiety.
And another reservation: we must learn to differentiate between fears and anxieties. Fears are states of apprehension which focus on isolated and recognizable dangers so that they may be judiciously appraised and realistically countered. Anxieties are diffuse states of tension (caused by a loss of mutual regulation and a consequent upset in libidinal and aggressive controls) which magnify and even cause the illusion of an outer danger, without point-ing to any avenue of defense or mastery. These two forms of ap-prehension obviously often occur together, and we can insist on a strict separation only for the sake of the present argument. If, in an economic depression, a man is afraid that he may lose his money, his fear may be justified. But if the idea of having to live on an income only ten times, instead of twenty-five times, 25 large as that of his average fellow-citizen causes him to lose his nerve and to commit suicide, then we must consult our clinical formula, which may help us find out, for example, that wealth was the cornerstone of his identity and that the economic depression coincided with the man's climacteric. The fear of losing his money, then, became associated with the anxiety aroused by the idea of having to live a role not characterized by unlimited re-sources, and this at a time when the fear of losing his sexual potency had mobilized an infantile anxiety once connected with ideas of being inactivated and castrated. In the adult, then, impairment of judgment by infantile rage is the result of a state of irrational tension brought about by a short circuit between rational adult fears and associated infantile anxieties. This is the truth behind Franklin D. Roosevelt's simple yet magic statement that we have nothing to fear but fear itself, a statement which for the sake of our argument must be paraphrased to read: We have nothing to fear but anxiety. For it is not the fear of a danger (which we might be well able to meet with judicious action), but the fear of the associated state of aimless anxiety which drives us into irrational action, irrational flight-or, indeed, irrational denial of danger. When threatened with such anxiety, we either magnify a danger which we have no reason to fear excessively or we ignore a danger which we have every reason to fear. To be able to be aware of fear, then, without giving in to anxiety; to train our fear in the face of anxiety to remain an accurate measure and warning of that which man must fear this is a necessary condition for a judicious frame of mind. Latent infantile panics common to all mankind or to particular sections of it are used by shrewd leaders, cliques, and pressure groups to make people see exaggerated dangers or to make them ignore existing danger until it is too late.
We can only summarize some of the anxieties involved and let each (author and reader alike) ask himself in what way his own walk of life may contribute to the neutralization of the panic which shadows man as he progresses.
In childhood, of course, fear and anxiety are so close to one another that they are indistinguishable, and this for the reason that the child, because of his immature equipment, has no way of differentiating between inner and outer, real and imagined, dangers: he has yet to learn this, and while he learns, he needs the adult's reassuring instruction. In so far as the child fails to be convinced by the adult's reasoning and especially where he perceives instead the adult's latent horror and bewilderment, a panicky sense of vague catastrophe remains as an ever ready potentiality.
Babies are startled by a number of things, such as a sudden loss of support or a sudden intense noise or beam of light. Such events are accidental and rare, and are quickly adjusted to, unless a baby has learned to fear suddenness in the changes around him.
From here on it is difficult to say when he fears the recurrence of a particular event, or suddenness as such, and when he reacts with anxiety to the adult ineptness or tension which is expressed in recurring suddenness. Fear of such objective things as loss of sup-port or noise thus easily becomes anxiety connected with the sudden loss of attentive care.
The unavoidable imposition on the child of outer controls which are not in sufficient accord with the quality and quantity of his inner control at the time, is apt to produce in him a cycle of anger and anxiety. This leaves a residue of an intolerance of being manipulated and coerced beyond the point at which outer control still feels like self-control. Connected with this is an intolerance of being interrupted in a vital act, or of not being permitted to conclude an act in an idiosyncratically important way. All of these anxieties lead to self-coercion by empty stereotypy and lonely repetition. Here we find the origins of compulsion and obsession and the concomitant need for the vengeful manipulation and coercion of others.
The intolerance of not being permitted to bring experiences to completion has its counterpart in the fear of being impoverished in a particular organ mode. On the oral level, there is something of a fear of being left empty (nutritional) and of being starved of stimulation (sensory and sensual). These fears later become inter-changeable, so that sensation-seeking and fear of starvation may characterize people who have more than enough to eat but less than enough sensual intimacy.
The anxiety caused by the fear of losing autonomy, in its intestinal form, concerns the possible emptying and robbing of one's inside by inimical people and inner saboteurs who can make the bowels let go against one's own sovereign wish. Corresponding to the ambivalent aspect of this stage, an alternate fear would concern the danger of being closed up, of being forced to contain the bulging bowel, of having no "outlet."
In the muscular area there is also a double intolerance: the anxiety caused by the sense of being restrained and held to the point of muscular impotence has its counterpart in that of not being held at all, of losing outer bounds and boundaries, and with them the necessary orientation for the definition of one's autonomy. The alliance of muscular and anal sadism, then, seems to foster the fear of being attacked from the rear, of being either overwhelmed and bound, or raped rectally, in the apparent way of animals.
Standing alone has many connotations of pride and isolation, of wishing to be admired, and of the fear of being exposed to devastating inspection and, of course, of falling.
In the center of the boy's locomotor-phallic fears lurks that of castration. The clinical evidence for the strategic existence of a fear for that sensitive organ, the penis, which so defiantly "sticks its neck out" is overwhelming. More generally, there is a fear of remaining small either in one's total size or in one's genital stature, of not having been provided with "the right stuff."
On the ambulatory side, there is the anxiety of being immobilized and imprisoned, and yet, again, also an anxiety of not being guided, of not finding borderlines defined so that one may fight and assert one's initiative. Here is the infantile origin of (the man's) need for an enemy so that he may arm himself against and fight a concrete adversary and thus be freed of the constant anxiety of unknown enemies who, at unpredictable times, may find him unarmed and uncovered.
The fear of remaining empty (oral) or being emptied (anal) has a different quality in girls, since the body image of the girl (even before she "knows" her arrangements as in the form of an anatomical diagram) includes a valuable inside, an inside on the development of which depends her fulfillment as an organism and as a role bearer. This fear of being left empty, and, more simply, that of being left, seems to be the most basic feminine fear, extend-ing over the whole of a woman's existence. It is normally intensified with every menstruation and takes its final toll during the menopause. No wonder, then, that the anxiety aroused by these fears can express itself either in complete subjection to male thought, in desperate competition with it, or in efforts to catch the male and make him a mere tool.
Here I must take special note of one of the most paradoxical and far-reaching consequences of the feminine fear of being left. Lest their men discard and abandon them in the periodical pursuits of competition, conquest, and war, women are apt not to question these pursuits, which, again and again, lead to the disruption of the home and to the slaughter of sons. They pretend that they really believe in war and in man's magnificent equipment, where actually they have merely learned to accept as inevitable a martial excitement which is essentially outside their comprehension. It may well be that war cannot be banned until women, for the sake of a worthwhile survival, dare to recognize and to support the as yet undeveloped power of unarmed resistance. But here women must first learn to understand their fear of being abandoned, and their unwillingness to question judiciously man's cultivation of war for war's sake.”
(Erik Erikson, Childhood And Society, 1950)

E2.2.B.3.1.e. D.W. WINNICOTT DETAILS THE NEED FOR SECURITY, INSTINCTUAL GRATIFICATION, AND STABLE RELATIONSHIPS TO FORM AN "INTEGRATED PERSONALITY" IN THE "PRIMARY HOME EXPERIENCE". He reframes social failure (delinquency) as an "illness" caused by a failure of the early environment.
“By a primary home experience is meant experience of an environment adapted to the special needs of the infant and the little child, without which the foundations of mental health cannot be laid down. Without someone speciﬁcally orientated to his needs the infant cannot ﬁnd a working relation to external reality. Without someone to give satisfactory instinctual gratiﬁcations the infant cannot ﬁnd his body, nor can he develop an integrated personality. Without one person to love and to hate he cannot come to know that it is the same person that he loves and hates, and so cannot ﬁnd his sense of guilt, and his desire to repair and restore. Without a limited human and physical environment that he can know he cannot ﬁnd out the extent to which his aggressive ideas actually fail to destroy, and so cannot sort out the difference between fantasy and fact. Without a father and mother who are together, and who take joint responsibility for him, he cannot ﬁnd and express his urge to separate them, nor experience relief at failing to do so. The emotional development of the ﬁrst years is complex and cannot be skipped over, and every infant absolutely needs a certain degree of favourable environment if he is to negotiate the essential ﬁrst stages of this development. 
 To be of value these primary home experiences belatedly provided in the hostels had to be stable over a period measured in years and not in months; and it can be well understood that the results could never be as good as the ordinary results of good primary homes would have been. Success in hostel work, therefore, is to be thought of in terms of lessening the failure of the child’s own home.”
(D.W. Winnicott, Deprivation and Delinquency, 1984)

E2.2.B.3.1.f. AN INVENTED WORD TO ENCAPSULATE THE WEARINESS WITH THE SAME OLD ISSUES THAT YOU’VE ALWAYS HAD 
“Altschmerz 
n. weariness with the same old issues that you’ve always had—the same boring flaws and anxieties you’ve been gnawing on for years, which leaves them soggy and tasteless and inert, with nothing interesting left to think about, nothing left to do but spit them out and wander off to the backyard, ready to dig up some fresher pain you might have buried long ago.”
(John Koenig, The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021)

E2.2.B.3.1.g. Shannon Cartier Lucy, The Girl at the Loo Table, 2021 / Girl with swans, 2019 / Our new home, 2017
"The aspects of life we generally take for granted like securing a home, a family, and finding a role to play in society are ways we attempt to make life meaningful. But, life immersed in this material world brings its own disorder and grief. And I think on some level, we all crave relief from the « order » of our everyday lives. 
I grew up with a parent with schizophrenia. It was customary in my home to find a toaster in the freezer or The Holy Bible in the dishwasher. A strange environment, perhaps, to grow up in, an environment fashioned by someone with "disordered thinking and behaviour." But disordered reality has become an elevated language for me. It's poetic and hilarious. So by expressing the simple, mundane and oppressive aspect of my own life perhaps these paintings can transmute my own inner experience into one which is felt more universally.”
(Shannon Lucy, 2019)

Art:
- Shannon Cartier Lucy, The Girl at the Loo Table, 2021 / Girl with swans, 2019 / Our new home, 2017

E2.2.B.3.2. The Subconscious Architecture: How We Are "Programmed": the "unconscious" structures that are built by our past experiences and then automatically shape our present perceptions and choices.

E2.2.B.3.2.a. "THE WORLD OF CULTURE AND GENERAL RULES

One of Hume's simplest yet most significant ideas is that humans are more partial than selfish. People think they are philosophers and good thinkers when they claim that selfishness is the ultimate motive for all actions. This is too easy. Don't we see that few men devote most of their fortune to the pleasures of their wives and the education of their children, reserving only a small portion for themselves?

The truth is that humans are always members of a clan or community. Family, friendship, and neighborhood are categories that, before being types of community in Tönnies, are, in Hume, the natural determinants of sympathy. And precisely because the essence of passion and particular interest is not selfishness, but rather partiality and sympathy, the latter does not transcend particular interest or passion. "Our sense of duty always follows the usual and natural course of our passions." Taking this to its logical conclusion means apparently losing the benefit of our distinction between selfishness and sympathy. The latter is no less opposed to society than the former.

	Instead of preparing men to form large societies, such a noble affection is almost as contrary to it as the narrowest selfishness.

[...]  However, if sympathy is similar to selfishness, what significance does Hume's observation that humans are not selfish but rather sympathetic have? If society finds sympathy to be as much of an obstacle as the purest selfishness, then the meaning and structure of society change depending on whether it is considered from the point of view of selfishness or sympathy. Selfishness would only have to limit itself. Sympathy is different; it must be integrated into a positive whole. Hume criticizes contract theories for presenting an abstract and false image of society. These theories define society only in negative terms and see it as a set of limitations on selfishness and interests instead of as a positive system of invented enterprises. This is why it is so important to remember that natural man is not selfish; everything depends on this conception of society. [...]"
(Gilles Deleuze, Empiricism and Subjectivity, Chapter II, 1977)

E2.2.B.3.2.b. Gillian Wearing, Self-portrait as my Mother, Jean Gregory, 2003
"When an emotional chord is struck, it stirs to life past memories of the same feeling. […]
A particular emotion revives all memories of its prior instantiations. Every feeling (after the first) is a multilayered experience, only partly reflecting the present, sensory world. [...]
Because human beings remember with neurons, we are disposed to see more of what we have already seen, hear anew what we have heard most often, think just what we have always thought. Our minds are burdened by an informational inertia whose headlong course is not easy to slow… No individual can think his way around his own Attractors (*), since they are embedded in the structure of thought… Because limbic resonance and regulation join human minds together in a continuous exchange of influential signals, every brain is part of a local network that shares information — including Attractors. […]
Through the limbic transmission of an Attractor’s influence, one person can lure others into his emotional virtuality. All of us, when we engage in relatedness, fall under the gravitational influence of another’s emotional world, at the same time that we are bending his emotional mind with ours. Each relationship is a binary star, a burning flux of exchanged force fields, the deep and ancient influences emanating and felt, felt and emanating. [...]
In a relationship, one mind revises another; one heart changes its partner. This astounding legacy of our combined status as mammals and neural beings is limbic revision: the power to remodel the emotional parts of the people we love, as our Attractors activate certain limbic pathways, and the brain’s inexorable memory mechanism reinforces them. Who we are and who we become depends, in part, on whom we love."
(*) An attractor network is a network of neurons often recurrently connected, whose time dynamics settle to a stable pattern.
(Thomas Lewis, Fari Amini, and Richard Lannon, A General Theory of Love, 2001)

Art:
- Gillian Wearing, Self-portrait as my Mother, Jean Gregory, 2003

E2.2.B.3.2.c. RAND CALLS THE "SENSE OF LIFE” THE FORCE THAT "SETS THE NATURE OF A MAN’S EMOTIONAL RESPONSES AND THE ESSENCE OF HIS CHARACTER." 
Philosophy and Sense of Life
SINCE religion is a primitive form of philosophy—an attempt to offer a comprehensive view of reality—many of its myths are distorted, dramatized allegories based on some element of truth, some actual, if profoundly elusive, aspect of man’s existence. One of such allegories, which men find particularly terrifying, is the myth of a supernatural recorder from whom nothing can be hidden, who lists all of a man’s deeds—the good and the evil, the noble and the vile—and who confronts a man with that record on judgment day.
That myth is true, not existentially, but psychologically. The merciless recorder is the integrating mechanism of a man’s subconscious; the record is his sense of life.
A sense of life is a pre-conceptual equivalent of metaphysics, an emotional, subconsciously integrated appraisal of man and of existence. It sets the nature of a man’s emotional responses and the essence of his character.
Long before he is old enough to grasp such a concept as metaphysics, man makes choices, forms value-judgments, experiences emotions and acquires a certain implicit view of life. Every choice and value-judgment implies some estimate of himself and of the world around him—most particularly, of his capacity to deal with the world. He may draw conscious conclusions, which may be true or false; or he may remain mentally passive and merely react to events (i.e., merely feel). Whatever the case may be, his subconscious mechanism sums up his psychological activities, integrating his conclusions, reactions or evasions into an emotional sum that establishes a habitual pattern and becomes his automatic response to the world around him. What began as a series of single, discrete conclusions (or evasions) about his own particular problems, becomes a generalized feeling about existence, an implicit metaphysics with the compelling motivational power of a constant, basic emotion—an emotion which is part of all his other emotions and underlies all his experiences. This is a sense of life.
To the extent to which a man is mentally active, i.e., motivated by the desire to know, to understand, his mind works as the programmer of his emotional computer—and his sense of life develops into a bright counterpart of a rational philosophy. To the extent to which a man evades, the programming of his emotional computer is done by chance influences; by random impressions, associations, imitations, by undigested snatches of environmental bromides, by cultural osmosis. If evasion or lethargy is a man’s predominant method of mental functioning, the result is a sense of life dominated by fear—a soul like a shapeless piece of clay stamped by footprints going in all directions. (In later years, such a man cries that he has lost his sense of identity; the fact is that he never acquired it.)
Man, by his nature, cannot refrain from generalizing; he cannot live moment by moment, without context, without past or future; he cannot eliminate his integrating capacity, i.e., his conceptual capacity, and confine his consciousness to an animal’s perceptual range. Just as an animal’s consciousness cannot be stretched to deal with abstractions, so man’s consciousness cannot be shrunk to deal with nothing but immediate concretes. The enormously powerful integrating mechanism of man’s consciousness is there at birth; his only choice is to drive it or to be driven by it. Since an act of volition—a process of thought—is required to use that mechanism for a cognitive purpose, man can evade that effort. But if he evades, chance takes over: the mechanism functions on its own, like a machine without a driver; it goes on integrating, but integrating blindly, incongruously, at random—not as an instrument of cognition, but as an instrument of distortion, delusion and nightmare terror, bent on wrecking its defaulting processor’s consciousness.
A sense of life is formed by a process of emotional generalization which may be described as a subconscious counterpart of a process of abstraction, since it is a method of classifying and integrating. But it is a process of emotional abstraction: it consists of classifying things according to the emotions they invoke—i.e., of tying together, by association or connotation, all those things which have the power to make an individual experience the same (or a similar) emotion. For instance: a new neighborhood, a discovery, adventure, struggle, triumph—or: the folks next door, a memorized recitation, a family picnic, a known routine, comfort. On a more adult level: a heroic man, the skyline of New York, a sunlit landscape, pure colors, ecstatic music—or: a humble man, an old village, a foggy landscape, muddy colors, folk music.
Which particular emotions will be invoked by the things in these examples, as their respective common denominators, depends on which set of things fits an individual’s view of himself. For a man of self-esteem, the emotion uniting the things in the first part of these examples is admiration, exaltation, a sense of challenge; the emotion uniting the things in the second part is disgust or boredom. For a man who lacks self-esteem, the emotion uniting the things in the first part of these examples is fear, guilt, resentment; the emotion uniting the things in the second part is relief from fear, reassurance, the undemanding safety of passivity.
Even though such emotional abstractions grow into a metaphysical view of man, their origin lies in an individual’s view of himself and of his own existence. The sub-verbal, subconscious criterion of selection that forms his emotional abstractions is: “That which is important to me” or: “The kind of universe which is right for me, in which I would feel at home.” It is obvious what immense psychological consequences will follow, depending on whether a man’s subconscious metaphysics is consonant with the facts of reality or contradicts them.
The key concept, in the formation of a sense of life, is the term “important.” It is a concept that belongs to the realm of values, since it implies an answer to the question: Important—to whom? Yet its meaning is different from that of moral values. “Important” does not necessarily mean “good.” It means “a quality, character or standing such as to entitle to attention or consideration” (The American College Dictionary). What, in a fundamental sense, is entitled to one’s attention or consideration? Reality.
“Important”—in its essential meaning, as distinguished from its more limited and superficial uses—is a metaphysical term. It pertains to that aspect of metaphysics which serves as a bridge between metaphysics and ethics: to a fundamental view of man’s nature. That view involves the answers to such questions as whether the universe is knowable or not, whether man has the power of choice or not, whether he can achieve his goals in life or not. The answers to such questions are “metaphysical value-judgments,” since they form the base of ethics.
It is only those values which he regards or grows to regard as “important,” those which represent his implicit view of reality, that remain in a man’s subconscious and form his sense of life.
“It is important to understand things”—“It is important to obey my parents”—“It is important to act on my own”—“It is important to please other people”—“It is important to fight for what I want”—“It is important not to make enemies”—“My life is important”—“Who am I to stick my neck out?” Man is a being of self-made soul—and it is of such conclusions that the stuff of his soul is made. (By “soul” I mean “consciousness.”) 
The integrated sum of a man’s basic values is his sense of life.”
(Ayn Rand, The romantic manifesto, 1969)

E2.2.B.3.2.d. "MOST SOMATIC MARKERS WE USE FOR RATIONAL DECISION-MAKING PROBABLY WERE CREATED IN OUR BRAINS DURING THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION AND SOCIALIZATION."
“SOMATIC MARKERS: THEATE R IN THE BODY OR THEATER IN THE BRAIN? 
Given my previous discussion on the physiology of emotions, you should expect not just one mechanism for the somatic-marker pro­cess but two. By virtue of the basic mechanism, the body is engaged by the prefrontal cortices and amygdala to assume a particular state profile, whose result is subsequently signaled to the somatosensory cortex, attended, and made conscious. In the alternative mechanism the body is bypassed and the prefrontal cortices and amygdala merely tell the somatosensory cortex to organize itself in the explicit activity pattern that it would have assumed had the body been placed in the desired state and signaled upward accordingly. The somato­sensory cortex works as if it were receiving signals about a particular body state, and although the "as if" activity pattern cannot be pre­cisely the same as the activity pattern generated by a real body state, it may still influence decision making. 
"As if" mechanisms are a result of development. It is likely that as we were being socially "tuned" in infancy and childhood, most of our decision making was shaped by somatic states related to punishment and reward. But as we matured and repeated situations were cate­gorized, the need to rely on somatic states for every instance of decision making decreased, and yet another level of economic auto­mation developed. Decision-making strategies began depending in part on "symbols" of somatic states. To what extent we depend on such "as if" symbols rather than on the real thing is an important empirical question. I believe this dependence varies widely, from person to person, and from topic to topic. Symbolic processing may be advantageous or pernicious, depending on the topic and the circumstances. 
OVERT AND COVERT SOMAT IC MARKERS 
The somatic marker itself has more than one avenue of action; it has one through consciousness and another outside consciousness.
Whether body states are real or vicarious ("as if"), the correspond­ing neural pattern can be made conscious and constitute a feel­ing. However, although many important choices involve feelings, a good number of our daily decisions apparently proceed without feelings. That does not mean that the evaluation that normally leads to a body state has not taken place; or that the body state or its vicarious surrogate has not been engaged; or that the regulatory dispositional machinery underlying the process has not been acti­vated. Quite simply, a signal body state or its surrogate may have been activated but not been made the focus of attention. Without attention, neither will be part of consciousness, although either can be part of a covert action on the mechanisms that govern, without willful control, our appetitive (approach) or aversive (withdrawal) attitudes toward the world. While the hidden machinery underneath has been activated, our consciousness will never know it. Moreover, triggering of activity from neurotransmitter nuclei, which I de­scribed as one part of the emotional response, can bias cognitive processes in a covert manner and thus influence the reasoning and decision-making mode. 
With due respect for humans and with all the caution that should be associated with comparisons across species, it is apparent that in organisms whose brains do not provide for consciousness and rea­soning, covert mechanisms are the core of the decision-making apparatus. They are a means to build "predictions" of outcome and bias the organism's action devices for behaving in a particular way, which may appear to the external observer as a choice. This is, in all likelihood, how worker bumblebees "decide" on which flowers they should land in order to obtain the nectar they need to bring back to the hive. I am not proposing that deep inside each of our brains there is a bee brain deciding for us. Evolution is not the Great Chain of Being, and it has obviously taken many separate roads, one of which led to us. But I believe much can be gained by studying how simpler organisms perform such seemingly complicated tasks with modest neural means. Some mechanisms of the same type may operate in us too. That is all.”
(Antonio Damasio, Descartes Error, 1994)

DAMASIO DEFINES INTUITION AS THE RESULT OF "COVERT" SOMATIC MARKERS THAT OPERATE "OUTSIDE CONSCIOUSNESS" TO GUIDE OUR THINKING.
“INTUITION 
Acting at a conscious level, somatic states (or their surrogates) would mark outcomes of responses as positive or negative and thus lead to deliberate avoidance or pursuit of a given response option. But they may also operate covertly, that is, outside consciousness. The explicit imagery related to a negative outcome would be generated, but instead of producing a perceptible body-state change, it would in­hibit the regulatory neural circuits located in the brain core, which mediate appetitive, or approach, behaviors. With the inhibition of the tendency to act, or actual enhancement of the tendency to withdraw, the chances of a potentially negative decision would be reduced. In the very least, there would be a gain of time, during which conscious deliberation might increase the probability of making an appropriate (if not the most appropriate) decision. Moreover, a negative option might be voided altogether, or a highly positive one made more likely by enhancement of the impulse to act. This covert mechanism would be the source of what we call intuition, the mysterious mechanism by which we arrive at the solution of a problem without reasoning toward it. 
The role of intuition in the overall process of making decisions is illuminated in a passage by the mathematician Henri Poincare, whose insight fits the picture I have in mind:
‘In fact, what is mathematical creation? It does not consist in making new combinations with mathematical entities already known. Anyone could do that, but the combinations so made would be infinite in number and most of them absolutely with­out interest. To create consists precisely in not making useless combinations and in making those which are useful and which are only a small minority. Invention is discernment, choice. 
How to make this choice, I have before explained; the mathe­matical facts worthy of being studied are those which, by their analogy with other facts, are capable of leading us to the knowl­edge of a mathematical law, just as experimental facts lead us to the knowledge of a physical law. They are those which reveal to us unsuspected kinship between other facts, long known, but wrongly believed to be strangers to one another. 
Among chosen combinations the most fertile will often be those formed of elements drawn from domains which are far apart. Not that I mean as sufficing for invention the bringing together of objects as disparate as possible; most combinations so formed would be entirely sterile. But certain among them, very rare, are the most fruitful of all. 
To invent, I have said, is to choose; but the word is perhaps not wholly exact. It makes one think of a purchaser before whom are displayed a large number of samples, and who examines them, one after the other, to make a choice. Here the samples would be so numerous that a whole lifetime would not suffice to examine them. This is not the actual state of things. The sterile combina­tions do not even present themselves to the mind of the inventor. Never in the field of his consciousness do combinations appear that are not really useful, except some that he rejects but which have to some extent the characteristics of useful combinations. All goes on as if the inventor were an examiner for the second degree who would only have to question the candidates who had passed a previous examination.’
Poincare's view is similar to the one I am proposing. You do not have to apply reasoning to the entire field of possible options. A preselec­tion is carried out for you, sometimes covertly, sometimes not. A biological mechanism makes the preselection, examines candidates, and allows only a few to present themselves for a final exam. This proposal, it should be noted, is intended cautiously for the personal and social domain for which I have supporting evidence, although Poincare's insight suggests that the proposal might be extended to other domains. 
The physicist and biologist Leo Szilard made a similar point: "The creative scientist has much in common with the artist and the poet. Logical thinking and an analytical ability are necessary attributes to a scientist, but they are far from sufficient for creative work. Those in;ights in science that have led to a breakthrough were not logically derived from preexisting knowledge: The creative processes on which the progress of science is based operate on the level of the subconscious."' Jonas Salk has forcefully articulated the same in­sight and proposed that creativity rests on a "merging of intuition and reason." It is thus appropriate at this point to say a word about reasoning outside the personal and social realm.”
(Antonio Damasio, Descartes Error, 1994)

"BIOLOGICAL DRIVES SUCH AS OBEDIENCE, CONFORMITY, THE DESIRE TO PRESERVE SELF-ESTEEM" ARE EVOLUTIONARY INHERITANCES THAT MANIFEST AS EMOTIONS AND CAN OVERRIDE OUR "COOL" REASON. Failures of reason are often not just logical errors but are the result of these powerful, ancient, and often unconscious emotional systems hijacking the reasoning process.
“Evolution is thrifty and tinkering. It has had available, in the brains of numerous species, decision-making mechanisms that are body-based and survival-oriented, and those mechanisms have proven successful in a variety of ecological niches. As the environ­mental contingencies increased and as new decision strategies evolved, it would have made economical sense if the brain structures required to support such new strategies would retain a functional link to their forerunners. Their purpose is the same, survival, and the parameters that control their operation and measure their success are also the same: well-being, absence of pain. Examples abound to demonstrate that natural selection tends to work precisely this way, by conserving something that works, by selecting other devices which can cope with greater complexity, rarely evolving entirely new mechanisms from scratch. 
It is plausible that a system geared to produce markers and signposts to guide "personal" and "social" responses would have been co-opted to assist with "other" decision making. The machinery that helps you decide whom to befriend would also help you design a house in which the basement will not flood. Naturally, somatic markers would not need to be perceived as "feelings." But they would still act covertly to highlight, in the form of an attentional mecha­nism, certain components over others, and to control, in effect, the go, stop, and turn signals necessary for some aspects of decision making and planning in nonpersonal, nonsocial domains. This seems the kind of general marker device that Tim Shallice has proposed for decision making, although he has not specified a neu­rophysiological mechanism for his markers; in a recent article, Shal­lice comments on a possible similarity.  The underlying physiology might be the same: body-based signaling, conscious or not, on the basis of which attention can be focused. 
From an evolutionary perspective, the oldest decision-making device pertains to basic biological regulation; the next, to the per­sonal and social realm; and the most recent, to a collection of abstract-symbolic operations under which we can find artistic and scientific reasoning, utilitarian-engineering reasoning, and the de­velopments of language and mathematics. But although ages of evolution and dedicated neural systems may confer some indepen­dence to each of these reasoning/decision-making "modules," I sus­pect they are all interdependent. When we witness signs of creativity in contemporary humans, we are probably witnessing the integrated operation of sundry combinations of these devices. […]
Although I believe a body-based mechanism is needed to assist " cool" reason, it is also true that some of those body­based signals can impair the quality of reasoning. Reflecting on the investigations of Kahneman and Tversky, I see some failures of rationality as not just due to a primary calculation weakness, but also due to the influence of biological drives such as obedience, confor­mity, the desire to preserve self-esteem, which are often manifest as emotions and feelings.”
(Antonio Damasio, Descartes Error, 1994)

E2.2.B.3.2.e.  EACH THOUGHT IS BORN AN OWNER OF THE THOUGHTS THAT WENT BEFORE, AND “DIES OWNED, TRANSMITTING WHATEVER IT REALIZED AS ITS SELF TO ITS OWN LATER PROPRIETOR.
“As I write, I am sitting at a café on Seventh Avenue, watching the world go by. My attention and focus dart to and fro: a girl in a red dress goes by, a man walking a funny dog, the sun (at last!) emerging from the clouds. But there are also other sensations that seem to come by themselves: the noise of a car backfiring, the smell of cigarette smoke as an upwind neighbor lights up. These are all events which catch my attention for a moment as they happen. Why, out of a thousand possible perceptions, are these the ones I seize upon? Reflections, memories, associations, lie behind them. For consciousness is always active and selective — charged with feelings and meanings uniquely our own, informing our choices and interfusing our perceptions. So it is not just Seventh Avenue that I see but *my* Seventh Avenue, marked by my own selfhood and identity. […]

We deceive ourselves if we imagine that we can ever be passive, impartial observers. Every perception, every scene, is shaped by us, whether we intend it or know it, or not. We are the directors of the film we are making — but we are its subjects too: every frame, every moment, is us, is ours.

But how then do our frames, our momentary moments, hold together? How, if there is only transience, do we achieve continuity? […]

Our passing thoughts, as William James says (in an image that smacks of cowboy life in the 1880s), do not wander round like wild cattle. Each one is owned and bears the brand of this ownership, and each thought, in James’s words, is born an owner of the thoughts that went before, and “dies owned, transmitting whatever it realized as its Self to its own later proprietor.” So it is not just perceptual moments, simple physiological moments — though these underlie everything else — but moments of an essentially personal kind that seem to constitute our very being… We consist entirely of “a collection of moments,” even though these flow into one another like Borges’s river.”
(Oliver Sacks, The River of Consciousness, 2017)

E2.2.B.3.2.f.  PLATO ARGUMENTS THAT HUMAN CHARACTER AND BEHAVIOR ARE DETERMINED BY THE INTERPLAY BETWEEN DIFFERENT "PARTS" OF THE SOUL: REASON (TO LOGISTIKON) AND APPETITE (TO EPITHYMETIKON). This psychological determinism is the direct justification for Plato's rigid, hierarchical social order. The "whole structure of society" is based on the idea that different people have different dominant psychic parts, and their place in society should be determined accordingly.
“Analysis of society has already shown us that there are three main social functions, the deliberative or governing, the protective and executive and the productive ; and the good of society has been seen to depend upon these functions being kept distinct and upon each being rightly performed. Can we discover any deeper reason for this organization of society ? Is the distribution of functions dependent on the constitution of human nature? If so, shall we not find that the right performance of function on the part of society is dependent upon a corresponding performance of function on the part of the souls of individuals, and that justice and the other virtues, which, as we have so far seen them, consist in certain relations between certain kinds of men in the state, are the expression of corresponding relations between certain  elements in the soul of man? Justice, Plato lays down,  must be the same so far as its form goes (or, as we  should say, must be in principle the same), whether  it is manifested in the state or in a single man, that  is to say, we may expect to find in the right performance of function by the soul some similar principle to  that which governs the right performance of function  by the state.  
In beginning this discussion Plato tells us that he is dissatisfied with the method by which he is seeking  to define justice, and further on in the Republic he comes  back to this passage (504 A sq.).  However, the method  is in accordance with that of other parts of the book ;  it consists partly in appealing to popular conceptions,  refining on them and developing them, partly in applying a preconceived principle of his own by which he  criticizes th~. In the first place, he tells us, it is  a truism that the character of a nation or a state is the  character of individual men in it.  Men belonging to  the various nations, which came within the field of his  observation (Greeks, Scythians and Thracians, Phoenicians and Egyptians), exhibit the dispositions and the  characteristic activities which are the marks of the  several classes of which the state is composed. The real  question, he says, is whether in the various activities or  functions of the soul, which are characteristic of particular classes or particular nations, the whole soul is  active, or only a form or part of the soul.  What  makes him think this question so important?  If it  turned out that the whole soul was equally involved in  each of these various activities (each of which is specially  characteristic of the functions of one social class), the  question would arise whether any one soul could not  equally well be employed upon any one of these social  functions, and whether any one man could not equally  well be a governor or a soldier or a trader. The whole  structure of society, as Plato conceives it, is based upon  the fact that the activities in question are activities of  different 'parts' of the soul, and that, though each of  these parts is present in a degree in every man, the  different parts are very differently developed in different  men. 
To determine this question Plato first ( 436 B sq.) lays  down a general principle, which is an application of  what is sometimes called the Law of Identity and Contradiction, and which he formulates thus: the same  thing cannot act or be acted upon in the same part of it  and at the same time in opposite ways.  To apply  this to the soul ; do we find in it certain forms of  action or reaction taking place at the same time  and towards the same thing, which are mutually exclusive and opposite to one other? Appetite generally,  he answers, may be defined as a form of assenting to  something, drawing something to ourselves, or reaching out towards something; if, then, we ever find in  the soul an activity, the direct opposite to this, manifested at the same time and in regard to the same  object, we must infer that there are two different  agents present, two different forms of soul.  Now as  a matter of fact we are familiar with this phenomenon.  We often find ourselves, for example, desiring to drink  and at the same time reflecting that it is better not to, and  we must conclude that the element of desire or appetite […] which attracts us to the  drink, and the element of reason […] which holds us back from it, are two distinct parts or forms of the soul .”
(Richard Lewis Nettleship, Lectures on the Republic of Plato, 1901)

FOR PLATO, A "SELF-CONTROLLED MAN" IS ONE "IN WHOSE SOUL THERE IS HARMONY AND NO INTERNAL CONFLICT" BECAUSE EACH PART IS PERFORMING ITS PROPER FUNCTION. This internal architecture of the soul is the direct parallel and justification for the external architecture of the state. "Real justice" is when the outward action of "doing one's own business" in the city is a direct expression of this correct internal order.
“The virtues of society  consisted in the ways in which different classes of men  with ce1-tain functions in society performed those functions. The organization of society, owing to which they  had these functions in it, depended upon the fact that  certain characteristics were dominant in certain men,  just as different nations too are distinguished from one  another by the predominance of one or other of the  same characteristics, the fighting spirit being dominant  in one, the commercial spirit and the desire for material  prosperity in another.  But while different classes and  races of men thus differ, there is no human being in  whom these characteristic things exist alone; no human  being is all appetite, or all ' spirit,' or all philosophy.  And so morality, beyond implying the performance by  each individual of the function in society to which, in a well-ordered state at any rate, the dominant element  in his soul assigns him, means also certain modes of  action and certain mutual relations on the part of these  fundamental forms of psychical activity in the individual.  A happy instinct, Plato says, has from the first led us  on the track of justice. We dreamt that the principle of  'doing one's own business' […], spoken  of first in its simple economic sense, was justice.  It  proves to have been an ' image,' an outward expression  of justice.  Real justice means not the mere doing of  one's own business in the state, but such outward doing  of one's own business as is an expression of a corresponding mode of action within the soul ; if the outward action  is really just, it means that the soul is just within, that  like a just state the whole soul and the several parts  of it perform their proper functions in relation to one  another.  In all points the virtue of a well-constituted  state is shown to be identical in principle with the virtue  of a healthy individual soul.  When we call a man wise,  we mean he has the power of understanding what is for  his real interest as a whole man; when we call a state  wise, we ought to mean that the men who have the gift  for governing have their understandings entirely set  upon the interest of the whole state.  Again, a brave  man is one who has the courage of his opinions, that is,  one who will carry out his principles, whether those  principles are the result of his own reason or received  from others; and a brave state is one where the men  who have to defend it, have the courage to carry out  the laws and principles imposed by constituted authority.  Again, by a temperate or self-controlled man we mean  not merely one who governs his appetites, but one in  whose soul there is harmony and no internal conflict. between different parts of his nature ; and by a self-controlled state we mean one in which social order is not merely preserved by the army and police, but rests upon general agreement. Lastly, a man is found just in all relations of life in so far as the different elements of his nature are doing their own business, in so far, that is, as he is really one man and not many; and a state is just when it is a united whole, in which each class is set upon doing that which (looking at the interests of the community at large) it can do best. Thus the virtues of the state, which are the modes of action of the citizens in their public capacity, are, when traced to their source, the expression of a certain condition of their souls, which Plato calls justice in the soul. And further, this inward condition of the soul and the constitution of society, which is its outward expression, are so far one in principle that each consists in the proper discharge of function by distinct parts in a single whole.
Under all the forms which the argument in the later Books of the Republic takes, the chief object in which Plato is interested is to work out this conception of the healthy constitution of the soul.”
(Richard Lewis Nettleship, Lectures on the Republic of Plato, 1901)

E2.2.B.3.2.g. OUR "IMPLICIT BELIEFS" AND "EXPECTATIONS"—WHICH ARE FORMED BY OUR "PAST EXPERIENCES" AND THE LABELS SOCIETY APPLIES TO US—CAN DETERMINE OUR PHYSIOLOGICAL OUTCOMES.
“"HOW MUCH DO OUR THOUGHTS SHAPE OUR HEALTH?
The way we think about time, aging and sickness may influence our health, behavior and general well-being in surprising ways […]
We found that wounds healed faster when participants believed more time had passed and slower when they believed less time had passed—even though the actual elapsed time was the same in every case. We are now in the process of replicating and extending this finding to people recovering from hernia surgery, cataract surgery and dental surgery.
Our implicit beliefs about time are not the only thing we can change to improve our health—our research suggests we should also think more mindfully about categories and diagnostic labels. For example, when we spoke with endocrinologists, they agreed that there was no relevant difference between someone who measured a 5.6 percent or 5.7 percent on a hemoglobin test called A1C, which measures blood sugar levels. But a line must be drawn somewhere, and standard medical protocol is to consider anyone with an A1C level below 5.7 percent as having “normal” levels and anyone above that point as “prediabetic.” In a study that was recently accepted for publication, we compared data from 3,984 people who scored a 5.6 percent or 5.7 percent and found a significant difference in their ensuing medical trajectory. Those who got the prediabetic label experienced significantly greater increases in A1C results over the ensuing 10 years and had a significantly higher tendency to develop diabetes. Because the two groups were essentially the same at the start, the most reasonable conclusion is that subsequent differences were the result of the diagnostic label.
While it’s worth noting that doctors may have treated these people differently once they received the prediabetic label, many endocrinologists told us that they generally give patients with either a 5.6 or 5.7 percent score the same advice: they note that the patient’s blood glucose level is a little high and suggest that lifestyle changes could help. We therefore suspect people with this classification tended to have different expectations for themselves—even though, initially, people in both groups had comparable blood sugar levels on the high side of normal. We dubbed this tendency for otherwise comparable people to fall victim to the diagnostic label they are given “the borderline effect”: when we set a threshold for a specific medical condition, people immediately above that borderline and those immediately below it may be essentially the same, but after the label is applied, they leave with very different impressions of their health.
Taken together, this work suggests that people can think themselves sick when they could otherwise be healthy and that they can also think themselves well. Each person goes through life acquiring various beliefs about how their body works and what it means to be healthy. Often these ideas reflect our core assumptions about the world and affect us with little conscious awareness. Much as someone can develop preferences or biases based on past experience, our research suggests that people also develop implicit beliefs that affect their health. For instance, a person may think they can spot the signs that they are getting sick or older. Their expectations, which structure how they feel, what they think and what they do, shape what happens next.”
(Ellen Langer & Peter Aungle, Scientific American, May 3, 2024)

Read it in Scientific American:
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-much-do-our-thoughts-shape-our-health/

E2.2.B.3.3. The Tyranny of the Unconscious: Manifestations and Defenses. What happens when unconscious, programmed forces take control, overriding the conscious will.

E2.2.B.3.3.a. "NON-ASSERTION OF OUR RIGHTS.—The exertion of power is laborious and demands courage. That is why so many do not assert their most valid rights, because their rights are a kind of power, and they are too lazy or too cowardly to exercise them. Indulgence and patience are the names given to the virtues that cloak these faults.
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human, Aphorism 251, 1878)

E2.2.B.3.3.b. HE EXCELLENTLY SHOWS THAT THERE IS A FALSE IMITATION OF GOD IN SIN; AND HE SEARCHES FOR IT IN HIS THEFT.
"What then did wretched I so love in thee, thou theft of mine, thou deed of darkness, in that sixteenth year of my age? Lovely thou wert not, because thou wert theft. But art thou any thing, that thus I speak to thee? Fair were the pears we stole, because they were Thy creation, Thou fairest of all, Creator of all, Thou good God; God, the sovereign good and my true good. Fair were those pears, but not them did my wretched soul desire; for I had store of better, and those I gathered, only that I might steal. For, when gathered, I flung them away, my only feast therein being my own sin, which I was pleased to enjoy. For if aught of those pears came within my mouth, what sweetened it was the sin. And now, O Lord my God, I enquire what in that theft delighted me; and behold it hath no loveliness; I mean not such loveliness as in justice and wisdom; nor such as is in the mind and memory, and senses, and animal life of man; nor yet as the stars are glorious and beautiful in their orbs; or the earth, or sea, full of embryo-life, replacing by its birth that which decayeth; nay, nor even that false and shadowy beauty which belongeth to deceiving vices.

For so doth pride imitate exaltedness; whereas Thou alone art God exalted over all. Ambition, what seeks it, but honours and glory? whereas Thou alone art to be honoured above all, and glorious for evermore. The cruelty of the great would fain be feared; but who is to be feared but God alone, out of whose power what can be wrested or withdrawn? when, or where, or whither, or by whom? The tendernesses of the wanton would fain be counted love: yet is nothing more tender than Thy charity; nor is aught loved more healthfully than that Thy truth, bright and beautiful above all. Curiosity makes semblance of a desire of knowledge; whereas Thou supremely knowest all. Yea, ignorance and foolishness itself is cloaked under the name of simplicity and uninjuriousness; because nothing is found more single than Thee: and what less injurious, since they are his own works which injure the sinner? Yea, sloth would fain be at rest; but what stable rest besides the Lord? Luxury affects to be called plenty and abundance; but Thou art the fulness and never-failing plenteousness of incorruptible pleasures. Prodigality presents a shadow of liberality: but Thou art the most overflowing Giver of all good. Covetousness would possess many things; and Thou possessest all things. Envy disputes for excellency: what more excellent than Thou? Anger seeks revenge: who revenges more justly than Thou? Fear startles at things unwonted and sudden, which endangers things beloved, and takes forethought for their safety; but to Thee what unwonted or sudden, or who separateth from Thee what Thou lovest? Or where but with Thee is unshaken safety? Grief pines away for things lost, the delight of its desires; because it would have nothing taken from it, as nothing can from Thee.

Thus doth the soul commit fornication, when she turns from Thee, seeking without Thee, what she findeth not pure and untainted, till she returns to Thee. Thus all pervertedly imitate Thee, who remove far from Thee, and lift themselves up against Thee. But even by thus imitating Thee, they imply Thee to be the Creator of all nature; whence there is no place whither altogether to retire from Thee. What then did I love in that theft? and wherein did I even corruptly and pervertedly imitate my Lord? Did I wish even by stealth to do contrary to Thy law, because by power I could not, so that being a prisoner, I might mimic a maimed liberty by doing with impunity things unpermitted me, a darkened likeness of Thy Omnipotency? Behold, Thy servant, fleeing from his Lord, and obtaining a shadow. O rottenness, O monstrousness of life, and depth of death! could I like what I might not, only because I might not?"
(Saint Augustine , Confessions, Book II, 397-400)

"What shall I render unto the Lord, that, whilst my memory recalls these things, my soul is not affrighted at them? I will love Thee, O Lord, and thank Thee, and confess unto Thy name; because Thou hast forgiven me these so great and heinous deeds of mine. To Thy grace I ascribe it, and to Thy mercy, that Thou hast melted away my sins as it were ice. To Thy grace I ascribe also whatsoever I have not done of evil; for what might I not have done, who even loved a sin for its own sake? Yea, all I confess to have been forgiven me; both what evils I committed by my own wilfulness, and what by Thy guidance I committed not. What man is he, who, weighing his own infirmity, dares to ascribe his purity and innocency to his own strength; that so he should love Thee the less, as if he had less needed Thy mercy, whereby Thou remittest sins to those that turn to Thee? For whosoever, called by Thee, followed Thy voice, and avoided those things which he reads me recalling and confessing of myself, let him not scorn me, who being sick, was cured by that Physician, through whose aid it was that he was not, or rather was less, sick: and for this let him love Thee as much, yea and more; since by whom he sees me to have been recovered from such deep consumption of sin, by Him he sees himself to have been from the like consumption of sin preserved.

What fruit had I then (wretched man!) in those things, of the remembrance whereof I am now ashamed? Especially, in that theft which I loved for the theft's sake; and it too was nothing, and therefore the more miserable I, who loved it. Yet alone I had not done it: such was I then, I remember, alone I had never done it. I loved then in it also the company of the accomplices, with whom I did it? I did not then love nothing else but the theft, yea rather I did love nothing else; for that circumstance of the company was also nothing. What is, in truth? who can teach me, save He that enlighteneth my heart, and discovereth its dark corners? What is it which hath come into my mind to enquire, and discuss, and consider? For had I then loved the pears I stole, and wished to enjoy them, I might have done it alone, had the bare commission of the theft sufficed to attain my pleasure; nor needed I have inflamed the itching of my desires by the excitement of accomplices. But since my pleasure was not in those pears, it was in the offence itself, which the company of fellow-sinners occasioned.

What then was this feeling? For of a truth it was too foul: and woe was me, who had it. But yet what was it? Who can understand his errors? It was the sport, which as it were tickled our hearts, that we beguiled those who little thought what we were doing, and much disliked it. Why then was my delight of such sort that I did it not alone? Because none doth ordinarily laugh alone? ordinarily no one; yet laughter sometimes masters men alone and singly when no one whatever is with them, if anything very ludicrous presents itself to their senses or mind. Yet I had not done this alone; alone I had never done it. Behold my God, before Thee, the vivid remembrance of my soul; alone, I had never committed that theft wherein what I stole pleased me not, but that I stole; nor had it alone liked me to do it, nor had I done it. O friendship too unfriendly! thou incomprehensible inveigler of the soul, thou greediness to do mischief out of mirth and wantonness, thou thirst of others' loss, without lust of my own gain or revenge: but when it is said, "Let's go, let's do it," we are ashamed not to be shameless. "
(Saint Augustine , Confessions, Book II, 397-400)

E2.2.B.3.3.c.  In Ruben Östlund's film, Force majeure (2014), Tomas lies to himself tryng to escape form the coward reaction he had at the beginning of the film. When he admits it, he can't live with it.

Look for the scenes: Avalanche > Tomas' first refusal in the hallway > Second refusal in the restaurant > Watching the film with the couple: confrontation with reality > Tomas cries > Tomas screams in the mountains > Tomas' nervous breakdown, unable to cope with himself

The story of Tomas in Force Majeure is a powerful narrative illustration of Psychological Determinism.

Impact of a Single Past Experience: The entire film revolves around a single, pivotal "past experience": Tomas's instinctual, cowardly reaction to flee from an avalanche, abandoning his family [00:03]. This one event becomes the absolute center of his personal history, and every subsequent action is determined by it.

Denial as a Psychological Defense: Tomas's immediate response is to lie and deny the reality of his action, both to others and to himself. The confrontation scene shows him repeatedly refusing to acknowledge what he did, even when his wife insists he take responsibility [01:21]. This denial is a psychological defense mechanism, an attempt to protect his self-image as a husband and father from a truth his psyche cannot handle.

Present Choices Determined by the Past: All of Tomas's "present choices" following the event—his arguments, his defensiveness, his eventual emotional breakdown—are not free actions but are psychologically determined reactions to that one moment. He is trapped by his past, and his inability to integrate this unflattering truth about himself leads to the complete unraveling of his identity. His breakdown shows that, as the text says, once he is forced to admit the truth, he "can't live with it," demonstrating the overwhelming power of this psychological determinism.

Watch on eof the confrontation scene on YouTube: https://youtu.be/BtH2YSD7kNE?si=iNknGAdCI6z7bNEm

E2.2.B.3.3.d. LYING CAN ALSO SAVE US (IF NOT LIBERATE US)!
In Ang Lee's movie, Life of Pi (2011), the tiger on the boat does not exist. Pi murdered the cook, who was like a hyena. Pi was desperate after seeing the cook kill his mother, who was like an orangutan, and the zebra.
The tiger was "sleeping" under the boat's tarpaulin and only woke up after Pi witnessed the murder of his mother.
At first, Pi is terrified of the "tiger," but little by little, he "tames" it. Once back in the human world, the "tiger" inside Pi disappears into the forest without looking back. Pi must forget what happened on the boat to preserve his sanity.

E2.2.B.3.3.e. P_Eddo Hartmann_Setting the Stage, Pyongyang, North Korea_2014

"Disillusionment, desengaño as the Spaniards say, is a remedy worse than the disease it claims to cure and almost always results in a strengthening of the illusion. A stubborn supporter of any ideology will always be, not preoccupied as one might expect, but rather reassured and reinforced in his belief by the failure of this same ideology, as François Furet shows in his work on the communist ideal in the 20th century : the communist illusion is in no way defeated, but on the contrary emerges reinforced by the succession of its historical disappointments. Any man who admits to being wrong is more than ever entrenched into his own error, in the same way a madman who declares himself cured has only risen in rank in the hierarchy of his own madness. Everyone knows this. What we know less, and that I admit ignoring myself, is the secret of the psychological mechanism which explains why unveiled illusions tend to reaffirm their grip on the subject. [...] The misguided mind persists in its mad rush forward, which it worsens when it comes to new crossroads."
(Clément Rosset, The Demon of Tautology, 1997)

E2.2.B.3.3.f. Vincent van Gogh_Prisoners exercising, 1890
"There is little doubt about the significance of this painting that was done in February 1890, at a particularly troubled time in Van Gogh's life. He was severely depressed and desperate to leave the stultifying environs of the asylum at Saint-Remy, but it had been decided that he would not be fit to cope alone until the spring. His feelings of being physically trapped, and mentally caught in a perpetual cycle of mental illness beyond his control are clearly evident.
Prisoners Exercising was actually made after a print of Newgate Prison in London by Dore, whose work Van Gogh had admired for some years. Van Gogh had begun to collect graphic illustrations from magazines in the early 1880s, and added prints of Doumier, Paul Gavami (1804-66) and Dore to his collection. He then referred to these works in later years (as well as multiple prints of Millet's paintings), often making several copies of a single image. The prints were in block and white, so Van Gogh improvised with the color, and gave the paintings his own visual interpretation."
(Wikipaintings)


Art:
- Vincent van Gogh_Prisoners exercising, 1890

E2.2.B.3.3.g. "IT WAS THE PASSIONS ABOUT WHOSE ORIGIN WE DECEIVED OURSELVES THAT TYRANNIZED MOST STRONGLY OVER US."
“Soul and body, body and soul—how mysterious they were! There was animalism in the soul, and the body had its moments of spirituality. The senses could refine, and the intellect could degrade. Who could say where the fleshly impulse ceased, or the psychical impulse began? How shallow were the arbitrary definitions of ordinary psychologists! And yet how difficult to decide between the claims of the various schools! Was the soul a shadow seated in the house of sin? Or was the body really in the soul, as Giordano Bruno thought? The separation of spirit from matter was a mystery, and the union of spirit with matter was a mystery also.

He began to wonder whether we could ever make psychology so absolute a science that each little spring of life would be revealed to us. As it was, we always misunderstood ourselves and rarely understood others. Experience was of no ethical value. It was merely the name men gave to their mistakes. Moralists had, as a rule, regarded it as a mode of warning, had claimed for it a certain ethical efficacy in the formation of character, had praised it as something that taught us what to follow and showed us what to avoid. But there was no motive power in experience. It was as little of an active cause as conscience itself. All that it really demonstrated was that our future would be the same as our past, and that the sin we had done once, and with loathing, we would do many times, and with joy.

It was clear to him that the experimental method was the only method by which one could arrive at any scientific analysis of the passions; and certainly Dorian Gray was a subject made to his hand, and seemed to promise rich and fruitful results. His sudden mad love for Sibyl Vane was a psychological phenomenon of no small interest. There was no doubt that curiosity had much to do with it, curiosity and the desire for new experiences, yet it was not a simple, but rather a very complex passion. What there was in it of the purely sensuous instinct of boyhood had been transformed by the workings of the imagination, changed into something that seemed to the lad himself to be remote from sense, and was for that very reason all the more dangerous. It was the passions about whose origin we deceived ourselves that tyrannized most strongly over us. Our weakest motives were those of whose nature we were conscious. It often happened that when we thought we were experimenting on others we were really experimenting on ourselves.”
(Oscar Wilde, The Picture of Dorian Gray, 1890)

DORIAN EXPLICITLY IDENTIFIES THE SOURCE OF THIS INEVITABILITY WITHIN HIS OWN PSYCHE. HE KNOWS THERE ARE "PASSIONS IN HIM THAT WOULD FIND THEIR TERRIBLE OUTLET" AND "POISONOUS INFLUENCES THAT CAME FROM HIS OWN TEMPERAMENT."
“As the door closed, Dorian put the key in his pocket and looked round the room. His eye fell on a large, purple satin coverlet heavily embroidered with gold, a splendid piece of late seventeenth-century Venetian work that his grandfather had found in a convent near Bologna. Yes, that would serve to wrap the dreadful thing in. It had perhaps served often as a pall for the dead. Now it was to hide something that had a corruption of its own, worse than the corruption of death itself—something that would breed horrors and yet would never die. What the worm was to the corpse, his sins would be to the painted image on the canvas. They would mar its beauty and eat away its grace. They would defile it and make it shameful. And yet the thing would still live on. It would be always alive.
He shuddered, and for a moment he regretted that he had not told Basil the true reason why he had wished to hide the picture away. Basil would have helped him to resist Lord Henry’s influence, and the still more poisonous influences that came from his own temperament. The love that he bore him—for it was really love—had nothing in it that was not noble and intellectual. It was not that mere physical admiration of beauty that is born of the senses and that dies when the senses tire. It was such love as Michelangelo had known, and Montaigne, and Winckelmann, and Shakespeare himself. Yes, Basil could have saved him. But it was too late now. The past could always be annihilated. Regret, denial, or forgetfulness could do that. But the future was inevitable. There were passions in him that would find their terrible outlet, dreams that would make the shadow of their evil real.”
(Oscar Wilde, The Picture of Dorian Gray, 1890)

AFTER BRIEFLY CONTEMPLATING HIS RESPONSIBILITY FOR A RUINED LIFE, DORIAN GRAY CALLOUSLY DISMISSES IT AND IS DESCRIBED AS BEING "CONCENTRATED ON EVIL" AS "FEARFUL IMPULSES" TAKE OVER "EVERY FIBRE OF THE BODY, AS EVERY CELL OF THE BRAIN."
“Dorian Gray hurried along the quay through the drizzling rain. His meeting with Adrian Singleton had strangely moved him, and he wondered if the ruin of that young life was really to be laid at his door, as Basil Hallward had said to him with such infamy of insult. He bit his lip, and for a few seconds his eyes grew sad. Yet, after all, what did it matter to him? One’s days were too brief to take the burden of another’s errors on one’s shoulders. Each man lived his own life and paid his own price for living it. The only pity was one had to pay so often for a single fault. One had to pay over and over again, indeed. In her dealings with man, destiny never closed her accounts.
There are moments, psychologists tell us, when the passion for sin, or for what the world calls sin, so dominates a nature that every fibre of the body, as every cell of the brain, seems to be instinct with fearful impulses. Men and women at such moments lose the freedom of their will. They move to their terrible end as automatons move. Choice is taken from them, and conscience is either killed, or, if it lives at all, lives but to give rebellion its fascination and disobedience its charm. For all sins, as theologians weary not of reminding us, are sins of disobedience. When that high spirit, that morning star of evil, fell from heaven, it was as a rebel that he fell.
Callous, concentrated on evil, with stained mind, and soul hungry for rebellion, Dorian Gray hastened on, quickening his step as he went.”
(Oscar Wilde, The Picture of Dorian Gray, 1890)

E2.2.B.3.3.h. TOMAS REALIZES THAT WHAT HE CONSIDERED AN EXPRESSION OF HIS FREEDOM—HIS WOMANIZING—IS IN FACT A POWERFUL PSYCHOLOGICAL IMPERATIVE ENSLAVING HIM.
“"Prague has grown so ugly lately," said Tereza.
"I know," said Tomas.
Tereza paused and said softly, "The best thing to do would be to move away."
"I agree," said Tomas, "but there's nowhere to go."
He was sitting on the bed in his pajamas, and she came and sat down next to him, putting her arms around his body from the side.
"What about the country?" she said.
"The country?" he asked, surprised.
"We'd be alone there. You wouldn't meet that editor or your old colleagues. The people there are different. And we'd be getting back to nature. Nature is the same as it always was."
Just then Tomas felt another stab in his stomach. It made him feel old, feel that what he longed for more than anything else was peace and quiet.
"Maybe you're right," he said with difficulty. The pain made it hard for him to breathe.
"We'd have a little house and a little garden, but big enough to give Karenin room for a decent run."
"Yes," said Tomas.
He was trying to picture what it would be like if they did move to the country. He would have
difficulty finding a new woman every week. It would mean an end to his erotic adventures.
"The only thing is, you'd be bored with me in the country," said Tereza as if reading his mind.
The pain grew more intense. He could not speak. It occurred to him that his womanizing was also something of an "Es muss sein!"—an imperative enslaving him. He longed for a holiday. But for an absolute holiday, a rest from a// imperatives, from all "Es muss sein!" If he could take a rest (a permanent rest) from the hospital operating table, then why not from the world operating table, the one where his imaginary scalpel opened the strongbox women use to hide their illusory one-millionth part dissimilarity?”
(Milan Kundera, The Unbearable Lightness of Being, 1984)

E2.2.B.3.3.i. THE CHARACTER OF MR. HYDE SERVES AS ONE OF LITERATURE'S MOST POWERFUL METAPHORS FOR A DESTRUCTIVE, UNCONSCIOUS PART OF THE PSYCHE.
“Yes, I preferred the elderly and discontented doctor, surrounded by friends and cherishing honest hopes; and bade a resolute farewell to the liberty, the comparative youth, the light step, leaping impulses and secret pleasures, that I had enjoyed in the disguise of Hyde. I made this choice perhaps with some unconscious reservation, for I neither gave up the house in Soho, nor destroyed the clothes of Edward Hyde, which still lay ready in my cabinet. For two months, however, I was true to my determination; for two months, I led a life of such severity as I had never before attained to, and enjoyed the compensations of an approving conscience. But time began at last to obliterate the freshness of my alarm; the praises of conscience began to grow into a thing of course; I began to be tortured with throes and longings, as of Hyde struggling after freedom; and at last, in an hour of moral weakness, I once again compounded and swallowed the transforming draught.
I do not suppose that, when a drunkard reasons with himself upon his vice, he is once out of five hundred times affected by the dangers that he runs through his brutish, physical insensibility; neither had I, long as I had considered my position, made enough allowance for the complete moral insensibility and insensate readiness to evil, which were the leading characters of Edward Hyde. Yet it was by these that I was punished. My devil had been long caged, he came out roaring. I was conscious, even when I took the draught, of a more unbridled, a more furious propensity to ill. It must have been this, I suppose, that stirred in my soul that tempest of impatience with which I listened to the civilities of my unhappy victim; I declare, at least, before God, no man morally sane could have been guilty of that crime upon so pitiful a provocation; and that I struck in no more reasonable spirit than that in which a sick child may break a plaything. But I had voluntarily stripped myself of all those balancing instincts by which even the worst of us continues to walk with some degree of steadiness among temptations; and in my case, to be tempted, however slightly, was to fall.
Instantly the spirit of hell awoke in me and raged. With a transport of glee, I mauled the unresisting body, tasting delight from every blow; and it was not till weariness had begun to succeed, that I was suddenly, in the top fit of my delirium, struck through the heart by a cold thrill of terror. A mist dispersed; I saw my life to be forfeit; and fled from the scene of these excesses, at once glorying and trembling, my lust of evil gratified and stimulated, my love of life screwed to the topmost peg. I ran to the house in Soho, and (to make assurance doubly sure) destroyed my papers; thence I set out through the lamplit streets, in the same divided ecstasy of mind, gloating on my crime, light-headedly devising others in the future, and yet still hastening and still hearkening in my wake for the steps of the avenger.
Hyde had a song upon his lips as he compounded the draught, and as he drank it, pledged the dead man. The pangs of transformation had not done tearing him, before Henry Jekyll, with streaming tears of gratitude and remorse, had fallen upon his knees and lifted his clasped hands to God. The veil of self-indulgence was rent from head to foot. I saw my life as a whole: I followed it up from the days of childhood, when I had walked with my father’s hand, and through the self-denying toils of my professional life, to arrive again and again, with the same sense of unreality, at the damned horrors of the evening. I could have screamed aloud; I sought with tears and prayers to smother down the crowd of hideous images and sounds with which my memory swarmed against me; and still, between the petitions, the ugly face of my iniquity stared into my soul. As the acuteness of this remorse began to die away, it was succeeded by a sense of joy. The problem of my conduct was solved. Hyde was thenceforth impossible; whether I would or not, I was now confined to the better part of my existence; and O, how I rejoiced to think of it! with what willing humility I embraced anew the restrictions of natural life! with what sincere renunciation I locked the door by which I had so often gone and come, and ground the key under my heel!”
(Robert Louis Stevenson, The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde, 1886)

THE CHARACTER OF DR JEKYLL DESCRIBES THE "HORROR OF BEING HYDE," THE "CONTINUALLY IMPENDING DOOM," AND THE MUTUAL HATRED THAT NOW DEFINES THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE TWO PERSONAS. IT IS A PORTRAIT OF A MIND AT WAR WITH ITSELF.
“When I came to myself at Lanyon’s, the horror of my old friend perhaps affected me somewhat: I do not know; it was at least but a drop in the sea to the abhorrence with which I looked back upon these hours. A change had come over me. It was no longer the fear of the gallows, it was the horror of being Hyde that racked me. I received Lanyon’s condemnation partly in a dream; it was partly in a dream that I came home to my own house and got into bed. I slept after the prostration of the day, with a stringent and profound slumber which not even the nightmares that wrung me could avail to break. I awoke in the morning shaken, weakened, but refreshed. I still hated and feared the thought of the brute that slept within me, and I had not of course forgotten the appalling dangers of the day before; but I was once more at home, in my own house and close to my drugs; and gratitude for my escape shone so strong in my soul that it almost rivalled the brightness of hope.
I was stepping leisurely across the court after breakfast, drinking the chill of the air with pleasure, when I was seized again with those indescribable sensations that heralded the change; and I had but the time to gain the shelter of my cabinet, before I was once again raging and freezing with the passions of Hyde. It took on this occasion a double dose to recall me to myself; and alas! six hours after, as I sat looking sadly in the fire, the pangs returned, and the drug had to be re-administered. In short, from that day forth it seemed only by a great effort as of gymnastics, and only under the immediate stimulation of the drug, that I was able to wear the countenance of Jekyll. At all hours of the day and night, I would be taken with the premonitory shudder; above all, if I slept, or even dozed for a moment in my chair, it was always as Hyde that I awakened. Under the strain of this continually impending doom and by the sleeplessness to which I now condemned myself, ay, even beyond what I had thought possible to man, I became, in my own person, a creature eaten up and emptied by fever, languidly weak both in body and mind, and solely occupied by one thought: the horror of my other self. But when I slept, or when the virtue of the medicine wore off, I would leap almost without transition (for the pangs of transformation grew daily less marked) into the possession of a fancy brimming with images of terror, a soul boiling with causeless hatreds, and a body that seemed not strong enough to contain the raging energies of life. The powers of Hyde seemed to have grown with the sickliness of Jekyll. And certainly the hate that now divided them was equal on each side. With Jekyll, it was a thing of vital instinct. He had now seen the full deformity of that creature that shared with him some of the phenomena of consciousness, and was co-heir with him to death: and beyond these links of community, which in themselves made the most poignant part of his distress, he thought of Hyde, for all his energy of life, as of something not only hellish but inorganic. This was the shocking thing; that the slime of the pit seemed to utter cries and voices; that the amorphous dust gesticulated and sinned; that what was dead, and had no shape, should usurp the offices of life. And this again, that that insurgent horror was knit to him closer than a wife, closer than an eye; lay caged in his flesh, where he heard it mutter and felt it struggle to be born; and at every hour of weakness, and in the confidence of slumber, prevailed against him, and deposed him out of life. The hatred of Hyde for Jekyll was of a different order. His terror of the gallows drove him continually to commit temporary suicide, and return to his subordinate station of a part instead of a person; but he loathed the necessity, he loathed the despondency into which Jekyll was now fallen, and he resented the dislike with which he was himself regarded. Hence the ape-like tricks that he would play me, scrawling in my own hand blasphemies on the pages of my books, burning the letters and destroying the portrait of my father; and indeed, had it not been for his fear of death, he would long ago have ruined himself in order to involve me in the ruin. But his love of life is wonderful; I go further: I, who sicken and freeze at the mere thought of him, when I recall the abjection and passion of this attachment, and when I know how he fears my power to cut him off by suicide, I find it in my heart to pity him.”
(Robert Louis Stevenson, The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde, 1886)

E2.2.B.3.3.j. YEATS IS CONFRONTATED WITH THE POSSIBILITY OF POWERFUL, UNCONSCIOUS FORCES WITHIN THE SELF THAT CAN OVERRIDE THE CONSCIOUS WILL: "A PART OF MYSELF--SOMETHING ALWAYS TO BE A DANGER PERHAPS"
“Perhaps a year before we returned to London, a Catholic friend brought me to a spiritualistic seance at the house of a young man who had been lately arrested under a suspicion of Fenianism, but had been released for lack of evidence. He and his friends had been sitting weekly about a table in the hope of spiritual manifestation and one had developed mediumship. A drawer full of books had leaped out of the table when no one was touching it, a picture had moved upon the wall. There were some half dozen of us, and our host began by making passes until the medium fell asleep sitting upright in his chair. Then the lights were turned out, and we sat waiting in the dim light of a fire. Presently my shoulders began to twitch and my hands. I could easily have stopped them, but I had never heard of such a thing and I was curious. After a few minutes the movement became violent and I stopped it. I sat motionless for a while and then my whole body moved like a suddenly unrolled watch-spring, and I was thrown backward on the wall. I again stilled the movement and sat at the table. Everybody began to say I was a medium, and that if I would not resist some wonderful thing would happen. I remembered that my father had told me that Balzac had once desired to take opium for the experience sake, but would not because he dreaded the surrender of his will. We were now holding each other's hands and presently my right hand banged the knuckles of the woman next to me upon the table. She laughed, and the medium, speaking for the first time, and with difficulty, out of his mesmeric sleep, said, "tell her there is great danger." He stood up and began walking round me, making movements with his hands as though he were pushing something away. I was now struggling vainly with this force which compelled me to movements I had not willed, and my movements had become so violent that the table was broken. I tried to pray, and because I could not remember a prayer, repeated in a loud voice    

Of Man's first disobedience and the fruit   
Of that forbidden tree whose mortal taste   
Brought death into the world and all our woe...   
Sing, heavenly muse.  

My Catholic friend had left the table and was saying a Pater Noster and Ave Maria in the corner. Presently all became still and so dark that I could not see anybody. I described it to somebody next day as like going out of a noisy political meeting on to a quiet country road. I said to myself," I am now in a trance but I no longer have any desire to resist." But when I turned my eyes to the fireplace I could see a faint gleam of light, so I thought "no, I am not in a trance." Then I saw shapes faintly appearing in the darkness & thought, "they are spirits;" but they were only the spiritualists and my friend at her prayers. The medium said in a faint voice, "we are through the bad spirits." I said, "will they ever come again, do you think?" and he said, "no, never again, I think," and in my boyish vanity I thought it was I who had banished them. For years afterwards I would not go to a seance or turn a table and would often ask myself what was that violent impulse that had run through my nerves? was it a part of myself--something always to be a danger perhaps; or had it come from without, as it seemed?”
(William Butler Yeats, Reveries over Childhood and Youth, 1915)

E2.2.B.3.4. The Paradox of Liberation: Redefining Freedom and the Self.

E2.2.B.3.4.a. "Such is the reversible nature of transcendence that we sometimes experience it as freedom and other times as alienation. By projecting myself beyond what I am—anticipating, overflowing, and exceeding myself—I can freely experience myself and almost admit that I am greater than myself. However, like the two sides of a coin, this drive toward other possibilities and this dissidence immediately make me feel the constraints of reality as resistance and limitations. It is by projecting myself beyond myself that I feel smaller. I am alienated by my freedom"
(Nicolas Grimaldi, Ambiguities of Freedom, 1999).

E2.2.B.3.4.b. "FOR NIETZSCHE, WE ARE NOT INDIVIDUALLY RESPONSIBLE FOR OUR INSTINCTS. HE IS A THINKER OF THE INNOCENCE OF BECOMING. He rejects the doctrine of free will because it is not a question of will. Paradoxically, the will to power is not a question of will. Free will is an illusion stemming from our propensity to distinguish between the subject and verb in our Indo-European grammars. There are only forces that tend to intensify depending on the resistance they encounter. We can, of course, try to influence our behavior, but we cannot question the instincts that evolved over much longer periods of time. Nietzsche does not renounce the notion of the responsibility of the sovereign individual who has the right to make promises because he has the capacity to keep them. However, he wants to distinguish between the awareness of responsibility and the awareness of guilt. These two forms of awareness do not have the same origin or genealogy. According to Nietzsche, one can be responsible outside of Judeo-Christian values, which cultivate a sense of guilt. One can be responsible without being guilty.
How should we respond to suffering? Should we respond with guilt or with Judeo-Christian pity? Or should we question the values that are partly the source of this suffering—or at least exacerbate it? This will be Nietzsche's answer.

There is also a tragic joy in Nietzsche's Dionysian philosophy, which calls for affirming the eternity of life beyond the limits of individuality by dispossessing oneself. This implies a change in the temporal scale beyond the individual's destiny. According to Nietzsche, complete liberation necessitates challenging the concept of identity, which is essentially a grammatical construct within a stable society that perpetuates this illusion. In reality, there is merely a continuous flow that crystallizes at certain moments."
(Emmanuel Salanskis on the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on September 11, 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/ce-qui-ne-me-tue-pas-me-rend-plus-fort-9300828

E2.2.B.3.4.c. A_Emily Ponsonby_Waterbed_(1) /Emily Ponsonby/ ; A_Emily Ponsonby_Waterbed_(2) /Emily Ponsonby/
"THE MEANING OF FREEDOM CAN NEVER BE GRASPED BY THE DIVIDED MIND. If I feel separate from my experience, and from the world, freedom will seem to be the extent to which I can push the world around, and fate the extent to which the world pushes me around. But to the whole mind there is no contrast of « I » and the world. There is just one process acting, and it does everything that happens. It raises my little finger and it creates earthquakes. Or, if you want to put it that way, I raise my little finger and also make earthquakes. No one fates and no one is being fated."
(Alan Watts, The Wisdom of Insecurity: A Message for an Age of Anxiety, 1951)

I AM FREE, THE WORLD PROCESS IS FREE, TO DO ANYTHING WHICH IS NOT A CONTRADICTION.
"Of course this is a strange view of freedom. We are accustomed to think that, if there is any freedom at all, it resides, not in nature, but in the separate human will and its power of choice.

But what we ordinarily mean by choice is not freedom. Choices are usually decisions motivated by pleasure and pain, and the divided mind acts with the sole purpose of getting "I" into pleasure and out of pain. But the best pleasures are those for which we do not plan, and the worst part of pain is expecting it and trying to get away from it when it has come. You cannot plan to be happy. You can plan to exist, but in themselves existence and non-existence are neither pleasurable nor painful. I am even assured by doctors that there are circumstances under which death can be a highly pleasant experience.

The sense of not being free comes from trying to do things which are impossible and even meaningless. You are not "free" to draw a square circle, to live without a head, or to stop certain reflex actions. These are not obstacles to freedom; they are the conditions of freedom. I am not free to draw a circle if perchance it should turn out to be a square circle. I am not, thank heaven, free to walk out of doors and leave my head at home. Likewise I am not free to live in any moment but this one, or to separate myself from my feelings. In short I am not free when I am trying to do something contradictory, such as to move without changing position, or to burn my finger without feeling pain. 

On the other hand, I am free, the world process is free, to do anything which is not a contradiction. The question then arises: is it a contradiction, is it impossible, to act or to decide without pleasure as the ultimate aim? The theory that we must inevitably do what gives us the greater pleasure or the lesser pain, is a meaningless assertion based on verbal confusion. To say that I decide to do something because it pleases me says only that I decide to do it because I decide to do it. If "pleasure" is defined in the beginning as "what I prefer," then what I prefer will always be pleasure. If I prefer pain, like a masochist, then pain will be pleasure. In short, the theory begs the question at the start by saying that pleasure means what we desire: therefore anything that we desire is pleasure.

But I fall straight into contradiction when I try to act and decide in order to be happy, when I make "being pleased" my future goal. For the more my actions are directed towards future pleasures, the more I am incapable of enjoying any pleasures at all. For all pleasures are present, and nothing save complete awareness of the present can even begin to guarantee future happiness. I can act in order to eat tomorrow, or take a trip to the mountains next week, but there is really no way of being certain that this will make me happy. On the contrary, it is common experience that nothing ruins a "pleasure" so much as watching yourself in the midst of it to see whether it pleases you. You can only live in one moment at a time, and you cannot think simultaneously about listening to the waves and whether you are enjoying listening to the waves. Contradictions of this kind are the only real types of action without freedom."
(Alan Watts, The Wisdom of Insecurity: A Message for an Age of Anxiety, 1951)

THERE IS ANOTHER THEORY OF DETERMINISM WHICH STATES THAT ALL OUR ACTIONS ARE MOTIVATED BY "UNCONSCIOUS MENTAL MECHANISMS," and that for this reason even the most spontaneous decisions are not free. This is but another example of split-mindedness, for what is the difference between "me" and "mental mechanisms" whether conscious or unconscious? Who is being moved by these processes? The notion that anyone is being motivated comes from the persisting illusion of "I." The real man, the organism in-relation-to-the-universe, is this unconscious motivation. And because he is it, he is not being moved by it. In other words, it is not motivation; it is simply operation. Moreover, there is no "unconscious" mind distinct from the conscious, for the "unconscious" mind is conscious, though not of itself, just as the eyes see but do not see themselves. [...]"
(Alan Watts, The Wisdom of Insecurity: A Message for an Age of Anxiety, 1951)

WHEN I DO NOT TRY TO GET AWAY [FROM FEAR] I DISCOVER THAT THERE IS NOTHING "STUCK" OR FIXED ABOUT THE REALITY OF THE MOMENT.
"If I am afraid, my efforts to feel and act bravely are moved by the fear, for I am afraid of fear, which is simply to say that my efforts to escape from what I am are moving in a circle. Beside the examples of saints and heroes I feel ashamed that I amount to nothing, and so I begin to practice humility because of my wounded pride, and charity because of my self love. The urge is ever to make "I" amount to something. I must be right, good, a real person, heroic, loving, self-effacing. I efface myself in order to assert myself, and give myself away in order to keep myself. The whole thing is a contradiction. [...]

Of course it sounds as if it were the most abject fatalism to have to admit that I am what I am, and that no escape or division is possible. It seems that if I am afraid, then I am "stuck" with fear. But in fact I am chained to the fear only so long as I am trying to get away from it. On the other hand, when I do not try to get away I discover that there is nothing "stuck" or fixed about the reality of the moment. When I am aware of this feeling without naming it, without calling it "fear," "bad," "negative," etc., it changes instantly into something else, and life moves freely ahead. The feeling no longer perpetuates itself by creating the feeler behind it.

We can perhaps see now why the undivided mind is not moved into those escapes from the present which are usually called "evil." The further truth that the undivided mind is aware of experience as a unity, of the world as itself, and that the whole nature of mind and awareness is to be one with what it knows, suggests a state that would usually be called love. For the love that expresses itself in creative action is something much more than an emotion. It is not something which you can "feel" and "know," remember and define. Love is the organizing and unifying principle which makes the world a universe and the disintegrated mass a community. It is the very essence and character of mind, and becomes manifest in action when the mind is whole."
(Alan Watts, The Wisdom of Insecurity: A Message for an Age of Anxiety, 1951)

RELEASED FROM THE CIRCLE OF ATTEMPTED SELF-LOVE, THE MIND OF MAN DRAWS THE WHOLE UNIVERSE INTO ITS OWN UNITY AS A SINGLE DEWDROP SEEMS TO CONTAIN THE ENTIRE SKY. THIS, RATHER THAN ANY MERE EMOTION, IS THE POWER AND PRINCIPLE OF FREE ACTION AND CREATIVE MORALITY.
"We can perhaps see now why the undivided mind is not moved into those escapes from the present which are usually called "evil." The further truth that the undivided mind is aware of experience as a unity, of the world as itself, and that the whole nature of mind and awareness is to be one with what it knows, suggests a state that would usually be called love. For the love that expresses itself in creative action is something much more than an emotion. It is not something which you can "feel" and "know," remember and define. Love is the organizing and unifying principle which makes the world a universe and the disintegrated mass a community. It is the very essence and character of mind, and becomes manifest in action when the mind is whole.

For the mind must be interested or absorbed in something, just as a mirror must always be reflecting something. When it is not trying to be interested in itself - as if a mirror would reflect itself - it must be interested, or absorbed, in other people and things. There is no problem of how to love. We love. We are love, and the only problem is the direction of love, whether it is to go straight out like sunlight, or to try to turn back on itself like a "candle under a bushel."

Released from the circle of attempted self-love, the mind of man draws the whole universe into its own unity as a single dewdrop seems to contain the entire sky. This, rather than any mere emotion, is the power and principle of free action and creative morality. On the other hand, the morality of rules and regulations based on rewards and punishments, even when these are as intangible as the pain of guilt and the pleasure of self-respect, has no relation to free action. It is a way of ruling slaves by "benevolent exploitation" of their illusions, and, however far pursued, can never lead to freedom.

Where there is to be creative action, it is quite beside the point to discuss what we should or should not do in order to be right or good. A mind that is single and sincere is not interested in being good, in conducting relations with other people so as to live up to a rule. Nor, on the other hand, is it interested in being free, in acting perversely just to prove its independence. Its interest is not in itself, but in the people and problems of which it is aware; these are "itself." It acts, not according to the rules, but according to the circumstances of the moment, and the "well" it wishes to others is not security but liberty."
(Alan Watts, The Wisdom of Insecurity: A Message for an Age of Anxiety, 1951)

THERE IS NO FATE UNLESS THERE IS SOMEONE OR SOMETHING TO BE FATED. THUS WHEN THE LINE BETWEEN MYSELF AND WHAT HAPPENS TO ME IS DISSOLVED AND THERE IS NO STRONGHOLD LEFT FOR AN EGO EVEN AS A PASSIVE WITNESS, I FIND MYSELF NOT IN A WORLD BUT AS A WORLD WHICH IS NEITHER COMPULSIVE NOR CAPRICIOUS.
"Just because it is a hoax from the beginning, the personal ego can make only a phony response to life. For the world is an ever-elusive and ever-disappointing mirage only from the standpoint of someone standing aside from it — as if it were quite other than himself — and then trying to grasp it. Without birth and death, and without the perpetual transmutation of all the forms of life, the world would be static, rhythm-less, undancing, mummified.
But a third response is possible. Not withdrawal, not stewardship on the hypothesis of a future reward, but the fullest collaboration with the world as a harmonious system of contained conflicts — based on the realization that the only real “I” is the whole endless process. This realization is already in us in the sense that our bodies know it, our bones and nerves and sense-organs. We do not know it only in the sense that the thin ray of conscious attention has been taught to ignore it, and taught so thoroughly that we are very genuine fakes indeed. [...]
Our practical projects have run into confusion again and again through failure to see that individual people, nations, animals, insects, and plants do not exist in or by themselves. This is not to say only that things exist in relation to one another, but that what we call “things” are no more than glimpses of a unified process. Certainly, this process has distinct features which catch our attention, but we must remember that distinction is not separation. Sharp and clear as the crest of the wave may be, it necessarily “goes with” the smooth and less featured curve of the trough. … In the Gestalt theory of perception this is known as the figure/ground relationship. [...]
The universe implies the organism, and each single organism implies the universe — only the “single glance” of our spotlight, narrowed attention, which has been taught to confuse its glimpses with separate “things,” must somehow be opened to the full vision [...]
There is no fate unless there is someone or something to be fated. There is no trap without someone to be caught. There is, indeed, no compulsion unless there is also freedom of choice, for the sensation of behaving involuntarily is known only by contrast with that of behaving voluntarily. Thus when the line between myself and what happens to me is dissolved and there is no stronghold left for an ego even as a passive witness, I find myself not in a world but as a world which is neither compulsive nor capricious. What happens is neither automatic nor arbitrary: it just happens, and all happenings are mutually interdependent in a way that seems unbelievably harmonious. Every this goes with every that. Without others there is no self, and without somewhere else there is no here, so that — in this sense — self is other and here is there. [...] [Note from Maria Popova:" (Perhaps this is what Gertrude Stein really meant when she wrote “there is no there there.”)"]
In immediate contrast to the old feeling, there is indeed a certain passivity to the sensation, as if you were a leaf blown along by the wind, until you realize that you are both the leaf and the wind. The world outside your skin is just as much you as the world inside: they move together inseparably, and at first you feel a little out of control because the world outside is so much vaster than the world inside. Yet you soon discover that you are able to go ahead with ordinary activities—to work and make decisions as ever, though somehow this is less of a drag. Your body is no longer a corpse which the ego has to animate and lug around. There is a feeling of the ground holding you up, and of hills lifting you when you climb them. Air breathes itself in and out of your lungs, and instead of looking and listening, light and sound come to you on their own. Eyes see and ears hear as wind blows and water flows. All space becomes your mind. Time carries you along like a river, but never flows out of the present: the more it goes, the more it stays, and you no longer have to fight or kill it. [...]"
(Alan Watts, The Book: On the Taboo Against Knowing Who You Are, 1966)

"In recognizing this lies the cure for the illusion of the separate ego — but this recognition can’t be willed into existence, since the will itself is part of the ego:
Just as science overcame its purely atomistic and mechanical view of the world through more science, the ego-trick must be overcome through intensified self-consciousness. For there is no way of getting rid of the feeling of separateness by a so-called “act of will,” by trying to forget yourself, or by getting absorbed in some other interest. This is why moralistic preaching is such a failure: it breeds only cunning hypocrites — people sermonized into shame, guilt, or fear, who thereupon force themselves to behave as if they actually loved others, so that their “virtues” are often more destructive, and arouse more resentment, than their “vices.”
In considering how an organism might realize this sense of implying the universe and how we might shake the ego-illusion in favor of a deeper sense of belonging, Watts expresses a certain skepticism for practices like yoga and meditation when driven by striving rather than total acceptance — a skepticism all the more poignant amidst our age of ubiquitous yoga studios and meditation retreats, brimming with competitive yogis and meditators:

"An experience of this kind cannot be forced or made to happen by any act of your fictitious “will,” except insofar as repeated efforts to be one-up on the universe may eventually reveal their futility. Don’t try to get rid of the ego-sensation. Take it, so long as it lasts, as a feature or play of the total process — like a cloud or wave, or like feeling warm or cold, or anything else that happens of itself. Getting rid of one’s ego is the last resort of invincible egoism! It simply confirms and strengthens the reality of the feeling. But when this feeling of separateness is approached and accepted like any other sensation, it evaporates like the mirage that it is.
This is why I am not overly enthusiastic about the various “spiritual exercises” in meditation or yoga which some consider essential for release from the ego. For when practiced in order to “get” some kind of spiritual illumination or awakening, they strengthen the fallacy that the ego can toss itself away by a tug at its own bootstraps."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings, review on Alan Watts´s The Book: On the Taboo Against Knowing Who You Are, 1966)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2014/01/27/alan-watts-taboo/

E2.2.B.3.4.d. "THE DIALECTIC OF THE MASTER AND THE SLAVE: ACCORDING TO HEGEL, IN ORDER TO REALIZE ITS OWN SPIRITUALITY, CONSCIOUSNESS MUST BE RECOGNIZED BY ANOTHER CONSCIOUSNESS.

"About Hegel: The master is unfortunately recognized in his autonomy by a consciousness that he himself does not recognize as autonomous. Therefore, he cannot be satisfied, and his autonomy is only negative. Mastery is a dead end.
The slave, however, is not bound to his condition; he wants to change it. Unlike the master, he can educate himself. What we call history is nothing but the sequence of his long efforts to obtain real freedom."
(Albert Camus)

The dialectic of the master and the slave: This retrospective expression summarizes Chapter IV of The Phenomenology of Spirit and was popularized by Alexandre Kojève's lectures. In Hegelian vocabulary, dialectic starts from Kant's concept that it allows us to think about necessary contradictions that reason conceals when it tries to think about what is beyond its capabilities. Hegel builds on this concept, believing that it applies not only to thought, but also to reality. Reality is composed of finite things that transcend themselves. Dialectic is a process in which a thing is called upon to deny its own nature, transform itself, and become something else. In a sense, Hegel was a disciple of Heraclitus because becoming governs reality.
Hegel developed dialectics because he could not conceive of life using reason alone. For him, thinking about life was the goal of philosophy. Dialectics is an attempt to develop a conception of thought equal to life, rather than simply applying concepts to it.
In order to realize its own spirituality, consciousness must be recognized by another consciousness. It must deny its singularity to access others. Man is born twice: once as a natural being and once as a spiritual being. The dialectic of mastery and servitude is a conceptual parable describing a structure found in various contexts. This structure corresponds to a primitive scene in the prehistoric, pre-social normative state (ethical, political, etc.). In this scene, two individuals facing each other have no resources other than themselves with which to relate to each other. However, this parable should not be reduced to the experience of civilized man.
In previous chapters, Hegel describes how consciousness forgets itself in an attempt to find truth in objects in the world. Consciousness does not succeed, but it becomes aware that the world is not only given to it; the way it relates to the world also depends on itself. Consciousness becomes self-conscious, taking itself as an object in the quest for truth. However, it does not succeed because it lacks a reflection of itself in the things it desires in nature. Furthermore, the consumed object disappears. Consciousness understands that it can only grasp its own truth in a relationship of recognition—in the sense of granting value to someone—in the face of an alter ego. Recognition involves proving to the other—who knows nothing about me—that one is not a mere natural being (which disappears in consumption) by engaging in a fight to the death. "It is only by risking one's life that one preserves one's freedom." This struggle demonstrates that we are not merely animals. It is not a struggle for survival to save one's skin, as with animals, but rather a struggle to be recognized as consciousness. I am willing to risk my life to demonstrate that my value surpasses that of natural life.
To gain recognition for my actions, I need others to do the same. To show that I am superior to life, I must be recognized by someone else who does the same. First and foremost, it is a fight against oneself to save one's own skin. Both can die; it is a failure of recognition. This failure demonstrates the necessity of staying alive. Then, the relationship between master and servant is established.
One consciousness goes all the way, while the other experiences the tremor of its singularity and fears death. The master first becomes master of life before becoming master of the servant—the latter is first enslaved to life. It is a three-way relationship. The first relationship of servitude is the one retained by Nietzsche and Deleuze in Nietzsche and Philosophy. The reversal of servitude by the servant's consciousness has three stages.
1. Fear of death. The master may not have valued life at its true worth. The servant is confronted by the absolute master of death, who calls his reality into question.
2. Service to others = discipline of desire through decentering: in civil society, this leads to an economic system in which people do not work solely to satisfy their own needs.
3. Work, which is the conversion of the tremor of singularity into an experience of self-transformation through a transformation of the world: this is another way in which service liberates us from animality. Rather than suppressing the natural things around me (through consumption), I make nature a reflection of spiritual activity.
These three experiences are the basis for liberation, for reconciling oneself with the world through the creation of a state based on universality. The master is trapped in his singularity.
"While the servant works for the master, his desire takes on a dimension that consists not only of the master's desire, but also contains within itself the desire of another. The servant thus rises above singularity, which is bound to the self of his natural will, and stands, in proportion to his value, higher than the master considered in his selfishness. [...] such submission of the servant's will forms the beginning of true human freedom. The trembling of the singularity of the will, the feeling of nothingness, of selfishness, the habit of obedience is a necessary moment in the formation of every human being."
Submission to the state (in accordance with Rousseauist thinking) is not coercion but obligation. Coercion is the law of the strongest. Obligation is a natural submission to an order whose legitimacy is recognized.
(Olivier Tinland in the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on May 1, 2018)

Listen to the podcast in French: 
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/quoi-hegel-quest-ce-quil-a-hegel-24-la-dialectique-du-maitre-et-de-lesclave

E2.2.B.3.4.e."SUSPENDED JUDGMENTS

[...] We too - encouraged by these great individualists have a right to fall back upon whatever individuality may have been left to us; and, resting upon that, sinking into the soul of that, to defy all that public opinion and the voice of the majority may be able to do.

And we shall be wise also if we recognise, before it is too late, that what is most intrinsic and inalienable in ourselves is just that very portion of us which has nothing to do with our work in life, nothing to do with our duty to the community.

We shall be wise if we recognise, before it is too late, that the thing most sacred in us is that strange margin of unoccupied receptivity, upon which settle, in their flight over land and sea, the beautiful wild birds of unsolicited dreams.

We shall be wise if, before we die, we learn a little of the art of suspending our judgment - the art of "waiting upon the spirit."

For it is only when we have suspended our judgment; it is only when we have suspended our convictions, our principles, our ideals, our moralities, that "the still small voice" of the music of the universe, sad and sweet and terrible and tender, drifts in upon us, over the face of the waters of the soul.

The essence of us, the hidden reality of us, is too rare and delicate a thing to bear the crude weight of these sturdy opinions, these vigorous convictions, these social ardours, without growing dulled and hardened.

We all have to bear the burden of humanity; and the artists among us may be thankful that the predatory curse resting upon the rich is very seldom ours: but the burden of humanity must not be allowed to press all joy, all originality, all waywardness, all interest, all imagination out of our lives.

It is not for long, at best or worst, that we know what it is to be conscious of being living children of the human race upon this strange planet."
(John Cowper Powys, Suspended Judgments, 1916)

"The days pass quickly, and the seasons and the years. From the graves of the darlings of our souls there comes a voice and a cry. A voice bidding us sink into our own true selves before we too are numbered with the dead; a cry bidding us sacrifice everything before we sacrifice the prerogative of our inmost identity, the right to feel and think and dream as persons born into a high inheritance, the inheritance of the mind that has the right to question all things and to hold fast what pleases it in defiance of opinion and logic and probability and argument.

For it is only when we suspend our judgments and leave arguing and criticising, that the quiet gods of the moonlit shores of the world murmur their secrets in our ears.

They come without our seeking for them, these rare intimations; without our seeking for them, and, sometimes, without our desiring them; but when they come they come as revelations of something deeper in us than any mere soul of humanity. They come from a region that is as far beyond humanity as it is beyond nature. They come from the fairy-land of that mysterious country wherein dwell the dreams and the fancies of those lonely ones among the sons of men who have been possessed by imagination. They come from the unknown land where those inhabit who are, as the Psalmist says, "free among the dead." They come from the land which we left when we were born, and to which we return when we die. And whether this is a land of nothingness and oblivion none knoweth; for none hath returned to tell us. Meanwhile we can imagine what we will; and we can suspend our last judgment until we ourselves are judged."
(John Cowper Powys, Suspended Judgments, 1916)


E2.2.B.3.4.f. CAN CONSCIOUSNESS BLOCK GENUINE ACTION?
"A minimum of unconsciousness is necessary if one wants to stay inside history. To act is one thing; to know one is acting is another. When lucidity invests the action, insinuates itself into it, action is undone and, with it, prejudice, whose function consists, precisely, in subordinating, in enslaving consciousness to action. The man who unmasks his fictions renounces his own resources and, in a sense, himself. "
(Emil Cioran, The Temptation to Exist, 1956)

E2.2.B.4. How to navigate a universe which is the result of chance?

E2.2.B.4.a. The Contingent Self in a Random World
This chapter establishes the fundamental premise of the essay: that our universe and our lives within it are governed by chance, contingency, and randomness. It explores the philosophical and psychological implications of this condition, defining the terrain we must learn to navigate.

E2.2.B.4.a.i. The Reign of Chance and Coincidence
This sub-chapter will define the universe as a space of fortuity, where events and lives intersect randomly, and where meaning is not inherent but must be found.

Photo: Wislawa Szymborska
"Love at First Sight

They’re both convinced
that a sudden passion joined them.
Such certainty is beautiful,
but uncertainty is more beautiful still.

Since they’d never met before, they’re sure
that there’d been nothing between them.
But what’s the word from the streets, staircases, hallways—
perhaps they’ve passed by each other a million times?

I want to ask them
if they don’t remember—
a moment face to face
in some revolving door?
perhaps a “sorry” muttered in a crowd?
a curt “wrong number” caught in the receiver?—
but I know the answer.
No, they don’t remember.

They’d be amazed to hear
that Chance has been toying with them
now for years.

Not quite ready yet
to become their Destiny,
it pushed them close, drove them apart,
it barred their path,
stifling a laugh,
and then leaped aside.

There were signs and signals,
even if they couldn’t read them yet.
Perhaps three years ago
or just last Tuesday
a certain leaf fluttered
from one shoulder to another?
Something was dropped and then picked up.
Who knows, maybe the ball that vanished
into childhood’s thicket?

There were doorknobs and doorbells
where one touch had covered another
beforehand.
Suitcases checked and standing side by side.
One night, perhaps, the same dream,
grown hazy by morning.

Every beginning
is only a sequel, after all,
and the book of events
is always open halfway through."
(Wislawa Szymborska)

Photo:
- Wislawa Szymborska

"(Re #196) God is Love, but Love gets weird.
NATE, DALY CITY, USA

Can you write us a poem? We need one!
MARIO, ROME, ITALY

Dear Nate and Mario,
 
Love Gets Weird
 
God is love but love gets weird
Said the flea to the ant in the devil’s beard
We are passengers here, and it’s as we feared
That God is love but love gets weird
 
Yes, God gets weird and so does love
Said the flea to the ant and gave him a shove
And came down upon him from above
Crying, God gets weird and so does love
 
Well, Weird got Love and God got Weird
And in the monstrous morning there appeared
The very thing we’ve always feared
That God is nothing, but love gone weird
 
Words by Nate Lane/Nick Cave
 
Love Nick"
(Nick Cave,  The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #198 / JULY 2022)

[EN] Photo: Maria Popova, Singing only is
"Borges [closed] the essay by acknowledging « it is doubtful that the world has a meaning [...] ».
I recognized this upon sitting down for morning meditation in my garden after a nightlong storm and watching an almost otherworldly deposit roll onto the cushion: a tiny, perfect robin egg, improbable and sorrowful in its displaced blue beauty.
I considered climbing the neighbor’s colossal tree to find the storm-shaken nest and reinstate the egg. [...]
But then I considered this chance-event as the product of the same impartial forces that deposited the exact spermatozoid of my father’s onto my mother’s ovum at the exact moment to produce the chance-event of my particular configuration of atoms animated by this particular consciousness that just is, the consciousness mourning the robin that will never be. To call one expression of chance good and another bad is mere human hubris — the hubris of narrative and interpretation superimposed on an impartial universe devoid of why, awash in is.
No one knows the meaning of why anything comes to be, or doesn’t. Here is this pale blue orb, dropped from the tree-of-heaven onto a tiny Brooklyn point on the face of this Pale Blue Dot, itself a « mote of dust suspended in a sunbeam » within an immense and impartial universe, conceived in the creation myths and early scientific theories of our meaning-hungry ancestors as a great cosmic egg.
Here I am, and here you are, and here is the robin’s egg in its near-life collision with chance. To ask for its meaning is as meaningless a question as to demand the meaning of a color or the meaning of a bird. On this particular day, at this particular moment — the only locus of aliveness we ever have — the contour of meaning comes in shades of blue, singing only is."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings, June 13, 2021)

 Photo: 
- Maria Popova, Singing only is

THE UNIVERSE IS CONSTANTLY "ROLLING THE DICE TO SEE WHAT HAPPENS NEXT"
“The reason general relativity broke down near the big bang is that it did not incorporate the uncertainty principle, the random element of quantum theory that Einstein had objected to on the grounds that God does not play dice. However, all the evidence is that God is quite a gambler. One can think of the universe as being like a giant casino, with dice being rolled or wheels being spun on every occasion. You might think that operating a casino is a very chancy business, because you risk losing money each time dice are thrown or the wheel is spun. But over a large number of bets, the gains and losses average out to a result that can be predicted, even though the result of any particular bet cannot be predicted. The casino operators make sure the odds average out in their favor. That is why casino operators are so rich. The only chance you have of winning against them is to stake all your money on a few rolls of the dice or spins of the wheel.
It is the same with the universe. When the universe is big, as it is today, there are a very large number of rolls of the dice, and the results average out to something one can predict. That is why classical laws work for large systems. But when the universe is very small, as it was near in time to the big bang, there are only a small number of rolls of the dice, and the uncertainty principle is very important.
Because the universe keeps on rolling the dice to see what happens next, it doesn't have just a single history, as one might have thought. Instead, the universe must have every possible history, each with its own probability. There must be a history of the universe in which Belize won every gold medal at the Olympic Games, though maybe the probability is low.”
(Stephen_Hawking, The Universe in a Nutshell, 2001)

THE PROTAGONIST, TOMAS, INITIALLY INTERPRETS HIS LIFE THROUGH TWO GRAND NARRATIVES—FIRST, THE "SWEET LIGHTNESS OF BEING" (ABSOLUTE FREEDOM), AND SECOND, THE "WEIGHTY RESOLUTION" OF HEROIC NECESSITY ("ES MUSS SEIN!"). However, he ultimately realizes that both are self-deceptions and that his entire life-altering love story was the product of "six chance happenings."
“The realization that he was utterly powerless was like the blow of a sledgehammer, yet it was curiously calming as well. No one was forcing him into a decision. He felt no need to stare at the walls of the houses across the courtyard and ponder whether to live with her or not. Tereza had made the decision herself.
He went to a restaurant for lunch. He was depressed, but as he ate, his original desperation waned, lost its strength, and soon all that was left was melancholy. Looking back on the years he had spent with her, he came to feel that their story could have had no better ending. If someone had invented the story, this is how he would have had to end it.
One day Tereza came to him uninvited. One day she left the same way. She came with a heavy suitcase.
She left with a heavy suitcase.
He paid the bill, left the restaurant, and started walking through the streets, his melancholy growing more and more beautiful. He had spent seven years of life with Tereza, and now he realized that those years were more attractive in retrospect than they were when he was living them.
His love for Tereza was beautiful, but it was also tiring: he had constantly had to hide things from her, sham, dissemble, make amends, buck her up, calm her down, give her evidence of his feelings, play the defendant to her jealousy, her suffering, and her dreams, feel guilty, make excuses and apologies. Now what was tiring had disappeared and only the beauty remained.
Saturday found him for the first time strolling alone through Zurich, breathing in the heady smell of his freedom. New adventures hid around each corner. The future was again a secret. He was on his way back to the bachelor life, the life he had once felt destined for, the life that would let him be what he actually was.
For seven years he had lived bound to her, his every step subject to her scrutiny. She might as well have chained iron balls to his ankles. Suddenly his step was much lighter. He soared. He had entered Parmenides' magic field: he was enjoying the sweet lightness of being.
(Did he feel like phoning Sabina in Geneva? Contacting one or another of the women he had met during his several months in Zurich? No, not in the least. Perhaps he sensed that any woman would make his memory of Tereza unbearably painful.)
This curious melancholic fascination lasted until Sunday evening. On Monday, everything changed. Tereza forced her way into his thoughts: he imagined her sitting there writing her farewell letter; he felt her hands trembling; he saw her lugging her heavy suitcase in one hand and leading Karenin on his leash with the other; he pictured her unlocking their Prague flat, and suffered the utter abandonment breathing her in the face as she opened the door.
During those two beautiful days of melancholy, his compassion (that curse of emotional telepathy) had taken a holiday. It had slept the sound Sunday sleep of a miner who, after a hard week's work, needs to gather strength for his Monday shift.
Instead of the patients he was treating, Tomas saw Tereza.
He tried to remind himself. Don't think about her! Don't think about her! He said to himself, I'm sick with compassion. It's good that she's gone and that I'll never see her again, though it's not Tereza I need to be free of—it's that sickness, compassion, which I thought I was immune to until she infected me with it.
On Saturday and Sunday, he felt the sweet lightness of being rise up to him out of the depths of the future. On Monday, he was hit by a weight the likes of which he had never known. The tons of steel of the Russian tanks were nothing compared with it. For there is nothing heavier than compassion. Not even one's own pain weighs so heavy as the pain one feels with someone, for someone, a pain intensified by the imagination and prolonged by a hundred echoes.
He kept warning himself not to give in to compassion, and compassion listened with bowed head and a seemingly guilty conscience. Compassion knew it was being presumptuous, yet it quietly stood its ground, and on the fifth day after her departure Tomas informed the director of his hospital (the man who had phoned him daily in Prague after the Russian invasion) that he had to return at once. He was ashamed. He knew that the move would appear irresponsible, inexcusable to the man. He thought to unbosom himself and tell him the story of Tereza and the letter she had left on the table for him. But in the end he did not. From the Swiss doctor's point of view Tereza's move could only appear hysterical and abhorrent. And Tomas refused to allow anyone an opportunity to think ill of her. The director of the hospital was in fact offended. Tomas shrugged his shoulders and said, "Es muss sein. Es muss sein."
It was an allusion. The last movement of Beethoven's last quartet is based on the following two motifs […] 
To make the meaning of the words absolutely clear, Beethoven introduced the movement with a phrase, "Der schwer gefasste Entschluss," which is commonly translated as "the difficult resolution." This allusion to Beethoven was actually Tomas's first step back to Tereza, because she was the one who had induced him to buy records of the Beethoven quartets and sonatas. The allusion was even more pertinent than he had thought because the Swiss doctor was a great music lover. Smiling serenely, he asked, in the melody of Beethoven's motif, "Muss es sein?"
"]a, es muss sein!" Tomas said again."
(Milan Kundera, The Unbearable Lightness of Being, 1984)

THE PROTAGONIST, TOMAS, INITIALLY INTERPRETS HIS LIFE THROUGH TWO GRAND NARRATIVES—FIRST, THE "SWEET LIGHTNESS OF BEING" (ABSOLUTE FREEDOM), AND SECOND, THE "WEIGHTY RESOLUTION" OF HEROIC NECESSITY ("ES MUSS SEIN!"). However, he ultimately realizes that both are self-deceptions and that his entire life-altering love story was the product of "six chance happenings." (Continued 1)
“Unlike Parmenides, Beethoven apparently viewed weight as something positive. Since the German word schwer means both "difficult" and "heavy," Beethoven's "difficult resolution" may also be construed as a "heavy" or "weighty resolution." The weighty resolution is at one with the voice of Fate ("Es muss sein!"); necessity, weight, and value are three concepts inextricably bound: only necessity is heavy, and only what is heavy has value.
This is a conviction born of Beethoven's music, and although we cannot ignore the possibility (or even probability) that it owes its origins more to Beethoven's commentators than to Beethoven himself, we all more or less share, it: we believe that the greatness of man stems from the fact that he bears his fate as Atlas bore the heavens on his shoulders. Beethoven's hero is a lifter of metaphysical weights.
Tomas approached the Swiss border. I imagine a gloomy, shock-headed Beethoven, in person, conducting the local firemen's brass band in a farewell to emigration, an "Es Muss Sein " march.
Then Tomas crossed the Czech border and was welcomed by columns of Russian tanks. He had to stop his car and wait a half hour before they passed. A terrifying soldier in the black Uniform of the armored forces stood at the crossroads directing traffic as if every road in the country belonged to him and him alone.
"Es muss sein!" Tomas repeated to himself, but then he began to doubt. Did it really have to be?
Yes, it was unbearable for him to stay in Zurich imagining Tereza living on her own in Prague.
But how long would he have been tortured by compassion? All his life? A year? Or a month? Or only a week?

How could he have known? How could he have gauged it? Any schoolboy can do experiments in the physics laboratory to test various scientific hypotheses. But man, because he has only one life to live, cannot conduct experiments to test whether to follow his passion (compassion) or not.
It was with these thoughts in mind that he opened the door to his flat. Karenin made the homecoming easier by jumping up on him and licking his face. The desire to fall into Tereza's arms (he could still feel it while getting into his car in Zurich) had completely disintegrated. He fancied himself standing opposite her in the midst of a snowy plain, the two of them shivering from the cold.
From the very beginning of the occupation, Russian military airplanes had flown over Prague all night long. Tomas, no longer accustomed to the noise, was unable to fall asleep.
Twisting and turning beside the slumbering Tereza, he recalled something she had told him a long time before in the course of an insignificant conversation. They had been talking about his friend Z. when she announced, "If I hadn't met you, I'd certainly have fallen in love with him."
Even then, her words had left Tomas in a strange state of melancholy, and now he realized it was only a matter of chance that Tereza loved him and not his friend Z. Apart from her consummated love for Tomas, there were, in the realm of possibility, an infinite number of unconsummated loves for other men.
We all reject out of hand the idea that the love of our life may be something light or weightless; we presume our love is what must be, that without it our life would no longer be the same; we feel that Beethoven himself, gloomy and awe-inspiring, is playing the "Es muss sein!" to our own great love.
Tomas often thought of Tereza's remark about his friend Z. and came to the conclusion that the love story of his life exemplified not "Es muss sein! " (It must be so), but rather "Es konnte auch anders sein" 
(It could just as well be otherwise).
Seven years earlier, a complex neurological case happened to have been discovered at the hospital in Tereza's town. They called in the chief surgeon of Tomas's hospital in Prague for consultation, but the chief surgeon of Tomas's hospital happened to be suffering from sciatica, and because he could not move he sent Tomas to the provincial hospital in his place. The town had several hotels, but Tomas happened to be given a room in the one where Tereza was employed. He happened to have had enough free time before his train left to stop at the hotel restaurant. Tereza happened to be on duty, and happened to be serving Tomas's table. It had taken six chance happenings to push Tomas towards Tereza, as if he had little inclination to go to her on his own.
He had gone back to Prague because of her. So fateful a decision resting on so fortuitous a love, a love that would not even have existed had it not been for the chief surgeon's sciatica seven years earlier. And that woman, that personification of absolute fortuity, now again lay asleep beside him, breathing deeply.
It was late at night. His stomach started acting up as it tended to do in times of psychic stress.
Once or twice her breathing turned into mild snores. Tomas felt no compassion. All he felt was the pressure in his stomach and the despair of having returned.”
(Milan Kundera, The Unbearable Lightness of Being, 1984)

IN A MULTIVERSE SCENARIO, THE TRUE SOURCE OF UNPREDICTABILITY IN THE UNIVERSE IS NOT OUR INABILITY TO MEASURE THINGS PERFECTLY, BUT THE "PARALLEL-UNIVERSE MULTIPLICITY" DESCRIBED BY QUANTUM MECHANICS. Even with perfect knowledge of the initial state, the future of any single universe remains fundamentally unpredictable because all possible outcomes actually occur across the multiverse.
“In 1982 the physicist Richard Feynman considered the computer simulation of quantum-mechanical objects. His starting-point was something that had already been known for some time without its significance being appreciated, namely that predicting the behaviour of quantum-mechanical systems (or, as we can describe it, rendering quantum-mechanical environments in virtual reality) is in general an intractable task. One reason why the significance of this had not been appreciated is that no one expected the computer prediction of interesting physical phenomena to be especially easy. Take weather forecasting or earthquake prediction, for instance. Although the relevant equations are known, the difficulty of applying them in realistic situations is notorious. This has recently been brought to public attention in popular books and articles on chaos and the ‘butterfly effect’. These effects are not responsible for the intractability that Feynman had in mind, for the simple reason that they occur only in classical physics — that is, not in reality, since reality is quantum-mechanical. Nevertheless, I want to make some remarks here about ‘chaotic’ classical motions, if only to highlight the  quite different characters of classical and quantum unpredictability.
Chaos theory is about limitations on predictability in classical physics, stemming from the fact that almost all classical systems are inherently unstable. The ‘instability’ in question has nothing to do with any tendency to behave violently or disintegrate. It is about an extreme sensitivity to initial conditions. Suppose that we know the present state of some physical system, such as a set of billiard balls rolling on a table. If the system obeyed classical physics, as it does to a good approximation, we should then be able to determine its future behaviour — say, whether a particular ball will go into a pocket or not — from the relevant laws of motion, just as we can predict an eclipse or a planetary conjunction from the same laws. But in practice we are never able to measure the initial positions and velocities perfectly. So the question arises, if we know them to some reasonable degree of accuracy, can we also predict to a reasonable degree of accuracy how they will behave in the future? And the answer is, usually, that we cannot. The difference between the real trajectory and the predicted trajectory, calculated from slightly inaccurate data, tends to grow exponentially and irregularly (‘chaotically’) with time, so that after a while the original, slightly imperfectly known state is no guide at all to what the system is doing. The implication for computer prediction is that planetary motions, the epitome of classical predictability, are untypical classical systems. In order to predict what a typical classical system will do after only a moderate period, one would have to determine its initial state to an impossibly high precision. Thus it is said that in principle, the flap of a butterfly’s wing in one hemisphere of the planet could cause a hurricane in the other hemisphere. The infeasibility of weather forecasting and the like is then attributed to the impossibility of accounting for every butterfly on the planet.
However, real hurricanes and real butterflies obey quantum theory, not classical mechanics. The instability that would rapidly amplify slight mis-specifications of an initial classical state is simply not a feature of quantum-mechanical systems. In quantum mechanics, small deviations from a specified initial state tend to cause only small deviations from the predicted final state. Instead, accurate prediction is made difficult by quite a different  effect.
The laws of quantum mechanics require an object that is initially at a given position (in all universes) to ‘spread out’ in the multiverse sense. For instance, a photon and its other-universe counterparts all start from the same point on a glowing filament, but then move in trillions of different directions. When we later make a measurement of what has happened, we too become differentiated as each copy of us sees what has happened in our particular universe. If the object in question is the Earth’s atmosphere, then a hurricane may have occurred in 30 per cent of universes, say, and not in the remaining 70 per cent. Subjectively we perceive this as a single, unpredictable or ‘random’ outcome, though from the multi-verse point of view all the outcomes have actually happened. This parallel-universe multiplicity is the real reason for the unpredictability of the weather. Our inability to measure the initial conditions accurately is completely irrelevant. Even if we knew the initial conditions perfectly, the multiplicity, and therefore the unpredictability of the motion, would remain. And on the other hand, in contrast to the classical case, an imaginary multiverse with only slightly different initial conditions would not behave very differently from the real multiverse: it might suffer hurricanes in 30.000001 per cent of its universes  and not in the remaining 69.999 999 per cent.
The flapping of butterflies’ wings does not, in reality, cause hurricanes because the classical phenomenon of chaos depends on perfect determinism, which does not hold in any single universe. Consider a group of identical universes at an instant at which, in all of them, a particular butterfly’s wings have flapped up. Consider a second group of universes which at the same instant are identical to the first group, except that in them the butterfly’s wings are down. Wait for a few hours. Quantum mechanics predicts that, unless there are exceptional circumstances (such as someone watching the butterfly and pressing a button to detonate a nuclear bomb if it flaps its wings), the two groups of universes, nearly identical at first, are still nearly identical. But each group, within itself, has become greatly differentiated. It includes universes with hurricanes, universes without hurricanes, and even a very tiny number of universes in which the butterfly has spontaneously changed its species through an accidental rearrangement of all its atoms, or the Sun has exploded because all its atoms bounced by chance towards the nuclear reaction at its core. Even so, the two groups still resemble each other very closely. In the universes in which the butterfly raised its wings and hurricanes occurred, those hurricanes were indeed unpredictable; but the butterfly was not causally responsible, for there were near-identical hurricanes in universes where  everything else was the same but the wings were lowered.
It is perhaps worth stressing the distinction between unpredictability and
intractability. Unpredictability has nothing to do with the available computational resources. Classical systems are unpredictable (or would be, if they existed) because of their sensitivity to initial conditions. Quantum systems do not have that sensitivity, but are unpredictable because they behave differently in different universes, and so appear random in most universes. In neither case will any amount of computation lessen the unpredictability. Intractability, by contrast, is a computational-resource issue. It refers to a situation where we could readily make the prediction if only we could perform the required computation, but we cannot do so because the resources required are impractically large. In order to disentangle the problems of unpredictability from those of intractability in quantum mechanics, we have to consider quantum systems that are, in principle,  predictable.”
(David Deutsch, The Fabric of Reality, 1996)

ADAM SMITH ARGUES THAT WHILE WE BELIEVE WE SHOULD JUDGE PEOPLE BASED ON THEIR INTENTIONS, OUR ACTUAL MORAL FEELINGS ARE POWERFULLY AND IRRATIONALLY INFLUENCED BY THE CHANCE OUTCOMES OF THEIR ACTIONS.
“OF THE EXTENT OF THIS INFLUENCE OF FORTUNE._
The effect of this influence of fortune is, first, to diminish our sense
of the merit or demerit of those actions which arose from the most
laudable or blamable intentions, when they fail of producing their
proposed effects: and, secondly, to increase our sense of the merit or
demerit of actions, beyond what is due to the motives or affections from
which they proceed, when they accidentally give occasion either to
extraordinary pleasure or pain.

1. First, I say, though the intentions of any person should be ever so
proper and beneficent, on the one hand, or ever so improper and
malevolent, on the other, yet, if they fail in producing their effects,
his merit seems imperfect in the one case, and his demerit incomplete in
the other. Nor is this irregularity of sentiment felt only by those who
are immediately affected by the consequences of any action. It is felt,
in some measure, even by the impartial spectator. The man who solicits
an office for another, without obtaining it, is regarded as his friend,
and seems to deserve his love and affection. But the man who not only
solicits, but procures it, is more peculiarly considered as his patron
and benefactor, and is entitled to his respect and gratitude. The person
obliged, we are apt to think, may with some justice, imagine himself on
a level with the first: but we cannot enter into his sentiments, if he
does not feel himself inferior to the second. It is common indeed to
say, that we are equally obliged to the man who has endeavoured to serve
us, as to him who actually did so. It is the speech which we constantly
make upon every unsuccessful attempt of this kind; but which, like all
other fine speeches, must be understood with a grain of allowance. The
sentiments which a man of generosity entertains for the friend who
fails, may often indeed be nearly the same with those which he conceives
for him who succeeds: and the more generous he is, the more nearly will
those sentiments approach to an exact level. With the truly generous, to
be beloved, to be esteemed by those whom they themselves think worthy of
esteem, gives more pleasure, and thereby excites more gratitude, than
all the advantages which they can ever expect from those sentiments.
When they lose those advantages therefore, they seem to lose but a
trifle, which is scarce worth regarding. They still however lose
something. Their pleasure therefore, and consequently their gratitude,
is not perfectly complete: and accordingly if, between the friend who
fails and the friend who succeeds, all other circumstances are equal,
there will, even in the noblest and the best mind, be some little
difference of affection in favour of him who succeeds. Nay, so unjust
are mankind in this respect, that though the intended benefit should be
procured, yet if it is not procured by the means of a particular
benefactor, they are apt to think that less gratitude is due to the man,
who with the best intentions in the world could do no more than help it
a little forward. As their gratitude is in this case divided among the
different persons who contributed to their pleasure, a smaller share of
it seems due to any one. Such a person, we hear men commonly say,
intended no doubt to serve us; and we really believe exerted himself to
the utmost of his abilities for that purpose. We are not, however,
obliged to him for this benefit; since had it not been for the
concurrence of others, all that he could have done would never have
brought it about. This consideration, they imagine, should, even in the
eyes of the impartial spectator, diminish the debt which they owe to
him. The person himself who has unsuccessfully endeavoured to confer a
benefit, has by no means the same dependency upon the gratitude of the
man whom he meant to oblige, nor the same sense of his own merit towards
him, which he would have had in the case of success.

Even the merit of talents and abilities which some accident has hindered
from producing their effects, seems in some measure imperfect, even to
those who are fully convinced of their capacity to produce them. The
general who has been hindered by the envy of ministers from gaining some
great advantage over the enemies of his country, regrets the loss of the
opportunity for ever after. Nor is it only upon account of the public
that he regrets it. He laments that he was hindered from performing an
action which would have added a new lustre to his character in his own
eyes, as well as in those of every other person. It satisfies neither
himself nor others to reflect that the plan or design was all that
depended on him, that no greater capacity was required to execute it
than what was necessary to concert it: that he was allowed to be every
way capable of executing it, and that had he been permitted to go on,
success was infallible. He still did not execute it; and though he might
deserve all the approbation which is due to a magnanimous and great
design, he still wanted the actual merit of having performed a great
action. To take the management of any affair of public concern from the
man who has almost brought it to a conclusion, is regarded as the most
invidious injustice. As he had done so much, he should, we think, have
been allowed to acquire the complete merit of putting an end to it. It
was objected to Pompey, that he came in upon the victories of Lucullus,
and gathered those laurels which were due to the fortune and valour of
another. The glory of Lucullus, it seems, was less complete even in the
opinion of his own friends, when he was not permitted to finish that
conquest which his conduct and courage had put in the power of almost
any man to finish. It mortifies an architect when his plans are either
not executed at all, or when they are so far altered as to spoil the
effect of the building. The plan, however, is all that depends upon the
architect. The whole of his genius is, to good judges, as completely
discovered in that as in the actual execution. But a plan does not, even
to the most intelligent, give the same pleasure as a noble and
magnificent building. They may discover as much both of taste and genius
in the one as in the other. But their effects are still vastly
different, and the amusement derived from the first, never approaches to
the wonder and admiration which are sometimes excited by the second. We
may believe of many men, that their talents are superior to those of
Cæsar and Alexander; and that in the same situations they would perform
still greater actions. In the mean time, however, we do not behold them
with that astonishment and admiration with which those two heroes have
been regarded in all ages and nations. The calm judgments of the mind
may approve of them more, but they want the splendor of great actions to
dazzle and transport it. The superiority of virtues and talents have
not, even upon those who acknowledge that superiority, the same effect
with the superiority of atchievements.

As the merit of an unsuccessful attempt to do good seems thus, in the
eyes of ungrateful mankind, to be diminished by the miscarriage, so does
likewise the demerit of an unsuccessful attempt to do evil. The design
to commit a crime, how clearly soever it may be proved, is scarce ever
punished with the same severity as the actual commission of it. The case
of treason is perhaps the only exception. That crime immediately
affecting the being of the government itself, the government is
naturally more jealous of it than of any other. In the punishment of
treason, the sovereign resents the injuries which are immediately done
to himself: in the punishment of other crimes, he resents those which
are done to other men. It is his own resentment which he indulges in the
one case: it is that of his subjects which by sympathy he enters into it
in the other. In the first case, therefore, as he judges in his own
cause, he is very apt to be more violent and sanguinary in his
punishments than the impartial spectator can approve of. His resentment
too rises here upon smaller occasions, and does not always, as in other
cases, wait for the perpetration of the crime, or even for the attempt
to commit it. A treasonable concert, though nothing has been done, or
even attempted in consequence of it, nay, a treasonable conversation, is
in many countries punished in the same manner as the actual commission
of treason. With regard to all other crimes, the mere design, upon which
no attempt has followed, is seldom punished at all, and is never
punished severely. A criminal design, and a criminal action, it may be
said indeed, do not necessarily suppose the same degree of depravity,
and ought not therefore to be subjected to the same punishment. We are
capable, it may be said, of resolving, and even of taking measures to
execute, many things which, when it comes to the point, we feel
ourselves altogether incapable of executing. But this reason can have no
place when the design has been carried the length of the last attempt.
The man, however, who fires a pistol at his enemy, but misses him, is
punished with death by the laws of scarce any country. By the old law of
Scotland, though he should wound him, yet, unless death ensues within a
certain time, the assassin is not liable to the last punishment. The
resentment of mankind, however, runs so high against this crime, their
terror for the man who shows himself capable of committing it, is so
great, that the mere attempt to commit it ought in all countries to be
capital. The attempt to commit smaller crimes is almost always punished
very lightly, and sometimes is not punished at all. The thief, whose
hand has been caught in his neighbour’s pocket before he had taken any
thing out of it, is punished with ignominy only. If he had got time to
take away an handkerchief, he would have been put to death. The
house-breaker, who has been found setting a ladder to his neighbour’s
window, but had not got into it, is not exposed to the capital
punishment. The attempt to ravish is not punished as a rape. The attempt
to seduce a married woman is not punished at all, though seduction is
punished severely. Our resentment against the person who only attempted
to do a mischief, is seldom so strong as to bear us out in inflicting
the same punishment upon him, which we should have thought due if he had
actually done it. In the one case, the joy of our deliverance alleviates
our sense of the atrocity of his conduct; in the other, the grief of our
misfortune increases it. His real demerit, however, is undoubtedly the
same in both cases, since his intentions were equally criminal: and
there is in this respect, therefore, an irregularity in the sentiments
of all men, and a consequent relaxation of discipline in the laws of, I
believe, all nations, of the most civilized, as well as of the most
barbarous. The humanity of a civilized people disposes them either to
dispense with, or to mitigate punishments wherever their natural
indignation is not goaded on by the consequences of the crime.
Barbarians, on the other hand, when no actual consequence has happened
from any action, are not apt to be very delicate or inquisitive about
the motives.

The person himself who either from passion, or from the influence of bad
company, has resolved, and perhaps taken measures to perpetrate some
crime, but who has fortunately been prevented by an accident which put
it out of his power, is sure, if he has any remains of conscience, to
regard this event all his life after as a great and signal deliverance.
He can never think of it without returning thanks to Heaven for having
been thus graciously pleased to save him from the guilt in which he was
just ready to plunge himself, and to hinder him from rendering all the
rest of his life a scene of horror, remorse, and repentance. But though
his hands are innocent, he is conscious that his heart is equally guilty
as if he had actually executed what he was so fully resolved upon. It
gives great ease to his conscience, however, to consider that the crime
was not executed, though he knows that the failure arose from no virtue
in him. He still considers himself as less deserving of punishment and
resentment; and this good fortune either diminishes, or takes away
altogether, all sense of guilt. To remember how much he was resolved
upon it, has no other effect than to make him regard his escape as the
greater and more miraculous: for he still fancies that he has escaped,
and he looks back upon the danger to which his peace of mind was
exposed, with that terror, with which one who is in safety may sometimes
remember the hazard he was in of falling over a precipice, and shudder
with horror at the thought.

2. The second effect of this influence of fortune, is to increase our
sense of the merit or demerit of actions beyond what is due to the
motives or affection from which they proceed, when they happen to give
occasion to extraordinary pleasure or pain. The agreeable or
disagreeable effects of the action often throw a shadow of merit or
demerit upon the agent, though in his intention there was nothing that
deserved either praise or blame, or at least that deserved them in the
degree in which we are apt to bestow them. Thus, even the messenger of
bad news is disagreeable to us, and, on the contrary, we feel a sort of
gratitude for the man who brings us good tidings. For a moment we look
upon them both as the authors, the one of our good, the other of our bad
fortune, and regard them in some measure as if they had really brought
about the events which they only give an account of. The first author of
our joy is naturally the object of a transitory gratitude: we embrace
him with warmth and affection, and should be glad, during the instant of
our prosperity, to reward him as for some signal service. By the custom
of all courts, the officer who brings the news of a victory, is entitled
to considerable preferments, and the general always chuses one of his
principal favourites to go upon so agreeable an errand. The first author
of our sorrow is, on the contrary, just as naturally the object of a
transitory resentment. We can scarce avoid looking upon him with chagrin
and uneasiness; and the rude and brutal are apt to vent upon him that
spleen which his intelligence gives occasion to. Tigranes, King of
Armenia, struck off the head of the man who brought him the first
account of the approach of a formidable enemy. To punish in this manner
the author of bad tidings, seems barbarous and inhuman: yet, to reward
the messenger of good news, is not disagreeable to us; we think it
suitable to the bounty of kings. But why do we make this difference,
since, if there is no fault in the one, neither is there any merit in
the other? It is because any sort of reason seems sufficient to
authorize the exertion of the social and benevolent affections; but it
requires the most solid and substantial to make us enter into that of
the unsocial and malevolent.

But though in general we are averse to enter into the unsocial and
malevolent affections, though we lay it down for a rule that we ought
never to approve of their gratification, unless so far as the malicious
and unjust intention of the person, against whom they are directed
renders him their proper object; yet, upon some occasions, we relax of
this severity. When the negligence of one man has occasioned some
unintended damage to another, we generally enter so far into the
resentment of the sufferer, as to approve of his inflicting a punishment
upon the offender much beyond what the offence will have appeared to
deserve, had no such unlucky consequence followed from it.

There is a degree of negligence, which would appear to deserve some
chastisement though it should occasion no damage to any body. Thus, if a
person should throw a large stone over a wall into a public street
without giving warning to those who might be passing by, and without
regarding where it was likely to fall, he would undoubtedly deserve some
chastisement. A very accurate police would punish so absurd an action,
even though it had done no mischief. The person who has been guilty of
it, shows an insolent contempt of the happiness and safety of others.
There is real injustice in his conduct. He wantonly exposes his
neighbour to what no man in his senses would choose to expose himself,
and evidently wants that sense of what is due to his fellow-creatures
which is the basis of justice and of society. Gross negligence therefore
is, in the law, said to be almost equal to malicious design[3]. When any
unlucky consequences happen from such carelessness, the person who has
been guilty of it is often punished as if he had really intended those
consequences; and his conduct, which was only thoughtless and insolent,
and what deserved some chastisement, is considered as atrocious, and as
liable to the severest punishment. Thus if, by the imprudent action
above-mentioned, he should accidentally kill a man, he is, by the laws
of many countries, particularly by the old law of Scotland, liable to
the last punishment. And though this is no doubt excessively severe, it
is not altogether inconsistent with our natural sentiments. Our just
indignation against the folly and inhumanity of his conduct is
exasperated by our sympathy with the unfortunate sufferer. Nothing
however would appear more shocking to our natural sense of equity, than
to bring a man to the scaffold merely for having thrown a stone
carelessly into the street without hurting anybody. The folly and
inhumanity of his conduct, however, would in this case be the same; but
still our sentiments would be very different. The consideration of this
difference may satisfy us how much the indignation, even of the
spectator, is apt to be animated by the actual consequences of the
action. In cases of this kind there will, if I am not mistaken, be found
a great degree of severity in the laws of almost all nations; as I have
already observed that in those of an opposite kind there was a very
general relaxation of discipline.”
(Adam Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments, 1777)

E2.2.B.4.a.ii. The Contingent "I": Being Tossed into the World
This sub-topic examines the nature of the self that exists within this random universe—a self that is both a product of contingency and a necessary, fixed point of consciousness.

1. P_Henri Cartier-Bresson_Simone de Beauvoir_1946
"Tossed into the world, I have been subjected to its laws and its contingencies, ruled by wills other than my own, by circumstance and by history: it is therefore reasonable for me to feel that I am myself contingent. What staggers me is that at the same time I am not contingent. If I had not been born no question would have arisen: I have to take the fact that I do exist as my starting point. To be sure, the future of the woman I have been may turn me into someone other than myself. But in that case it would be this other woman who would be asking herself who she was. For the person who says “Here am I” there is no other coexisting possibility. Yet this necessary coincidence of the subject and his history is not enough to do away with my perplexity. My life: it is both intimately known and remote; it defines me and yet I stand outside it. [...]

Like Einstein’s universe, it is both boundless and finite. Boundless: it runs back through time and space to the very beginnings of the world and to its utmost limits. In my being I sum up the earthly inheritance and the state of the world at this moment. […]

And yet life is also a finite reality. It possesses an inner heart, a centre of interiorization, a me which asserts that it is always the same throughout the whole course. A life is set within a given space of time; it has a beginning and an end; it evolves in given places, always retaining the same roots and spinning itself an unchangeable past whose opening toward the future is limited. It is impossible to grasp and define a life as one can grasp and define a thing, since a life is “an unsummed whole,” as Sartre puts it, a detotalized totality, and therefore it has no being. But one can ask certain questions about it."
(Simone de Beauvoir, All Said and Done, 1974)

2. "THE SELF
We possess nothing in the world—a mere chance can strip us of everything—except the power to say ‘I’. That is what we have to give to God—in other words, to destroy. There is absolutely no other free act which it is given us to accomplish—only the destruction of the ‘I’.

[...] Nothing in the world can rob us of the power to say ‘I’. Nothing except extreme affliction. Nothing is worse than extreme affliction which destroys the ‘I’ from outside, because after that we can no longer destroy it ourselves.

[...] In affliction the vital instinct survives all the attachments which have been torn away, and blindly fastens itself to everything which can provide it with support, like a plant fastens its tendrils. Gratitude (except in a base form) and justice are not conceivable in this state. Slavery. There is no longer the extra amount of energy required to support free-will by which man takes the measure of things. Affliction, from this point of view, is hideous as life in its nakedness always is, like an amputated stump, like the swarming of insects. Life without form. Survival is then the only attachment. That is where extreme affliction begins—when all other attachments are replaced by that of survival. Attachment appears then in its nakedness without any other object but
itself—Hell.

It is by this mechanism that to those in affliction life appears as the one thing desirable, at the very time when their life is in no way preferable to death."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

3. [EN] Trine Sondergaard, Mirror object, 2015 : These old used mirrors, marked by the ravages of time, are hung on the wall at an angle that prevents them from reflecting the surrounding space. They refer only indirectly to the world, creating abstract images through their distortion of reality and their self-reference.

CAN ONE FOLLOW ONE'S DESIRES EVEN WHEN DETERMINED TO DO SO?
"The individual, at whatever level one grasps him, in its elements, in life or in thought, is a rather variable sum of uncounted habits. Since all habits  characterizing a being, even if they were known, would not profit simultaneously from all moments which could actualize them, the unity of a being seems always mired in contingency. Basically, an individual is already only a sum of accidents: moreover, this sum is itself accidental. By the same token, the identity of a being is never fully realized, it suffers from the fact that the wealth of its habits have not been governed with enough attention. A  global identity is then made of more or less exact repetitions, of more or less detailed reflections. No doubt the individual strives to copy today from yesterday; this copying is helped by the dynamics of rhythm, but these rhythms are not all at the same point of their evolution and it is thus that the most solid of spiritual permanency, of a desired identity, affirmed in a character, regresses to resemblance. Life then carries our image from mirror to mirror; we are thus reflections of reflections and our courage is made of the memory of our decisions. However firm we are, we never keep ourselves whole because we have never been conscious of our whole being."
(Gaston Bachelard, The Intuition of the Instant, 1931)

Art: 
- Trine Sondergaard, Mirror object, 2015

4. Illustration: David Ha_Devient-on quelqu’un d’autre quand on ment

The passing of time itself is conducive to lies.
"First of all, time makes us lie because it is the organ of denial. The same thing, through chronology, becomes something else, and then something else again. Becoming is being other than oneself, being what one is not—sometimes less, sometimes more." Through a kind of continuation of otherness, becoming produces people who are unequal and dissimilar to themselves while rendering all predications synthetic. However, since our means of expression represent only a certain instantaneous fidelity—in light of the countless inner truths whose succession makes up our history—we would have to multiply translations ad infinitum to come as close as possible to the total truth. What superhuman patience, what dynamic instrument, and what tireless sincerity would be required, compromised at every moment? Inevitably, the gap widens between the system of stationary signs and the continuity of successive moments, each authentic and absolute, that comprise our existence. As we become aware of this fissure, we are tempted to exploit it by using it as an alibi. This elastic truth greatly favors dishonesty and approximation. We are thus caught in the dilemma of either a timeless fidelity that diverges more and more from our inner truth and becomes more deceitful than hypocrisy, or a sincerity that is always contemporary with its present but whose price is denial, perjury, and perpetual apostasy. Thus, at every moment, we are offered the possibility of truthful lying, presenting a momentary message as an eternal feeling, as a truth in itself.
(Wladimir Jankélévitch, Moral Philosophy, 1962–1963 lectures).

"What I find particularly interesting is what Jankélévitch highlights: we do not have authenticity as a state. We cannot describe ourselves as we would an external object that remains stable. Our future is necessarily false because we are constantly changing. There is a progressive, chronological writing of the self, which means our consciousness is always split. Thus, consciousness and time inscribe the possibility of falsehood into our lives. It is with this possibility of falsehood that we must approach the question of sincerity"
(Nathalie Frogneux)


Jean-Claude Roman, the man who pretended to be a doctor for years—as depicted in Nicole Garcia's 2002 film, The Adversary—shows how hypocrisy can sometimes be so convincing that it becomes a new way of life. A successful lie has a cumulative effect over time, meaning that, since others accept him as a doctor, he increasingly sees himself as one. Ultimately, when he is in prison, he is known as "Doc." It's complicated because he lies to everyone, yet everything happens as if his lie were sincere. Ultimately, he lives an entirely false life with the sincerity of someone who wants to be a doctor. One can lie while being sincere; he truly intends to become a doctor and become who he claims to be.
Another example is Mischa Defonseca, who made up a story about being Jewish and surviving with wolves during World War II to escape her family's past collaboration with the Nazis. She gave presentations about her story in schools until she was forced to publicly admit that it was a lie. In her defense, she said that she often had difficulty distinguishing reality from her inner world.
Nous ne condamnons pas ces mensonges pour des raisons morales, mais pour défendre la cohérence du monde et de notre "être-ensemble". 

We do not condemn these lies for moral reasons, but rather to defend the coherence of our shared life.
 
The consistency of our shared life requires us to articulate the relationship between accuracy and sincerity. If we share a world, we must be able to share certain facts. According to Bernard Williams, we have a relationship with truth and truthfulness that makes us human. To renounce this relationship would mean breaking with who we are. Williams believes that truth is based on the virtues of sincerity and accuracy because they cultivate each other. For example, I cannot be sincere if I am not concerned that what I say is accurate and adequate to the external world and not likely to be contradicted. Obviously, accuracy requires measuring instruments. I am not always accurate; it is a virtue. It must be earned little by little through increasingly precise epistemologies, measuring instruments, and multiplying perspectives. For example, we can clearly see that accuracy is hard-won in complex issues such as global warming through the accumulation of different points of view. Simply looking and observing is not enough; we must commit to using the most precise and accurate methods possible to find epistemologies that allow us to measure the world as best we can while remaining sincere. We can have things right in front of our eyes and not see them. We must be able to question our prejudices and our conception of the world because the new measures may require us to reevaluate our sincerity.
We can distinguish between sincerity and frankness. Frankness goes beyond sincerity, especially when expressing a point of view that could upset our relationships with others, the world, or ourselves. There is an illusion in parresia, or speaking the truth, which is the idea that being sincere means being completely transparent. It's important to realize that we're rarely completely transparent with ourselves, so sincerity is an ongoing process.
Nathalie Frogneux is interested in the tipping point when our freedom in relation to the world, to others, and to ourselves—in the way we interpret and relate to ourselves—is reversed and becomes a prison, a breakdown in trust in our relationships with others, or a difficulty relating to ourselves. While we may be fascinated by the creative power of great liars, at a certain point, this freedom seems to reverse into its opposite.
It is difficult to accept Jankélévitch's urging that lying is part of our lives. Is the demand for transparency a misunderstanding of who we are since we are constantly evolving? We are quite comfortable with "happy lies," as St. Augustine called them: those that allow us to exaggerate to make our speech more interesting or to avoid being entirely accurate so as not to bore others. Praise also increases people's well-being. Through the performative power of language, praise increases what is. A flower is more beautiful when I talk about it than when I ignore it. Language is not a duplicate of reality. What is interesting is the point at which we feel the need for reunification—the moment when we say, "Stop talking nonsense!" The desire to confess may be a sign of reaching this limit (see Jérôme Porée, Phénoménologie de l'aveu, 2018). We often talk about confessions being extracted when, in fact, confession is also a moment of reunification with the world and with oneself.
See aphorism 54 in Nietzsche's Human, All Too Human. Removing the possibility of lying removes the power of imagination and our freedom over ourselves. We are caught in a dialectic between the freedom to invent and our desire for a consistent world. Subjective truth is established in dialogue in a triangle between oneself, others, and the world. There are limits to the discrepancy between what I tell myself and what the world or others confirm (Nathalie Frogneux, "The Power of Speech").
(Nathalie Frogneux, "The Power of Speech: Do We Become Someone Else When We Lie?" on the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on November 14, 2019)

Lissten to the podcast in French: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/le-pouvoir-de-la-parole-44-devient-quelquun-dautre-quand-ment

5. “THE VERY FACT THAT WE EXIST AS BEINGS WHO CAN ASK THE QUESTION... IS A RESTRICTION ON THE HISTORY WE LIVE IN."
“If the histories of the universe in imaginary time are indeed closed surfaces, as Hartle and I proposed, it would have fundamental implications for philosophy and our picture of where we came from. The universe would be entirely self-contained; it wouldn't need anything outside to wind up the clockwork and set it going. Instead, everything in the universe would be determined by the laws of science and by rolls of the dice within the universe. This may sound presumptuous, but it is what I and many other scientists believe.
Even if the boundary condition of the universe is that it has no boundary, it won't have just a single history. It will have multiple histories, as suggested by Feynman. There will be a history in imaginary time corresponding to every possible closed surface, and each history in imaginary time will determine a history in real time. Thus we have a superabundance of possibilities for the universe. What picks out the particular universe that we live in from the set of all possible universes?
One point we can notice is that many of the possible histories of the universe won't go through the sequence of forming galaxies and stars that was essential to our own development. While it may be that intelligent beings can evolve without galaxies and stars, this seems unlikely. Thus, the very fact that we exist as beings who can ask the question "Why is the universe the way it is?" is a restriction on the history we live in.
It implies it is one of the minority of histories that have galaxies and stars. This is an example of what is called the anthropic principle. The anthropic principle says that the universe has to be more or less as we see it, because if it were different, there wouldn't be anyone here to observe it.
Many scientists dislike the anthropic principle because it seems rather vague and does not appear to have much predictive power. But the anthropic principle can be given a precise formulation, and it seems to be essential when dealing with the origin of the universe. M-theory, described in Chapter 2, allows a very large number of possible histories for the universe. Most of these histories are not suitable for the development of intelligent life; either they are empty, last for too short a time, are too highly curved, or wrong in some other way. Yet according to Richard Feynman's idea of multiple histories, these uninhabited histories can have quite a high probability.
In fact, it doesn't really matter how many histories there may be that don't contain intelligent beings. We are interested only in the subset of histories in which intelligent life develops. This intelligent life need not be anything like humans. Little green aliens would do as well. In fact, they might do rather better. The human race does not have a very good record of intelligent behavior."
(Stephen Hawking, The Universe in a Nutshell, 2001)

6. GOTAMA REGARDS BELIEF IN SELF AS THE CONVICTION THAT ONE IS ULTIMATELY IN CONTROL OF ONE’S DESTINY: BELIEVING IN IT AS REAL HOLDS US BACK FROM GIVING OURSELVES OVER TOTALLY TO LIFE, IN THE END, TO LOVE.
“Nowhere in this pithy text does Gotama declare that there is no self. […] 
[The] unfindability of the self in no way entails that the self does not exist and therefore cannot function as a moral agent. All it means is that the self is ambiguous and elusive, incapable of being pinned down and defined. Today we might say that this is because a person is not a static, circumscribed thing but a hub of complex living processes that are continually evolving and changing in vital interactions with the environment. […]
“Bhikkhus,” he says. “The body (rupa) is not self. If it were, it would not get sick. You could tell your body: ‘be like this’ or ‘don’t be like that.’ But because the body is not self, it does get sick. You can’t tell it: ‘be like this,’ or ‘don’t be like that.’” He points out that the same is true for feelings, perceptions, inclinations, and consciousness. You cannot determine in advance how you will feel, what you will perceive, how you will be inclined to act, or what you will be conscious of. You do not choose to feel happy rather than sad, to perceive a world that delights rather than disturbs you, to always incline to a calm rather than an agitated response, to be unconscious rather than conscious of something distressing. In other words, you are not in charge of what is going on within your own experience.
Experience happens to you. You are thrown into this world at birth, subjected to accidents, infections, cancers, and strokes; if you survive, you will age and decline until one day you exhale your last breath and die. Each of us seeks to mitigate the negatives in life by taking care of our health, keeping fit and active, avoiding dark alleys and war zones, but in the end the grim reaper cuts us down. There is nothing we can do about it. Gotama regards belief in self as the conviction that one is ultimately in control of one’s destiny. This could well be a reference to the idea of self as “the ruler within, the immortal,” found in the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad. Gotama objects to a specific intuition of what the self is. But he does not thereby deny that one leads one’s life as a distinct person or self endowed with moral agency. […]
For Gotama experience is what matters. Although we seem to observe ourselves from the perspective of a detached witness, we should not be tricked into believing that the witness is therefore more enduring or reliable than anything else. If we do so, we resist “comprehending” the world, secure in the conceit that what we really are has nothing to do with the shifting, tragic lives of ourselves and others. Embracing dukkha entails abandoning any ontological commitment to a disembodied self or consciousness that is apart from experience yet magically peers in on it. Whatever survival advantages such a perspective might have provided our ancestors, believing in it as real holds us back from giving ourselves over totally to life. In this sense, embodied attention is an unflinching participation with what is happening now; it is indistinguishable, in the end, from love.”
(Stephen Batchelor, After Buddhism, rethinking the dharma for a secular age, 2016)

7. HEIDEGGER DESCRIBES BEING AS A FORCE THAT "LETS BEINGS LOOSE INTO THE DARING VENTURE" AND "FLING[S] THEM LOOSE". The "ventured" being is fundamentally "unprotected" and "unshielded"—flung into danger and risk. Yet, precisely because it is part of the venture, it is also "retained," "upheld," and "rests securely in its ground."
“1 As Nature gives the other creatures over
2 to the venture of their dim delight
3 and in soil and branchwork grants none special cover,
4 so too our being's pristine ground settles our plight;
5 we are no dearer to it; it ventures us.
6 Except that we, more eager than plant or beast,
7 go with this venture, will it, adventurous
8 more sometimes than Life itself is, more daring
9 by a breath (and not in the least
10 from selfishness).... There, outside all caring,
11 this creates for us a safety—just there,
12 where the pure forces' gravity rules; in the end,
13 it is our unshieldedness on which we depend,
14 and that, when we saw it threaten, we turned it
15 so into the Open that, in widest orbit somewhere,
16 where the Law touches us, we may affirm it.
Rilke calls this poem "improvised verses." […]
In line 8 of our poem, "Nature" is also called "Life." Nature, Life here designate Being in the sense of all beings as a whole. In a note of 1885/86, Nietzsche once wrote: "Being—we have no idea of it other than 'living.'—How can anything dead 'be'?"
Rilke calls Nature the Urjjrund, the pristine ground, because it is the ground of those beings that we ourselves are. This suggests that man reaches more deeply into the ground of beings than do other beings. The ground of beings has since ancient times been called Being. The relation of Being which grounds to the beings that are grounded, is identical for man on the one hand, plant and beast on the other. It consists in this, that Being each time "gives" particular beings "over to venture." Being lets beings loose into the daring venture. This release, flinging them loose, is the real daring. The Being of beings is this relation of the flinging loose to beings. Whoever is in being at a given time is what is being ventured. Being is the venture pure and simple. It ventures us, us humans. It ventures the living beings. The particular being is, insofar as it remains what has ever and always been ventured. But the particular being is ventured into Being, that is, into a daring. Therefore, beings hazard themselves, are given over to venture. Beings are, by going with the venture to which they are given over. The Being of beings is the venture. This venture resides in the will which, since Leibniz, announces itself more clearly as the Being of beings that is revealed in metaphysics. We must not think of will here as the abstract generalization of willing understood in psychological terms. Rather, the human willing that is experienced metaphysically remains only the willed counterpart of will as the Being of beings. Rilke, in representing Nature as the venture, thinks of it metaphysically in terms of the nature of will. This nature of will still conceals itself, both in the will to power and in the will as venture. The will exists as the will to will.
The poem makes no direct statement about the ground of all beings, that is, about Being as the venture pure and simple. But if Being as venture is the relation of flinging loose, and thus retains in the flinging even what has been ventured, then the poem tells us something indirectly about the venture by speaking of what has been ventured.
Nature ventures living beings, and "grants none special cover." Likewise, we men who have been ventured are "no dearer" to the daring that ventures us. The two imply: venture includes flinging into danger. To dare is to risk the game. Heraclitus (Fragment 52) thinks of Being as the aeon, the world's age, and of the aeon in turn as a child's game:  […] "Time is a child playing, playing draughts; the kingship is a child's." If that which has been flung were to remain out of danger, it would not have been ventured. It would not be in danger if it were shielded. Words in German associated with shield are Schutz (protection), Schiltze (marksman), schiitzen (to protect); they belong to schiessen (to shoot), as Buck (boss, knob), biicken (to bend or stoop) belong to biegen (to bend or bow). Schiessen, to shoot, means schiebeny to trust, e.g., to thrust home a bolt. The roof thrusts forth over the wall. In the country we still say: the peasant woman schiesst einy she shoves the dough formed for baking into the oven. The shield is what is pushed before and in front of. It keeps danger from harming, even touching, the endangered being. What is shielded is entrusted to the protector, the shielder. Our older and richer language would have used words like verlaubty verlobt—held dear. The unshielded, on the contrary, is "no dearer." Plant, animal, and man—insofar as they are beings at all, that is, insofar as they are ventured—agree in this, that they are not specially protected. But since they differ nonetheless in their being, there will also be a difference in their unprotectedness. As ventured, those who are not protected are nevertheless not abandoned. If they were, they would be just as little ventured as if they were protected. Surrendered only to annihilation, they would no longer hang in the balance. In the Middle Ages the word for balance, die Wage, still means about as much as hazard or risk. This is the situation in which matters may turn out one way or the other. That is why the apparatus which moves by tipping one way or the other is called die Wage. It plays and balances out. The word Wajjey in the sense of risk and as name of the apparatus, comes from wageny wegen, to make a way, that is, to go, to be in motion. Be-wagen means to cause to be on the way and so to bring into motion: to shake or rock, wiegen. What rocks is said to do so. because it is able to bring the balance, Wage, into the play of movement, this way or that. What rocks the balance weighs down; it has weight. To weigh or throw in the balance, as in the sense of wager, means to bring into the movement of the game, to throw into the scales, to release into risk. What is so ventured is, of course, unprotected; but because it hangs in the balance, it is retained in the venture. It is upheld. Its ground keeps it safely within it. What is ventured, as something that is, is something that is willed; retained within the will, it itself remains in the mode of will, and ventures itself. What is ventured is thus careless, sine cum, securum— secure, safe. What is ventured can follow the venture, follow it into the unprotectedness of the ventured, only if it rests securely in the venture. The unprotectedness of what is ventured not only does not exclude, it necessarily includes, its being secure in its ground. What is ventured goes along with the venture.”
(Martin Heidegger, Poetry, Language, Thought, 1971)

8. NOT UNLIKE THE PROTAGONIST IN KOBO ABE'S THE WOMAN IN THE DUNES, WE FIND OURSELVES THROWN INTO A WORLD NOT OF OUR MAKING, OFTEN ENGAGED IN TASKS THAT SEEM ABSURD, STRUGGLING AGAINST OVERWHELMING FORCES (LIKE THE SAND), AND FORCED TO MAKE SENSE OF OUR CONTINGENT EXISTENCE.
“The sun was boiling mercury, poised at the edge of the sand cliff. Little by little it was beginning to heat the bottom of the hole. He hastily turned his eyes away from the intense glare. In the next instant he had already forgotten it. He simply stared at the facade of the sand wall. 
It was unbelievable! The rope ladder had vanished from the place it had been the night before. The marker bags, half buried by the sand, were perfectly visible. There was no mistake, he remembered the spot. He wondered: Had the ladder alone been swallowed up by the sand? He rushed to the wall and sank his arms into the sand, groping for it. The sand gave way, unresisting, and ran down. However, he wasn't trying to find a needle in a haystack; if he did not succeed with the first try, he never would, no matter how much he searched. Stifling his rising apprehension, he looked again in blank amazement at the abruptness of the slope. 
Wasn't there some spot where it could be scaled? he wondered. He circled the house two or three times, looking. If he climbed up on the roof of the house, the distance to the rim of the hole would be shortest on the north side, toward the sea, but it would still be over thirty feet And, what was more, the wall there was steeper than anywhere else. The massive brow of sand which hung down seemed exceedingly dangerous. 
The west wall seemed to be a comparatively gentle incline, having a curved surface like the inside of a cone. At an optimistic estimate it was probably around fifty or even forty-five degrees. Cautiously he took a probing step. With each step forward he slid back a half step. Even so, it looked as though he could make it with a very great effort. 
Things went as he had expected for the first five or six steps. And then his feet began to sink into the sand. Before he knew whether he was making progress or not, he was buried up to his knees and seemed to have lost all power of movement. Then he attempted frantically to scramble up on all fours. The burning sand scorched his palms. Sweat poured from his whole body. Sand and sweat blinded him. Soon he had cramps in his legs and was unable to move them at all. 
He stopped struggling and caught his breath, assuming he had already covered a considerable distance, but when he opened his eyes, squinting, he was amazed to find that he had come not even five yards. What exactly had he accomplished by all this effort? he wondered. Moreover, the incline he had climbed seemed to be far steeper than when he had looked at it from below. And above where he stood, it looked even worse. Although he had wanted to climb up, he seemed to have spent all his energy simply burrowing into the sand wall. The brow of sand just above his face blocked his path. In desperation he tried to struggle on a little further, but the instant he reached out for the sand over his head his footing gave way. 
He was spewed out from the sand and flung to the bottom of the hole. His left shoulder made a sound like the splitting of chopsticks. But he did not notice any pain. For some time fine sand rustled gently down the face of the cliff as if to ease the hurt he had received; then it stopped. Anyway, his injury was an exceedingly small one. 
It was still too soon to be frightened. 
He stifled a desire to scream and slowly crept back to the hut. The woman was still sleeping in the same position. He called her, gently at first and then in a louder and louder voice. Instead of answering, she turned over as though annoyed. […]
"Say, the ladder's gone! Where's the best place to climb out of here, for heaven's sake? You can't get out of a place like this without a ladder." 
She gathered up the towel with a nervous gesture, and with unexpected energy slapped her face with it two or three times and then, completely turning her back to him, crouched with her knees doubled beneath her and her face to the floor. Was it a bashful movement? This was hardly the place. The man let out a shout as if a dam had given way. 
"This is no joking matter! I don't know what I'll do if you don't get that ladder out. I'm in a hurry! Where in God's name did you hide it? I've had enough of your pranks. Give it here. At once!" 
But she did not answer. She remained in the same position, simply shaking her head left and right. 
He stiffened. His vision blurred, his breathing faltered and almost stopped; he abruptly realized the pointlessness of his questioning. The ladder was of rope. A rope ladder couldn't stand up by itself. Even if he got his hands on it there was no possibility of setting it up from below—which meant that the woman had not taken it down, but someone else had taken it away from the road above. His unshaven face, smudged with sand, suddenly looked miserable. 
The woman's actions and her silence took on an unexpected and terrible meaning. He refused to believe it, yet in his heart he knew his worst fears had come true. The ladder had probably been removed with her knowledge, and doubtless with her full consent. Unmistakably she was an accomplice. Of course her posture had nothing to do with embarrassment; it was the posture of a sacrificial victim, of a criminal willing to accept any punishment. He had been lured by the beetle into a desert from which there was no escape—like some famished mouse. 
He sprang up and, hurrying to the door, looked out again. The wind had risen. The sun was almost directly over the hole. Heat waves, glistening as if alive, rose from the burning sand. The sand cliff towered higher and higher above him; its omniscient face seemed to tell his muscles and bones the meaninglessness of resistance. The hot air penetrated his skin. The temperature began to rise higher.”
(Kobo Abe, The woman in the dunes, 1962)

9. “PULL A STRING, A PUPPET MOVES
each man must realize 
that it can all disappear very
quickly: 
the cat, the woman, the job,
the front tire,
the bed, the walls, the 
room; all our necessities
including love,
rest on foundations of sand  - 
and any given cause, 
no matter how unrelated: 
the death of a boy in Hong Kong
or a blizzard in Omaha ... 
can serve as your undoing. 
all your chinaware crashing to the 
kitchen floor, your girl will enter 
and you'll be standing, drunk, 
in the center of it and she'll ask:
my god, what's the matter? 
and you'll answer: I don't know, 
I don't know …”
(Charles Bukowski)

10. A_Jean Arp_Human Concretion_1934_(1) ; A_Jean Arp_Human Concretion_1934_(2) /Jean Arp/

A PHYSICAL MANIFESTATION OF THE UNPREDICTABILITY
“Arp worked largely in plaster, with the expectation of making stone and bronze versions of the resulting works. He called an early group of sculptures Human Concretions, which he created by joining together smaller components, using plaster both to make the constitutive elements and to bind them together. Multiple layers of plaster, spread with a spatula, smoothed transitions between different elements, and additions would be filed and sanded to create surfaces of enormous subtlety. The resulting swells and dips confounded expectations of what other sides of the sculpture might look like, a physical manifestation of the unpredictability Arp sought in the laws of chance. The term "concretion" referred to a specific process in the geological formation of limestone, as Arp later explained: "Concretion signifies the natural processes of condensation, hardening, coagulation, thickening, growing together. Concretion designates curdling, the curdling of the earth and the heavenly bodies.”
(Curatorship: Peggy Guggenheim Collection, Venice)

E2.2.B.4.a.iii. An Alternative View: The World as Necessity or Will
To sharpen the definition of a chance-based world, this section will explore the opposing philosophical view—that the world is governed by a deterministic, mechanical will.

"[For Schopenhauer,] there is neither birth nor death, life nor death, but only a mechanism—the will—whose successive movements create the illusion of autonomy, freedom, and life for those who are conscious of being affected by it (i.e., human beings). However, what humans call 'life' refers only to the will's ability to mechanically repeat itself, to a disguised renewal, and to humans' ability to illusorily assume responsibility for a will that appears to be acted upon, but is actually suffered. Ultimately, the idea of life would not exist without the illusion that allows humans to consider themselves the subjects of their desires and will. According to Schopenhauer, man's ability to outbid himself, to personally 'want' what wants within him—the fundamental illusion of human thought—is the only thing that allows us to imagine the nebulous features of a life superimposed on nature (on the will). The life that humans imagine when experiencing their own will is false, a poor imitation. The fundamental illusion that Schopenhauer constantly attacks is the idea that the will can be alive. A life willed outside the will at work in nature would be alive—that is to say, true—but nothing of the sort exists. [...]

Similar to the concept of chance, Schopenhauerian pessimism dissolves the distinction between life and death. However, he does so by different means. Instead of integrating the totality of existence into the concept of chance, Schopenhauer resorts to a metaphysical notion of organization—the will—which is the opposite of chance. Nevertheless, it is "by chance" that the will has extended its hold over existence. As mentioned earlier, Schopenhauer first posits a constituted world, from which it is possible to speak of chance or, rather, absurdity. In this world, a fundamental equivalence between levels of existence is apparent. However, the pessimistic thinker (Schopenhauer) perceives this equivalence as a universal law—the will—established once and for all. In contrast, the tragic thinker (Lucretius) perceives it as a generalized chance and an absence of constitution (or "nature"). Both thinkers reduce what exists to a single level of existence, but for opposite reasons. For the pessimist, nothing is chance, so there is an absurd, well-constructed, mechanical world whose springs are organized in a coherent manner, albeit outside of any reasonable purpose. For the tragic thinker, everything is chance, so there is an absence of a constituted world, whether rational or aberrant."
(Clément Rosset, Logic of the Worst, 1971)

CHESS

I

In their serious corner the players
rule their slow pieces. The board
delays them till dawn
in their strict ambit,
where two colors hate each other.

Within, magical severities infuse
the figures: homeric tower, light
horse, armed queen,
last king, oblique
bishop and assailant pawns.

When the players have gone,
when time has eaten them,
the rite has certainly not stopped.

This war was lit in the East,
whose amphitheater today is all the world.
And as the other, this game is infinite.

II

Weak king, biased bishop, embittered
queen, straight tower and wily pawn,
over the black
and white of the road
they seek and wage armed battle.

They do not know that the appointed hand
of the player governs their fate,
they do not know
that an adamantine rigor
subjects their will and their journey.

The player too is prisoner
(the sentence is Omar’s) of that other board,
the black nights and the white days.

God moves the player and the player moves the piece
What God behind God began the weaving
of dust and time and dream and the throes of death?


AJEDREZ

I

En su grave rincón, los jugadores
rigen las lentas piezas. El tablero
los demora hasta el alba en su severo
ámbito en que se odian dos colores.

Adentro irradian mágicos rigores
las formas: torre homérica, ligero
caballo, armada reina, rey postrero,
oblicuo alfil y peones agresores.

Cuando los jugadores se hayan ido,
cuando el tiempo los haya consumido,
ciertamente no habrá cesado el rito.

En el Oriente se encendió esta guerra
cuyo anfiteatro es hoy toda la tierra.
Como el otro, este juego es infinito.

II

Tenue rey, sesgo alfil, encarnizada
reina, torre directa y peón ladino
sobre lo negro y blanco del camino
buscan y libran su batalla armada.

No saben que la mano señalada
del jugador gobierna su destino,
no saben que un rigor adamantino
sujeta su albedrío y su jornada.

También el jugador es prisionero
(la sentencia es de Omar) de otro tablero
de negras noches y blancos días.

Dios mueve al jugador, y éste, la pieza.
¿Qué Dios detrás de Dios la trama empieza
de polvo y tiempo y sueño y agonías?
(Jorge Luis Borges, Oeuvre Poétique 1925-1965)

[EN] Marcos Coelho Benjamin, Wheel, 1997
“A mandala is a world that is immediately perceived because it is neither an accumulation of various things nor a container, but a unitary space in which a situation unfolds within its own coherence. A play between a space and some limits. It concerns us and includes us in it. Contrary to this meaning, the term « world » today denotes, for us, the exhaustive set of all that is, from insects to stars - and it therefore refers to a quantitative enumeration, a statistical catalog, of everything that exists or, according to Kant's analysis, the « totality of the objects of a possible experience. » The world has thus become a totality when the mandala is a wholeness. The difference is not necessarily obvious, it is nonetheless essential. Our word « totalitarianism », coined by Hannah Arendt, sheds light on the current meaning of « totality ». A totalitarian political regime is one which admits of no organized opposition and in which the state tends to confiscate the totality of a society's activities. The totalitarian project is based on the negation of all difference, in an imposed uniformity. « Totality » therefore refers to the project of full control over all that is. Wholeness, on the other hand, is the character of that which lacks nothing in order to fully exist. A living and open fullness in mouvement."
(Fabrice Midal, Mandalas, Rediscovering the world's unity)


Art :
- Marcos Coelho Benjamin, Roue, 1997

"The rebel is a man who is on the point of accepting or rejecting the sacred and determined on laying claim to a human situation in which all the answers are human—in other words, formulated in reasonable terms. From this moment every question, every word, is an act of rebellion while in the sacred world every word is an act of grace. It would be possible to demonstrate in this manner that only two possible worlds can exist for the human mind: the sacred (or, to speak in Christian terms, the world of grace and the world of rebellion. The disappearance of one is equivalent to the appearance of the other, despite the fact that this appearance can take place in disconcerting forms."
(Albert Camus, The rebel, 1951)

E2.2.B.4.b. The Human Response: Composing a Life from Fortuitous Events
This chapter explores how human consciousness interacts with the randomness of the universe. It argues that navigation is not a passive acceptance of fate, but an active process of attention, interpretation, and action that transforms random occurrences into meaningful experiences.

E2.2.B.4.b.i. The Attentive Mind: Transforming Coincidence into Motif
This sub-topic will focus on the first step of navigation: the crucial role of attention and interpretation in giving meaning to random events.

A_Georgia O'Keeffe_Blue and Green Music_circa 1919-1921
The comparison of life to a musical composition, visually echoed by Georgia O'Keeffe's abstract painting Blue and Green Music, reinforces the idea that navigating chance is a creative, aesthetic act. We are not just victims of randomness; we are composers who weave it into a meaningful whole.

"Our day-to-day life is bombarded with fortuities or, to be more precise, with the accidental meetings of people and events we call coincidences. “Co-incidence” means that two events unexpectedly happen at the same time, they meet: Tomas appears in the hotel restaurant at the same time the radio is playing Beethoven. We do not even notice the great majority of such coincidences. If the seat Tomas occupied had been occupied instead by the local butcher, Tereza never would have noticed the radio was playing Beethoven… But her nascent love inflamed her sense of beauty, and she would never forget that music. Whenever she heard it, she would be touched. Everything going on around her at that moment would be haloed by the music and take on its beauty. [...]

Human lives… are composed like music. Guided by his* sense of beauty, an individual transforms a fortuitous occurrence… into a motif, which then assumes a permanent place in the composition of the individual’s life… Without realizing it, the individual composes his life according to the laws of beauty even in times of great distress. [...]

Chance and chance alone has a message for us. Everything that occurs out of necessity, everything expected, repeated day in and day out, is mute. […]

Necessity knows no magic formula — they are all left to chance."
(Milan Kundera, The Unbearable Lightness of Being, 1984)

A_Regina Parra_A grande chance_(1) / A_Regina Parra_A grande chance_(2)
By placing a man-made sign of opportunity within the wild randomness of a forest, Regina Parra suggests that "the big chance" is not something that exists outside of the contingent world, but an event that our attentive minds must spot and seize from within it.

"In serendipity, we find an organizing principle for meaning amid the randomness that governs the universe of which our own lives are but an echo. It is the music amid the noise of being. [...] Serendipity - the gladsome coincidence of two events, rendered meaningful by the emotional weight of each and the infinitesimal cosmic odds of their co-occurrence. [...]
It is important, Kundera argues, to be awake to serendipity — for letting coincidences go unnoticed deprives our lives of “a dimension of beauty.” But his very metaphor undermines the case for pure chance as the conductor of our lives: Music, after all, is not the product of chance but of the composer’s deliberate choice in sequencing the notes and silences. Our experience of beauty is the product of the quality of attention we choose to pay an object. Simone de Beauvoir, writing in the same era as Kundera, came closer to the composite truth when she contemplated how chance and choice converge to shape our lives. [...]

Still, Kundera captures an elemental fact: We may choose to love whom we love, but it is chance that first intersects our fates. Coincidences remind us that chance may not be the sole conductor of our lives, but it is what gives life the capacity for surprise, for sudden deviation from the predicted path — those quickenings of the soul that elevate life above mere existence and envelop it in an aura of magic that makes it worth living."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2023/09/11/milan-kundera-coincidenes/?mc_cid=e86282b7e3&mc_eid=0b6483decb

""The particular path of the mind must be studied. There is a whole casuistry to be explored: Why, at a particular moment in a particular consciousness, will this perception evoke this idea rather than another?" The association of ideas does not explain why one idea is evoked over another. From this point of view, we must therefore define the relationship as 'the particular circumstance in which we deem it appropriate to compare two ideas, even when they are arbitrarily united in the imagination.' While association is necessary to make any relationship possible in general, it does not explain each particular relationship. What gives a relationship its sufficient reason is circumstance.

This notion of circumstance appears constantly in Hume's philosophy. It is at the center of history and makes a science of the particular and differential psychology possible. When Freud and Bergson demonstrate that the association of ideas only explains the superficial aspects of us—the formalism of consciousness—they essentially mean that only affectivity can justify singular content, the profound, and the particular. They are undoubtedly right. However, Hume never said anything else. He simply believed that the superficial and formal also had to be explained and that this task was the most important. For the rest, he invokes circumstance. This notion always refers to affectivity. The idea that affectivity is a matter of circumstance must be taken literally.
These are the very variables that define our passions and interests. Understood in this way, a set of circumstances always singularizes a subject since it represents the subject's passions, needs, interests, and beliefs. Therefore, we can see that the principles of passion must be combined with the principles of association for the subject to be formed in the mind. While the latter explains how ideas are associated, only the former explains why one idea is associated with another at a given moment. [...]

In all cases, we see that the subject presents itself in the mind under the influence of two types of combined principles. It is as if the principles of association give the subject its necessary form and the principles of passion give it its unique content. The latter function as a principle of the subject's individuation. However, this duality does not imply an opposition between the singular and the universal. The principles of passion are no less universal and constant than the others. They define laws in which circumstances play the role of variables. They concern the individual in the sense that a science of the individual can be carried out. [...] We can already sense how this unity will manifest in the subject. If the relationship cannot be separated from circumstances and the subject cannot be separated from singular content that is essential to it, it is because, in essence, subjectivity is practical. Its definitive unity will be revealed in the relationships between motive and action, means and end. These relationships are not only relationships; they are also something else: the unity of the relationships themselves and of the circumstances. The fundamental proposition of empiricism is that there is no theoretical subjectivity and that there cannot be any. On closer inspection, this is another way of saying that the subject is constituted in the given. If the subject is constituted in the given, then there is no subject other than the practical subject."
(Gilles Deleuze, Empiricism and Subjectivity, 1977)

P_Talisman

“TALISMAN
The act
of granting powers
to a rock
so it can be used
to conjure luck,
it worked before
it might again,
how small
and irregular
this matter of
millions of years
of compression
and icebergs melting
ending here,
deep in a pocket,
at work
on the course
of a diagnosis.”
(Lia Purpura, It shouldn’t have been beautiful, 2015)

A_Jenny Holzer_You live the surprise results of old plans_1983-1985

“PROBABILITY
Most coincidences are not
miraculous, but way more
common than we think –
it’s the shiver
of noticing being
central in a sequence
of events
that makes so much
seem wild and rare –
because what if it wasn’t?
Astonishment’s nothing
without your consent.”
(Lia Purpura, It shouldn’t have been beautiful, 2015)

E2.2.B.4.b.ii. The Creative Encounter: Seizing the Occasion
Moving beyond passive attention, this section will explore the active and creative seizing of opportunities presented by chance.

"Opportunity is not just an unexpected favor that must be seized; it is also something that our freedom seeks and, if necessary, creates. If opportunity is a grace, then grace presupposes a conscience in a state of grace in order to be received. A restless conscience capable of making the most of chance can find opportunity in everything. Opportunity electrifies creative genius because opportunity is the electric shock of inspiration. However, it is creative genius that transforms an encounter from a meaningless occurrence into a meaningful opportunity. This reciprocal causality—this paradoxical relationship between effect and cause—is what gives improvisation the depth of a creative process. Improvisation is not just a hasty operation or a sloppy last-minute maneuver finished in a rush. It also refers to the mystery of mental childbirth. It is the beginning of the beginning—the first step of creative invention from the blank page and the amorphous, stammering word" (Vladimir Jankélévitch, Somewhere in the Unfinished, 1978).
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, Somewhere in the Unfinished, 1978)

[EN] Ben Smith, Cusp, 2019
Ben Smith's painting Cusp is a stunning visual metaphor for the moment Jankélévitch describes. It captures the "incandescent now caught in action"—the fleeting, irreversible instant just before the bite, a moment "caught between the not-yet and the not-anymore."

"The occasion is not only tenuous, but instantaneous; not only instantaneous, but irreversible. The occasion, at least in its original freshness, will not be offered to us again and this uniqueness explains both its fascinating and poignant character. The acute occasion does not include a precedent nor a second chance, it does not announce itself by warning signs nor survive a second time; you can neither prepare for it, nor catch up with it after the fact ... Caught between the not-yet and the not-anymore, it excludes the repetitiveness of reiterations, just as its unpredictability and its irrationality exclude anticipation! The timeliness without which the opportunity will escape is inscribed within the time frame of lightning, of an incandescent now caught in action, of such a fleeting moment that the very second I speak of it, it is already gone!"
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, Somewhere in the unfinished, 1978)

Art:
- Ben Smith_Cusp, 2019

A PSYCHOLOGICAL AND NEUROLOGICAL FRAMEWORK FOR HOW HUMANS ENGAGE WITH THE UNEXPECTED.
 “Ignored inconveniences accumulate, rather than disappear.  When they accumulate in sufficient numbers, they produce a  catastrophe—a self-induced catastrophe, to be sure, but one that  may be indistinguishable from an “act of God.” Inconveniences  interfere with the integrity of our plans—so we tend to pretend that  they are not there. Catastrophes, by contrast, interfere with the  integrity of our whole stories, and massively dysregulate our  emotions. By their nature, they are harder to ignore—although that  does not stop us from trying to do so.   Inconveniences  are  common;  unfortunately,  so  are  catastrophes—self-induced and otherwise. We are adapted to  catastrophes, like inconveniences, as constant environmental  features. We can resolve catastrophe, just as we can cope with  inconvenience—although at higher cost. As a consequence of this  adaptation, this capacity for resolution, catastrophe can rejuvenate.  It can also destroy.   The more ignored inconveniences in a given catastrophe, the  more likely it will destroy.   Enough has been learned in the last half-century of inquiry into intellectual and emotional  function to enable the development of a provisional general theory of emotional  regulation. Description of the role that reaction to novelty or anomaly plays in human  information processing is clearly central to such a theory. A compelling body of evidence  suggests that our affective, cognitive and behavioral responses to the unknown or  unpredictable are “hard-wired”; suggests that these responses constitute inborn structural  elements of the processes of consciousness itself. We attend, involuntarily, to those  things that occur contrary to our predictions—that occur despite our desires, as expressed  in expectation. That involuntary attention comprises a large part of what we refer to when  we say “consciousness.” Our initial attention constitutes the first step in the process by  which we come to adjust our behavior and our interpretive schemas to the world of  experience—assuming that we do so; constitutes as well the first step we take when we  modify the world to make it what we desire, instead of what it is currently.   Modern investigation into the role of novelty in emotion and thought began with the  Russians—E.N.Sokolov, O.Vinogradova, A.R.Luria (and, more recently, E.Goldberg)— who adopted an approach to human function that is in many ways unique. Their tradition  apparently stems from Pavlov, who viewed the reflex arc as a phenomenon of central  importance, and from the Marxist intellectual legacy, which regarded work—creative  action—as the defining feature of man. Whatever the specific historical precedents, it is  most definitely the case that the Russians have regarded motor output and its abstract  equivalents as the critically relevant aspect of human existence.”
(Jordan Peterson, Maps of Meaning The Architecture of Belief, 1999)

WHEN FACED WITH OVERWHELMING COMPLEXITY, OUR FREEDOM LIES IN OUR ABILITY TO EITHER CHANGE OUR ACTIONS OR CHANGE OUR MINDS
 " A brain in a vat is at the wheel of a runaway trolley, approaching a fork in the track. The brain is hooked up to the trolley in such a way that the brain can determine which course the trolley will take. There are only two options: the right side of the fork, or the left side. There is no way to derail or stop the trolley, and the brain is aware of this. On the right side of the track there is a single railroad worker, Jones, who will definitely be killed if the brain steers the trolley to the right. If Jones lives he will go on to kill five men for the sake of thirty orphans (one of the five men he will kill is planning to destroy a bridge that the orphans’ bus will be crossing later that night). One of the orphans who will be killed would have grown up to become a tyrant who made good, utilitarian men do bad things, another would have become John Sununu, a third would have invented the pop-top can.  
If the brain in the vat chooses the left side of the track, the trolley will  definitely hit and kill another railman, Leftie, and will hit and destroy ten  beating hearts on the track that would have been transplanted into ten  patients at the local hospital who will die without donor hearts. These are  the only hearts available, and the brain is aware of this. If the railman on  the left side of the track lives, he, too, will kill five men—in fact, the same  five that the railman on the right would kill. However, Leftie will kill the  five as an unintended consequence of saving ten men: he will  inadvertently kill the five men as he rushes the ten hearts to the local  hospital for transplantation. A further result of Leftie’s act is that the  busload of orphans will be spared. Among the five men killed by Leftie is  the man responsible for putting the brain at the controls of the trolley. If  the ten hearts and Leftie are killed by the trolley, the ten prospective heart- transplant patients will die and their kidneys will be used to save the lives  of twenty kidney transplant patients, one of whom will grow up to cure  cancer and one of whom will grow up to be Hitler. There are other  kidneys and dialysis machines available, but the brain does not know this.   Assume that the brains choice, whatever it turns out to be, will serve as  an example to other brains in vats, and thus the effects of its decision will  be amplified. Also assume that if the brain chooses the right side of the  fork, an unjust war free of war crimes will ensue, whereas if the brain  chooses the left fork, a just war fraught with war crimes will result.  Furthermore, there is an intermittently active Cartesian demon deceiving  the brain in such a way that the brain is never sure that it is being  deceived.   
Question: Ethically speaking, what should the brain do?
We cannot act in two ways at one time—cannot move forwards and backwards, cannot  stop and go, simultaneously. When faced with stimuli whose meaning is indeterminate  we are therefore placed in conflict. Such conflict must be resolved, before adaptive action  may take place. We can actually only do one thing, at one time, although we may be  motivated by confusing, threatening, dangerous or unpredictable circumstances to  attempt many incommensurate things simultaneously.   

Unexplored Territory: Phenomenology and Neuropsychology   
The dilemma of contradictory simultaneous meanings can be solved in only two related  ways (although it can be avoided in many others). We can alter our behaviors, in the  difficult situation, so that those behaviors no longer produce consequences we do not  desire or cannot interpret. Alternatively, we can reframe our contexts of evaluation (our  goals and our interpretations of the present), so that they no longer produce paradoxical  implications, with regard to the significance of a given situation. These processes of  behavioral modification and reframing constitute acts of effortful revaluation, which  means thorough, exploratory reconsideration of what has been judged previously to be  appropriate or important.”
(Jordan Peterson, Maps of Meaning The Architecture of Belief, 1999)


A NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL MODEL FOR HOW HUMAN BEINGS CONFRONT THE UNKNOWN
“Things or situations with indeterminate meanings therefore challenge our adaptive competence; force us to revaluate our present circumstances and alter our ongoing behaviors. Such circumstances arise when something we have under control, from one perspective, is troublesome or otherwise out of control from another. Out of control means, most basically, unpredictable: something is beyond us when our interactions with it produce phenomena whose properties could not be determined, beforehand. Unexpected or novel occurrences, which emerge when our plans do not turn out the way we hope they would, therefore constitute an important—perhaps the most important—subset of the broader class of stimuli of indeterminate meaning. Something unexpected, or novel, necessarily occurs in relationship to what is known; is always identified and evaluated with respect to our currently operative plan [which is to say that a familiar thing in an unexpected place (or at an unexpected time) is actually something unfamiliar]. The wife of an adulterous husband, for example, is well-known to him, perhaps, when she is at home. The fact of her, and her behavior, constitutes explored territory. She is an entirely different sort of phenomenon, however, from the perspective of affect (and implication for behavioral output) if she makes an unexpected appearance at his favorite motel room, in the midst of a tryst. What will the husband do, in his wife’s presence, when she surprises him? First, he will be taken aback, in all likelihood—then he will concoct a story that makes sense of his behavior (if he can manage it, on such short notice). He has to think up something new, do something he has never done before. He has to manage his wife, who he thinks he has fooled—his wife, whose mere unexpected presence at the motel is proof of her endless residual mystery. Our habitual patterns of action only suffice for things and situations of determinate significance—by definition: we only know how to act in the presence of the familiar. The appearance of the unexpected pops us out of unconscious, axiomatic complacency and forces us (painfully) to think.  
The implications of novel or unpredictable occurrences are unknown, by definition. This observation carries within it the seeds of a difficult and useful question: what is the significance of the unknown? It might seem logical to assume that the answer is none—something unexplored cannot have meaning, because none has yet been attributed to it. The truth, however, is precisely opposite. Those things we do not understand nonetheless signify. If you can’t tell what something means, because you don’t know what it is, what then does it mean? It is not nothing—we are in fact frequently and predictably upset by the unexpected. Rather, it could be anything, and that is precisely the crux of the problem. Unpredictable things are not irrelevant, prior to the determination of their specific meaning. Things we have not yet explored have significance, prior to our adaptation to them, prior to our classification of their relevance, prior to our determination of their implication for behavior. Things not predicted, not desired, that occur while we are carrying out our carefully designed plans—such things come loaded, a priori, with meaning, both positive and negative. The appearance of unexpected things or situations indicates, at least, that our plans are in error, at some stage of their design—in some trivial way, if we are lucky; in some manner that might be devastating to our hopes and wishes, to our self-regard, if we are not.  
Unexpected or unpredictable things—novel things, more exactly (the class of novel things, most particularly)—have a potentially infinite, unbounded range of significance. What does something that might be anything mean? In the extremes, it means, the worst that could be (or, at least, the worst you can imagine) and, conversely, the best that could be (or the best you can conceive of). Something new might present the possibility for unbearable suffering, followed by meaningless death—a threat virtually unbounded in significance. That new and apparently minor but nonetheless strange and worrisome ache you noticed this morning, for example, while you were exercising, might just signify the onset of the cancer that will slowly and painfully kill you. Alternatively, something unexpected might signify inconceivable opportunity for expansion of general competence and well-being. Your old, boring but secure job unexpectedly disappears. A year later, you are doing what you really want to do, and your life is incomparably better.  
An unexpected thing or situation appearing in the course of goal-directed behavior constitutes a stimulus that is intrinsically problematic: novel occurrences are, simultaneously, cues for punishment (threats) and cues for satisfaction (promises).81 This paradoxical a priori status is represented schematically in Figure 5: The Ambivalent Nature of Novelty. Unpredictable things, which have a paradoxical character, accordingly activate two antithetical emotional systems, whose mutually inhibitory activities provide basic motivation for abstract cognition, whose cooperative endeavor is critical to the establishment of permanent memory, and whose physical substrates constitute universal elements of the human nervous system. The most rapidly activated82 of these two systems governs inhibition of ongoing behavior, cessation of currently goal-directed activity;83 the second, equally powerful but somewhat more conservative,84 underlies exploration, general behavioral activation85 and forward locomotion.86 Operation of the former appears associated with anxiety, with fear and apprehension, with negative affect—universal subjective reactions to the threatening and unexpected.87 Operation of the latter, by contrast, appears associated with hope, with curiosity and interest, with positive affect—subjective responses to the promising and unexpected.88 The process of exploring the emergent unknown is therefore guided by the interplay between the emotions of curiosity/hope/excitement on the one hand and anxiety on the other—or, to describe the phenomena from another viewpoint, between the different motor systems responsible for approach (forward locomotion) and inhibition of ongoing behavior.”
(Jordan Peterson, Maps of Meaning The Architecture of Belief, 1999)


A NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL MODEL FOR HOW HUMAN BEINGS CONFRONT THE UNKNOWN (Continued)
“The constant and universal presence of the incomprehensible in the world has elicited  adaptive response from us and from all other creatures with highly developed nervous  systems. We have evolved to operate successfully in a world eternally composed of the  predictable, in paradoxical juxtaposition with the unpredictable. The combination of what  we have explored and what we have still to evaluate actually comprises our environment,  insofar as its nature can be broadly specified—and it is to that environment that our  physiological structure has become matched. One set of the systems that comprise our  brain and mind governs activity, when we are guided by our plans—when we are in the  domain of the known. Another appears to operate when we face something unexpected— when we have entered the realm of the unknown.105   The “limbic unit” generates the orienting reflex, among its other tasks. It is the  orienting reflex, which manifests itself in emotion, thought and behavior, that is at the  core of the fundamental human response to the novel or unknown. This reflex takes a  biologically determined course, ancient in nature, primordial as hunger or thirst, basic as  sexuality, extant similarly in the animal kingdom, far down the chain of organic being.  The orienting reflex is the general instinctual reaction to the category of all occurrences  which have not yet been categorized—is response to the unexpected, novel or unknown  per se, and not to any discriminated aspect of experience, any specifically definable  situation or thing. The orienting reflex is at the core of the process that generates  (conditional) knowledge of sensory phenomena and motivational relevance or valence.  Such knowledge is most fundamentally how to behave, and what to expect as a  consequence, in a particular situation, defined by culturally modified external  environmental circumstance and equally modified internal motivational state. It is also  information about what is, from the objective perspective—is the record of that sensory  experience occurring in the course of ongoing behavior.   The orienting reflex substitutes for particular learned responses when the  incomprehensible suddenly makes its appearance. The occurrence of the unpredictable,  the unknown, the source of fear and hope, creates a seizure of ongoing specifically goal- directed behavior. Emergence of the unexpected constitutes evidence for the incomplete  nature of the story currently guiding such behavior; comprises evidence for error at the  level of working description of current state, representation of desired future state or  conception of the means to transform the former into the latter. Appearance of the  unknown motivates curious, hopeful exploratory behavior, regulated by fear, as means to  update the memory-predicated working model of reality (to update the known, so to  speak, which is defined or familiar territory). The simultaneous production of two  antithetical emotional states, such as hope and fear, means conflict, and the unexpected  produces intrapsychic conflict like nothing else. The magnitude and potential intensity of  this conflict cannot be appreciated under normal circumstances, because under normal  circumstances—in defined territory—things are going according to plan. It is only when  our goals have been destroyed that the true significance of the decontextualized object or  experience is revealed—and such revelation makes itself known first in the form of  fear.106 We are protected from such conflict—from subjugation to instinctive terror—by  the historical compilation of adaptive information generated in the course of previous  novelty-driven exploration. We are protected from unpredictability by our culturally determined beliefs, by the stories we share. These stories tell us how to presume and how to act to maintain the determinate, shared and restricted values that compose our familiar worlds.”
(Jordan Peterson, Maps of Meaning The Architecture of Belief, 1999)


“CHANGE IS THE RESTLESS BEDROCK ON WHICH WE’RE FOUNDED. Lauren Olamina, the heroine of Octavia E. Butler’s Earthseed series, makes a god out of change itself, “the only lasting truth in the world.” For her, the sacred is found in adaptation. Perhaps this is what I’m seeking, too, the ability to step into the world’s flux, to travel with it rather than rasping against it, to let my own form dance across it. “We do not worship God,” Lauren writes in verse. “We perceive and attend to God / We learn from God . . . We shape God.” It’s as good a truth as any, as holy a space in which to rest our minds: We are not the passive recipients of the numinous, but the active constructors of a pantheon. We make the change, and it makes us. Entering into that exchange—knowing the depths of permanence and the restlessness of movement—is the work of a lifetime.
How do we meet this kind of God, this irresistible force that roars through our existence like a hurricane? We adapt. We evolve. We rebuild and remake and renew. We listen to what it has to tell us, and undertake the work of integrating the new knowledge. Sometimes we read it in books. Sometimes we read it elsewhere, in scents carried on the air and the flight paths of birds. Sometimes we need to feel the tingle of magic to remind us what we believe.”
(Katherine May, Enchantment, 2023)

E2.2.B.4.b.iii. The Paradox of Action: Freedom in a Web of Unpredictability
This section will analyze the consequences of acting within a chance-filled world, where every action is a "miracle" that initiates an uncontrollable and unpredictable chain of events.

A_Jenny Holzer_Action causes more trouble than thought

"THE PROCESS CHARACTER OF ACTION [...]

That deeds possess such an enormous capacity for endurance, superior to every other man-made product, could be a matter of pride if men were able to bear its burden, the burden of irreversibility and unpredictability, from which the action process draws its very strength. That this is impossible, men have always known. They have known that he who acts never quite knows what he is doing, that he always becomes "guilty" of consequences he never intended or even foresaw, that no matter how disastrous and unexpected the consequences of his deed he can never undo it, that the process he starts is never consummated unequivocally in one single deed or event, and that its very meaning never discloses itself to the actor but only to the backward glance of the historian who himself does not act. All this is reason enough to turn away with despair from the realm of human affairs and to hold in contempt the human capacity for freedom, which, by producing the web of human relationships, seems to entangle its producer to such an extent that he appears much more the victim and the sufferer than the author and doer of what he has done. Nowhere, in other words, neither in labor, subject to the necessity of life, nor in fabrication, dependent upon given material, does man appear to be less free than in those capacities whose very essence is freedom and in that realm which owes its existence to nobody and nothing but man.

It is in accordance with the great tradition of Western thought to think along these lines: to accuse freedom of luring man into necessity, to condemn action, the spontaneous beginning of something new, because its results fall into a predetermined net of relationships, invariably dragging the agent with them, who seems to forfeit his freedom the very moment he makes use of it. The only salvation from this kind of freedom seems to lie in non-acting, in abstention from the whole realm of human affairs as the only means to safeguard one's sovereignty and integrity as a person. If we leave aside the disastrous consequences of these recommendations (which materialized into a consistent system of human behavior only in Stoicism), their basic error seems to lie in that identification of sovereignty with freedom which has always been taken for granted by political as well as philosophic thought. If it were true that sovereignty and freedom are the same, then indeed no man could be free, because sovereignty, the ideal of uncompromising self-sufficiency and mastership, is contradictory to the very condition of plurality. No man can be sovereign because not one man, but men, inhabit the earth—and not, as the tradition since Plato holds, because of man's limited strength, which makes him depend upon the help of others. All the recommendations the tradition has to offer to overcome the condition of non-sovereignty and win an untouchable integrity of the human person amount to a compensation for the intrinsic "weakness" of plurality. Yet, if these recommendations were followed and this attempt to overcome the consequences of plurality were successful, the result would be not so much sovereign domination of one's self as arbitrary domination of all others, or, as in Stoicism, the exchange of the real world for an imaginary one where these others would simply not exist.

In other words, the issue here is not strength or weakness in the sense of self-sufficiency. In polytheist systems, for instance, even a god, no matter how powerful, cannot be sovereign; only under the assumption of one god ("One is one and all alone and evermore shall be so") can sovereignty and freedom be the same. Under all other circumstances, sovereignty is possible only in imagination, paid for by the price of reality. Just as Epicureanism rests on the illusion of happiness when one is roasted alive in the Phaleric Bull, Stoicism rests on the illusion of freedom when one is enslaved. Both illusions testify to the psychological power of imagination, but this power can exert itself only as long as the reality of the world and the living, where one is and appears to be either happy or unhappy, either free or slave, are eliminated to such an extent that they are not even admitted as spectators to the spectacle of self-delusion.


If we look upon freedom with the eyes of the tradition, identifying freedom with sovereignty, the simultaneous presence of freedom and non-sovereignty, of being able to begin something new and of not being able to control or even foretell its consequences, seems almost to force us to the conclusion that human existence is absurd. In view of human reality and its phenomenal evidence, it is indeed as spurious to deny human freedom to act because the actor never remains the master of his acts as it is to maintain that human sovereignty is possible because of the incontestable fact of human freedom. The question which then arises is whether our notion that freedom and non-sovereignty are mutually exclusive is not defeated by reality, or to put it another way, whether the capacity for action does not harbor within itself certain potentialities which enable it to survive the disabilities of non-sovereignty."
(Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition, 1958)

"Every act, seen from the perspective not of the agent but of the process in whose framework it occurs and whose automatism it interrupts, is a “miracle”—that is, something which could not be expected. If it is true that action and beginning are essentially the same, it follows that a capacity for performing miracles must likewise be within the range of human faculties. This sounds stranger than it actually is. It is in the very nature of every new beginning that it breaks into the world as an “infinite improbability,” and yet it is precisely this infinitely improbable which actually constitutes the very texture of everything we call real. Our whole existence rests, after all, on a chain of miracles, as it were—the coming into being of the earth, the development of organic life on it, the evolution of mankind out of the animal species. For from the viewpoint of the processes in the universe and in nature, and their statistically overwhelming probabilities, the coming into being of the earth out of cosmic processes, the formation of organic life out of inorganic processes, the evolution of man, finally, out of the processes of organic life are all “infinite improbabilities,” they are “miracles” in everyday language. It is because of this element of the “miraculous” present in all reality that events, no matter how well anticipated in fear or hope, strike us with a shock of surprise once they have come to pass. The very impact of an event is never wholly explicable; its factuality transcends in principle all anticipation. The experience which tells us that events are miracles is neither arbitrary nor sophisticated; it is, on the contrary, most natural and, indeed, in ordinary life almost commonplace. Without this commonplace experience, the part assigned by religion to supernatural miracles would be well-nigh incomprehensible."
(Hannah Arendt, Between Past and Future, 1961)

"Perhaps it is not necessary to visit distant worlds in order to grasp the essential truths of the universe, or to understand its order and functioning. Books which do not belong to great literature, books which do not command “the grand style,” often bring us closer to the mystery of life. They treat of the fundamental experience of man, of his “unalterable” human nature, in quite another way from that of the classical writers. They speak of this common fund which binds us not only to one another but to God. They speak of man as an integral part of the universe and not as a “sport of creation”. They speak of man as though to him alone it were given to discover the Creator. They link man’s destiny with the destiny of all creation; they do not make him a victim of fate or an “object of redemption.” In glorifying man they glorify the whole universe. They may not speak in the grand manner. As I have just said, they are less interested in language than in subject matter, more interested in ideas than in the thoughts which clothe them. As a consequence, they often appear to be poor writers, they lend themselves to ridicule and caricature. Nothing is easier to make sport of than the yearning for the sublime. Often, be it noted, this yearning is masked or concealed; often the author himself is not aware of what he seeks or what he states in veiled fashion. 
What is the subject matter of these oft despised books? Briefly, the web of life and death; the pursuit of identity through the drama of identification; the terrors of initiation; the lure of indescribable visions; the road to acceptance; the redemption of the creature world and the transformation of Nature; the final loss of memory, in God. Into the texture of such books is woven all that is symbolic and everlasting - not stars and planets but the deeps between them; not other worlds and their possibly fantastic inhabitants but the ladders that reach to them; not laws and principles but ever unfolding circles of creation and the hierarchies which constitute them.
As to the drama which informs these works, it has nothing to do with the individual versus society, nothing to do with the “conquest of bread,” nor has it even ultimately to do with the conflict between good and evil. It has to do with freedom. For not a line could have been written by the men I have in mind if man had ever known freedom or even what is meant by it. Here truth and freedom are synonymous. In these works the drama begins only when man voluntarily opens his eyes. This act, the sole one which may be said to have heroic significance, displaces all the sound and fury of historical substance. Outward bound, man is at last able to look inward with grace and certitude. No longer looking at life from the world plane, man ceases to be the victim of chance or circumstance: he “elects” to follow his vision. To become one with the imagination. From this moment on he begins to travel; all previous voyages were but circumnavigation."
(Henry Miller, The books in my life, New Direction books, p.144-146, 1969)

A_Pierre Amédée Marcel-Beronneau_Orpheus in Hades_1897 ;  A_Narcissus, tapestry_circa 1500_(1) ; A_Narcissus, tapestry_circa 1500_(2)
"Orpheus is the enigma of listening, Narcissus is the enigma of looking. What do we preserve by listening? What do we preserve by looking? What is there to preserve? These are urgent questions for our time. To bring back Eurydice near him, after she has been killed by a snake, Orpheus agrees to venture in the underground world of the dead. His poetic song touches the Gods who let him cross the underworld, but he will only bring Eurydice back to light if he does not look back as she follows him out. All the great artists from Dante to Charlie Chaplin have made this movement of crossing the hell which was proper to their time in order to bring life back. What in our world should be confronted?  What hell do we have to go through to find a real light that isn't fake? What is it, deep inside us, that needs to be sought out because it is only inside us? Becoming an adult, having a certain control over one's existence, implies rubbing shoulder with death, stepping over fear, that of our own existence and that of the world, to seek the flower of innocence, the flower of metamorphosis and this without being able to turn around, without being able to measure our actions."
(Fabrice Midal, Let´s look at the world through Narcissus'eyes !, broadcast on France Culture on 08/26/2018)

THE ACTIONS OF ANCIENT FORAGERS, THOUGH SEEMINGLY LOCAL, HAD CUMULATIVE EFFECTS THAT "COMPLETELY RESHAPED THE ECOLOGY OF OUR PLANET."
"Without the discovery of as yet unavailable research tools, we will probably never know what the ancient foragers believed or what political dramas they experienced. Yet it is vital to ask questions for which no answers are available, otherwise we might be tempted to dismiss 60,000 of 70,000 years of human history with the excuse that ‘the people who lived back then did nothing of importance’.
The truth is that they did a lot of important things. In particular, they shaped the world around us to a much larger degree than most people realise. Trekkers visiting the Siberian tundra, the deserts of central Australia and the Amazonian rainforest believe that they have entered pristine landscapes, virtually untouched by human hands. But that’s an illusion. The foragers were there before us and they brought about dramatic changes even in the densest jungles and the most desolate wildernesses. The next chapter explains how the foragers completely reshaped the ecology of our planet long before the first agricultural village was built. The wandering bands of storytelling Sapiens were the most important and most destructive force the animal kingdom had ever produced."
(Yuval Noah Harari, Sapiens, A Brief History of Humankind, 2011)

E2.2.B.4.c. The Art of Navigation: Practices for a Life of Chance
This final chapter proposes concrete attitudes, ethics, and practices for living skillfully and meaningfully in a universe governed by chance. It moves from analysis to a "how-to" guide for navigating randomness.

E2.2.B.4.c.i. The Artist as Navigator: Imprisoning and Preserving Chance
This sub-topic will use artistic practice as a model for how to engage with and master chance, not by eliminating it, but by playing with it.

Art: Valie Export_Anagrammatical Compostion with Dice by Valie Export (after W. A. Mozart, Plano) for Soprano Saxophone, 2010 - Video (black and white, sound) 5:48 min
"The starting point for this video is an eighteenth-century musical dice game attributed to Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. A sequence of short, precomposed musical options are randomly selected through rolling dice and following a table of rules; these sequences are then patched together to create a new composition. Here we see one possible result of this chance procedure, which, the artist explained, "in a long, Intensive time process... was rolled by me.” The unpredictable sound of the dice interacts with that of the newly generated melody, becoming an integral part of the musical experiment."
(Curatorship, MomA, NYC)

This artwork serves as a key example of how artists have historically used chance not as a threat to be avoided, but as a generative tool to be harnessed.

Art: 
- Valie Export_Anagrammatical Compostion with Dice by Valie Export (after W. A. Mozart, Plano) for Soprano Saxophone, 2010 - Video (black and white, sound) 5:48 min

Art: Marcel Duchamp _Network of Stoppages, 1914 - Oil and pencil on canvas
"It is "a joke about the meter," Duchamp glibly noted about this piece, but his premise for it reads like a theorem: "If a straight horizontal thread one meter long falls from a height of one meter onto a horizontal plane twisting as it pleases [it] creates a new image of the unit of length." Duchamp dropped three of these threads onto three stretched canvases, where they were then adhered, in order to preserve the random curves they assumed upon landing. The canvases were cut along those curves, creating a template for new units of measure that retain the meter's length but undermine its rational basis.

According to the Laws of Chance

In 1913, Marcel Duchamp dropped three one-meter-long pieces of thread onto three canvases, letting them fall as they may. The result was 3 Standard Stoppages, described by Duchamp as an "experiment... made... to imprison and preserve forms obtained through chance." That same year, he composed Erratum Musical by drawing music notes from a hat."
(Curatorship, MomA, NYC)

Art: 
- Marcel Duchamp _Network of Stoppages, 1914 - Oil and pencil on canvas

"PACHINKO [...]

As for the
art of playing the game, it too differs from that of our machines. For the Western player, once the ball is propelled, the main thing is to correct its trajectory as it falls back down ( by giving little nudges to the machine); for the Japanese player, everything is determined in the initial dispatch, everything depends on the force the thumb imparts to the flipper ; the adroitness is immediate, definitive, it alone accounts for the talent of the player, who can correct chance only in advance and in a single movement; or more exactly: the propulsion of the ball is at best only delicately constrained or halted ( bur' not at all directed ) by the hand of the player, who with a single movement moves and observes: this hand therefore that of an artist ( in the Japanese fashion), for whom the (graphic) feature is a "controlled accident." Pachinko reproduces, in short, on the mechanical level, precisely the principle of painting alla prime,, which insists that the line be drawn in a single movement, once and for all, and that by reason of the very quality of the paper and the ink, it can never be corrected; in the same way the ball, once propelled, cannot be deviated ( it would be an outrageous piece of boorishness to shake the machine, as our Western sports do ) : its path is predetermined by the sole flash of its impetus."
(Roland Barthes, Empire of signs, 1970)

E2.2.B.4.c.ii.The Stoic Stance: Preparing the Inner Citadel
This section will explore the classical approach to navigating fortune: building an internal resilience that is impervious to the blows of external chance.

[EN] Francis Alÿs in collaboration with Juan Garcia, Catalogo 14, 1994-96
The painting by Francis Alÿs, depicting an object at a tipping point, visually captures the precariousness of life and fortune that the Stoic is always mentally prepared to face. It is a moment of potential chance and change that the prepared mind can withstand without shock.

"Fortune … falls heavily on those to whom she is unexpected; the man who is always expecting her easily withstands her. For an enemy’s arrival too scatters those whom it catches off guard; but those who have prepared in advance for the coming conflict, being properly drawn up and equipped, easily withstand the first onslaught, which is the most violent. Never have I trusted Fortune, even when she seemed to offer peace. All those blessings which she kindly bestowed on me — money, public office, influence — I relegated to a place whence she could claim them back without bothering me. I kept a wide gap between them and me, with the result that she has taken them away, not torn them away. [...]
No man has been shattered by the blows of Fortune unless he was first deceived by her favours. Those who loved her gifts as if they were their own forever, who wanted to be admired on account of them, are laid low and grieve when the false and transient pleasures desert their vain and childish minds, ignorant of every stable pleasure. But the man who is not puffed up in good times does not collapse either when they change. His fortitude is already tested and he maintains a mind unconquered in the face of either condition: for in the midst of prosperity he has tried his own strength against adversity."
(Seneca, Consolation to Helvia - his mother)

"RANDOM
It is related to chance, encounters, and the unpredictability of hazards. It should not be confused with the indeterminate or inexplicable. Nothing is more determined than a rolling die. Yet, nothing is more random than its future result. Nothing? Yes: what two, three, or four rolling dice will do. Randomness can be calculated (see probability theory). Randomness can be explained (see meteorology). However, it cannot be predicted, or only poorly. Therefore, we must take it into account without knowing it. This is a virtue, prudence, and a danger, superstition. It is better to pay attention to what we can control than to try to guess or influence what we cannot. Do they prevent each other? Probably not. However, neither is a substitute for the other. The proportion of each varies according to individuals and situations, depending on how much they depend on us."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

"We must start at the beginning. The beginning of everything is courage. Courage is the virtue that inaugurates the beginning, while fidelity is the virtue of continuation and sacrifice is the virtue of the end. Between the sharp moments of sacrifice and courage—the one that unravels and the one that establishes—lasting fidelity unfolds in the chronic and continuous interval of crises. Fidelity is faithful until death, where it finds its limit and conclusion. The virtue of continuation clings to the initial and founding choice that courage assumes. However, fidelity, which is coextensive with the interval, is not simply enclosed between the limits of the beginning and the end. Courage is required to remain faithful. This means that, at every moment, fidelity requires small acts of courage to persist in its continuation. Fidelity resists the whims of change and versatility, the temptations of frivolous forgetfulness and ingratitude, and the trials of suffering. Fidelity is stubbornly continued courage. Courage is the patient continuation of the beginning. Courageous fidelity prolongs the inchoative moment beyond the beginning itself. Fidelity could lose courage; therefore, courage is not just the spasm of the first decision, but a state of being. Faithful courage is a state of being"
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, The Virtues and Love, 1970)

I WILL NOT FORGET THAT ONCE I HAD A LAUGH
"Once I had a laugh
And when I'm older
I will not forget
That once I had a laugh
And when I'm tired
I will not forget
That once I had a laugh
And when I'm fallin'
I will not forget
That once I had a laugh

Once I had a laugh
And now I'm older
But I will not forget
That once I had a laugh
And now I'm fallin'
But I will not forget
That once I had a laugh
I hear you callin'
But it's not over yet
Cause once I had a laugh"
(Norah Jones, Ounces I had a laugh)

Listen to the song on YouTube: https://youtu.be/8dgLG82AtYM

Los Carpinteros_150 People

Is religion ridiculous? Many atheists think that it is. Alain de Botton is an atheist, but he believes there is much that atheists can learn from religions, mainly organisational aspects: Rituals, communal, educational aspects:
A larger perspective of the self: A what of what is consoling in religions is that you adopt a new cosmic perspective: your importance in space and time tends to be reduced and that tends to be a very satisfactory emotion. This is still very open to non believers: see Spinoza. Science often doesn't frame itself to bring out its therapeutic aspects. Science has an esthetic value accessible by the neophytes: You don't need a lot of knowledge about science to derive much of the psychological and aesthetical benefits that is there.
(Alain de Botton on Atheism 2.0 on Philosophy Bites)

Listen to theepisode: http://philosophybites.com/2012/01/alain-de-botton-on-atheism-20-1.html


A MAN HAS NO OTHER ENEMIES THAN HIMSELF
Everyone commonly thinks they have enemies, but this is a mistake. People are inconsistent, yet it's common to cultivate one's enemies more attentively than one's friends. You believe that this man wants to harm you, but he has probably forgotten about it. However, you have not forgotten him. Your presence reminds him of his duties. A man has hardly any enemies other than himself. He is always his own worst enemy through his false judgments, vain fears, despair, and depressing thoughts. Simply tell a man, 'Your destiny depends on you.'"
(Alain, On Happiness, October 23, 1909)

E1.5.E.1.2_REF4.2_LIT.wXXXXXXXX  D.H. LAWRENCE TO HIS FRIEND CYNTHIA ASQUITH, WHO DESPITE HER TALENT AND HER PASSION, FELT TRAPPED IN HER CIRCUMSTANCES — a marriage too small for her, to which she felt tethered by her children, in a country still too corseted by Victorian mores to allow a woman the full freedom to claim her life:
“You must get the *intrinsic* reality clear within your soul — even if you betray it in reality, yet *know* it: that is everything. And know that in the end, always you keep the ultimate choice of your destiny: to abide by the intrinsic reality, or by the extrinsic: the choice is yours, do not let it slide from you, keep it always secure, reserved… Keep the choice of the right always in your own hands. Never admit that it is taken from you… Keep the choice of life… always in your hands: *don’t* ever relinquish it.”
(D.H. Lawrence, Letters, 1932)

"Sans rien autour

N'ayant plus de maison ni logis,
Plus de chambre où me mettre,
Je me suis fabriqué une fenêtre
Sans rien autour.

Fenêtre encadrant la matière
Par le tracé tendre de son contour,
Elle s'ouvre comme la paupière
Se ferme sans rien autour.

Se sont dépouillées les vieilles amours,
Mais la fenêtre dépourvue de glace
Gagne les hauteurs, elle se déplace,
Avec son cadre étonnant,

Qui n'est ni chair ni bois blanc,
Mais qui conserve la forme exacte
D'un oeil parcourant sans ciller
L'espace soumis, le temps rayé."
(Armen Lubin ou Chahan Chahnour)

"Nina Simone once said: Freedom means having no fear. Sometimes on stage, she added, she would reach that kind of state. How do you free yourself from fear?
TIM, BRUSSELS, BELGIUM


Dear Tim,

Freedom for me is the ability to relinquish control of the outcome of things and so, in this respect, I agree with Nina Simone; it is to be delivered from fear. These are fraught times but, for me, meditation, the loss of my son, and even the fact that I am just getting older, has allowed me to arrive at a place where I do not feel at the mercy of consequence in the way that I used to — it doesn’t matter to me so much these days what happens. I feel that if I stay true to myself and follow my intuitions, if I surrender control of life’s outcomes, things tend to work out okay. On an artistic level, I play what I want to play, and say what I want to say, and let the chips fall where they may. This is a kind of freedom. As I have said before in The Red Hand Files, the universe has had its best shot at me and I am still kicking around. The Red Hand Files have played a significant part in this feeling of resilience to the capricious and indifferent nature of the world, they have made me stronger. Each answer I write seems to be an act of surrender, but at the same time a kind of armouring up — vulnerability as a form of protection.

Tim, your question, that came in today, was the 30,000th one. It is also two years this week since I started The Red Hand Files and I can’t tell you how much this means to me. On top of that, this week was my lovely wife’s birthday and also the funeral of my dear, dear mother. Thank you to the many people who offered their condolences at the loss of my mother and reminded me, over and over again, of her beautiful words —

“Head high and fuck ‘em all!”

She was the greatest.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #116 / SEPTEMBER 2020)

Read it in the Red Hand Files: https://www.theredhandfiles.com/nina-simone-fear/

Paulo Bruscky, Eu comigo [Me with Myself], 1977
As Hannah Arendt reminds us in The Human Condition (1958), all post-Socratic philosophies from ancient Greece suffer perhaps from the same limitation - to serve as philosophies of liberation - of being trapped in a model that strives to strengthen the "I": "If the experience of pain is the ultimate foundation of hedonism in its ancient varieties as in its modern ones, it is very different and much stronger in the modern age. It is no longer a generality, as in antiquity, that everyone tries to correct in himself the one who can't take life sufferings, in a vision where pain and pleasure still retain much meaning in the world. In Antiquity, liberation from life's alienation, in all schools - stoicism, epicureanism, hedonism, cynicism -, was based on a deep distrust of the world; all obeyed a burning desire to retrieve from the world, from the worries and the sufferings it inflicted, to take refuge in the security of an interior domain where the ego would be exposed only to itself."
It may be necessary to turn to the intuitions shared by pre-Socratic philosophies in the West and by Buddhism at the same time in East, to encounter a model of liberation of thought that makes it easier (nothing is easy in terms of wisdom!) for a disillusioned and happy human life to coexist with the full awareness of its finitude.

Art :
- Paulo Bruscky, Eu comigo [Me with Myself], 1977

"Everything can be taken from a man but one thing: the last of the human freedoms — to choose one’s attitude in any given set of circumstances, to choose one’s own way. […]
It is this spiritual freedom — which cannot be taken away — that makes life meaningful and purposeful. An active life serves the purpose of giving man the opportunity to realize values in creative work, while a passive life of enjoyment affords him the opportunity to obtain fulfillment in experiencing beauty, art, or nature. But there is also purpose in that life which is almost barren of both creation and enjoyment and which admits of but one possibility of high moral behavior: namely, in man’s attitude to his existence, an existence restricted by external forces."
(Viktor Frankl, Man's search for meaning, 1946 - Viktor Frankl is a survivor from Nazi concentration camps)

Paulo Bruscky, Eu comigo [Me with Myself], 1977
As Hannah Arendt reminds us in The Human Condition (1958), all post-Socratic philosophies from ancient Greece suffer perhaps from the same limitation - to serve as philosophies of liberation - of being trapped in a model that strives to strengthen the "I": "If the experience of pain is the ultimate foundation of hedonism in its ancient varieties as in its modern ones, it is very different and much stronger in the modern age. It is no longer a generality, as in antiquity, that everyone tries to correct in himself the one who can't take life sufferings, in a vision where pain and pleasure still retain much meaning in the world. In Antiquity, liberation from life's alienation, in all schools - stoicism, epicureanism, hedonism, cynicism -, was based on a deep distrust of the world; all obeyed a burning desire to retrieve from the world, from the worries and the sufferings it inflicted, to take refuge in the security of an interior domain where the ego would be exposed only to itself."
It may be necessary to turn to the intuitions shared by pre-Socratic philosophies in the West and by Buddhism at the same time in East, to encounter a model of liberation of thought that makes it easier (nothing is easy in terms of wisdom!) for a disillusioned and happy human life to coexist with the full awareness of its finitude.

E2.2.B.4.c.iii. The Ethic of Affirmation: Shaping the God of Change
This concluding sub-topic proposes the most active and ultimate form of navigation: moving from defense to active partnership with the forces of change.

[EN] Martial Raysse, An arrow has pierced my heart
"From the moment one admits that the world pursues no end, Nietzsche proposes to welcome its innocence, to affirm that it escapes all judgment since it cannot be judged to possess any intention, and to replace all value judgments by a single yes, a full and exalted adhesion to this world. Thus, from absolute despair will spring infinite joy, from blind servitude, merciless freedom. To be free is precisely to abolish the ends. As soon as one consents to it, the innocence of becoming represents the maximum of freedom. The free spirit loves what is necessary. Nietzsche's deepest thought is that the necessity of phenomena, since it is absolute, without cracks, does not imply any kind of constraint. Total adherence to absolute necessity is his paradoxical definition of freedom. The question "free from what?" is then replaced by "free for what?". Freedom coincides with heroism. It is the asceticism of the Great Man, "the most taut bow that exists."
(Albert Camus, The Rebel)


Art:
- Martial Raysse, An arrow has pierced my heart

Read "God" or "Nature":
"All that you touch
You Change.

All that you Change
Changes you.

The only lasting truth
Is Change.

God
Is Change.

[...]

A victim of God may,
Through learning adaption,
Become a partner of God,
A victim of God may,
Through forethought and planning,
Become a shaper of God.
Or a victim of God may,
Through shortsightedness and fear,
Remain God’s victim,
God’s plaything,
God’s prey."
(Octavia Butler, Parable of the Sower, 1993)

Nicolas Poussin_Narcisse, 1627 ; Nicolas Poussin_Écho et Narcisse ; Nicolas Poussin_L'empire de Flore, 1631


To shed some light on the myth of Narcissus, let's take a look at Nicolas Poussin's work. He painted five pictures of Narcissus. In each one, Narcissus is portrayed not as a vain, self-absorbed man, but as a pure individual.

1. I discovered a reproduction of the first painting Poussin made on this theme around 1627 by chance in a magazine. It was not in any museum or book on the painter and was unknown to me. It was rediscovered in 1997 and put up for auction. The painting shows a young man standing slightly bent over a body of water. Eros is depicted as a small child resolutely pointing his bow at Narcissus. Here, Poussin depicts Narcissus as innocent, about to be struck by the god of love, Eros. This painting illustrates one of the main themes of the Narcissus myth: the allure of dazzling beauty and innocence. What does it mean to be innocent? In this case, it means simply being oneself, without the need to define or identify oneself, or to seek confirmation. It is striking that Narcissus looks at himself in the water without grasping his own reflection or being aware of its effect. He is free from all forms of perversity and manipulation.


2. Nicolas Poussin's second painting on this theme, "Echo and Narcissus," is located in the Louvre Museum. The painting is explicitly based on Ovid's text, in which the poet first intertwined the stories of Echo and Narcissus. The 17-year-old painter Balthus copied this painting for his mother's companion, the poet Rainer Maria Rilke. In gratitude, the poet dedicated the following French poem to Balthus:

"Surrounded by his arm as if by a shell,
She hears her being whispering
While he endures this outrage
Of his image, never too pure,
Thoughtfully following their example,
Nature returns within herself,
The flower contemplates itself in its sap.
becomes too tender, and the rock endures.
It is the return of desire that brings it back.
toward all life growing weary from afar.
Where does it fall?
Does it want to renew a center?
beneath the decaying surface?"

"Entouré de son bras comme d'un coquillage,
Elle entend son être qui murmure 
Tandis que lui supporte cet outrage 
De son image jamais trop pure 
Pensivement en suivant leur exemple,
En elle-même rentre la nature
La fleur qui dans sa sève se contemple 
S'attendrit trop et le rocher s'endure
C'est le retour de tout désir qui rentre
Vers toute vie qui de loin s'en lasse 
Où tombe-t-il ?
Veut-il sous la surface qui dépérit
Renouveler un centre ?"

Rilke offers a profound interpretation of the myth of Narcissus. What does the myth tell us? It tells us that finding oneself is important, and this process involves a movement of infinite tenderness. After contemplating Poussin's painting, Rilke realized that the myth is not only about the fate of a young man, but also about the meaning of our presence in the world. "Thoughtfully following their example, nature returns to itself." When I turn inward, I don't shut myself up in a small space; rather, I participate in a movement of blossoming and metamorphosis. This movement is fruitful because it renews my center, allowing me to no longer be scattered or lost. Just as there is no world without an axis, I cannot live without a center. This center is not a fixed point or a kind of identity but a movement that renews itself like a fountain. In Rilke's words, being narcissistic is like being a gushing fountain that continually renews its stream of water.
 
"I want only one lesson:
It is yours, fountain
That falls back into itself
The risky waters to which it befits.
This heavenly return to earthly life."

"Je ne veux qu'une seule leçon 
C'est la tienne, fontaine 
Qui en toi-même retombe
Celle des eaux risquées auxquelles incombe 
Ce céleste retour vers la vie terrienne"

3. In 1631, Poussin painted The Empire of Flora, which was inspired by Ovid's work, The Fasti. In the painting, we see Flora, a splendid young goddess, accompanied by the beings who, according to mythology, became flowers. On the left is Ajax, who committed suicide. From his spilled blood grows a carnation. Behind Narcissus, Chloris holds a basket of sunflowers in her right hand. She turns toward the sun chariot of her lover, Apollo, and covers her eyes with her other hand to shield herself from the glare. In the foreground on the right, Crocus and Ajax are entwined like bindweed. Why did Nicolas Poussin paint this picture? I hypothesize that the painter chose this theme because the transformation of mythological beings into plants has profound meaning for him and sheds light on our time on earth. The story teaches us that living is finding our place in a world that speaks to us. When I look at these flowers, they are not just vegetation; they speak to me of beauty, the renewal of life, and the attention I must pay to them. This is surprising because, in our society, the world is seen as a collection of commodities and resources to be maximized. For Nicolas Poussin, however, the world is a poem. Why do so many of us need to be in nature? It's because we feel that we are part of the whole. We don't stand in front of nature in a state of distant contemplation; we are truly in nature and become part of it.
(Fabrice Midal, "Narcisse, accused bu not guilty: Let's Narcissize the World!" broadcast on France Culture on August 26, 2018)

Listen to the podcast in French:
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/narcisse-accuse-non-coupable/narcissisons-le-monde


"We also have to adapt to time. Unfortunately, time is too often reduced to a period to be managed in order to make the most of it. Nicolas Poussin shows us that time is a period that must be seized through cycles, such as day and night. The world and time have an order that is also a language. This is why we can take our place in them.
 
Poussin shows us the flip side of what I call 'the legend of the dead world': nothing is truly alive; everything can be reduced to mechanisms. Trees aren't alive; they can be cut down, and all we need to do is replace them through sound management. Cows are no longer beings to us—they are calorie reserves that must be managed as best we can. We are led to believe that the world is dead. However, Poussin shows us how alive it is. He is an antidote to this pseudo-legend, helping us to rediscover that nature and time are narcissistic and need to be viewed through poetry. Poetry allows the world to be the world and time to be time. Here, the term "poem" refers to a simple phenomenon: consider the meaning of the first name given to a newborn child. Despite the madness of our times, no one has decided it would be more rational to give children numbers instead of names. Names are chosen because they remind us of ancestors, heroes, and personalities. A first name is part of a story or narrative. If you understand why we still give first names today, then you will understand Nicolas Poussin, who gave names to time, things, and beings...

To understand this distortion, which threatens all our activities, philosopher Herbert Marcuse contrasts Prometheus with the beautiful Narcissus. Marcuse, too, sought a way out of the barbarism threatening us and turned to Narcissus. Prometheus stole fire from the gods, enabling humans to master the earth. Prometheus is the prince of force who hates poetry, culture, and anything that does not seem useful to him. He symbolizes the logic of domination and the obsession with power. He succeeded, and we celebrate him. As Marcuse points out, if Prometheus is the cultural hero of work, production, and progress through repression, then we must look to the opposite pole for symbols of another principle of reality. Orpheus and Narcissus embody joy and fulfillment. Their voices sing rather than command, their gestures give and receive, and their actions bring peace, putting an end to the labor of conquest.

To conclude this program, I would like to explain the connection between the myths of Orpheus and Narcissus. Both Orpheus and Narcissus are mythical figures who undergo an initiation. Orpheus is the enigma of listening; Narcissus, of seeing. What do we preserve by listening? What do we preserve by looking? What is there to preserve? These are urgent questions for our time. In order to keep Eurydice, who was killed by a snake, close to him, Orpheus agrees to enter the Underworld. His poetic song moves the gods, who allow him to pass through the underworld. However, he can only bring her back if he does not look back. Great artists from Dante to Charlie Chaplin have made this journey through their own underworlds to bring life back. What in our world must we traverse? What hell must we go through to find true light, not just a sham? What lies deep within us that must be sought because it exists only there? Becoming an adult and achieving a certain mastery over one's existence implies passing through death and overcoming the fear of our own existence and that of the world. We must seek the flower of innocence and metamorphosis without the ability to turn back or measure our actions. This is why Narcissus is the embodiment of happiness and self-discovery, celebrating life in all its glory. He reminds us that life is not limited to our ideas, plans, or potential—and in this sense, turning to Narcissus today means saving ourselves, because we must all become narcissistic and work from the recognition of what is most alive in us."
(Fabrice Midal, "Narcisse, accused bu not guilty: Let's Narcissize the World!" broadcast on France Culture on August 26, 2018)

Listen to the podcast in French:
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/narcisse-accuse-non-coupable/narcissisons-le-monde

A_Oswaldo Guayasamin_Las Manos de la Protesta

"In the consciousness-raising days of the second wave of feminism, we made a big deal out of anger, the anger of women. We praised it and cultivated it as a virtue. We learned to boast of being angry, to swagger our rage, to play the Fury.

We were right to do so. We were telling women who believed they should patiently endure insults, injuries, and abuse that they had every reason to be angry. We were rousing people to feel and see injustice, the methodical mistreatment to which women were subjected, the almost universal disrespect of the human rights of women, and to resent and refuse it for themselves and for others. Indignation, forcibly expressed, is an appropriate response to injustice. Indignation draws strength from outrage, and outrage draws strength from rage. There is a time for anger, and that was such a time.

Anger is a useful, perhaps indispensable tool in motivating resistance to injustice. But I think it is a weapon — a tool useful only in combat and self-defense. [...]

In the consciousness-raising days of the second wave of feminism, we made a big deal out of anger, the anger of women. We praised it and cultivated it as a virtue. We learned to boast of being angry, to swagger our rage, to play the Fury.

We were right to do so. We were telling women who believed they should patiently endure insults, injuries, and abuse that they had every reason to be angry. We were rousing people to feel and see injustice, the methodical mistreatment to which women were subjected, the almost universal disrespect of the human rights of women, and to resent and refuse it for themselves and for others. Indignation, forcibly expressed, is an appropriate response to injustice. Indignation draws strength from outrage, and outrage draws strength from rage. There is a time for anger, and that was such a time.

Anger is a useful, perhaps indispensable tool in motivating resistance to injustice. But I think it is a weapon — a tool useful only in combat and self-defense. [...]

Mostly my anger is connected less with self-respect than with negatives: jealousy, hatred, fear.

Fear, in a person of my temperament, is endemic and inevitable, and I can’t do much about it except recognize it for what it is and try not to let it rule me entirely. If I’m in an angry mood and aware of it, I can ask myself, So what is it you’re afraid of? That gives me a place to look at my anger from. Sometimes it helps get me into clearer air. [...]

Jealousy sticks its nasty yellow-green snout mostly into my life as a writer. I’m jealous of other writers who soar to success on wings of praise, I’m contemptuously angry at them, at the people who praise them — if I don’t like their writing. I’d like to kick Ernest Hemingway for faking and posturing when he had the talent to succeed without faking. I snarl at what I see as the unending overestimation of James Joyce. The enshrinement of Philip Roth infuriates me. But all this jealous anger happens only if I don’t like what they write. If I like a writer’s writing, praise of that writer makes me happy. I can read endless appreciations of Virginia Woolf. A good article about José Saramago makes my day. So evidently the cause of my anger isn’t so much jealousy or envy as, once again, fear. Fear that if Hemingway, Joyce, and Roth really are The Greatest, there’s no way I can ever be very good or very highly considered as a writer — because there’s no way I am ever going to write anything like what they write or please the readers and critics they please.

The circular silliness of this is self-evident; but my insecurity is incurable. Fortunately, it operates only when I read about writers I dislike, never when I’m actually writing. When I’m at work on a story, nothing could be farther from my mind than anybody else’s stories, or status, or success. [...]

My fears come down to fear of not being safe (as if anyone is ever safe) and of not being in control (as if I ever was in control). Does the fear of being unsafe and not in control express itself as anger, or does it use anger as a kind of denial of the fear?

One view of clinical depression explains it as sourced in suppressed anger. Anger turned, perhaps, against the self, because fear — fear of being harmed, and fear of doing harm — prevents the anger from turning against the people or circumstances causing it.

If so, no wonder a lot of people are depressed, and no wonder so many of them are women. They are living with an unexploded bomb. […]

I see in the lives of people I know how crippling a deep and deeply suppressed anger is. It comes from pain, and it causes pain. [...]

What is the way to use anger to fuel something other than hurt, to direct it away from hatred, vengefulness, self-righteousness, and make it serve creation and compassion?"
(Ursula K. Le Guin, No Time to Spare: Thinking About What Matters, About Anger)

A_Shitao_Pine in the Mountain_17th century ;  A_Shen Zhou_Pine and Rocks_15th century

"From a height where there is no fall, the bottom provides additional impetus toward the summit. As a result, static images take on a special dynamic life. While remaining in touch with Nietzsche's work, we will study the vertical dynamization of certain familiar images in a more general examination.
 
For example, consider the pine tree on the edge of the abyss. Schopenhauer contemplated it. He interpreted it as a testament to the will to live, describing the harsh symbiosis between the plant and the rock and the tree's struggle against gravity. In Nietzsche's work, the tree is less bent; it is a more vertical being that taunts the fall (Poésies, trans., p. 267).
"But you, Zarathustra,
 
Do you also love the abyss like the pine tree?"
The pine tree clings to its roots,
where the rock itself
 
looks down into the depths with a shudder.
That shudder will never become vertigo. Nietzscheanism is essentially the overcoming of vertigo. Near the abyss, Nietzsche seeks dynamic images of ascent. Through a well-known dialectic of pride, the reality of the abyss gives Nietzsche the awareness of being a surging force.
(Gaston Bachelard, Air and Dreams: An Essay on the Imagination of Movement, 1943)

EL3.151. "INVERSION - A LOT OF ADVANTAGES CAN BE GAINED SIMPLY BY AVOIDING THE STANDARD PATHS TO FAILURE.

Inversion is not the way we are taught to think. We are taught to identify what we want and explore things that will move us closer to our objective. However, by identifying and avoiding things that will ensure we don’t get what we want, we dramatically increase our odds of success.

Often, we get so fixated on solving a problem in a particular way that we miss simpler, more elegant solutions. Inversion forces us to consider the opposite side of the equation. Instead of asking, “How do I solve this problem?” inversion asks, “What would guarantee failure?”

Instead of asking, “How can I achieve this goal?” it asks, “What is preventing me from achieving it?” By inverting the question, we can gain insights that our normal thought patterns might miss.

The next time you find yourself struggling, try inverting your thinking. Ask yourself how you could guarantee failure. The answers may surprise you and open up new avenues for possible solutions."
(Shane Parrish, The Great Mental Models v1: General Thinking Tools)

«The contradictions of judgments, then, neither offend nor alter, they only rouse and exercise, me. We evade correction, whereas we ought to offer and present ourselves to it, especially when it appears in the form of conference, and not of authority. At every opposition, we do not consider whether or no it be dust, but, right or wrong, how to disengage ourselves: instead of extending the arms, we thrust out our claws. I could suffer myself to be rudely handled by my friend, so much as to tell me that I am a fool, and talk I know not of what. I love stout expressions amongst gentle men, and to have them speak as they think; we must fortify and harden our hearing against this tenderness of the ceremonious sound of words. I love a strong and manly familiarity and conversation: a friendship that pleases itself in the sharpness and vigour of its communication, like love in biting and scratching: it is not vigorous and generous enough, if it be not quarrelsome, if it be civilised and artificial, if it treads nicely and fears the shock:

Neque enim disputari sine reprehensione potest ["Neither can a man dispute, but he must contradict." (Or:) "Nor can people dispute without reprehension." —Cicero, De Finib., i. 8.].

When any one contradicts me, he raises my attention, not my anger: I advance towards him who controverts, who instructs me; the cause of truth ought to be the common cause both of the one and the other. What will the angry man answer? Passion has already confounded his judgment; agitation has usurped the place of reason. It were not amiss that the decision of our disputes should pass by wager: that there might be a material mark of our losses, to the end we might the better remember them; and that my man might tell me: "Your ignorance and obstinacy cost you last year, at several times, a hundred crowns." I hail and caress truth in what quarter soever I find it, and cheerfully surrender myself, and open my conquered arms as far off as I can discover it; and, provided it be not too imperiously, take a pleasure in being reproved, and accommodate myself to my accusers, very often more by reason of civility than amendment, loving to gratify and nourish the liberty of admonition by my facility of submitting to it, and this even at my own expense. 

Nevertheless, it is hard to bring the men of my time to it: they have not the courage to correct, because they have not the courage to suffer themselves to be corrected; and speak always with dissimulation in the presence of one another: I take so great a pleasure in being judged and known, that it is almost indifferent to me in which of the two forms I am so: my imagination so often contradicts and condemns itself, that 'tis all one to me if another do it, especially considering that I give his reprehension no greater authority than I choose; but I break with him, who carries himself so high, as I know of one who repents his advice, if not believed, and takes it for an affront if it be not immediately followed. [...]

I find I am much prouder of the victory I obtain over myself, when, in the very ardour of dispute, I make myself submit to my adversary's force of reason, than I am pleased with the victory I obtain over him through his weakness. In fine, I receive and admit of all manner of attacks that are direct, how weak soever; but I am too impatient of those that are made out of form. I care not what the subject is, the opinions are to me all one, and I am almost indifferent whether I get the better or the worse. I can peaceably argue a whole day together, if the argument be carried on with method; I do not so much require force and subtlety as order; I mean the order which we every day observe in the wranglings of shepherds and shop-boys, but never amongst us: if they start from their subject, 'tis out of incivility, and so 'tis with us; but their tumult and impatience never put them out of their theme; their argument still continues its course; if they interrupt, and do not stay for one another, they at least understand one another. Any one answers too well for me, if he answers what I say: when the dispute is irregular and disordered, I leave the thing itself, and insist upon the form with anger and indiscretion; falling into wilful, malicious, and imperious way of disputation, of which I am afterwards ashamed. 'Tis impossible to deal fairly with a fool: my judgment is not only corrupted under the hand of so impetuous a master, but my conscience also.»
(Montaigne, Essays, art III, Of the art of conference, Chapter VIII)

'Bearing in mind our likeness with the gods 
     Let us, for our own good, 
See ourselves as exiled deities 
     In possession of life 
By virtue of an ancient authority 
     Coeval with Jove. 

Proud masters over our own selves, 
     Let’s use existence 
Like a villa the gods have given us 
     To forget the summer. 

It’s not worth our while to use in another, 
     More fretful manner 
Our wavering existence, a condemned stream
     Of the somber river. 

Like the calm, implacable Destiny 
     That reigns above the gods, 
Let’s construct a voluntary fate 
     Above ourselves, 
So that when it oppresses us, it is we 
     Who’ll be our oppressors. 
And when we enter the night, we’ll enter
     By our own two feet."
( Fernando Pessoa, 30 July 1914)

E1.5.C.2.1.b_REF9_LIT.wXXXXXXXX

E2.2.B.5. How much of a person's character is innate and how much is acquired?

E2.2.B.5.1. The "Innate" Foundation (Nature): what our character might inherit from our biology, our "hard-wiring," and our deep evolutionary past.

E2.2.B.5.1.a. "INSTINCT
Know-how passed down genetically. Humans are pretty much devoid of it; they have little more than instincts that must be educated."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E2.2.B.5.1.b. "INNATISM
 
It is not merely believing that there is something innate in humans—which is hardly disputable—but rather, asserting that innateness is not limited to the body. This means that certain ideas or behaviors are inherent in us from birth. It is believing in the innateness of both the body and the mind.
 
For a materialist, a certain degree of innateness is self-evident. If the body is innate, then so is the mind. The brain, by definition, is innate. This does not prevent it from developing and constructing itself after birth. The innate is only opposed to the acquired insofar as the acquired allows it to be, just as the acquired is only opposed to the innate insofar as the innate presupposes it. Language, for example, is an innate faculty, but every language is acquired. Descartes's mistake was believing that the mind's innate state consisted of ready-made ideas when, in fact, it is more a matter of functions (inseparably neural and logical) and ideas to be formed."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

In Joseph Kosinski's 2013 film Oblivion, the persistence of memory in all of Jack Harper's (Tom Cruise) clones is an implausible example of innateness. How could a clone created by a machine have an innate memory of love when its education and experience have been rigorously calibrated so that nothing remains of the original model's past?

Watch the scene on YouTube: https://youtu.be/vUuAbRVVZwA?si=Zj8ot2K9QgkocHbd

E2.2.B.5.1.c. I_Homo Sapiens conquers the world

WHAT EXACTLY IS THE "NATURE" IN THE "NATURE VS. NURTURE" DEBATE FOR MODERN HUMANS?
"Neanderthals are often depicted in caricatures as the archetypical brutish and stupid ‘cave people’, but recent evidence has changed their image.
According to the Interbreeding Theory, when Sapiens spread into Neanderthal lands, Sapiens bred with Neanderthals until the two populations merged. If this is the case, then today’s Eurasians are not pure Sapiens. They are a mixture of Sapiens and Neanderthals. Similarly, when Sapiens reached East Asia, they interbred with the local Erectus, so the Chinese and Koreans are a mixture of Sapiens and Erectus.
The opposing view, called the ‘Replacement Theory’ tells a very different story – one of incompatibility, revulsion, and perhaps even genocide. According to this theory, Sapiens and other humans had different anatomies, and most likely different mating habits and even body odours. They would have had little sexual interest in one another. And even if a Neanderthal Romeo and a Sapiens Juliet fell in love, they could not produce fertile children, because the genetic gulf separating the two populations was already unbridgeable.
The two populations remained completely distinct, and when the Neanderthals died out, or were killed off , their genes died with them. According to this view, Sapiens replaced all the previous human populations without merging with them. If that is the case, the lineages of all contemporary humans can be traced back, exclusively, to East Africa, 70,000 years ago. We are all ‘pure Sapiens’.
A lot hinges on this debate. From an evolutionary perspective, 70,000 years is a relatively short interval. If the
Replacement Theory is correct, all living humans have roughly the same genetic baggage, and racial distinctions
among them are negligible. But if the Interbreeding Theory is right, there might well be genetic differences between Africans, Europeans and Asians that go back hundreds of thousands of years. This is political dynamite, which could provide material for explosive racial theories.
In recent decades the Replacement Theory has been the common wisdom in the field. It had firmer archaeological backing, and was more politically correct (scientists had no desire to open up the Pandora’s box of racism by claiming significant genetic diversity among modern human populations). But that ended in 2010, when the results of a four-year effort to map the Neanderthal genome were published. Geneticists were
able to collect enough intact Neanderthal DNA from fossils to make a broad comparison between it and the DNA of contemporary humans. The results stunned the scientific community.
It turned out that 1–4 per cent of the unique human DNA of modern populations in the Middle East and Europe is
Neanderthal DNA. That’s not a huge amount, but it’s significant. A second shock came several months later, when DNA extracted from the fossilised finger from Denisova was mapped. The results proved that up to 6 per cent of the
unique human DNA of modern Melanesians and Aboriginal Australians is Denisovan DNA.
If these results are valid – and it’s important to keep in mind that further research is under way and may either reinforce or modify these conclusions – the Interbreeders got at least some things right. But that doesn’t mean that the Replacement Theory is completely wrong. Since Neanderthals and Denisovans contributed only a small
amount of DNA to our present-day genome, it is impossible to speak of a ‘merger’ between Sapiens and other human species. [...]

But if the Neanderthals, Denisovans and other human species didn’t merge with Sapiens, why did they vanish?One possibility is that Homo sapiens drove them to extinction. Imagine a Sapiens band reaching a Balkan valley where Neanderthals had lived for hundreds of thousands of years. The newcomers began to hunt the deer and gather the nuts and berries that were the Neanderthals’ traditional staples. Sapiens were more proficient hunters and gatherers – thanks to better technology and superior social skills – so they multiplied and spread. The less resourceful Neanderthals found it increasingly difficult to feed themselves. Their population dwindled and they slowly died out, except perhaps for one or two members who joined their Sapiens neighbours.
Another possibility is that competition for resources flared up into violence and genocide. Tolerance is not a Sapiens trademark. In modern times, a small dfference in skin colour, dialect or religion has been enough to prompt one group of Sapiens to set about exterminating another group. Would ancient Sapiens have been more tolerant towards an entirely different human species? It may well be that when Sapiens encountered Neanderthals, the result was the first and most significant ethnic-cleansing campaign in history."
(Yuval Noah Harari, Sapiens, A Brief History of Humankind, 2011)

E2.2.B.5.2. The "Acquired" Framework (Nurture): how social mechanisms (family, school, culture) and personal history shape our character, beliefs, and even our understanding of innate traits.

E2.2.B.5.2.a. A_Eva Kot'átková_(1) ; A_Eva Kot'àtkovà_Stomach of the world_ 2018_(6) ; A_Eva Kot'àtkovà_Stomach of the world_ 2018_(7) ; A_Eva Kot'àtkovà_Stomach of the world_ 2018_(9)

"Eva Kot'átková critically examines the mechanisms that influence our behavior and that shape both individual and social interaction: family, school, traditions, education system and institutional norms. She observes how educational concepts are expressed in power relationships and reflected in disciplinary sanctions. With her installations of surreal collages, objects and films, the artist deliberately exaggerates the constraints of social life without wanting to point out abuses with her forefinger. The constellation of everyday objects in the wall installation 'Stomach of the world' draws attention to invisible and subtle forms of oppression, manipulation and control that are pre-shaped in everyone's head and play there unconsciously."
(Curatorship Lenbachhaus, Munich)


E2.2.B.5.2.b. "Identity isn’t given once and for all: it is built up and changes throughout a person’s lifetime… Not many of the elements that go to make up our identity are already in us at birth. A few physical characteristics of course — sex, color and so on. And even at this point not everything is innate. Although, obviously, social environment doesn’t determine sex, it does determine its significance. To be born a girl is not the same in Kabul as it is in Oslo; the condition of being a woman, like every other factor in a person’s identity, is experienced differently in the two places.

The same could be said of color. To be born black is a different matter according to whether you come in to the world in New York, Lagos, Pretoria or Luanda… For an infant who first sees the light of day in Nigeria, the operative factor as regards his identity is not whether he is black rather than white, but whether he is Yoruba, say, rather than Hausa… In the United States it’s of no consequence whether you have a Yoruba rather than a Hausa ancestor: it’s chiefly among the whites — the Italians, the English, the Irish and the rest — that ethnic origin has a determining effect on identity.[…]

I mention these examples only to underline the fact that even color and sex are not “absolute” ingredients of identity. That being so, all the other ingredients are even more relative. [...]

What determines a person’s affiliation to a given group is essentially the influence of others: the influence of those about him — relatives, fellow-countrymen, co-religionists — who try to make him one of them; together with the influence of those on the other side, who do their best to exclude him. Each one of us has to make his way while choosing between the paths that are urged upon him and those that are forbidden or strewn with obstacles. He is not himself from the outset; nor does he just “grow aware” of what he is; he becomes what he is. He doesn’t merely “grow aware” of his identity; he acquires it step by step."
(Amin Maalouf, In the Name of Identity: Violence and the Need to Belong, 1996)

E2.2.B.5.2.c. “It takes so many years for the truths we have formed to become part of our very flesh.”
(Paul Valéry, Dialogue of the Tree, 1943)

E2.2.B.5.2.d. "Could every aspect of reality exist only in relation to viewpoints on it? Is everything about us socially constructed rather than given?
Human behavior is shaped by labeling so if you have been called by a category your own world view and that of others towards you will be confined to the label. People are often motivated to join the debate because of some political objective to escape the subordination that derives from categorization. Activists can argue their condition is not socially constructed because they want to give legitimacy to their particular social identity. By the other token, you see people using construction to engage in liberation politics like Simone de Beauvoir showing the social construction of what is a woman has oppressed them and constrained their liberty. We find that some categories as gender have been approached both ways, but for others like race, most parties believe is intrinsic. 
Some philosophers from the continental tradition (Nietzsche, Foucault) are the most intent on defending that practically everything is socially constructed. Regarding scientific knowledge it is much harder to advocate for social construction, but we find socially motivated reasons for how scientific research budgets are allocated and how we give identity to discoveries (classification schemes of species for example).
But "Man is not a measure of all things", we are answerable to the reality of the world. Adopting a relativist position that everything is contingent on something else dos not mean that anything goes. To shift our theoretical vocabulary can lead to new insights even in science."
(Jesse Prinz on Is Everything Socially Constructed?, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: http://philosophybites.com/2015/09/jesse-prinz-on-is-everything-socially-constructed.html

E2.2.B.5.2.e. Visionner le film de nouveau pour choisir les scènes.
Combien est-ce difficile de changer passé la très jeune enfance!
Tags: FILM: L'ENFANT SAUVAGE

E2.2.B.5.3. "Innate" and "acquired" are not opposing forces but are deeply intertwined: nature requires nurture to function, and nurture acts upon a natural foundation.

E2.2.B.5.3.a. A_Erwin Olaf, Dusk & Dawn, 2009

Can I exist without content? Can I exist without form?
" « How much form do I allow, and how much content? » Erwin Olaf explored this question, which is fundamental to his work, as the central theme of his Dusk series. The photographs and video are all in black. For good measure, the artist went so far as to select his models for the colour of their skin. Olaf shows an African-American family, circa 1900, against the backdrop of an upper class interior. He found inspiration in the photographs of Frances Benjamin Johnston (1864-1952). They show freed slaves at the turn of the century, taking part in training that was to prepare them for a better future. Did this future become a reality in Dusk? The video takes a surreal turn when a faceless boy asks « Mom, tell me, can I exist without content? »
As the mirror image of Dusk, the Dawn series is entirely in white. The juxtaposition clearly reveals that the colour scheme is not just aesthetic, serving as the external form; it also leads to shifts in the meaning of its content. The works should be interpreted as programmatic statements to the effect that, for Olaf, neither form nor content can exist in isolation."
(Curatorship Kunsthalle, Munich)

Watch Dusk on Vimeo: https://vimeo.com/25399947
Watch Dawn on Vimeo: https://vimeo.com/45427184

E2.2.B.5.3.b. Authenticity
[...] Donald Winnicott, building on  Freud’s ideas about authenticity, reflects on the true and the false self. It is not between the public image and the private self, rather it depends on the developmental story of how one was parented. An infant whose parent has responded sufficiently empathically will be able to develop a sense of who he is and what his needs are. If the caretaker imposed its own agenda on the child, the child will develop a false self.
Are we purely socially embedded creatures fundamentally defined by our relationships to others and the debate about authenticity is just a fetichizing of uniqueness and individual freedom typical of a capitalist society? The reality probably stands in the middle, there must be a core but we are also defined and socially responsible to others.
Tags: IN OUR TIME: PHILOSOPHY

E2.2.B.5.3.c. P_Sylvia Plath
"What do I know of sorrow? No one I love has ever died or been tortured. I have never wanted for food to eat, or a place to sleep. I have been gifted with five senses and an attractive exterior. So I can philosophize from my snug little cushioned seat. So I am going to one of the most outstanding colleges in America; I am living with two thousand of the most outstanding girls in the United States. What have I to complain about? Nothing much. The main way I can add to my self-respect is by saying that I’m on scholarship, and if I hadn’t exercised my free will and studied through high school I never would be here. But when you come right down to it, how much of that was free will? How much was the capacity to think that I got from my parents, the home urge to study and do well academically, the necessity to find an alternative for the social world of boys and girls to which I was forbidden acceptance? And does not my desire to write come from a tendency toward introversion begun when I was small, brought up as I was in the fairy-tale world of Mary Poppins and Winnie-the-Pooh? Did not that set me apart from most of my school mates? — the fact that I got all A’s and was “different” from the rough-and-tumble Conways — how I am not quite sure, but “different” as the animal with the touch of human hands about him when he returns to the herd. All this may be a subtle way of egoistically separating myself from the common herd, but take it for what it’s worth. [...]

As for free will, there is such a narrow crack of it for man to move in, crushed as he is from birth by environment, heredity, time and event and local convention. If I had been born of Italian parents in one of the caves in the hills I would be a prostitute at the age of 12 or so because I had to live (why?) and that was the only way open. If I was born into a wealthy New York family with pseudo-cultural leanings, I would have had my coming-out party along with the rest of them, and be equipped with fur coats, social contacts, and a blasé pout. How do I know? I don’t; I can only guess. I wouldn’t be I. But I am I now; and so many other millions are so irretrievably their own special variety of “I” that I can hardly bear to think of it. I: how firm a letter; how reassuring the three strokes: one vertical, proud and assertive, and then the two short horizontal lines in quick, smug succession. The pen scratches on the paper … I … I … I … I … I … I."
(Sylvia Plath, The Unabridged Journals of Sylvia Plath, 1982)

E2.2.B.5.3.d. "People like to think of themselves as reasonably virtuous, but there is usually a gap between how they think of themselves and how they actually behave. 
Psychological research shows most of us have mixed characters with positive and negative aspects, activated by the situation. Saying we are fully shaped by our environment and that there is no core features of our psychology is too extreme (position of the situationists) and does not reflect recent empirical findings.
On honesty: People placed in the situation of taking a test where they earn 50 cents per correct answers, if they are allowed to self-correct, self-report their answers and then shred their paper so that they are sure no one will know if they cheated, will on a given test, on average report 14 correct answers although control groups who are not allowed to cheat and self-correct get on average 7 answers right.
However, if people are given the ethical charter of their school to read and sign before the test, even when allowed to cheat, people will report on average 7 correct answers. This leads to the conclusion that even people who cheat want to think of themselves as good persons. If the lying to oneself implied by cheating  - and then forgetting it or convincing oneself that it is all right - is prevented by the fresh reminder of the ethical charter, we can envision that periodic self-reminders of the behavior we want to adopt are powerful tools (the moral exercises stoics used to subject to were a prefiguration of these recent findings).
On responsibility: In a room participants to an experiment are filling formularies - some of the participants are part of the experimenters' team. One of them goes out the door, and in the next room all can hear a big noise like a bookshelf falling and screams of a person visibly hurt by the accident.
1. if some participant displays a concern, most of the others will join and want to help the person next door;
2. if nobody bulges in the room, only 7% of the participants will take the solitary initiative to want to help;
3. If participants are alone in the room filling formularies, 70% of them will promptly want to help. 
This demonstrates the strength of heard mentality and how we value the opinion of others against our own convictions.
To complement active reminders in order to shape our psychological traits, research has shown that choosing and trying to emulate role models of the behavior we want to develop impacts one's character."
(Christian Miller on the Character Gap, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: https://philosophybites.com/2019/02/christian-miller-on-the-character-gap.html

E2.2.B.5.3.e. "The nature of human altruism
Some of the most fundamental questions concerning our evolutionary origins, our social relations, and the organization of society are centred around issues of altruism and selfishness. Experimental evidence indicates that human altruism is a powerful force and is unique in the animal world. However, there is much individual heterogeneity and the interaction between altruists and selfish individuals is vital to human cooperation. Depending on the environment, a minority of altruists can force a majority of selfish individuals to cooperate or, conversely, a few egoists can induce a large number of altruists to defect. Current gene-based evolutionary theories cannot explain important patterns of human altruism, pointing towards the importance of both theories of cultural evolution as well as gene–culture co-evolution."
(Ernst Fehr & Urs Fischbacher, Nature, vol. 425, 23 october 2003)

Access the full article in Nature: https://www.nature.com/articles/nature02043

E2.2.B.5.3.f. "ACQUIRED [...]
The acquired is no less real or unjust than the innate. A somewhat complex human phenomenon always lies at the intersection of the two." For example, language ability is innate, yet every language is acquired. Intelligence? Talents? They presuppose a biological foundation and are therefore innate. However, they also require history, development, and education through acquisition. Double luck—or bad luck. If Mozart had not been taught music, he would never have written his operas. However, even if I were taught all the music in the world, I still would not be Mozart. The innate and the acquired always go together, sometimes reinforcing each other and sometimes balancing or hindering each other. "We are born human, then we become human."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E2.2.B.5.3.g. "TALENT
It's more than a gift but less than genius. A child who excels in math or drawing isn't necessarily considered talented. A talented or brilliant artist, such as Cézanne, may only be moderately gifted. Giftedness is an aptitude for learning. Talent is the ability to create, of which genius is the most extreme form. Giftedness is something you're born with; it's genetic. Talent is something you develop during childhood and adolescence. It's linked to your history, psychology, and the adventure of becoming yourself. Giftedness is impersonal. Talent is more about the individual and how they express themselves creatively and uniquely.
 
We know the word comes from a metaphor. In the famous parable of the talents, Jesus implicitly compares the abilities each person has received to coins, which they must put to good use. What matters is not so much the talent one has, but what one does with it. It's not talent anymore, but work or waste."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E2.2.B.5.3.h. "CHARACTER
is an engraver of medals or coins, leaving an indelible mark or permanent, distinctive sign. Therefore, the word refers to all the permanent or habitual dispositions of an individual, their ethos, their way of feeling, sensing, acting, and reacting—their particular way of being themselves. "It is what nature has engraved in us," said Voltaire. I would not go that far. Character seems to me to be more individualized and evolving than temperament but less so than personality. I would readily say that an individual's temperament is what nature has made of them, their character is what history has made of their temperament, and their personality is what they have made and continue to make of what history and nature have made of them. Character refers to the past and, therefore, to everything within us that no longer depends on us. According to Heraclitus's famous saying, "a man's character is his demon" or his destiny because it is what chooses within him, what he does not choose. We have to live with it.
In the Critique of Practical Reason, Kant distinguishes between an empirical character and an intelligible character for every human being. The empirical character is subject to the conditions of time and, therefore, to causality. It is completely determined by the past and has an impact on the future. In fact, if we knew it well enough, we could predict a person's future behavior with the same certainty as a lunar eclipse or the rising of the sun. The intelligible character, on the contrary, escapes the conditions of time and the causal chain of phenomena. It is the absolutely free choice that each person makes for themselves ("the character they give themselves," writes Kant). Thus, the same individual is both completely determined (as a phenomenon) and completely free (as a noumenon). The conjunction of the two is, of course, impossible to understand or explain. Even if we agree with Kant, however, it is difficult to see how an individual could choose itself since it must first exist to choose anything. Even when considered in itself, the intelligible character remains unintelligible."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E2.2.B.5.3.i. OUR BIOLOGICAL INCOMPLETENESS AT BIRTH IS THE VERY CONDITION THAT ALLOWS US TO BE "SHAPED WITH A SURPRISING DEGREE OF FREEDOM."
"Walking upright has its downside. The skeleton of our primate ancestors developed for millions of years to support a creature that walked on all fours and had a relatively small head. Adjusting to an upright position was quite a challenge, especially when the scaffolding had to support an extra-large cranium.
Humankind paid for its lofty vision and industrious hands with backaches and stiff necks.
Women paid extra. An upright gait required narrower hips, constricting the birth canal – and this just when babies’ heads were getting bigger and bigger.
Death in childbirth became a major hazard for human females. Women who gave birth earlier, when the infants brain and head were still relatively small and supple, fared better and lived to have more children. Natural selection consequently favoured earlier births. And, indeed, compared to other animals, humans are born prematurely, when many of their vital systems are still underdeveloped. A colt can trot shortly after birth; a kitten leaves its mother to forage on its own when it is just a few weeks old. Human babies are helpless, dependent for many years on their elders for sustenance, protection and education.
This fact has contributed greatly both to humankind’s extraordinary social abilities and to its unique social problems. Lone mothers could hardly forage enough food for their o spring and themselves with needy children in tow.
Raising children required constant help from other family members and neighbours. It takes a tribe to raise a human. Evolution thus favoured those capable of forming strong social ties. In addition, since humans are born underdeveloped, they can be educated and socialised to a far greater extent than any other animal. Most mammals emerge from the womb like glazed earthenware emerging from a kiln – any attempt at remoulding will scratch or break them.
Humans emerge from the womb like molten glass from a furnace. They can be spun, stretched and shaped with a surprising degree of freedom. This is why today we can educate our children to become Christian or Buddhist, capitalist or socialist, warlike or peace-loving."
(Yuval Noah Harari, Sapiens, A Brief History of Humankind, 2011)

E2.2.B.5.3.j. ERIK ERIKSON ILLUSTRATES HOW NATURAL/BIOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL AND SOCIAL AND CULTURAL FORCES INTERACT AND "MUTUALLY AGGRAVATE" EACH OTHER. He shows that a psychological breakdown happens when "too many props are endangered in all three spheres at one and the same time."
“There have been many war neuroses of this kind. Their victims were in a constant state of potential panic. They felt attacked or endangered by sudden or loud noises as well as by symptoms that flashed through their bodies: palpitations, waves of fever heat, headaches. They were just as helpless, however, in the face of their emotions: childlike anger and anxiety without reason were provoked by anything too sudden or too intense, a perception or a feeling, a thought, or a memory. What was sick in these men, then, was their screening system, that ability not to pay attention to a thousand stimuli which we perceive at any given moment but which we are able to ignore for the sake of whatever we are concentrating on. Worse, these men were unable to sleep deeply and to dream well. Through long nights they would hang between the Scylla of annoying noises and the Charybdis of the anxiety dreams which would startle them out of finally achieved moments of deep sleep. In the daytime they would find themselves unable to remember certain things; they would lose their way or suddenly detect, in conversation, that they had unwittingly misrepresented things. They could not rely on the characteristic processes of the functioning ego by which time and space are organized and truth is tested.
What had happened? Were these the symptoms of physically shaken, somatically damaged nerves? In some cases, undoubtedly the condition started with such damage, or at least with momentary traumatization. More often, however, several factors combined to cause a real crisis and to make it a lasting one. The case presented included all of these factors: the lowering of group morale and the gradual growth of imperceptible group panic be-cause of doubt in the leadership; immobilization under enemy fire that could not be located and returned; the inducement to "giving up" in a hospital bed; and finally, immediate evacuation and a lasting conflict between two inner voices, one of which said, "Let them take you home, don't be a sucker," and the other, "Don't let the others down; if they can take it, you can."
What impressed me most was the loss in these men of a sense of identity. They knew who they were; they had a personal identity. But it was as if, subjectively, their lives no longer hung together and never would again. There was a central disturbance of what I then started to call ego identity. At this point it is enough to say that this sense of identity provides the ability to experience one's self as something that has continuity and sameness, and to act accordingly. In many cases there was at the decisive time in the history of the breakdown a seemingly innocent item such as the gun in our medical soldier's unwilling hands: a symbol of evil, which endangered the principles by which the individual had at-tempted to safeguard personal integrity and social status in his life at home. Likewise, the anxiety often broke out with the sudden thought, I should now be at home, painting the roof, or paying that bill, or seeing this boss or calling on that girl; and the despairing feeling that all of this which should have been would never be. This, in turn, seemed to be intrinsically interwoven with an aspect of life in this country which will be fully discussed later-namely, the fact that many of our young men keep their life plans and their identities tentative on the principle suggested by the early course of American history-that a man must have and must pre-serve and defend the freedom of the next step and the right to make a choice and grasp opportunities. To be sure, Americans too settle down and, in fact, can be sedentary with a vengeance. But sitting with conviction presupposes also the assurance that they could move if they chose to, move geographically or socially or both. It is the free choice that counts and the conviction that no-body can either "fence you in" or "push you around." Thus contrasting symbols become all-important, symbols of possession, of status, and of sameness, and symbols of choice, change, and aggression. Depending on the immediate situation, these symbols can become good or evil. In our marine, the gun had become the symbol of his family's downfall and represented all the angry and ugly things which he had chosen not to do.
Thus again, three contemporaneous processes, instead of sup-porting one another, seem to have mutually aggravated their respective dangers: (1) The group. These men wanted to have the situation well in hand as a group, with a defined identity among the armed forces of this country. Mistrust in leadership, instead, caused grumbling panic. Our man countered this panic, of which he could not possibly be free, by the defensive position so often taken in his life, that he was the well-composed, tolerant leader of children. (2) The patient's organism. This struggled to maintain homeostasis under the impact of both the (subliminal) panic and symptoms of an acute infection, but was sabotaged by the severe fever. Against this the man held out to the breaking point because of that other "conviction" that he could "take any-thing." (3) The patient's ego. Already overtaxed by the group panic and the increasing fever, to neither of which he was at first willing to give in, the patient's ego balance was upset by the fact that the very superiors on whom he had relied ordered him (or so he thought) to break a symbolic vow on which his self-esteem was so precariously based. No doubt then, this occurrence opened the floodgate of infantile urges which he had so rigidly held in abeyance. For in all of his rigidity only part of his personality had genuinely matured, while another part had been supported by the very props which now collapsed. Under such conditions he was unable to endure inactivity under air bombardment and some-thing in him gave in only too easily to the offer of evacuation. Here the situation changed, introducing new complications. For once evacuated, many men felt, as it were, unconsciously obligated to continue to suffer and to suffer somatically, in order to justify the evacuation, not to speak of the later discharge, which some men could never have forgiven themselves on the grounds of a "mere neurosis." After the first World War, much emphasis was put on a compensation neurosis-neuroses unconsciously prolonged so as to secure continued financial help. The second World War experience has indicated insight into an overcompensation neurosis-i.e., the unconscious wish to continue to suffer in order to overcompensate for the weakness of having let others down; for many of these escapists were more loyal than they knew. Our conscientious man, too, repeatedly felt "shot through the head" by excruciating pain whenever he definitely was better, or rather whenever he became aware of having felt well for some time without noticing it.
We could say with reasonable assurance that this man would not have broken down in this particular way had it not been for the conditions of war and combat-just as most doctors would be reasonably certain that young Sam could not have had convulsions of such severity without some "somatic compliance." In either case, however, the psychological and therapeutic problem is to understand how the combined circumstances weakened a central defense and what specific meaning the consequent break-down represents.
The combined circumstances which we recognize are an aggregate of simultaneous changes in the organism (exhaustion and fever), in the ego (breakdown of ego identity), and in the milieu (group panic). These changes aggravate one another if traumatic suddenness in one set of changes makes impossible demands on the balancing power of the other two, or if a convergence of main themes gives all changes a high mutual specificity. We saw such a convergence in Sam's case, where a hostility problem came to a critical focus all at once in his milieu, in his maturational stage, in his somatic condition, and in his ego defenses. Sam's and the marine's cases both showed another dangerous trend-namely, ubiquity of change, a condition existing when too many props are endangered in all three spheres at one and the same time.”
(Erik Erikson, Childhood And Society, 1950)

E2.2.B.5.3.k. D.W. WINNICOTT ARGUES THAT A CHILD IN THE "LATENCY PERIOD"—WHO IS PSYCHOLOGICALLY FOCUSED ON BUILDING INTERNAL CONTROLS—IS NATURALLY PRIMED TO "SEE A GREAT DEAL OF VIRTUE IN WHAT A FASCIST OR NAZI REGIME IS SUPPOSED TO PROVIDE, IN WHICH SOMEONE WHO IS IDEALISED CONTROLS AND DIRECTS." 
“CHILDREN IN THE WAR   
 (Written for teachers, 1940) 
 To understand the effect of war on children it is ﬁrst necessary to know what capacity children have for the understanding of war and of the causes of war, and of the reasons by which we justify our ﬁghting. Of course, what is true of one age group is not true of another. This may be rather obvious, but it is important, and I will try to put into words what it implies. 
 What is also important is the variation between one child and another, apart from age differences. This I will also try to describe.  
  AGE GROUP VARIATIONS 
 Tiny children are only indirectly affected by war. They are scarcely wakened from sleep by guns. The worst effects come from separation from familiar sights and smells, and perhaps from mother, and from loss of contact with father, things which often cannot be avoided. They may however come into contact with mother’s body more than they would ordinarily do, and some-times they have to know what mother feels like when she is scared. 
 Quite soon, however, children begin to think and talk in terms of war. Instead of talking in terms of fairy stories that have been read and repeated, the child uses the currency of the adults around him, and his mind is full of aeroplanes, bombs, and craters. 
 The older child leaves the age of violent feelings and ideas, and enters a period of waiting for life itself, a period which is the teacher’s heyday, told what is accepted as right and good. In this period, as is well known, the  real  violence of war can be very distasteful, while at the same time aggression appears regularly in play and fantasy with romantic colouring. Many never leave this stage of emotional development, and the result may be harmless, and may even lead to highly successful accomplishment. Actual war, however, seriously upsets the lives of adults who have stuck here, and this gives the cue to those who have charge of children who are in this ‘latency’ period of emotional development to select and enlarge upon the non-violent side of war. One teacher has described how this may be done through the use of war news in the geography lesson: this town in Canada is interesting because of evacuation, this country is important because it contains oil or has a good harbour, that country may become important next week because it grows wheat or supplies manganese. The violent side of war is not stressed. 
 A child in this age group does not understand the idea of a ﬁght for freedom, and indeed could be expected to see a great deal of virtue in what a Fascist or Nazi regime is supposed to provide, in which someone who is idealised controls and directs. This is what is happening inside the child’s own nature at this age, and such a child would be liable to feel that freedom meant licence. 
 In the majority of schools the stress would be laid on the Empire, the parts coloured red in the maps of the world, and it is not easy to show why children in the latency period of emotional development should not be allowed to idealise (since idealise they must) their own country and kind. 
 A child of 8 or 9 years might be expected to play at ‘English and Germans’ as a variation on the theme of ‘Cowboys and Indians’, or ‘Oxford and Cambridge’. Some children show a preference for one or other side, but this may vary from day to day, and many do not much care. Then comes an age at which it is expected that, if the game is one of ‘English and Germans’, the child shall prefer to identify with his own country. The wise teacher is not in a hurry to ﬁnd this. 
 Discussion of the case of the child of 12 and over becomes complex because of the great effects which result from the delay of puberty. As I have said, many people partially retain the qualities that belong to the so-called latency period, or return to these qualities after a furtive attempt to attain a more mature development. For them one can say that the same principles hold as for the real latency child, except that it is with more and more misgiving that we tolerate them. For instance, whereas it is quite normal for a 9-year-old to like to be controlled and directed by an idealised authority, it is less healthy if the child is 14. One can often see a deﬁnite and conscious hankering after the Nazi or Fascist regime in a child who hovers on the brink, fearing to launch away into puberty, and such a hankering should obviously be treated with sympathy, or be sympathetically ignored, even by those whose more mature judgment on political matters makes admiration of a dictator an ugly thing. In a certain number of cases this pattern sets in as a permanent alternative to puberty. 
 After all, the Authoritarian regime has not sprung out of nothing; in one sense it is a well-recognised way of life found in the wrong age group. When it claims to be mature it has to stand the full test of reality, and this brings out the fact that the idealisation in the Authoritarian idea is itself an indication of something unideal, something to be feared as a controlling and directing power. The onlooker can see this bad direction at work, but the young devotee himself presumably only knows that he blindly follows where his idealised leader leads. 
 Children who are really coming to grips with puberty and the new ideas which belong to that period, who are ﬁnding a new capacity for the enjoyment of personal responsibility, and who are beginning to cope with an increased potential for destruction and construction, may ﬁ nd some help in war and war news. The point is that grown-ups are more honest in wartime than in peace-time. Even those who cannot acknowledge personal responsibility for this war mostly do show that they can hate and ﬁght. Even  The Times  is full of stories that can be enjoyed like an exciting adventure story. The B.B.C. likes to link Hun-hunting with the pilot’s breakfast, dinner, and tea, and exploits over Berlin are called picnics, though each exploit brings about death and destruction. In wartime we are all as bad and as good as the adolescent in his dreams, and this reassures him. We as an adult group may recover sanity, after a spell of war, and the adolescent, as an individual, may one day become able easily to pursue the arts of peace, though by then he will be no longer a youth. 
 The adolescent, therefore, may be expected to enjoy actual war bulletins as given to adults, which he can take or leave as he pleases. He may hate them, but by then he knows what it is we are so eager about, and this clears his conscience when he discovers that he has himself the capacity to enjoy wars and cruelty as they turn up in his fantasy. Something corresponding to this could be said of adolescent girls, and the differences between boys and girls in this respect very much need working out.”
(D.W. Winnicott, Deprivation and Delinquency, 1984)

E2.2.B.5.3.l. I_Deena So’Oteh_What Is Narcissism
NARCISSISM MAY BE AT LEAST PARTIALLY GENETICALLY HERITABLE, YET DYSFUNCTIONAL PARENTING MIGHT ALSO PLAY A SIGNIFICANT ROLE.
“WHAT IS NARCISSISM? SCIENCE CONFRONTS A WIDELY MISUNDERSTOOD PHENOMENON […]
Marianne (whose name has been changed for privacy) recalls her father, a brilliant scientist whom her own therapist deemed a malignant narcissist after reading the voluminous letters he’d sent over the years. (He never sought therapy.) It was “all about constant punishment,” Marianne says. He implemented stringent rules, such as putting a strict time limit on how long their family of five children could use the bathroom during long road trips. If, by the time he’d filled the tank, everyone hadn’t returned to the car, he’d leave. On one occasion, Marianne was abandoned at a gas station when she couldn’t make it back on time. “There was [hardly] a day without that kind of drama—one person being isolated, punished, humiliated, being called out,” she remembers. “If you cried, he’d say you’re being histrionic. He didn’t associate that crying with his actions; he thought it was performative.”
Her father also pitted her siblings and their mother against one another to prevent them from forging close connections—and he constantly looked for flaws in those around him. Marianne recalls dinner parties at home where her father spent hours trying to pinpoint weaknesses among the other husbands and to hurt couples’ opinions of each other. When Marianne brought home boyfriends, her father challenged them and tried to prove that he was superior. And despite being a dazzling academic who easily charmed people when they first met him, he got fired time and time again because of conflicts at the universities where he worked. “It was all about one-upmanship,” she says. “His impulse to destroy anything that was shiny, that was popular, that was loved—it overwhelmed everything else.”
Malignant narcissists often pose the greatest challenge for therapists—and they may be particularly dangerous in leadership positions, Diamond notes. They can have deficient moral functioning while exerting an enormous amount of influence on followers. “I think this is something that’s going on right now with the rise of authoritarianism worldwide,” she adds.

An Adverse Childhood?
Research with identical and nonidentical twins suggests that narcissism may be at least partially genetically heritable, but other studies indicate that dysfunctional parenting might also play a significant role. Grandiosity may derive from caregivers’ inflated views about their child’s superiority, whereas vulnerability may originate in having a caregiver who was cold, neglectful, abusive or invalidating. Complicating matters, some studies find overvaluation also plays a role in vulnerable narcissism, whereas others fail to find a link between parenting and grandiosity. “Children who develop NPD may have felt seen and appreciated when they achieved or behaved in a certain way that satisfied a caregiver’s expectations but ignored, dismissed or scolded when they failed to do so,” Ronningstam summarizes in her guide to the disorder.
Skidmore attributes his own NPD to both genes and painful childhood experiences. “I’ve never met a narcissist who has not had trauma,” he says. “People just use love as this carrot on a stick [that] they hang above your head, and they tell you to behave or they’ll take it away. And so I have this mindset of, ‘Well then, screw it! I don’t need love. I can take admiration, achievements, my intelligence—you can’t take those things away from me.’ ”
Many researchers nonetheless say a lot more work is needed to determine what role, if any, parenting plays. Miller points out that most research to date of grandiosity, in particular, has found small effects. Further, the work was done retrospectively—asking people to recall their past experiences—rather than prospectively to see how early life experiences affect outcomes. [...]

Toward Treatments
To date, there have been no randomized clinical trials for treatments specific for narcissistic personality disorder. Clinicians have, however, begun to adapt psychotherapies that have proved to be effective in other, related conditions, such as borderline personality disorder. Treatments currently used include “mentalization,” which aims to help individuals make sense of both their own and others’ mental states, and “transference,” which focuses on enhancing a person’s ability to self-reflect, take the perspective of others and regulate their emotions. But there is still a dire need for effective treatments.

“People with pathological narcissism and narcissistic personality disorder have a reputation of not changing or dropping off from treatment,” Ronningstam says. “Instead of blaming that on them, the clinicians and researchers need to really further develop strategies that can be adjusted to the individual difference—and at the same time to focus on and promote change.”

After she discovered she had NPD, Tessa started a YouTube channel called Spirit­Narc where she posted videos about her experiences and perspectives on narcissism. “I really want the world to understand [narcissism],” she says. “I’m so sick of the narrative that’s going around—people see the outside behavior and say, ‘This means these people are awful.’ ” What these people don’t see, she adds, is the suffering that lies below the surface.”
(Diana Kwon, Scientific American, September 1, 2023)

Read the full article in Scientific American:
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/what-is-narcissism-science-confronts-a-widely-misunderstood-phenomenon1/?ref=refind

E2.2.B.5.3.m. ACCORDING TO THE THEORY OF CONSTRUCTED EMOTION, YOUR BRAIN CREATES EMOTION BY PREDICTIVELY SIMULATING SENSORY INPUTS FROM YOUR BODY AND THE WORLD USING CONCEPTS, WITH THE WINNING SIMULATION BECOMING YOUR EXPERIENCE IN ORDER TO REGULATE YOUR BODY BUDGET.
“The theory of constructed emotion explains how you experience and perceive emotion in the absence of any consistent, biological fingerprints in the face, body, or brain. Your brain continually predicts and simulates all the sensory inputs from inside and outside your body, so it under-stands what they mean and what to do about them. These predictions travel through your cortex, cascading from the body-budgeting circuitry in your interoceptive network to your primary sensory cortices, to create distributed, brainwide simulations, each of which is an instance of a concept. The simulation that’s closest to your actual situation is the winner that becomes your experience, and if it’s an instance of an emotion concept, then you experience emotion. This whole process occurs, with the help of your control network, in the service of regulating your body budget to keep you alive and healthy. In the process, you impact the body budgets of those around you, to help you survive to propagate your genes into the next generation. This is how brains and bodies create social reality. This is also how emotions become real. Yes, that’s a mouthful. And some details are still reasoned speculation, like the exact mechanisms of the concept cascade. But we can say confidently that the theory of constructed emotion is a viable way to think about how emotions are made. The theory accounts for all of the phenomena of the classical view, plus its anomalies such as the huge variability in emotional experiences, in emotion concepts, and in physical changes during emotion. It dissolves useless nature/nurture debates (e.g., what is hard-wired versus what is learned) by using a single framework to understand both physical reality and social reality, moving us one step closer to a scientific bridge between the social and natural worlds.”
(Lisa Feldman Barrett, How Emotions Are Made - The Secret Life of the Brain, 2017)

E2.2.B.5.4. Against the "excess" of a purely innate or purely acquired argument: the truth lies in their complex, relative relationship.

E2.2.B.5.4.a. A_Alfred Rethel_Nemesis_1937

Nemesis goddess of measure, fatal to those committing excess... an inspiration to guide the exalted in our excessively polarized political debates.

"MODERATION AND EXCESS [...]
The ideologies which guide our world were born in the time of absolute
scientific discoveries. Our real knowledge, on/the other hand, only justifies a system of thought based qn
relative discoveries. "Intelligence," says Lazare Bickel, "is our faculty for not developing what we think
to the very end, so that we can still believe in reality." Approximative thought is the only creator of
reality. [...]
One cannot say that nothing has any meaning, because in doing so one affirms a value sanctified by an
opinion; nor that everything has a meaning, because the word everything has no meaning for us. The
irrational imposes limits on the rational, which, in its turn, gives it its moderation. Something has a
meaning, finally, which we must obtain from meaninglessness. In the same way, it cannot be said that
existence takes place only on the level of essence. Where could one perceive essence except on the level
of existence and evolution? But nor can it be said that being is only existence. Something that is always in
the process of development could not exist—there must be a beginning. Being can only prove itself in
development, and development is nothing without being. The world is not in a condition of pure stability;
nor is it only movement. It is both movement and stability. The historical dialectic, for example, is not in
continuous pursuit of an unknown value. It revolves around the limit, which is its prime value. Heraclitus,
the discoverer of the constant change of things, nevertheless set a limit to this perpetual process. This
limit was symbolized by Nemesis, the goddess of moderation and the implacable enemy of the
immoderate. A process of thought which wanted to take into account the contemporary contradictions of
rebellion should seek its inspiration from this goddess."
(Albert Camus, Thye Rebel, 1951)

E2.2.D. Different Philosophical Conceptions of Freedom

E2.2.D.1. Libertarianism (Free Will): Present this conception that affirms a radical capacity for choice, an unconditioned power of decision.

E2.2.D.1.1. The libertarian idea of free will as a total, "unconditioned" power that is fundamentally "mysterious" and separate from material causality.

E2.2.D.1.1.a. "FREE WILL
 
Insofar as it is absolute or indeterminate, freedom of will is 'the power to determine oneself without being determined by anything' (Marcel Conche, L'Aléatoire, V, 7). It is a mysterious, strictly metaphysical power. If it could be explained by causes or known by science, it would no longer be free. One can only believe in free will by renouncing the idea of understanding it, or understand it as an illusion by ceasing to believe in it. Thus, we must choose between Descartes and Spinoza, Alain and Freud, existentialism (especially Sartrean existentialism) and what I have called, for lack of a better term, "insistingentialism"—between free will and liberation."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E2.2.D.1.1.b. RAND BUILDS A DIRECT CONTRAST BETWEEN TWO OPPOSING PHILOSOPHICAL PREMISES: VOLITION (FREE WILL), WHICH RAND ALIGNS WITH THE LITERARY SCHOOL OF ROMANTICISM AND THE USE OF PLOT – AND  DETERMINISM, WHICH SHE ALIGNS WITH THE LITERARY SCHOOL OF NATURALISM AND THE CHARACTERISTIC OF PLOTLESSNESS. 
“If man does not possess volition, then his life and his character are determined by forces beyond his control—if so, then the choice of values is impossible to him—if so, then such values as he appears to hold are only an illusion, predetermined by the forces he has no power to resist—if so, then he is impotent to achieve his goals or to engage in purposeful action—and if he attempts the illusion of such action, he will be defeated by those forces, and his failure (or occasional success) will have no relation to his actions. The literary form expressing the essence of this view is plotlessness (since there can be no purposeful progression of events, no logical continuity, no resolution, no climax).
If man’s character and the course of his life are the product of unknown (or unknowable) forces, then, in a literary work, both the characterizations and the events are not to be invented by the author, but are to be copied from such particular characters and events as he has observed. Since he denies the existence of any effective motivational principle in human psychology, he cannot create his characters conceptually. He can only observe the people he meets, as he observes inanimate objects, and reproduce them—in the implicit hope that some clue to the unknown forces controlling human destiny may be discovered in such reproductions.
These basic premises of Romanticism and Naturalism (the volition or anti-volition premise) affect all the other aspects of a literary work, such as the choice of theme and the quality of the style, but it is the nature of the story structure—the attribute of plot or plotlessness—that represents the most important difference between them and serves as the main distinguishing characteristic for classifying a given work in one category or the other.
This is not to say that a writer identifies and applies all the consequences of his basic premise by a conscious process of thought. Art is the product of a man’s subconscious integrations, of his sense of life, to a larger extent than of his conscious philosophical convictions. Even the choice of the basic premise may be subconscious—since artists, like any other men, seldom translate their sense of life into conscious terms. And, since an artist’s sense of life may be as full of contradictions as that of any other man, these contradictions become apparent in his work; the dividing line between Romanticism and Naturalism is not always maintained consistently in every aspect of every given work of art (particularly since one of these basic premises is false). But if one surveys the field of art and studies the works produced, one will observe that the degree of consistency in the consequences of these two basic premises is a remarkably eloquent demonstration of the power of metaphysical premises in the realm of art.
With very rare (and partial) exceptions, Romanticism is non-existent in today’s literature. This is not astonishing when one considers the crushing weight of the philosophical wreckage under which generations of men have been brought up—a wreckage dominated by the doctrines of irrationalism and determinism. In their formative years, young people could not find much evidence on which to develop a rational, benevolent, value-oriented sense of life, neither in philosophical theory nor in its cultural echoes nor in the daily practice of the passively deteriorating society around them.
But observe the psychological symptoms of an unrecognized, unidentified issue: the virulently intense antagonism of today’s esthetic spokesmen to any manifestation of the Romantic premise in art. It is particularly the attribute of plot in literature that arouses an impassioned hostility among them—a hostility with deeply personal overtones, too violent for a mere issue of literary canons. If plot were a negligible and inappropriate element of literature, as they claim it to be, why the hysterical hatred in their denunciations? This type of reaction pertains to metaphysical issues, i.e., to issues that threaten the foundations of a person’s entire view of life (if that view is irrational). What they sense in a plot structure is the implicit premise of volition (and, therefore, of moral values). The same reaction, for the same subconscious reason, is evoked by such elements as heroes or happy endings or the triumph of virtue, or, in the visual arts, beauty. Physical beauty is not a moral or volitional issue—but the choice to paint a beautiful human being rather than an ugly one, implies the existence of volition: of choice, standards, values.
The destruction of Romanticism in esthetics—like the destruction of individualism in ethics or of capitalism in politics—was made possible by philosophical default. It is one more demonstration of the principle that that which is not known explicitly is not in man’s conscious control. In all three cases, the nature of the fundamental values involved had never been defined explicitly, the issues were fought in terms of non-essentials, and the values were destroyed by men who did not know what they were losing or why.
This was the predominant pattern of issues in the field of esthetics, which, throughout history, has been a virtual monopoly of mysticism. The definition of Romanticism given here is mine—it is not a generally known or accepted one. There is no generally accepted definition of Romanticism (nor of any key element in art, nor of art itself).
Romanticism is a product of the nineteenth century—a (largely subconscious) result of two great influences: Aristotelianism, which liberated man by validating the power of his mind—and capitalism, which gave man’s mind the freedom to translate ideas into practice (the second of these influences was itself the result of the first). But while the practical consequences of Aristotelianism were reaching men’s daily existence, its theoretical influence was long since gone: philosophy, since the Renaissance, had been retrogressing overwhelmingly to the mysticism of Plato. Thus the historically unprecedented events of the nineteenth century—the Industrial Revolution, the child-prodigy speed in the growth of science, the skyrocketing standard of living, the liberated torrent of human energy—were left without intellectual direction or evaluation. The nineteenth century was guided, not by an Aristotelian philosophy, but by an Aristotelian sense of life. (And, like a brilliantly violent adolescent who fails to translate his sense of life into conscious terms, it burned itself out, choked by the blind confusions of its own overpowering energy.)
Whatever their conscious convictions, the artists of that century’s great new school—the Romanticists—picked their sense of life out of the cultural atmosphere: it was an atmosphere of men intoxicated by the discovery of freedom, with all the ancient strongholds of tyranny—of church, state, monarchy, feudalism—crumbling around them, with unlimited roads opening in all directions and no barriers set to their newly unleashed energy. It was an atmosphere best expressed by that century’s naive, exuberant and tragically blind belief that human progress, from here on, was to be irresistible and automatic.
Esthetically, the Romanticists were the great rebels and innovators of the nineteenth century. But, in their conscious convictions, they were for the most part anti-Aristotelian and leaning toward a kind of wild, freewheeling mysticism. They did not see their own rebellion in fundamental terms; they were rebelling—in the name of the individual artist’s freedom—not against determinism, but, much more superficially, against the esthetic “Establishment” of the time: against Classicism.”
 (Ayn Rand, The romantic manifesto, 1969)

RAND ARGUES THAT THE ROMANTICS' "FUNDAMENTAL ERROR" WAS TO CHAMPION INDIVIDUALITY BASED ON "FEELINGS" RATHER THAN "REASON."
The Romanticists saw their cause primarily as a battle for their right to individuality and—unable to grasp the deepest metaphysical justification of their cause, unable to identify their values in terms of reason—they fought for individuality in terms of feelings, surrendering the banner of reason to their enemies.
There were other, lesser consequences of this fundamental error, all of them symptoms of the intellectual confusion of the age. Groping blindly for a metaphysically oriented, grand-scale, exalted way of life, the Romanticists, predominantly, were enemies of capitalism, which they regarded as a prosaic, materialistic, “petty bourgeois” system—never realizing that it was the only system that could make freedom, individuality and the pursuit of values possible in practice. Some of them chose to be advocates of socialism; some turned for inspiration to the Middle Ages and became shameless glamorizers of that nightmare era; some ended up where most champions of the non-rational end up: in religion. All of it served to accelerate Romanticism’s growing break with reality.
When, in the later half of the nineteenth century, Naturalism rose to prominence and, assuming the mantle of reason and reality, proclaimed the artists’ duty to portray “things as they are”—Romanticism did not have much of an opposition to offer.
It must be noted that philosophers contributed to the confusion surrounding the term “Romanticism.” They attached the name “Romantic” to certain philosophers (such as Schelling and Schopenhauer) who were avowed mystics advocating the supremacy of emotions, instincts or will over reason. This movement in philosophy had no significant relation to Romanticism in esthetics, and the two movements must not be confused. The common nomenclature, however, is significant in one respect: it indicates the depth of the confusion on the subject of volition. The “Romantic” philosophers’ theories were a viciously malevolent, existence-hating attempt to uphold volition in the name of whim worship, while the esthetic Romanticists were groping blindly to uphold volition in the name of man’s life and values here, on earth. In terms of essentials, the brilliant sunlight of Victor Hugo’s universe is the diametrical opposite of the venomous muck of Schopenhauer’s. It was only philosophical package-dealing that could throw them in the same category. But the issue demonstrates the profound importance of the subject of volition, and the grotesque distortions it assumes when men are unable to grasp its nature. This issue may also serve as an illustration of the importance of establishing that volition is a function of man’s rational faculty.
In recent times, some literary historians have discarded, as inadequate, the definition of Romanticism as an emotion-oriented school and have attempted to redefine it, but without success. Following the rule of fundamentality, it is as a volition-oriented school that Romanticism must be defined—and it is in terms of this essential characteristic that the nature and history of Romantic literature can be traced and understood.
The (implicit) standards of Romanticism are so demanding that in spite of the abundance of Romantic writers at the time of its dominance, this school has produced very few pure, consistent Romanticists of the top rank. Among novelists, the greatest are Victor Hugo and Dostoevsky, and, as single novels (whose authors were not always consistent in the rest of their works), I would name Henryk Sienkiewicz’s Quo Vadis and Nathaniel Hawthorne’s The Scarlet Letter. Among playwrights, the greatest are Friedrich Schiller and Edmond Rostand.
The distinguishing characteristic of this top rank (apart from their purely literary genius) is their full commitment to the premise of volition in both of its fundamental areas: in regard to consciousness and to existence, in regard to man’s character and to his actions in the physical world. Maintaining a perfect integration of these two aspects, unmatched in the brilliant ingenuity of their plot structures, these writers are enormously concerned with man’s soul (i.e., his consciousness). They are moralists in the most profound sense of the word; their concern is not merely with values, but specifically with moral values and with the power of moral values in shaping human character. Their characters are “larger than life,” i.e., they are abstract projections in terms of essentials (not always successful projections, as we shall discuss later). In their stories, one will never find action for action’s sake, unrelated to moral values. The events of their plots are shaped, determined and motivated by the characters’ values (or treason to values), by their struggle in pursuit of spiritual goals and by profound value-conflicts. Their themes are fundamental, universal, timeless issues of man’s existence—and they are the only consistent creators of the rarest attribute of literature: the perfect integration of theme and plot, which they achieve with superlative virtuosity.”
 (Ayn Rand, The romantic manifesto, 1969)

E2.2.D.1.2. The primary arguments for free will: the experiential defense (how we feel free) and the political defense (why a society must be structured as if we are free).

E2.2.D.1.2.a.  FRIEDRICH HAYEK EXPOSES THE CLASSIC LIBERTARIAN SOLUTION FOR HOW TO SECURE FREEDOM IN A SOCIETY. IT ARGUES THAT COERCION IS MINIMIZED WHEN THE STATE, WHICH HOLDS A MONOPOLY ON FORCE, HAS ITS POWER STRICTLY LIMITED BY "KNOWN GENERAL RULES." This makes the government's actions predictable and non-arbitrary, creating an "assured private sphere" within which the individual can be free.
“The transition from the concept of individual liberty to that of liberty as power has been facilitated by the philosophical tradition that uses the word “restraint” where we have used “coercion” in deﬁning liberty. Perhaps “restraint” would in some respects be a more suitable word if it was always remembered that in its strict sense it presupposes the action of a restraining human agent. In this sense, it usefully reminds us that the infringements on liberty consist largely in people’s being prevented from doing things, while “coercion” emphasizes their being made to do particular things. Both aspects are equally important: to be precise, we should probably deﬁ ne liberty as the absence of restraint and constraint. Unfortunately, both these words have come also to be used for inﬂuences on human action that do not come from other men; and it is only too easy to pass from deﬁning liberty as the absence of restraint to deﬁning it as the “absence of obstacles to the realization of [our] desires” or even more generally as “the absence of external impediments.” This is equivalent to interpreting it as eﬀective power to do whatever we want.
This reinterpretation of liberty is particularly ominous because it has penetrated deeply into the usage of some of the countries where, in fact, individual freedom is still largely preserved. In the United States it has come to be widely accepted as the foundation for the political philosophy dominant in “liberal” circles. Such recognized intellectual leaders of the “progressives” as J. R. Commons and John Dewey have spread an ideology in which “liberty is power, eﬀective power to do speciﬁc things” and the “demand for liberty is the demand for power,” while the absence of coercion is merely “the negative side of freedom” and “is to be prized only as a means to a freedom which is power.” This confusion of liberty as power with liberty in its original meaning inevitably leads to the identiﬁcation of liberty with wealth; and this makes it possible to exploit all the appeal which the word “liberty” carries in the sup-port for a demand for the redistribution of wealth. Yet, though freedom and wealth are both good things which most of us desire and though we often need both to obtain what we wish, they still remain diﬀerent. Whether or not I am my own master and can follow my own choice and whether the possibilities from which I must choose are many or few are two entirely diﬀerent questions. The courtier living in the lap of luxury but at the beck and call of his prince may be much less free than a poor peasant or artisan, less able to live his own life and to choose his own opportunities for usefulness. Similarly, the general in charge of an army or the director of a large construction project may wield enormous powers which in some respects may be quite uncontrollable, and yet may well be less free, more liable to have to change all his intentions and plans at a word from a superior, less able to change his own life or to decide what to him is most important, than the poorest farmer or shepherd.
If there is to be any clarity in the discussion of liberty, its deﬁnition must not depend upon whether or not everybody regards this kind of liberty as a good thing. It is very probable that there are people who do not value the liberty with which we are concerned, who cannot see that they derive great beneﬁts from it, and who will be ready to give it up to gain other advantages; it may even be true that the necessity to act according to one’s own plans and decisions may be felt by them to be more of a burden than an advantage. But liberty may be desirable, even though not all persons may take advantage of it. We shall have to consider whether the beneﬁt derived from liberty by the majority is dependent upon their using the opportunities it oﬀers them and whether the case for liberty really rests on most people wanting it for them-selves. It may well be that the beneﬁts we receive from the liberty of all do not derive from what most people recognize as its eﬀects; it may even be that liberty exercises its beneﬁcial eﬀects as much through the discipline it imposes on us as through the more visible opportunities it oﬀers.
Above all, however, we must recognize that we may be free and yet miser-able. Liberty does not mean all good things or the absence of all evils. It is true that to be free may mean freedom to starve, to make costly mistakes, or to run mortal risks. In the sense in which we use the term, the penniless vagabond who lives precariously by constant improvisation is indeed freer than the conscripted soldier with all his security and relative comfort. But if liberty may therefore not always seem preferable to other goods, it is a distinctive good that needs a distinctive name. And though “political liberty” and “inner liberty” are long- established alternative uses of the term which, with a little care, may be employed without causing confusion, it is questionable whether the use of the word “liberty” in the sense of “power” should be tolerated.
In any case, however, the suggestion must be avoided that, because we employ the same word, these “liberties” are diﬀerent species of the same genus. This is the source of dangerous nonsense, a verbal trap that leads to the most absurd conclusions. Liberty in the sense of power, political liberty, and inner liberty are not states of the same kind as individual liberty: we can-not, by sacriﬁcing a little of the one in order to get more of the other, on balance gain some common element of freedom. We may well get one good thing in the place of another by such an exchange. But to suggest that there is a common element in them which allows us to speak of the eﬀect that such an exchange has on liberty is sheer obscurantism, the crudest kind of philosophical realism, which assumes that, because we describe these conditions with the same word, there must also be a common element in them. But we want them largely for diﬀerent reasons, and their presence or absence has diﬀerent eﬀects. If we have to choose between them, we cannot do so by asking whether liberty will be increased as a whole, but only by deciding which of these diﬀerent states we value more highly.”
(Friedrich Hayek, The Constitution of Liberty, 1960)


HAYEK DEVELOPS HIS THEORY OF SPONTANEOUS ORDER. HE DESCRIBES IT AS A "THIRD POSSIBILITY" BEYOND DELIBERATE HUMAN DESIGN OR SUPERNATURAL DESIGN—THE "EMERGENCE OF ORDER AS THE RESULT OF ADAPTIVE EVOLUTION." 
“Like the ancient, the modern British conceptions of liberty grew against the background of a comprehension, ﬁrst achieved by the lawyers, of how institutions had developed. “There are many things specially in laws and governments,” wrote Chief Justice Hale in the seventeenth century in a critique of Hobbes, “that mediately, remotely, and consequentially are reasonable to be approved, though the reason of the party does not presently or immediately and distinctly see its reasonableness. . . . Long experience makes more discoveries touching conveniences or inconveniences of laws than is possible for the wisest council of men at ﬁrst to foresee. And that those amendments and supplements that through the various experiences of wise and knowing men have been applied to any law must needs be better suited to the convenience of laws, than the best invention of the most pregnant wits not aided by such a series and tract of experience. . . . This adds to the diﬃculty of a present fathoming of the reason of laws, because they are the production of long and iterated experience which, though it be commonly called the mistress of fools, yet certain it is the wisest expedient among mankind, and discovers those defects and supplies which no wit of man could either at once foresee or aptly remedy. . . . It is not necessary that the reasons of the institution should be evident unto us. It is suﬃcient that they are instituted laws that give a certainty to us, and it is reasonable to observe them though the particular reason of the institution appear not.
From these conceptions gradually grew a body of social theory that showed how, in the relations among men, complex and orderly and, in a very deﬁnite sense, purposive institutions might grow up which owed little to design, which were not invented but arose from the separate actions of many men who did not know what they were doing. This demonstration that something greater than man’s individual mind may grow from men’s fumbling eﬀorts represented in some ways an even greater challenge to all design theories than even the later theory of biological evolution. For the ﬁrst time it was shown that an evident order which was not the product of a designing human intelligence need not therefore be ascribed to the design of a higher, super-natural intelligence, but that there was a third possibility—the emergence of order as the result of adaptive evolution.
Since the emphasis we shall have to place on the role that selection plays in this process of social evolution today is likely to create the impression that we are borrowing the idea from biology, it is worth stressing that it was, in fact, the other way round: there can be little doubt that it was from the theories of social evolution that Darwin and his contemporaries derived the suggestion for their theories. Indeed, one of those Scottish philosophers who ﬁrst developed these ideas anticipated Darwin even in the biological ﬁ eld; and the later application of these conceptions by the various “historical schools” in law and language rendered the idea that similarity of structure might be accounted for by a common origin, a commonplace in the study of social phenomena long before it was applied to biology. It is unfortunate that at a later date the social sciences, instead of building on these beginnings in their own ﬁ eld, re- imported some of these ideas from biology and with them brought in such conceptions as “natural selection,” “struggle for existence,” and “survival of the ﬁttest,” which are not appropriate in their ﬁ eld; for in social evolution, the decisive factor is not the selection of the physical and inheritable properties of the individuals but the selection by imitation of successful institutions and habits. Though this operates also through the success of individuals and groups, what emerges is not an inheritable attribute of individuals, but ideas and skills—in short, the whole cultural inheritance which is passed on by learning and imitation.”
(Friedrich Hayek, The Constitution of Liberty, 1960)

FRIEDRICH HAYEK  ARGUES THAT INDIVIDUAL LIBERTY—DEFINED AS THE ABSENCE OF COERCION—MUST BE TREATED AS AN "OVERRIDING PRINCIPLE GOVERNING ALL PARTICULAR ACTS OF LEGISLATION." THIS ELEVATION OF NEGATIVE LIBERTY TO THE HIGHEST POLITICAL VALUE IS A CORE TENET OF LIBERTARIANISM.
“The important question that arises here is whether the agreement of a majority on a moral rule is suﬃcient justiﬁcation for enforcing it on a dissenting minority or whether this power ought not also to be limited by more general rules—in other words, whether ordinary legislation should be limited by general principles just as the moral rules of individual conduct preclude certain kinds of action, however good may be their purpose. There is as much need of moral rules in political as in individual action, and the consequences of successive collective decisions as well as those of individual decisions will be beneﬁcial only if they are all in conformity with common principles.
Such moral rules for collective action are developed only with diﬃculty and very slowly. But this should be taken as an indication of their preciousness. The most important among the few principles of this kind that we have developed is individual freedom, which it is most appropriate to regard as a moral principle of political action. Like all moral principles, it demands that it be accepted as a value in itself, as a principle that must be respected without our asking whether the consequences in the particular instance will be beneﬁcial. We shall not achieve the results we want if we do not accept it as a creed or presumption so strong that no considerations of expediency can be allowed to limit it.
The argument for liberty, in the last resort, is indeed an argument for principles and against expediency in collective action, which, as we shall see, is equivalent to saying that only the judge and not the administrator may order coercion. When one of the intellectual leaders of  nineteenth-century liberalism, Benjamin Constant, described liberalism as the système de principes, he pointed to the heart of the matter. Not only is liberty a system under which all government action is guided by principles, but it is an ideal that will not be preserved unless it is itself accepted as an overriding principle governing all particular acts of legislation. Where no such fundamental rule is stubbornly adhered to as an ultimate ideal about which there must be no compromise for the sake of material advantages—as an ideal which, even though it may have to be temporarily infringed during a passing emergency, must form the basis of all permanent arrangements—freedom is almost certain to be destroyed by piecemeal encroachments. For in each particular instance it will be possible to promise concrete and tangible advantages as the result of a curtailment of freedom, while the beneﬁts sacriﬁced will in their nature always be unknown and uncertain. If freedom were not treated as the supreme principle, the fact that the promises which a free society has to oﬀer can always be only chances and not certainties, only opportunities and not deﬁnite gifts to particular individuals, would inevitably prove a fatal weakness and lead to its slow erosion.
The reader will probably wonder by now what role there remains to be played by reason in the ordering of social aﬀairs, if a policy of liberty demands so much refraining from deliberate control, so much acceptance of the undirected and spontaneously grown. The ﬁrst answer is that, if it has become necessary to seek appropriate limits to the uses of reason here, to ﬁnd these limits is itself a most important and diﬃcult exercise of reason. More-over, if our stress here has been necessarily on those limits, we have certainly not meant to imply thereby that reason has no important positive task. Reason undoubtedly is man’s most precious possession. Our argument is intended to show merely that it is not all- powerful and that the belief that it can become its own master and control its own development may yet destroy it. What we have attempted is a defense of reason, against its abuse by those who do not understand the conditions of its eﬀective functioning and continuous growth. It is an appeal to men to see that we must use our reason intelligently and that, in order to do so, we must preserve that indispensable matrix of the uncontrolled and non-rational which is the only environment wherein reason can grow and operate eﬀectively.”
(Friedrich Hayek, The Constitution of Liberty, 1960)

BY CRITIQUING THE LIBERAL JOHN STUART MILL FOR GOING TOO FAR IN HIS ATTACK ON "MORAL COERCION," HAYEK CARVES OUT HIS OWN SPECIFIC POSITION. He argues for a society that values both maximum legal freedom from state coercion and the beneficial ordering function of non-coercive social pressure.
“Attempts have often been made, notably by John Stuart Mill, to deﬁne the private sphere that should be immune from coercion in terms of a distinction between actions that aﬀect only the acting person and those which also aﬀect others. But, as there is hardly any action that may not conceivably aﬀect others, this distinction has not proved very useful. It is only by delimiting the protected sphere of each individual that the distinction becomes signiﬁcant. Its aim cannot be to protect people against all actions by others that may be harmful to them but only to keep certain of the data of their actions from the control of others. In determining where the boundaries of the protected sphere ought to be drawn, the important question is whether the actions of other people that we wish to see prevented would actually interfere with the reasonable expectations of the protected person.
In particular, the pleasure or pain that may be caused by the knowledge of other people’s actions should never be regarded as a legitimate cause for coercion. The enforcement of religious conformity, for instance, was a legitimate object of government when people believed in the collective responsibility of the community toward some deity and it was thought that the sins of any member would be visited upon all. But where private practices cannot aﬀect anybody but the voluntary adult actors, the mere dislike of what is being done by others, or even the knowledge that others harm themselves by what they do, provides no legitimate ground for coercion.
We have seen that the opportunities of learning about new possibilities that the growth of civilization constantly oﬀers provide one of the main arguments or freedom; it would therefore make nonsense of the whole case for freedom if, because of the envy of others or because of their dislike of anything that disturbs their ingrained habits of thought, we should be restrained from pursuing certain activities. While there is clearly a case for enforcing rules of con-duct in public places, the bare fact that an action is disliked by some of those who learn about it cannot be a suﬃcient ground for prohibiting it.
Generally speaking, this means that the morality of action within the private sphere is not a proper object for coercive control by the state. Perhaps one of the most important characteristics that distinguish a free from an unfree society is indeed that, in matters of conduct that do not directly aﬀect the protected sphere of others, the rules which are in fact observed by most are of a voluntary character and not enforced by coercion. Recent experience with totalitarian regimes has emphasized the importance of the principle “never [to] identify the cause of moral values with that of the State.” It is indeed probable that more harm and misery have been caused by men determined to use coercion to stamp out a moral evil than by men intent on doing evil.
Yet the fact that conduct within the private sphere is not a proper object for coercive action by the state does not necessarily mean that in a free society such conduct should also be exempt from the pressure of opinion or disapproval. A hundred years ago, in the stricter moral atmosphere of the Victorian era, when at the same time coercion by the state was at a minimum, John Stuart Mill directed his heaviest attack against such “moral coercion.” In this he probably overstated the case for liberty. At any rate, it probably makes for greater clarity not to represent as coercion the pressure that public approval or disapproval exerts to secure obedience to moral rules and conventions.
We have already seen that coercion is, in the last resort, a matter of degree and that the coercion which the state must both prevent and threaten for the sake of liberty is only coercion in its more severe forms—the kind which, when threatened, may prevent a person of normal strength from pursuing an object important to him. Whether or not we wish to call coercion those milder forms of pressure that society applies to nonconformists, there can be little question that these moral rules and conventions that possess less binding power than the law have an important and even indispensable role to perform and probably do as much to facilitate life in society as do the strict rules of law. We know that they will be observed only generally and not universally, but this knowledge still provides useful guidance and reduces uncertainty. While the respect for such rules does not prevent people from occasionally behaving in a manner that is disapproved, it limits such behavior to instances in which it is fairly important to the person to disregard the rules. Sometimes these non- coercive rules may represent an experimental stage of what later in a modiﬁed form may grow into law. More often they will provide a ﬂexible background of more or less unconscious habits which serve as a guide to most people’s actions. On the whole, those conventions and norms of social intercourse and individual conduct do not constitute a serious infringement of individual liberty but secure a certain minimum of uniformity of conduct that assists individual eﬀorts more than it impedes them.”
(Friedrich Hayek, The Constitution of Liberty, 1960)

FRIEDRICH HAYEK DEFINE THE CLASSICAL LIBERAL (OR LIBERTARIAN) POSITION BY SHARPLY DISTINGUISHING IT FROM THE POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY WITH WHICH IT IS MOST OFTEN CONFUSED.
Conservatism: Is based on a "fear of change, a timid distrust of the new as such." It lacks positive principles and can only slow down, not redirect, the course of events. 
Liberalism/Libertarianism: Is based on "courage and confidence, on a preparedness to let change run its course even if we cannot predict where it will lead." It has a "faith in the spontaneous forces of adjustment."
“1. At a time when most movements that are thought to be progressive advocate further encroachments on individual liberty, those who cherish freedom are likely to expend their energies in opposition. In this they ﬁnd themselves much of the time on the same side as those who habitually resist change. In matters of current politics today they generally have little choice but to sup-port the conservative parties. But, though the position I have tried to deﬁ ne is also often described as “conservative,” it is very diﬀerent from that to which this name has been traditionally attached. There is danger in the confused condition which brings the defenders of liberty and the true conservatives together in common opposition to developments which threaten their diﬀerent ideals equally. It is therefore important to distinguish clearly the position taken here from that which has long been known—perhaps more appropriately—as conservatism.
Conservatism proper is a legitimate, probably necessary, and certainly wide-spread attitude of opposition to drastic change. It has, since the French Revolution, for a century and a half played an important role in European politics. Until the rise of socialism its opposite was liberalism. There is nothing corresponding to this conﬂict in the history of the United States, because what in Europe was called “liberalism” was here the common tradition on which the American polity had been built: thus the defender of the American tradition was a liberal in the European sense.2 This already existing confusion was made worse by the recent attempt to transplant to America the European type of conservatism, which, being alien to the American tradition, has acquired a somewhat odd character. And some time before this, American radicals and socialists began calling themselves “liberals.” I will nevertheless continue for the moment to describe as liberal the position which I hold and which I believe diﬀers as much from true conservatism as from socialism. Let me say at once, however, that I do so with increasing misgivings, and I shall later have to consider what would be the appropriate name for the party of liberty. The reason for this is not only that the term “liberal” in the United States is the cause of constant misunderstandings today, but also that in Europe the pre-dominant type of rationalistic liberalism has long been one of the pacemakers of socialism.
Let me now state what seems to me the decisive objection to any conservatism which deserves to be called such. It is that by its very nature it cannot oﬀer an alternative to the direction in which we are moving. It may succeed by its resistance to current tendencies in slowing down undesirable developments, but, since it does not indicate another direction, it cannot prevent their continuance. It has, for this reason, invariably been the fate of conservatism to be dragged along a path not of its own choosing. The tug of war between conservatives and progressives can only aﬀect the speed, not the direction, of contemporary developments. But, though there is need for a “brake on the vehicle of progress,” personally cannot be content with simply helping to apply the brake. What the liberal must ask, ﬁrst of all, is not how fast or how far we should move, but where we should move. In fact, he diﬀers much more from the collectivist radical of today than does the conservative. While the last generally holds merely a mild and moderate version of the prejudices of his time, the liberal today must more positively oppose some of the basic conceptions which most conservatives share with the socialists.
2. The picture generally given of the relative position of the three parties does more to obscure than to elucidate their true relations. They are usually represented as diﬀerent positions on a line, with the socialists on the left, the conservatives on the right, and the liberals somewhere in the middle. Nothing could be more misleading. If we want a diagram, it would be more appropriate to arrange them in a triangle with the conservatives occupying one corner, with the socialists pulling toward the second and the liberals toward the third. But, as the socialists have for a long time been able to pull harder, the conservatives have tended to follow the socialist rather than the liberal direction and have adopted at appropriate intervals of time those ideas made respectable by radical propaganda. It has been regularly the conservatives who have com-promised with socialism and stolen its thunder. Advocates of the Middle Way with no goal of their own, conservatives have been guided by the belief that the truth must lie somewhere between the extremes—with the result that they have shifted their position every time a more extreme movement appeared on either wing.
The position which can be rightly described as conservative at any time depends, therefore, on the direction of existing tendencies. Since the development during the last decades has been generally in a socialist direction, it may seem that both conservatives and liberals have been mainly intent on retarding that movement. But the main point about liberalism is that it wants to go elsewhere, not to stand still. Though today the contrary impression may some-times be caused by the fact that there was a time when liberalism was more widely accepted and some of its objectives closer to being achieved, it has never been a  backward- looking doctrine. There has never been a time when liberal ideals were fully realized and when liberalism did not look forward to further improvement of institutions. Liberalism is not averse to evolution and change; and where spontaneous change has been smothered by government control, it wants a great deal of change of policy. So far as much of current governmental action is concerned, there is in the present world very little rea-son for the liberal to wish to preserve things as they are. It would seem to the liberal, indeed, that what is most urgently needed in most parts of the world is a thorough  sweeping- away of the obstacles to free growth.
This diﬀerence between liberalism and conservatism must not be obscured by the fact that in the United States it is still possible to defend individual liberty by defending long- established institutions. To the liberal they are valuable not mainly because they are long established or because they are American but because they correspond to the ideals which he cherishes.”
 (Friedrich Hayek, The Constitution of Liberty, 1960)

NASSIM NICHOLAS TALEB  PROVIDES A POWERFUL ARGUMENT, GROUNDED IN COMPLEXITY SCIENCE AND EXPERIMENTAL ECONOMICS, FOR THE THEORY OF SPONTANEOUS ORDER. The "Zero-Intelligence Markets" experiment demonstrates how a "good structure" can produce an efficient, intelligent collective outcome even with completely unintelligent participants.
“ZERO-INTELLIGENCE MARKETS
The underlying structure of reality matters much more than the participants, something policymakers fail to understand.
Under the right market structure, a collection of idiots produces a well-functioning market.
The researchers Dhananjay Gode and Shyam Sunder came to a surprising result in 1993. You populate markets with zero intelligence agents, that is buying and selling randomly, under some structure such that a proper auction process matches bids and offers in a regular way. And guess what? We get the same allocative efficiency as if market participants were intelligent. Friedrich Hayek has been, once again, vindicated. Yet one of the most cited ideas in history, that of the invisible hand, appears to be the least integrated into modern psyche.
Furthermore:
It may be that be that some idiosyncratic behavior on the part of the individual (deemed at first glance “irrational”) may be necessary for efficient functioning at the collective level.
More critically for the “rationalist” crowd,
Individuals don’t need to know where they are going; markets do.
Leave people alone under a good structure and they will take care of things.”
(Nassim Nicholas Taleb, Skin in the game, 2017)

E2.2.D.1.2.b. WILLIAM JAMES IDENTIFIES "VICIOUS ABSTRACTIONISM" AS THE INTELLECTUAL SIN OF REDUCING A COMPLEX REALITY TO A SINGLE ABSTRACT CONCEPT, USING IT PRIVATIVELY TO EXCLUDE OTHER FEATURES, WHICH MUTILATES UNDERSTANDING AND CREATES PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS.
“ABSTRACTIONISM AND 'RELATIVISMUS'

Abstract concepts, such as elasticity, voluminousness, disconnectedness,
are salient aspects of our concrete experiences which we find it useful
to single out. Useful, because we are then reminded of other things
that offer those same aspects; and, if the aspects carry consequences in
those other things, we can return to our first things, expecting those
same consequences to accrue.

To be helped to anticipate consequences is always a gain, and such being
the help that abstract concepts give us, it is obvious that their use is
fulfilled only when we get back again into concrete particulars by their
means, bearing the consequences in our minds, and enriching our notion
of the original objects therewithal.

Without abstract concepts to handle our perceptual particulars by,
we are like men hopping on one foot. Using concepts along with the
particulars, we become bipedal. We throw our concept forward, get
a foothold on the consequence, hitch our line to this, and draw our
percept up, travelling thus with a hop, skip and jump over the surface
of life at a vastly rapider rate than if we merely waded through the
thickness of the particulars as accident rained them down upon our
heads. Animals have to do this, but men raise their heads higher and
breathe freely in the upper conceptual air.

The enormous esteem professed by all philosophers for the
conceptual form of consciousness is easy to understand. From Plato's
time downwards it has been held to be our sole avenue to essential
truth. Concepts are universal, changeless, pure; their relations are
eternal; they are spiritual, while the concrete particulars which they
enable us to handle are corrupted by the flesh. They are precious in
themselves, then, apart from their original use, and confer new dignity
upon our life.

One can find no fault with this way of feeling about concepts so long as
their original function does not get swallowed up in the admiration
and lost. That function is of course to enlarge mentally our momentary
experiences by ADDING to them the consequences conceived; but
unfortunately, that function is not only too often forgotten by
philosophers in their reasonings, but is often converted into its exact
opposite, and made a means of diminishing the original experience
by DENYING (implicitly or explicitly) all its features save the one
specially abstracted to conceive it by.

This itself is a highly abstract way of stating my complaint, and it
needs to be redeemed from obscurity by showing instances of what is
meant. Some beliefs very dear to my own heart have been conceived in
this viciously abstract way by critics. One is the 'will to believe,' so
called; another is the indeterminism of certain futures; a third is the
notion that truth may vary with the standpoint of the man who holds it.
I believe that the perverse abuse of the abstracting function has led
critics to employ false arguments against these doctrines, and often has
led their readers to false conclusions. I should like to try to save the
situation, if possible, by a few counter-critical remarks.

Let me give the name of 'vicious abstractionism' to a way of using
concepts which may be thus described: We conceive a concrete situation
by singling out some salient or important feature in it, and classing it
under that; then, instead of adding to its previous characters all the
positive consequences which the new way of conceiving it may bring, we
proceed to use our concept privatively; reducing the originally rich
phenomenon to the naked suggestions of that name abstractly taken,
treating it as a case of 'nothing but' that concept, and acting as if
all the other characters from out of which the concept is abstracted
were expunged. [Footnote: Let not the reader confound the fallacy here
described with legitimately negative inferences such as those drawn in
the mood 'celarent' of the logic-books.] Abstraction, functioning in
this way, becomes a means of arrest far more than a means of advance
in thought. It mutilates things; it creates difficulties and finds
impossibilities; and more than half the trouble that metaphysicians and
logicians give themselves over the paradoxes and dialectic puzzles of
the universe may, I am convinced, be traced to this relatively simple
source. THE VICIOUSLY PRIVATIVE EMPLOYMENT OF ABSTRACT CHARACTERS AND
CLASS NAMES is, I am persuaded, one of the great original sins of the
rationalistic mind.”
(William James, The Meaning of Truth, 1909)


WILLIAM JAMES ARGUES THAT DETERMINISTS ATTACK FREE WILL THROUGH "VICIOUS ABSTRACTIONISM" BY ISOLATING THE MOMENT OF CHOICE AS PURE DISCONNECTION, thereby ignoring the continuity of character and motive that the indeterminist actually experiences, and falsely portraying a life of free choices as a chaotic break between past and future.
“To proceed immediately to concrete examples, cast a glance at the belief
in 'free will,' demolished with such specious persuasiveness recently
by the skilful hand of Professor Fullerton. [Footnote: Popular Science
Monthly, N. Y., vols. lviii and lix.] When a common man says that his
will is free, what does he mean? He means that there are situations of
bifurcation inside of his life in which two futures seem to him equally
possible, for both have their roots equally planted in his present and
his past. Either, if realized, will grow out of his previous motives,
character and circumstances, and will continue uninterruptedly the
pulsations of his personal life. But sometimes both at once are
incompatible with physical nature, and then it seems to the naive
observer as if he made a choice between them NOW, and that the question
of which future is to be, instead of having been decided at the
foundation of the world, were decided afresh at every passing moment in
I which fact seems livingly to grow, and possibility seems, in turning
itself towards one act, to exclude all others.

He who takes things at their face-value here may indeed be deceived. He
may far too often mistake his private ignorance of what is predetermined
for a real indetermination of what is to be. Yet, however imaginary
it may be, his picture of the situation offers no appearance of breach
between the past and future. A train is the same train, its passengers
are the same passengers, its momentum is the same momentum, no matter
which way the switch which fixes its direction is placed. For the
indeterminist there is at all times enough past for all the different
futures in sight, and more besides, to find their reasons in it, and
whichever future comes will slide out of that past as easily as the
train slides by the switch. The world, in short, is just as CONTINUOUS
WITH ITSELF for the believers in free will as for the rigorous
determinists, only the latter are unable to believe in points of
bifurcation as spots of really indifferent equilibrium or as containing
shunts which there--and there only, NOT BEFORE--direct existing motions
without altering their amount.

Were there such spots of indifference, the rigorous determinists think,
the future and the past would be separated absolutely, for, ABSTRACTLY
TAKEN, THE WORD 'INDIFFERENT' SUGGESTS DISCONNECTION SOLELY. Whatever
is indifferent is in so far forth unrelated and detached. Take the
term thus strictly, and you see, they tell us, that if any spot of
indifference is found upon the broad highway between the past and the
future, then no connection of any sort whatever, no continuous momentum,
no identical passenger, no common aim or agent, can be found on both
sides of the shunt or switch which there is moved. The place is an
impassable chasm.

Mr. Fullerton writes--the italics are mine--as follows:--

'In so far as my action is free, what I have been, what I am, what I
have always done or striven to do, what I most earnestly wish or resolve
to do at the present moment--these things can have NO MORE TO DO WITH
ITS FUTURE REALIZATION THAN IF THEY HAD NO EXISTENCE.... The possibility
is a hideous one; and surely even the most ardent free-willist will,
when he contemplates it frankly, excuse me for hoping that if I am free
I am at least not very free, and that I may reasonably expect to find
SOME degree of consistency in my life and actions. ... Suppose that I
have given a dollar to a blind beggar. Can I, if it is really an act
of free-will, be properly said to have given the money? Was it given
because I was a man of tender heart, etc., etc.? ... What has all
this to do with acts of free-will? If they are free, they must not be
conditioned by antecedent circumstances of any sort, by the misery of
the beggar, by the pity in the heart of the passer-by. They must be
causeless, not determined. They must drop from a clear sky out of the
void, for just in so far as they can be accounted for, they are not
free.' [Footnote: Loc. cit., vol. lviii, pp. 189, 188.]

Heaven forbid that I should get entangled here in a controversy about
the rights and wrongs of the free-will question at large, for I am only
trying to illustrate vicious abstractionism by the conduct of some
of the doctrine's assailants. The moments of bifurcation, as the
indeterminist seems to himself to experience them, are moments both of
re-direction and of continuation. But because in the 'either--or' of the
re-direction we hesitate, the determinist abstracts this little element
of discontinuity from the superabundant continuities of the experience,
and cancels in its behalf all the connective characters with which the
latter is filled. Choice, for him, means henceforward DISconnection pure
and simple, something undetermined in advance IN ANY RESPECT WHATEVER,
and a life of choices must be a raving chaos, at no two moments of which
could we be treated as one and the same man. If Nero were 'free' at. the
moment of ordering his mother's murder, Mr. McTaggart [Footnote: Some
Dogmas of Religion, p. 179.] assures us that no one would have the
right at any other moment to call him a bad man, for he would then be an
absolutely other Nero.”
(William James, The Meaning of Truth, 1909)

E2.2.D.1.3. The Determinist Rebuttal (The Case Against "Unconditioned" Choice): counter-argument and critique of the "radical" nature of free will from philosophical, psychological, and physical perspectives.

E2.2.D.1.3.a. "A DOMINANT role in nearly all recent inquiries into the free-will problem has been played by a principle which I shall call "the principle of alternate possibilities." This principle states that a person is morally responsible for what he has done only if he could have done otherwise. Its exact meaning is a subject of controversy, particularly concerning whether someone who accepts it is thereby committed to believing that moral responsibility and determinism are incompatible. Practically no one, how- ever, seems inclined to deny or even to question that the principle of alternate possibilities (construed in some way or other) is true. It has generally seemed so overwhelmingly plausible that some philosophers have even characterized it as an a priori truth. People whose accounts of free will or of moral responsibility are radically at odds evidently find in it a firm and convenient common ground upon which they can profitably take their opposing stands. But the principle of alternate possibilities is false. A person may well be morally responsible for what he has done even though he could not have done otherwise. The principle's plausibility is an illusion, which can be made to vanish by bringing the relevant moral phenomena into sharper focus. [...]
Suppose a person tells us that he did what he did because he was unable to do otherwise; or suppose he makes the similar statement that he did what he did because he had to do it. We do often accept statements like these (if we believe them) as valid excuses, and such statements may well seem at first glance to invoke the revised principle of alternate possibilities. But I think that when we accept such statements as valid excuses it is because we assume that we are being told more than the statements strictly and literally convey. We understand the person who offers the excuse to mean that he did what he did only because he was unable to do otherwise, or only because he had to do it. And we understand him to mean, more particularly, that when he did what he did it was not because that was what he really wanted to do. The principle of alternate possibilities should thus be replaced, in my opinion, by the following principle: a per- son is not morally responsible for what he has done if he did it only because he could not have done otherwise. This principle does not appear to conflict with the view that moral responsibility is compatible with determinism. The following may all be true: there were circumstances that made it impossible for a person to avoid doing something; these circumstances actually played a role in bringing it about that he did it, so that it is correct to say that he did it because he could not have done otherwise; the person really wanted to do what he did; he did it because it was what he really wanted to do, so that it is not correct to say that he did what he did only because he could not have done otherwise. Under these conditions, the person may well be morally responsible for what he has done. On the other hand, he will not be morally responsible for what he has done if he did it only because he could not have done otherwise, even if what he did was some- thing he really wanted to do."
(Harry Frankfurt, Alternate possibilities and Moral responsability, The journal of Philosophy, 1969)

E2.2.D.1.3.b. RUSSELL EXPOSES WHAT HE SEES AS THE MAJOR FLAWS AND INCONSISTENCIES IN LOCKE'S ATTEMPT TO RECONCILE SELF-INTEREST WITH VIRTUE:
•	It cannot account for human irrationality (our preference for immediate pleasure).
•	Its psychological premise is wrong ("the pleasure is due to the desire, not the desire to the pleasure").
•	It falls into a common philosophical trap: "first lay down a false doctrine, and then argue that wickedness consists in acting in a manner that proves it false."
“No one has yet succeeded in inventing a philosophy at once credible and self-consistent. Locke aimed at credibility, and achieved it at the expense of consistency. Most of the great philosophers have done the opposite. A philosophy which is not self-consistent cannot be wholly true, but a philosophy which is self-consistent can very well be wholly false. The most fruitful philosophies have contained glaring inconsistencies, but for that very reason have been partially true. There is no reason to suppose that a self-consistent system contains more truth than one which, like Locke’s, is obviously more or less wrong.Locke’s ethical doctrines arc interesting, partly on their own account, partly as an anticipation of Bentham. When I speak of his ethical doctrines, I do not mean his moral disposition as a practical man, but his general theories as to how men act and how they should act. Like Bentham, Locke was a man filled with kindly feeling, who yet held that everybody (including himself) must always be moved, in action, solely by desire for his own happiness or pleasure. A few quotations will make this clear.
‘Things are good or evil only in relation to pleasure or pain. That we call “good” which is apt to cause or increase pleasure, or diminish pain, in us.’
‘What is it moves desire? I answer, happiness, and that alone.’ ‘Happiness, in its full extent, is the utmost pleasure we are capable of.’ ‘The necessity of pursuing true happiness [is] the foundation of all liberty.’
‘The preference of vice to virtue [is] a manifest wrong judgment.’ ‘The government of our passions [is] the right improvement of liberty.’
The last of these statements depends, it would seem, upon the doctrine of rewards and punishments in the next world. God has laid down certain moral rules; those who follow them go to heaven, and those who break them risk going to hell. The prudent pleasure seeker will therefore be virtuous. With the decay of the belief that sin leads to hell, it has become more difficult to make a purely self-regarding argument in favour of a virtuous life. Bentham, who was n free-thinker, substituted the human lawgiver in place of God : it was the business of laws and social institutions to make a harmony between public and private interests, so that each man, in pursuing his own happiness, should be compelled to minister to the general happiness. But this is less satisfactory than the reconciliation of public and private interests effected by means of heaven and hell, both because lawgivers are not always wise or virtuous, and because human governments are not omniscient.
Locke has to admit, what is obvious, that men do not always act in the way which, on a rational calculation, is likely to secure them a maximum of pleasure. We value present pleasure more than future pleasure, and pleasure in the near future more than pleasure in the distant future. It may be said—this is not said by Locke—that the rate of interest is a quantitative measure of the general discounting of future pleasures. If the prospect of spending £1,000 a year hence were as delightful as the thought of spending it to-day, I should not need to be paid for postponing my pleasure. Locke admits that devout believers often commit sins which, by their own creed, put them in danger of hell. We all know people who put off going to the dentist longer than they would if they were engaged in the rational pursuit of pleasure. Thus, even if pleasure or the avoidance of pain be our motive, it must be added that pleasures lose their attractiveness and pains their terrors in proportion to their distance in the future.
Since it is only in the long run that, according to Locke, self-interest and the general interest coincide, it becomes important that men should be guided, as far as possible, by their long-run interests. That is to say, men should be prudent. Prudence is the one virtue which remains to be preached, for every lapse from virtue is a failure of prudence. Emphasis on prudence is characteristic of liberalism. It is connected with the rise of capitalism, for the prudent became rich while the imprudent became or remained poor. It is connected also with certain forms of Protestant piety: virtue with a view to heaven is psychologically very analogous to saving with a view to investment. Belief in the harmony between private and public interests is characteristic of liberalism, and long survived the theological foundation that it had in Locke.
Locke states that liberty depends upon the necessity of pursuing true happiness and upon the government of our passions. This opinion he derives from his doctrine that private and public interests are identical in the long run, though not necessarily over short periods. It follows from this doctrine that, given a community of citizens who are all both pious and prudent, they will all act, given liberty, in a manner to promote the general good. There will be no need of human laws to restrain them, since divine laws will suffice. The hitherto virtuous man who is tempted to become a highwayman will say to himself: ‘I might escape the human magistrate, but I could not escape punishment at the hands of the Divine Magistrate’ He will accordingly renounce his nefarious schemes, and live as virtuously as if he were sure of being caught by the police. Legal liberty, therefore, is only completely possible where both prudence and piety arc universal; elsewhere, the restraints imposed by the criminal law arc indispensable.

Locke stales repeatedly that morality is capable of demonstration, but he does not develop this idea so fully as could be wished. The most important passage is:
''Morality capable of demonstration. The idea of a Supreme Being, infinite in power, goodness, and wisdom, whose workmanship we are, and on whom we depend; and the idea of ourselves, as understanding, rational beings, being such as are clear in us, would, I suppose, if duly considered and pursued, afford such foundations of our duty and rules of action as might place morality among the sciences capable of demonstration : wherein I doubt not, but from self-evident propositions, by necessary consequences, as incontestable as those in mathematics, the measures of right and wrong might be made out, to any one that will apply himself with the same indifferency and attention to the one as he does to the other of these sciences. The relation of other modes may certainly be perceived, as well as those of number and extension : and I cannot see why they should not also be capable of demonstration, if due methods were thought on to examine or pursue their agreement or disagreement. “Where there is no property, there is no justice’, is a proposition as certain as any demonstration in Euclid: for the idea of property being a right to anything, and the idea to which the name “injustice is given being the invasion or violation of that right, it is evident that these ideas being thus established, and these names annexed to them, I can as certainly know this proposition to be true as that a triangle has three angles equal to two right ones. Again : “No government allows absolute liberty : the idea of government being the establishment of society upon certain rules or laws, which require conformity to them; and the idea of absolute liberty being for anyone to do whatever he pleases: I am as capable of being certain of the truth of this proposition as of any in the mathematics.'
This passage is puzzling because, at first, it seems to make moral rules dependent upon God’s decrees, while in the instances that are given it is suggested that moral rules arc analytic. I suppose that, in fact, Locke thought some parts of ethics analytic and others dependent upon God's decrees. Another puzzle is that the instances given do not seem to be ethical propositions at all.
There is another difficulty which one could wish to see considered. It is generally held by theologians that God’s decrees are not arbitrary, but are inspired by His goodness and wisdom. This requires that there should be some concept of goodness antecedent to God’s decrees, which has led Him to make just those decrees rather than any others. What this concept may be, it is impossible to discover from Locke. What he says is that a prudent man will act in such and such ways, since otherwise God will punish him; but he leaves us completely in the dark as to why punishment should be attached to certain acts rather than to their opposites. Locke’s ethical doctrines are, of course, not defensible. Apart from the fact that there is something revolting in a system which regards prudence as the only virtue, there are other, less emotional, objections to his theories.
In the first place, to say that men only desire pleasure is to put the cart before the horse. Whatever I may happen to desire, I shall feel pleasure in obtaining it; but as a rule the pleasure is due to the desire, not the desire to the pleasure. It is possible, as happens with masochists, to desire pain; in that case, there is still pleasure in the gratification of the desire, but it is mixed with its opposite. Even in Locke's own doctrine, it is not pleasure as such that is desired, since a proximate pleasure is more desired than a remote one. If morality is to be declined from the psychology of desire, as Locke and his disciples attempt to do, there can be no reason for deprecating the discounting of distant pleasures, or for urging prudence as a moral duty. His argument, in a nutshell, is : ‘We only desire pleasure. But, in fact, many men desire, not pleasure as such, but proximate pleasure. This contradicts our doctrine that they desire pleasure as such, and is therefore wicked.’ Almost all philosophers, in their ethical systems, first lay down a false doctrine, and then argue that wickedness consists in acting in a manner that proves it false, which would be impossible if the doctrine were true. Of this pattern Locke affords an example.”
(Bertrand Russell, History Of Western Philosophy, 1945)

E2.2.D.1.3.c. RUSSELL ARGUES THAT THE TRADITIONAL DOCTRINE OF FREE WILL IS PHILOSOPHICALLY INCOHERENT, SCIENTIFICALLY UNSUPPORTED, AND, MOST IMPORTANTLY, THAT "NOBODY BELIEVES IN IT IN PRACTICE." Russell provides a sharp psychological critique of why people cling to a belief in free will. He argues it is rooted not in evidence, but in our emotional "wish to think [people] wicked" and in our "human self-esteem"—it is flattering to be the center of a cosmic moral drama.
“The Doctrine of Free Will
The attitude of the Christians on the subject of natural law has been curiously vacillating and uncertain. There was, on the one hand, the doctrine of free will, in which the great majority of Christians believed; and this doctrine required that the acts of human beings at least should not be subject to natural law. There was, on the other hand, especially in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, a be-lief in God as the Lawgiver and in natural law as one of the main evidences of the existence of a Creator. In recent times the objection to the reign of law in the interests of free will has begun to be felt more strongly than the belief in natural law as affording evidence for a Lawgiver. Materialists used the laws of physics to show, or attempt to show, that the movements of human bodies are mechanically determined, and that consequently everything that we say and every change of position that we effect fall outside the sphere of any possible free will. If this be so, whatever may be left for our unfettered volitions is of little value. If, when a man writes a poem or commits a murder, the bodily movements involved in his act result solely from physical causes, it would seem absurd to put up a statue to him in the one case and to hang him in the other. There might in certain metaphysical systems remain a region of pure thought in which the will would be free; but, since that can be communicated to others only by means of bodily movement, the realm of freedom would be one that could never be the subject of communication and could never have any social importance.
Then, again, evolution has had, a considerable influence upon those Christians who have accepted it. They have seen that it will not do to make claims on behalf of man which are totally different from those which are made on behalf of other forms of life. Therefore, in order to safe-guard free will in man, they have objected to every attempt at explaining the behavior of living matter in terms of physical and chemical laws. The position of Descartes, to the effect that all lower animals are automata, no longer finds favor with liberal theologians. The doctrine of continuity makes them inclined to go a step further still and maintain that even what is called dead matter is not rigidly governed in its behavior by unalterable laws. They seem to have overlooked the fact that, if you abolish the reign of law, you also abolish the possibility of miracles, since miracles are acts of God which contravene the laws governing ordinary phenomena. I can, however, imagine the modern liberal theologian maintaining with an air of profundity that all creation is miraculous, so that he no longer needs to fasten upon certain occurrences as special evidence of Divine intervention.
Under the influence of this reaction against natural law, some Christian apologists have seized upon the latest doc-trines of the atom, which tend to show that the physical laws in which we have hitherto believed have only an ap proximate and average truth as applied to large numbers of atoms, while the individual electron behaves pretty much as it likes. My own belief is that this is a temporary phase, and that the physicists will in time discover laws governing minute phenomena, although these laws may differ very considerably from those of traditional physics, However that may be, it is worthwhile to observe that the modern doctrines as to minute phenomena have no bearing upon anything that is of practical importance. Visible motions, and indeed all motions that make any difference to any-body, involve such large numbers of atoms that they come well within the scope of the old laws. To write a poem or commit a murder (reverting to our previous illustration), it is necessary to move an appreciable mass of ink or lead. The electrons composing the ink may be dancing freely around their little ballroom, but the ballroom as a whole is moving according to the old laws of physics, and this alone is what concerns the poet and his publisher. The modern doctrines, therefore, have no appreciable bearing upon any of those problems of human interest with which the theologian is concerned.
The free-will question consequently remains just where it was. Whatever may be thought about it as a matter of ultimate metaphysics, it is quite clear that nobody believes in it in practice. Everyone has always believed that it is possible to train character; everyone has always known that alcohol or opium will have a certain effect on behavior. The apostle of free will maintains that a man can by will power avoid getting drunk, but he does not maintain that when drunk a man can say "British Constitution" as clearly as if he were sober. And everybody who has ever had to do with children knows that a suitable diet does more to make them virtuous than the most eloquent preaching in the world. The one effect that the free-will doctrine has in practice is to prevent people from following out such common-sense knowledge to its rational conclusion. When a man acts in ways that annoy us we wish to think him wicked, and we refuse to face the fact that his annoying behavior is a result of antecedent causes which, if you follow them long enough, will take you beyond the moment of his birth and therefore to events for which he cannot be held responsible by any stretch of imagination.
No man treats a motorcar as foolishly as he treats an-other human being. When the car will not go, he does not attribute its annoying behavior to sin; he does not say, "You are a wicked motorcar, and I shall not give you any more petrol until you go." He attempts to find out what is wrong and to set it right. Arf analogous way of treating human beings is, however, considered to be contrary to the truths of our holy religion. And this applies even in the treatment of little children. Many children have bad habits which are perpetuated by punishment but will probably pass away of themselves if left unnoticed. Nevertheless, nurses, with very few exceptions, consider it right to inflict punishment, although by so doing they run the risk of causing insanity. When insanity has been caused it is cited in courts of law as a proof of the harmfulness of the habit, not of the punishment. (I am alluding to a recent prosecution for obscenity in the State of New York.)
Reforms in education have come very largely through the study of the insane and feeble-minded, because they have not been held morally responsible for their failures and have therefore been treated more scientifically than normal children. Until very recently it was held that, if a boy could not learn his lessons, the proper cure was caning or flogging. This view is nearly extinct in the treatment of children, but it survives in the criminal law. It is evident that a man with a propensity to crime must be stopped, but so must a man who has hydrophobia and wants to bite people, although nobody considers him morally responsible. A man who is suffering from plague has to be imprisoned until he is cured, although nobody thinks him wicked. The same thing should be done with a man who suffers from a propensity to commit forgery; but there should be no more idea of guilt in the one case than in the other. And this is only common sense, though it is a form of common sense to which Christian ethics and metaphysics are op-posed.
To judge of the moral influence of any institution upon a community, we have to consider the kind of impulse which is embodied in the institution and the degree to which the institution increases the efficacy of the impulse in that community. Sometimes the impulse concerned is quite obvious, sometimes it is more hidden. An Alpine club, for example, obviously embodies the impulse to adventure, and a learned society embodies the impulse toward knowledge. The family as an institution embodies jealousy and parental feeling; a football club or a political party embodies the impulse toward competitive play; but the two greatest social institutions-namely, the church and the state-are more complex in their psychological motivation. The primary purpose of the state is clearly security against both internal criminals and external enemies. It is rooted in the tendency of children to huddle together when they are frightened and to look for a grown-up per-son who will give them a sense of security. The church has more complex origins. Undoubtedly the most important source of religion is fear; this can be seen in the present day, since anything that causes alarm is apt to turn people's thoughts to God. Battle, pestilence, and shipwreck all tend to make people religious. Religon has, however, other appeals besides that of terror; it appeals especially to our human self-esteem. If Christianity is true, mankind are not such pitiful worms as they seem to be; they are of interest to the Creator of the universe, who takes the trouble to be pleased with them when they behave well and dis-pleased when they behave badly. This is a great compliment. We should not think of studying an ants' nest to find out which of the ants performed their formicular duty, and we should certainly not think of picking out those individual ants who were remiss and putting them into a bonfire. If God does this for us, it is a compliment to our importance; and it is even a pleasanter compliment if he awards to the good among us everlasting happiness in heaven. Then there is the comparatively modern idea that cosmic evolution is all designed to bring about the sort of results which we call good that is to say, the sort of results that give us pleasure. Here again it is flattering to suppose that the universe is controlled by a Being who shares our tastes and prejudices.”
(Bertrand Russell, Why I Am Not A Christian, 1927)

E2.2.D.1.3.d. WE CAN CONTRAST THE "BLOCK UNIVERSE" OR "ETERNALISM"—A CONCEPT SUPPORTED BY EINSTEIN AND PREFIGURED BY WILLIAM BLAKE WHERE PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE ALL EXIST SIMULTANEOUSLY—AND CONTRASTS ITS DISTURBING IMPLICATION OF NO FREE WILL with the alternative "growing block universe" theory, which attempts to restore it.
“Blake’s concept of eternity sits at the heart of his Albion mythology and was central to his understanding of the universe. He often uses the word as you might expect a Christian to use the word heaven, as some blissful realm different to the material world. But while heaven is distant, Blake’s eternity is always just within reach, simultaneously within and without and potentially available to all. In his copy of Swedenborg’s Divine Love and Divine Wisdom, Blake had written that Swedenborg’s argument was ‘False’ on the grounds that ‘if a thing loves it is infinite’. After a moment’s reflection, he then added, ‘Perhaps we only differ in the meaning of the words Infinite & Eternal.’ Eternity is a word that can be used in ways that are only loosely defined, and he recognised that his understanding of the word may be different to how others used it. So what, exactly, was Blake talking about when he used the word ‘Eternity’?
One common definition of eternity is that it refers to an infinite period of time. Understood in this way, eternity is simply time without end. This definition does not fit well with modern cosmology, however. This claims that time did not exist before the creation of the universe in the Big Bang, and that time may also end at some far-off future moment if the universe does indeed cease to exist, as some models predict. Eternity cannot refer to infinite time, therefore, because according to our current understanding of the universe there will only be a finite amount of time.
Instead, eternity can be defined as all of time. Understood in this way, eternity is the period that contains everything that has ever happened and everything that will happen. Yet for this definition of eternity to be something more than an intellectual abstraction and to describe something real, it is necessary for all of time to actually exist. If Blake’s eternity is a meaningful concept, in other words, then the future and the past need to be as real as the present. They need to be physical things, and not just a thought experiment.
During Blake’s time, eternity was more of a religious or spiritual idea than a scientific one. As far as eighteenth-century science was concerned, the past no longer existed and the future was yet to happen. Eternity was little more than a metaphor. In the twenty-first century, however, this is no longer the case. This aspect of Blake’s idiosyncratic cosmology is supported by the work of Albert Einstein.
In his special theory of relativity, Einstein showed that time passes at different rates in different circumstances. As hard to accept as this may be, the passing of time is changed by increases in speed and gravity. As a result, there are circumstances in which an event has not yet happened from the perspective of one observer, but which has already occurred from the perspective of someone else. This raises the question of how it is possible to say that something has happened, given that this may be true in some circumstances but false in others. According to Einstein, the answer is that we cannot. After relativity, the idea of ‘now’ became something that could not be satisfactorily defined.
This led to the cosmological theory known as the ‘block universe’. In a block universe all of time, including that which appears to us to be the past and the future, exists together, as one large ‘block’ of four-dimensional spacetime. Events that occur within the block universe are defined by the four dimensions of breadth, width, height and duration. The block universe solves the problems of defining ‘now’ by making the concept irrelevant. In a block universe, the passing of time is little more than an illusion. Every event exists always, regardless of whether it happened hundreds of years ago or hundreds of years in the future. Every first kiss and every last word is like an exhibit preserved in a museum that only beings with a godlike perspective can explore.
After the death of his lifelong friend the engineer Michele Besso, Einstein sent a letter of condolence to Besso’s family. He wrote that, ‘Now [Besso] has departed from this strange world a little ahead of me. That means nothing. For us believing physicists the distinction between past, present, and future only has the meaning of an illusion, though a persistent one.’ Einstein himself died one month later. Or at least, that is how it appears to those of us trapped within the persistent illusion of linear time. From Einstein’s perspective, he and Besso are still alive and joking around, and neither of them has been born yet, and they have been dead and gone for uncountable millennia. Blake displays a similar understanding about the illusion of passing time in Jerusalem, where he writes that, ‘I see the Past, Present & Future, existing all at once.’ He also writes: ‘And all that has existed in the space of six thousand years: Permanent, & not lost not lost nor vanishd, & every little act, Word, work, & wish, that has existed, all remaining still’
These are descriptions of eternity that perfectly describe Einstein’s block universe.
Belief in the literal existence of a block universe is called eternalism. The implications of eternalism are complex and, to most people, extremely disturbing. If the future already exists and cannot be changed, then there can be no free will. Your future actions were fixed before you are even born. This idea offends our sense of morality and justice, and reduces any feelings of pride and accomplishment we may have about our achievements into little more than vanity. How can we strive to prove ourselves if our life’s work was going to happen regardless? And likewise, how can we condemn Adolf Hitler or Judas Iscariot if the Holocaust and the betrayal of Jesus were always going to occur, and indeed already existed long before Hitler and Judas were born? If it was physically impossible for Hitler or Judas to act differently, how can we judge and blame?
From the perspective of eternalism our legal system is absurd, because it assumes the existence of free will when it judges those accused of crimes. But in an eternalist universe there is no free will, so we are effectively condemning people for the crime of existing. In a similar way, victims of abuse were preordained to suffer. Their abuse was destined to occur even before life appeared on earth, or the solar system formed. You can debate at length whether this makes the universe immoral or amoral, but it’s clear that such a universe is a hard one to love.
Supporters of eternalism respond to these issues in two ways. The first is to remind us that just because something is unappealing doesn’t mean that it can’t also be true. There is no guarantee that our universe will be something that we like. There is no reason why our own moral perspectives and sense of justice should coincide with the construction and behaviour of the entire universe.
The second response is to dismiss the problem on the grounds that, in terms of how we live our lives on a moment-to-moment basis, it doesn’t really matter. Even if our sense of free will is nothing but an illusion, it is a consistent and convincing illusion and it is easy enough to go through life acting as if it was real.
The greatest literary exploration of the concept of eternalism is the epic, Blake-inspired novel Jerusalem by Alan Moore, which includes a conversation about the true nature of reality between the eighteenth-century nonconformist minister Philip Doddridge and an angel. ‘Might I ask if, anywhere in this ingenious arrangement, any of us ever truly had Free Will?’ Doddridge asks the angel. The angel somewhat apologetically tells him that nobody had. ‘After a well-timed pause as if before the punch line of a joke’, the angel replies with a further question: ‘Did you miss it?’
This exchange is overheard by a character called Bill, who understands the reason for the laughter triggered by the angel’s question: ‘[Bill] got the gag. In some ways, it was almost comforting, the notion that whatever you did or accomplished, you were in the end only an actor running through a masterfully scripted drama. You just didn’t know it at the time, and thought you were extemporising. It was sort of comical, Bill saw that now, but he still found some solace in the thought that in a predetermined world, there was no point at all in fretting over anything, nor any purpose to regret.’ Moore’s exploration of eternalism has led to him offering the following advice: ‘Never do anything that you can’t live with for eternity.’ Of course, it’s not like you have any choice in the matter.
Despite these arguments, many people reject the idea of a block universe on principle and have attempted to find a different model of the universe, which, they hope, will work with relativity but also turn out to be more appealing. One such model is the ‘growing block universe’ theory of time. This claims that both the past and the present exist, in a similar way to the block universe proposed by eternalists, but that the future does not. The future remains ours to invent, and thus free will is back in the picture, along with morality and justice.
In this model, the block universe is said to be continually growing as time passes, like a tree trunk expanding and adding more rings as the years pass. The past is continually present, which accounts for the temporal anomalies reported by the theory of relativity, but the future has yet to appear and, as such, it is not determined. The idea was first proposed in 1923 by the English philosopher C. D. Broad, who wrote that: ‘It will be observed that such a theory as this accepts the reality of the present and the past, but holds that the future is simply nothing at all. Nothing has happened to the present by becoming past except that fresh slices of existence have been added to the total history of the world. The past is thus as real as the present.’
Broad’s growing block universe is intuitively closer to our common-sense understanding of the world than the eternalist approach, but it appeals more to philosophers than it does to scientists. It still leaves the knotty problem of being unable to say if the current moment is actually ‘now’, as the ever-preserved past will feel as much like ‘now’ as the actual present moment. This uncertainty around the concept of ‘now’ makes definitive statements about the non-existence of the future somewhat problematic. From a scientific perspective, the existence of the future is not any weirder than the existence of the past, and to have one but not the other requires explaining.
The growing block universe model has never shaken off the suspicion that, ultimately, it’s a bit of a fudge based on wishful thinking. That said, it is a model that fits well with the Gothic sensibilities that Blake shared. In Gothic art, the past is never really gone. It remains as an eternal, permanent presence which weighs on the present moment, and its cold, ominous atmosphere teases the idea that what appears to be ‘now’ may also be an undead past, unaware that its time has gone.”
(John Higgs, William Blake vs The World, 2021)

E2.2.D.1.4. Freedom is not a "given" power but an emergent property born from the very constraints of our nature.

E2.2.D.1.4.a. SCHILLER ARGUES THAT FREEDOM IS AN EMERGENT PROPERTY, BORN FROM THE VERY STRUCTURE OF OUR DETERMINED NATURE.
“LETTER XIX.
Two principal and different states of passive and active capacity of being determined [Bestimmbarkeit] can be distinguished in man; in like manner two states of passive and active determination [Bestimmung]. The explanation of this proposition leads us most readily to our end.

The condition of the state of man before destination or direction is given him by the impression of the senses is an unlimited capacity of being determined. The infinite of time and space is given to his imagination for its free use; and, because nothing is settled in this kingdom of the possible, and therefore nothing is excluded from it, this state of absence of determination can be named an empty infiniteness, which must not by any means be confounded with an infinite void.

Now it is necessary that his sensuous nature should be modified, and that in the indefinite series of possible determinations one alone should become real. One perception must spring up in it. That which, in the previous state of determinableness, was only an empty potency becomes now an active force, and receives contents; but, at the same time, as an active force it receives a limit, after having been, as a simple power, unlimited. Reality exists now, but the infinite has disappeared. To describe a figure in space, we are obliged to limit infinite space; to represent to ourselves a change in time, we are obliged to divide the totality of time. Thus we only arrive at reality by limitation, at the positive, at a real position, by negation or exclusion; to determination, by the suppression of our free determinableness.

But mere exclusion would never beget a reality, nor would a mere sensuous impression ever give birth to a perception, if there were not something from which it was excluded, if by an absolute act of the mind the negation were not referred to something positive, and if opposition did not issue out of non-position. This act of the mind is styled judging or thinking, and the result is named thought.

Before we determine a place in space, there is no space for us; but without absolute space we could never determine a place. The same is the case with time. Before we have an instant, there is no time to us: but without infinite time—eternity—we should never have a representation of the instant. Thus, therefore, we can only arrive at the whole by the part, to the unlimited through limitation; but reciprocally we only arrive at the part through the whole, at limitation through the unlimited.

It follows from this, that when it is affirmed of beauty that it mediates for man, the transition from feeling to thought, this must not be understood to mean that beauty can fill up the gap that separates feeling from thought, the passive from the active. This gap is infinite; and, without the interposition of a new and independent faculty, it is impossible for the general to issue from the individual, the necessary from the contingent. Thought is the immediate act of this absolute power, which, I admit, can only be manifested in connection with sensuous impressions, but which in this manifestation depends so little on the sensuous that it reveals itself specially in an opposition to it. The spontaneity or autonomy with which it acts excludes every foreign influence; and it is not in as far as it helps thought—which comprehends a manifest contradiction but only in as far as it procures for the intellectual faculties the freedom to manifest themselves in conformity with their proper laws. It does it only because the beautiful can become a means of leading man from matter to form, from feeling to laws, from a limited existence to an absolute existence.

But this assumes that the freedom of the intellectual faculties can be balked, which appears contradictory to the conception of an autonomous power. For a power which only receives the matter of its activity from without can only be hindered in its action by the privation of this matter, and consequently by way of negation; it is therefore a misconception of the nature of the mind to attribute to the sensuous passions the power of oppressing positively the freedom of the mind. Experience does indeed present numerous examples where the rational forces appear compressed in proportion to the violence of the sensuous forces. But instead of deducing this spiritual weakness from the energy of passion, this passionate energy must rather be explained by the weakness of the human mind. For the sense can only have a sway such as this over man when the mind has spontaneously neglected to assert its power.

Yet in trying by these explanations to move one objection, I appear to have exposed myself to another, and I have only saved the autonomy of the mind at the cost of its unity. For how can the mind derive at the same time from itself the principles of inactivity and of activity, if it is not itself divided, and if it is not in opposition with itself?

Here we must remember that we have before us, not the infinite mind, but the finite. The finite mind is that which only becomes active through the passive, only arrives at the absolute through limitation, and only acts and fashions in as far as it receives matter. Accordingly, a mind of this nature must associate with the impulse towards form or the absolute, an impulse towards matter or limitation, conditions without which it could not have the former impulse nor satisfy it. How can two such opposite tendencies exist together in the same being? This is a problem that can no doubt embarrass the metaphysician, but not the transcendental philosopher. The latter does not presume to explain the possibility of things, but he is satisfied with giving a solid basis to the knowledge that makes us understand the possibility of experience. And as experience would be equally impossible without this autonomy in the mind, and without the absolute unity of the mind, it lays down these two conceptions as two conditions of experience equally necessary without troubling itself any more to reconcile them. Moreover, this immanence of two fundamental impulses does not in any degree contradict the absolute unity of the mind, as soon as the mind itself, its selfhood, is distinguished from those two motors. No doubt, these two impulses exist and act in it, but itself is neither matter nor form, nor the sensuous nor reason, and this is a point that does not seem always to have occurred to those who only look upon the mind as itself acting when its acts are in harmony with reason, and who declare it passive when its acts contradict reason.

Arrived at its development, each of these two fundamental impulsions tends of necessity and by its nature to satisfy itself; but precisely because each of them has a necessary tendency, and both nevertheless have an opposite tendency, this twofold constraint mutually destroys itself, and the will preserves an entire freedom between them both. It is therefore the will that conducts itself like a power—as the basis of reality—with respect to both these impulses; but neither of them can by itself act as a power with respect to the other. A violent man, by his positive tendency to justice, which never fails in him, is turned away from injustice; nor can a temptation of pleasure, however strong, make a strong character violate its principles. There is in man no other power than his will; and death alone, which destroys man, or some privation of self-consciousness, is the only thing that can rob man of his internal freedom.

An external necessity determines our condition, our existence in time, by means of the sensuous. The latter is quite involuntary, and directly it is produced in us we are necessarily passive. In the same manner an internal necessity awakens our personality in connection with sensations, and by its antagonism with them; for consciousness cannot depend on the will, which presupposes it. This primitive manifestation of personality is no more a merit to us than its privation is a defect in us. Reason can only be required in a being who is self-conscious, for reason is an absolute consecutiveness and universality of consciousness; before this is the case he is not a man, nor can any act of humanity be expected from him. The metaphysician can no more explain the limitation imposed by sensation on a free and autonomous mind than the natural philosopher can understand the infinite, which is revealed in consciousness in connection with these limits. Neither abstraction nor experience can bring us back to the source whence issue our ideas of necessity and of universality: this source is concealed in its origin in time from the observer, and its super-sensuous origin from the researches of the metaphysician. But, to sum up in a few words, consciousness is there, and, together with its immutable unity, the law of all that is for man is established, as well as of all that is to be by man, for his understanding and his activity. The ideas of truth and of right present themselves inevitable, incorruptible, immeasurable, even in the age of sensuousness; and without our being able to say why or how, we see eternity in time, the necessary following the contingent. It is thus that, without any share on the part of the subject, the sensation and self-consciousness arise, and the origin of both is beyond our volition, as it is out of the sphere of our knowledge.

But as soon as these two faculties have passed into action, and man has verified by his experience, through the medium of sensation, a determinate existence, and through the medium of consciousness its absolute existence, the two fundamental impulses exert their influence directly their object is given. The sensuous impulse is awakened with the experience of life—with the beginning of the individual; the rational impulsion with the experience of law—with the beginning of his personality; and it is only when these two inclinations have come into existence that the human type is realized. Up to that time, everything takes place in man according to the law of necessity; but now the hand of nature lets him go, and it is for him to keep upright humanity, which nature places as a germ in his heart. And thus we see that directly the two opposite and fundamental impulses exercise their influence in him, both lose their constraint, and the autonomy of two necessities gives birth to freedom.


LETTER XX.
That freedom is an active and not a passive principle results from its very conception; but that liberty itself should be an effect of nature (taking this word in its widest sense), and not the work of man, and therefore that it can be favored or thwarted by natural means, is the necessary consequence of that which precedes. It begins only when man is complete, and when these two fundamental impulsions have been developed. It will then be wanting whilst he is incomplete, and while one of these impulsions is excluded, and it will be re-established by all that gives back to man his integrity.

Thus it is possible, both with regard to the entire species as to the individual, to remark the moment when man is yet incomplete, and when one of the two exclusions acts solely in him. We know that man commences by life simply, to end by form; that he is more of an individual than a person, and that he starts from the limited or finite to approach the infinite. The sensuous impulsion comes into play therefore before the rational impulsion, because sensation precedes consciousness; and in this priority of sensuous impulsion we find the key of the history of the whole of human liberty.

There is a moment, in fact, when the instinct of life, not yet opposed to the instinct of form, acts as nature and as necessity; when the sensuous is a power because man has not begun; for even in man there can be no other power than his will. But when man shall have attained to the power of thought, reason, on the contrary, will be a power, and moral or logical necessity will take the place of physical necessity. Sensuous power must then be annihilated before the law which must govern it can be established. It is not enough that something shall begin which as yet was not; previously something must end which had begun. Man cannot pass immediately from sensuousness to thought. He must step backwards, for it is only when one determination is suppressed that the contrary determination can take place. Consequently, in order to exchange passive against active liberty, a passive determination against an active, he must be momentarily free from all determination, and must traverse a state of pure determinability. He has then to return in some degree to that state of pure negative indetermination in which he was before his senses were affected by anything. But this state was absolutely empty of all contents, and now the question is to reconcile an equal determination and a determinability equally without limit, with the greatest possible fulness, because from this situation something positive must immediately follow. The determination which man received by sensation must be preserved, because he should not lose the reality; but at the same time, in so far as finite, it should be suppressed, because a determinability without limit would take place. The problem consists then in annihilating the determination of the mode of existence, and yet at the same time in preserving it, which is only possible in one way: in opposing to it another. The two sides of a balance are in equilibrium when empty; they are also in equilibrium when their contents are of equal weight.

Thus, to pass from sensation to thought, the soul traverses a medium position, in which sensibility and reason are at the same time active, and thus they mutually destroy their determinant power, and by their antagonism produce a negation. This medium situation in which the soul is neither physically nor morally constrained, and yet is in both ways active, merits essentially the name of a free situation; and if we call the state of sensuous determination physical, and the state of rational determination logical or moral, that state of real and active determination should be called the aesthetic.”
(Friedrich Schiller, The Aesthetical Essays, 1875)

E2.2.D.2. Determinism: Explain the arguments that deny freedom in favor of necessary and sufficient causes for our actions.

E2.2.D.2.1. The Foundations of Determinism: the main intellectual arguments for determinism. It introduces the "necessary and sufficient causes" from both a logical and a physical perspective, arguing that the past and present inevitably fix the future.

E2.2.D.2.1.a. "FATALISM
Belief in the inevitability of everything. This amounts to discouraging action; all fatalism is lazy, or at least it should be.

FATALITY
The superstitious name for destiny (fatum): Everything is predetermined, so the future is as impossible to change as the past. It was certainly true a hundred thousand years ago that you would read these lines today. However, that is not because of fatality. Fatality is merely a misinterpretation of eternity. It is the act of subjecting reality to truth when all action does the opposite."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

“FATUM
The Latin word for 'destiny,' taken in its strongest and most binding sense: a destiny written in advance, a 'pre-saying' whose fulfillment is inevitable, no matter what one does. Consider Laius, who unwittingly fulfills the oracle's prediction by trying to escape it, and Oedipus, who only realizes after the fact that the incest and parricide he committed unknowingly were predetermined at his birth.
 
Though this idea may seem superstitious and is often dismissed, it can nevertheless be based on two powerful concepts. The Stoics continued to explore and articulate these concepts in relation to each other: the principle of causality, which leads to what Epicurus called “the fate of physicists,” and the principle of bivalence, which acts as a kind of destiny for logicians. If everything can be explained by a preceding cause and that cause is itself the result of another cause, and so on indefinitely, then the present is merely the effect of the past that predetermined it. Likewise, the future will inevitably result from the present. Ultimately, only the past exists (everything is contained within what has already occurred); the present and future are merely its delayed unfolding.
 
It is hardly any different if every proposition, including those concerning the future, is already either true or false (the principle of bivalence). If it is already true that I will recover, what is the point of seeking treatment? I will recover anyway. And what is the point if it is already false, since I will not recover no matter what I do?

For the Stoics, the chain of causes and the chain of truths are one and the same: destiny itself. This leads to absolute fatalism, which discourages action. The ancients called this the "lazy argument" (see this term). However, we can escape this mindset by first understanding that chains of causes are a remedy against both Chrysippus and Bohr against Laplace. Second, we must acknowledge that we are also causes through our actions. Finally, we must accept that truth is subject to reality—it is reality itself, thought sub specie aeternitatis—and cannot govern it. A map is true because it corresponds to the territory, not the other way around. The primacy of action over power and of reality over thought. Fatalists are a bit like the humorist who was surprised that rivers in our cities always flow under bridges. This, he believed, could not be the result of chance. In this, he was certainly right. However, he was mistaken to view it as anything other than a joke, as proof of destiny or providence."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E2.2.D.2.1.b. "PREDETERMINISM
A fatalistic determinism, or what Epicurus called 'the fate of physicists': The past causes the present, which causes the future, so everything is written in advance. It is a determinism stretched out over time—an obese determinism. In my opinion, it is also a misinterpretation of causality. If only the present exists, then only the present (of which we are a part) can be considered cause and effect. How can the past, which no longer exists, govern the future, which does not yet exist? How can either determine the present, which encompasses everything?"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E2.2.D.2.1.c. LEIBNIZ'S PHILOSOPHY IS A CLASSIC EXAMPLE OF A DETERMINIST SYSTEM GROUNDED NOT IN PHYSICS OR THEOLOGY, BUT IN PURE LOGIC.
“Leibniz based his philosophy upon two logical premisses, the law of contradiction and the law of sufficient reason. Both depend upon the notion of an ‘analytic’ proposition, which is one in which the predicate is contained in the subject—for instance, ‘all white men are men'. The law of contradiction states that all analytic propositions are true. The law of sufficient reason (in the esoteric system only) states that all true propositions are analytic. This applies even to what we should regard as empirical statements about matters of fact. If I make a journey, the notion of me must from all eternity have included the notion of this journey, which is a predicate of me. ‘We may say that the nature of an individual substance, or complete being, is to have a notion so completed that it suffices to comprehend, and to render deducible from it, all the predicates of the subject to which this notion is attributed. Thus the quality of king, which belongs to Alexander the Great, abstracting from the subject, is not sufficiently determined for an individual, and does not involve other qualities of the same subject, nor all that the notion of this prince contains, whereas God, seeing the individual notion or haecceity of Alexander, sees in it at the same time the foundation and the reason of all the predicates which can be truly attributed to him, as e.g. whether he would conquer Darius and Poms, even to knowing a priori (and not by experience) whether he died a natural death or by poison, which we can only know by history.'
One of the most definite statements of the basis of his metaphysic occurs in a letter to Amauld:
‘In consulting the notion which I have of every true proposition, I find that every predicate, necessary or contingent, past, present, or future, is comprised in the notion of the subject, and I ask no more. . . . The proposition in question is of great importance, and deserves to be well established, for it follows that every soul is as a world apart, independent of everything else except God; that it is not only immortal and so to speak impassible, but that it keeps in its substance traces of all that happens to it.’
He goes on to explain that substances do not act on each other, but agree through all mirroring the universe, each from its own point of view. There can be interaction, because all that happens to each subject is part of its own notion, and eternally determined if that substance exists.
This system is evidently just as deterministic as that of Spinoza. Amauld expresses his horror of the statement (which Leibniz had made): ‘That the individual notion of each person involves once for all everything that will ever happen to him/ Such a view is evidently incompatible with the Christian doctrine of sin and free will. Finding it ill received by Arnauld, Leibniz carefully refrained from making it public.
For human beings, it is true, there is a difference between truths known by logic and truths known by experience. This difference arises in two ways. In the first place, although everything that happens to Adam follows from his notion, if he exists, we can only ascertain his existence by experience. In the second place, the notion of any individual substance is infinitely complex, and the analysis required to deduce his predicates is only possible for God. These differences, however, are only due to our ignorance and intellectual limitations; for God, they do not exist. God apprehends the notion of Adam in all its infinite complexity, and can therefore see all true propositions about Adam as analytic. God can also ascertain a priori whether Adam exists. For God knows His own goodness, from which it follows that He will create the best possible world; and He also knows whether or not Adam forms part of this world. There is therefore no real escape from determinism through our ignorance.
There is, however, a further point, which is very curious. At most times, Leibniz represents the Creation as a free act of God, requiring the exercise of His will. According to this doctrine, the determination of what actually exists is not effected by observation, but must proceed by way of God's goodness. Apart from God's goodness, which leads Him to create the best possible world, there is no a priori reason why one thing should exist rather than another. But sometimes, in papers not shown to any human being, there is a quite different theory as to why some things exist and others, equally possible, do not. According to this view, everything that does not exist struggles to exist, but not all possibles can exist, because they are not all ‘compossible’. It may be possible that A should exist, and also possible that B should exist, but not possible that both A and B should exist; in that case, A and B are not ‘cornpossible’. Two or more things are only ‘compossible’ when it is possible for all of them to exist. Leibniz seems to have imagined a sort of war in the Limbo inhabited by essences all trying to exist; in this war, groups of compossibles combine, and the largest group of compossibles wins, like the largest pressure group in a political contest. Leibniz even uses this conception as a way of defining existence. He says ; ‘The existent may be defined as that which is compatible with more things than is anything incompatible with itself. That is to say, if A is incompatible with B, while A is compatible with C and D and E, but B is only compatible with F and G, then A, but not B, exists by definition. The existent/ he says, ‘is the being which is compatible with the most things/ In this account, there is no mention of God, and apparently no act of creation. Nor is there need of anything but pure logic for determining what exists. The question whether A and B arc compossible is. for Leibniz, a logical question, namely : Docs the existence of both A and B involve a contradiction? It follows that, in theory, logic can decide the question what group of compossibles is the largest, and this group consequently will exist.
Perhaps, however, Leibniz did not really mean that the above was a definition of existence. If it was merely a criterion, it can be reconciled with his popular views by means of what he calls ‘metaphysical perfection*. Metaphysical perfection, as he uses the term, seems to mean quantity of existence. It is, he says, ‘nothing but the magnitude of positive reality strictly understood’. He always argues that God created as much as possible; this is one of his reasons for rejecting a vacuum. There is a general belief (which I have never understood) that it is better to exist than not to exist; on this ground children arc exhorted to be grateful to their parents. Leibniz evidently held this view, and thought it part of God’s goodness to create as full a universe as possible. It would follow that the actual world would consist of the largest group of compossibles. It would still be true that logic alone, given a sufficiently able logician, could decide whether a given possible substance would exist or not. Leibniz, in his private thinking, is the best example of a philosopher who uses logic as a key to metaphysics. This type of philosophy begins with Parmenides, and is carried further in Plato’s use of the theory of ideas to prove various extra-logical propositions. Spinoza belongs to the same type, and so does Hegel. But none of these is so clear cut as Leibniz in drawing inferences from syntax to the real world. This kind of argumentation has fallen into disrepute owing to the growth of empiricism. Whether any valid inferences arc possible from language to non-linguistic facts is a question as to which I do not care to dogmatize; but certainly the inferences found in Leibniz and other a priori  philosophers are not valid, since all are due to a defective logic.”
(Bertrand Russell, History Of Western Philosophy, 1945)

E2.2.D.2.1.d. JAMES GLEICK TRACES THE PHILOSOPHICAL DEBATE BETWEEN FREE WILL AND FATALISM, showing how the "block universe" concept from physics and logical paradoxes like Aristotle's "sea battle" support determinism, a view later critiqued by David Foster Wallace for confusing semantic logic with metaphysical reality.
“PHILOSOPHERS DID NOT NEED the space-time continuum to tell them that there were problems about free will. As soon as the rules of logic were added to the human tool kit, the ancients found themselves capable of constructing the most amusing puzzles. Human language switches between past and future with a simple change of tense, and this can trap the unwary.
“For what is and what has come about, then, it is necessary that affirmation, or negation, should be true or false,” Aristotle said. In other words, statements about the present and statements about the past are either true or false. Consider the proposition There was a sea battle yesterday. True or false. There is nothing in between. So it is natural to consider whether this applies to statements about the future. There will be a sea battle tomorrow. By Saturday this will be true or false, but must it be either true or false now? Put in terms of language and logic, these propositions look identical, so the same rules should apply. There will be a sea battle tomorrow. If it’s not true or false, what else is there?
Aristotle remained unconvinced. He carved out an exception for propositions about the future. Where the future is concerned, he felt logic needed room for another state of things: call it indeterminate, contingent, unfixed, unknown, up for grabs…The modern philosopher finds this clumsy.
By the weekend, there will have been a sea battle. Not every language has a future perfect progressive tense built in; when your language does, it tends to feel natural. Either there will have been a sea battle or there won’t. When the time comes, we’ll know which. It will seem to have been inevitable. In this way, language and logic tend to suggest an eternalist view, the Universe Rigid, the view that gained solidity with the arrival of clockwork physical laws as revealed by Newton and Laplace. The block-universe package was wrapped and sealed, seemingly, in the four-dimensional space-time continuum. The new physics profoundly influenced philosophers, whether they acknowledged it or not. It freed them from the common intuitive sensation that past and future are quite different. It freed philosophers, that is, while imprisoning the rest of us. “Past and future must be acknowledged to be as real as the present,” wrote Bertrand Russell in 1926, “and a certain emancipation from slavery to time is essential to philosophic thought.” A fatalist says: Everything that happens had to happen. Q.E.D.
Donald C. Williams, a realist from California, picked up that thread at midcentury with a paper on “The Sea Fight Tomorrow.” His brand of realism was four-dimensional—fully modern, in other words. He asserted “the view of the world, or the manner of speaking about it” (a nice distinction, so easily forgotten), ‘which treats the totality of being, of facts, or of events as spread out eternally in the dimension of time as well as the dimension of space. Future events and past events are by no means present events, but in a clear and important sense they do exist, now and forever, as rounded and definite articles of the world’s furniture.’
In the 1960s, the sea battle of tomorrow got a new life in the journals of philosophy. An argument raged over the logic of fatalism, and a milestone in the debate was the essay “Fatalism” by Richard Taylor, a metaphysician and beekeeper at Brown University. “A fatalist,” he wrote, “thinks of the future in the manner in which we all think of the past.” Fatalists take both past and future as given, and equally so. They may get this view from religion or, lately, from science:
‘Without bringing God into the picture, one might suppose that everything happens in accordance with invariable laws, that whatever happens in the world at any future time is the only thing that can then happen, given that certain other things were happening just before, and that these, in turn, are the only things that can happen at that time, given the total state of the world just before then, and so on, so that again, there is nothing left for us to do about it.’
Taylor proposed to prove fatalism entirely by philosophical reasoning, “without recourse to any theology or physics.” He used symbolic logic, representing the various statements about the sea battle in terms of P and P′ and Q and Q′. All he needed were “certain presuppositions made almost universally in contemporary philosophy.” Something had to give: either fatalism or the rules of logic. A philosophy battle ensued. One of Taylor’s presuppositions was not as evident to everyone else: “that time is not by itself ‘efficacious’; that is, that the mere passage of time does not augment or diminish the capacities of anything.” In other words, time itself is not an agent of change; more of an innocent bystander. Time doesn’t do anything. (“What is a mere passage of time” retorted one of his critics. “Could time possibly pass without something, somewhere, changing—without the tick of a clock, the movement of a planet, the twitch of a muscle, or the sight of a flash?”)
Two decades later, at Amherst College, an undergraduate philosophy student named David Foster Wallace, himself the son of a professional philosopher, grew obsessed with this nettlesome debate, “the famous and infamous Taylor argument.” He wrote to a friend, “If you read the Taylor literature, it’s really ulcer-city.” He plunged in nonetheless. His obsession became his honors thesis, which might have taken its title from the imaginary Bob Wilson’s “An Investigation into Certain Mathematical Aspects of a Rigor of Metaphysics.” He drew diagrams to sort out “world-situations” and their possible “daughters” and “mothers.” Yet as much as the formal, axiomatic side of philosophy appealed to Wallace—gave him continual pleasure and satisfaction—he never accepted it without reservation. The limits of logic and the limits of language remained live issues for him.
Words represent things but the words are not the things. We know that but we can forget. Fatalism is a philosophy built out of words, and ultimately its conclusions apply to words—not necessarily to reality. When Taylor leaves work, he summons the elevator just like the rest of us, by pressing the button. He does not think to himself, Don’t worry, the elevator will follow its destiny. He may think, When I press the elevator button, it is not a free choice—it was fated. But he still goes to the trouble of doing it. He doesn’t just stand there and wait.
Of course, Taylor himself knew this full well. He can’t be refuted so easily.
‘A fatalist—if there is any such—thinks he cannot do anything about the future. He thinks it is not up to him what is going to happen next year, tomorrow, or the very next moment. He thinks that even his own behavior is not in the least within his power, any more than the motions of the heavenly bodies, the events of remote history, or the political developments in China. It would, accordingly, be pointless for him to deliberate about what he is going to do, for a man deliberates only about such things as he believes are within his power to do.’
He added, “And we are not, in fact, ever tempted to deliberate about what we have done and left undone.”
I wonder whether Taylor had read much time-travel fiction or even, for that matter, whether he lived in the world I live in, where regret is not unknown and people do sometimes speculate about what might have been. Everywhere we look, people are pressing elevator buttons, turning doorknobs, hailing taxicabs, lifting sustenance to their lips, and begging their lovers’ favor. We act as though the future is, if not in our control, not yet settled. Nonetheless, Taylor dismissed our “subjective feelings.” We would suffer illusions of free will, because, by happenstance, we tend to know less about the future than about the past.
Many philosophers, in the years that followed, had tried to refute Taylor, but his logic proved amazingly robust. Wallace wanted to defend the common intuition “that persons as agents are capable of influencing the course of events in their world.” He plunged into the depths of symbolic logic. “Since obviously under any analysis I have to do either O or O′ (since O′ is not-O), that is, since (O ∨ O′); and since by (I-4) it is either not possible that I do O or not possible that I do O′, (∼◊O ∨ ∼◊O′), which is equivalent to (∼◊∼∼O ∨ ∼◊∼O), which is equivalent to (∼O ∨ O), we are left with (O ∨ ∼O); so that it is necessary that whatever I do, O or O′, I do necessarily, and cannot do otherwise” is a sample sentence. (“Obviously”!) In the end he defeated Taylor’s fatalism by stepping back and viewing not only the chains of symbols but also the levels of symbolic representation—viewing them, as it were, from above. Wallace distinguished between the realm of semantics and the realm of metaphysics. Considered strictly as words, he argued, Taylor’s logic may be internally valid, but it’s cheating to leap from semantic premises and arguments to a metaphysical conclusion.
“Taylor’s claim was never really that fatalism was actually ‘true,’ only that it was forced upon us by proof from certain basic logical and semantic principles,” he concluded. “If Taylor and the fatalists want to force upon us a metaphysical conclusion, they must do metaphysics, not semantics.” In metaphysics we find the doctrine of determinism—we’ve seen this before, given its perfect expression by Laplace. Determinism is this (per Wallace): ‘he idea that, given a precise and total state of affairs at one instant, and the physical laws that govern the causal relations between states of affairs, there is one and only one possible state of affairs that could obtain at the next instant.’
Taylor takes this for granted. If X, then Y means one thing in logic. In the physical world, it means something trickier and always (we should know by now) subject to doubt. In logic, it is rigid. In physics, there is slippage. Chance has a part to play. Accidents can happen. Uncertainty is a principle. The world is more complex than any model.
Taylor was begging the question. To prove fatalism he was assuming determinism. Many physicists do that, too, even now. “Physicists like to think that all you have to do is say, ‘These are the conditions, now what happens next,’ ” said Richard Feynman. Determinism is built into so many of their formalisms, just as it is for logicians. But formalisms are just that. The physical laws are a construct, a convenience. They are not coextensive with the universe.
Was that only possible which came to pass? Having spent years in these dark waters, Wallace had done enough philosophy for a while. He had an alternative future in mind, and he chose it. “I left there,” he said later, “and I didn’t go back.”
(James Gleick, Time Travel, 2016)

E2.2.D.2.1.e. RUSSELL PRESENTS THE ANCIENT GREEK ATOMISTS (LEUCIPPUS AND DEMOCRITUS) AS THE FIRST TRULY SCIENTIFIC AND "STRICT DETERMINIST" WORLDVIEW.
“The fundamental ideas of the common philosophy of Leucippus and Democritus were due to the former, but as regards the working out it is hardly possible to disentangle them, nor is it, for our purposes, important to make the attempt. Leucippus, if not Democritus, was led to atomism in the attempt to mediate between monism and pluralism, as represented by Parmenides and Empedocles respectively. Their point of view was remarkably like that of modem science, and avoided most of the faults to which Greek speculation was prone. They believed that everything is composed of atoms, which are physically, but not geometrically, indivisible; that between the atoms there is empty space; that atoms are indestructible; that they always have been, and always will be, in motion; that there arc an infinite number of atoms, and even of kinds of atoms, the differences being as regards shape and size. Aristotle* asserts that, according to the atomists, atoms also differ as regards heat, the spherical atoms, which compose fire, being the hottest; and as regards weight, he quotes Democritus as saying The more any indivisible exceeds, the heavier it is.' But the question whether atoms are originally possessed of weight in the theories of the atomists is a controversial one.
The atoms were always in motion, but there is disagreement among commentators as to the character of the original motion. Some, especially Zeller, hold that the atoms were thought to be always falling, and that the heavier ones fell faster; they thus caught up the lighter ones, there were impacts, and the atoms were deflected like billiard balls. This was certainly the view of Epicurus, who in most respects based his theories on those of Democritus, while trying, rather unintelligently, to take account of Aristotle’s criticisms. But there is considerable reason to think that weight was not an original property of the atoms of Leucippus and Democritus. It seems more probable that, on their view, atoms were originally moving at random, as in the modern kinetic theory of gases. Democritus said there was neither up nor down in the infinite void, and compared the movement of atoms in the soul to that of motes in a sunbeam when there is no wind. This is a much more intelligent view than that of Epicurus, and I think we may assume it to have been that of Leucippus and Democritus.
As a result of collisions, collections of atoms came to form vortices. The rest proceeded much as in Anaxagoras, but it was an advance to explain the vortices mechanically rather than as due to the action of mind. 
It was common in antiquity to reproach the atomists with attributing everything to chance. They were, on the contrary, strict determinists, who believed that everything happens in accordance with natural laws. Democritus explicitly denied that anything can happen by chance. Leucippus, though his existence is questioned, is known to have said one thing : ‘Naught happens for nothing, but everything from a ground and of necessity. It is true that he gave no reason why the world should originally have been as it was; this, perhaps, might have been attributed to chance. But when once the world existed, its further development was unalterably fixed by mechanical principles. Aristotle and others reproached him and Democritus for not accounting for the original motion of the atoms, but in this the atomists were more scientific than their critics. Causation must start from something, and wherever it starts no cause can be assigned for the initial datum. The world may be attributed to a Creator, but even then the Creator Himself is unaccounted for. The theory of the atomists, in fact, was more nearly that of modern science than any other theory propounded in antiquity.
The atomists, unlike Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, sought to explain the world without introducing the notion of purpose or final cause. The ‘final cause’ of an occurrence is an event in the future for the sake of which the occurrence takes place. In human affairs, this conception is applicable. Why does the baker make bread? Because people will be hungry. Why are railways built? Because people will wish to travel. In such cases, things are explained by the purpose they serve. When we ask 'why?* concerning an event, we may mean cither of two things. We may mean : 'What purpose did this event serve?* or we may mean: ‘What earlier circumstances caused this event?' The answer to the former question is a teleological explanation, or an explanation by final causes; the answer to the latter question is a mechanistic explanation. I do not see how it could have been known in advance which of these two questions science ought to ask, or whether it ought to ask both. But experience has shown that the mechanistic question leads to scientific knowledge, while the teleological question does not. The atomists asked the mechanistic question, and gave a mechanistic answer. Their successors, until the Renaissance, were more interested in the teleological question, and thus led science up a blind alley.
In regard to both questions alike, there is a limitation which is often ignored, both in popular thought and in philosophy. Neither question can be asked intelligibly about reality as a whole (including God), but only about parts of it. As regards the teleological explanation, it usually arrives, before long, at a Creator, or at least an Artificer, whose purposes are realized in the course of nature. But if a man is so obstinately teleological as to continue to ask what purpose is served by the Creator, it becomes obvious that his question is impious. It is, moreover, unmeaning, since, to make it significant, we should have to suppose the Creator created by some super-Creator whose purposes He served. The conception of purpose, therefore, is only applicable within reality, not to reality as a whole.
A not dissimilar argument applies to mechanistic explanations. One event is caused by another, the other by a third, and so on. But if we ask for a cause of the whole, we are driven again to the Creator, who must Himself be uncaused. All causal explanations, therefore must have an arbitrary beginning. That is why it is no defect in the theory of the atomists to have left the original movements of the atoms unaccounted for.”
(Bertrand Russell, History Of Western Philosophy, 1945)

E2.2.D.2.2. Critique of Free Will as a Psychological Illusion: Frre Will would be a "conceptual mythology" rooted in grammar, social power structures, and a misunderstanding of our own psychology.

E2.2.D.2.2.a. HOW CAN SOMEONE INTENTIONALLY CHOOSE TO BE UNREASONABLE? IF OUR CHOICES ARE DETERMINED BY MOTIVES, HOW CAN WE CHOOSE AGAINST OUR OWN REASON?

“WHETHER THE ADHERENTS OF THE DOCTRINE OF FREE WILL HAVE A RIGHT TO PUNISH?—Men whose vocation it is to judge and punish try to establish in every case whether an evil-doer is really responsible for his act, whether he was able to apply his reasoning powers, whether he acted with motives and not unconsciously or under constraint. If he is punished, it is because he preferred the worse to the better motives, which he must consequently have known. Where this knowledge is wanting, man is, according to the prevailing view, not responsible—unless his ignorance, e.g. his ignorantia legis, be the consequence of an intentional neglect to learn what he ought: in that case he already preferred the worse to the better motives at the time when he refused to learn, and must now pay the penalty of his unwise choice. If, on the other hand, perhaps through stupidity or shortsightedness, he has never seen the better motives, he is generally not punished, for people say that he made a wrong choice, he acted like a brute beast. The intentional rejection of the better reason is now needed before we treat the offender as fit to be punished. But how can any one be intentionally more unreasonable than he ought to be? Whence comes the decision, if the scales are loaded with good and bad motives? So the origin is not error or blindness, not an internal or external constraint? (It should furthermore be remembered that every so-called “external constraint” is nothing more than the internal constraint of fear and pain.) Whence? is the repeated question. So reason is not to be the cause of action, because reason cannot decide against the better motives? Thus we call “free will” to our aid. Absolute discretion is to decide, and a moment is to intervene when no motive exercises an influence, when the deed is done as a miracle, resulting from nothing. This assumed discretion is punished in a case where no discretion should rule. Reason, which knows law, prohibition, and command, should have left no choice, they say, and should have acted as a constraint and a higher power. Hence the offender is punished because he makes use of “free will”—in other words, has acted without motive where he should have been guided by motives. But why did he do it? This question must not even be asked; the deed was done without a “Why?” without motive, without origin, being a thing purposeless, unreasoned.—However, according to the above-named preliminary condition of punishability, such a deed should not be punished at all! Moreover, even this reason for punishing should not hold good, that in this case something had not been done, had been omitted, that reason had not been used at all: for at any rate the omission was unintentional, and only intentional omission is considered punishable. The offender has indeed preferred the worse to the better motives, but without motive and purpose: he has indeed failed to apply his reason, but not exactly with the object of not applying it. The very assumption made in the case of punishable crime, that the criminal intentionally renounced his reason, is removed by the hypothesis of “free will.” According to your own principles, you must not punish, you adherents of the doctrine of free will!—These principles are, however, nothing but a very marvellous conceptual mythology, and the hen that hatched them has brooded on her eggs far away from all reality.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human III, Aphorism 23, 1878)

E2.2.D.2.2.b. “ORIGIN OF THE DOCTRINE OF FREE WILL.—Necessity sways one man in the shape of his passions, another as a habit of hearing and obeying, a third as a logical conscience, a fourth as a caprice and a mischievous delight in evasions. These four, however, seek the freedom of their will at the very point where they are most securely fettered. It is as if the silkworm sought freedom of will in spinning. What is the reason? Clearly this, that every one thinks himself most free where his vitality is strongest; hence, as I have said, now in passion, now in duty, now in knowledge, now in caprice. A man unconsciously imagines that where he is strong, where he feels most thoroughly alive, the element of his freedom must lie. He thinks of dependence and apathy, independence and vivacity as forming inevitable pairs.—Thus an experience that a man has undergone in the social and political sphere is wrongly transferred to the ultimate metaphysical sphere. There the strong man is also the free man, there the vivid feeling of joy and sorrow, the high hopes, the keen desires, the powerful hates are the attributes of the ruling, independent natures, while the thrall and the slave live in a state of dazed oppression.—The doctrine of free will is an invention of the ruling classes.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human III, Aphorism 9, 1878)

E2.2.D.2.2.c. "Survival is not the most important concept in this formula." Nietzsche is a thinker of the will to power, a hypothesis he introduced in Thus Spoke Zarathustra and then generalized in Beyond Good and Evil. One implication of this hypothesis is that forces tend to intensify rather than merely preserve themselves. The logic of self-preservation is a temporary exception to the logic of intensification. Certain organisms find themselves having to fight for survival, but, in Nietzsche's view, this is exceptional. It is one of the criticisms he levels at Darwin" (Emmanuel Salanskis).
 
(Emmanuel Salanskis).
Nietzsche conceives of the body-mind as monistic, without any dualism between the two. In this framework, the will to power is strengthened when it succeeds in interpreting the resistance it encounters. "Only great pain deepens" if one is capable of intellectual or spiritual work on it. At the end of On the Genealogy of Morals, N. suggests that giving meaning to suffering is a way of making it bearable. Nietzsche wants to give suffering a different meaning than that given to it by Judeo-Christian morality.
However, we must remember Nietzsche's aristocratic nature. The aphorism from Twilight of the Idols, "What does not kill me makes me stronger," does not apply to everyone. Most sick people are decadent and prisoners of the time's morbid values. He is capable of it.
For Nietzsche, we are not individually responsible for our instincts. He believes in the innocence of becoming. He rejects the doctrine of free will because it is not a question of will. Paradoxically, the will to power is not a question of will. Free will is an illusion stemming from our propensity to distinguish between subject and verb in Indo-European grammars. According to Nietzsche, there are only forces that always tend to intensify depending on the resistance they encounter (see Human, All Too Human, 39). While we can try to influence our behavior, we cannot question instincts that evolved over much longer periods of time. Nietzsche does not renounce the notion of the responsibility of the sovereign individual who has the right to make promises because he has the capacity to keep them. However, he wants to distinguish between the awareness of responsibility and the awareness of guilt. These two types of awareness do not have the same origin or genealogy. According to Nietzsche, responsibility exists outside of Judeo-Christian values, which cultivate a sense of guilt. One can be responsible without being guilty.
How should we respond to suffering? Through guilt or Judeo-Christian pity? Or should we question the values that are partly the source of this suffering—or at least exacerbate it? This will be Nietzsche's answer."
(Emmanuel Salanskis, in the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, brodcast on France Culture on September 11, 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/ce-qui-ne-me-tue-pas-me-rend-plus-fort-9300828

E2.2.D.2.2.d. A_Raoul Larche_The storm and her clouds_1899_(1) ; A_Raoul Larche_The storm and her clouds_1899_(2) ; A_Raoul Larche_The storm and her clouds_1899_(3) ; A_Raoul Larche_The storm and her clouds_1899_(4)

DETERMINISM
“Storm Targets Midwest” –
as if after deep consideration
or in a passionate fit,
the sky chose
them and not us.
That’s one way to ride
the day’s events
into meaning.”
(Lia Purpura, It shouldn’t have been beautiful, 2015)

E2.2.D.2.3. The Poetics of Fatalism (The Lived Experience of Necessity): 
what it feels like to perceive the world as a determined system.

E2.2.D.2.3.a. "WE SPEAK OF OUR HEARTS, OUR PLANS, AS IF THEY WERE OURS, AND YET IT’S A POWER OUTSIDE OURSELVES THAT TOSSES US ABOUT AND LAYS US IN THE GRAVE JUST AS IT PLEASES." 
“Stunned I staggered on and presently was standing by the sea, gazing onto the waves — oh! down strove my heart, down into the deep, and my arms flew out towards the free flowing surge; but soon, as if from heaven, a gentler spirit came over me and with its peaceful wand brought order to the turmoil of my sorrowing soul; more tranquilly I pondered my fate, my faith in the world, my dismal experiences, I reflected on my fellow men, as from early youth I’d come to know and apprehend them, brought up in their multifarious ways, and everywhere found dull or strident discord; only in simple childlike limitation did I still find pure melodies — ‘it’s better,’ I told myself, ‘to become a bee and build one’s house in innocence than to rule with the rulers of the world and howl with them as with wolves, than to lord it over whole peoples and sully one’s hands on such polluted material.’ I wanted to return to Tinos and live for my gardens and fields. 
Smile all you like! I was very much in earnest. For the life of the world consists in alternate unfolding and closing, issuing forth and returning to self, why not too the heart of man?
It’s true this new lesson was hard for me to accept, it’s true I was loath to leave behind the proud errancy of my youth — for who gladly tears off his wings? — but it had to be!
I went through with it. I was now really embarked. A fresh mountain breeze carried me out of Smyrna’s harbour. In wonderful tranquillity, just like a child knowing nothing of the next moment, I lay there on my ship and gazed on the trees and mosques of the city, my green walks along the shore, my footpath up to the acropolis, all this I gazed upon, and let it draw away, further and further away; but now, as I came out onto the high sea and everything was slowly sinking lower, like a coffin into the grave, suddenly then it was as if my heart were broken — ‘O heaven!’ I cried, and all the life in me awoke and struggled to hold back the fleeing present, but it was gone, gone!
Like a mist it lay before me, that heavenly land where, like a hind let loose on open pasture, far and wide I’d roamed over vales and heights and brought the echo of my heart to springs and streams, to breadths and depths of the earth.
Yonder onto Tmolus I’d walked in lonely innocence; down there to where Ephesus once stood in happy youth and Teos and Miletus, up there into the holy grieving Troad I’d wandered with Alabanda — with Alabanda — and like a god I’d ruled over him, and like a child, tender and trusting, I’d done his eye’s bidding with joy in my soul, full of jubilant delight in his being, always happy, whether holding his horse’s bridle for him, or when, exalted above myself, in glorious resolve, in daring thoughts, in fiery eloquence, I matched his soul!
And now it had come to this, now I was nothing, I’d been so hopelessly despoiled of everything, become the poorest among men and didn’t even know how.
‘O endless erring!’ I thought to myself, ‘when will man tear himself free from your chains?
‘We speak of our hearts, our plans, as if they were ours, and yet it’s a power outside ourselves that tosses us about and lays us in the grave just as it pleases, and we know neither whence it comes nor whither it goes.
‘We’d like to grow high up here and spread our boughs and branches out there, and yet it’s soil and weather that decide the way it goes with us, and if the lightning falls upon your crown and splits you down to the roots, poor tree! what has it to do with you?’
That’s what I thought. Does it anger you, my Bellarmin? Just wait to hear what’s still to come.
You see, the sad thing, my dear friend! is that the mind so readily takes on the errant heart’s complexion, so readily holds fast to fleeting sorrow, that thought, which ought to heal the pains, becomes itself sick, that the gardener whose task it is to plant the rosebushes so often lacerates his hand on them, oh! it’s this that’s made many a man a fool before those whom, like another Orpheus, he’d otherwise have ruled, it’s this that’s so often made the noblest nature an object of derision before such men as can be found in any street, this is the rock on which heaven’s favourites founder, that their love is powerful and tender as their mind, that often their heart’s waves move more strongly and more swiftly than the trident with which the sea-god rules them, and therefore, my dear friend, let no man get above himself!”
(Friedrich Holderin, Hyperion, or the hermit in Greece, 1797)

E2.2.D.2.3.b. "EACH MAN FULﬁLLS THE DESTINY HE MUST FULﬁLL
And desires the destiny he desires; 
     He neither fulﬁlls what he desires 
     Nor desires what he fulﬁlls. 
Like stones that border ﬂower beds 
We are arranged by Fate, and there remain,
     Our lot having placed us 
     Where we had to be placed.
Let’s have no better knowledge of what 
Was our due than that it was our due. 
     Let’s fulﬁll what we are. 
     Nothing more are we given"
(Fernando Pessoa, A Little Larger Than the Entire Universe Selected Poems)

"CHESS 
Pawns, they go out into the peaceful night, 
Tired and full of ﬁctitious feelings. 
They’re going home, talking about nothing, 
Dressed in furs, coats and pelisses. 

As pawns, destiny only allows them 
One forward square per move, unless 
They’re given another one diagonally, 
On a new path, through someone else’s death. 

Eternal subjects of the noble pieces, 
Like the bishop or rook, that move far and fast, 
They’re suddenly overtaken by fate 
In their lonely march, and breathe their last. 

One or another, making it all the way, 
Redeems not his own but someone else’s life. 
And the game goes on, indifferent to each piece, 
The relentless hand moving them all alike. 

Then, poor creatures dressed in furs or silks, 
Checkmate! the game’s over and the weary hand 
Stows away the contest’s meaningless pieces, 
Since, just a game, it’s nothing in the end."
(Fernando Pessoa, 1 November 1927)

E2.2.D.2.3.c. “THE SUBALTERNS
I
“ Poor wanderer,” said the leaden sky,
“ I fain would lighten thee,
But there are laws in force on high
Which say it must not be.”
II
—“ I would not freeze thee, shorn one,” cried
The North, “knew I but how
To warm my breath, to slack my stride ;
But I am ruled as thou.”
III
—“To-morrow I attack thee, wight,”
Said Sickness. “Yet I swear
I bear thy little ark no spite.
But am bid enter there.”
IV
—“ Come hither. Son,” I heard Death say ;
“ I did not will a grave
Should end thy pilgrimage to-day,
But I, too, am a slave !”
V
We smiled upon each other then,
And life to me had less
Of that fell look it wore ere when
They owned their passiveness. »
(Thomas Hardy, The Collected Poems, 1840-1928)

E2.2.D.2.4. The Consequences of Determinism (Rethinking Society and Punishment): If we deny freedom and accept determinism, how must we restructure our social and ethical concepts, particularly justice and responsibility?

E2.2.D.2.4.a. "There seem to me to be some ideas that may very well be false, but are beneficial to a person or group of people to believe them. I, personally, would put the belief in God in that category. Similarly, there are other ideas that may very well be true, but it is simply not beneficial to a person, or society in general, to believe them. I would put determinism, or lack of free will, in that category. It is just untenable to base a society on the idea that we have no free will – that no one is responsible for their actions, whether they be good or bad."
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #194 / MAY 2022)

E2.2.D.2.4.b. If all our actions are determined by prior causes, that doesn't seem to leave much scope for punishment. In pure deterministic terms, if one action always has a cause, how can we be held accountable and punished for our actions? Freewill skeptics reject punishment framed as retributivism (a sort of payback) so their view of how to calibrate punishment follows a forward-looking consequentialist  approach (prevent crime).
Consequentialism has its limits: In pure consequentialism terms, you might punish an innocent so as to prevent future crime, or apply an unhuman punishment if it proved to be an effective deterrent of future crime.
An alternative is the concept of quarantine applied to incapacitate an agent invoking self-defense of society and prevention of harm to others. How to prevent abuses in the same line of extreme consequentialists? Restrictions: Adopt the least restrictive measures, moral duty of well-being and rehabilitation of prisoners. Under this model you would never punish an innocent for the example because punishment could only be based on quarantine grounds for the individual.
Harsh retributive models like in the US do not work when compared with Norway for exemple that incarcerate 10 times less people and has a lower rate of recidivism.
(Gregg Caruso on Freewill and Punishment, Philosophy bites)

Listen to the episode: http://philosophybites.com/2016/04/gregg-caruso-on-freewill-and-punishment.html

"IF ALL OUR ACTIONS ARE DETERMINED BY PRIOR CAUSES, THAT DOESN'T SEEM TO LEAVE MUCH SCOPE FOR PUNISHMENT. In pure deterministic terms, if one action always has a cause, how can be be help accountable and punished for our actions? Freewill skeptics reject punishment framed as retributivism (a sort of payback) so their view of how to calibrate punishment follows a forward-looking consequentialist  approach (prevent crime).
Consequentialism has its limits: In pure consequentialism terms, you might punish an innocent so as to prevent future crime, or apply an unhuman punishment if it proved to be an effective deterrent of future crime.
An alternative is the concept of quarantine applied to incapacitate an agent invoking self-defense of society and prevention of harm to others. How to prevent abuses in the same line of extreme consequentialists? Restrictions: Adopt the least restrictive measures, moral duty of well-being and rehabilitation of prisoners. Under this model you would never punish an innocent for the example because punishment could only be based on quarantine grounds for the individual.
Harsh retributive models like in the US do not work when compared with Norway for exemple that incarcerate 10 times less people and has a lower rate of recidivism."
(Gregg Caruso on Freewill and Punishment)

Listen to the episode: http://philosophybites.com/2016/04/gregg-caruso-on-freewill-and-punishment.html

E2.2.D.3. Compatibilism (Soft Determinism): Explore theories that attempt to reconcile freedom and determinism by redefining the notion of freedom (for example, acting according to one's desires, even if those desires are causally determined).

E2.2.D.3.1. The "feeling of freedom" versus the reality of "innumerable forces" acting upon us.

E2.2.D.3.1.a. "As we steer a course through the river of our lives, we are affected by innumerable forces, the vast majority unknown to us. By some accounts this makes of our freedom an illusion, for how can we purport to freely choose when we can’t even see a fraction of the legion of influences acting on us, limiting our movements, sparking our appetites? The threat this picture poses to traditional notions of agency suggests a counternarrative. There must be some part of us that floats above the river, untouched by its waters and therefore utterly free and totally responsible for our every turn. But both these pictures are misleading, and for the same reason. Our freedom, and hence our responsibility for the choices we make, is neither a thing to look for in our material existence nor some ghostlike essence unmoored from that existence. Rather, it is a necessary postulate for a being who can imagine having chosen differently, the condition of the possibility of conceiving of that life as one possible path among many."
(William Egginton, The Rigor of Angels: Borges, Heisenberg, Kant, and the Ultimate Nature of Reality, 2023)

E2.2.D.3.1.b. I_Parameters for the brain
"The paradox of freewill
“Nothing is more unbearable, once one has it, than freedom,” James Baldwin observed in recognizing how limited our freedom is and how illusory our choices, for he knew that “people can’t, unhappily, invent their mooring posts, their lovers and their friends, anymore than they can invent their parents.”

And yet we move through the world with an air of agency, without which life would feel unlivable — a gauntlet of causality stretching all the way back to the Big Bang, into which we are hurled as helpless pawns in some cosmic game that has already played out. It is a disquieting notion — one we have countered with our dream of free will, continually mistaking the feeling of freedom for the fact of freedom

But even within the presets and parameters conferred upon us by the cosmic and cultural forces that made us, there exists a margin of movement in which notions like control, agency, and moral responsibility live. In that margin, we become fully human.

In this fascinating BBC documentary, journalist Melissa Hogenboom and a constellation of neuroscientists, physicists, and philosophers explore the science and subtleties of the free will question — a question that remains not only unanswered but a testament to Hannah Arendt’s astute observation that “to lose the appetite for meaning we call thinking and cease to ask unanswerable questions [would be to lose] the capacity to ask all the answerable questions upon which every civilization is founded.”
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

Watch the documentary on Vimeo: https://vimeo.com/557541237?share=copy

E2.2.D.3.1.c. Urs Fischer, Flying moon, 2019 / René Magritte, The human condition, 1933 / Wilhelm Sasnal, untitled, 2004 & 2021

WE PICTURE MAN AS A BRAVE NAKED WILL SURROUNDED BY AN EASILY COMPREHENDED EMPIRICAL WORLD. WE HAVE BOUGHT THE LIBERAL THEORY AS IT STANDS, BECAUSE WE HAVE WISHED TO ENCOURAGE PEOPLE TO THINK OF THEMSELVES AS FREE, AT THE COST OF SURRENDERING THE BACKGROUND.
"We have suffered a general loss of concepts, the loss of a moral and political vocabulary. We no longer use a spread-out substantial picture of the manifold virtues of man and society. We no longer see man against a background of values, of realities, which transcend him. We picture man as a brave naked will surrounded by an easily comprehended empirical world. For the hard idea of truth we have substituted a facile idea of sincerity. What we have never had, of course, is a satisfactory Liberal theory of personality, a theory of man as free and separate and related to a rich and complicated world from which, as a moral being, he has much to learn. We have bought the Liberal theory as it stands, because we have wished to encourage people to think of themselves as free, at the cost of surrendering the background.

We have never solved the problems about human personality posed by the Enlightenment. Between the various concepts available to us the real question has escaped: and now, in a curious way, our present situation is analogous to an eighteenth-century one. We retain a rationalistic optimism about the beneficent results of education, or rather, technology. We combine this with a romantic conception of “the human condition,” a picture of the individual as stripped and solitary: a conception which has, since Hitler, gained a peculiar intensity. [...]

The temptation of art, a temptation to which every work of art yields except the greatest ones, is to console. The modern writer, frightened of technology and (in England) abandoned by philosophy and (in France) presented with simplified dramatic theories, attempts to console us by myths or by stories. [...]

A simple-minded faith in science, together with the assumption that we are all rational and totally free, engenders a dangerous lack of curiosity about the real world, a failure to appreciate the difficulties of knowing it. We need to return from the self-centred concept of sincerity to the other-centred concept of truth. We are not isolated free choosers, monarchs of all we survey, but benighted creatures sunk in a reality whose nature we are constantly and overwhelmingly tempted to deform by fantasy. Our current picture of freedom encourages a dream-like facility; whereas what we require is a renewed sense of the difficulty and complexity of the moral life and the opacity of persons. We need more concepts in terms of which to picture the substance of our being; it is through an enriching and deepening of concepts that moral progress takes place. Simone Weil said that morality was a matter of attention, not of will. We need a new vocabulary of attention. [...]

Through literature we can re-discover a sense of the density of our lives. Literature can arm us against consolation and fantasy and can help us to recover from the ailments of Romanticism. If it can be said to have a task, that surely is its task. But if it is to perform it, prose must recover its former glory, eloquence and discourse must return. [...]

I would connect eloquence with the attempt to speak the truth. […]

Form itself can be a temptation, making the work of art into a small myth which is a self-contained and indeed self-satisfied individual… Real people are destructive of myth, contingency is destructive of fantasy and opens the way for imagination… Too much contingency of course may turn art into journalism. But since reality is incomplete, art must not be too much afraid of incompleteness. Literature must always represent a battle between real people and images; and what it requires now is a much stronger and more complex conception of the former.

In morals and politics we have stripped ourselves of concepts. Literature, in curing its own ills, can give us a new vocabulary of experience, and a truer picture of freedom. With this, renewing our sense of distance, we may remind ourselves that art too lives in a region where all human endeavour is failure. Perhaps only Shakespeare manages to create at the highest level both images and people; and even Hamlet looks second-rate compared with Lear. Only the very greatest art invigorates without consoling, and defeats our attempts, in W. H. Auden’s words, to use it as magic."
(Iris Murdoch,  Existentialists and Mystics: Writings on Philosophy and Literature, 1997)

E2.2.D.3.1.d. A_Victor Vasarely_Man_1943

"From the outset, the West has been plagued by the contradiction that "good men are not good." It seeks to resolve this contradiction by proving that we must choose between "being" and "not being." Conversely, the East considers this distinction to be temporary and seeks proof, without obsession, that we can overcome the problem while being and not being.
 

Added to this symmetry is another fundamental difference. In the West, reaching the truth—paradise—is a collective adventure. At the end of time, the Lord's chosen ones will find themselves in the famous club that expelled Adam. The rules are now known to all. Those who are readmitted know why; they have done good. As for the others, the door is closed to them forever because they have done evil. A new club awaits them: Hell. In Buddhism, cleansing karma is an individual journey of an illusory self that, through successive rebirths, tends toward extinction. There are no clubs with the good on one side and the bad on the other.
 

There is no heaven or hell. There is no going back to square one; destiny is the adventure of fading away.
These two opposing logics will have very different consequences for civilization. The West is torn between "too late" and "too early": "too late" because paradise is lost forever and "too early" because the apocalypse is still far off. The West is a prisoner of time, caught between a past where it was and a future where it will be. Between the two—that is, now—it does not exist. Having lost its "being," it is a slave to the world. This prison has been the setting for history—the violent attempt at a frantic quest for freedom associated with the search for existence. The only way to exist, even "a little," is through action; the thickness of the family album proves it. Acting hastens the apocalypse. Over the centuries, theories designed to force happiness have been imposed with feverish obstinacy. Seeking certainties measured by pseudosciences. We know the result. "
(Pierre de Roo, Mechanics of Destiny, A Philosophical Approach to Theories of the Future, 2001)

E2.2.D.3.1.e. "Buddhism helps us to think that our feelings also infiltrate all reasoning—and that reason and emotions are intertwined. In a way, thoughts think themselves, which leads to the debate about free will: do we act, or are we acted upon" 
(Robert Wright on Why Buddhism is True, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: http://philosophybites.com/2018/05/robert-wright-on-why-buddhism-is-true.html

E2.2.D.3.1.f. "As we steer a course through the river of our lives, we are affected by innumerable forces, the vast majority unknown to us. By some accounts this makes of our freedom an illusion, for how can we purport to freely choose when we can’t even see a fraction of the legion of influences acting on us, limiting our movements, sparking our appetites? The threat this picture poses to traditional notions of agency suggests a counternarrative. There must be some part of us that floats above the river, untouched by its waters and therefore utterly free and totally responsible for our every turn. But both these pictures are misleading, and for the same reason. Our freedom, and hence our responsibility for the choices we make, is neither a thing to look for in our material existence nor some ghostlike essence unmoored from that existence. Rather, it is a necessary postulate for a being who can imagine having chosen differently, the condition of the possibility of conceiving of that life as one possible path among many."
(William Egginton, The Rigor of Angels: Borges, Heisenberg, Kant, and the Ultimate Nature of Reality, 2023)

E2.2.D.3.1.g. "As we steer a course through the river of our lives, we are affected by innumerable forces, the vast majority unknown to us. By some accounts this makes of our freedom an illusion, for how can we purport to freely choose when we can’t even see a fraction of the legion of influences acting on us, limiting our movements, sparking our appetites? The threat this picture poses to traditional notions of agency suggests a counternarrative. There must be some part of us that floats above the river, untouched by its waters and therefore utterly free and totally responsible for our every turn. But both these pictures are misleading, and for the same reason. Our freedom, and hence our responsibility for the choices we make, is neither a thing to look for in our material existence nor some ghostlike essence unmoored from that existence. Rather, it is a necessary postulate for a being who can imagine having chosen differently, the condition of the possibility of conceiving of that life as one possible path among many."
(William Egginton, The Rigor of Angels: Borges, Heisenberg, Kant, and the Ultimate Nature of Reality, 2023)

E2.2.D.3.2. Redefining Causality and Responsibility:  how freedom and determinism are not mutually exclusive

E2.2.D.3.2.a. Epictetus uses the metaphor of the world as a theater stage: “The choice of role is someone else's business,” but the actor's style is ours. For Stoics, freedom lies in the spontaneity of our actions, initiated in close dependence on the rhythms that suit us, in the way we remain faithful to the rhythms that determine us.

E2.2.D.3.2.b. "CAUSALITY (PRINCIPLE OF -)
The principle of causality stipulates that every event has a cause, and under the same conditions, the same cause produces the same effect. It is a bet on the rationality of reality and the constancy of its laws. Like all bets, it is a bet without proof and has not yet failed.
 
The principle of causality should not be confused with absolute determinism, which assumes the constancy of the laws of nature and the unity and continuity of causal series over time. In this strong sense, determinism is predeterminism; everything is predetermined or written in advance. Similarly, indeterminism does not imply a violation of the principle of causality, but rather, the plurality and discontinuity of causal chains. In Lucretius, clinamen is not without cause; its cause is the atom. However, it is without antecedent cause. It is pure present, which no past explains or contained. It occurs incerto tempore, incertisque locis ("indeterminate in space and time"). As Marcel Conche notes, "The principle of causality is not contradicted because it does not imply that every cause produces its effect under conditions of place and time." Thus, clinamen breaks "the destiny of physicists" (predeterminism), not the rationality of reality (causality).

It should be noted that every cause, being itself a fact, must have a cause, which in turn must have a cause, and so on ad infinitum. This is what Spinoza calls the infinite chain of finite causes (Eth., I, prop. 28). Determinism presupposes the continuity of this chain; indeterminism, its discontinuity. But there is more. From a metaphysical point of view, the indefinitely repeatable application of the principle of causality seems to require—if we want to escape infinite regression—a first cause, which would be without cause or self-causing. The principle of causality, taken absolutely, thus leads to its own violation (a cause without a cause) or to a circle (a cause that causes itself). If God is the cause of everything, what is the cause of God? If there is no God, what is the cause of everything?"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E2.2.D.3.2.c. "One could conceptualize liberty as Isaiah Berlin did in "Two Concepts of liberty" (1969).
On the one hand, freedom can be the absence of external constraints or interference that prevent an individual from acting or thinking as they choose (negative freedom). It refers to the freedom to be left alone and free from coercion or interference by other individuals or institutions. On the other hand, freedom is the presence of the resources and opportunities necessary for individuals to act on their choices and pursue their goals (positive freedom). It is not the absence of external constraints or interference but the presence of the necessary conditions that allow individuals to lead meaningful and fulfilling lives. However, in this essay, I will not use this dichotomy. A triadic analysis can explain all theories of freedom. Any assertion regarding freedom must take the following form to be complete: x is (is not) free from y to do (not to do, become, not become) z. All disagreements on freedom are disagreements about what is included under each variable (MacCallum, 1967). It assumes that any internal or external constraint on an individual's plan/goals reduces her freedom and adds a more robust and inclusive concept of freedom than negative or positive freedom, as it considers the complex and multifaceted ways in which power and domination can shape an individual's life."
(Jean Schindler, 2023)

E2.2.D.3.n.i. MARATHE MASTERFULLY ARTICULATES THE CORE DISTINCTION, WHICH IS CENTRAL TO MODERN POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY (POPULARIZED BY ISAIAH BERLIN) BETWEEN POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE LIBERTY.	
•	"Freedom-From" (Negative Liberty): He correctly identifies the American ideal, as explained by Steeply, as a purely negative freedom: "no one tells your precious individual U.S.A. selves what they must do... freedom from constraint and forced duress."
•	"Freedom-To" (Positive Liberty): He poses this as the necessary alternative. He argues that freedom requires the capacity to make good choices, which is a capacity that must be taught and guided: "How to choose any but a child's greedy choices if there is no loving-filled father to guide...?"
The sky of U.S.A.'s desert was clotted with blue stars. Now it was deep at night. Only above the U.S.A. city was the sky blank of stars; its color was pearly and blank. Marathe shrugged. 'Perhaps in you is the sense that citizens of Canada are not involved in the real root of the threat.' 
Steeply shook the head in seeming annoyance. 'What's that supposed to mean?' he said. The lurid wig of him slipped when he moved the head with any abrupt force. 
The first way Marathe betrayed anything of emotion was to smooth rather too fussily at the blanket on his lap. 'It is meaning that it will not of finality be Québecers making this kick to l'aìne des Etats Unis. Look: the facts of the situation speak loudly. What is known. This is a U.S.A. production, this Entertainment cartridge. Made by an American man in the U.S.A. The appetite for the appeal of it: this also is U.S.A. The U.S.A. drive for spectation, which your culture teaches. This I was saying: this is why choosing is everything. When I say to you choose with great care in loving and you make ridicule it is why I look and say: can I believe this man is saying this thing of ridicule?' Marathe leaned slightly forward on his stumps, leaving the machine pistol to use both his hands in saying. Steeply could tell this was important to Marathe; he really believed it. 
Marathe made small emphatic circles and cuts in the air while he spoke: 'These facts of situation, which speak so loudly of your Bureau's fear of this samizdat: now is what has happened when a people choose nothing over themselves to love, each one. A U.S.A. that would die — and let its children die, each one — for the so-called perfect Entertainment, this film. Who would die for this chance to be fed this death of pleasure with spoons, in their warm homes, alone, unmoving: Hugh Steeply, in complete seriousness as a citizen of your neighbor I say to you: forget for a moment the Entertain-ment, and think instead about a U.S.A. where such a thing could be possible enough for your Office to fear: can such a U.S.A. hope to survive for a much longer time? To survive as a nation of peoples? To much less exercise dominion over other nations of other peoples? If these are other peoples who still know what it is to choose? who will die for something larger? who will sacrifice the warm home, the loved woman at home, their legs, their life even, for something more than their own wishes of sentiment? who would choose not to die for pleasure, alone?' 
Steeply removed with cool deliberation another Belgian cigarette and lit it, this time on the first match. Waving the match out with a circular flourish and snap. All this took time of his silence. Marathe settled back. Marathe wondered why the presence of Americans could always make him feel vaguely ashamed after saying things he believed. An aftertaste of shame after revealing passion of any belief and type when with Americans, as if he had made flatulence instead of had revealed belief. 
Steeply rested his one elbow on the forearm of the other arm across his prostheses, to smoke like a woman: 'You're saying that the administration wouldn't even be concerned about the Entertainment if we didn't know we were fatally weak. As in as a nation. You're saying the fact that we're worried speaks volumes about the nation itself.' 
Marathe shrugged. 'Us, we will force nothing on U.S.A. persons in their warm homes. We will make only available. Entertainment. There will be then some choosing, to partake or choose not to.' Smoothing slightly at his lap's blanket. 'How will U.S.A.s choose? Who has taught them to choose with care? How will your Offices and Agencies protect them, your people? 
By laws? By killing Québecois?' Marathe rose, but very slightly. 'As you were killing Colombians and Bolivians to protect U.S.A. citizens who desire their narcotics? How well did this work for your Agencies and Offices, the killing? How long was it before the Brazilians replaced the dead of Colombia?' 
Steeply's wig had slipped hard to starboard. 'Rémy, no. Drug-dealers don't want you dead, necessarily; they just want your money. There's a difference. You people seem to want us dead. Not just the Concavity re-demised. Not just secession for Quebec. The 
F.L.Q., maybe they're like the Bolivians. But Fortier wants us dead.' 
'Again you pass over what is important. Why B.S.S. cannot understand us. You cannot kill what is already dead.' 
'Just you wait and see if we're dead, paisano.' 
(David Foster Wallace, Infinite Jest, 1996)

ADAM SMITH ARGUES THAT TRUE FREEDOM IS A FORM OF SELF-MASTERY. THE "MAN OF PRINCIPLE" IS FREE BECAUSE HE IS NOT A SLAVE TO HIS OWN FLEETING AND UNRELIABLE INNER STATES
“Without this sacred regard to general rules, there is no man whose
conduct can be much depended upon. It is this which constitutes the most
essential difference between a man of principle and honour and a
worthless fellow. The one adheres, on all occasions, steadily and
resolutely to his maxims, and preserves through the whole of his life
one even tenour of conduct. The other, acts variously and accidentally,
as humour, inclination, or interest chance to be uppermost. Nay, such
are the inequalities of humour to which all men are subject, that
without this principle, the man who, in his cool hours, had the most
delicate sensibility to the propriety of conduct, might often be led to
act absurdly upon the most frivolous occasions, and when it was scarce
possible to assign any serious motive for his behaviour in this manner.
Your friend makes you a visit when you happen to be in a humour which
makes it disagreeable to receive him: in your present mood this civility
is very apt to appear an impertinent intrusion; and if you were to give
way to the views of things which at this time occur, though civil in
your temper, you would behave to him with coldness and contempt. What
renders you incapable of such a rudeness, is nothing but a regard to the
general rules of civility and hospitality, which prohibit it. That
habitual reverence which your former experience has taught you for
these, enables you to act, upon all such occasions, with nearly equal
propriety, and hinders those inequalities of temper, to which all men
are subject, from influencing your conduct in any very sensible degree.
But if without regard to these general rules, even the duties of
politeness, which are so easily observed, and which can scarce have any
serious motive to violate, would yet be so frequently violated, what
would become of the duties of justice, of truth, of chastity, of
fidelity, which it is often so difficult to observe, and which there may
be so many strong motives to violate? But upon the tolerable observance
of these duties, depends the very existence of human society, which
would crumble into nothing if mankind were not generally impressed with
a reverence for those important rules of conduct.

This reverence is still further enhanced by an opinion which is first
impressed by nature, and afterwards confirmed by reasoning and
philosophy, that those important rules of morality, are the commands and
laws of the Deity, who will finally reward the obedient, and punish the
transgressors of their duty.”
(Adam Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments, 1777)

E2.2.D.3.2.d. THE ONLY THING THAT MATTERS IS WHETHER OR NOT YOU CAN PERFORM A TASK ACCORDING TO YOUR ETHICS, WHEN UNDER PRESSURE FROM AN INCLINATION OR A DETERMINISM. Whether your decision was the result of free will or not is beside the point.
“Gotama is interested in what people can do, not with what they are. The task he proposes entails distinguishing between what is to be accepted as the natural condition of life itself (the unfolding of experience) and what is to be let go of (reactivity). We may have no control over the rush of fear prompted by finding a snake under our bed, but we do have the ability to respond to the situation in a way that is not determined by that fear.
But if reactivity is an inclination, and therefore part of the experience over which you have no control, how can you exercise any choice that might make a difference? Or, more simply stated: If everything you experience arises from conditions, how can there be free will? Surely the doctrines of not-self and conditioned arising preclude the possibility of freely chosen agency and present a vision of life that plays itself out according to the blind forces of impersonal causality. These oft-stated objections come from treating the Buddha’s teaching as though it were a metaphysics concerned with illuminating the true nature of reality. As soon as we consider it a task-based ethics, however, such objections vanish. The only thing that matters is whether or not you can perform a task. When an inclination to say something cruel occurs, for example, can you resist acting on that impulse? If you can, you have succeeded. Whether your decision to withhold the barbed remark was the result of free will or not is beside the point.
The question of free will versus determinism should perhaps be added to the list of questions about which the Buddha refused to make any comment. Like the others, it has no direct bearing on the practice of the dharma. It is also a peculiarly Western concern; it has never been an issue for Buddhist thinkers. That it is still generating debate today after centuries of discussion strongly suggests that it may never be conclusively resolved.”
(Stephen Batchelor, After Buddhism, rethinking the dharma for a secular age, 2016)

E2.2.D.3.2.e. "THE FACT IS THAT ALL HUMAN ACTIONS ARE BOTH FREE AND DETERMINED, ACCORDING TO THE POINT OF VIEW FROM WHICH ONE CONSIDERS THEM." Edward Hallett Carr argues that we can investigate the causes of an action (the historian's job) while still holding the person morally responsible for that action, so long as it was not the result of "external compulsion."
“In 1954 Sir Isaiah Berlin published his essay on Historical Inevitability. He dropped the attack on Plato, perhaps out of some lingering respect for that ancient pillar of the Oxford Establishment1; and he added to the indictment the argument, not found in Poppa:, that the ‘historicism’ of Hegel and Marx is objectionable because, by explaining human actions in causal terms, it implied a denial of human free will, and encourages historians to evade their supposed obligation (of which I spoke in my last lecture) to pronounce moral condemnation on the Charlemagnes, Napoleons, and Stalins of history. Otherwise not much has changed. But Sir Isaiah Berlin is a deservedly popular and widely-read writer. During the past five or six years, almost everyone in this country or in the United States who has written an article about history, or even a serious review of a historical work, has cocked a knowing snook at Hegel and Marx and determinism, and pointed out die absurdity of failing to recognize the role of accident in history. It is perhaps unfair to hold Sir Isaiah responsible for his disciples. Even when he talks nonsense, he earns our indulgence by talking it in an engaging and attractive way. The disciples repeat the nonsense, and fail to make it attractive. In any case, there is nothing new in all this. Charles Kingsley, not the most distinguished of our Regius Professors of Modern History, who had probably never read Hegel or heard of Marx, spoke in his inaugural lecture in 1860 of man’s ‘mysterious power of breaking the laws of his own being’ as proof that no ‘inevitable sequence’ could exist in history. But fortunately we have forgotten Kingsley. It is Professor Popper and Sir Isaiah Berlin who between them have flogged this very dead horse back into a semblance of life; and some patience will be required to clear up the muddle. 
First then let me take determinism, which I will define -I hope, uncontroversially - as the belief that everything that happens has a cause or causes, and could not have happened differently unless something in the cause or causes had also been different. Determinism is a problem not of history, but of all human behaviour. The human being whose actions have no cause and are therefore undetermined is as much an abstraction as the individual outside society whom we discussed in a previous lecture. Professor Popper’s assertion that ‘everything is possible in human affairs’ is either meaningless or false. No¬ body in ordinary life believes or can believe this. The axiom that everything has a cause is a condition of our capacity to understand what is going on around us. The nightmare quality of Kafka’s novels lies in the fact that nothing that happens has any apparent cause, or any cause that can be ascertained: this leads to the total disintegration of the human personality, which is based on the assumption that events have causes, and that enough of these causes are ascertainable to build up in the human mind a pattern of past and present sufficiently coherent to serve as a guide to action. Everyday life would be impossible unless one assumed that human behaviour was determined by causes which are in principle ascertainable. Once upon a time some people thought it blasphemous to inquire into the causes of natural phenomena, since these were obviously governed by the divine will. Sir Isaiah Berlin’s objection to our explaining why human beings acted as they did, on the ground that these actions are governed by the human will, belongs to the same order of ideas, and perhaps indicates that the social sciences are in the same stage of development today as were the natural sciences when this kind of argument was directed against them. 
Let us see how we handle this problem in everyday life. As you go about your daily affairs, you are in the habit of meeting Smith. You greet him with an amiable, but pointless, remark about the weather, or about the state of college or university business; he replies with an equally amiable and pointless remark about the weather or the state of business. But supposing that one morning Smith, instead of answering your remark in his usual way, were to break into a violent diatribe against your personal appearance or character. Would you shrug your shoulders, and treat this as a convincing demonstration of the freedom of Smith’s will and of the fact that everything is possible in human affairs ? I suspect that you would not. On the contrary, you would probably say something like: ‘Poor Smithy You know, of course, his father died in a mental hospital,’ or ‘Poor Smith’. He must have been having more trouble with his wife.’ In other words, you would attempt to diagnose the cause of Smith’s apparently causeless behaviour, in the firm conviction that comp cause there must be. By so doing you would, I fear, incur the wrath of Sir Isaiah Berlin, who would bitterly complain that, by providing a causal explanation of Smith’s be¬ haviour, you had swallowed Hegel’s and Marx’s deterministic assumption, and shirked your obligation to denounce Smith as a cad. But nobody in ordinary life takes this view, or supposes that either determinism or moral responsibility is at stake. The logical dilemma about free will and determinism does not arise in real life. It is not that some human actions are free and others determined. The fact is that all human actions are both free and determined, according to the point of view from which one considers them. The practical question is different again. Smith’s action had a cause, or a number of causes; but in so far as it was caused not by some external compulsion, but by the compulsion of his own personality, he was morally responsible, since it is a condition of social life that normal adult human beings are morally responsible for their own personality. Whether hold him responsible in this particular case is a matter for your practical judgement. But, if you do, this does not mean that you regard his action as having no cause: cause and moral responsibility are different categories. An Institute and Chair of Criminology have recently been established in this university. It would not, I feel sure, occur to any of those engaged in investigating the causes of crime to suppose that this committed them to a denial of the moral responsibility of the criminal. 
Now let us look at the historian. Like the ordinary man, he believes that human actions have causes which are in principle ascertainable. History, like everyday life, would be impossible if this assumption were not made. It is the special fiction of the historian to investigate these causes. This may be thought to give him a special interest in the determined aspect of human behaviour: but he does not reject free will—exception the untenable hypothesis that voluntary actions have no cause. Nor is he troubled by the question of inevitability. Historians, like other people, sometimes fall into rhetorical language and speak of an occurrence as 'inevitable' when they mean merely that the conjunction of factors leading one to expect it was overwhelmingly strong. Recently I searched my own history for the offending word, and cannot give myself an entirely dean bill of health: in one passage I wrote that, after the revolution of1917, a dash between the Bolsheviks and the Orthodox Church was 'inevitable'. No doubt it would have been wiser to say 'extremely probable'. But may I be excused for finding the correction a shade pedantic? In practice, historians do not assume that events are inevitable before they have taken place. They frequently discuss alternative courses available to the actors in the story, on the assumption that the option was open, though they go on quite correctly to explain why one course was eventually chosen rather than the other. Nothing in history is inevitable, except in the formal sense that, for it to have happened other¬ wise, the antecedent causes would have had to be different. As a historian, I am perfectly prepared to do without 'inevitable', 'unavoidable', ‘inescapable’, and even ‘inductable’. Life will be drabber. But let us leave them to poets and metaphysicians.
So barren and pointless does this charge of inevitability appear, and so great the vehemence with which it has been pursued in recent years, that I think we must look for the hidden motives behind it. Its principal source is, I suspect, what I may call the 'might-have-been' school of thought - or rather of emotion. It attaches itself almost exclusively to contemporary history. Last term here in Cambridge I saw a talk to some society advertised under the title ‘Was the Russian Revolution Inevitable ?' I am sure it was intended as a perfectly serious talk. But if you had seen a talk advertised on ‘Were the Wars of the Roses Inevitable?’ you would at once have suspected some joke. The historian writes of the Norman Conquest or the American War of Independence as if what happened was in fact bound to happen, and as if it was his business simply to explain what happened and why; and nobody accuses him of being a determinist and of failing to discuss the alternative possibility that William the Conqueror or the American insurgents might have been defeated. When, however, I write about the Russian revolution of 1917 in precisely this way - the only proper way to the historian – I find myself under attack from my critics for having by implication depicted what happened as something that was bound to happen, and foiled to examine all the other things that might have happened. Suppose, it is said, that Stolypin had had time to complete his agrarian reform, or that Russia had not gone to war, perhaps the revolution would not have occurred; or suppose that the Kerensky government had made good, and that the leadership of the revolution had been assumed by the Mensheviks or the Social Revolutionaries instead of by the Bolsheviks. These suppositions are theoretically conceivable; and one can always play a parlour game with the might-have-beens of history. But they have nothing to do with determinism; for the determinist will only reply that, for these things to have happened, the causes would also have had to be different. Nor have they anything to do with history. The point is that today nobody seriously wishes to reverse the results of the Norman Conquest or of American independence, or to express a passion¬ ate protest against these events; and nobody objects when the historian treats them as a closed chapter. But plenty of people, who have suffered directly or vicariously from the results of the Bolshevik victory, or still fear its remoter consequences, desire to register their protest against it; and this takes the form, when they read history, of letting their imagination nm riot on all the more agreeable things that might have happened, and of being indignant with the historian who goes on quietly with his job of explaining what did happen and why their agreeable wish-dreams remain unfulfilled. The trouble about contemporary history is that people remember the time when all the options were still open, and find it difficult to adopt the attitude of the historian for whom they have been dosed by the/air accompli. This is a purely emotional and unhistorical reaction. But it has furnished most of the fuel for the recent campaign against the supposed doctrine of ‘historical inevitability’. Let US get rid of this red herring once and for all.”
(Edward Hallett Carr, What is History, 1961)

E2.2.D.3.2.f. DAVID DEUTSCH ATTEMPTS TO RECONCILE THE EXISTENCE OF FREE WILL WITH A SEEMINGLY PARADOXICAL PHYSICAL POSSIBILITY (TIME TRAVEL), WHICH WOULD BE GOVERNED BY THE DETERMINISTIC LAWS OF PHYSICS. He argues that the conflict is illusory and that the "faulty assumption" is neither the existence of time travel nor free will. The faulty assumption is the "classical theory of time." He argues that if we have the correct physical theory (quantum mechanics and the multiverse), the apparent conflict between the deterministic laws and free will disappears.
“Before I discuss past-directed time travel itself, what about the rendering of past-directed time travel? To what extent could a virtual-reality generator be programmed to give the user the experience of past-directed time travel? We shall see that the answer to this question, like all questions about the scope  of virtual reality, tells us about physical reality as well.
The distinctive aspects of experiencing a past environment are, by definition, experiences of certain physical objects or processes — ‘clocks’ and
‘calendars’ — in states that occurred only at past times (that is, in past snapshots). A virtual-reality generator could, of course, render those objects in those states. For instance, it could give one the experience of living in the age of the dinosaurs, or in the trenches of the First World War, and it could make the constellations, dates on newspapers or whatever, appear correctly for those times. How correctly? Is there any fundamental limit on how accurately any given era could be rendered? The Turing principle says that a universal virtual-reality generator can be built, and could be programmed to render any physically possible environment, so clearly it could be  programmed to render any environment that did once exist physically.
To render a time machine that had a certain repertoire of past destinations (and therefore also to render the destinations themselves), the program would have to include historical records of the environments at those destinations. In fact, it would need more than mere records, because the experience of time travel would involve more than merely seeing past events unfolding around one. Playing recordings of the past to the user would be mere image generation, not virtual reality. Since a real time traveller would participate in events and act back upon the past environment, an accurate virtual-reality rendering of a time machine, as of any environment, must be interactive. The program would have to calculate, for each action of the user, how the historical environment would have responded to that action. For example, to convince Dr Johnson that a purported time machine really had taken him to ancient Rome, we should have to allow him to do more than just watch passively and invisibly as Julius Caesar walked by. He would want to test the authenticity of his experiences by kicking the local rocks. He might kick Caesar — or at least, address him in Latin and expect him to reply in kind. What it means for a virtual-reality rendering of a time machine to be accurate is that the rendering should respond to such interactive tests in the same way as would the real time machine, and as would the real past environments to which it travelled. That should include, in this case,  displaying a correctly behaving, Latin-speaking rendering of Julius Caesar.
Since Julius Caesar and ancient Rome were physical objects, they could, in principle, be rendered with arbitrary accuracy. The task differs only in degree from that of rendering the Centre Court at Wimbledon, including the spectators. Of course, the complexity of the requisite programs would be tremendous. More complex still, or perhaps even impossible in principle, would be the task of gathering the information required to write the programs to render specific human beings. But writing the programs is not the issue here. I am not asking whether we can find out enough about a past environment (or, indeed, about a present or future environment) to write a program that would render that environment specifically. I am asking whether the set of all possible programs for virtual-reality generators does or does not include one that gives a virtual-reality rendering of past-directed time travel and, if so, how accurate that rendering can be. If there were no programs rendering time travel, then the Turing principle would imply that time travel was physically impossible (because it says that everything that is physically possible can be rendered by some program). And on the face of it, there is indeed a problem here. Even though there are programs which accurately render past environments, there appear to be fundamental obstacles to using them to render time travel. These are the same obstacles that appear to prevent time travel itself, namely the so-called ‘paradoxes’ of  time travel.
Here is a typical such paradox. I build a time machine and use it to travel back into the past. There I prevent my former self from building the time machine. But if the time machine is not built, I shall not be able to use it to travel into the past, nor therefore to prevent the time machine from being built. So do I make this trip or not? If I do, then I deprive myself of the time machine and therefore do not make the trip. If I do not make the trip, then I allow myself to build the time machine and so do make the trip. This is sometimes called the ‘grandfather paradox’, and stated in terms of using time travel to kill one’s grandfather before he had any children. (And then, if he had no children, he could not have had any grandchildren, so who killed him?) These two forms of the paradox are the ones most commonly cited, and happen to require an element of violent conflict between the time traveller and people in the past, so one finds oneself wondering who will win. Perhaps the time traveller will be defeated, and the paradox avoided. But violence is not an essential part of the problem here. If I had a time machine, I could decide as follows: that if, today, my future self visits me, having set out from tomorrow, then tomorrow I shall not use my time machine; and that if I receive no such visitor today, then tomorrow I shall use the time machine to travel back to today and visit myself. It seems to follow from this decision that if I use the time machine then I shall not use it, and if I do not use it then  I shall use it: a contradiction.
A contradiction indicates a faulty assumption, so such paradoxes have traditionally been taken as proofs that time travel is impossible. Another assumption that is sometimes challenged is that of free will — whether time travellers can choose in the usual way how to behave. One then concludes that if time machines did exist, people’s free will would be impaired. They would somehow be unable to form intentions of the type I have described; or else, when they travelled in time, they would somehow systematically forget the resolutions they made before setting out. But it turns out that the faulty assumption behind the paradoxes is neither the existence of a time machine nor the ability of people to choose their actions in the usual way. All that is at fault is the classical theory of time, which I have already shown, for quite  independent reasons, to be untenable.
If time travel really were logically impossible, a virtual-reality rendering of it would also be impossible. If it required a suspension of free will, then so would a virtual-reality rendering of it. The paradoxes of time travel can be expressed in virtual-reality terms as follows. The accuracy of a virtual-reality rendering is the faithfulness, as far as is perceptible, of the rendered environment to the intended one. In the case of time travel the intended environment is one that existed historically. But as soon as the rendered environment responds, as it is required to, to the user kicking it, it thereby becomes historically inaccurate because the real environment never did respond to the user: the user never did kick it. For example, the real Julius Caesar never met Dr Johnson. Consequently Dr Johnson, in the very act of testing the faithfulness of the rendering by conversing with Caesar, would destroy that faithfulness by creating a historically inaccurate Caesar. A rendering can behave accurately by being a faithful image of history, or it can respond accurately, but not both. Thus it would appear that, in one way or the other, a virtual-reality rendering of time travel is intrinsically incapable of being accurate — which is another way of saying that time travel could not  be rendered in virtual reality.
But is this effect really an impediment to the accurate rendering of time travel? Normally, mimicking an environment’s actual behaviour is not the aim of virtual reality: what counts is that it should respond accurately. As soon as you begin to play tennis on the rendered Wimbledon Centre Court, you make it behave differently from the way the real one is behaving. But that does not make the rendering any less accurate. On the contrary, that is what is required for accuracy. Accuracy, in virtual reality, means the closeness of the rendered behaviour to that which the original environment would exhibit if the user were present in it. Only at the beginning of the rendering does the rendered environment’s state have to be faithful to the original. Thereafter it is not its state but its responses to the user’s actions that have to be faithful. Why is that ‘paradoxical’ for renderings of time travel but not for other renderings — for instance, for renderings of ordinary travel?
It seems paradoxical because in renderings of past-directed time travel the user plays a unique double, or multiple, role. Because of the looping that is involved, where for instance one or more copies of the user may co-exist and interact, the virtual-reality generator is in effect required to render the user while simultaneously responding to the user’s actions. For example, let us imagine that I am the user of a virtual-reality generator running a time-travel-rendering program. Suppose that when I switch on the program, the environment that I see around me is a futuristic laboratory. In the middle there is a revolving door, like those at the entrances of large buildings, except that this one is opaque and is almost entirely enclosed in an opaque cylinder. The only way in or out of the cylinder is a single entrance cut in its side. The door within revolves continuously. It seems at first sight that there is little one can do with this device except to enter it, go round one or more times with the revolving door, and come out again. But above the entrance is a sign: ‘Pathway to the Past’. It is a time machine, a fictional, virtual-reality one. But if a real past-directed time machine existed it would, like this one, not be an exotic sort of vehicle but an exotic sort of place. Rather than drive or fly it to the past, one would take a certain path through it (perhaps using  an ordinary space vehicle) and emerge at an earlier time.”
(David Deutsch, The Fabric of Reality, 1996)

E2.2.D.3.r.i. DAVID DEUTSCH PROVIDES A THOUGHT EXPERIMENT DESIGNED TO EXPLORE THE APPARENT CONFLICT BETWEEN FREE WILL AND THE DETERMINISTIC LAWS OF PHYSICS. The scenario of an interactive time-travel simulation is a test case for whether freedom and a fixed past/future can be reconciled.
“At the beginning of the session, when I first see the time machine, I immediately see it disgorging one or more copies of me. Why? Because with interaction switched on, when I come to use the time machine at five minutes past noon I shall have the right to affect the past to which I return, and that past is what is happening now, at noon. Thus my future self or selves are arriving to exercise their right to affect the laboratory at noon, and to affect  me, and in particular to be seen by me.
The copies of me go about their business. Consider the computational task that the virtual-reality generator has to execute, in rendering these copies. There is now a new element that makes this overwhelmingly more difficult than it was in the non-interactive mode. How is the virtual-reality generator to find out what the copies of me are going to do? It does not yet have any recordings of that information, for in physical time the session has only just  begun. Yet it must immediately present me with renderings of my future self.
So long as I am resolved to pretend that I cannot see these renderings, and then to mimic whatever I see them do, they are not going to be subjected to too stringent a test of accuracy. The virtual-reality generator need only make them do something — anything that I might do; or more precisely any behaviour that I am capable of mimicking. Given the technology that we are assuming the virtual-reality generator to be based on, that would presumably not be exceeding its capabilities. It has an accurate mathematical model of my body, and a degree of direct access to my brain. It can use these to calculate some behaviour which I could mimic, and then have its initial  renderings of me carry out that behaviour.
So I begin the experience by seeing some copies of me emerge from the revolving door and do something. I pretend not to notice them, and after five minutes I go round the revolving door myself and mimic what I earlier saw the first copy doing. Five minutes later I go round again and mimic the second copy, and so on. Meanwhile, I notice that one of the copies always repeats what I had been doing during the first five minutes. At the end of the time-travelling sequence, the virtual-reality generator will again have several records of what happened during the five minutes after noon, but this time all those records will be identical. In other words, only one history happened, namely that I met my future self but pretended not to notice. Later I became that future self, travelled back in time to meet my past self, and was apparently not noticed. That is all very tidy and non-paradoxical — and unrealistic. It was achieved by the virtual-reality generator and me engaging in an intricate, mutually referential game: I was mimicking it while it was mimicking me. But with normal interactions switched on, I can choose not to  play that game.
If I really had access to virtual-reality time travel, I should certainly want to test the authenticity of the rendering. In the case we are discussing, the testing would begin as soon as I saw the copies of me. Far from ignoring them, I would immediately engage them in conversation. I am far better equipped to test their authenticity than Dr Johnson would be to test Julius Caesar’s. To pass even this initial test, the rendered versions of me would effectively have to be artificial intelligent beings — moreover, beings so similar to me, at least in their responses to external stimuli, that they can convince me they are accurate renderings of how I might be five minutes from now. The virtual-reality generator must be running programs similar in content and complexity to my mind. Once again, the difficulty of writing such programs is not the issue here: we are investigating the principle of virtual-reality time travel, not its practicality. It does not matter where our hypothetical virtual-reality generator gets its programs, for we are asking whether the set of all possible programs does or does not include one that accurately renders time travel. But our virtual-reality generator does in principle have the means of discovering all the possible ways I might behave in various situations. This information is located in the physical state of my brain, and sufficiently precise measurements could in principle read it out. One (probably unacceptable) method of doing this would be for the virtual-reality generator to cause my brain to interact, in virtual reality, with a test environment, record its behaviour and then restore its original state, perhaps by running it backwards. The reason why this is probably unacceptable is that I would presumably experience that test environment, and though I should not recall it afterwards, I want the virtual-reality generator to give me  the experiences I specify and no others.
In any case, what matters for present purposes is that, since my brain is a physical object, the Turing principle says that it is within the repertoire of a universal virtual-reality generator. So it is possible in principle for the copy of me to pass the test of whether he accurately resembles me. But that is not the only test I want to perform. Mainly, I want to test whether the time travel itself is being rendered authentically. To that end I want to find out not just whether this person is authentically me, but whether he is authentically from the future. In part I can test this by questioning him. He should say that he remembers being in my position five minutes ago, and that he then travelled around the revolving door and met me. I should also find that he is testing my authenticity. Why would he do that? Because the most stringent and straightforward way in which I could test his resemblance to the future me would be to wait until I have passed through the time machine, and then look for two things: first, whether the copy of me whom I find there behaves as I remember myself behaving; and second, whether I behave as I remember  the copy behaving.
In both these respects the rendering will certainly fail the test! At my very first and slightest attempt to behave differently from the way I remember my copy behaving, I shall succeed. And it will be almost as easy to make him behave differently from the way in which I behaved: all I have to do is ask him a question which I, in his place, had not been asked, and which has a distinctive answer. So however much they resemble me in appearance and personality, the people who emerge from the virtual-reality time machine are not authentic renderings of the person I am shortly to become. Nor should they be — after all, I have the firm intention not to behave as they do when it is my turn to use the time machine and, since the virtual-reality generator is now allowing me to interact freely with the rendered environment, there is nothing to prevent me from carrying out that intention.
Let me recap. As the experiment begins I meet a person who is recognizably me, apart from slight variations. Those variations consistently point to his being from the future: he remembers the laboratory at five minutes past noon, a time which, from my perspective, has not happened yet. He remembers setting out at that time, passing through the revolving door and arriving at noon. He remembers, before all that, beginning this experiment at noon and seeing the revolving door for the first time, and seeing copies of himself emerging. He says that this happened over five minutes ago, according to his subjective perception, though according to mine the whole experiment has not yet lasted five minutes. And so on. Yet though he passes all tests for being a version of me from the future, it is demonstrably not my future. When I test whether he is the specific person I am going to become, he fails that test. Similarly, he tells me that I fail the test for being his past  self, since I am not doing exactly what he remembers himself doing.
So when I travel to the laboratory’s past, I find that it is not the same past as I have just come from. Because of his interaction with me, the copy of me whom I find there does not behave quite as I remember behaving. Therefore, if the virtual-reality generator were to record the totality of what happens during this time-travel sequence, it would again have to store several snapshots for each instant as defined by the laboratory clock, and this time they would all be different. In other words, there would be several distinct, parallel histories of the laboratory during the five-minute time-travelling period. Again, I have experienced each of these histories in turn. But this time I have experienced them all interactively, so there is no excuse for saying that any of them are less real than the others. So what is being rendered here is a little multiverse. If this were physical time travel, the multiple snapshots at each instant would be parallel universes. Given the quantum concept of time, we should not be surprised at this. We know that the snapshots which stack themselves approximately into a single time sequence in our everyday experience are in fact parallel universes. We do not normally experience the other parallel universes that exist at the same time, but we have reason to believe that they are there. So, if we find some method, as yet unspecified, of travelling to an earlier time, why should we expect that method necessarily to take each copy of us to the particular snapshot which that copy had already experienced? Why should we expect every visitor we receive from the future to hail from the particular future snapshots in which we shall eventually find ourselves? We really should not expect this. Asking to be allowed to interact with the past environment means asking to change it, which means by definition asking to be in a different snapshot of it from the one we remember. A time traveller would return to the same snapshot (or, what is perhaps the same thing, to an identical snapshot) only in the extremely contrived case I discussed above, where no effective interaction takes place between the copies who meet,  and the time traveller manages to make all the parallel histories identical.”
(David Deutsch, The Fabric of Reality, 1996)

E2.2.D.3.r.i.  I_David Deutsch_Figure 12.3, Multiverse paths of a time traveller trying to ‘enact a paradox’
DAVID DEUTSCH PROVIDES A THOUGHT EXPERIMENT DESIGNED TO EXPLORE THE APPARENT CONFLICT BETWEEN FREE WILL AND THE DETERMINISTIC LAWS OF PHYSICS. The scenario of an interactive time-travel simulation is a test case for whether freedom and a fixed past/future can be reconciled. (Continued)
“Now let me subject the virtual-reality time machine to the ultimate test. Let me deliberately set out to enact a paradox. I form the firm intention that I stated above: I resolve that if a copy of me emerges at noon from the time machine, then I shall not enter it at five minutes past noon, or indeed at any time during the experiment. But if no one emerges, then at five minutes past noon I shall enter the time machine, emerge at noon, and then not use the time machine again. What happens? Will someone emerge from the time machine or not? Yes. And no! It depends which universe we are talking about. Remember that more than one thing happens in that laboratory at noon. Suppose that I see no one emerging from the time machine, as illustrated at the point marked ‘Start’ at the right of Figure 12.3. Then, acting on my firm intention, I wait until five minutes past noon and then walk round that now-familiar revolving door. Emerging at noon, I find, of course, another version of myself, standing at the point marked ‘Start’ on the left of Figure 12.3. As we converse, we find that he and I had formed the same intention. Therefore, because I have emerged into his universe, he will behave differently from the way I behaved. Acting on the same intention as mine leads him not to use the time machine. From then on, he and I can continue to interact for as long as the simulation lasts, and there will be two versions of me in that universe. In the universe I came from, the laboratory remains empty after five minutes past twelve, for I never return to it. We have encountered no paradox. Both versions of me have succeeded in enacting our shared intention — which was therefore not, after all, logically incapable  of being carried out.
I and my alter ego in this experiment have had different experiences. He saw someone emerging from the time machine at noon, and I did not. Our experiences would have been equally faithful to our intention, and equally non-paradoxical, had our roles been reversed. That is, I could have seen him emerging from the time machine at noon, and then not used it myself. In that case both of us would have ended up in the universe I started in. In the  universe he started in, the laboratory would remain empty.
Which of these two self-consistent possibilities will the virtual-reality generator show me? During this rendering of an intrinsically multiversal process, I play only one of the two copies of me; the program renders the other copy. At the beginning of the experiment the two copies look identical (though in physical reality they are different because only one of them is connected to a physical brain and body outside the virtual environment). But in the physical version of the experiment — if a time machine existed physically — the two universes containing the copies of me who were going to meet would initially be strictly identical, and both copies would be equally real. At the multiverse-moment when we met (in one universe) or did not meet (in the other), those two copies would become different. It is not meaningful to ask which copy of me would have which experience: so long as we are identical, there is no such thing as ‘which’ of us. Parallel universes do not have hidden serial numbers: they are distinguished only by what happens in them. Therefore in rendering all this for the benefit of one copy of me, the virtual-reality generator must recreate for me the effect of existing as two identical copies who then become different and have different experiences. It can cause that literally to happen by choosing at random, with equal probabilities, which of the two roles it will play (and therefore, given my intention, which role I shall play). For choosing randomly means in effect tossing some electronic version of a fair coin, and a fair coin is one that shows ‘heads’ in half the universes in which it is tossed and ‘tails’ in the other half. So in half the universes I shall play one role, and in the other half, the other. That is exactly what would happen with a real time machine.
We have seen that a virtual-reality generator’s ability to render time travel accurately depends on its having detailed information about the user’s state of mind. This may make one briefly wonder whether the paradoxes have been genuinely avoided. If the virtual-reality generator knows what I am going to do in advance, am I really free to perform whatever tests I choose?We need not get into any deep questions about the nature of free will here. I am indeed free to do whatever I like in this experiment, in the sense that for every possible way I may choose to react to the simulated past — including randomly, if I want to — the virtual-reality generator allows me to react in that way. And all the environments I interact with are affected by what I do, and react back on me in precisely the way they would if time travel were not taking place. The reason why the virtual-reality generator needs information from my brain is not to predict my actions, but to render the behaviour of my counterparts from other universes. Its problem is that in the real version of this situation there would be parallel-universe counterparts of me, initially identical and therefore possessing the same propensities as me and making the same decisions. (Farther away in the multiverse there would also be others who were already different from me at the outset of the experiment, but a time machine would never cause me to meet those versions.) If there were some other way of rendering these people, the virtual-reality generator would not need any information from my brain, nor would it need the prodigious computational resources that we have been envisaging. For example, if some people who know me well were able to mimic me to some degree of accuracy (apart from external attributes such as appearance and tone of voice, which are relatively trivial to render) then the virtual-reality generator could use those people to act out the roles of my parallel-universe counterparts, and could thereby render time travel to that same degree of  accuracy.
A real time machine, of course, would not face these problems. It would simply provide pathways along which I and my counterparts, who already existed, could meet, and it would constrain neither our behaviour nor our interactions when we did meet. The ways in which the pathways interconnect — that is, which snapshots the time machine would lead to —would be affected by my physical state, including my state of mind. That is no different from the usual situation, in which my physical state, as reflected in my propensity to behave in various ways, affects what happens. The great difference between this and everyday experience is that each copy of me is tentially having a large effect on other universes (by travelling to them). Does being able to travel to the past of other universes, but not our own, really amount to time travel? Is it just inter-universe travel that makes sense, rather than time travel? No. The processes I have been describing really are time travel. First of all, it is not the case that we cannot travel to a snapshot where we have already been. If we arrange things correctly, we can. Of course if we change anything in the past — if we make it different from how it was in the past we came from — then we find ourselves in a different past. Fully fledged time travel would allow us to change the past. In other words, it allows us to make the past different from the way we remember it (in this universe). That means different from the way it actually is, in the snapshots in which we did not arrive to change anything. And those include, by  definition, the snapshots we remember being in.
So wanting to change the specific past snapshots in which we once were does indeed not make sense. But that has nothing to do with time travel. It is a nonsense that stems directly from the nonsensical classical theory of the flow of time. Changing the past means choosing which past snapshot to be in, not changing any specific past snapshot into another one. In this respect, changing the past is no different from changing the future, which we do all the time. Whenever we make a choice, we change the future: we change it from what it would have been had we chosen differently. Such an idea would make no sense in classical, spacetime physics with its single future determined by the present. But it does make sense in quantum physics. When we make a choice, we change the future from what it will be in universes in which we choose differently. But in no case does any particular snapshot in the future change. It cannot change, for there is no flow of time with respect to which it could change. ‘Changing’ the future means choosing which snapshot we will be in; ‘changing’ the past means exactly the same thing. Because there is no flow of time, there is no such thing as changing a particular past snapshot, such as one we remember being in. Nevertheless, if we somehow gain physical access to the past, there is no reason why we could not change it in precisely the sense in which we change the future, namely by choosing to be in a different snapshot from the one we would  have been in if we had chosen differently.
Arguments from virtual reality help in understanding time travel because the concept of virtual reality requires one to take ‘counter-factual events’ seriously, and therefore the multi-universe quantum concept of time seems natural when it is rendered in virtual reality. By seeing that past-directed time travel is within the repertoire of a universal virtual-reality generator, we learn that the idea of past-directed time travel makes perfect sense. But that is not to say that it is necessarily physically achievable. After all, faster-than-light travel, perpetual motion machines and many other physical impossibilities are all possible in virtual reality. No amount of reasoning about virtual reality can prove that a given process is permitted by the laws of physics (though it can prove that it is not: if we had reached the contrary conclusion, it would have implied, via the Turing principle, that time travel cannot occur physically). So what do our positive conclusions about virtual-reality time  travel tell us about physics?
They tell us what time travel would look like if it did occur. They tell us that past-directed time travel would inevitably be a process set in several interacting and interconnected universes. In that process, the participants would in general travel from one universe to another whenever they travelled in time. The precise ways in which the universes were connected would  depend, among other things, on the participants’ states of mind.
So, for time travel to be physically possible it is necessary for there to be a multiverse. And it is necessary that the physical laws governing the multiverse be such that, in the presence of a time machine and potential time travellers, the universes become interconnected in the way I have described, and not in any other way. For example, if I am not going to use a time machine come what may, then no time-travelling versions of me must appear in my snapshot; that is, no universes in which versions of me do use a time machine can become connected to my universe. If I am definitely going to use the time machine, then my universe must become connected to another universe in which I also definitely use it. And if I am going to try to enact a ‘paradox’ then, as we have seen, my universe must become connected with another one in which a copy of me has the same intention as I do, but by carrying out that intention ends up behaving differently from me. Remarkably, all this is precisely what quantum theory does predict. In short, the result is that if pathways into the past do exist, travellers on them are free to interact with their environment in just the same way as they could if the pathways did not lead into the past. In no case does time travel become  inconsistent, or impose special constraints on time travellers’ behaviour.”
(David Deutsch, The Fabric of Reality, 1996)

E2.2.D.3.2.g. LEWIS'S ARGUMENT TO RECONCILE THE EXISTENCE OF HUMAN FREE WILL WITH A WORLD CREATED BY AN OMNIPOTENT GOD IS THAT THESE TWO CONCEPTS ARE NOT ONLY COMPATIBLE but that a stable, determined Nature is a logically necessary condition for the existence of "a society of free souls." He argues that freedom requires choice, and choice requires a stable, independent world of things to choose between.
“Omnipotence means “ power to do all, or everything. And we are told in Scripture that “ with
God all things are possible ”. It is common enough, in argument with an unbeliever, to be told that God, if He existed and were good, would do this or that; and then, if we point out that the proposed action is impossible, to be met with the retort, “ But I thought God -was supposed to be able to do anything This raises the whole question of impossibility.
In ordinary usage the word impossible generally implies a suppressed clause beginning with the word unless. Thus it is impossible for me to see the street from where I sit writing at this moment ; that is, it is impossible to see the street unless I go up to the top floor where I shall be high enough to overlook the intervening building. If I had broken my leg I should say “ But it is impossible to go up to the top floor meaning, however, that it is impossible unless some friends turn up who will carry me. Now let us advance to a different plane of impossibility, by saying “ It is, at any rate, impossible to see the street so long as I remain where I am and the intervening building remains where it is.” Someone might add “unless the nature of space, or of vision, were different from what it is I do not know what the best philosophers and scientists would say to this, but I should have to reply “ I don’t know whether space and vision could possibly have been of such a nature as you suggest”. Now it is clear that the words could possibly here refer to some absolute kind of possibility or impossibility which is different from the relative possibilities and impossibilities we have been considering. I cannot say whether seeing round comers is, in tins new sense, possible or not, because I do not know whether it is self-contradictory or not. But I know very well that if it is self-contradictory it is absolutely impossible. The absolutely impossible may also be called the intrinsically impossible because it carries its impossibility within itself, instead of borrowing it from other impossibilities which in their turn depend upon others. It has no clause attached to it. It is impossible under all conditions and in all worlds and for all agents.
“ All agents ” here includes God Himself. His Omnipotence means power to do all that is intrinsically possible, not to do the intrinsically impossible. You may attribute miracles to Him, but not nonsense. This is no limit to His power. If you choose to say “God can give a creature free-will and at the same time withhold free-will from it,” you have not succeeded in saying anything about God : meaningless combinations of words do not suddenly acquire meaning simply because we prefix to them the two other words “ God can ”. It remains true that all things are possible with God : the intrinsic impossibilities are not things but nonentities. It is no more possible for God than for the weakest of His creatures to carry out both of two mutually exclusive alternatives ; not because His power meets an obstacle, but because nonsense remains nonsense even when we talk it about God.
It should, however, be remembered that human reasoners often make mistakes, either by arguing from false data or by inadvertence in the argument itself. We may thus come to think things possible which are really impossible, and vice versa?- We ought, therefore, to use great caution in defining those intrinsic impossibilities which even Omnipotence cannot perform. What follows is to be regarded less as an assertion of what they are than a sample of what they might be like.
The inexorable “ laws of Nature ” which operate in defiance of human suffering or desert, which are not turned aside by prayer, seem, at first sight to furnish a strong argument against the goodness and power of God. I am going to submit that not even Omnipotence could create a society of free souls without at the same time creating a relatively independent and “ inexorable ” Nature.
There is no reason to suppose that self-consciousness, the recognition of a creature by itself as a “self”, can exist except in contrast with an “ other”, a something which is not the self. It is against an environment, and preferably a social environment, an environment of other selves, that the awareness of Myself stands out. This would raise a difficulty about, the consciousness of God if we were mere theists : being Christians, we learn from the doctrine of the Blessed Trinity 'that something analogous to “ society ” exists within the Divine being from all eternity—that God is Love, not merely in the sense of being the Platonic form of love, but because, within Him, the concrete reciprocities of love exist before all worlds and are thence derived to the creatures.
Again, the freedom of a creature must mean freedom to choose : and choice implies the existence of things to choose between. A creature with no environment would have no choices to make : so that freedom, like self-consciousness (if they are not, indeed, the same thing) again demands the presence to the self of something other than the self. The minimum condition of self-consciousness and freedom, then, would be that the creature should apprehend God and, therefore, itself as distinct from God. It is possible that such creatures exist, aware of God and themselves, but of no fellow-creatures. If so, their freedom is simply that of making a single naked choice—of loving God more than the self or the self more than God. But a life so reduced to essentials is not imaginable to us. As soon as we attempt to introduce the mutual knowledge of fellow-creatures we run up against the necessity of “ Nature ”.”
(C S Lewis, The problem of pain, 1940)

E2.2.D.3.2.h. PLATO'S MYTH OF ER RECONCILES CHANCE, NECESSITY, AND CHOICE: THE MYTH CREATES A SYSTEM IN WHICH ALL THREE ELEMENTS PLAY A CRUCIAL ROLE IN SHAPING A LIFE:
•	Necessity/Determinism: The overarching cosmic framework is the "Spindle of Necessity," and a soul's choice is determined by the character it formed in its previous life.
•	Chance: The order in which the souls get to choose their next life is determined by "lot."
•	Free Will: Despite these constraints, each soul has a moment of profound and "all-important" free choice in which it selects its own future.
“At the end of their seven days' rest the souls which have returned from bliss or punishment are brought a long journey into the presence of the three Fates, the daughters of Necessity, before whom their choice of a new life has to be made. The choosing of new lives takes place at a spot from which the mechanism of the universe is visible, and of this the myth gives a detailed description. Plato conceives of the heavens as a hollow sphere which revolves with a motion of its own, and of which the outermost portion is that in which the fixed stars are. Within it are seven other hollow spheres containing the orbits of the sun, the moon, and the five planets which were then known. These have various revolutions of their own, in the opposite direction to the uniform motion of the ovpav6s as a whole. All these eight spheres revolve round the earth,' which is the centre of the whole. The whole is bound round with a band of bright light, which is supposed to mean the Milky Way. This astronomical conception  is combined by Plato with the old notions of Necessity  moving the world, and of destiny being spun by the  Fates; and the image which results from this com- bination is, of course, not clear or consistent in all its  details.  The whole hollow sphere, with the seven  separate spheres with separate motions of their own  fitted in it, forms the whorl […] of the spindle  […] of Necessity. It is fastened by the Milky  Way and other bands to the hook […] of the  spindle.  The shaft […] of the spindle passes  right through the whole of the eight spheres ; and,  around the point where it enters them, the lips of the  spheres are seen as a continuous surface of eight con- centric rings, of which the colours and the relative widths  are described in accordance with the colours and the  relative distances from the earth ascribed to the heavenly  bodies which move with them. The spindle rests on the  knees of Necessity, and the whole mechanism is turned  by the Fates-Clotho, Lachesis, whose name signifies  chance, and Atropos, whose name signifies the inevitable.  The shaft and the hook of the spindle are of adamant,  that is to say they are imperishable and unchanging;  but the whorl, the system of spheres, that is to say the  whole visible universe, is partly of adamant, partly of  other substances, which means that the universe partly  exhibits uniform and eternal law and partly irregularity  and change.  
Plato further introduces into the image the Pythagorean idea that in some way the motions of the heavenly  bodies make up a musical harmony.  It arose from the  attempt to find a law regulating the various distances  of these bodies from the earth ; some Pythagoreans  imagined that a relation could be established between  these distances and the intervals between the notes of the  scale.  This is the origin of the idea of the 'music of the  spheres.'  In Plato's picture a Siren sits upon each of  the rings formed by the spheres, and is carried round  with it.  Each Siren sings a single note, and the eight  notes make a scale […].  The three Fates sing to  the music of the spheres: Lachesis of the past, Clotho of  the present, Atropos of the future.  The choice which the souls make of life is the all- important crisis in their history.  Plato in his description  of their choosing has expressed his opinion  upon Free Will and Necessity.  In every human life  there is an element of necessity or of what (so far as the  man himself is concerned) may be called chance; there  is also an element of choice.  This idea is applied here  to the causes which determine the conditions under which  a man is born.  In the first place, the order in which the  souls choose is determined for them by lot.  In the  second place, however late in the order a soul gets its  choice, it still gets a choice, and, as is proclaimed to them  in the name of the Fates, even the soul that chooses last  will have a life worth living, if it chooses wisely, and  thereafter lives intently […].  In the third place,  when the soul has made its choice of life it has chosen  its destiny […] ; that is to say, practically, a man's own will is his destiny, in the sense that he can never  reverse what he has once willed to do, nor its consequences.  Circumstances, the fact of choice, and the  irrevocableness of choice are the three great elements in  life.  At this choosing of lives, many souls of animals become  men, and vice versa. As has been seen  a]ready, Plato was quite serious in the idea of continuity  between animal and human life.  There is no doubt, too,  that he was perfectly serious in the belief-which is  expressed in the whole myth of Er, and particularly  where the soul's choice of a new life is represented  as the outcome of the way in which it has previously  lived-that man's conduct in one phase of existence  has a determining effect on his destiny in some future  phase. “
(Richard Lewis Nettleship, Lectures on the Republic of Plato, 1901)

E2.2.D.3.3. The Emergent Model: Freedom from Determinism  F freedom is not a metaphysical "ghost" but a complex, higher-level property.

E2.2.D.3.3.a. BECAUSE HE IS A BEGINNING, MAN CAN BEGIN; TO BE HUMAN AND TO BE FREE ARE ONE AND THE SAME. GOD CREATED MAN IN ORDER TO INTRODUCE INTO THE WORLD THE FACULTY OF BEGINNING: FREEDOM.
In the City of God Augustine, as is only natural, speaks more from the background of specifically Roman experiences than in any of his other writings, and freedom is conceived there not as an inner human disposition but as a character of human existence in the world. Man does not possess freedom so much as he, or better his coming into the world, is equated with the appearance of freedom in the universe; man is free because he is a beginning and was so created after the universe had already come into existence: [Initium] ut esset, creatus est homo, ante quem nemo fuit. In the birth of each man this initial beginning is reaffirmed, because in each instance something new comes into an already existing world which will continue to exist after each individual’s death. Because he is a beginning, man can begin; to be human and to be free are one and the same. God created man in order to introduce into the world the faculty of beginning: freedom. [...]

No doubt human life, placed on the earth, is surrounded by automatic processes—by the natural processes of the earth, which, in turn, are surrounded by cosmic processes, and we ourselves are driven by similar forces insofar as we too are a part of organic nature. Our political life, moreover, despite its being the realm of action, also takes place in the midst of processes which we call historical and which tend to become as automatic as natural or cosmic processes, although they were started by men. The truth is that automatism is inherent in all processes, no matter what their origin may be—which is why no single act, and no single event, can ever, once and for all, deliver and save a man, or a nation, or mankind. It is in the nature of the automatic processes to which man is subject, but within and against which he can assert himself through action, that they can only spell ruin to human life. Once man-made, historical processes have become automatic, they are no less ruinous than the natural life process that drives our organism and which in its own terms, that is, biologically, leads from being to non-being, from birth to death. The historical sciences know only too well such cases of petrified and hopelessly declining civilizations where doom seems foreordained, like a biological necessity, and since such historical processes of stagnation can last and creep on for centuries, they even occupy by far the largest space in recorded history; the periods of being free have always been relatively short in the history of mankind.  [...]

Objectively, that is, seen from the outside and without taking into account that man is a beginning and a beginner, the chances that tomorrow will be like yesterday are always overwhelming. Not quite so overwhelming, to be sure, but very nearly so as the chances were that no earth would ever rise out of cosmic occurrences, that no life would develop out of inorganic processes, and that no man would emerge out of the evolution of animal life. The decisive difference between the “infinite improbabilities” on which the reality of our earthly life rests and the miraculous character inherent in those events which establish historical reality is that, in the realm of human affairs, we know the author of the “miracles.” It is men who perform them—men who because they have received the twofold gift of freedom and action can establish a reality of their own."
(Hannah Arendt, Between Past and Future, 1961)

E2.2.D.3.3.b. DAMASIO ARGUES THAT OUR "FREE" CULTURAL AND ETHICAL STRATEGIES ARE NOT SEPARATE FROM OUR BIOLOGY, BUT ARE "INTERWOVEN WITH" AND BUILT UPON THE FOUNDATION OF OUR INNATE, SURVIVAL-ORIENTED BRAIN CIRCUITS. FREEDOM EMERGES FROM OUR DETERMINED NATURE, NOT IN OPPOSITION TO IT. 
“How much drives and instincts alone can ensure an organism's survival seems to depend on the complexity of the environment and the complexity of the organism in question. Among animals, from insects to mammals, there are unequivocal examples of successful coping with particular forms of environment on the basis of innate strategies, and no doubt those strategies often include complex aspects of social cognition and behavior. I never cease to marvel at the intricate social organization of our distant monkey cousins, or at the elaborate social observances of so many birds. When we consider our own species, however, and the far more varied and largely unpredictable environments in which we have thrived, it is apparent that we must rely on highly evolved genetically based biological mechanisms, as well as on suprainstinctual survival strategies that have developed in society, are transmitted by culture, and require, for their application, consciousness, reasoned deliberation, and willpower. This is why human hunger, desire, and explosive anger do not proceed unchecked toward feeding frenzy, sexual assault, and murder, at least not always, assuming that a healthy human organ sm has developed in a society in which the suprainstinctual survival strategies are actively transmitted and respected. 
Western and Eastern thinkers, religious and not, have been aware of this for millennia; closer to us, the topic preoccupied both Des­cartes and Freud, to name but two. The control of animal inclination by thought, reason, and the will was what made us human, according to Descartes' Passions of the Soul.6 I agree with his formulation, except that where he specified a control achieved by a nonphysical agent I envision a biological operation structured within the human organism and not one bit less complex, admirable, or sublime. The creation of a superego which would accommodate instincts to social dictates was Freud's formulation, in Civilization and Its Discontents, which was stripped of Cartesian dualism but was nowhere explicit in neural terms.7 A task that faces neuroscientists today is to consider the neurobiology supporting adaptive supraregulations, by which I mean the study and understanding of the brain structures required to know about those regulations. I am not attempting to reduce social phenomena to biological phenomena, but rather to discuss the powerful connection between them. It should be clear that although culture and civilization arise from the behavior of biolog­ical individuals, the behavior was generated in collectives of individ­uals interacting in specific environments. Culture and civilization could not have arisen from single individuals and thus cannot be reduced to biological mechanisms and, even less, can they be re­duced to a subset of genetic specifications. Their comprehension demands not just general biology and neurobiology but the meth­odologies of the social sciences as well. 
In human societies there are social conventions and ethical rules over and above those that biology already provides. Those additional layers of control shape instinctual behavior so that it can be adapted flexibly to a complex and rapidly changing environment and ensure survival for the individual and for others (especially if they belong to the same species) in circumstances in which a preset response from the natural repertoire would be immediately or eventually counter­productive. The perils preempted by such conventions and rules may be immediate and direct (p.hysical or mental harm), or remote and indirect (future loss, embarrassment). Although such conventions and rules need be transmitted only through education and socializa­tion, from generation to generation, I suspect that the neural repre­sentations of the wisdom they embody, and of the means to implement that wisdom, are inextricably linked to the neural repre­sentation of innate regulatory biological processes. I see a "trail" connecting the brain that represents one, to the brain that repre­sents the other. Naturally, that trail is made up of connections among neurons. 
For most ethical rules and social conventions, regardless of how elevated their goal, I believe one can envision a meaningful link to simpler goals and to drives and instincts. Why should this be so? Because the consequences of achieving or not achieving a rarefied social goal contribute (or are perceived as contributing), albeit indi­rectly, to survival and to the quality of that survival. 
Does this mean that love, generosity, kindness, compassion, hon­esty, and other commendable human characteristics are nothing but the result of conscious but selfish, survival-oriented neurobiological regulation? Does this deny the possibility of altruism and negate free will? Does this mean that there is no true love, no sincere friendship, no genuine compassion? That is definitely not the case. Love is true, friendship sincere, and compassion genuine, ifI do not lie about how I feel, if I really feel loving, friendly, and compassionate. Perhaps I would be more eligible for praise if I arrived at such sentiments by means of pure intellectual effort and willpower, but what if I have not, what if my current nature helps me get there faster, and be nice and honest without even trying? The truth of the feeling (which concerns how what I do and say matches what I have in mind), the magnitude of the feeling, and the beauty of the feeling, are not endangered by realizing that survival, brain, and proper education have a lot to do with the reasons why we experience such feelings. The same applies to a considerable extent to altruism and free will. Realizing that there are biological mechanisms behind the most sublime human behavior does not imply a simplistic reduction to the nuts and bolts of neurobiology. In any case, the partial explanation of complexity by something less complex does not signify debasement. 
The picture I am drawing for humans is that of an organism that comes to life designed with automatic survival mechanisms, and to which education and acculturation add a set of socially permissible and desirable decision-making strategies that, in turn, enhance sur­vival, remarkably improve the quality of that survival, and serve as the basis for constructing a person. At birth, the human brain comes to development endowed with drives and instincts that include not just a physiological kit to regulate metabolism but, in addition, basic devices to cope with social cognition and behavior. It emerges from child development with additional layers of survival strategy. The neurophysiological base of those added strategies is interwoven with that of the instinctual repertoire, and not only modifies its use but extends its reach. The neural mechanisms supporting the suprain­stinctual repertoire may be similar in their overall formal design to those governing biological drives, and may be constrained by them. Yet they require the intervention of society to become whatever they become, and thus are related as much to a given culture as to general neurobiology. Moreover, out of that dual constraint, suprainstinc­tual survival strategies generate something probably unique to hu­mans: a moral point of view that, on occasion, can transcend the interests of the immediate group and even the species.”
(Antonio Damasio, Descartes Error, 1994)

E2.2.D.3.p.i. DAMASIO OFFERS A UNIQUE AND POWERFUL MODEL FOR COMPATIBILISM GROUNDED IN NEUROSCIENCE. Freedom is not a mysterious force that violates physics, but an emergent capacity of humans’ complex and interwoven innate biological systems with our cultural conditioning.
 “Before you apply any kind of cost-benefit analysis to [a] premises, and before you reason toward the solution of the problem, something quite important happens: When the bad outcome connected with a given response option comes into mind, however fleetingly, you experience an unpleasant gut feeling. Because the feeling is about the body, I gave the phenomenon the technical term somatic state ("soma" is Greek for body); and because it "marks" an image, I called it a marker. Note again that I use somatic in the most general sense (that which pertains to the body) and I include both visceral and non visceral sensation when I refer to somatic markers. 
What does the somatic marker achieve? It forces attention on the negative outcome to which a given action may lead, and functions as an automated alarm signal which says: Beware of danger ahead if you choose the option which leads to this outcome. The signal may lead you to reject, immediately, the negative course of action and thus make you choose among other alternatives. The automated signal protects you against future losses, without further ado, and then allows you to choose from among fewer alternatives. There is still room for using a cost-benefit analysis and proper deductive compe­tence, but only after the automated step drastically reduces the number of options. Somatic markers may not be sufficient for nor­mal human decision-making since a subsequent process of reason­ing and final selection will still take place in many though not all instances. Somatic markers probably increase the accuracy and efficiency of the decision process. […]
What is the origin of somatic markers, in neural terms? How have we come to possess such helpful devices? Were we born with them? If not, how did they arise? 
As we saw in the previous chapter, we were born with the neural machinery required to generate somatic states in response to cer­tain classes of stimuli, the machinery of primary emotions. Such machinery is inherently biased to process signals concerning per­sonal and social behavior, and it incorporates at the outset disposi­tions to pair a large number of social situations with adaptive somatic responses. Certain findings in normal humans would fit this view, and so would the evidence for complex patterns of social cognition encountered in other mammals and in birds. Nonetheless, most somatic markers we use for rational decision-making probably were created in our brains during the process of education and socializa­tion, by connecting specific classes of stimuli with specific classes of somatic state. In other words, they are based on the process of secondary emotions. 
The buildup of adaptive somatic markers requires that both brain and culture be normal. When either brain or culture is defective, at the outset, somatic markers are unlikely to be adaptive. An example of the former can be found at least in some patients affected by a condition known as developmental sociopathy or psychopathy.
Developmental sociopaths or psychopaths are well known to all of us from the daily news. They steal, they rape, they kill, they lie. They are often smart. The threshold at which their emotions kick in, when they do, is so high that they appear unflappable, and are, from their self reports, unfeeling and uncaring. They are the very picture of the cool head we were told to keep in order to do the right thing. In cold blood, and to everybody's obvious disadvantage including their own, sociopaths often repeat their crimes. They are in fact yet another example of a pathological state in which a decline in rationality is accompanied by diminution or absence of feeling. It is certainly possible that developmental sociopathy arises from dysfunction within the same overall system which was impaired in Gage, at cortical or subcortical level. But rather than resulting from blunt macroscopic damage occurring in adulthood, however, the impair­ment of developmental sociopaths would come from abnormal circuitry and abnormal chemical signaling and begin early in devel­opment. Understanding the neurobiology of sociopathy might lead to prevention or treatment. It might also help understand the degree to which social factors interact with biological ones to aggravate the condition, or increase its frequency, and even shed light on condi­tions which may be superficially similar and yet be largely deter­mined by sociocultural factors. 
When the neural machinery that specifically supports the buildup and deployment of somatic markers is damaged in adulthood, as it was in Gage, the somatic-marker device no longer functions properly even if it has been normal until then. I use the term "acquired" sociopathy, as qualified shorthand, to describe a part of the behaviors of such patients although my patients and developmental sociopaths are different in several respects, not the least of which is that my patients are rarely violent. 
The effect of a "sick culture" on a normal adult system of reason­ing seems to be less dramatic than the effect of a focal area of brain damage in that same normal adult system. Yet there are counter­examples. In Germany and the Soviet Union during the '930S and '940s, in China during the Cultural Revolution, and in Cambodia during the Pol Pot regime, to mention only the most obvious such cases, a sick culture prevailed upon a presumably normal machinery of reason, with disastrous consequences. I fear that sizable sectors of Western society are gradually becoming other tragic counter­examples. 
Somatic markers are thus acquired by experience, under the con­trol of an internal preference system and under the influence of an external set of circumstances which include not only entities and events with which the organism must interact, but also social con­ventions and ethical rules. 
The neural basis for the internal preference system consists of mostly innate regulatory dispositions, posed to ensure survival of the organism. Achieving survival coincides with the ultimate reduction of unpleasant body states and the attaining of homeostatic ones, i.e., functionally balanced biological states. The internal pref­erence system is inherently biased to avoid pain, seek potential pleasure, and is probably pretuned for achieving these goals in social situations. 
The external set of circumstances encompasses the entities, phys­ical environment, and events relative to which individuals must act; possible options for action; possible future outcomes for those ac­tions; and the punishment or reward that accompanies a certain option, both immediately and in deferred time, as outcomes of the opted action unfold. Early in development, punishment and reward are delivered not only by the entities themselves, but by parents and other elders and peers, who usually embody the social conventions and ethics of the culture to which the organism belongs. The interac­tion between an internal preference system and sets of external circumstances extends the repertory of stimuli that will become automatically marked. 
The critical, formative set of stimuli to somatic pairings is, no doubt, acquired in childhood and adolescence. But the accrual of somatically marked stimuli ceases only when life ceases, and thus it is appropriate to describe that accrual as a process of continuous learning.”
(Antonio Damasio, Descartes Error, 1994)

E2.2.D.3.p.ii. An Aside on Altruism
At this stage we may inquire whether the preceding account ap­plies to most if not all decisions which are commonly classified as altruistic, such as the sacrifices that parents make for children, or that just plain good individuals make for other individuals, or that good citizens once made for king and state, and that the remaining heroes of our day still make. In addition to the obvious good that altruists bring to others, they may heap good upon themselves in the form of self-esteem, social recognition, public honor and affection, prestige, and perhaps even money. The prospect of any of those rewards can be accompanied by exaltation (whose neural basis I see as a positive somatic marker), and no doubt can bring even more palpable ecstasy when the prospect becomes reality. Altruistic behav­iors benefit their practitioners in yet another way that is relevant here: they save altruists from the future pain and suffering that would have been caused by loss or shame upon not behaving altruistically. It is not only that the idea of risking your life to save your child makes you feel good, but that the idea of not saving your child and losing her. makes you feel far worse than the immediate risk does. In other words, the evaluation takes place between immediate pain and future reward, and between immediate pain and even worse future pain. (A some­what comparable example is the acceptance of the risks of combat in war. In the past, the social framework in which "moral" wars were waged included a positive payoff for the survivors of combat, and shame and disgrace for those who declined to enter it.) 
Does this mean that there is no true altruism? Is this too cynical a view of the human spirit? I do not think so. First, the truth of altruism, or any equivalent behavior, has to do with the relation between what we internally believe, feel, or intend, and what we externally declare to believe, feel, or intend. Truth does not pertain to the physiological causes that make us believe, feel, or intend in a particular way. Beliefs, feelings, and intentions are indeed the result of a number of factors rooted in our organisms and in the culture in which we have been immersed, even if such factors may be remote and we may not be aware of them. If there are neurophysiological and educational reasons making it likely for some people to be honest and generous, so be it. It does not follow that their honesty and sacrifices are any less meritorious. Moreover, understanding neurobiological mechanisms behind some aspects of cognition and behavior does not diminish the value, beauty, or dignity of that cognition or behavior. 
Second, although biology and culture often determine our reason­ing, directly or indirectly, and may seem to limit the exercise of individual freedom, we must recognize that humans do have some room for such freedom, for willing and performing actions that may go against the apparent grain of biology and culture. Some sublime human achievements come from rejecting what biology or culture propels individuals to do. Such achievements are the affir­mation of a new level of being in which one can invent new artifacts and forge more just ways of existing. Under certain circumstances, however, freedom from biological and cultural constraints can also be a hallmark of madness and can nourish the ideas and acts of the insane.”
(Antonio Damasio, Descartes Error, 1994)

E2.2.D.3.p.iii. BY UNDERSTANDING THE DETERMINISTIC, BIOLOGICAL MACHINERY OF OUR FEELINGS, WE CAN ENHANCE THEIR POSITIVE EFFECTS AND REDUCE THEIR POTENTIAL HARM.
“A Passion for Reasoning
AT THE BEGINNING of this book I suggested that feelings are a powerful influence on reason, that the brain systems required by the former are enmeshed in those needed by the latter, and that such specific systems are interwoven with those which regulate the body. 
The facts I have presented generally support these hypotheses, but these are hypotheses nonetheless, offered in the hope that they may attract further investigation and be subject to revision as new findings appear. Feelings do seem to depend on a dedicated multi­component system that is indissociable from biological regulation. Reason does seem to depend on specific brain systems, some of which happen to process feelings. Thus there may be a connecting trail, in anatomical and functional terms, from reason to feelings to body. It is as if we are possessed by a passion for reason, a drive that originates in the brain core, permeates other levels of the nervous system, and emerges as either feelings or nonconscious biases to guide decision making. Reason, from the practical to the theoretical, is probably constructed on this inherent drive by a process which resembles the mastering of a skill or craft. Remove the drive, and you will not acquire the mastery. But having the drive does not automat­ically make you a master. 
Should these hypotheses be supported, are there sociocultural implications to the notion that reason is nowhere pure? I believe that there are, and that they are by and large positive. 
Knowing about the relevance of feelings in the processes of reason does not suggest that reason is less important than feelings, that it should take a backseat to them or that it should be less cultivated. On the contrary, taking stock of the pervasive role of feelings may give us a chance of enhancing their positive effects and reducing their potential harm. Specifically, without diminishing the orienting value of normal feelings, one would want to protect reason from the weakness that abnormal feelings or the manipulation of normal feelings can introduce in the process of planning and deciding. 
I do not believe that knowledge about feelings should make us less inclined to empirical verification. I only see that greater knowledge about the physiology of emotion and feeling should make us more aware of the pitfalls of scientific observation. The formulation I presented should not diminish our determination to control external circumstances to the advantage of individuals and society, or our resolve to develop, invent, or perfect the cultural instruments with which we can make the world better: ethics, law, art, science, tech­nology. In other words, nothing in my formulation urges acceptance of things as they are. I must emphasize this point, since the mention of feelings often conjures up an image of self-oriented concern, of disregard for the world around, and of tolerance for relaxed stan­dards of intellectual performance. That is, in effect, the very op­posite of my view, and one less worry for those who, like the molecular .biologist Gunther Stent, have been concerned, justly, that the overvaluing of feelings might result in less determination to uphold the Faustian contract that has brought progress to humanity.' 
What worries me is the acceptance of the importance of feelings without any effort to understand their complex biological and so­ciocultural machinery. The best example of this attitude can be found in the attempt to explain bruised feelings or irrational behav­ior by appealing to surface social causes or the action of neu­rotransmitters, two explanations that pervade the social discourse as presented in the visual and printed media; and in the attempt to correct personal and social problems with medical and nonmedical drugs. It is precisely this lack of understanding of the nature of feelings and reason (one of the hallmarks of the "culture of com­plaint"2) that is cause for alarm. 
The idea of the human organism outlined in this book, and the relation between feelings and reason that emerges from the findings discussed here, do suggest, however, that the strengthening of ra­tionality probably requires that greater consideration be given to the vulnerability of the world within. 
On a practical note, the role outlined for feelings in the making of rationality has implications for some issues currently facing our society, education and violence among them. This is not the place to do justice to these issues but let me comment that educational systems might benefit from emphasizing unequivocal connections between current feelings and predicted future outcomes, and that children's overexposure to violence, in real life, newscasts, or through audiovisual fiction, downgrades the value of emotions and feelings in the acquisition and deployment of adaptive social behav­ior. The fact that so much vicarious violence is presented without a moral framework only compounds its desensitizing action.”
(Antonio Damasio, Descartes Error, 1994)

E2.2.D.3.3.c. JAMES CLEAR ARGUES THAT HABITS ARE NOT RESTRICTIONS BUT THE VERY FOUNDATION OF FREEDOM, AS THEY ARE AUTOMATED SOLUTIONS THAT REDUCE COGNITIVE LOAD AND LIBERATE THE CONSCIOUS MIND TO FOCUS ON HIGHER-LEVEL THINKING AND CREATIVITY.
“WHY YOUR BRAIN BUILDS HABITS
A habit is a behavior that has been repeated enough times to become automatic.
The process of habit formation begins with trial and error. Whenever you
encounter a new situation in life, your brain has to make a decision. How do I
respond to this? The first time you come across a problem, you’re not sure how
to solve it. Like Thorndike’s cat, you’re just trying things out to see what works.
Neurological activity in the brain is high during this period. You are carefully
analyzing the situation and making conscious decisions about how to act. You’re
taking in tons of new information and trying to make sense of it all. The brain is
busy learning the most effective course of action.
Occasionally, like a cat pressing on a lever, you stumble across a solution.
You’re feeling anxious, and you discover that going for a run calms you down.
You’re mentally exhausted from a long day of work, and you learn that playing
video games relaxes you. You’re exploring, exploring, exploring, and then—
BAM—a reward.
After you stumble upon an unexpected reward, you alter your strategy for next
time. Your brain immediately begins to catalog the events that preceded the
reward. Wait a minute—that felt good. What did I do right before that?
This is the feedback loop behind all human behavior: try, fail, learn, try
differently. With practice, the useless movements fade away and the useful
actions get reinforced. That’s a habit forming.
Whenever you face a problem repeatedly, your brain begins to automate the
process of solving it. Your habits are just a series of automatic solutions that
solve the problems and stresses you face regularly. As behavioral scientist Jason
Hreha writes, “Habits are, simply, reliable solutions to recurring problems in our
environment.”
As habits are created, the level of activity in the brain decreases. You learn to
lock in on the cues that predict success and tune out everything else. When a
similar situation arises in the future, you know exactly what to look for. There is
process of trial and error and creates a mental rule: if this, then that. These
cognitive scripts can be followed automatically whenever the situation is
appropriate. Now, whenever you feel stressed, you get the itch to run. As soon as
you walk in the door from work, you grab the video game controller. A choice
that once required effort is now automatic. A habit has been created.
Habits are mental shortcuts learned from experience. In a sense, a habit is just
a memory of the steps you previously followed to solve a problem in the past.
Whenever the conditions are right, you can draw on this memory and
automatically apply the same solution. The primary reason the brain remembers
the past is to better predict what will work in the future.
Habit formation is incredibly useful because the conscious mind is the
bottleneck of the brain. It can only pay attention to one problem at a time. As a
result, your brain is always working to preserve your conscious attention for
whatever task is most essential. Whenever possible, the conscious mind likes to
pawn off tasks to the nonconscious mind to do automatically. This is precisely
what happens when a habit is formed. Habits reduce cognitive load and free up
mental capacity, so you can allocate your attention to other tasks.
Despite their efficiency, some people still wonder about the benefits of habits.
The argument goes like this: “Will habits make my life dull? I don’t want to
pigeonhole myself into a lifestyle I don’t enjoy. Doesn’t so much routine take
away the vibrancy and spontaneity of life?” Hardly. Such questions set up a false
dichotomy. They make you think that you have to choose between building
habits and attaining freedom. In reality, the two complement each other.
Habits do not restrict freedom. They create it. In fact, the people who don’t
have their habits handled are often the ones with the least amount of freedom.
Without good financial habits, you will always be struggling for the next dollar.
Without good health habits, you will always seem to be short on energy. Without
good learning habits, you will always feel like you’re behind the curve. If you’re
always being forced to make decisions about simple tasks—when should I work
out, where do I go to write, when do I pay the bills—then you have less time for
freedom. It’s only by making the fundamentals of life easier that you can create
the mental space needed for free thinking and creativity.
Conversely, when you have your habits dialed in and the basics of life are
handled and done, your mind is free to focus on new challenges and master the
next set of problems. Building habits in the present allows you to do more of
what you want in the future.”
(James Clear, Atomic habits, 2018)

E2.2.D.3.4. Freedom as Integration and "Style":  freedom is not about what happens (the determined content) but how we live it (our chosen style).

E2.2.D.3.4.a. "MORNINGS AT BLACKWATER

For years, every morning, I drank 
from Blackwater Pond. 
It was flavored with oak leaves and also, no doubt, the feet of ducks.

And always it assuaged me 
from the dry bowl of the very far past.

What I want to say is 
that the past is the past, 
and the present is what your life is, 
and you are capable 
of choosing what that will be, 
darling citizen.

So come to the pond, 
or the river of your imagination, 
or the harbor of your longing,

and put your lips to the world. 
And live 
your life."
(Mary Oliver, Red bird, 2008)

E2.2.D.3.4.b. AS DETERMINED BEINGS WE ARE FREE, AND AS FREE BEINGS WE ARE DETERMINED.
"To some extent it is certainly a manifestation of this anti-intellectualism that there has recently been a marked increase of Western interest in the philosophies and religions of Asia. Unlike Christianity-for reasons which we shall explain these are ways of life which seem, above all, to offer release from conflict and anxiety. Their goal is a state of inner feeling in which oppositions have become mutually co-operative instead of mutually exclusive, in which there is no longer any conflict between the individual man and nature, or between intelligence and instinct. Their view of the world is unitary (or, to be quite technical, "nondualistic"), and in such a world there is no absolute overwhelming urgency to be right rather than wrong, or to live rather than die. It is, however, quite difficult for us to understand this point of view, for the very reason that we habitually regard opposites as mutually exclusive, like God and the Devil. Because of this, our idea of unity and our way of solving conflicts is simply to eliminate one of the two parties. In other words, we have difficulty in seeing the relativity or mutual interdependence of contraries. For this reason our revolts against the excesses of intelligence are always in danger of selling out to instinct.

But this is the habitual dualist's solution to the problem of dualism: to solve the dilemma by chopping off one of the horns. [...]

In the same way it is only apparently contradictory to describe a sensation in which it seems that whatever I do freely and intelligently is at the same time completely determined, and vice versa. It seems that absolutely everything both inside and outside me is happening by itself, yet at the same time that I myself am doing all of it, that my separate individuality is simply a function, something being done by everything which is not me, yet at the same time everything which is not me is a function of my separate individuality. Ordinarily we can see the truth of these seemingly paradoxical feelings if we take them separately, if we look at one without looking simultaneously at the other. This is why, for example, the arguments for free will and determinism are equally cogent though seemingly contradictory. The same goes for almost all the great debates of Western philosophy - the realists against the nominalists, the idealists against the materialists, and so on. We get into conflicts and debates about these problems because our language and our way of thinking are somewhat clumsy in their grasp of relationships. In other words, because it is much easier for us to see opposites as mutually exclusive than as mutually interdependent.

The sensation I am trying to describe is the experience of things and events in a relationship, as distinct from the partial experience of things and events in separation. I have sometimes said that if we could translate the modern Western theory of relativity into experience, we should have what the Chinese and the Indians call the Absolute - as when they say that everything which happens is the Tao, or that all things are of one "suchness." What they mean is that all things are in relation, and thus that - considered simply by itself - no thing, no event, has any reality. There seem to be relatively few people, even in the civilizations of Asia, for whom relationship is an actual sensation, over and above a mere idea. The anxiety which comes about through the conflict of intelligence with instinct, of man as the conscious will with nature both in and around him, does not seem to me to have any solution unless we can actually feel relationship, unless it is a matter of clear sensation that as determined beings we are free, and that as free beings we are determined. For if we can feel this way, it will not appear that the use of will and intelligence is a conflict with our natural environment and endowment."
(Alan Watts, This is it, 1958)

E2.2.D.3.d. i. WHY, THEN, DO WE NOT FEEL RELATIONSHIP?  IT IS BECAUSE WE LOOK AT THINGS SEPARATELY INSTEAD OF SIMULTANEOUSLY.
"Why is the mutual interdependence between ourselves and the external world not the most obvious and dominant fact of consciousness? Why do we not see that the world we try to control, our whole inner and outer natural environment, is precisely that which gives us the power to control anything? It is because we look at things separately instead of simultaneously. When we are busy trying to control or change our circumstances, we ignore and are unconscious of the dependence of our consciousness and energy upon the outer world. When, on the other hand, we are oppressed by circumstances and feel controlled by the outer world, we forget that our very own consciousness is bringing that world into being. [...]

"What is troubling us," said Wittgenstein, "is the tendency to believe that the mind is like a little man within."

Now if we examine the records of mystical experience, or of what I am now calling the experience of relationship, we shall find that, time and time again, it is connected with "spiritual poverty” - that is to say, with giving up the ownership of everything, including oneself or one's consciousness. It is the total abandonment of proprietorship on the external world of nature and the internal world of the human organism. This does not come about through the virtue of the will, through one's own strength, which in any case is not one's own. It comes about from the insight that there is no proprietor, no inner controller. This becomes evident as soon as the consciousness which has felt itself to be the inner controller starts to examine itself, and finds out that it does not give itself the power of control. Its push is nature's pull; it is a loop in an endless knot, where a pull from the right is a push from the left.

When it thus becomes clear that I own nothing, not even what I have called myself, it is as if, to use St. Paul's words, I had nothing but possessed all things. When I can no more identify myself with that little man inside, there is nothing left to identify with - except everything! There is no longer the slightest contradiction between feeling like a leaf on a stream and throwing one's whole energy into responsible action [...].

All that I have been describing is a subjective feeling. It gives no specific direction as to what is or is not a proper use of intelligence in varying the course of nature - which must always be a matter of opinion and of trial and error. What it does give is what I feel to be a correct apprehension of the continuum, of the context, in which we are working, and this seems to me to be prior to, basic to, the problem of what exactly is to be done. Much as we discuss the latter question, is it really sensible to do so until we are more aware of the context in which action is to be taken? That context is our relationship to the whole so-called objective world of n ture - and relationship as something concrete, as more than an abstract and theoretical positioning of billiard balls, is practically screened out of consciousness by our present use of intelligence."
(Alan Watts, This is it, 1958)

E2.2.D.3.4.c. "PROPENSITY (VS. CAUSALITY) [...]
Entering into a logic of propensity overturns the grand European staging of choice and freedom, sublime though it may be. In terms of ethics, the Greek question is that of the cause of my action.

The West has been so attached to freedom and has made it its ideal because it is concerned with each individual's capacity to be their own cause, independent of any external determination. In other words, to find their cause in "themselves," to be causa sui, as Spinoza says in the first sentence of Ethics. However, when we think in terms of continuous processes rather than isolable, atomizable being or action, the question becomes, "Through what uninterrupted inclination and what makes my relationship with the world unceasing can I be the cause of my own actions?" In parallel with the Chinese concept of tian-xing and ren-xing, the question becomes: Through what uninterrupted inclination and incessant relationship of inter-incitement with the world (xiang-gan) am I influencing the value of my behavior, elevating or debasing it? This propensity is not deterministic, however. It is the flip side of our freedom, which does not change anything. The part played by choice and initiative is diluted during this process to the point of being imperceptibly selective. This "choice" is merely the manifestation of where the "balance" ultimately lies and shifts from the realm of the result. Thus, the question becomes, "How can I promote and qualify this upstream behavior from which the morality of my conduct will then flow by propensity? That is to say, how can I develop the slightest “seed” of morality discovered within myself (such as my sudden reaction of “unbearable” when faced with the misfortune of others, in Mencius) and ‘cultivate’ this inclination towards good, like “water flows downhill,” by promoting its conditioning? For when finally the whole of one's conduct is nothing more than the expression of this moral propensity, virtue becoming spontaneous, no longer requiring constraint or effort (Zhong yong, § 20), one has attained “wisdom.” [...]"
(François Jullien, Chineses Thoughts vs. Philosophy, 2015)

E2.2.D.3.e.i. "AVAILABILITY (VS FREEDOM) [...]
Should we not explore this distinction further and consider that Europe's difficulty in conceiving of availability can only be understood in relation to the notion of freedom—a rival concept—which has prevailed in Europe and blocked its development? Also, when many contemporary Chinese intellectuals call for the concept of freedom (zizai), translated from the West, in relation to Chinese thought prior to Westernization, particularly in relation to Zhuangzi, is this not a terminological dispute, and is the issue one of conceptual logic? I would push this opposition to the point of mutual exclusion. Europe misunderstood this concept of availability because it developed the concept of freedom. The opposite is true for China. Are the two concepts antagonistic to the point of contradiction rather than synonymous, as is commonly believed? Freedom demands a break from the current situation, promoting the self to the status of "Subject" and assuming initiative. This break requires the power of negation, which the Subject claims, and it brings about a departure from the imposed conditions. In other words, freedom promotes this ideal through a break—not an "opening"—with the world order.
Rather, we must distinguish between what the Greeks called "freedom." On the one hand, there is the possibility of doing what I want, as I please, and without being prevented from doing so (what they called exousia). I readily acknowledge that this is commonly found in various cultures, including China, and that Chinese thought has particularly developed and enriched this concept (xiao yao you, the first word of Zhuangzi, meaning "evolve" at ease and without hindrance). On the other hand, there is eleutheria, which, in Homer, is first and foremost the condition of the free man as opposed to the slave, who loses his "day of freedom" when defeated. The "Greeks" forged this experience first on a political level, with small cities resisting a vast empire at the divide between two continents and refusing to submit to the power of the Great King (the Persian Wars). Then, they established political institutions that were detached from natural family ties (democracy versus inherited gentile power). Finally, when the city fell apart, they achieved internal emancipation through domination over their passions and, first and foremost, their "representations," phantasiai (which flourished with Stoicism). Thus, freedom is the product of an invention, rather than a "discovery," which is highly singular. However, its biases are forgotten in Europe because they have been so thoroughly assimilated. Classical thought was able to posit the idea of basing itself on the laws of freedom as "universal." These laws are understood as autonomy and are of a different order from natural laws—no longer physical, but metaphysical—and are established as absolute.
As everyone knows, the opposite of freedom is servitude. However, the opposite would be availability and the unfolding of a harmonious relationship—not of emancipation, but of integration with the order of things. In Chinese thought, particularly in Zhuangzi, there is also emancipation from the constraints of life in the world. Such "disengagement" makes us more inclined to embrace the natural course of things (ziran) because it is not an ideal constructed by separating ourselves from the world. Rather than detaching from the world to become independent, openness connects us to its development, allowing us to exploit its resources without confronting it. The self conducts itself better by undoing itself as "self" and responding to its immediate, immanent impulses, free from artificial stimuli. Let us take a step back and look at the bigger picture. Unlike the Greeks, China did not come into being in a struggle for civic independence. It conceived of politics as a simple extension of family structures.
This is why China did not conceive of the breaking and disalienation of the subject through freedom, but rather, of a capacity that opens up the position on all sides, keeping all possibilities equal and keeping the subject in a hollow (non-thematic) state. This puts the subject in phase with what comes to it from the world—hence China's original trust in the world."
(François Jullien, Chineses Thoughts vs. Philosophy, 2015)


E2.2.D.3.4.d. “WHAT WE DREAM OF
TURNS TO DUST
What we dream of turns to dust
While dust is more than we can dream.
Time tumbles towards the faceless sea
As we gaze at the waterfall.

We are the marionettes of lust,
As predetermined as we seem;
Yet we are in ourselves as free
As nothing on the brink of all.

As we breathe each bated breath,
And work our unabated will,
And do our evil and our good,
Not always clear on which is which;

And wait unspeakably for death,
With faith or not, for good or ill,
We conquer every land we would,
And rule a kingdom vast and rich.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E2.2.D.3.4.e. "So I am not the one who is the lord of my life; I am one of
the threads to be spun into the calico of life! Well, then, even
though I cannot spin, I can still cut the thread."
(Søren Kierkegaard, Either or, part 1, 1843)

E2.2.D.3.4.f. "THE ONLY FREEDOM THE GODS GRANT US 
     IS THIS: TO SUBMIT
Of our own free will to their sovereignty. 
     We should do just that, 
Since only in the illusion of freedom 
     Does freedom exist. 

It is what the gods, subject 
     To eternal fate, do 
To maintain their calm and unwavering 
     Ancient conviction 
That their life is divine and free. 
     Imitating the gods, 

Who are no freer on Olympus than we are, 
     Let’s build our lives 
Like those who build castles of sand 
     To delight their eyes, 
And the gods will know how to thank us 
     For being so like them."
(Fernando Pessoa, 30 July 1914)

“DREAMED PLEASURE IS PLEASURE, ALBEIT IN A DREAM. 
What we suppose of ourselves we become, 
     If with a focused mind 
     We persist in believing it. 
So do not censure my way of thinking 
About things, beings, and fate.
     For myself I create as much
     As I create for myself.
Outside me, indifferent to what I think, 
Fate is fulﬁlled. But I fulﬁll myself
     Within the small ambit
     Of what is given to me as mine.”
(Fernando Pessoa, 30 January 1927)

E2.2.D.3.4.g. Freedom makes possible a creative perception of new orders of necessity. [...] Doing what you like is seldom freedom, because what you like is determined by what you think and that is often a pattern which is fixed.

E2.2.D.3.l.i. Lucia Nogeira, Full stop, 1993
Luis Camnitzer, Window, 2001–2002, 2010
 Nazareno Rodrigues_Um prato cheio de certeza
"THE IMPULSE OF NECESSITY [...]
The question is what to do if there is a clash of two absolute necessities. The first thing that happens is that we get this emotional charge and we can build up powerful feelings of anger, hate, frustration, as I described before. As long as that absolute necessity remains, nothing can change it, because in a way each person says that they have a valid reason to stick to what they've got, and they have a valid reason to hate the other person for getting in the way of what is absolutely necessary [...]
So in the dialogue we are expecting the notions of absolute necessity to come up, to clash with each other. [...]
At a certain moment we may have the insight that each one of us is doing the same thing — sticking to the absolute necessity of his idea — and that nothing can happen if we do that. If so, it may raise the question “Is it absolutely necessary? So much is being destroyed just because we have this notion of it being absolutely necessary.” Now if you can question it and say, “Is it absolutely necessary?” then at some point it may loosen up. People may say, “Well, maybe [...]
I think this is one of the key points, then — to realize when you come to an assumption, that there is an assumption of absolute necessity which you're getting into, and that's why everything is sticking." [...]
(David Bohm, On dialogue, 1996)

Art:
- Nazareno Rodrigues_Um prato cheio de certeza
- Lucia Nogeira_Full stop, 1993
- Luis Camnitzer_Fenster, 2001–2002, 2010

E2.2.D.3.l.ii. Bernard Frize_Premières épreuve, 1990
"If an artist just puts on his paint in arbitrary places, you would say there wasn't anything to it; if he just follows somebody else's order of necessity, he's mediocre. He's got to create his own order of necessity. Different parts of the form he is making must have an inner necessity or else the thing has not really much of a value. This artistic necessity is creative. The artist has his freedom in this creative act. Therefore, freedom makes possible a creative perception of new orders of necessity. If you can't do that, you're not really free. You may say you're doing whatever you like and that's your impulse, but I think we've seen that your impulses can come from your thoughts. [...]
[D]oing what you like is seldom freedom, because what you like is determined by what you think and that is often a pattern which is fixed. Therefore we have a creative necessity which we discover, you can discover individually or we can do so collectively in the group of how to operate in a group in a new way. Any group which has problems really has got to solve them creatively if they're serious problems. It can't just be by trade-offs and negotiations of the old ways."
(David Bohm, On dialogue, 1996)

"First, I built a tray, a backing plate, and four sides, to a standard French "6 Figure" format, in which I poured more than forty different colours of ordinary paint for painting a kitchen or bathroom; I poured it like pouring milk into a saucepan, without really paying attention. After one and a half months, a "skin" had dried on the surface and if it was first detached from the edges, it was easy to lift it up without ripping it and lay it on a canvas stretcher over a frame of the same size (a canvas painted only once). I had put so much paint in the tray that a lot was left over. I waited for a new skin to appear, again laid it over a canvas, and so on until all of the liquid was gone. I waited over a year for the series to develop." (Bernard Frize)

Art:
- Bernard Frize_Premières épreuve, 1990

E2.2.D.3.4.h. MARATHE MASTERFULLY ARTICULATES THE CORE DISTINCTION, WHICH IS CENTRAL TO MODERN POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY (POPULARIZED BY ISAIAH BERLIN) BETWEEN POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE LIBERTY. (continued 1)
“Marathe made a gesture as if striking his own head. 'Again passing over the important. This appetite to choose death by pleasure if it is available to choose — this appetite of your people unable to choose appetites, this is the death. What you call the death, the collapsing: this will be the formality only. Do you not see? This was the genius of Guillaume DuPlessis, what M. DuPlessis taught the cells, even if F.L.Q. and les Fils did not understand. Much less the Albertans, all crazy inside their head. We of the A.F.R., we understand. This is why this cell of Québecers, that danger of Entertainment so fine it will kill the viewer, if so — the exact way does not matter. The exact time of death and way of death, this no longer matters. Not for your peoples. You wish to protect them? But you can only delay. Not save. The Entertainment exists. The attache and gendarmes of the razzle incident — more proof. It is there, existing. The choice for death of the head by pleasure now exists, and your authorities know, or you would not be now trying to stop the pleasure. Your Sans-Christe Gentle was in this one part correct: "Someone is to blame." 
'That had nothing to do with the Reconfiguration. The Reconfiguration was self-preservation.' 
'That: forget it. There is the villain he saw you needed, all of you, to delay this splitting apart. To keep you together, the hating some other. Gentle is crazy in his head, but in this "fault of someone" he was correct in saying it. Un ennemi commun. But not someone outside you, this enemy. Someone or some people among your own history sometime killed your U.S.A. nation already, Hugh. Someone who had authority, or should have had authority and did not exercise authority. I do not know. But someone sometime let you forget how to choose, and what. Someone let your peoples forget it was the only thing of importance, choosing. So completely forgetting that when I say choose to you you make expressions with your face such as "Herrrrrre we are going," Someone taught that temples are for fanatics only and took away the temples and promised there was no need for temples. And now there is no shelter. And no map for finding the shelter of a temple. And you all stumble about in the dark, this confusion of permissions. The without-end pursuit of a happiness of which someone let you forget the old things which made happiness possible. How is it you say: "Anything is going"'?' 
'And this is why we shudder at what a separate Quebec would be like. Choose what we tell you, neglect your own wish and desires, sacrifice. For Quebec. For the State.' 
Marathe shrugged. 'L'état protecteur.' 
Steeply said 'Does this sound a little familiar, Rémy? The National Socialist Neofascist State of Separate Quebec? You guys are worse than the worst Albertans. Totalitarity. Cuba with snow. Ski immediately to your nearest reeducation camp, for instructions on choosing. Moral eugenics. China. Cambodia. Chad. Unfree.' 
'Unhappy.' 
'There are no choices without personal freedom, Buckeroo. It's not us who are dead inside. These things you find so weak and contemptible in us — these are just the 
hazards of being free.' 
'But what does this U.S.A. expression want to mean, this Buckeroo?' 
Steeply turned to face away into the space they were above. 'And now here we go. Now you will say how free are we if you dangle fatal fruit before us and we cannot help ourselves from temptation. And we say "human" to you. We say that one cannot be human without freedom.' 
Marathe's chair squeaked slightly as his weight shifted. 'Always with you this freedom! For your walled-up country, always to shout "Freedom! Freedom!" as if it were obvious to all people what it wants to mean, this word. But look: it is not so simple as that. Your freedom is the freedom-from: no one tells your precious individual U.S.A. selves what they must do. It is this meaning only, this freedom from constraint and forced duress.' Marathe over Steeply's shoulder suddenly could realize why the skies above the cor-uscating city were themselves erased of stars: it was the fumes from the exhaust's wastes of the moving autos' pretty lights that rose and hid stars from the city and made the city Tucson's lume nacreous in the dome's blankness of it. 'But what of the freedom-to? Not just free-from. Not all compulsion comes from without. You pretend you do not see this. What of freedom-to. How for the person to freely choose? How to choose any but a child's greedy choices if there is no loving-filled father to guide, inform, teach the person how to choose? How is there freedom to choose if one does not learn how to choose?' 
Steeply threw away a cigarette and faced partly Marathe, from the edge: 'Now the story of the rich man.' 
Marathe said 'The rich father who can afford the cost of candy as well as food for his children: but if he cries out "Freedom!" and allows his child to choose only what is sweet, eating only candy, not pea soup and bread and eggs, so his child becomes weak and sick: is the rich man who cries "Freedom!" the good father?' 
Steeply made four small noises. Excitement of some belief made the American's electrolysis's little pimples of rash redden even in the milky dilute light of lume and low stars. The moon over the Mountains of Rincon was on its side, its color the color of a fat man's face. Marathe could believe he could hear some young U.S.A. voices shouting and laughing in a young gathering somewhere out on the desert floor below, but saw no headlights or young persons. Steeply stamped a high heel in frustration. Steeply said: 
'But U.S. citizens aren't presumed by us to be children, to paternalistically do their thinking and choosing for them. Human beings are not children.' 
Marathe pretended again to sniff. 
'Ah, yes, but then you say: No?' Steeply said. 'No? you say, not children? You say: What is the difference, please, if you make a recorded pleasure so entertaining and diverting it is lethal to persons, you find a Copy-Capable copy and copy it and disseminate it for us to choose to see or turn off, and if we cannot choose to resist it, the pleasure, and cannot choose instead to live? You say what your Fortier believes, that we are children, not human adults like the noble Québecers, we are children, bullies but still children inside, and will kill ourselves for you if you put the candy within the arms' reach.'
(David Foster Wallace, Infinite Jest, 1996)

E2.2.D.4. Existentialism: Address the existentialist perspective that emphasizes the radical responsibility of the individual in the face of their freedom and the construction of their essence.

E2.2.D.4.1. The Foundational Principle: "Existence Precedes Essence": 
we are not born with a fixed nature or "essence." We first exist, and only through our choices and actions do we create who we are.

E2.2.D.4.1.a. "EXISTENTIALISM
What does it mean that "existence precedes essence"? It means that man exists first, encounters himself, and arises in the world; only afterwards does he define himself. As existentialism understands him, man is not definable because he is not, at first, anything. He only becomes what he makes himself" (Existentialism Is a Humanism). This is why existentialism is a philosophy of freedom in the metaphysical sense and one of the most radical philosophies ever.
 
This is also its weakness. How can we exist, do anything, choose anything, invent anything, or project ourselves before we are something or someone? Who would say that a newborn baby is nothing? How can we consider being who we are merely a situation to be transcended and not, at least in part, an inescapable determination (since to change is always to change oneself)? "Each person is an absolute choice of oneself," writes Sartre in Being and Nothingness. I have never been able to believe or think this. How can we choose without first existing? What meaning does it have in the present to distinguish what I do or want from what I am? Existence is action and situation; essence and existence are one and the same in the present. Of course, this is not how we experience or imagine it. We feel that we are what the past has "made us," and that we choose what we will do in the future. "Essence is what has been," writes Sartre: "I am what I have been." Existence, on the other hand, is what has not yet been; it is what throws itself toward the future and what will be if I choose or act. "Freedom escapes toward the future. It is defined by the end it projects—that is, by the future it must become" (Being and Nothingness, IV, ch. I, 2, B). But this distinction between essence and existence only makes sense for consciousness, which gives itself a past and a future, not for reality itself, which exists only in the present—and of which consciousness, whether it wants to or not, is a part. A memory exists only in the present. A plan exists only in the present. And how could the present not be what it is or be something else? Sartre, in all consistency, explains that freedom is only possible as nothingness, not as being, which has always seemed to me a sufficient refutation: freedom, in this absolute sense, is only possible on the condition of not being. Existentialism is nothing but an imaginary humanism.
Must we then fall back into an essentialism that would lock us forever into what we are, for which existence would be nothing more than an effect of essence? Not at all. In the present, essence and existence are one and the same. How could they precede each other? Neither existentialism nor essentialism: existence does not precede essence any more than essence precedes existence. They only exist together, in the same world, in the same present, and that is what it means to exist, and therefore also to insist (see the articles “Insistence” and “Insistingialism”). We are not born free; we become free, at least in part. This is no longer a philosophy of freedom, but of liberation. No longer of existence, but of knowledge and action."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E2.2.D.4.1.b. "Atheistic existentialism, of which I am a representative, declares with greater
consistency that if God does not exist there is at least one being whose existence
comes before its essence, a being which exists before it can be defined by any
conception of it. .... What do we mean by saying that existence precedes essence?
We mean that man first of all exists, encounters himself, surges up in the world –
and defines himself afterwards. If man as the existentialist sees him is not
definable, it is because to begin with he is nothing. He will not be anything until
later, and then he will be what he makes of himself.
Thus, there is no human nature, because there is no God to have a
conception of it. Man simply is. Not that he is simply what he conceives himself to
be, but he is what he wills, and as he conceives himself after already existing – as
he wills to be after that leap towards existence. Man is nothing else but that which
he makes of himself. That is the first principle of existentialism."
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Existentialism Is a Humanism, October 29, 1945).


"Indeed, none of our actions, in creating the person we want to be, fails to simultaneously create an image of how we think people should be. [...]
Thus, I am responsible for myself and everyone else. I create a certain image of humanity that I choose. In choosing myself, I choose humanity." [...]
This means that a person who commits to this realization cannot escape the feeling of their total and profound responsibility, knowing that they are not only the person they choose to be, but also a lawmaker who chooses the whole of humanity at the same time. [...]
It is as if the whole of humanity has its eyes fixed on every man and adjusts itself to his actions. Every man must ask himself, "Am I really the one who has the right to act in a way that causes humanity to adjust to my actions?" [...]
We are alone and without excuses. This is what I mean when I say that humans are condemned to be free. Condemned because he did not create himself; yet free because, once thrown into the world, he is responsible for everything he does. [...]
Existentialism therefore believes that man, without any support or help, is condemned at every moment to invent himself. Ponge said in a beautiful article: "Man is the future of man." [...]"
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Existentialism Is a Humanism, October 29, 1945)

E2.2.D.4.1.c. “EXISTENTIALISM IS A HUMANISM”
My purpose here is to offer a defense of existentialism against several reproaches that have been laid against it.
First, it has been reproached as an invitation to people to dwell in quietism of despair. For if every way to a solution is barred, one would have to regard any action in this world as entirely ineffective, and one would arrive finally at a contemplative philosophy. Moreover, since contemplation is a luxury, this would be only another bourgeois philosophy. This is, especially, the reproach made by the Communists.
From another quarter we are reproached for having underlined all that is ignominious in the human situation, for depicting what is mean, sordid or base to the neglect of certain things that possess charm and beauty and belong to the brighter side of human nature: ... Both from this side and from the other we are also reproached for leaving out of account the solidarity of mankind and considering man in isolation. And this, say the Communists, is because we base our doctrine upon pure subjectivity – upon the Cartesian “I think”: which is the moment in which solitary man attains to himself; a position from which it is impossible to regain solidarity with other men who exist outside of the self. The ego cannot reach them through the cogito.
From the Christian side, we are reproached as people who deny the reality and seriousness of human affairs. For since we ignore the commandments of God and all values prescribed as eternal, nothing remains but what is strictly voluntary. Everyone can do what he likes, and will be incapable, from such a point of view, of condemning either the point of view or the action of anyone else.
It is to these various reproaches that I shall endeavor to reply today; that is  why I have entitled this brief exposition “Existentialism is a Humanism.”...
The essential charge laid against us is, of course, that of over-emphasis upon the evil side of human life. I have lately been told of a lady who, whenever she lets slip a vulgar expression in a moment of nervousness, excuses herself by exclaiming, “I believe I am becoming an existentialist.” So it appears that ugliness is being identified with existentialism. That is why some people say we are 
“naturalistic,” and if we are, it is strange to see how much we scandalize and horrify them, for no one seems to be much frightened or humiliated nowadays by what is properly called naturalism.  .... It is, however, ... these very people, always  harping upon realism, who complain that existentialism is too gloomy a view of things. Indeed their excessive protests make me suspect that what is annoying them is not so much our pessimism, but, much more likely, our optimism. For at bottom, what is alarming in the doctrine that I am about to try to explain to you is – is it not? – that it confronts man with a possibility of choice. To verify this, let us review the whole question upon the strictly philosophic level. What, then, is this that we call existentialism?
Most of those who are making use of this word would be highly confused if  required to explain its meaning.  .... The question is only complicated because there are two kinds of existentialists. There are, on the one hand, the Christians, amongst whom I shall name Jaspers and Gabriel Marcel, both professed Catholics; and on the other the existential atheists, amongst whom we must place Heidegger as well as the French existentialists and myself. What they have in common is simply the fact that they believe that existence comes before essence – or, if you will, that we must begin from the subjective. What exactly do we mean by that?
If one considers an article of manufacture as, for example, a book or a paper-knife – one sees that it has been made by an artisan who had a conception of it; and he has paid attention, equally, to the conception of a paper-knife and to the pre-existent technique of production which is a part of that conception and is, at bottom, a formula. Thus the paper-knife is at the same time an article producible in a certain manner and one which, on the other hand, serves a definite purpose, for one cannot suppose that a man would produce a paper-knife without knowing what it was for. Let us say, then, of the paperknife that its essence – that is to say the sum of the formulae and the qualities which made its production and its definition possible – precedes its existence. The presence of such-and-such a paper-knife or book is thus determined before my eyes. Here, then, we are viewing the world from a technical standpoint, and we can say that production precedes existence.
When we think of God as the creator, we are thinking of him, most of the time, as a supernal artisan. Whatever doctrine we may be considering, whether it be a doctrine like that of Descartes, or of Leibniz himself, we always imply that the will follows, more or less, from the understanding or at least accompanies it, so that when God creates he knows precisely what he is creating. Thus, the conception of man in the mind of God is comparable to that of the paper-knife in the mind of the artisan: God makes man according to a procedure and a conception, exactly as the artisan manufactures a paper-knife, following a definition and a formula. Thus each individual man is the realization of a certain conception which dwells in the divine understanding. 
Atheistic existentialism, of which I am a representative, declares with greater consistency that if God does not exist there is at least one being whose existence comes before its essence, a being which exists before it can be defined by any conception of it. .... What do we mean by saying that existence precedes essence? 
We mean that man first of all exists, encounters himself, surges up in the world – and defines himself afterwards. If man as the existentialist sees him is not definable, it is because to begin with he is nothing. He will not be anything until later, and then he will be what he makes of himself. 
Thus, there is no human nature, because there is no God to have a conception of it. Man simply is. Not that he is simply what he conceives himself to be, but he is what he wills, and as he conceives himself after already existing – as he wills to be after that leap towards existence. Man is nothing else but that which he makes of himself. That is the first principle of existentialism. 
And this is what people call its “subjectivity,” using the word as a reproach against us. But what do we mean to say by this, but that man is of a greater dignity than a stone or a table? For we mean to say that man primarily exists – that man is, before all else, something which propels itself towards a future and is aware that it is doing so. Man is, indeed, a project which possesses a subjective life, instead of being a kind of moss, or a fungus or a cauliflower. Before that projection of the self nothing exists; not even in the heaven of intelligence: man will only attain existence when he is what he purposes to be. Not, however, what he may wish to be. For what we usually understand by wishing or willing is a conscious decision taken – much more often than not – after we have made ourselves what we are. I may wish to join a party, to write a book or to marry – but in such a case what is usually called my will is probably a manifestation of a prior and more spontaneous decision. "
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Existentialism Is a Humanism, 1946)

“EXISTENTIALISM IS A HUMANISM” (Continued 1)
If, however, it is true that existence is prior to essence, man is responsible for what he is. Thus, the first effect of existentialism is that it puts every man in possession of himself as he is, and places the entire responsibility for his existence squarely upon his own shoulders. And, when we say that man is responsible for himself, we do not mean that he is responsible only for his own individuality, but that he is responsible for all men. ....
If, moreover, existence precedes essence and we will to exist at the same time as we fashion our image, that image is valid for all and for the entire epoch in which we find ourselves. Our responsibility is thus much greater than we had supposed, for it concerns mankind as a whole. If I am a worker, for instance, I may choose to join a Christian rather than a Communist trade union. And if, by that membership, I choose to signify that resignation is, after all, the attitude that best becomes a man, that man’s kingdom is not upon this earth, I do not commit myself alone to that view. Resignation is my will for everyone, and my action is, in consequence, a commitment on behalf of all mankind. Or if, to take a more personal case, I decide to marry and to have children, even though this decision proceeds simply from my situation, from my passion or my desire, I am thereby committing not only myself, but humanity as a whole, to the practice of monogamy. I am thus responsible for myself and for all men, and I am creating a certain image of man as I would have him to be. In fashioning myself I fashion man.
Who, then, can prove that I am the proper person to impose, by my own choice, my conception of man upon mankind? I shall never find any proof whatever; there will be no sign to convince me of it. If a voice speaks to me, it is still I myself who must decide whether the voice is or is not that of an angel. If I regard a certain course of action as good, it is only I who choose to say that it is good and not bad. ...  When, for instance, a military leader takes upon himself the responsibility for an attack and sends a number of men to their death, he chooses to do it and at bottom he alone chooses. No doubt under a higher command, but its orders, which are more general, require interpretation by him and upon that interpretation depends the life of ten, fourteen or twenty men. In making the decision, he cannot but feel a certain anguish. All leaders know that anguish. It does not prevent their acting, on the contrary it is the very condition of their action, for the action presupposes that there is a plurality of possibilities, and in choosing one of these, they realize that it has value only because it is chosen. Now it is anguish of that kind which existentialism describes, and moreover, as we shall see, makes explicit through direct responsibility towards other men who are concerned. Far from being a screen which could separate us from action, it is a condition of action itself.
And when we speak of “abandonment” – a favorite word of Heidegger – we only mean to say that God does not exist, and that it is necessary to draw the consequences of his absence right to the end. .... 
The existentialist, on the contrary, finds it extremely embarrassing that God does not exist, for there disappears with Him all possibility of finding values in an intelligible heaven. .... For if indeed existence precedes essence, one will never be able to explain one’s action by reference to a given and specific human nature; in other words, there is no determinism – man is free, man is freedom. Nor, on the other hand, if God does not exist, are we provided with any values or commands that could legitimize our behavior. Thus we have neither behind us, nor before us in a luminous realm of values, any means of justification or excuse. – We are left alone, without excuse. That is what I mean when I say that man is condemned to be free. Condemned, because he did not create himself, yet is nevertheless at liberty, and from the moment that he is thrown into this world he is responsible for everything he does. ....
As an example by which you may the better understand this state of abandonment, I will refer to the case of a pupil of mine, who sought me out in the following circumstances. His father was quarreling with his mother and was also inclined to be a “collaborator”; his elder brother had been killed in the German offensive of 1940 and this young man, with a sentiment somewhat primitive but generous, burned to avenge him. His mother was living alone with him, deeply afflicted by the semi-treason of his father and by the death of her eldest son, and her one consolation was in this young man. But he, at this moment, had the choice between going to England to join the Free French Forces or of staying near his mother and helping her to live. He fully realized that this woman lived only for him and that his disappearance – or perhaps his death – would plunge her into despair. He also realized that, concretely and in fact, every action he performed on his mother’s behalf would be sure of effect in the sense of aiding her to live, whereas anything he did in order to go and fight would be an ambiguous action which might vanish like water into sand and serve no purpose. ...."
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Existentialism Is a Humanism, 1946)

“EXISTENTIALISM IS A HUMANISM” (Continued 2)
"Quietism is the attitude of people who say, “let others do what I cannot do.” The doctrine I am presenting before you is precisely the opposite of this, since it declares that there is no reality except in action. It goes further, indeed, and adds, “Man is nothing else but what he purposes, he exists only in so far as he realizes himself, he is therefore nothing else but the sum of his actions, nothing else but what his life is.” Hence we can well understand why some people are horrified by our teaching. For many have but one resource to sustain them in their misery, and that is to think, “Circumstances have been against me, I was worthy to be something much better than I have been. I admit I have never had a great love or a great friendship; but that is because I never met a man or a woman who were worthy of it; if I have not written any very good books, it is because I had not the leisure to do so; or, if I have had no children to whom I could devote myself it is because I did not find the man I could have lived with. So there remains within me a wide range of abilities, inclinations and potentialities, unused but perfectly viable, which endow me with a worthiness that could never be inferred from the mere history of my actions.” But in reality and for the existentialist, there is no love apart from the deeds of love; no potentiality of love other than that which is manifested in loving; there is no genius other than that which is expressed in works of art. .... What we mean to say is that a man is no other than a series of undertakings, that he is the sum, the organization, the set of relations that constitute these undertakings.
In the light of all this, what people reproach us with is not, after all, our pessimism, but the sternness of our optimism. If people condemn our works of fiction, in which we describe characters that are base, weak, cowardly and sometimes even frankly evil, it is not only because those characters are base, weak, cowardly or evil. For suppose that, like Zola, we showed that the behavior of these characters was caused by their heredity, or by the action of their environment upon them, or by determining factors, psychic or organic. People would be reassured, they would say, “You see, that is what we are like, no one can do anything about it.” But the existentialist, when he portrays a coward, shows him as responsible for his cowardice. He is not like that on account of a cowardly heart or lungs or cerebrum, ... he is like that because he has made himself into a coward by actions. There is no such thing as a cowardly temperament ...  A coward is defined by the  deed that he has done.
We have now, I think, dealt with a certain number of the reproaches against existentialism. You have seen that it cannot be regarded as a philosophy of quietism since it defines man by his action; nor as a pessimistic description of man, for no doctrine is more optimistic, the destiny of man is placed within himself. Nor is it an attempt to discourage man from action since it tells him that there is no hope except in his action, and that the one thing which permits him to have life is the deed. 
Our point of departure is, indeed, the subjectivity of the individual, and that for strictly philosophic reasons. ....  And at the point of departure there cannot be any other truth than this, I think, therefore I am, which is the absolute truth of consciousness as it attains to itself. Every theory which begins with man, outside of this moment of self-attainment, is a theory which thereby suppresses the truth, for outside of the Cartesian cogito, all objects are no more than probable, and any doctrine of probabilities which is not attached to a truth will crumble into nothing. In order to define the probable one must possess the true. Before there can be any truth whatever, then, there must be an absolute truth, and there is such a truth which is simple, easily attained and within the reach of everybody; it consists in one’s immediate sense of one’s self.
In the second place, this theory alone is compatible with the dignity of man, it is the only one which does not make man into an object. All kinds of materialism lead one to treat every man including oneself as an object – that is, as a set of pre-determined reactions, in no way different from the patterns of qualities and phenomena which constitute a table, or a chair or a stone. Our aim is precisely to establish the human kingdom as a pattern of values in distinction from the material world. 
What is at the very heart and center of existentialism, is the absolute character of the free commitment, by which every man realizes himself in realizing a type of humanity – a commitment always understandable, to no matter whom in no matter what epoch – and its bearing upon the relativity of the cultural pattern which may result from such absolute commitment. ....
This does not completely refute the charge of subjectivism. Indeed that objection appears in several other forms, of which the first is as follows. People say to us, “Then it does not matter what you do,” and they say this in various ways.
For, when I confront a real situation – for example, that I am a sexual being, able to have relations with a being of the other sex and able to have children – I am obliged to choose my attitude to it, and in every respect I bear the responsibility of the choice which, in committing myself, also commits the whole of humanity. Even if my choice is determined by no a priori value whatever, it can have nothing to do with caprice: ....  Rather let us say that the moral choice is  comparable to the construction of a work of art."
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Existentialism Is a Humanism, 1946)

E2.2.D.4.2. The Ontology of Freedom according to Sartre: Consciousness as Nothingness - freedom is possible because human consciousness ("For-itself") is not a solid "thing" ("In-itself") but a "gap," a "nothingness," or a "negation" that separates us from the determined world.

E2.2.D.4.2.a. SARTRE´S CONTRIBUTION IS TO INTRODUCE A GAP IN THE CONSCIOUS SUBJECT.
"Phenomenology - [...] In Descarte's understanding of subjectivity, consciousness and self-consciousness come together: If you are perceiving an object, you are simultaneously aware of perceiving that object. For Sartre we have 2 intentional objects: 1) the intentional object of the perception of a glass of water is the glass of water [consciousness], 2) the intentional object of the awareness of perceiving the glass of water is the perception of the glass of water [self-consciousness]. Since there are 2 different intentional objects there must be two distinct states of consciousness. There is a gap between the perceptive state of consciousness and the reflective state of consciousness. Negativity or negation ("Le néant") becomes part of what it is to be a subject. Negativity is what makes freedom a constitutive aspect of human subjectivity, because it is the basis of freewill to realize a possibility of what we are not yet."
(Phenomenology, In Our Time, broadcast on BBC4 on Thu 22 Jan 2015)

Listen to the full podcast: https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b04ykk4m

E2.2.D.4.2.b. “NOTHINGNESS 
Hegel noted that 'nothingness is simple equality with itself, perfect emptiness, absence of determination and content, a state of non-differentiation in itself.' This is why it is nothing without ceasing to be, since it is this nothing. It is 'the same determination, or rather the same absence of determination, and therefore absolutely the same thing as pure being' (Logic, 1.1). Perhaps less fooled by language or dialectics, Bergson saw nothingness as nothing more than a word, a pseudo-idea which could only be obtained by negating being, the only thing that can be thought of positively. He was undoubtedly right. However, this does not prove that we can completely dispense with this pseudo-idea. [...]
It confirms once again that nothingness exists only for humans: "Man is the being through whom nothingness comes into the world" (Sartre). In this sense, nothingness is less what is not than what is no longer, not yet, or not quite. It is the empty correlate of consciousness, which never imprisons it with its objects or being. It is the result of its power of nullification, which would be a mistake to hypostatize. "In the clear night of the nothingness of anxiety," writes Heidegger, "the original manifestation of being finally shows itself—that there is being and not nothingness." Nothingness is the condition that makes the revelation of Being possible for human reality (Dasein). Nothingness is not simply the antithetical concept of Being; rather, the essence of Being itself contains Nothingness from the beginning."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

“NÉANTISATION
It is not annihilation, which suppresses a being, but rather, it reveals or deepens the absence of a being within the heart of being, like a worm" (Sartre, L'Être et le Néant, I, chap. 1, p. 57). According to Heidegger, this nullification is characteristic of nothingness itself ("nothingness nullifies": a notion that amuses analytical philosophers greatly) or of the for-itself, according to Sartre ("man is the being through whom nothingness comes into the world"). For example, when I look for a friend in a café and they are not there, I perceive not only the café's presence, but also the absence of my friend. This absence nullifies the café, which is now merely a backdrop, and reveals the nothingness of the absent person (I, ch. 1, pp. 44–47). Similarly, when I experience myself as free—that is, as not being what I am, since I must make myself be, and as being what I am not—I escape the fullness of the en-soi and the principle of identity. I experience myself as nothingness and the power of nullification. "Human reality is its own nothingness," writes Sartre. "To be, for the self, is to annihilate the self that it is. Under these conditions, freedom can be nothing other than this annihilation" (FV, ch. 1, p. 515). To annihilate is not to destroy. It is to create what does not exist rather than to eliminate what does. Classical philosophers would say it is a well-known power of the imagination."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E2.2.D.4.2.c. ACCORDING TO SARTRE, THE CREATED BEING THAT MUST "RECOVER ITSELF, TEAR ITSELF AWAY FROM THE CREATOR... AND ASSUME ITS BEING"
“The mode of the percipi is the passive. If then the being of the phenomenon resides in its percipi (1), this being is passivity. Relativity and passivity-such are the characteristic structures of the esse (2) in so far as this is reduced to the percipi. What is passivity? I am passive when I undergo a modification of which I am not the origin; that is, neither the source nor the creator. Thus my being supports a mode of being of which it is not the source. Yet in order for me to support, it is still necessary that I exist, and due to this fact my existence is always situated on the other side of passivity. "To support passively," for example, is a conduct which I assume and which engages my liberty as much as to "reject resolutely." If I am to be for always "the-one-who-has-been-offended," I must persevere in my being; that is, I myself assume my existence. But all the same I respond on my own account in some way and I assume my offense; I cease to be passive in relation to it. Hence we have this choice of alternatives: either, indeed, I am not passive in my being, in which case I become the foundation of my affections even if at first I have not been the origin of them-or I am affected with passivity in my very existence, my being is a received being, and hence all falls into nothingness. Thus passivity is a doubly relative phenomenon, relative to the activity of the one who acts and to the existence of the one who suffers. This implies that passivity cannot affect the actual being of the passive existent; it is a relation of one being to another being and not of one being to a nothingness. It is impossible that the percipere (3) affects the perceptum (4) of being, for in order for the perceptum to be affected it would of necessity have to be already given in some way and exist before having received being. One can conceive of a creation on condition that the created being recover itself, tear itself away from the creator in order to close in on itself immediately and assume its being; it is in this sense that a book exists as distinct from its author. But if the act of creation is to be continued indefinitely, if the created being is to be supported even in its inmost parts, if it does not have its own independence, if it is in itself only nothingness-then the creature is in no way distinguished from its creator; it is absorbed in him; we are dealing with a false transcendence, and the creator cannot have even an illusion of getting out of his subjectivity.” 
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)
Notes:
(1) Percipi (To Be Perceived): This term represents the state of being perceived. In the excerpt, Sartre directly equates the "mode of the percipi" with "the passive." For an object or a phenomenon, its existence under the formula of "esse est percipi" is entirely contingent on a consciousness that perceives it. This, for Sartre, is a problematic reduction because it renders the object's being as something it "undergoes" rather than something it is in itself. It is a received being, lacking its own foundation and independence.
(2) Esse (To Be / Being): For Sartre, "esse" signifies being in its most fundamental sense. However, he immediately complicates this by distinguishing between two primary modes of being: being-in-itself (l'en-soi) and being-for-itself (le pour-soi). In the context of the passage, "esse" is initially examined through the lens of Berkeley's idealism, where the being of a thing is reduced to its being perceived. Sartre critiques this as a state of "passivity" and "relativity," a diminished form of existence that is dependent on another for its being.
(3) Percipere (To Perceive / The Act of Perceiving): This is the active counterpart to percipi. "Percipere" is the act of perceiving, the conscious activity of a subject. In Sartre's philosophy, this is the domain of the for-itself, or consciousness. Consciousness is always directed outwards, intending towards objects. The act of perceiving is not a passive reception of sensory data but an active engagement with the world. It is a project of consciousness, and as Sartre argues, this activity is what defines the for-itself's freedom.
(4) Perceptum (The Perceived Thing / The Object of Perception): The "perceptum" is that which is perceived, the object as it is apprehended by consciousness. In the passage, Sartre makes a crucial distinction: "It is impossible that the percipere affects the perceptum of being." Here, he is arguing against the idealist notion that the act of perceiving creates or constitutes the being of the object. For Sartre, the object of perception (perceptum) must already exist in some way, independent of the consciousness that perceives it. The perceptum has its own being (as being-in-itself) which is separate from the act of perception (percipere).

BY "BEING-IN-ITSELF" SARTRE DEFINES A MODE OF BEING OF NON-CONSCIOUS OBJECTS. THIS BEING IS SOLID, SELF-IDENTICAL, BEYOND CHANGE, AND HAS NO POTENTIAL. By defining what is not free, Sartre sets the stage for understanding what human freedom (which he calls "being-for-itself") is, by way of radical contrast.
“Being is equally beyond negation as beyond affirmation. Affirmation is always affirmation of something; that is, the act of affirming is distinguished from the thing affirmed. But if we suppose an affirmation in which the affirmed comes to fulfill the affirn1ing and is confused with it, this affirmation cannot be affirmed-owing to too much of plenitude and the immediate inherence of the noema in the noesis. It is there that we find being-if we are to define it more clearly-in connection with consciousness. It is the noema in the noesis; that is, the inherence in itself without the least distance. From this point of view, we should not call it "immanence," for immanence in spite of all connection with self is still that very slight withdrawal which can be realized-away from the self. But being is not a connection with itself. It is itself. It is an immanence which cannot realize itself, an affirmation which cannot affirm itself, an activity which cannot act, because it is glued to itself. Everything happens as if, in order to free the affirmation of self from the heart of being, there is necessary a decompression of being. Let us not, however, think that being is merely one undifferentiated self-affirmation; the undifferentiation of the in-itself is beyond an infinity of self-affirmations, inasmuch as there is an infinity of modes of self-affirming. We may summarize these first conclusions by saying that being is in itself.
But if being is in itself, this means that it does not refer to itself as self-consciousness does. It is this self. It is itself so completely that the perpetual reflection which constitutes the self is dissolved in an identity. That is why being is at bottom beyond the self, and our first formula can be only, an approximation due to the requirements of language. In fact being is opaque to itself precisely because it is filled with itself. This can be better expressed by saying that being is what it is. This statement is in appearance strictly analytical. Actually it is far from being reduced to that principle of identity which is the unconditioned principle of all analytical judgments. First the formula designates a particular region of being, that of being in-itself. We shall see that the being of for-itself is defined, on the contrary, as being what it is not and not being what it is. The question here then is of a regional principle and is as such synthetical. Furthermore it is necessary to oppose this formula-being in-itself is what it is-to that which designates the being of consciousness. The latter in fact, as we shall see, has to be what it is.
This instructs us as to the special meaning which must be given to the "is" in the phrase, being is what it is. From the moment that beings exist who have to be what they are, the fact of being what they are is no longer a purely axiomatic characteristic; it is a contingent principle of be in-itself. In this sense, the principle of identity, the principle of analytical judgments, is also a regional synthetical principle of being. It designates the opacity of being-in-itself. This opacity has nothing to do with our position in relation to the in-itself; it is not that we are obliged to apprehend it and to observe it because we are "without." Being-in-itself has no within which is opposed to a without and which is analogous to a judgment, a law, a consciousness of itself. The in-itself has nothing secret; it is solid (massif). In a sense we can designate it as a synthesis. But it is the most indissoluble of all: the synthesis of itself with itself.
The result is evidently that being is isolated in its being and that it does not enter into any connection with what is not itself. Transition, becoming, anything which permits us to say that being is not yet what it will be and that it is already what it is not-all that is forbidden on principle. For being is the being of becoming and due to this fact it is beyond becoming. It is what it is. This means that by itself it can not even be what it is not; we have seen indeed that it can encompass no negation. It is full positivity. It knows no otherness; it never posits itself as other-than-another-being. It can support no connection with the other. It is itself indefinitely and it exhausts itself in being. From this point of view we shall see later that it is not subject to temporality. It is, and when it gives way, one cannot even say that it no longer is. Or, at least, a consciousness can be conscious of it as no longer being, precisely because consciousness is temporal. But being itself does not exist as a lack there where it was; the full positivity of being is re-formed on its giving way. It was and at present other beings are: that is all.
Finally-this will be our third characteristic-being-in-itself is. This means that being can neither be derived from the possible nor reduced to the necessary. Necessity concerns the connection between ideal propositions but not that of existents. An existing phenomenon can never be derived from another existent qua existent. This is what we shall call the contingency of being-in-itself. But neither can being-in-itself be derived from a possibility. The possible is a structure of the for-itself; that is, it belongs to the other region of being. Being-in-itself is never either possible or impossible. It is. This is what consciousness expresses in anthropomorphic terms by saying that being is superfluous (de trop)-that is, that consciousness absolutely cannot derive being from anything, either from another being, or from a possibility, or from a necessary law. Uncreated, without reason for being, without any connection with another being, being-in-itself is de trop for eternity.
Being is. Being is in-itself. Being is what it is. These are the three characteristics which the preliminary examination of the phenomenon of being allows us to assign to the being of phenomena. For the moment it is impossible to push our investigation further. This is not yet the examination of the in-itself-which is never anything but what it is which will allow us to establish and to explain its relations with the for itself. Thus we have left "appearances" and have been led progressively to posit two types of being, the in-itself and the for-itself, concerning which we have as yet only superficial and incomplete information. A multitude of questions remain unanswered: What is the ultimate meaning of these two types of being? For what reasons do they both belong to being in general? What is the meaning of that being which includes within itself these two radically separated regions of being? If idealism and realism both fail to explain the relations which in fact unite these regions which in theory are without communication, what other solution can we find for this problem? And how can the being of the phenomenon be transphenomenal?
It is to attempt to reply to these questions that I have written the present work.”
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

SARTRE'S CENTRAL ONTOLOGICAL ARGUMENT FOR WHY HUMANS ARE RADICALLY FREE IS THAT BECAUSE  ONLY HUMANS CAN BRING "NOTHINGNESS" (NEGATION, QUESTIONING, POSSIBILITY) INTO THE WORLD OF PURE BEING, OUR VERY NATURE MUST BE DIFFERENT. THIS ABILITY TO DETACH FROM THE CAUSAL CHAIN OF BEING IS FREEDOM. 
“It would be inconceivable that a Being which is full positivity should maintain and create outside itself a Nothingness or transcendent being, for there would be nothing in Being by which Being could surpass itself toward Non-Being. The Being by which Nothingness arrives in the world must nihilate Nothingness in its Being, and even so it still runs the risk of establishing Nothingness as a transcendent in the very heart of immanence unless it nihilates Nothingness in its being in connection with its own being. The Being by which Nothingness arrives in the world is a being such that in its Being, the Nothingness of its Being is in question. The being by which Nothingness comes to the world must be its own Nothingness. By this we must understand riot a nihilating act, which would require in turn a foundation in Being, but an ontological characteristic of the Being required. It remains to learn in what delicate, exquisite region of Being we shall encounter that Being which is its own Nothingness.
We shall be helped in our inquiry by a more complete examination of the conduct which served us as a point of departure. We must return to the question. We have seen, it may be recalled, that every question in essence posits the possibility of a negative reply. In a question we question a being about its being or its way of being. This way of being or this being is veiled; there always remains the possibility that it may unveil itself as a Nothingness. But from the very fact that we presume that an Existent can always be revealed as nothing, every question supposes that we realize a nihilating withdrawal in relation to the given, which becomes a simple presentation, fluctuating between being and Nothingness.
It is essential therefore that the questioner have the permanent possibility of dissociating himself from the causal series which constitutes being and which can produce only being. If we admitted that the question is determined in the questioner by universal determinism, the question would thereby become unintelligible and even inconceivable. A real cause, in fact, produces a real effect and the caused being is wholly engaged by the cause in positivity; to the extent that its being depends on the cause, it cannot have within itself the tiniest germ of nothingness. Thus in so far as the questioner must be able to effect in relation to the questioned a kind of nihilating withdrawal, he is not subject to the causal order of the world; he detaches himself from Being. This means that by a double movement of nihilation, he nihilates the thing questioned in relation to himself by placing it in a neutral state, between being and nonbeing- and that he, nihilates himself in relation to the thing questioned by wrenching himself from being in order to be able to bring out of himself the possibility of a non-being. Thus in posing a question, a certain negative element is introduced into the world. We see nothingness making the world irridescent, casting a shimmer over things. But at the same time the question emanates from a questioner who in order to motivate himself in his being as one who questions, disengages himself from being. This disengagement is then by definition a human process. Man presents himself at least in this instance as a being who causes Nothingness to arise in the world, inasmuch as he himself is affected with non-being to this end.
These remarks may serve as guiding thread as we examine the negatives of which we spoke earlier. There is no doubt at all that these are transcendent realities; distance, for example, is imposed on us as something which we have to take into account, which must be cleared with effort. However these realities are of a very peculiar nature; they all indicate immediately an essential relation of human reality to the world. They derive their origin from an act, an expectation, or a project of the human being; they all indicate an aspect of being as it appears to the human being who is engaged in the world. The relations of man in the world, which the negatives indicate, have nothing in common with the relations aposteriori which are brought out by empirical activity. We are no longer dealing with those relations of instrumentality by which, according to Heidegger, objects in the world disclose themselves to "human reality." Every negative appears rather as one of the essential conditions of this relation of instrumentality. In order for the totality of being to order itself around us as instruments, in order for it to parcel itself into differentiated complexes which refer one to another and which can be used, it is necessary that negation rise up not as a thing among other things but as the rubric of a category which presides over the arrangement and the redistribution of great masses of being in things. Thus the rise of man in the midst of the being which "invests" him causes a world to be discovered. But the essential and primordial moment of this rise is the negation. Thus we have reached the first goal of this study. Man is the being through whom nothingness comes to the world. But this question immediately provokes another: What must man be in his being in order that through him nothingness may come to being?
Being can generate only being and if man is inclosed in this process of generation, only being will come out of him. If we arc to assume that man is able to question this process-i.e., to make it the object of interrogation-he must be able/to hold it up to view as a totality. He must be able to put himself outside of being and by the same stroke weaken the structure of the being of being. Yet it is not given to "human reality" to annihilate even provisionally the mass of being which it posits before itself. Man's relation with being is that he can modify it. For man to put a particular existent out of circuit is to put himself out of circuit in relation to that existent. In this case he is not subject to it; he is out of reach; it cannot act on him, for he has retired beyond a nothingness. Descartes following the Stoics has given a name to this possibility which human reality has to secrete a nothingness which isolates it-it is free dom. But freedom here is only a name. If we wish to penetrate further into the question, we must not be content with this reply and we ought to ask now, What is human freedom if through it nothingness comes into the world?
It is not yet possible to deal with the problem of freedom in all its fullness. In fact the steps which we have completed up to now show clearly that freedom is not a faculty of the human soul to be envisaged and described in isolation. What we have been trying to define is the being of man in so far as he conditions the appearance of nothingness, and this being has appeared to us as freedom. Thus freedom as the requisite condition for the nihilation of nothingness is not a property which belongs among others to the essence of the human being. We have already noticed furthermore that with man the relation of existence to essence is not comparable to what it is for the things of the world. Human freedom precedes essence in man and makes it possible; the essence of the human being is suspended in his freedom. What we call freedom is impossible to distinguish from the being of "human reality." Man does not exist first in order to be free subsequently; there is no difference between the being of man and his being-free. This is not the time to make a frontal attack on a question which can be treated exhaustively only in the light of a rigorous elucidation of the human being. Here we are dealing with freedom in connection with the problem of nothingness and only to the extent that it conditions the appearance of nothingness.
What first appears evident is that human reality can detach itself from the world-in questioning, in systematic doubt, in skeptical doubt, […] , etc. -only if by nature it has the possibility of self-detachment. This was seen by Descartes, who is establishing doubt on freedom when he claims for us the possibility of suspending our judgments. Alain's position is similar. It is also in this sense that Hegel asserts the freedom of the mind to the degree that mind is mediation-i.e., the Negative. Furthermore it is one of the trends of contemporary philosophy to see in human consciousness a sort of escape from the self; such is the meaning of the transcendence of Heidegger. The intentionality of Husserl and of Brentano has also to a large extent the characteristic of a detachment from self. But we are not yet in a position to consider freedom as an inner structure of consciousness. We lack for the moment both instruments and technique to permit us to succeed in that enterprise. What interests us at present is a temporal operation since questioning is, like doubt, a kind of behavior; it assumes that the human being reposes first in the depths of being and then detaches himself from it by a nihilating withdrawal. Thus we are envisaging the condition of the nihilation as a relation to the self in the heart of a temporal process. We wish simply to show that by identifying consciousness with a causal sequence indefinitely continued, one transmutes it into a plenitude of being and thereby causes it to return into the unlimited totality of being-as is well illustrated by the futility of the efforts to dissociate psychological determinism from universal determinism and to constitute it as a separate series.”
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

IN  SARTRE'S MOST FAMOUS EXAMPLE OF "BAD FAITH" (MAUVAISE FOI), THE CAFÉ WAITER WHO TRIES TOO HARD TO BE A WAITER IS DECEIVING HIMSELF. He is pretending that his essence ("waiter-ness") determines his actions, when in fact he is a radically free consciousness who is choosing to perform those actions at every moment.
“Let us consider this waiter in the cafe. His movement is quick and forward, a little too precise, a little too rapid. He comes toward the patrons with a step a little too quick. He bends forward a little too eagerly; his voice, his eyes express an interest a little too solicitous for the order of the customer. Finally there he returns, trying to imitate in his walk the inflexible stiffness of some kind of automaton while carrying his tray with the recklessness of a tight-rope-walker by putting it in a perpetually unstable, perpetually broken equilibrium which he perpetually reestablishes by a light movement of the arm and hand. All his behavior seems to us a game. He applies himself to chaining his movements as if they were mechanisms, the one regulating the other; his gestures and even his voice seem to be mechanisms; he gives himself the quickness and pitiless rapidity of things. He is playing, he is amusing himself. But what is he playing? We need not watch long before we can explain it: he is playing at being a waiter in a cafe. There is nothing there to surprise us. The game is a kind of marking out and investigation. The child plays with his body in order to explore it, to take inventory of it; the waiter in the cafe plays with his condition in order to realize it. This obligation is not different from that which is imposed on all tradesmen. Their condition is wholly one of ceremony. The public demands of them that they realize it as a ceremony; there is the dance of the grocer, of the tailor, of the auctioneer, by which they endeavour to persuade their clientele that they are nothing but a grocer, an auctioneer, a tailor. A grocer who dreams is offensive to the buyer, because such a grocer is not wholly a grocer. Society demands that he limit himself to his function as a grocer, just as the soldier at attention makes himself into a soldier-thing with a direct regard which does not see at all, which is no longer meant to see, since it is the rule and not the interest of the moment which determines the point he must fix his eyes on (the sight "fixed at ten paces"). There are indeed many precautions to imprison a man in what he is, as if we lived in perpetual fear that he might escape from it, that he might break away and suddenly elude his condition.
In a parallel situation, from within, the waiter in the cafe cannot be immediately a cafe waiter in the sense that this inkwell is an inkwell, or the glass is a glass. It is by no means that he cannot form reflective judgments or concepts concerning his condition. He knows well what it "means:" the obligation of getting up at five o'clock, of sweeping the floor of the shop before the restaurant opens, of starting the coffee pot going, etc. He knows the rights which it allows: the right to the tips, the right to belong to a union, etc. But all these concepts, all these judgments refer to the transcendent. It is a matter of abstract .possibilities, of rights and duties conferred on a "person possessing rights." And it is precisely this person who I have to be (if I am the waiter in question) and who I am not. It is not that I do not wish to be this person or that I want this person to be different. But rather there is no common measure between his being and mine. It is a "representation" for others and for myself, which means that I can be he only in representation. But if I represent myself as him, I am not he; I am separated from him as the object from the subject, separated by nothing, but this nothing isolates me from him. I cannot be he, I can only play at being him; that is, imagine to myself that I am he. And thereby I affect him with nothingness. In vain do I fulfill the functions of a cafe waiter. I can be he only in the neutralized mode, as the actor is Hamlet, by mechanically making the typical gestures of my state and by aiming at myself as an imaginary cafe waiter through those gestures taken as an "analogue." What I attempt to realize is a being-in-itself of the cafe waiter, as if it were not just in my power to confer their value and their urgency upon my duties and the rights of my position, as if it were not my free choice to get up each morning at five o'clock or to remain in bed, even though it meant getting fired. As if from the very fact that I sustain this role in existence I did not transcend it on every side, as if I did not constitute myself as one beyond my condition. Yet there is no doubt that I am in a sense a cafe waiter-otherwise could I not just as well call myself a diplomat or a reporter? But if I am one, this cannot be in the mode of being in-itself. 'I am a waiter in the mode of being what I am not.”
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

THE TEXT LAYS OUT SARTRE'S ENTIRE ONTOLOGY—THE CRUCIAL DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE "IN-ITSELF" (THE SOLID, CONTINGENT, NON-CONSCIOUS WORLD OF OBJECTS) AND THE "FOR-ITSELF" (CONSCIOUSNESS, WHICH IS A "NOTHINGNESS" THAT ARISES BY SEPARATING ITSELF FROM BEING). THIS FRAMEWORK IS THE NECESSARY FOUNDATION FOR HIS THEORY OF FREEDOM.
“We indicated earlier that we can be nothing without playing at being. "If I am a cafe waiter," we said, "this can be only in the mode of not being one." And that is true. If I could be a cafe waiter, I should suddenly constitute myself as a contingent block of identity. And that I am not. This contingent being in-itself always escapes me. But in order that I may freely give a meaning to the obligations which my state involves, then in one sense at the heart of the for-itself, as a perpetually evanescent totality, being-in-itself must be given as the evanescent contingency of my situation. This is the result of the fact that while I must play at being a cafe waiter in order to be one, still it would be in vain for me to play at being a diplomat or a sailor, for I would not be one. This inapprehensible fact of my condition, this impalpable difference which distinguishes this drama of realization from drama pure and simple is what causes the for-itself, while choosing the meaning of its situation and while constituting itself as the foundation of itself in situation, not to choose its position. This part of my condition is what causes me to apprehend myself simultaneously as totally responsible for my being-inasmuch as I am its foundation-and yet as totally unjustifiable. Without facticity consciousness could choose its attachments to the world in the same way as the souls in Plato's Republic choose their condition. I could determine myself to "be born a worker" or to "be born a bourgeois." But on the other hand facticity cannot constitute me as being a bourgeois or being a worker. It is not even strictly speaking a resistance of fact since it is only by recovering it in the substructure of the pre-reflective cogito that I confer on it its meaning and its resistance. Facticity is only one indication which I give myself of the being to which I must reunite myself in order to be what I am. It is impossible to grasp facticity in its brute nudity, since all that we will find of it is already recovered and freely constructed. The simple fact "of being there," at that table, in that chair is already the pure object of a limiting-concept and as such cannot be grasped. Yet it is contained in my "consciousness of being-there," as its full contingency, as the nihilated in-itself on the basis of which the for-itself produces itself as consciousness of being there. The for-itself looking deep into itself as the consciousness of being there will never discover anything in itself but motivations; that is, it will be perpetually referred to itself and to its constant freedom. (I am there in order to.. etc.) But the contingency which paralyzes these motivations to the same degree as they totally found themselves is the facticity of the for-itself. The relation of the for-itself, which is its own foundation qua for-itself, to facticity can be correctly termed a factual necessity. It is indeed this factual necessity which Descartes and Husserl seized upon as constituting the evidence of the cogito. The for-itself is necessary in so far as it provides its own foundation. And this is why it is the object reflected by an apodictic intuition. I cannot doubt that I am. But in so far as this for-itself as such could also no~ be, it has all the contingency of fact. Just as my nihilating freedom is apprehended in anguish, so the for-itself is conscious of its facticity. It has the feeling of its complete gratuity; it apprehends itself as being there for nothing, as being de trop.
We must not confuse facticity with that Cartesian substance whose attribute is thought. To be sure, thinking substance exists only as it thinks; and since it is a created thing, it participates in the contingency of the ens creatum. But it is. It preserves the character of being-in-itself in its integrity, although the for-itself is its attribute. This is what is called Descartes' substantialist illusion. For us, on the other hand, the appearance of the for-itself or absolute event refers indeed to the effort of an in-itself to found itself; it corresponds to an attempt on the part of being to remove contingency from its being. But this attempt results in the nihilation of the in-itself, because the in-itself cannot found itself without introducing the self or a reflective, nihilating reference into the absolute identity of its being and consequently degenerating into for-itself. The for-itself corresponds then to an expanding de-structuring of the in-itself, and the in-itself is nihilated and absorbed in its attempt to found itself. Facticity is not then a substance of which the for-itself would be the attribute and which would produce thought without exhausting itself in that very production. It simply resides in the for-itself as a memory of being, as its unjustifiable presence in the world. Being-in-itself 'can found 'its nothingness but not its being. In its decompression it nihilates itself in a for-itself which becomes qua for-itself its own foundation; but the contingency which the for-itself has derived from the in-itself remains out of reach. It is what remains of the in-itself in the for-itself as facticity and what causes the for-itself to have only a factual necessity; that is, it is the foundation of its consciousness-of-being or existence, but on no account can it found its presence. Thus consciousness can in no case prevent itself from being and yet it is totally responsible for its being. […]
ANY study of human reality must begin with the cogito. But the Cartesian "I think" is conceived in the instantaneous perspective of temporality. Can we find in the heart of the cogito a way of transcending this instantaneity? If human reality were limited to the being of the "I think," it would have only the truth of an instant. And it is indeed true that with Descartes the cogito is an instantaneous totality, since by itself it makes no claim on the future and since an act of continuous "creation" is necessary to make it pass from one instant to another. But can we even conceive of the truth of an instant? Does the cogito not in its own way engage both past and future? Heidegger is so persuaded that the "I think" of Husserl is a trap for larks, fascinating and ensnaring, that he has completely avoided any appeal to consciousness in his description of Dasein. His goal is to show it immediately as care; that is, as escaping itself in the project of self toward the possibilities which it is. It is this projection of the self outside the self which he calls "understanding" (Verstand) and which permits him to establish human reality as being a "revealing-revealed." But this attempt to shown first the escape from self of the Dasein is going to encounter in turn insurmountable difficulties; we cannot first suppress the dimension "consciousness," not even if it is in order to reestablish it subsequently. Understanding has meaning only if it is consciousness of understanding. My possibility can exist as my possibility only if it is my consciousness which escapes itself toward my possibility. Otherwise the whole system of being and its possibilities will fall into the unconscious-that is into the in-itself. Behold, we are thrown back again towards the cogito. We must make this our point of departure. Can we extend it without losing the benefits of reflective evidence? What has the description of the for-itself revealed to us?
First we have encountered a nihilation in which the being of the for-itself is affected in its being. This revelation of nothingness did not seem to us to pass beyond the limits of the cogito. But let us consider more closely.
The for-itself cannot sustain nihilation without determining itself as a lack of being. This means that the nihilation does not coincide with a simple introduction of emptiness into consciousness. An external being has not expelled the in-itself from consciousness; rather the for-itself is perpetually determining itself not to be the in-itself. This means that it can establish itself only in terms of the in-itself and against the in-itself. Thus since the nihilation is the nihilation of being, it represents the original connection between the being of the for-itself and the being of the in-itself. The concrete, real in-itself is wholly present to the heart of consciousness as that which consciousness determines itself not to be. The cogito must necessarily lead us to discover this total, out-of-reach presence of the in-itself. Of course the fact of this presence will be the very transcendence of the for-itself. But it is precisely the nihilation which is the origin of transcendence conceived as the original bond between the for-itself and the in-itself. Thus we catch a glimpse of a way  of getting out of the cogito. We shall see later indeed that the profound meaning of the cogito is essentially to refer outside itself. But it is not yet time to describe this characteristic of the for-itself. What our ontological description has immediately revealed is that this being is the foundation of itself as a lack of being; that is, that it determines its being by means of a being which it is not.”
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

OUR FREEDOM IS THE FACT THAT OUR FUTURE IS NOT PREDETERMINED BUT MUST BE CONSTANTLY "POSSIBILIZED" BY US. THIS CULMINATES IN THE FAMOUS STATEMENTS: "TO BE FREE IS TO BE CONDEMNED TO BE FREE." 
This world has meaning as future only in so far as I am present to it as another who I will be, in another position, physical, emotional, social, etc. Yet it is this which is at the end of my present For-itself and beyond being-in-itself, and this is the reason why we have a tendency first to present the future as a state of the world and to make it appear subsequently on the ground of the world. If I write, I am conscious of the words as written and as about to be written. The words alone seem to be the future which awaits me. But the very fact that they appear as to be written implies that writing, as a non-thetic self-consciousness, is the possibility which I am. Thus the Future as the future presence of a For-itself to a being drags being-in-itself along with it into the future. This being to which the For-itself wiII be present is the meaning of the in-itself co-present with the present For-itself, as the future is the meaning of the For-itself. The Future is presence to a co-future being because the For-itself can exist only outside itself at the side of being and because the future is a future For-itself. But thus through the Future a particular future arrives in the World; that is, the For-itself is its meaning as Presence to being which is beyond being. Through the For-itself, a Beyond of being is revealed next to which the For-itself has to be what it is. As the saying goes, "I must become what I was;" but I must become what I was-in a world that has become and in a world that has become from the standpoint of what it is. This means that I give to the world its own possibilities in terms of the state which I apprehend on it. Determinism appears on the ground of the futurizing project of myself. Thus the future wiII be distinguished from the imaginary, where similarly I am what I am not, where similarly I find my meaning in a being which I have to be but where this For-itself which I have to be emerges on the ground of the nihilation of the world, apart from the world of being.
But the Future is not solely the presence of the For-itself to a being situated beyond being. It is something which waits for the For-itself which I am. This something is myself. When I say that I wiII be happy, we understand that it is the present "I," dragging its Past after it, who wiII be happy. Thus the Future is "I" in as much as I await myself as presence to a being beyond being. I project myself toward the Future in order to merge there with that which I lack; that is, with that which if synthetically added to my Present would make me be what I am. Thus what the For-itself has to be as presence to being beyond being is its own possibility. The Future is the ideal point where the sudden infinite compression of facticity (Past), of the For-itself (Present), and of its possible (a particular Future) will at last cause the Self to arise as the existence in-itself of the For-itself. The project of the For-itself toward the future which it is is a project toward the In-itself. In this sense the For-itself has to be its future because it can be the foundation of what it is only before itself and beyond being. It is the very nature of the For-itself that it must be "an always future hollow." For this reason it will never have become, in the Present, what it had to be, in the Future. The entire future of the present For-itself falls into the Past as the future along with this For-itself itself. It will. be the past future of a particular For-itself or a former future. This future is not realized. What is realized is a For-itself which is designated by the Future and which is  constituted in connection with this future. For example, my final position on the tennis court has determined on the ground of the future all my intermediary positions, and finally it has been reunited with an ultimate position identical with what it was in the future as the meaning of my movements. But, precisely, this "reuniting" is purely ideal; it is not really operative. The future does not allow itself to be rejoined; it slides into the Past as a bygone future, and the Present For-itself in all its facticity is revealed as the foundation of its own nothingness and once again as the lack of a new future. Hence comes that ontological disillusion which awaits the For-itself at each
emergence into the future. "Under the Empire how beautiful was the Republic!" Even if my present is strictly identical in its content with the future toward which I projected myself beyond being, it is not this present toward which I was projecting myself; for I was projecting myself toward the future qua future-that is, as the point of the reuniting of my being, as the place of the upsurge of the Self.
Now we are better able to raise the question of the being of the Future since this Future which I have to be is simply my possibility of presence to being beyond being. In this sense the Future is strictly opposed to the Past. The Past is, to be sure, the being which ram outside of myself, but it is the being which I am without the possibility of not being it. This is what we have defined as being its past behind itself. The being of the Future which I have to be, on the contrary, is such that I can only be it; for my freedom gnaws at its being from below. This means that the Future constitutes the meaning of my present For-itself, as the project of its possibility, but that it in no way predetermines my For-itself which is to-come, since the For-itself is always abandoned to the nihilating obligation of being the foundation of its nothingness. The Future can only effect a pre-outline of the limits within which the For-itself will make itself be as a flight making itself present to being in the direction of another future. The future is what I would be if I were not free and what I can have to be only because I am free. It appears on the horizon to announce to me what I am from the standpoint of what I shall be. ("What are you doing? I am in the process of tacking up this tapestry, of hanging this picture on the wall"). Yet at the same time by its nature as a future present-for-itself, it is disarmed; for the For-itself which will be, will be in the mode of determining itself to be, and the Future, then become a past future as a pre-outline of this for-itself, will be able only as the past to influence it to be what it makes itself be. In a word, I am my Future in the constant perspective of the possibility of not being it. Hence that anguish which we have described above which springs from the fact that I am not sufficiently that Future which I have to be and which gives its meaning to my present: it is because I am a being whose meaning is always problematic. In vain would the For-itself long to be enchained to its Possibility, as to the being which it is outside itself but which it is surely outside itself. The For-itself can never be its Future except problematically, for it is separated from it by. a Nothingness which it is. In short the For-itself is free, and its Freedom is to itself its own limit. To be free is to be condemned to be free. Thus the Future qua Future does not have to be. It is not in itself, and neither is it in the mode of being of the For-itself since it is the meaning of the For-itself. The Future is not, it is possibiIized.
The Future is the continual possibilization of possibles-as the meaning of the present For-itself in so far as this meaning is problematic and as such radically escapes the present For-itself.
The Future thus defined does not correspond to a homogeneous and chronologically ordered succession of moments to come. To be sure, there is a hierarchy of my possibles. But this hierarchy does not correspond to the order of-universal Temporality such as will be established on the bases of original Temporality. I am an infinity of possibilities, for the meaning of the For-itself is complex and cannot be contained in one formula. But a particular possibility may be more determinant for the meaning of the present For-itself than another which is nearer in universal time. For example, the possibility of going at two o'clock to see a friend whom I have not seen for two years-this is truly a possible which I am. But the nearer possibilities-the possibilities of going there in a taxi, by bus, by subway, on foot-all these at present remain undertermined. I am not anyone of these possibilities. Also there are gaps in the series of my possibilities. In the order of knowledge the gaps will be filled by the constitution of an homogeneous time without lacuna; in the order of action they will be fined by the will-that is, by rational, thematizing choice in terms of my possibles, and of possibilities which are not and will never be my possibilities and which I will realize in the mode of total indifference in order to be reunited with a possible which I am.”
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

ACCORDING TO SARTRE, THE "FOR-ITSELF" (CONSCIOUSNESS) ACTS UPON THE "IN-ITSELF" (THE WORLD OF OBJECTS) AS A FREE, NEGATING POWER OF OUR CONSCIOUSNESS THAT CARVES UP THE "UNDIFFERENTIATED UNITY" OF THE WORLD INTO THE MEANINGFUL, DISTINCT QUALITIES THAT WE EXPERIENCE.
“We shall best account for the original phenomenon of perception by insisting on the fact that the relation of the quality to us is that of absolute proximity (it "is there," it haunts us) without either giving or refusing itself, but we must add that this proximity implies a distance. It is what is immediately out of reach, what by definition refers us to ourselves as to an emptiness. Contemplation of it can only increase our thirst for being as the sight of the food out of reach added to Tantalus' hunger. Quality is the indication of what we are not and of the mode of being which is denied to us. The perception of white is the consciousness of the impossibility on principle for the For-itself to exist as color-that is, by being what it is. In this sense not only is being not distinguished from its qualities but even the whole apprehension of quality is the apprehension of a this. Quality, whatever it may be, is revealed to us as a being. The odor which I suddenly breathe in with my eyes closed, even before I have referred it to an odorous object, is already an odor-being and not a subjective impression. The light which strikes my eyes in the morning through my closed eyelids is already a light-being. This will appear obvious if one reflects on the fact that quality is. As a being which is what it is, it can indeed appear to a subjectivity, but it cannot be inserted in the woof of that subjectivity which is what it is not and which is not what it is. To say that a quality is a quality-being is not to endow it with a mysterious support analogous to substance; it is simply to observe that its mode of being is radically different from the mode of the being "for-itself." The being of whiteness or of sourness indeed could in no way be apprehended as ekstatic.
If someone should ask now how it happens that the "this" has qualities we should reply that actually the “this” is released as a totality on the ground of the world and that it is given as an undifferentiated unity. It is the for-itself which can deny itself from various points of view when confronting the this and which reveals the quality as a new this on the ground of the thing. For each negating act by which the freedom of the For-itself spontaneously constitutes its being, there is a corresponding total revelation of being "in profile." This profile is nothing but a relation of the thing to the For-itself, a relation realized by the For-itself. It is the absolute determination of negativity, for it is not enough that the for-itself by an original negation should not be being nor that it should not be this being; in order for its determination as the nothingness of being to be full, the for-itself must realize itself as a certain unique manner of not being this being.
This absolute determination, which is the determination of quality as a profile of the "this," belongs to the freedom of the For-itself. It is not; it is as "to-be." Anyone may see this for himself by considering how the revelation of one quality of the thing appears always as a factual gratuity grasped across a freedom. While I cannot make this orange peel cease being green, it is I who am responsible for my apprehending it as a rough green or a green roughness. But the relation figure-ground here is rather different from that of the this to the world. For instead of the figure's appearing on an undifferentiated ground, it is wholly penetrated by the ground; it holds the ground within it as its own undifferentiated density. I apprehend the peel as green; its "brightness-roughness" is revealed as an inner undifferentiated ground and plenitude of being for the green. There is no abstraction here in the sense that abstraction separates what is united, for being always appears entire in its profile. But the realization of being conditions the abstraction, for the abstraction is not the apprehension of a quality "in midair" but of a this-quality where the undifferentiation of the inner ground tends toward absolute equilibrium. The green abstracted does not lose its density of being-otherwise it would be nothing more than a subjective mode of the for-itself-but the brightness, the shape, the roughness, etc., which are given across it dissolve in the nihilating equilibrium of pure and simple massiveness. Abstraction, however, transcendence. But it can be realized only as a presence to being beyond being; it is a surpassing. This presence to being can be realized only on the level of possibility and in so far as the For-itself has to be its own possibilities. The abstract is revealed as the meaning which quality has to be as co-present to the presence of a for-itself to-come. Thus the abstract green is the meaning-to-come of the concrete this in so far as it reveals itself to me through its profile "green-brightness-roughness." The green is the peculiar possibility of this profile in so far as it is revealed across the possibilities which I am; that is, in so far as it is made-to-be. But this brings us to instrumentality and the temporality of the world. We shall return to this point. For the moment it is sufficient to say that the abstract haunts the concrete as a possibility fixed in the in-itself, which the concrete has to be. Whatever our perception may be, as the original contact with being, the abstract is always there but to-come; I apprehend it in the future with my future. It is correlative with the peculiar possibility of my present concrete negation as the possibility of being no more than this negation. The abstract is the meaning of this in so far as it reveals itself in the future across my possibility of fixing in in-itself the negation which I have to be.”
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

BECAUSE WE ARE NOT A FULL, COMPLETE, SOLID BEING, WE ARE IN A CONSTANT STATE OF "FLIGHT" FROM OUR PAST TOWARDS A FUTURE THAT WILL MAKE US WHOLE. WE ARE PERPETUALLY CREATING OURSELVES BY CHOOSING THE VALUES AND POSSIBILITIES THAT DEFINE OUR LACK.
“The for-itself is then a double flight from the world; it escapes its own being-in-the-midst-of-the-world as a presence to a world which it is fleeing. The possible is the free end of the flight. The for-itself cannot flee toward a transcendent which it is not, but only toward a transcendent which it is. It is this fact which removes all possibility of surcease from this perpetual Bight. If I may use a down-to-earth image for the sake of . making my thought clearer, picture an ass drawing behind him a cart. He attempts to get hold of a carrot which has been fastened at the end of a stick which in turn has been tied to the shaft of the cart. Every effort on the part of the ass to seize the carrot results in advancing the whole apparatus and the cart itself, which always remains at the same distance from the ass. Thus we run after a possible which our very running causes to appear, which is nothing but our running itself, and which thereby is by definition out of reach. We run toward ourselves and we are-due to this very fact-the being which cannot be reunited with itself. In one sense the running is void of meaning since the goal is never given but invented and projected proportionately as we run toward it. In another sense we cannot refuse to it that meaning which it rejects since in spite of everything possibility is the meaning of the for-itself. Thus there is and there is not a meaning in the flight.
Now in that very flight from the past which I am toward the future which I am, the future is prefigured in relation to the past at the same time that it confers on the past all its meaning. The future is the past surpassed as a given in-itself toward an in-itself which would be its own foundation-that is, which would be in so far as I .should have to be it. My possibility is the free recovery of my past in so far as this recovery can rescue it by providing its foundation. I flee the being without foundation which I was toward the founding act which I can be only in the mode of the I would be. Thus the possible is the lack which the for-itself makes itself be; that is, which is lacking to the present negation in so far as it is a qualified negation (a negation which has its quality outside itself in the past). As such the possible is itself qualified-not by virtue of being a given, which would be its own quality in the world of the in-itself, but as an indication of the recovery which would found the ekstatic qualification which the for-itself was.
Thus thirst, for example, is three dimensional: it is a present flight from a state of emptiness which the for-itself was. This very flight confers on the given state its character of emptiness or lack; in the past the lack could not be lack, for the given can be "lacking" only if it is surpassed towards -- by a being which is its own transcendence. But this flight is a flight towards --, and it is this "towards" which gives flight its meaning. As such flight is itself a lack which makes itself-that is, a constitution in the past of a given as a lack or potentiality and at the same time the free recovery of the given by a for-itself which makes itself a lack in the form, the "reflection-reflecting"-that is, as consciousness of lack. Finally that, toward which the lack is fled, in so far as it causes itself to be conditioned in its being-a-Iack by that which it lacks, is the possibility that it is to be a thirst which would be no longer a lack but a thirst-repletion. The possible is the indication of the repletion; value, as a phantom being which surrounds and penetrates the for-itself through and through, is the indication of a thirst which would be simultaneously a given-as it "was it"-and a recovery-as the game of "the reflection-reflecting" constitutes it ekstatically. As one can see, we are dealing here with a plenitude which determines itself as thirst. The ekstatic relation past-present provides the outline of this plenitude with the structure "thirst" as its meaning, and the possible which I am must furnish its very density, its. Fleshly plenitude, as reflection (refIexion).”
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

"I AM CONDEMNED TO EXIST FOREVER BEYOND MY ESSENCE... I AM CONDEMNED TO BE FREE."
“The few observations which we have made on the subject in the course of this work and which we must summarize here. In the first chapter we established the fact that if negation comes into the world through human reality, the latter must be a being who can realize a nihilating rupture with the world and with himself; and we established that the permanent possibility of this rupture is the same as freedom. But on the other hand, we stated that this permanent possibility of nihilating what I am in the form of "having-been" implies for man a particular type of existence. We were able then to determine by means of analyses like that of bad faith that human reality is its own nothingness. For the for-itself, to be is to nihilate the in-itself which it is. Under these conditions freedom can be nothing other than this nihilation. It is through this that the for-itself escapes its being as its essence; it is through this that the for-itself is always something other than what can be said of it. For in the final analysis the For-itself is the one which escapes this very denomination, the one which is already beyond the name which is given to it, beyond the property which is recognized in it. To say that the for-itself has to be what it is, to say that it is what it is not while not being what it is, to say that in it existence precedes and conditions essence or inversely according to Hegel, that for it "Wesen ist was gewesen ist"-all this is to say one and the same thing: to be aware that man is free. Indeed by the sole fact that I am conscious of the causes which inspire my action, these causes are already transcendent objects for my consciousness; they are outside. In vain shall I seek to catch hold of them; I escape them by my very existence. I am condemned to exist forever beyond my essence, beyond the causes and motives of my act. I am condemned to be free. This means that no limits to my freedom can be found except freedom itself or, if you prefer, that we are not free to cease being free. To the extent that the for-itself wishes to hide its I own nothingness from itself and to incorporate the in-itself as its true mode of being, it is trying also to hide its freedom from itself.
The ultimate meaning of determinism is to establish within us an unbroken continuity of existence in itself. The motive conceived as a psychic fact-i.e., as a full and given reality-is, in the deterministic view, articulated without any break with the decision and the act, both of which are equally conceived as psychic givens. The in-itself has got hold of all these "data"; the motive provokes the act as the physical cause its effect; everything is real, everything is full. Thus the refusal of freedom can be conceived only as an attempt to apprehend oneself as being-in-itself; it amounts to the same thing. Human reality may be defined as a being such that in its being its freedom is at stake because human reality perpetually tries to refuse to recognize its freedom. Psychologically in each one of us this amounts to trying to take the causes and motives as things. We try to confer permanence upon them. We attempt to hide from ourselves that their nature and their weight depend each moment on the meaning which I give to them; we take them for constants. This amounts to considering the meaning which I gave to them just now or yesterday-which is irremediable because it is past-and extrapolating from it a character fixed still in the present. I attempt to persuade myself that the cause is as it was. Thus it would pass whole and untouched from my past consciousness to my present consciousness. It would inhabit my consciousness. This amounts to trying to give an essence to the for-itself. In the same way people will posit ends as transcendences, which is not an error. But instead of seeing that the transcendences there posited are maintained in their being by my own transcendence, people will assume that I encounter them upon my surging up in the world; they come from God, from nature, from "my" nature, from society. These ends ready made and pre-human will therefore define the meaning of my act even before I conceive it, just as causes as pure psychic givens will produce it without my even being aware of them. Cause, act, and end constitute a continuum, a plenum. These abortive attempts to stifle freedom under the weight of being (they collapse with the sudden upsurge of anguish before freedom) show sufficiently that freedom in its foundation coincides with the nothingness which is at the heart of man. Human-reality is free because it is not enough. It is free because it is perpetually wrenched away from itself and because it has been separated by a nothingness from what it is and from what it will be. It is free, finally, because its present being is itself a nothingness in the form of the "reflection-reflecting." Man is free because he is not himself but presence to himself. The being which is what it is cannot be free. Freedom is precisely the nothingness which is made-to-he at the heart of man and which forces human-reality to make itself instead of to be. As we have seen, for human reality, to be is to choose oneself; nothing comes to it either from the outside or from within which it can receive or accept.
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

SARTRE GROUNDS THE EXPERIENCE OF FREEDOM IN ANGUISH. HE EXPLICITLY STATES THAT OUR DIRECT CONSCIOUSNESS OF THIS ABSOLUTE FREEDOM IS NOT A HAPPY OR SIMPLE FEELING, BUT IS EXPRESSED THROUGH "ANGUISH, ABANDONMENT, RESPONSIBILITY." These feelings are the very "quality of our consciousness in so far as this is pure and simple freedom."
“We choose the world, not in its contexture as in-itself but in its meaning, by choosing ourselves. Through the internal negation by denying that we are the world, we make the world appear as world, and this internal negation can exist only if it is at the same time a projection toward a possible. It is the very way in which I entrust myself to the inanimate, in which I abandon myself to my body (or, on the other hand, the way in which I resist either one of these) which causes the appearance of both my body and the inanimate world with their respective value. Consequently there also I enjoy a full consciousness of myself and of my fundamental projects, and this time the consciousness is positional. Nevertheless, precisely because it is positional, what it releases to me is the transcendent image of what I am. The value of things, their instrumental role, their proximity and real distance (which have no relation to their spatial proximity and distance) do nothing more than to outline my image-that is, my choice. My clothing (a uniform or a lounge suit, a soft or a starched shirt) whether neglected or cared for, carefully chosen or ordinary, my furniture, the street on which I live, the city in which I reside, the books with which I surround myself, the recreation which I enjoy, everything which is mine (that is, finally, the world of which I am perpetually conscious, at least by way of a meaning implied by the object which I look at or use) : all this informs me of my choice that is, my being. But such is the structure of the positional consciousness that I can trace this knowledge back to a subjective apprehension of myself, and it refers me to other objects which I produce or which I dispose of in connection with the order of the preceding without being able to perceive that I am thus more and more sculpturing my figure in the world. Thus we are fully conscious of the choice which we are. And if someone objects that in accordance with these observations it would be necessary to be conscious not of our being-chosen but of choosing ourselves, we shall reply that this consciousness is expressed by the twofold "feeling" of anguish and of responsibility. Anguish, abandonment, responsibility, whether muted or full strength, constitute the quality of our consciousness in so far as this is pure and simple freedom.
Earlier we posed a question: I have yielded to fatigue, we said, and doubtless I could have done otherwise but at what price? At present we are in a position to answer this. Our analysis, in fact, has just shown us that this act was not gratuitous. To be sure, it was not explained by a motive or a cause conceived as the content of a prior state of consciousness, but it had to be interpreted in terms of an original project of which it formed an integral part. Hence it becomes evident that we can not suppose that the act could have been modified without at the same time supposing a fundamental modification of my original choice of myself. This way of yielding to fatigue and of letting myself fall down at the side of the road expresses a certain initial stiffening against my body and the inanimate in-itself. It is placed within the compass of a certain view of the world in which difficulties can appear "not worth the trouble of being tolerated"; or, to be exact, since the motive is a pure non-thetic consciousness and consequently an initial project of itself toward an absolute end (a certain aspect of the in-itself-for-itself), it is an apprehension of the world (warmth, distance from the city, uselessness of effort, etc.) as the cause of my ceasing to walk. Thus this possible-to stop-theoretically takes on its meaning only in and through the hierarchy of the possibles which I am in terms of the ultimate and initial possible. This does not imply that I must necessarily stop but merely that I can refuse to stop only by a radical conversion of my being-in-the-world; that is, by an abrupt metamorphosis of my initial project-i.e., by another choice of myself and of my ends. Moreover this modification is always possible. The anguish which, when this possibility is revealed, manifests our freedom to our consciousness is witness of this perpetual modifiability of our initial project. In anguish we do not simply apprehend the fact that the possibles which we project are perpetually eaten away by our freedom-to-come; in addition we apprehend our choice-i.e., ourselves-as unjustifiable. This means that we apprehend our choice as not deriving from any prior reality but rather as being about to serve as foundation for the ensemble of significations which constitute reality. Unjustifiability is not only the subjective recognition of the absolute contingency of our being but also that of the interiorization and recovery of this contingency on our own account. For the choice-as we shall see-issues from the contingency of the in-itself which it nihilates and transports it to the level of the gratuitous determination of the for-itself by itself. Thus we are perpetually engaged in our choice and perpetually conscious of the fact that we ourselves can abruptly invert this choice and "reverse steam"; for we project the future by our very being, but our existential freedom perpetually eats it away as we make known to ourselves what we are by means of the future but without getting a grip on this future which remains always possible without ever passing to the rank of the real. Thus we are perpetually threatened by the nihilation of our actual choice and perpetually threatened with choosing ourselves-and consequently with becoming-other than we are. By the sole fact that our choice is absolute, it is fragile; that is, by positing our freedom by means of it, we posit by the same stroke the perpetual possibility that the choice may become a "here and now" which has been made-past in the interests of a "beyond" which I shall be.”
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

E2.2.D.4.3. The Human Condition: Bad Faith and The Situation - because radical freedom is a burden, our primary temptation is to deny it through "Bad Faith" (self-deception).

E2.2.D.4.3.a. Jean-Paul Sartre's Being and Nothingness is sometimes described as the bible of existentialism. At its core is the notion of Bad Faith. For this episode of the Philosophy Bites podcast Sebastian Gardner, author of a recent book about Being and Nothingness, explains what Sartre meant by Bad Faith: mostly a condition of self-deception.
In the example of the café waiter, he identifies him as immersing himself in his role and his function in a way that brings him an illicit satisfaction - experiencing himself as a thing, an object with determinate properties, denying that he is free. He is playing the game of automation of consciousness.
In the vignette of the man trying to seduce a woman in a café, she is treating her hand as an object when she lets the man touch it without withdrawing - this serves as a self-deception strategy since she has not yet decided if she wants to go further in the relationship - she puts off to later that decision by becoming mindless of her body.
In the vignette of the homosexual debating with himself if he should acknowledge his past an call himself an homosexual or should disavow the facts and believe he can change - he illustrates that our past in some sense does determine what we are and also that we are free to reinvent ourselves. Sartre expresses this paradox saying the human subject's consciousness is non self-identical. How is it possible to exhibit yourself a certain way up to a certain point and yet to retain the capacity to change course? This capacity is grounded on the 2 dimensions of facticity and transcendence. Facticity includes the heritage of culture but also of on'es previous actions. Transcendence is the capacity to go beyond facticity.
Bad faith as the term is used by Sartre is not a moral term, but it is an ethical concept to convince us to operate a practical reorientation: it is not a descriptive metaphysics, it is a revisionary one (he is not describing the way the world is empirically, his philosophy has a near religious dimension to it). He is opposed to common sense in his system.
(Sebastian Gardner on Jean-Paul Sartre on Bad Faith, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: http://philosophybites.com/2009/02/sebastian-gardner-on-jeanpaul-sartre-on-bad-faith.html

E2.2.D.4.3.b. SARTRE URGES US TO TAKE BACK CONTROL OF OUR LIVES, FIGHTING BAD FAITH WHICH COMES FROM AUTOMATIC STATES OF CONSCIOUSNESS THAT DEPRIVE US OF OUR FREEDOM
"Cogito Ergo Sum - The validation of an "I" in Descartes's conclusion "I think therefore I am" that he derives from radical doubt has been contested over the centuries. "It thinks", "Thinking is going on" or there exists flickering thoughts which not necessarily are bundled under a continuing identity seems a more logical conclusion. 
Sartre recognizes the heritage he awes to Descartes in anchoring the importance of subjectivity: that the subject is conscious of itself and has to construct itself from the ground up. If he builds existentialism on the acknowledgement that there is an undubitable self, which then can be imputed full responsibility, he distances himself significantly from Descartes in stating that we are not necessarily conscious of our mental states - and actually rarely are so. He urges us to take back control of our lives, fighting bad faith which comes from automatic states of consciousness that deprive us of our freedom. Most of the time we are in pre-consciousness, absorbed in our tasks and the role we embody. We need to move from pre-reflection to reflection."
(Cogito Ergo Sum, In Our times, brodcast on BBC4 on Thu 28 Apr 2011)

Listen to the full podcast: https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b010mvcp

E2.2.D.4.3.c. WHEN WE CHOSE TO BELIEVE WE ARE NOT FREE
"Authenticity - [...] Sartre [...] argues authenticity cannot be defined in terms of relationship with death because it is not an event I can anticipate. For him the central concept is freedom. To be inauthentic is to not want to acknowledge the freedom that all human beings possess. Most of us live in a state of inauthenticity he call “bad faith”, where we chose to believe we are not free. Iris Murdoch would criticize the absolute freedom Sartre refers to saying it would only exist in a “moral desert” - on what basis could you then make a choice? Should we conclude that authenticity cannot be the only value on which to base a coherent philosophy? Painting Sartre as creating moral values out of a vacuum is a caricature though, for him authenticity does have moral implications. It is not that we can choose any value we like, but the only one which makes sense is freedom.
Simone de Beauvoir built on Sartre’s existentialism pointing that one had to take into account social position when one was talking about freedom and that there were degrees of freedom depending on the kinds of social relations we found ourselves - including being a woman at the time when she wrote."
(Authenticity, In our times, broadcast on BBC4 on Thu 19 Nov 2020)

Listen to the full podcast: https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/m00035z4

E2.2.D.4.3.d. "BAD FAITH
A form of duplicity or lying toward others and oneself. It is pretending, through words or actions, to be something one is not.
 
However, one must still be something. Here, the notion of bad faith becomes a Sartrian concept. Look at that waiter serving. "His movements are quick and deliberate, a little too precise." It's as if he's playing a role. What role? The role of a waiter. You might ask how that's possible since he is indeed a waiter. The answer is that he is not. "A waiter cannot immediately become a waiter in the same way that an inkwell becomes an inkwell or a glass becomes glass." He is a human being. He is free. He is neither this nor that (a waiter, his mother's son, or the father of his children). He has to be, which presupposes that he does not exist. This explains the anxiety, a feeling inseparable from nothingness and freedom (not being what I am and being what I am not). It is certainly more comfortable to "imprison man in what he is," that is, to play his role while forgetting that it is a role. Sartre calls this bad faith: pretending to be what one is, as a glass is glass. Therefore, it is pretending not to be free. Bad faith is a form of faith because it involves believing in what one is as if it were a thing, a fatality, or a god who is in itself for itself. Therefore, it is a constant risk for all consciousness. According to Sartre, its opposite is not sincerity (wanting to coincide with one's being is already bad faith), but rather, authenticity (Being and Nothingness, I, chap. 2). The question remains: Is authenticity another lie? Is believing that we are not what we are and that we are what we are not—in other words, believing in our consciousness and our freedom as a power of annihilation—lucidity or illusion?"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E2.2.D.4.3.e. "SITUATION
In Sartre's sense of the term, being in a situation means being subject to a number of facts and constraints that one has not chosen, such as being a man or a woman, tall or short, of a particular social class, or living in a specific country at a specific time. However, one remains free to accept or reject these facts and constraints. [...]
This is very convenient. All we need to do is call 'situation' everything that the human sciences consider to be determinism (the body, the unconscious, education, the social environment, etc.), and free will is saved." However, the question remains: What makes me choose what I choose? If my choices are determined by who I am, then every choice is determined by something I did not choose. Therefore, to preserve freedom, my choices must be explained not by what I am, but by what I am not. This is where freedom regains its footing, or rather, its nothingness. According to Sartre, being in a situation means being confronted with a determined but not determining being as nothingness (since a determination can only apply to being, not to nothingness), and remaining free to accept or reject it. The situation is the objective correlate (determined, not determining) of my subjectivity; it is the essence of my nothingness.
 
As we can see, the concept only saves freedom for those who are not what they are and are what they are not—in other words, those who escape, or believe they escape, the principle of identity. For those who are what they are and not what they are not—not a nothingness, but a being—the situation is just a figure of speech; it is a determinism that dares not speak its name."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E2.2.D.4.3.f. "CAPITAL SIN
But you still have to be able to stand yourself and look at yourself in the mirror, so to speak. At a certain level of horror or mediocrity, this becomes difficult without lying to yourself. This is what makes bad faith a deadly sin because it enables most of our ignominies by masking or justifying them. For example, Eichmann, an enthusiastic official of the Holocaust, told his judges after the war that he was only following his impulses. Or the ordinary scoundrel who explains that it's not his fault, but that of his childhood, his unconscious, or his neurosis. Too convenient. As Sartre showed, to be in bad faith is to act as if one were not free or responsible when one is responsible for one's actions at least. In a more banal sense, it is also to lie to others. The principle is often the same: we lie to hide our faults, justify them, or attribute a value to ourselves that we do not have. Those who renounce lying to themselves and others, who have stopped pretending, have little choice but to choose between virtue and shame. It is a painful and demanding choice that bad faith seeks to spare us from. It allows us to do wrong by hiding it. [...]"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E2.2.D.4.3.g. WHAT SARTRE CALLS THE "SITUATION," IS THE INSEPARABLE SYNTHESIS OF FREEDOM AND FACTICITY (OUR UN-CHOSEN GIVENS). THIS CONCEPT RESOLVES THE APPARENT CONTRADICTION BETWEEN OUR ABSOLUTE FREEDOM AND OUR CONCRETE LIMITATIONS.
“(1) I am an existent in the midst of other existents. But I cannot "realize" this existence in the midst of others; I cannot apprehend as objects the existents which surround me nor apprehend myself as a surrounded existence nor even give a meaning to this notion of "in the midst of" except by choosing myself-not in my being but in my manner of being. The choice of this end is the choice of what is not-yet-existing. My position in the midst of the world is defined by the relation between the instrumental utility or adversity in the realities which surround me and my own facticity; that is, the discovery of the dangers which I risk in the world, of the obstacles which I can encounter there, the aid which can be offered me, all in the light of a radical nihilation of myself and of it radical, internal negation of the in-itself and all effected from the point of view of a freely posited end. This is what we mean by the situation.
(2) The situation exists only in correlation with the surpassing of the given toward an end. It is the way in which the given which I am and the given which I am not are revealed to the For-itself; which I am in the mode of not-being it. When we speak of situation therefore we are speaking of a "position apprehended by the For-itself which is in situation." It is impossible to consider a situation from the outside; it is fixed in a form in itself. Consequently the situation cannot be called either objective nor subjective although the partial structures of this situation (the cup which I use, the table on which I lean, etc.) can and must be strictly objective. 
The situation cannot be subjective, for it is neither the sum nor the unity of the impressions which things make on us. It is the things themselves and myself among things; for my upsurge into the world as the pure nihilation of being has no other result but to cause there to be things, and it adds nothing. In this aspect the situation betrays my facticity; that is, the fact that things simply are there as they are without the necessity or the possibility of being otherwise and that I am there among them.
But neither can the situation be objective in the sense that it would be a pure given which the subject would establish without being in any way engaged in the system thus constituted. In fact the situation by the very meaning of the given (a meaning without which there would not even be any given) reflects to the for-itself its freedom. If the situation is neither subjective nor objective, this is because it does not constitute a knowledge nor even an affective comprehension of the state of the world by a subject. The situation is a relation of being between a for-itself and the in-itself which the for-itself nihilates. The situation is the whole subject (he is nothing but his situation) and it is also the whole "thing" (there is never anything more than things). The situation is the subject illuminating things by his very surpassing, if you like; it is things referring, to the subject his own image. It is the total facticity, the absolute contingency of the world, of my birth, of my place, of my past, of my environment, of the fact of my fellowman-and it is my freedom without limits as that which causes there to be for me a facticity. It is this dusty, ascending road, this burning thirst which I have, the refusal of these people to give me anything to drink because I do not have any money or because I am not of their country or of their race; it is my abandonment in the midst of these hostile populations along with this fatigue in my body which will perhaps prevent me from reaching the goal which I had set for myself. But also it is precisely this goal, not in so far as I clearly and explicitly formulate it but in so far as it is there everywhere around me as that which unifies and explains all these facts, that which organizes them in a totality capable of description instead of making of them a disordered nightmare.
(3) If the for-itself is nothing other than its situation, then it follows that being-in-situation defines human reality by accounting both for its being-there and for its being-beyond. Human reality is indeed the being which is always beyond its being-there. And the situation is the organized totality of the being-there, interpreted and lived in and through being beyond. Therefore there is no privileged situation. We mean by this that there is no situation in which the given would crush beneath its weight the freedom which constitutes it as such-and that conversely there is no situation in which the for-itself would be more free than in others. This must not be understood in the sense of that "inward freedom" of Bergson's which Politzer ridiculed in La fin d'une parade philosophique (The End of a Philosophical Parade) and which simply amounted to recognizing in the slave the independence of the inner life and of the heart in chains. When we declare that the slave in chains is as free as his master, we do not mean to speak of a freedom which would remain undetermined. The slave in chains is free to break them; this means that the very meaning of his chains will appear to him in the light of the end which he will have chosen: to remain a-slave or to risk the worst in order to get rid of his slavery. Of course the slave will not be able to obtain the wealth and the standard of living of his master; but these are not the objects of his projects; he can only dream of the possession of these treasures. The slave's facticity is such that the world appears to him with another countenance and that he has to posit and to resolve different problems; in particular it is necessary fundamentally to choose himself on the ground of slavery and thereby to give a meaning to this obscure constraint. For example, if he chooses revolt, then slavery, far from being at the start an obstacle to this revolt, takes on its meaning and its coefficient of adversity only through the revolt. To be exact, just because the life of the slave who revolts and dies' in the course of this revolt is a free life, just because the situation illuminated by a free project is full and concrete, just because the urgent and principal problem of this life is "Shall I attain my goal?"-just because of all this, the situation of the slave cannot be compared with that of the master. Each of them in fact takes on its meaning only for the for-itself in situation and in terms of the free choice of its ends. A comparison could be made only by a third person and consequently it could take place only between two objective forms in the midst of the world; moreover it could be established only in the light of a project freely chosen by this third person. There is no absolute point of view which one can adopt so as to compare different situations, each person realizes only one situation-his own.”
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

WHAT SARTRE CALLS THE "SITUATION," IS THE INSEPARABLE SYNTHESIS OF FREEDOM AND FACTICITY (OUR UN-CHOSEN GIVENS). THIS CONCEPT RESOLVES THE APPARENT CONTRADICTION BETWEEN OUR ABSOLUTE FREEDOM AND OUR CONCRETE LIMITATIONS (Continued)
(4) Since the situation is illumined by ends which are themselves projected only in terms of the being-there, which they illuminate, it is presented as eminently concrete. Of course it contains and sustains abstract and universal structures, but it must be understood as the single countenance which the world turns toward us as our unique and personal chance. We may recall here a fable of Kafka's: A merchant comes to plead his case at the castle where a forbidding guard bars the entrance. The merchant does not dare to go further; he waits and dies still waiting. At the hour of death he asks the guardian, "How does it happen that I was the only one waiting?" And the guardian replies, "This gate was made only for you." Such is precisely the case with the for-itself if we may add in addition that each man makes for himself his own gate. The concreteness of the situation is expressed particularly by the fact that the for-itself never aims at ends which are fundamentally abstract and universal. Of course we shall see in the next chapter that the profound meaning of the choice is universal and that consequently the for-itself causes a human-reality to exist as a species. Again it is necessary to disengage the meaning which is implicit, and it is for this that we shall use existential psychoanalysis. Once disengaged the terminal and initial meaning of the for-itself will appear as an UnseIbstandig which in order to manifest itself needs a particular kind of concretion.24 But the end of the for-itself as it is lived and pursued in the project by which the for-itself surpasses and founds the real is revealed in its concreteness to the for-itself as a particular change in the situation which it lives (e.g., to break its chains, to be King of the 'Franks, to liberate Poland, to fight for the proletariat) . At first the for-itself will not project fighting for the proletariat in general but will aim at the proletariat across a particular concrete group of workers to which the person belongs. This is due to the fact that the end illuminates the given only because the end is chosen as the surpassing of this given. The for-itself does not arise with a wholly given end. but by "making" the situation, the for-itself "makes itself"-and conversely.
(5) Just as the situation is neither objective or subjective, so it can be considered neither as the free result of a freedom not as the ensemble of the constraints to which I am subject; it stems from the illumination of the constraint by freedom which gives to it its meaning as constraint. Among brute existents there can be no connection; it is freedom which founds the connections by grouping the existents into instrumental-complexes; and it is freedom which projects the reason for the connections that is, its end. But precisely because I project myself toward an end across a world of connections, I now meet with sequences, with linked series, with complexes, and I must determine to act according to laws. These laws and the way I make use of them decide the failure or the success of my attempts. But it is through freedom that legal relations come into the world. Thus freedom enchains itself in the world as a free project toward ends.
(6) The For-itself is a temporalization. This means that it is not but that it "makes itself." It is the situation which must account for that substantial permanence which we readily recognize in people ("He has not changed." "He is always the same.") and which the person experiences empirically in most cases as being his own. The free perseverance in a single project does not imply any permanence; quite the contrary, it is a perpetual renewal of my engagement-as we have seen. On the other hand, the realities enveloped and illuminated by a project which develops and confirms itself present the permanence of the in-itself; and to the c'(tent that they refer our image to us, they support us with their everlastingness; in fact it frequently happens that we take their permanence for our own. III particular the permanence of place and environment, of the judgments passed on us by our fellowmen, of our past-all shape a degraded image of our perseverance. While I am temporalizing myself, I am always French, a civil servant or a proletarian for others. This unrealizable has the character of an invariable limit for my situation.
Similarly what we call a person's temperament or character but which is nothing but his free project in so far as it is-for-the-Other, appears also for the For-itself as an invariable unrealizable. 'Alain has perceived correctly that character is a vow. When a man says, "I am not easy to please," he is entering into a free engagement with his ill-temper, and by the same token his words are a free interpretation of certain ambiguous details in his past. In this sense there is no character; there is only a project of oneself. But we must not, however, misunderstand the given aspect of the character. It is true that for the Other who apprehends me as the Other-as-object, I am ill-tempered, hypocritical or frank, cowardly or courageous. This aspect is referred to me by the Other's look; by the experience of the look, this character, which was a free, project lived and self-conscious, becomes an unrealizable ne varietur to be assumed. It depends then not only on the Other but on the position which I have taken with respect to the Other and on my perseverance in maintaining this position. So long as I let myself be fascinated by the Other's look, my character will figure in my own eyes as an unrealizable ne varietur, the substantial permanence of my being-the kind of thing expressed in such ordinary everyday remarks as "I am forty-five years old, and I'm not going to start changing myself today." The Character often is what the For-itself tries to recover in order to become the In-itself-for-itself which it projects being. Nevertheless it should be noted that this permanence of the past, of the environment, and of character are not given qualities; they are revealed on things only in correlation with the continuity of my project. For example, when after a war, after a long exile one finds a particular mountain landscape unchanged, it would be in vain to hope to found upon the inertia and apparent permanence of these stones the hope for a renascence of the past. This landscape reveals its permanence only across a persevering project. These mountains have a meaning inside my situation; in one way or another they shape my belonging to a nation which is at peace, her own mistress, one who holds a certain rank in the international hierarchy. Let me find them again after a defeat and during the occupation of a part of the national territory, and they cannot offer me the same countenance. This is because I myself have other projects, because I am engaged differently ill the world.”
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

E2.2.D.4.3.h. CERVANTES PROVIDES US WITH A CASE STUDY OF WHAT JEAN-PAUL SARTRE CALLED "BAD FAITH" (MAUVAISE FOI), THE ACT OF USING ONE'S FREEDOM TO DECEIVE ONESELF. THE HUSBAND, ANSELMO, IS CONFRONTED WITH THE CLEAR EVIDENCE OF HIS WIFE'S AFFAIR, BUT HE ACTIVELY CHOOSES TO INTERPRET IT AS ITS OPPOSITE. He "went on adding link after link to the chain with which he was binding himself and making his dishonour secure."
“The next day as the three were at table Anselmo asked Lothario to recite something of what he had composed for his mistress Chloris; for as Camilla did not know her, he might safely say what he liked.
“Even did she know her,” returned Lothario, “I would hide nothing, for when a lover praises his lady’s beauty, and charges her with cruelty, he casts no imputation upon her fair name; at any rate, all I can say is that yesterday I made a sonnet on the ingratitude of this Chloris, which goes thus:
SONNET
At midnight, in the silence, when the eyes
   Of happier mortals balmy slumbers close,
   The weary tale of my unnumbered woes
To Chloris and to Heaven is wont to rise.
And when the light of day returning dyes
   The portals of the east with tints of rose,
   With undiminished force my sorrow flows
In broken accents and in burning sighs.
And when the sun ascends his star-girt throne,
   And on the earth pours down his midday beams,
   Noon but renews my wailing and my tears;
And with the night again goes up my moan.
   Yet ever in my agony it seems
   To me that neither Heaven nor Chloris hears.”
The sonnet pleased Camilla, and still more Anselmo, for he praised it and said the lady was excessively cruel who made no return for sincerity so manifest. On which Camilla said, “Then all that love-smitten poets say is true?”
“As poets they do not tell the truth,” replied Lothario; “but as lovers they are not more defective in expression than they are truthful.”
“There is no doubt of that,” observed Anselmo, anxious to support and uphold Lothario’s ideas with Camilla, who was as regardless of his design as she was deep in love with Lothario; and so taking delight in anything that was his, and knowing that his thoughts and writings had her for their object, and that she herself was the real Chloris, she asked him to repeat some other sonnet or verses if he recollected any.
“I do,” replied Lothario, “but I do not think it as good as the first one, or, more correctly speaking, less bad; but you can easily judge, for it is this.
SONNET
I know that I am doomed; death is to me
   As certain as that thou, ungrateful fair,
   Dead at thy feet shouldst see me lying, ere
My heart repented of its love for thee.
If buried in oblivion I should be,
   Bereft of life, fame, favour, even there
   It would be found that I thy image bear
Deep graven in my breast for all to see.
This like some holy relic do I prize
   To save me from the fate my truth entails,
   Truth that to thy hard heart its vigour owes.
Alas for him that under lowering skies,
   In peril o’er a trackless ocean sails,
   Where neither friendly port nor pole-star shows.”
Anselmo praised this second sonnet too, as he had praised the first; and so he went on adding link after link to the chain with which he was binding himself and making his dishonour secure; for when Lothario was doing most to dishonour him he told him he was most honoured; and thus each step that Camilla descended towards the depths of her abasement, she mounted, in his opinion, towards the summit of virtue and fair fame.”
(Miguel de Cervantes, The History of Don Quixote, Vol 1, 1605)

DON QUIXOTE CHOOSES TO BELIEVE HE IS ENCHANTED TO AVOID THE PAINFUL TRUTH THAT HE HAS SIMPLY BEEN DEFEATED AND CAPTURED. Cervantes thus gives us a literary illustration of the core existentialist concept of "bad faith" (mauvaise foi), as later formalized by Jean-Paul Sartre.
“Don Quixote, who was listening to all this, said, “I give it;-moreover one who is enchanted as I am cannot do as he likes with himself; for he who had enchanted him could prevent his moving from one place for three ages, and if he attempted to escape would bring him back flying.”—And that being so, they might as well release him, particularly as it would be to the advantage of all; for, if they did not let him out, he protested he would be unable to avoid offending their nostrils unless they kept their distance.
The canon took his hand, tied together as they both were, and on his word and promise they unbound him, and rejoiced beyond measure he was to find himself out of the cage. The first thing he did was to stretch himself all over, and then he went to where Rocinante was standing and giving him a couple of slaps on the haunches said, “I still trust in God and in his blessed mother, O flower and mirror of steeds, that we shall soon see ourselves, both of us, as we wish to be, thou with thy master on thy back, and I mounted upon thee, following the calling for which God sent me into the world.” And so saying, accompanied by Sancho, he withdrew to a retired spot, from which he came back much relieved and more eager than ever to put his squire’s scheme into execution.
The canon gazed at him, wondering at the extraordinary nature of his madness, and that in all his remarks and replies he should show such excellent sense, and only lose his stirrups, as has been already said, when the subject of chivalry was broached. And so, moved by compassion, he said to him, as they all sat on the green grass awaiting the arrival of the provisions:
“Is it possible, gentle sir, that the nauseous and idle reading of books of chivalry can have had such an effect on your worship as to upset your reason so that you fancy yourself enchanted, and the like, all as far from the truth as falsehood itself is? How can there be any human understanding that can persuade itself there ever was all that infinity of Amadises in the world, or all that multitude of famous knights, all those emperors of Trebizond, all those Felixmartes of Hircania, all those palfreys, and damsels-errant, and serpents, and monsters, and giants, and marvellous adventures, and enchantments of every kind, and battles, and prodigious  encounters, splendid costumes, love-sick princesses, squires made counts, droll dwarfs, love letters, billings and cooings, swashbuckler women, and, in a word, all that nonsense the books of chivalry contain? For myself, I can only say that when I read them, so long as I do not stop to think that they are all lies and frivolity, they give me a certain amount of pleasure; but when I come to consider what they are, I fling the very best of them at the wall, and would fling it into the fire if there were one at hand, as richly deserving such punishment as cheats and impostors out of the range of ordinary toleration, and as founders of new sects and modes of life, and teachers that lead the ignorant public to believe and accept as truth all the folly they contain. And such is their audacity, they even dare to unsettle the wits of gentlemen of birth and intelligence, as is shown plainly by the way they have served your worship, when they have brought you to such a pass that you have to be shut up in a cage and carried on an ox-cart as one would carry a lion or a tiger from place to place to make money by showing it. Come, Señor Don Quixote, have some compassion for yourself, return to the bosom of common sense, and make use of the liberal share of it that heaven has been pleased to bestow upon you, employing your abundant gifts of mind in some other reading that may serve to benefit your conscience and add to your honour. And if, still led away by your natural bent, you desire to read books of achievements and of chivalry, read the Book of Judges in the Holy Scriptures, for there you will find grand reality, and deeds as true as they are heroic. Lusitania had a Viriatus, Rome a Caesar, Carthage a Hannibal, Greece an Alexander, Castile a Count Fernan Gonzalez, Valencia a Cid, Andalusia a Gonzalo Fernandez, Estremadura a Diego Garcia de Paredes, Jerez a Garci Perez de Vargas, Toledo a Garcilaso, Seville a Don Manuel de Leon, to read of whose valiant deeds will entertain and instruct the loftiest minds and fill them with delight and wonder. Here, Señor Don Quixote, will be reading worthy of your sound understanding; from which you will rise learned in history, in love with virtue, strengthened in goodness, improved in manners, brave without rashness, prudent without cowardice; and all to the honour of God, your own advantage and the glory of La Mancha, whence, I am informed, your worship derives your birth.”
Don Quixote listened with the greatest attention to the canon’s words, and when he found he had finished, after regarding him for some time, he replied to him:
“It appears to me, gentle sir, that your worship’s discourse is intended to persuade me that there never were any knights-errant in the world, and that all the books of chivalry are false, lying, mischievous and useless to the State, and that I have done wrong in reading them, and worse in believing them, and still worse in imitating them, when I undertook to follow the arduous calling of knight-errantry which they set forth; for you deny that there ever were Amadises of Gaul or of Greece, or any other of the knights of whom the books are full.”
(Miguel de Cervantes, The History of Don Quixote, Vol 1, 1605)

E2.2.D.4.4. The consequences and the goal of the existentialist perspective. Because we are free, we are "radically responsible" for everything we are. Our life's project is to abandon Bad Faith, embrace this responsibility, and construct an "authentic" self.

E2.2.D.4.4.a. KIERKEGAARD'S ANALYSIS IS A CRITIQUE OF THE "MODERN TRAGIC HERO." THIS HERO IS "SUBJECTIVELY REFLECTED IN HIMSELF," HAS BEEN "REFLECTED... OUT OF EVERY IMMEDIATE RELATION TO STATE, KINDRED, AND FATE," AND ULTIMATELY "STANDS AND FALLS ENTIRELY ON HIS OWN DEEDS." He argues that this modern conception of radical freedom and total responsibility is a "misunderstanding of the tragic."
“It is generally known that Aristotle gives two sources for action in tragedy, διάνοια καὶ ἦθος [thought and character], but he also notes that the primary factor is the τέλος [end, purpose] and the individuals do not act in order to present char-acters; rather these are included for the sake of action. Here it is easy to perceive a difference from modern tragedy. What specifically characterizes ancient tragedy is that the action does not proceed only from character, that the action is not subjectively reflected enough, but that the action itself has a relative admixture of suffering. Ancient tragedy, therefore, did not develop dialogue to the point of exhaustive reflection with everything merged in it; the distinct components of dialogue are actually present in the monologue and chorus. Whether the chorus comes closer to epic substantiality or to the lyrical élan, it nevertheless seems to provide "the more," so to speak, that will not merge in the individuality; the monologue, in turn, has a more lyrical concentration and has "the more" that will not merge in action and situation. In ancient tragedy, the action itself has an epic element; it is just as much event as action. This, of course, is because the ancient world did not have subjectivity reflected in itself. Even if the individual moved freely, he nevertheless rested in substantial determinants, in the state, the family, in fate. This substantial determinant is the essential fateful factor in Greek tragedy and is its essential characteristic. The hero's downfall, therefore, is not a result solely of his action but is also a suffering, whereas in modern tragedy the hero's downfall is not really suffering but is a deed. Thus, in the modern period situation and character are in fact predominant. The tragic hero is subjectively reflected in himself, and this reflection has not only reflected him out of every immediate relation to state, kindred, and fate but often has even reflected him out of his own past life. What concerns us is a certain specific element of his life as his own deed. For this rea-son, the tragic can be exhausted in situation and lines because no immediacy is left at all. Therefore, modern tragedy has no epic foreground, no epic remainder. The hero stands and falls entirely on his own deeds.
What is here briefly but sufficiently developed will have its importance in explaining a difference between ancient and modern tragedy that I regard as very important-the different nature of tragic guilt. It is well known that Aristotle insists that the tragic hero have ἁμαρτία [error]. But just as the action in Greek tragedy is something intermediate between action and the suffering, so also is guilt, and therein lies the tragic collision. But the more the subjectivity is reflective, the more Pelagianly one sees the individual thrown solely upon him-self, the more ethical guilt becomes. Between these two extremes lies the tragic. If the individual has no guilt whatever, the tragic interest is annulled, for in that case the tragic collision is enervated. On the other hand, if he has absolute guilt, he no longer interests us tragically. It is, therefore, surely a misunderstanding of the tragic when our age endeavors to have everything fateful transubstantiate itself into individuality and subjectivity. We want to know nothing about the hero's past; we load his whole life upon his shoulders as his own deed, make him accountable for everything, but in so doing we also transform his esthetic guilt into ethical guilt. In this way, the tragic hero becomes bad, evil actually becomes the tragic subject, but evil has no esthetic interest, and sin is not an esthetic element.

This misguided enterprise may somehow have its basis in the working of the whole age toward the comic. The comic lies precisely in the isolation; when one wants to affirm the tragic within this isolation, one has evil in its badness, not the authentic tragic guilt in its ambiguous guiltlessness.”
(Søren Kierkegaard, Either or, part 1, 1843)

FOR SØREN KIERKEGAARD, A TRUE SELF IS NOT A GIVEN, BUT MUST BE CREATED THROUGH THE ACT OF MAKING A SERIOUS, BINDING CHOICE. He warns the aesthete that his refusal to choose will lead to the "disintegration of your essence into a multiplicity," the loss of the "binding power of the personality."
“THE BALANCE BETWEEN THE ESTHETIC AND THE ETHICAL IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE PERSONALITY
My Friend,
What I have said so often to you I say once again, or, more [II 143] exactly, I shout it to you: Either/Or, aut/aut, for the introduction of a single corrective aut does not clarify the matter, inasmuch as the subject under discussion is too significant for anyone to be satisfied with just a part of it and in itself too coherent to be capable of being possessed in part. There are conditions of life in which it would be ludicrous or a kind of derangement to apply an Either/Or, but there are also people whose souls are too dissolute to comprehend the implications of such a dilemma, whose personalities lack the energy to be able to say with pathos: Either/Or.
These words have always made a great impression on me and still do, especially when I say them this way plainly and by themselves; therein lies the possibility of setting in motion the most terrifying contradictions. They act upon me like an incantation formula, and my soul becomes exceedingly earnest, at times is almost in a state of shock. I think of my early youth, when without really comprehending what it is to make a choice in life I listened with childish trust to the talk of my elders, and the moment of choice became a very solemn and momentous matter, although in choosing I only followed someone else's directions. I think of moments later in life when I stood at the crossroads, when my soul was made ripe in the hour of decision. I think of the many less important but for me not trivial incidents in my life when it was a matter of choosing, for even if there is only one situation in which these words have absolute meaning-namely, every time truth, justice, and sanctity appear on one side and lust and natural inclinations, dark passions and perdition on the other side. Nevertheless, even in matters that in and by themselves are innocent, what a person chooses is always important. It is important that he choose properly, test himself, so that eventually he does not have to begin a painful retreat to the point where he started and thank God if he has no more for which to upbraid himself than having wasted his time.
In daily conversation, I use these words as others use them; indeed, it would be a foolish pedantry to stop using them that way; but at times it may occur to me that I have used them about utterly trivial matters. They take off their humble clothes; I forget the insignificant ideas they separated; they appear before me in all their dignity, in their vestments. Just as a magistrate wears civilian clothes in everyday life and mingles with the crowd without any distinction, so also these words go about in everyday conversation; but when he appears in his authority, he separates himself from all the others. These words, then, appear before me like a magistrate I am accustomed to seeing only on solemn occasions, and my soul always becomes earnest. And even though my life has its Either/ Or behind it to a certain degree, I know very well that there will still be many a time when it will have its full significance. Meanwhile, I hope that when these words halt me on my way they will at least find me appropriately disposed, and I hope that I will make the right choice. But in any case I will try to choose with unfeigned earnestness; I may then at least dare to take comfort in the thought that I shall leave my wrong path sooner.

And now you, you certainly do use these words often enough indeed, they have almost become a byword to you. What meaning do they have for you? None whatsoever. For you, to remind you of your own expression, they are a wink, a turn of the hand, a coup de mains [sudden attack], an abracadabra. You know how to apply them on any occasion, and they are not without effect either. On you they work like strong drink on a high-strung person; you become completely intoxicated in what you call the higher madness.
"Therein is contained the whole wisdom of life, but no one has ever rendered them as impressively as if he were a god in the shape of a scarecrow who spoke to suffering humanity-as that great thinker and genuine philosopher of life who said to a man who had hurled his hat to the floor: Pick it up, and you will get a beating; leave it there, and you will also get a beating; now you may choose." You have your great joy "comforting" people when they turn to you in crucial situations; you listen to their expositions and then say: Yes, now I see it all perfectly; there are two possible situations- one can do either this or that. My honest opinion and my friendly advice is this: Do it or do not do it you will regret both. But the person who mocks others mocks himself, and it is not meaningless but is rather a profound mockery of yourself, a tragic proof of how flabby your soul is, that your view of life is concentrated in one single sentence: "I say simply Either/Or." Now, if you actually meant that in all earnestness, then there would be nothing to be done with you. One would have to let you be what you are and lament that heaviness of heart or lightness of mind had debilitated your spirit. But since we know that is not the case, we are not tempted to feel sorry for you but to wish that your life situation might tighten its screws on you and force you to let what resides in you come out, might begin that more rigorous examination that is not satisfied with chatter and witticisms. Life is a masquerade, you explain, and for you this is inexhaustible material for amusement, and as yet no one has succeeded in knowing you, for every disclosure is always a deception. Only in this way can you breathe and prevent people from crowding too close upon you and making it difficult for you to breathe. Your occupation consists in preserving your hiding place, and you are successful, for your mask is the most puzzling of all; in other words, you are a nonentity and are something only in relation to others, and what you are you are only through this relation. You hold out a lovesick hand to an affectionate shepherdess and at once are masked in all possible Arcadian sentimentality; a venerable clergyman you deceive with a brotherly kiss etc. You yourself are a nonentity, a puzzling figure on whose forehead stands Either/Or. […]
Although every such remark from you has no effect on me or, if it does, at most arouses righteous indignation, I nevertheless shall answer you for your own sake. Are you not aware that there comes a midnight hour when everyone must unmask; do you believe that life will always allow itself to be trifled with; do you believe that one can sneak away just before midnight in order to avoid it? Or are you not dismayed by it? I have seen people in life who have deceived others for such a long time that eventually they are unable to show their true nature. I have seen people who have played hide-and-seek so long that at last in a kind of lunacy they force their secret thoughts on others just as loathsomely as they proudly had concealed them from them earlier. Or can you think of anything more appalling than having it all end with the disintegration of your essence into a multiplicity, so that you actually became several, just as that unhappy demoniac became a legion, and thus you would have lost what is the most inward and holy in a human being, the binding power of the personality?
You really should not be facetious about something that is not only earnest but is also dreadful. In every person there is something that up to a point hinders him from becoming completely transparent to himself, and this can be the case to such a high degree, he can be so inexplicably intertwined in the life-relations that lie beyond him, that he cannot open himself. But the person who can scarcely open himself cannot love, and the person who cannot love is the unhappiest of all. And you flippantly do the same; you practice the art of being mysterious to everybody. My young friend, suppose there was no one who cared to guess your riddle-what joy would you have in it then? But above all for your own sake, for the sake of your salvation for I know no condition of the soul that can better be described as damnation halt this wild flight, this passion for annihilation that rages within you, for that is what you want: you want to annihilate everything; you want to satisfy the hunger of your doubt by consuming existence. For this you fashion yourself, and for this you toughen your mind. You readily admit that you are good for nothing, that your only diversion is to march around existence seven times, blow the trumpet, and then let the whole thing collapse so that your soul can be soothed, indeed, become sad, so that you can call forth echo, for echo sounds only in emptiness.”
(Søren Kierkegaard, Either or, part 2, 1843)

FOR SØREN KIERKEGAARD, THE ETHICAL MAN'S CORE ARGUMENT IS THAT THE PERSONALITY IS FORGED BY COMMITMENT: "THROUGH THE CHOICE THE PERSONALITY SUBMERGES ITSELF IN THAT WHICH IS BEING CHOSEN, AND WHEN IT DOES NOT CHOOSE, IT WITHERS AWAY IN ATROPHY."
“But by this road I probably will come no further along with you. Besides, my head, if you so please, is too weak to be able to endure this and, if I so please, too strong to take pleasure in this continual dizziness before my eyes. Therefore I shall embark on the subject from another side. Imagine a young man at the age when life really begins to have some meaning for him; he is healthy, pure, happy, brilliant, himself rich in hope, and the hope of everyone who knows him.
Imagine indeed, it is hard for me to have to say this imagine that he made a mistake in you, that he believed you were an earnest, tested, experienced person to whom one could safely turn for enlightenment about the enigmas of life. Imagine that he turned to you with that lovable confidence that is the ornament of youth, with the undeniable exaction that is the prerogative of youth-what would you reply to him? Would you reply: Well, [II 147] I simply say Either/Or? You certainly would hardly do that. Would you, as you are wont to say when you want to show your abhorrence of being burdened by others with their affairs of heart, would you poke your head out the window and say, "Go to the next house [Huus forbi]";s or would you treat him as you treat others who desire your counsel or seek enlightenment from you, whom you turn away as one does a tithe collector with the words that you are only a renter in life and not a householder and family man? This you probably would not do either. A brilliant young man is something you value far too much.
But your relation to him was not entirely what you ordinarily wished a relation to be; it was not an accidental encounter that put you in contact with him; your sense of irony was not tempted. Although he was the younger and you the older, yet he in his noble youthfulness made the moment earnest. Is it not true that you yourself would become young, that you would feel that there is something beautiful in being young but also something very earnest, that it is by no means unimportant how one uses one's youth, that one is faced with a choice, nevertheless always remains the same if that were the situation, it would be foolish to speak of its being too late for a person to choose, since in a deeper sense there could be no question of a choice at all. The choice itself is crucial for the content of the personality: through the choice the personality submerges itself in that which is being chosen, and when it does not choose, it withers away in atrophy. For a moment that between which the choice is to be made lies-for a moment it seems to lie-outside the person who is choosing; he stands in no relation to it, can maintain himself in a state of indifference toward it. This is the moment of deliberation, but, like the Platonic [moment], it actually is not at all, and least of all in the abstract sense in which you wish to hold onto it; and the longer one stares at it, the smaller it is. That which is to be chosen has the deepest relation to the one who is choosing, and when the choice is about an issue of elemental importance to life, the individual must at the same time continue to live, and this is why the longer he puts off the choice, the more easily he comes to alter it, although he goes on pondering and pondering and thereby believes that he is really keeping separate the [II 149] two alternatives of the choice.
If one views life's Either/Or in this way, one is not easily tempted to trifle with it. One sees that the inner working of the personality has no time for imaginary constructions in thought, so that it continually speeds ahead and in one way or another posits either the one or the other, whereby the choice is made more difficult in the next moment, for that which has been posited will be withdrawn. Imagine a captain of a ship the moment a shift of direction must be made; then he may be able to say: I can do either this or that. But if he is not a mediocre captain he will also be aware that during all this the ship is ploughing ahead with its ordinary velocity, and thus there is but a single moment when it is inconsequential whether he does this or does that. So also with a person if he forgets to take into account the velocity there eventually comes a moment where it is no longer a matter of an Either/Or, not because he has chosen, but because he has refrained from it, which also can be expressed by saying: Because others have chosen for him or because he has lost himself.
From the discussion so far, you will also see how my view of a choice is essentially different from yours, provided that I can speak of such a thing, for the difference in yours is precisely that it prevents a choice. For me, the moment of choosing is very earnest, not so much because of the rigorous thinking through of what appears separated in the choice, not because of the multiplicity of thoughts linked to each particular element, but because there is danger involved, that in the very next moment a choice may not be at my disposal, that something has already been experienced that must be done again. If one believes that at some moment a person can keep his personality completely blank and bare or that in the strictest sense one can halt and discontinue personal life, one certainly is mistaken. Already prior to one's choosing, the personality is interested in the choice, and if one puts off the choice, the personality or the obscure forces within it unconsciously chooses. Then when a choice is eventually made-provided, as I said before, one has not become completely volatilized one discovers that there is something that must be done over again, must be withdrawn, and this is often very difficult. There are stories about human beings whom mermaids or mermen have subjected to their power with their demonic music. To break the spell, so says the story, it was necessary for the person under the spell to play the same piece backward without making a single mistake. This is a very profound thought but very difficult to do, and yet this is the way it is. The error one has absorbed has to be rooted out in this way, and every time one makes a mistake one must begin all over again. As you see, this is why it is important to choose [II 150] and to choose in time.

You, however, have another method, for I know full well that the polemical side you turn to the world is not your true nature. Yes, if deliberating were the task for human life, then you would be close to perfection. I shall illustrate. To be appropriate to you, the alternatives must naturally be bold: either a pastor-or an actor. Here is the dilemma. Now all your passionate energy is aroused; reflection with its hundred arms seizes the idea of becoming a pastor. You find no rest; day and night you think about it; you read all the books you can find, go to church three times every Sunday, make the acquaintance of pastors, write sermons yourself, deliver them to yourself, and for half a year you are dead to the whole world. Now you are ready; you can speak with more insight and seemingly with more experience about being a pastor than many a one who has been a pastor for twenty years. When you meet them, it arouses your exasperation that they do not know how to expectorate with a completely different eloquence. You say: Is this enthusiasm? Compared with them, I, who am not a pastor, who have not dedicated myself to being a pastor, I speak with the voice of angels. That may very well be true, but you nevertheless did not become a pastor. Now you conduct yourself the same way with the other alternative, and your enthusiasm for art almost exceeds your ecclesiastical eloquence. Then you are ready to choose.

One thing is certain, however, that in the enormous mental activity you have gone through, much has dropped to the side, a host of minor reflections and observations. Therefore, at the moment you are to choose, these remnants come to life and into motion, and a new Either/Or turns up: a lawyer, perhaps a trial lawyer that has something in common with both sides. Now you are lost. At that very moment, you are enough of a trial lawyer to be able to demonstrate the rightness of including the third. Your life goes on in this way. After wasting a year and a half on these deliberations, after having strained with amazing energy all the powers of your soul, you have not advanced a single step. Then the thread of thought snaps. You become impatient, emotional; you burn and devastate, and now you continue: Either hairdresser or bank teller-I simply say Either/Or.

No wonder that these words have become an offense and a foolishness to you, "that they appear to you to be like the arms of the virgin whose embrace was death. " You look [II 151] down on people, make them objects of ridicule, and you have become what you most abominate-a critic, a universal critic in all the branches of learning. At times I cannot help smiling at you, and yet it is sad that your truly remarkable intellectual capacities have been dispersed in this way. But here again is the same contradiction in your nature, for you discem the ludicrous very well, and God help the person who falls into your hands if he is in the same situation. And yet the entire difference is that he perhaps becomes bowed down and crushed, whereas you become erect and more jocular than ever and make yourself and others happy with the gospel vanitas vanitatum vanitas [vanity of vanities all is vanity], hurrah! But this is no choice; it is what we say in Danish: Lad gaae [Let it pass]! Or it is a compromise like making five an even number. Now you feel yourself to be free; tell the world "Farewell."
(Søren Kierkegaard, Either or, part 2, 1843)

SØREN KIERKEGAARD EXPLAINS THAT THE PERSON WHO CHOOSES ETHICALLY CHOOSES THEMSELVES "CONCRETELY AS THIS SPECIFIC INDIVIDUAL... A SPECIFIC PRODUCT OF A SPECIFIC ENVIRONMENT." IN THIS ACT OF CHOOSING, THE INDIVIDUAL "CAN JUST AS WELL BE SAID TO PRODUCE HIMSELF."
“To this stipulation that to choose oneself is to repent oneself, however simple it is in and by itself, I cannot return frequently enough. In other words, everything revolves around this. The mystic also repents, but he repents himself out of himself, not into himself; he repents metaphysically, not ethically. To repent esthetically is loathsome, because it is flabbiness; to repent metaphysically is an unseasonable superfluity, for the individual certainly did not create the world and does not need to become so upset if the world should actually prove to be vanity. The mystic chooses himself abstractly, and therefore he has to repent himself abstractly. This can best be seen in the verdict the mystic pronounces on existence, the finite actuality in which he nevertheless is living. The mystic expressly teaches that it is vanity, illusion, sin, but every such judgment is a metaphysical judgment and does not ethically determine my relation to it. Even when he declares that finiteness is sin, he is saying just about the same thing he says when he calls it vanity. On the other hand, if he wants to claim the word "sin" ethically, he does not determine his relation to it ethically but metaphysically, because the ethical expression would not be to flee from it but to enter into it, to annul it or to bear it. Ethical repentance has only two movements it either annuls its object or bears it. These two movements also imply a concrete relation between the repenting individual and the object of his repentance, whereas fleeing from it expresses an abstract relationship.
The mystic chooses himself abstractly; one can therefore say that he is continually choosing himself out of the world, but as a result he cannot choose himself back into the world again. The true concrete choice is the one by which I choose myself back into the world the very same moment I choose myself out of the world. That is, when repenting I choose myself, I collect myself in all my finite concretion, and when I have thus chosen myself out of the finite in this way, I am in the most absolute continuity with it.
Since the mystic chooses himself abstractly, his trouble is that he finds it very difficult to begin to move or, to put it more correctly, that it is an impossibility for him. The same thing happens to the mystic in his religious first love as happens to you in your earthly first love. He has tasted it in all its blessedness and now has nothing to do except to wait for it to come again in just as much glory as before, and about that he can easily be tempted to harbor a doubt, which is the point I have frequently [II 224] made, that development is retrogression, a falling off. For a mystic, actuality is a delay, yes, of such precarious nature that he almost runs the risk that life will rob him of what he once possessed.
Therefore, if a mystic were asked what the meaning of life is, he perhaps would answer: The meaning of life is to learn to know God and to fall in love with him.
But this is not an answer to the question, for here the meaning of life is understood as an instant, not as succession.
If I were to ask him what meaning it has for life that life has had this meaning or, in other words, what is the meaning of temporality, he would not have much to say, in any case not much that is joyful. If he says that temporality is an enemy that has to be vanquished, one might ask him more specifically whether the vanquishing of this enemy would have no meaning. The mystic does not really think so, and yet he would rather be all through with temporality.
Therefore, just as he failed to appreciate actuality and metaphysically viewed it as vanity, so he now fails to appreciate the historical and metaphysically views it as futile toil. The highest meaning he can ascribe to temporality is that it is a period of testing in which one undergoes the test again and again, yet without really having any results or going any further than one was in the beginning. This, however, is a failure to appreciate temporality, for it is true that it always retains in itself an element of an ecclesia pressa [oppressed church], but it is also the possibility of the glorification of the finite spirit. The particular beauty of temporality is that the infinite spirit and the finite spirit in it are separated, and it is the particular greatness of the finite spirit that temporality is assigned to it. Therefore, temporality does not exist, if I dare speak this way, for the sake of God, in order that he, to put it in mystical terms, can test and try the one who loves, but it exists for the sake of humankind and is the greatest of all the gifts of grace.
A human being's eternal dignity lies precisely in this, that he can gain a history. The divine in him lies in this, that he himself, if he so chooses, can give this history continuity, because it gains that, not when it is a summary of what has taken place or has happened to me, but only when it is my personal deed in such a way that even that which has happened to me is transformed and transferred from necessity to freedom. What is enviable about human life is that one can assist God, can understand [II 225] him, and in turn the only worthy way for a human being to understand God is to appropriate in freedom everything that comes to him, both the happy and the sad. Or do you not think so? This is the way it appears to me indeed, I think that to say this aloud to a person is all one needs to do to make him envy himself.
The two positions touched on here could be regarded as attempts to actualize an ethical life-view. The reason that they do not succeed is that the individual has chosen himself in his isolation or has chosen himself abstractly. To say it in other words, the individual has not chosen himself ethically. He therefore has no connection with actuality, and when that is the case no ethical view of life can be put into practice. But the person who chooses himself ethically chooses himself concretely as this specific individual, and he achieves this concretion because this choice is identical with the repentance, which ratifies the choice. The individual, then, becomes conscious as this specific individual with these capacities, these inclinations, these drives, these passions, influenced by this specific social milieu, as this specific product of a specific environment. But as he becomes aware of all this, he takes upon himself responsibility for it all. He does not hesitate over whether he will take this particular thing or not, for he knows that if he does not do it something much more important will be lost. In the moment of choice, he is in complete isolation, for he withdraws from his social milieu, and yet at the same moment he is in absolute continuity, for he chooses himself as a product. And this choice is freedom's choice in such a way that in choosing himself as product he can just as well be said to produce himself. At the moment of choice, he is at the point of consummation, for his personality is consummating itself, and yet at the same moment he is at the very beginning, because he is choosing himself according to his freedom. As a product he is squeezed into the forms of actuality; in the choice he makes himself elastic, transforms everything exterior into interiority. He has his place in the world; in freedom he himself chooses his place that is, he chooses this place. He is a specific individual; in the choice he makes himself into a specific individual: namely, into the same one, because he chooses himself.
An individual thus chooses himself as a complex specific concretion and therefore chooses himself in his continuity. This concretion is the individual's actuality, but since he [II 226] chooses it according to his freedom, it may also be said that it is his possibility or, in order not to use such an esthetic expression, it is his task. In other words, the person who lives esthetically sees only possibilities everywhere; for him these make up the content of future time, whereas the person who lives ethically sees tasks everywhere. Then the individual sees this, his actual concretion, as task, as goal, as objective. But in seeing his possibility as his task, the individual expresses precisely his sovereignty over himself, something he never surrenders, even though on the other hand he does not relish the very unconstrained sovereignty that a king without a country always has. This gives the ethical individual a security that the person who lives only esthetically lacks altogether. The person who lives esthetically expects everything from the outside. This accounts for the sickly anxiety with which many people speak of the dreadfulness of not having found their place in the world. Who will deny the joy in having made a good catch in this respect, but such an anxiety always indicates that the individual expects everything from the place, nothing from himself. The person who lives ethically will also be careful about choosing his place properly, but if he detects that he has made a mistake, or if obstacles are raised that are beyond his control, he does not lose heart, for he does not surrender sovereignty over himself. He promptly sees his task and therefore is in action without delay.”
 (Søren Kierkegaard, Either or, part 2, 1843)

E2.2.D.4.4.b. ACCORDING TO SARTRE, THE SOLUTION TO THE PROBLEM OF BAD FAITH IS AUTHENTICITY. THIS CONCEPT IS THE ULTIMATE GOAL OF THE EXISTENTIALIST PROJECT AND REPRESENTS THE IDEAL OF A TRULY FREE EXISTENCE. 
“The ideal of good faith (to believe what one believes) is, like that of sincerity (to be what one is), an ideal of being-in-itself. Every belief is a belief that falls short; one never wholly believes what one believes. Consequently the primitive project of bad faith is only the utilization of this self-destruction of the fact of consciousness. If every belief in good faith is an impossible belief, then there is a place for every impossible belief. My inability to believe that I am courageous will not discourage me since every belief involves not quite believing. I shall define this impossible belief as my belief. To be sure, I shall not be able to hide from myself that I believe the subtle, total annihilation of bad faith by itself cannot surprise me; it exists at the basis of all faith. What is it then? At the moment when I wish to believe myself courageous I know that I am a coward. And this certainly would come to destroy my belief. But first, I am not anymore courageous than cowardly, if we are to understand this in the mode of being of the-in-itself. In the second place, I do not know that I am courageous; such a view of myself can be accompanied only by belief, for it surpasses pure reflective certitude. In the third place, it is very true that bad faith does not succeed in believing what it wishes to believe. But it is precisely as the acceptance of not believing what it believes that it is bad faith. Good faith wishes to flee the "not-believing-what-one-believes" by finding refuge in being. Bad faith flees being by taking refuge in "not-believing-what-one-believes." It has disarmed all beliefs in advance-those which it would like to take hold of and, by the same stroke, the others, those which it wishes to flee. In willing this self-destruction of belief, from which science escapes by searching for evidence, it ruins the beliefs which are opposed to it, which reveal themselves as being only belief. Thus we can better understand the original phenomenon of bad faith.
In bad faith there is no cynical lie nor knowing preparation for deceitful concepts. But the first act of bad faith is to flee what it cannot flee, to flee what it is. The very project of flight reveals to bad faith an inner disintegration in the heart of being, and it is this disintegration which bad faith wishes to be. In truth, the two immediate .attitudes which we can take in the face of our being are conditioned by the very nature of this being and its immediate relation with the in-itself. Good faith seeks to flee the inner disintegration of my being in the direction of the in-itself which it should be and is not. Bad faith seeks to flee the in-itself by means of the inner disintegration of my being. But it denies this very disintegration as it denies that it is itself bad faith. Bad faith seeks by means of "not-being-what-one-is" to escape from the in-itself which I am not in the mode of being what one is not. It denies itself as bad faith and aims at the in-itself which I am not in the mode of "not-being-what-one-is-not." (1) If bad faith is possible, it is because it is an immediate, permanent threat to every project of the human being; it is because consciousness conceals in its being a permanent risk of bad faith. The origin of this risk is the fact that the nature of consciousness simultaneously is to be what it is not and not to be what it is. In the light of these remarks we can now approach the ontological study of consciousness, not as the totality of the human being, but as the instantaneous nucleus of this being.
(1) If it is indifferent whether one is in good or in bad faith, because bad faith reapprehends good faith and slides to the very origin of the project of good faith, that does not mean that we cannot radically escape bad faith. But this supposes a self-recovery of being which was previously corrupted. This self-recovery we shall call authenticity, the description of which has no place here.”
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

E2.2.D.4.4.c. SARTRE MAKES A PROPOSAL FOR AN "EXISTENTIAL PSYCHOANALYSIS." THE PURPOSE OF THIS METHOD IS TO "DECIPHER" A PERSON'S BEHAVIOR IN ORDER TO DISCOVER THEIR "FUNDAMENTAL CHOICE" OR "ORIGINAL PROJECT" CONTRIBUTING TO THE "CONSTRUCTION OF THEIR ESSENCE". He rejects the past-oriented, unconscious "complex" of Freud´s methodology in favor of a future-oriented, "free, conscious determination".
"Freedom is existence, and in it existence precedes essence. The upsurge of freedom T is immediate and concrete and is not to be distinguished from its choice;  that is, from the person himself. But the structure under consideration  can be called the truth of freedom; that is, it is the human meaning of  freedom.  
It should be possible to establish the human truth of the person, as  we have attempted to do by an ontological phenomenology. The cata¬logue of empirical desires ought to be made the object of appropriate  psychological· investigations, observation and induction and, as needed,  experience can serve to draw up this list. They will indicate to the philoso¬pher the comprehensible relations which can unite to each other various  desires and various patterns- of behaviors, and will bring to light certain  concrete connections between the subject of experience and \"situations\"  experientially defined (which at bottom originate only from limitations  applied in the name of positivity to the fundamental situation. of the  subject in the world). But in establishing and classifying fundamental  desires of individual persons neither of these methods is' appropriate.  Actually there can be no question of determining a priori and ontologi¬cally what appears in all the unpredictability of a free act. This is why  we shall limit ourselves here to indicating very summarily the possi¬bilities of such a quest and its perspectives. The very fact that we can  subject any man whatsoever to such an investigation-that is what belongs  to human reality in general. Or, if you prefer, this is what can be estab¬lished by an ontology. But the inquiry itself and its results are on principle  wholly outside the possibilities of an ontology.  
On the other hand, pure, simple empirical description can only give  us catalogues and put us in the presence of pseudo-irreducibles (the  desire to write, to swim, a taste for adventure, jealousy, etc.). It is not  enough in fact to draw up a list of behavior patterns, of drives and in¬clinations, it is necessary also to decipher them; that is, it is necessary  to know how to question them. This research can be conduded only  according to the 1'llles of a specific method. It is this method which  we call existential psychoanalysis.  
The principle of this psychoanalysis is that man is a totality and not a  collection. Consequently he expresses himself as a whole in even his most  insignificant and his most superficial behavior: In other words there is not  a taste, a mannerism, or an human act which is not revealing.  The goal of psychoanalysis is to decipher the empirical behavior pat¬ terns of man; that is to bring out in the open the revelations which each  one of them contains and to fix them conceptually.  
Its point of departure is experience; its pillar of support is the funda¬ mental, pre-ontological comprehension which man has of the human  person. Although the majority of people can well ignore the indications  contained in a gesture, a word, a sign and can look with scorn on the revelation which they early, each human individual nevertheless possesses a  priori the meaning of the revelatory value of these manifestations and  is capable of deciphering them, at least if he is aided and guided by a  helping hand. Here as elsewhere, truth is not encountered by chance; it  does not belong to a domain where one must seek it without ever having  any presentiment of its location, as one can go to look for the source of  the Nile or of the Niger. It belongs a priori to human comprehension  and the essential task is an hermeneutic; that is, a deciphering, a deter-mination, and a conceptualization.  Its method is comparative. Since each example of human conduct  symbolizes in its own manner the fundamental choice which must be  brought to light, and· since at the same time each one disguises this  choice under its occasional character and its historical opportunity, only  the comparison of these acts of conduct can effect the emergence of the  unique revelation which they all express in a different way. The first out¬line of this method has been furnished for us by the psychoanalysis of  Freud and his disciples. For this reason it will be profitable here to in¬dicate more specifically the points where existential psychoanalysis will  be inspired by psychoanalysis proper and those where it will radically  differ from it.  Both kinds of psychoanalysis consider all objectively discernible mani¬festations of "psychic life" as symbols maintaining symbolic relations to  the fundamental, total structures which constitute the individual person.  
Both consider that there are no primary givens such as hereditary dis¬positions, character, etc. Existential psychoanalysis recognizes nothing  before the original upsurge of human freedom; empirical psychoanalysis  holds that the original affectivity of the individual is virgin wax before  its history. The libido is nothing besides its concrete fixations, save for a  permanent possibility of fixing anything whatsoever upon anything what¬soever. Both consider the human being as a perpetual, searching, historization. Rather than uncovering static, constant givens they discover the  meaning, orientation, and adventures of this history. Due to this fact  both consider man in the world and do not imagine that one can  question the being of a man without taking into account all his situation.  
Psychological investigations aim at reconstituting the life of the subject  from birth to the moment -of the cure; they utilize all the objective  documentation which they can find; letters, witnesses, intimate diaries,  "social" information of every kind. What they aim at restoring is less a  pure psychic event than a twofold structure: the crucial event of infancy  and the psychic crystallization around this event. Here again we have to  do with a situation. Each "historical" fact from this point of view will  be considered at once as a factor of the psychic evolution and as a symbol  of that evolution. [...] 
By renounc¬ing all mechanical causation, we renounce at the same time all general  interpretation of the symbolization confronted. Our goal could not be to  establish empirical laws of succession, nor could we constitute a universal  symbolism. Rather the psychoanalyst will have to rediscover at each step  a symbol functioning in the particular case which he is considering. If  each being is a totality, it is not conceivable that there can exist elementary  symbolic relationships (e.g.; the faeces = gold, or a pincushion = the  breast) which preserve a constant meaning in all cases; that is, which re¬main unaltered when they pass from one meaningful ensemble to another  ensemble. Furthermore the psychoanalyst will never lose sight of the fact  that the choice is living and consequently can be revoked by the subject  who is being studied. We have shown in the preceding chapter the impor¬tance of the instant, which represents abrupt changes in orientation and  the assuming of a new position in the face of an unalterable past. From  this moment on, we must always be ready to consider that symbols change  meaning and to abandon the symbol used hitherto. Thus existential psy¬choanalysis will have to be completely flexible and adapt itself to the  slightest observable changes in the subject. Our concern here is to under¬stand what is individual and often even instantaneous. The method which  has served for one subject will not necessarily be suitable to use for  another subject or for the same subject at a later period.  
Precisely because the goal of the inquiry must be to discover a choice  and not a state, the investigator must recall on every occasion that his object is not a datum buried in the darkness of the unconscious but a  free, conscious determination-which is not even resident in conscious-ness, but which is one with this consciousness itself. Empirical psycho¬analysis, to the extent that its method is better than its principles, is  often in sight of an existential discovery, but it always stops part way.  When it thus approaches the fundamental choice, the resistance of the  subject collapses suddenly and he recognizes the image of himself which  is presented to him as if he were seeing himself in a mirror. This involun¬tary testimony of the subject is precious for the psychoanalyst; he sees  there the sign that he has reached his goal; he can pass on from the investi¬gation proper to the cure. But nothing in his principles or in his initial  postulates permits him to understand or to utilize this testimony. Where  could he get any such right? If the complex is really unconscious-that is,  if there is a barrier separating the sign from the thing signified-how  could the subject recognize it? Does the unconscious complex recognize  itself? But haven't we been told that it lacks understanding? And if of  necessity we granted to it the faculty of understanding the signs, would  this not be to make of it by the same token a conscious unconscious?  What is understanding if not to be conscious of what is understood?"
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

E2.2.D.4.4.d. THE CONCLUSION OF SARTRE'S PHILOSOPHY IS THAT BECAUSE MAN IS "CONDEMNED TO BE FREE," HE "CARRIES THE WEIGHT OF THE WHOLE WORLD ON HIS SHOULDERS; HE IS RESPONSIBLE FOR THE WORLD AND FOR HIMSELF AS A WAY OF BEING."
“"FREEDOM AND RESPONSIBILITY  ALTHOUGH the considerations which are about to follow are of interest  primarily to' the ethicist, it may nevertheless be worthwhile after these  descriptions and arguments to return to the freedom of the for-itself and  to try to understand what the fact of this freedom represents for human  destiny.  The essential consequence of our earlier remarks is that man being  condemned to be free carries the weight of the whole world on his  shoulders; he is responsible for the world and for himself as a way of  being. We are taking the word "responsibility" in its ordinary sense as  "consciousness (of) being the incontestable author of an event or of an  object." In this sense the responsibility of the for-itself is overwhelming  since he25 is the one by whom it happens that there is a world; since he  is also the one who makes himself be, then whatever may be the situation  in which he finds himself, the for-itself must wholly assume this situa¬tion with its peculiar coefficient of adversity, even though it be insupport¬able. He must assume the situation with the proud consciousness of being  the author of it, for the very worst disadvantages or the worst threats  which can endanger my person have meaning only in and through my  project; and it is on the ground of the engagement which I am that they  appear. It is therefore senseless to think of complaining since nothing  foreign has decided what we feel, what we live, or what we are.  Furthermore this absolute responsibility is not resignation; it is simply  the logical-requirement of the consequences of our freedom. What hap¬pens to me happens through me, and I can neither affect myself with it  nor revolt against it nor resign myself to it. Moreover everything which  happens to me is mine. By this we must understand first of all that I am  always equal to what happens to me qua man, for what happens to a  man through other men and through himself can be only human. The  most terrible situations of war, the worst tortures do not create a non¬ human state of things; there is no non-human situation. It is only through  fear, flight, and recourse to magical types of conduct that I shall decide  on the non-human, but this decision is human, and I shall carry the entire  responsibility for it. But in addition the situation is mine because it is  the image of my free choice of myself, and everything which it presents  to me is mine in that this represents me and symbolizes me. Is it not I  who decide the coefficient of adversity in things and even their unpredicta¬bility by deciding myself?  Thus there are no accidents in a life; a community event which sud¬denly bursts forth and involves me in it does not come from the outside. [...] 
I am responsible for my very desire of fleeing responsibilities.  To make myself passive in the world, to refuse to act upon things and  upon Others is still to choose myself, and suicide is one mode among  others of being-in-the-world. Yet I find an absolute responsibility for the  fact that my facticity (here the fact of my birth) is directly inapprehensible and even inconceivable, for this fact of my birth never appears as a  brute fact but always across a projective reconstruction of my for-itself.  I am ashamed of being born or I am astonished at it or I rejoice over it,  or in attempting to get rid of my life I affirm that I live and I assume  this life as bad. Thus in a certain sense I choose being born. This choice  itself is integrally affected with facticity since I am not able not to  choose, but this facticity in turn will appear only in so far as I surpass it  toward my ends. Thus facticity is everywhere but inapprehensible; I never  encounter anything except my responsibility. That is why I cannot ask,  "Why was I born?" or curse the day of my birth or declare that I did  not ask to be born, for these various attitudes toward my birth-i.e.,  toward the tact that I realize a presence in the world-are absolutely  nothing else but ways of assuming this birth in full responsibility and of  making it mine. Here again I encounter only myself and my projects so  that finally my abandonment-i.e., my facticity--consists simply in the  fact that I am condemned to be wholly responsible for myself. I am the  being which is in such a way that in its being its being is in question. And  this "is" of my being is as present-and inapprehensible.  Under these conditions since every event in the world can be revealed  to me only as an opportunity (an opportunity made use of, lacked,  neglected, etc.), or better yet since everything which happens to us can  be considered as a chance (i.e., can appear to us only as a way of realizing  this being which is in question in our being) and since others as transcendences-transcended are themselves only opportunities and chances,  the responsibility of the for-itself extends to the entire world as a peopled·  world. It is precisely thus that the for-itself apprehends itself in anguish;  that is, as a being which is neither the foundation of its own being nor  of the Other's being nor of the in-itselfs which form the world, but a  being which is compelled to decide the meaning of being-within it and  everywhere outside of it. The one who realizes in anguish his condition  as being thrown into a responsibility which extends to his very abandonment has no longer either remorse or regret or excuse; he is no longer  anything but a freedom which perfectly reveals itself and whose being  resides in this very revelation. But as we pointed out at the beginning  of this work, most of the time we flee anguish in bad faith."
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

KEY TO SPECIAL TERMINOLOGY IN SARTRE’S BEING AND NOTHINGNESS.
“Abolition (disparition). The fact of ceasing to exist on the part of an object. This is, of course, from the point\of view of the For-itself, not of the In-itself since Being does not increase or-diminish.
Abschattungen. Used by Sartre in the usual phenomenological sense to refer to the successive appearances of the object "in profile."
Absurd. That which is meaningless. Thus man's existence is absurd because his contingency finds no external justification. His projects are absurd because they are directed toward an unattainable goal (the "desire to become God" or to be simultaneously the free For-itself and the absolute In-itself.)
Actaeon Complex. Totality of images which suggest that "knowing" is a form of appropriative violation with sexual overtones.
Anguish. The reflective apprehension of the Self as freedom, the realization that a nothingness slips in between my Self and my past and future so that nothing relieves me from the necessity of continually choosing myself and nothing guarantees the validity of the values which I choose. Fear is of something in the world, anguish is anguish before myself (as in Kierkegaard)
Apparition (apparition ). The coming into existence of an object. This is only from the point of view of the For-itself since Being itself neither "comes" nor "goes."
Appearance (apparition). See "Phenomenon" and "Abschattungen."
Bad Faith. A lie to oneself within the unity of a single consciousness. Through bad faith a person seeks to escape the responsible freedom of Being for-itself. Bad faith rests on a vacillation between transcendence and facticity which refuses to recognize either one for what it really is or to synthesize them.
Being (être). "Being is. Being is in-itself. Being is what it is." Being includes both Being-in-itself and Being-for-itself, but the latter is the nihilation of the former. As contrasted with Existence, Being is all-embracing and objective rather than individual and subjective.
Being-for-itself (être-pour-soi). The nihilation of Being-in-itself; consciousness conceived as a lack of Being, a desire for Being, a relation to Being. By bringing Nothingness into the world the For-itself can stand out from Being and judge other beings by knowing what it is not. Each For-itself is the nihilation of a particular being.
Being-in-itself (être-en-soi). Non-conscious Being. It is the Being of the phenomenon and overflows the knowledge which we have of it. It is a plenitude, and strictly speaking we can say of it only that it is.
Being-for-others (être-pour-autrui). The third ekstasis (q.v.) of the For-itself. There arises here a new dimension of being in which my Self exists outside as an object for others. The For-others involves a perpetual conflict as each For-itself seeks to recover its own Being by directly or indirectly making an object out of the other.
Cause. Occasionally used in the ordinary sense of physical cause and effect. In the human sphere cause (motif) is empty of all deterministic quality and stands for an objective apprehension of a situation which in the light of a certain end may serve as a means for attaining that end.
Coefficient of adversity. A term borrowed from Gaston Bachelard. It refers to the amount of resistance offered by external objects to the projects of the For-itself.
Cogito. Sartre claims that the pre-reflective cogito (see "consciousness") is the pre-cognitive basis for the Cartesian cogito. There is also, he says, a sort of cogito concerning the existence of Others. While we cannot abstractly prove the Other's existence, this cogito will disclose to me his "concrete, indubitable presence," just as my own "contingent but necessary existence" has been revealed to me.
Consciousness. The transcending For-itself. "Consciousness is a being such that in its being, its being is in question in so far as this being implies a being other than itself." Like Husserl Sartre insists that consciousness is always consciousness of something. He sometimes distinguishes types of consciousness according to psychic objects; e.g. pain-consciousness, shame-consciousness. Two more basic distinctions are made:
(1) Unreflective consciousness (also called non-thetic consciousness or non-positional self-consciousness). This is the pre-reflective cogito. Here there is no knowledge but an implicit consciousness of being consciousness of an object.
(2) Reflective consciousness (also called thetic consciousness or positional self-consciousness). For this see "reflection." 
Contingency. In the For-itself this equals facticity, the brute fact of being this For-itself in the world. The contingency of freedom is the fact that freedom is not able not to exist.
Dasein. Heidegger's term for the human being as a conscious existent. Basic meaning is "Being-there."
Dissociation (dCdoubkment), The never ,completed split in consciousness attempted by consciousness in reflection. The two parts (if they were separated) would be the reflective consciousness and the consciousness reflected- on.
Distraction. An act by which consciousness in order to flee anguish forces itself to look on certain of its own future possibilities as if they were actually possibilities of someone else. Distraction as regards the Past tries to view the Self as a fully constituted personality and to hold that acts are free when in conformity with this Essence, thus avoiding a free, new choice of Being. More generally distraction is any act by which consciousness determines itself not to see certain of its own reactions.
Eidetic Reduction. (Husserl). The process of considering any object or isolated example of subjectivity as merely an example of what it is apart from any affirmation of its actual existence. Sartre refers to it as meaning simply that "one can always pass beyond the concrete phenomenon toward its essence."
Ekstasis. Used in the original Greek sense of "standing out from." The For-itself is separated from its Self in three successive ekstases:
(1) Temporality. The For-itself nihilates the In-itself (to which in one 'sense it still belongs) in the three dimensions of past, present, and future (the three temporal ekstases) .
(2) Reflection. The For-itself tries to adopt an external point of view on itself.
(3) Being-for-others. The For-itself discovers that it has a Self for-the-Other, a Self which it is without ever being able to know or get hold of it.
Engage (engager). Includes both the idea of involvement and the idea of deliberate commitment. Thus the human being is inescapably engaged in the world, and freedom is meaningful only as engaged by its free choice of ends.
Epoche. Husserl's "putting into parentheses" all ideas about the existence of the world so as to examine consciousness independently of the question of any worldly existence. Sartre, of course, cannot follow this procedure since his task is to examine consciousness in-the-world.
Essence. For Sartre as for Hegel, essence is what has been. Sartre calls it man's past. Since there is no pre-established pattern for human nature, each man makes his essence as he lives.
Existence. Concrete, individual being here and now. Sartre says that for all existentialists existence precedes essence. Existence has for them also always a subjective quality when applied to human reality.
External negation. "An external bond established between two beings by a witness,"
Facticity (facticite). The For-itself's necessary connection with the In-itself, hence with the world and its own past. It is what allows us to say that the For-itself is or exists. The facticity of freedom is the fact that freedom is not able not to be free.
Finitude. To be carefully distinguished from "mortality," Finitude refers not to the fact that man dies but to the fact that as a free choice of his own project of being, he makes himself finite by excluding other possibilities each time that he chooses the one which he prefers. Man would thus because of his facticity be finite even if immortal.
Freedom. The very being of the For-itself which is "condemned to be free" and must forever choose itself-i.e., make itself. "'To be free' does not mean 'to obtain what one has wished' but rather 'by oneself to determine oneself to wish' (in the broad sense of choosing). In other words success is not important to freedom."
Future. The "possibles" of the For-itself. The future is what the For-itself has to be. It is "the determining being which the For-itself has to be beyond being."
Historicize (state or quality, "historicity"; active process, "historization"). To become involved as a concrete existent in an actual world so as to have an "history:'
Human-reality. Sartre's term for the human being or For-itself. Used both generally (like "mankind") and for the individual man.
Instant. Sartre denies that time is a succession of instants. The instant is psychologically important, however, as indicating the ever present possibility that the For-itself may at any point suddenly effect a rupture in its existence by choosing a new project of being. The instant thus becomes simultaneously the final and the initial terms for the respective projects.
Internal negation. Found only in connection with the action of the For-itself. A negation which influences the inner structure of a being who or which is , denied something. "Such a relation between two beings that the one which is denied to the other qualifies the other at the heart of its essence-by absence."
Jonah complex. Irrational desire to assimilate and to identify with oneself either the object of knowledge or a beloved person-without in any way impairing that object's character as an external object.”
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

KEY TO SPECIAL TERMINOLOGY IN SARTRE’S BEING AND NOTHINGNESS (Continued).
“Made-to-be. An unsatisfactory translation of est été, literally "is been." Sartre's use of the verb "to be" as transitive is, so far as I know, unique.
Metaphysics. "The study of individual processes which have given birth to this world as a concrete and particular totality." Metaphysics is thus concerned with the problem of why concrete existents are as they are. Sartre says that metaphysics is to ontology as history is to sociology.
Mine. "A synthesis of self and not-self."
Motive (mobile). "The ensemble of the desires, emotions, and passions which urge me to accomplish a certain act:' Sartre holds that these are freely constituted as a motive, not psychologically determined.
Nausea. The "taste" of the facticity and contingency of existence. "A dull and inescapable nausea perpetually reveals my body to my consciousness." On the ground of this fundamental nausea are produced all concrete, empirical nauseas (caused by spoiled meat, excrement, etc.).
Negatite. Sartre's word for types of human activity which while not obviously involving a negative judgment nevertheless contain negativity as an integral part of their structure; e.g., experiences involving absence. change, interrogation, destruction.
Nihilate. (neantir). A word coined by Sartre. Consciousness exists as consciousness by making a nothingness (q.v.) arise between it and the object of which it is consciousness. Thus nihilation is that by which consciousness exists. To nihilate is to encase with a shell of non-being. The English word "nihilate" was first used by Helmut Kuhn in his Encounter with Nothingness.
Noema (Husserl). The objective "pole" of conscious experience viewed after the epoche (q.v.); the object intended by consci9usness-as it is in itself plus all its phenomenal essential features.
Noesis. Husserl's term for the intentional direction by consciousness toward an object external to it. The intending act as such with all its essential features.
Nothingness"~ leant). Nothingness does not itself have Being, yet it is supported by Being. It comes into the world by the For-itself and is the recoil from fullness of self-contained Being which allows consciousness to exist as such.
Objectness. (ObjectiM). Not quite objectivity but rather the quality or state of being an object. Sometimes objectite is here translated as "object-state."
"Objectivation" and "objectivize" are related words and refer to making an object out of something or someone.
Ontology. The study "of the structures of being of the existent taken as a totality." Ontology describes Being itself, the conditions by which "there is" a world, human reality, etc. Cf. "metaphysics."
Past. What the For-itself has been. The Past thus becomes Being-in-itself and is the For-itself's essence and substance as well as part of its facticity. This is the only sense in which the For-itself has either essence or substance since in its living present it "is what it is not and is not what it is."
Phenomenon. Being as it appears or is revealed. Sartre uses the word in its usual phenomenological sense though he differs in his view of the transphenomenality of Being. He, of course, denies any distinction between phenomena and noumena.
Phenomenology. In general in speaking of the theory of phenomenology Sartre refers to the work of Husserl. It should be noted, however, that in spite of many points of disagreement with Husserl, Sartre considers his own work a phenomenological study. When he says that an idea merits phenomenological investigation, he means, of course, a study conducted according to his own method.
Possibilize (possibilise). Refers to the free act by which consciousness constitutes an action as capable of being performed or an attitude as capable of being assumed.
Possible (possible). A noun almost equal to "possibility," Sartre generally J!refers "possible" which signifies a concrete action to be performed in a concrete world rather than an abstract idea of possibility in general. The For-itself makes itself by choosing its possibles and projecting itself toward those preferred.
Presence. Concerns the relation of the For-itself to the rest of Being and involves an internal negation. "Presence to is an internal relation between the being which is present and the being to which it is present." "The For-itself is presence to all of Being-in-itself" by making
Being-in-itself "exist as a totality."
Present. The Present is not. The For-itself is presence to Being-in-itself by means of an internal negation. But this very presence is a flight toward the Future as a further project of the For-itself.
Presentation. That which is present to the mind as an object of consciousness. Sometimes distinguished from representation. When this distinction is observed, presentation refers to actual objects of which the mind is conscious, representation to imaginary ones.
Probability. A potentiality which refers back to the object though it is not made by the object nor does it have to be. It belongs to the In-itself whereas possibility lies in the province of the For-itself.
Project. Both verb and noun. It refers to the For-itself's choice of its way of being and is expressed by action in the light of a future end.
Reflection (refIet). I n the dyad "the-reflection-reflecting," the form in which the For-itself founds its own nothingness. "The For-itself can be only in the mode of a reflection causing itself to be reflected as not being a certain being." In other words consciousness exists as a translucent consciousness of being other than the objects of which it is consciousness.
Reflection. The attempt on the part of consciousness to become its own object. "Reflection is a type of being in which the For-itself is in order to be to itself what it is." There are two types.
( 1) Pure reflection. The presence of the reflective consciousness to the consciousness reflected-on. This requires a Katharsis effected by consciousness on itself.
(2) Impure (accessory) reflection. 'The constitution of "psychic temporality," the For-itself's contemplation of its psychic states.
Representation. See "Presentation."
Responsibility. "Consciousness (of) being the incontestable author of an event or an object."
Serious. The "Spirit of seriousness" (I'esprit de serieux) views wan as an object and subordinates him to the world. It thinks of values as having an absolute existence independent of human-reality.
Situation. The For-itself's engagement in the world. It is the product of both facticity and the For-itself's way of accepting and acting upon its facticity.
Space. "The nothingness of relation apprehended as a relation by the being which is its own relation." Space is primarily subjective because it is the result of the For-itself's act of organizing relations between external objects -always in the light of the For-itself's own ends.
Survey, project of surveying (survol). Process of thought or perception such that objects are grasped in a global act and cannot be separated into points or instants.
Temporality. Subjective process whereby the For-itself continuously lives its project of nihilating the In-itself. 'Through temporality the For-itself sets up its own measure for the duration and self-identity of things. Time is not in things but flows over them. The For-itself as what it has been (Past) is a flight (Present) toward what it projects to be (Future). "There is" (il ya ). Used by Sartre to indicate that the world and objects exist as a world and as objects rather than as meaningless, undifferentiated Being in-itself. The "there is" results, of course from the upsurge into Being the part of the For-itself.
Transcendence. Often refers simply to the process whereby the For-itself goes beyond the given in a further project of itself. Sometimes the For-itself is itself called a transcendence. If I make an object out of the Other, then he is ,for me a transcendence-transcended. On the other hand, the Being-in-itself which overflows all its appearances and all attempts of mine to grasp it is called a transcendent Being. The word "transcendence" is sometimes purely a substantive, sometimes refers to a process.
Transphenomenality. Refers tq the fact that Being although coextensive with its appearance is not limited to it, that Being "surpasses the knowledge which we have of it and provides the basis for such knowledge."
Unrealizable. An ideal which although by nature unattainable dominates human conduct as man strives to realize this goal. Sartre uses this for ideals common to all human reality, not for concrete, individual goals which might be realized by some people and not by others.
Value. In general value arises as the For-itself constitutes objects as desirable. More specifically value is the "beyond of all surpassings as the For-itself seeks to be united with its Self. It is what the For-itself lacks in order to be itself.
World. The whole of non-conscious Being as it appears to the For-itself and is organized by the For-itself in "instrumental complexes." Because of its facticity the For-itself is inescapably engaged in the world. Yet strictly speaking, without the For-itself, there would be not a world but only an undifferentiated plenitude of Being. “
(Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and nothingness, 1943)

E2.2.D.5. Kant's view—that freedom is not doing what you desire, but is the autonomy to follow a universal moral law dictated by reason, even against your desires

"Are we free to do good?"
Kant is an excellent thinker to help us think about what transcends us, such as the ideas of metaphysics, the soul, or freedom, which are often sudden. For Kant, any philosophical inquiry that is not concerned with the nature of an object but rather with the conditions of its possible knowledge is transcendental. He was the great 'demolisher' of Platonic metaphysics, which held that there are essences and ideals that humans can understand. According to Kant, humans have no access to knowledge that goes beyond the limits of experience. The Critique of Pure Reason addresses the questions, 'What can I know?' and 'What are the conditions of possibility of knowledge?' The Critique of Practical Reason addresses the question, "What should I do?" or "What are the conditions of possibility of freedom?" For the first time with Kant, reason is defined not only as the faculty of knowledge but also as an authority that prescribes a law for moral action. According to Kant, the second question cannot be answered without answering the first because, in order to do good, one must know what good is. However, what good is cannot come from transcendental knowledge. Since Plato, good and evil have been a matter of knowledge ("No one is evil willingly" —Plato). Kant separates theoretical knowledge from morality. The principle that saves us from moral relativism is that of universal moral law. What comes first is not good and evil, but rather the moral law that enables us to distinguish between them through judgment.

The moral law establishes freedom. This is illustrated by the passage about the man who is free to either follow or not follow the moral imperative imposed on him when he must either bear false witness against his friend or perish. Freedom and moral law are apparent when we contrast this example with that of a man who would renounce lust without remorse if knowledge of it meant death. In the latter case, it is merely a calculation between two desires: to enjoy oneself or to survive. Morality and freedom are not about weighing motives of varying intensity; they are about choosing between satisfying a desire and the moral law and its categorical imperative. Freedom is man's ability to autonomously detach from all sensible motives to conform to universal law. Conversely, there is no reason to renounce the satisfaction of a desire that does not conflict with the moral law. Kant expands on the notion of autonomy that Rousseau reserved for politics. Freedom is not opposed to obedience; rather, it is linked to the conformity of our actions to a law that does not come from the outside world (e.g., divine laws), but rather is dictated by the critical concept of autonomy. This concept allows us to discern the universal law of reason. A major difference between external law and the law of reason is that the latter has no content—it cannot be reduced to material prescriptions. The criterion is formal or logical. For example, lying is not universalizable behavior because, if everyone lied, lying would no longer make sense. Universalization is contradictory because the liar relies on the belief of the person being lied to that what is said is true. A liar exempts himself from a law that he recognizes, one of the criteria of which is that he must hide from other people. Evil is deceiving others and, to a certain extent, oneself, as when a liar allows himself one last little lie. Morality is prescriptive, even for Kant. However, the norm does not come from God or society, as Durkheim would have it, but rather from two principles: Universalization and non-contradiction. These two principles do not seem to depend on culture and thus resist moral relativism, even if differences in customs exist. On the one hand, the moral law can humiliate our self-esteem by contradicting our desires. However, there is a greatness that transcends this humiliation in the act of resisting temptation. This is freedom. "What connects humans to the world is not so much their sensory dimension, which always connects them to their finitude, but human dignity—a feeling of power." (Michaël Fœssel on the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on October 8, 2018)

Listen to the podcast in French:
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/critique-de-la-raison-pratique-de-kant-14-sommes-nous-libres-de-faire-le-bien

KANT'S SOLUTION TO THE PROBLEM OF FREEDOM AND DETERMINISM MOVES THE JUSTIFICATION FOR FREEDOM OUT OF THE REALM OF WHAT WE CAN THEORETICALLY KNOW AND INTO THE REALM OF WHAT WE MUST PRESUPPOSE FOR MORALITY TO BE POSSIBLE. We must postulate our own freedom because "otherwise there would be no such thing as virtue."
“Space and time, Kant says, are not concepts; they are forms of ‘intuition'. (The German word is ‘Anschauung’ which means literally ‘looking at' or ‘view'. The word ‘intuition', though the opted translation, is not altogether a satisfactory one.) There are also, however, a priori concepts; these are the twelve ‘categories’, which Kant derives from the forms of the syllogism. The twelve categories are divided into four sets of three : (1) of quantity: unity, plurality, totality; (2) of quality : reality, negation, limitation; (3) of relation : substance-and-accident, cause-and-effect, reciprocity; (4) of modality: possibility, existence, necessity. These are subjective in the same sense in which space and time are—that is to say, our mental constitution is such that they are applicable to whatever wo experience but there is no reason to suppose them applicable to things in themselves. As regards cause, however, there is an inconsistency, for things in themselves are regarded by Kant as causes of sensations, and free volitions are held by him to be causes occurrences in space and time. This inconsistency is not an accidental oversight; it is an essential part of his system.
A large part of The Critique of Pure Reason is occupied in showing the fallacies that arise from applying space and time or the categories to things that are not experienced. When this is done, so Kant maintains, we find ourselves troubled by ‘antinomies'—that is to say, by mutually contradictory propositions each of which can apparently be proved, Kant gives four such antinomies, each consisting of thesis and antithesis.
In the first, the thesis says: ‘The world has a beginning in time, and is also limited as regards space.' The antithesis says: ‘The world has no beginning in time, and no limits in space; it is infinite ns regards both time and space.'
The second antinomy proves that every composite substance both is, and is not, made up of simple parts. The thesis of the third antinomy maintains that there are two kinds of causality, one according to the laws of nature, the other that of freedom; the antithesis maintains that there is only causality according to the laws of nature. 
The fourth antinomy proves that there is, and is not, an absolutely necessary Being.
This part of the Critique greatly influenced Hegel, whose dialectic proceeds wholly by way of antinomies.
In a famous section, Kant sets to work to demolish all the purely intellectual proofs of the existence of God. He makes it clear that he has other reasons for believing in God; these he was to set forth later in The Critique of Practical Reason. But for the time being his purpose is purely negative.
There are, he says, only three proofs of God’s existence by pure reason; these are the ontological proof, the cosmological proof, and the physico-theological proof. '
The ontological proof, as he sets it forth, defines God as the ens realissimum, the most real being; i.e. the subject of all predicates that belong to being absolutely. It is contended, by those who believe the proof valid, that, since ‘existence’ is such a predicate, this subject must have the predicate ‘existence’, i.e. must exist. Kant objects that existence is not a predicate. A hundred thalers that I merely imagine may, he says, have all the same predicates as a hundred real thalers. The cosmological proof says: If anything exists, then an absolutely necessary Being must exist; now I know that I exist; therefore an absolutely necessary Being exists, and this must be the ens realissimum. Kant maintains that the last step in this argument is the ontological argument over again, and that it is therefore refuted by what has been already said.
The physico-theological proof is the familiar argument from design, but in a metaphysical dress. It maintains that the universe exhibits an order which is evidence of purpose. This argument is treated by Kant with respect, but he points out that, at best, it proves only an Architect, not a Creator, and therefore cannot give an adequate conception of God. He concludes that ‘the only theology of reason which is possible is that which is based upon moral laws or seeks guidance from them'.
God, freedom, and immortality, he says, are the three ‘ideas of reason’. But although pure reason leads us to form these ideas, it cannot itself prove their reality. The importance of these ideas is practical, i.e. connected with morals. The purely intellectual use of reason leads to fallacies; its only right use is directed to moral ends. The practical use of reason is developed briefly near the end of The Critique of Pure Reason, and more fully in The Critique of Practical Reason (1786). The argument is that the moral law demands justice, i.e. happiness proportional to virtue. Only Providence can insure this, and has evidently not insured it in this life. Therefore there is a God and a future life; and there must be freedom, since otherwise there would be no such thing as virtue.”
(Bertrand Russell, History Of Western Philosophy, 1945)

E2.2.D.6. Levinas redefines freedom not as a state of sovereign autonomy, but as something that is immediately "judged and invested" by an ethical demand from the outside.

LEVINAS ARGUES THAT MY FREEDOM IS NOT ABSOLUTE BUT IS "PUT INTO QUESTION" BY THE "FACE OF THE OTHER." THE ENCOUNTER WITH THE OTHER REVEALS NOT MY POWER, BUT MY "INJUSTICE." This shifts the entire foundation of freedom from a metaphysical property of the self to an ethical relationship with another. 
“The Idea of Infinity and Conscience
How does a face escape the discretionary power of the will which deals with evidence? Is not knowing a face acquiring a consciousness of it, and is not to acquire consciousness to adhere freely! Does not the idea of infinity, qua idea, inevitably refer back to the schema of the same encompassing the other? - Unless the idea of infinity means the collapse of the good conscience of the same. For everything comes to pass as though the presence of a face, the idea of infinity in the I, were the putting of my freedom into question. 
That the free will is arbitrary, and that one must leave this elementary stage, is an old certainty of philosophers. But for all of them the arbitrariness refers to a rational foundation, a justification of freedom by itself. The rational foundation of freedom is still preeminence of the same. 
Moreover, the necessity of justifying the arbitrary is due only to the failure suffered by an arbitrary power. The very spontaneity of freedom is not put into question - such seems to be the dominant tradition of Western philosophy. Only the limitation of freedom would be tragic or scandalous. Freedom poses a problem only because it has not chosen itself. The failure of my spontaneity is said to awaken reason and theory; a pain is said to be the mother of wisdom. Failure would lead me to put on brakes on my violence and introduce order into human relations, for everything is permitted but the impossible. In particular, modern political theories since Hobbes deduce the social order from the legitimacy, the incontestable right, of freedom. 
The other's face is the revelation not of the arbitrariness of the will, but its injustice. Consciousness of my injustice is produced when I incline myself not before facts, but before the other. In his face the other appears to me not as an obstacle, nor as a menace I evaluate, but as what measures me. For me to feel myself to be unjust I must measure myself against infinity. One must have the idea of infinity, which, as Descartes knows, is also the idea of the perfect, to know my own imperfection. The infinite does not stop me like a force blocking my force; it puts into question the naive right of my powers, my glorious spontaneity as a living being, a "force on the move." 
This way of measuring oneself against the perfection of the infinite is not a theoretical consideration in its turn, in which freedom would spontaneously take up its rights again. It is a shame freedom has of itself, discovering itself to be murderous and usurpatory in its very exercise. A second-century exegete, more concerned with what he had to do than of what he had to hope for, did not understand why the Bible begins with the account of creation instead of putting us from the first before the first commandments of Exodus. Only with great difficulty did he come to concede that the account of creation was all the same necessary for the life of the just man: for if the earth had not been given to man but simply taken by him, he would have possessed it only as an outlaw. Spontaneous and naive possession cannot be justified by virtue of its own spontaneity. 
Existence is not condemned to freedom, but judged and invested as a freedom. Freedom could not present itself all naked. This investiture of freedom constitutes moral life itself, which is through and through a heteronomy. 
The will that is judged, in the meeting with the other, does not assume the judgment it welcomes. That would still be a return of the same deciding of the other in the final analysis - heteronomy absorbed in autonomy. The structure of the free will becoming goodness is not like the glorious and self-sufficient spontaneity of the I and of happiness, which would be the ultimate movement of being; it is, as it were, its converse. The life of freedom discovering itself to be unjust, the life of freedom in heteronomy, consists in an infinite movement of freedom putting itself ever more into question. This is how the very depth of inwardness is hollowed out. The augmentation of exigency I have in regard to myself aggravates the judgment that is borne on me, that is, my responsibility. And the aggravation of my responsibility increases these exigencies. In this movement my freedom does not have the last word; I never find my solitude again - or, one might say, moral consciousness is essentially unsatisfied, or aeain, is always a desire. 
The unsatisfiedness of science is not simply a suffering of delicate and scrupulous souls, but is the very contraction, the hollow, the withdrawal into itself, and the systole of consciousness as such. Ethical consciousness itself is not invoked in this exposition as a "particularly recommendable" variety of consciousness, but as the concrete form of a movement more fundamental than freedom, the idea of infinity. It is the concrete form of what precedes freedom, but does not lead us back to violence, the confusion of what is separated, necessity, or fatality. 
Here above all is the situation in which one is not alone. But if this situation does not yield proof of the existence of the other, this is because proof already presupposes the movement and adherence of a free will, a certainty. Thus the situation in which the free will is invested precedes proof. For every certainty is the work of a solitary freedom. As a welcome of the real into my a priori ideas, an adhesion of my free will, the last gesture of cognition is freedom. The face to face situation in which this freedom is put into question as unjust, in which it finds it has a master and a judge, is realized prior to certainty, but also prior to uncertainty. 
This situation is an experience in the strongest sense of the term: a contact with a reality that does not fit into any a priori idea, which overflows all of them - and it is just for this reason that we have been able to speak of infinity. No movement of freedom could appropriate a face to itself or seem to "constitute" it. The face has already been there when it was anticipated or constituted; it collaborated in that work, it spoke. A face is pure experience, conceptless experience. The conception according to which the data of our senses are put together in the ego ends, before the other, with the de-ception, the dispossession which characterizes all our attempts to encompass this real. But the purely negative incomprehension of the other, which depends on our bad will, must be distinguished from the essential incomprehension of the infinite, which has a positive side, is conscience and desire. 
The unsatisfiedness of conscience, the de-ception before the other, coincides with desire - this is one of the essential points of this exposition. The desire for infinity does not have the sentimental complacency of love, but the rigor of moral exigency. And the rigor of moral exigency is not bluntly imposed, but is a desire, due to the attraction and infinite height of being itself, for the benefit of which goodness is exercised. God commands only through the men for whom one must act. 
Consciousness, the presence of self to self, passes for the ultimate theme of reflection. Conscience, a variation on this theme, a species of consciousness, is taken to add to it the concern for values and norms. We have raised several questions concerning this: can the self present itself to itself with so much natural complacency? Can it appear, shamelessly, in its own eyes? Is narcissism possible?37 Is not moral conscience the critique of and the principle of the presence of self to self? Then if the essence of philosophy consists in going back from all certainties toward a principle, if it lives from critique, the face of the other would be the starting point of philosophy. This is a thesis of heteronomy which breaks with a very venerable tradition. But, on the other hand, the situation in which one is not alone is not reducible to the fortunate meeting of fraternal souls that greet one another and converse. This situation is the moral conscience, the exposedness of my freedom to the judgment of the other. It is a disalignment which has authorized us to catch sight of the dimension of height and the ideal in the gaze of him to whom justice is due.”
(Emmanuel Levinas, Collected Philosophical Papers, 1987)

LEVINAS REDEFINES FREEDOM NOT AS AUTONOMY OR THE POWER OF A SOVEREIGN WILL, BUT AS AN INFINITE, UN-CHOSEN RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE OTHER. HE MAKES THE RADICAL CLAIM THAT RESPONSIBILITY PRECEDES FREEDOM. "Responsibility as an obsession... is a bond prior to every chosen bond." This is a direct reversal of the Western philosophical tradition (including existentialism) which typically posits a free subject who then takes on responsibilities.
“From Obsession to Hostage
Language, contact, is the obsession of an I "beset" by the others. Obsession is responsibility. But the responsibility characteristic of obsession does not derive from a freedom, for otherwise obsession would be only a becoming conscious. It would be the case of an I obsessed by a fault committed in full freedom, and we would recognize in it the thinking subject, in its splendid isolation, taking up intentional attitudes with regard to beings. Responsibility as an obsession is proximity; like kinship, it is a bond prior to every chosen bond. Language is fraternity, and thus a responsibility for the other, and hence a responsibility for what I have not committed, for the pain and the fault of others. At the antipodes of play, freedom not involving responsibilities, proximity is a responsibility that does not refer to my freedom. It is the state of a creature in a world without play, in the gravity which is perhaps the first coming of meaning to being beyond its stupid "that's the way it is." It is the state of being a hostage. 
The I, the ego, are individuated completely "from within," without recourse to a system. But this individuation cannot be described as a pole of a consciousness identifying itself, for the oneself is precisely the big secret that has to be described. The ipseity that the reflexive pronoun self expresses is not reducible to an objectification of the I by itself; the return to myself involved in the reflection already implies the initial reflexion of the oneself. In it an endless passivity is not assumed by any activity that would double it up and welcome it or preexist it. In its "accusative," which the nominative does not precede, arises a beginning. Obsessed precisely with responsibilities that do not go back to decisions taken by a freely contemplating subject, and thus accused with what it never did, persecuted and thrown back upon itself, backed up to itself, ipseity "takes on itself," in the absolute inability of slipping away from proximity, from the face, from the dereliction of the face where infinity is also absence. More exactly: the upsurge of ipseity is the very fact of this gravity in being. 
The impossibility of evading becomes a power. The I is the point that bears the gravity of the world, that which in being undoes the work of being, imperturbable and without exemptions. Being backed up to itself, it is the non-being of being. It is not nothingness, for this undoing is ambiguous, "mixed," or beyond being. 
It is not because there exists, among beings, a thinking being structured as I, pursuing ends, that being takes on signification and becomes a world; it is because in the proximity of being is inscribed the trace of an absence, or of the infinite, that there is dereliction, gravity, responsibility, obsession and I. The I, the non-interchangeable par excellence, is, in a world without play, what in a permanent sacrifice substitutes itself for others and transcends the world. But this is the source of speaking, for it is the essence of communication. 
It is not that the I would be only a being endowed with certain qualities called moral, which it would bear like attributes; the "egoness" of the I, its ex-ceptional and strange uniqueness is this incessant event of substitution, the fact of a being emptying itself of its being, of not-being. The ethical event of "expiation for another" is the concrete situation which the verb to not be designates. It is by reason of the state of being hostage that there can be in the world pity, compassion, pardon, and proximity (even the little there is). All the "transfers of feeling" by which the theorists of primordial war explain the birth of generosity would not succeed in being fixed in the ego if the ego were not, with all its being (or all its non-being), a hostage. It is not certain that at the beginning there was war. Before war there were altars. 
The ethical language we resort to does not proceed from a special moral experience, independent of the description developed until then. It comes from the very meaning of approach, which contrasts with knowledge, of the face which contrasts with phenomena. Phenomenology can follow the reverting of thematization into ethics in the description of a face. Ethical language alone succeeds in being equal to the paradox in which phenomenology is abruptly thrown: starting with the neighbor, it reads this paradox in the midst of an absence which orders it as a face, but in a way that we would be wrong to confuse with an indication or a monstration of the signified in the signifier, according to the facile itinerary in which pious thought too quickly deduces theological realities. The trace in which a face is ordered is not reducible to a sign for the simple reason that a sign and its relationship with the signified are already thematized. But an approach is not the thematization of any relationship; it is this very relationship. “
(Emmanuel Levinas, Collected Philosophical Papers, 1987)

LEVINAS’ CORE IDEA OF FREEDOM AS AN ETHICAL RESPONSIBILITY THAT IS PRIOR TO THE AUTONOMOUS, THINKING EGO CRITIQUES BOTH SIDES OF THE TRADITIONAL PHILOSOPHICAL DEBATE AS FLAWED: BOTH ANTI-HUMANISM (WHICH SEEKS TRUTH IN OBJECTIVE BEING) AND TRADITIONAL HUMANISM (WHICH REFUTES IT BY POINTING TO THE SUBJECTIVITY OF THE KNOWER).
He critiques anti-humanism (a form of determinism) for its self-contradictory reliance on a human subject (the scientist) to discover its "objective" truths and traditional humanism (including existentialism's "splendid isolation") for its naive conception of freedom as a pure, self-starting consciousness (logos), arguing that it misses a deeper, "pre-original" dimension.
“The crisis of humanism in our age no doubt has its source in the experience of man's inefficacity which the very abundance of our means for acting and the extent of our ambitions exhibits. In the world in which everything is in its place, where the eyes, hand, and foot can find them, where science prolongs the topography of perception and praxis even if it transfigures their space, in the sites in which there are set cities and fields which human beings inhabit, but then take their place, by diverse groupings, among entities - in all this reality "right side up," the counter-sense of the vast enterprises which have failed, in which politics and technology end up negating the projects that conducted them, teaches the inconsistency of man, plaything of his own works. The unburied dead in wars and extermination camps make one believe the idea of a death without a morning after and render tragic-comic the concern for oneself and illusory the pretension of the rational animal to have a privileged place in the cosmos and the power to dominate and integrate the totality of being in a self-consciousness. 
But self-consciousness itself is disintegrating. Psychoanalysis attests to the instability and fallacious character of the coincidence with oneself in the cogito, which was supposed to put a stop to the impostures of the evil genius and restore to the universe, everywhere become suspect, its erstwhile security. The coincidence with oneself in consciousness, in which, since Descartes, being is, is seen by the other (and, after the fact, by the subject himself) to be a plaything of, or worked over by, impulses, influences, and a language, which compose a mask called a person, no one [la personne ou personne] or at best a personage of purely empirical consistency. Henceforth the world founded on the cogito appears to be human, all too human, to the extent of making us seek truth in being, in a somehow superlative objectivity, clear of all "ideology," without human traces. 
One can, to be sure, ask by what spirit of inconsistency anti-humanism can still reserve for man the discovery of true knowledge. Does not knowing in the last analysis pass through self-consciousness? Do not the sciences of man - for whom nothing is more dubious than an ego that listens to and feels itself (since its being is said to unfold outside of itself), for whom nothing is more horrible than the swarming of cultural meanings, approached from within by a subjectivity (while their formal expression simplifies or explains them) - resort to the mediation of the man of science? 
But these old objections, which neither the sociology nor the psychoanalysis of knowledge are ignorant of, do not have the last word. For the formalist "refutation" which claims to triumph over subjectivist relativism (to contest the subjective is to affirm the value of the subjective that contests!) does not escape the skeptical contestation which is reborn from its ashes. It is as though we had here a discourse without any last word, as though the logos, which is of itself a beginning, an origin, […] correlative of void without a past which is freedom, freedom, were here constantly submerged by the pre-original, as though the subjectivity were not the freedom to adhere to a term that presents itself to it, but a passivity more passive than the passivity involved in receptivity. Receptivity is still an initiative of welcome, capable of assuming what strikes against it. It consequently traverses the present of the logos, or restores it to memory. In other words, the refutation of subjectivist relativism in its traditional form does not take into account the crisis which it surmounts and thinks itself to be in possession of the logos itself which, for a moment of ontological syncope, a between-time nowhere, it had lost. In overcoming the relativism of the human it operates a recuperation. The truth obtained as it were by rebound in the break-up of truths and by the wearing down of this "right side up" real is like the reverse of the True. But everything comes to pass as though in metaphysics the reverse were equivalent to the obverse. This is no doubt the sense of the objection Husserl addresses to Descartes when he reproaches him for having identified the "I am" of the cogito with the existence of a soul belonging to the world, that is, for having situated the absolute discovered in the destruction of the world among the things of the world, as though they had never been engulfed in the "nowhere," as though their suspension had been contingent, as though the being that, in the cogito, came out of a coma were still the same as 
the being that had fallen into a coma. This is a failure to recognize the modality (as Jeanne Delhomme would say) of what Heidegger will call the history of being. 
It makes possible, on the basis of the cogito, the return of God and of the world, deduced according to the traditional norms, whereas Kant and Husserl will seek in the transcendental deduction of the object and in the h-Ko\v of phenomenological reduction a new type of foundation. As consciousness was the foundation of being, metaphysics, is inverted', henceforth it does not take place in being, it is conceived with notions in the back of one's mind, at the bottom of the thoughts healthily fixed on being. Is not the end of metaphysics, a theme concomitant with the theme of the end of humanism, a way of recounting this "reversing"? Indeed in our day there is no end to the end of metaphysics, and the end of metaphysics is our unavowed metaphysics, for no avowal will be its equivalent. 
Yet the inconsistency in denouncing the absoluteness of the human in the name of evidences that the sciences of man, where man is not only the object but also the subject, contribute may be taken as only apparent. It would be enough to show the purely operational and provisional role of man in the unfolding and manifestation of a set of terms that form a system. Beyond "objectivity," possibly "ideological," an order would manifest itself in which subjectivity would no longer be anything but the detour that, in pursuance of an order, the manifestation or intelligibility or truth of this order would take. It is not man, having some vocation proper to him, that would invent or search or possess truth; it is truth that raises up and holds man (without holding on to him). Man appears as the route the structures of a formal or logico-mathematical type take to be ordered and be set in place according to their ideal architecture. Once set up they cast off the human scaffoldings which made their edification possible. Even if the existence of man, his being-there, consisted in existing in view of this very existence, it is to the guardianship or the illumination, or the occultation or the forgetting, of being which is not a being that this existence is devoted - all these movements and turns raise up and situate the human. Subjectivity would appear in view of its own disappearance, a moment necessary for the manifestation of the structure of being, the Idea. It is a moment in the quasi-temporal sense of the momentaneous, the transitory, the passing, even if a whole history and civilization take form in its passage. This passage does not thereby constitute a new dimension. Studied by structural ethnography as a reality in its turn made up of structures, it belongs to an objective order, of which the ethnography itself is but a setting into place, and to which it is no exception.”
(Emmanuel Levinas, Collected Philosophical Papers, 1987)


LEVINAS ANALYZES THE PHILOSOPHICAL TRADITION FROM DESCARTES AND KANT TO FICHTE AND HUSSERL, ARGUING THAT THEIR FOCUS ON A "SELF-POSITING" SUBJECT LEADS TO AN IMPASSE. He argues that the solipsistic trap of the autonomous ego can only be broken "in an exceptional way"—by being "called into question by the other."
“The inefficacy of human action teaches us the precarity of the concept of man. But to conceive of human action on the level of labor and command is to approach it in its derivative forms. Action, as distinguished from a simple repercussion of energy along a causal chain, is the feat of commencing, that is, of existing as an origin and from an origin toward the future. It is then effected with the principal - incohative - free characteristic of consciousness. Consciousness is a mode of being such that beginning is what is essential in it. To begin, to ignore or to suspend the indefinite thickness of the past, is the wonder of the present. Every content of consciousness has been welcomed, has been present, and, consequently, is present or represented, is memorable. Consciousness is the very impossibility of a past that would never have been present, that would be closed to memory and to history. Action, freedom, beginning, present, representation - memory and history -articulate in diverse ways the ontological modality consciousness is* Nothing can enter fraudulently, somehow smuggled into a conscious ego without being exposed to avow itself, being equaled in the avowal, becoming truth. All rationality then amounts to the discovery of the origin, the principle. Reason is an archeology, and the composite word archeology is a redundance. The intelligibility of the subject itself can consist only in this return to the origin, a movement which, as the Wissenschaftslehre taught, is the very being of the ego, the "self-positing" of the oneself. The reflexivity of the ego is nothing else than the fact of being the origin of the origin.
But already the postponement ad infinitum of the Sollen, which devolves from the subject posited as ego, origin of itself or freedom, announces the failure involved in human action, and there arises the anti-humanism that will reduce man to a medium necessary for being so that it can be reflected and show itself in its truth, that is, in the systematic concatenation of concepts. We can then ask: might not humanism have a meaning, if we think through the way being belies freedom? Can we not find a meaning (a ' 'reverse" sense, to be sure, but such is the only authentic one here) in freedom itself, starting with the very passivity of the human in which its inconsistency seems to become apparent? Can we not find this meaning without being thereby brought back to the "being of entities," system, and matter? 
It would be a question of a new concept of passivity, of a passivity more radical than that of an effect in a causal series, on the hither side of consciousness and knowing, but also on the hither side of the inertia of things which rest on themselves as substances and oppose their nature, a material cause, to all activity. This passivity would refer to the reverse side of being, prior to the ontological plane in which being is posited as nature', it would refer to the antecedence, without any outside yet, of creation, the meta-physical antecedence. It would be as though beyond the ambit of a melody a more acute or more grave register resounded and mingled with the chords heard, but with a sonority that no voice can sing and no instrument produce.7 This pre-original antecedence one could, to be sure, call religious, if the term did not make us run the risk of evoking a theology impatient to recuperate "spiritualism." Present, representation, and principles precisely exclude the "hither side." 
But when we see man being born again out of the inanity of man-as-principle, the inanity of principles, out of the putting into question of freedom understood as an origin and the present, when we seek subjectivity in radical passivity, do we not deliver ourselves over to fatality or to determination, which are the very abolition of a subject? That would be the case, if the alternative free/non-free were ultimate, and if subjectivity consisted in stopping at the ultimate or at the original. But it is on just this that our inquiry bears. No doubt in its isolation, in the apparently absolute separation which is the psyche, and in the sovereign freedom of representation, the ego knows nothing prior to its freedom or outside of the necessity which runs up against this freedom, but presents itself to it. It is obliged, as Fichte said, to be its own source. It is absent from its birth and from its death, without father and without murderer, and obliged to give them to itself - to deduce them - to deduce the non-I from its own freedom, with the risk of sinking into madness. The regression to the ultimate or to the original, the principle, is already effected by the freedom of the ego, which is beginning itself. The thesis and antithesis of the third Kantian antinomy imply the priority of the thesis, since the situation is not limited to themes: the thesis and antithesis present themselves to the consciousness that thematizes them and represents them to itself in the identity of the said, the logos;8 they both present themselves to a freedom for adoption or refusal. Absolute non-freedom could not show itself in any way. But the ego can be called into question by the other in an exceptional way - not as by an obstacle which it can always measure, nor by the death which it can also give itself.9 The ego can be brought to accusation, despite its innocence, by violence, to be sure, but also, despite the separation in which the exclusiveness and insularity of the psychic leave it, by the other. The other, as other, nonetheless "obsesses" it, and, nearby or far-off, imputes to it a responsibility, unexceptionable as a traumatism, a responsibility for which it had not taken any decision but which, closed up in itself, it cannot escape. Reduced to silence it still gives a response beneath the logos, as though its voice disposed of a register of graves or acutes beyond graves and acutes. Prior to the amphibology of being and entities and to the state of being a nature,10 the subject is undeclinable precisely as a hostage irreplaceable with others.”
(Emmanuel Levinas, Collected Philosophical Papers, 1987)

For Ludwig Wittgenstein, "Willing" is Not a Special Action

LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN ARGUES THAT THE CONCEPT OF WILLING AS A SPECIAL INNER ACTION THAT CAUSES OUR MOVEMENTS IS A GRAMMATICAL CONFUSION, AS "WILLING" IS NOT AN ACTION ONE CAN CHOOSE TO PERFORM BUT A CONCEPT WE USE TO DISTINGUISH WHAT WE DO FROM WHAT MERELY HAPPENS TO US.
“608. The idea of the intangibility of that mental state in estimating the time is of the greatest importance. Why is it intangible? Isn’t it because we refuse to count what is tangible about our state as part of the specific state which we are postulating? 
609. The description of ah atmosphere is a special application of language, for special purposes. 
((Interpreting ‘understanding’ as atmosphere; as a mental act. One can construct an atmosphere to attach to anything. ‘An indescribable character.’)) 
610. Describe the aroma of coffee.—Why can’t it be done? Do we lack the words? Andf or what are words lacking?—But how do we get the idea that such a description must after all be possible? Have you ever felt the lack of such a description? Have you tried to describe the aroma and not succeeded? 
((I should like to say: “These notes say something glorious, but I do not know what.” These notes are a powerful gesture, but I cannot put anything side by side with it that will serve as an explanation. A grave nod. James: “Our vocabulary is inadequate.” Then why don’t we introduce a new one? What would have to be the case for us to be able to?)) 
611. “Willing too is merely an experience,” one would like to say (the ‘will’ too only ‘idea’). It comes when it comes, and I cannot bring it about. 
Not bring it about?—Like what? What can I bring about, then? What am I comparing willing with when I say this? 
612. I should not say of the movement of my arm, for example: it comes when it comes, etc.. And this is the region in which we say significantly that a thing doesn’t simply happen to us, but that we do it. “I don’t need to wait for my arm to go up—I can raise it.” And here I am making a contrast between the movement of my arm and, say, the fact that the violent thudding of my heart will subside. 
613. In the sense in which I can ever bring anything about (such as stomach-ache through over-eating), I can also bring about an act of willing. In this sense I bring about the act of willing to swim by jumping into the water. Doubtless I was trying to say: I can’t will willing; that is, it makes no sense to speak of willing willing. “Willing” is not the name of an action; and so not the name of any voluntary action either. And my use of a wrong expression came from our wanting to think of willing as an immediate non-causal bringing- about. A misleading analogy lies at the root of this idea; the causal nexus seems to be established by a mechanism connecting two parts of a machine. The connexion may be broken if the mechanism is disturbed. (We think only of the disturbances to which a mechanism is normally subject, not, say, of cog-wheels suddenly going soft, or passing through one another, and so on.) 
614. When I raise my arm ‘voluntarily’ I do not use any instrument to bring the movement about. My wish is not such an instrument either. 
615. “Willing, if it is not to be a sort of wishing, must be the action itself. It cannot be allowed to stop anywhere short of the action.” If it is the action, then it is so in the ordinary sense of the word; so it is speaking, writing, walking, lifting a thing, imagining some¬ thing. But it is also trying, attempting, making an effort,—to speak, to write, to lift a thing, to imagine something etc.. 
616. When I raise my arm, I have not wished it might go up. The voluntary action excludes this wish. It is indeed possible to say: “I hope I shall draw the circle faultlessly”. And that is to express a wish that one’s hand should move in such-and-such a way. 
617. If we cross our fingers in a certain special way we are some¬ times unable to move a particular finger when someone tells us to do so, if he only points to the finger—merely shews it to the eye. If on the other hand he touches it, we can move it. One would like to describe this experience as follows: we are unable to will to move the finger. The case is quite different from that in which we are not able to move the finger because someone is, say, holding it. One now feels inclined to describe the former case by saying: one can’t find any point of application for the will till the finger is touched. Only when one feels the finger can the will know where it is to catch hold.—But this kind of expression is misleading. One would like to say: “How am I to know where I am to catch hold with the will, if feeling does not shew the place?” But then how is it known to what point I am to direct the will when the feeling is there? 
That in this case the finger is as it were paralysed until we feel a touch on it is shewn by experience; it could not have been seen a priori. 
618. One imagines the willing subject here as something without any mass (without any inertia); as a motor which has no inertia in itself to overcome. And so it is only mover, not moved. That is: 
One can say “I will, but my body does not obey me”—but not: “My will does not obey me.” (Augustine.) 
But in the sense in which I cannot fail to will, I cannot try to will either. 
619. And one might say: “I can always will only inasmuch as I can never try to will.” 
620. Doing itself seems not to have any volume of experience. It seems like an extensionless point, the point of a needle. This point seems to be the real agent. And the phenomenal happenings only to be consequences of this acting. “I do ...” seems to have a definite sense, separate from all experience. 
621. Let us not forget this: when ‘I raise my arm’, my arm goes up. And the problem arises: what is left over if I subtract the fact that my arm goes up from the fact that I raise my arm? 
((Are the kinaesthetic sensations my willing?)) 
622. When I raise my arm I do not usually try to raise it. 
623. “At all costs I will get to that house.”—But if there is no difficulty about it—can I try at all costs to get to the house? 
624. In the laboratory, when subjected to an electric current, for example, someone says with his eyes shut “I am moving my arm up and down”—though his arm is not moving. “So,” we say, “he has the special feeling of making that movement.”—Move your atm to and fro with your eyes shut. And now try, while you do so, to tell yourself that your arm is staying still and that you are only having certain queer feelings in your muscles and joints! 
625. “How do you know that you have raised your arm?”—“I feel it.” So what you recognize is the feeling? And are you certain that you recognize it right?—You are certain that you have raised your arm; isn’t this the criterion, the- measure, of the recognition? 
626. “When I touch this object with a stick I have the sensation of touching in the tip of the stick, not in the hand that holds it.” When someone says “The pain isn’t here in my hand, but in my wrist”, this has the consequence that the doctor examines the wrist. But what difference does it make if I say that I feel the hardness of the object in the tip of the stick or in my hand? Does what I say mean “It is as if I had nerve-endings in the tip of the stick?” In what sense is it like that?—Well, I am at any rate inclined to say “I feel the hardness etc. in the tip of the stick.” What goes with this is that when I touch the object I look not at my hand but at the tip of the stick; that I describe what I feel by saying “I feel something hard and round there” - not “I feel a pressure against the tips of my thumb, middle finger, and index finger. . . .” If, for example, someone asks me “What are you now feeling in the fingers that hold the probe?” I might reply: “I don’t know-1 feel something hard and rough over there." 
627. Examine the following description of a voluntary action: “I form the decision to pull the bell at 5 o’clock, and when it strikes 5, my arm makes this movement.”—Is that the correct description, and not this one: “.and when it strikes 5, I raise my arm”?-One would like to supplement the first description: “and see! my arm goes up when it strikes 5.” And this “and see!” is precisely what doesn’t belong here. I do not say “See, my arm is going up!” when I raise it. 
628. So one might say: voluntary movement is marked by the absence of surprise.”
(Ludwig Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations, 1953)

E2.2.C. Freedom as Conquest and Construction

E2.2.C.1. Freedom in the Face of Constraints: Propose a view of freedom not as a given, but as the ability to act despite constraints. Illustrate this with examples of resistance, transgression, or overcoming determinisms.

E2.2.C.1.1. Freedom is not as an absolute, given state, but a relative concept that exists only in dialogue with constraints, necessity, and the "other."

E2.2.C.1.1.a. "One could conceptualize liberty as Isaiah Berlin did in "Two Concepts of liberty" (1969).
On the one hand, freedom can be the absence of external constraints or interference that prevent an individual from acting or thinking as they choose (negative freedom). It refers to the freedom to be left alone and free from coercion or interference by other individuals or institutions. On the other hand, freedom is the presence of the resources and opportunities necessary for individuals to act on their choices and pursue their goals (positive freedom). It is not the absence of external constraints or interference but the presence of the necessary conditions that allow individuals to lead meaningful and fulfilling lives. 

However, a triadic analysis can explain all theories of freedom. Any assertion regarding freedom must take the following form to be complete: x is (is not) free from y to do (not to do, become, not become) z. All disagreements on freedom are disagreements about what is included under each variable (MacCallum, 1967). It assumes that any internal or external constraint on an individual's plan/goals reduces her freedom and adds a more robust and inclusive concept of freedom than negative or positive freedom, as it considers the complex and multifaceted ways in which power and domination can shape an individual's life."
(Jean Schindler, 2023)

E2.2.C.1.1.b.  THERE IS NO SUCH THING, FOR EXAMPLE, AS FREEDOM PER SE. THERE IS ONLY FREEDOM FROM CONSTRAINTS, OR FREEDOM TO ACT IN WAYS THAT WERE NOT POSSIBLE BECAUSE OF THOSE CONSTRAINTS.
“What Gotama means by asankhata, “unconditioned [?]” The question that has to be asked is, By
what exactly is nirvana not conditioned? If you assume the Unconditioned to be another way of talking about the Absolute, it is unlikely that such a question will cross your mind. For absolutes are, by definition, absolute: like God, they neither depend on nor are conditioned by anything else. It would seem obvious that the Unconditioned is simply not conditioned by anything—and most certainly not by something within the conditioned world, escape from which, as the text appears to say, is precisely what makes realization of the Unconditioned possible. Fortunately, Gotama is perfectly clear as to what he means by “unconditioned”:

Bhikkhus, I will teach you the unconditioned and the path
leading to the unconditioned. Listen to this.
And what, bhikkhus, is the unconditioned? An ending
of desire, an ending of hatred, an ending of delusion: this is
the unconditioned.
And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to the unconditioned?
Mindfulness directed to the body: this is called the
path leading to the unconditioned.

The unconditioned is an ending of three inclinations (sankhara): desire, hatred, and delusion. Note that Gotama does not define it as an ending of (or escape from) what is conditioned as such. Instead he points to a possibility that, starting with mindfulness of the body, one can learn to lead one’s life un-conditioned by desire, hatred, and delusion. In other words, rather than blindly following the inclinations that prompt one to act on one’s desires and fears, one trains oneself to dwell in a still and lucid frame of mind that no longer inclines in such ways. […]

Gotama takes a noun, “the unconditioned,” and treats it as a verb: “not to be conditioned” by something. He seems acutely aware of the relational nature of language. There is no such thing, for example, as freedom per se. There is only freedom from constraints, or freedom to act in ways that were not possible because of those constraints. Nor is there any awakening per se, but only awakening from the “sleep” of delusion, or awakening to the presence of others who suffer. And there
is no such thing as the unconditioned, only the possibility of not being conditioned by something. […]

This ethical reading shows that there is no need to believe in an absolute state called the “Unconditioned” or the “Unborn.” The unconditioned is simply a negation: not conditioned. Its place in “the all” is as an object of mind (dhamma). It is just an idea—an indispensable one for dharma practice, but an idea nonetheless. It refers to no more than the simple absence—whether momentary or of longer duration— of reactivity in human experience. Such an absence does not reveal some previously concealed Absolute Truth beyond the world. It emancipates one to live in this world unconstrained by such inclinations. [...]

The challenge presented by the fourfold task is to learn how to differentiate between reactivity, in which one blindly follows a familiar impulse, and responsiveness, in which one chooses to act in a way that is not conditioned by the impulses of greed, hatred, and confusion.”
(Stephen Batchelor, After Buddhism, rethinking the dharma for a secular age, 2016)

E2.2.C.1.1.c. BEFORE IT BECAME AN ATTRIBUTE OF THOUGHT OR A QUALITY OF THE WILL, FREEDOM WAS UNDERSTOOD TO BE THE FREE MAN’S STATUS, WHICH ENABLED HIM TO MOVE, to get away from home, to go out into the world and meet other people in deed and word. "Historically it is interesting to note that the appearance of the problem of freedom in Augustine’s philosophy was thus preceded by the conscious attempt to divorce the notion of freedom from politics, to arrive at a formulation through which one may be a slave in the world and still be free. Conceptually, however, Epictetus’s freedom, which consists in being free from one’s own desires, is no more than a reversal of the current ancient political notions; and the political background against which this whole body of popular philosophy was formulated, the obvious decline of freedom in the late Roman Empire, manifests itself still quite clearly in the role which such notions as power, domination, and property play in it. According to ancient understanding, man could liberate himself from necessity only through power over other men, and he could be free only if he owned a place, a home in the world. Epictetus transposed these worldly relationships into relationships within man’s own self, whereby he discovered that no power is so absolute as that which man yields over himself, and that the inward space where man struggles and subdues himself is more entirely his own, namely, more securely shielded from outside interference, than any worldly home could ever be.

Hence, in spite of the great influence the concept of an inner, nonpolitical freedom has exerted upon the tradition of thought, it seems safe to say that man would know nothing of inner freedom if he had not first experienced a condition of being free as a worldly tangible reality. We first become aware of freedom or its opposite in our intercourse with others, not in the intercourse with ourselves. Before it became an attribute of thought or a quality of the will, freedom was understood to be the free man’s status, which enabled him to move, to get away from home, to go out into the world and meet other people in deed and word. This freedom clearly was preceded by liberation: in order to be free, man must have liberated himself from the necessities of life. But the status of freedom did not follow automatically upon the act of liberation. Freedom needed, in addition to mere liberation, the company of other men who were in the same state, and it needed a common public space to meet them—a politically organized world, in other words, into which each of the free men could insert himself by word and deed."
(Hannah Arendt, La crise de la culture, 1954)

E2.2.C.1.1.d. A_Jannis Kounellis_Bells_1993 - Bronze bells, wooden beams and rope_(1) / A_Jannis Kounellis_Bells_1993 - Bronze bells, wooden beams and rope_(2)
"Kounellis was interested in the significant presence of church bells in the everyday life of Southern European communities. When this work was first displayed in Pistoia, Italy, the city's Romanesque cathedral was visible from the gallery windows. The artwork's hanging bells visually echoed those in the cathedral's tower, creating a dialogue between its solemn architecture and the sculpture's simple, raw materials. Tethered to the beams, Kounellis's bells are now silent, but they also hold the potential to ring again. For Kounellis 'bells represent language, a magnified human voice - and the enthusiastic roar of liberation'."
(Curatorship: Tate Modern, London)

E2.2.C.1.1.e. REDE
Rede é contenção e aprisionamento, mas é também conexão e integração, na medida em que constitui circuitos e fluxos de comunicação, e estabelece controle e limitações. A rede opera no âmbito coletivo e da troca, mas pode anular a diferença. E sob essa ambiguidade conceitual que a arte atua: tanto para construir analogias como para propor novas formas de tramas, malhas, estruturas, engenharias, labirintos, caminhos. A associação mais imediata à noção de rede em Cildo Meireles é constituída por analogia à série de trabalhos conhecidos como Malhas da liberdade, 1976-1977/2008.
Criam-se as condições para a construção material de redes, todas abertas e desconectadas de suas funções originais. Refuta-se, portanto, a máxima construtiva de que a forma segue a função.
As redes são formas estruturais que se espelham na sabedoria popular (redes de pesca), no exercício de desenhar (garatujas), nas formas da natureza (ramificações do reino vegetal) e nas complexas abstrações e teorias científicas (teoria do caos) para propor figuras e objetos instáveis, amplos e abertos. Em outros momentos, as dinâmicas da arte determinam um novo espaço de circulação, tanto em um sentido ideológico como antropológico. Trata-se da ideia de espaço como uma rede de circulação.
(Curadoria do SESC, São Paulo, 2019)

Art:
Cildo Meireles_Serie malhas da liberdade, 1976-1977/2008
Malhas da liberdade III, 1977
Ferro vidro
Cildo Meireles_Antes 1977/2003
Estrutura e chapa de aço (piso, escada, patamar, guarda-corpo, cadeira e mesa)
Cildo Meireles_Arte física: 30km de cordões estendidos e recolhidos, 1969
Registros e resquícios de ação: caixa com mapa e linha de algodão

Art:
Cildo Meireles_Serie malhas da liberdade, 1976-1977/2008
Malhas da liberdade III, 1977
Ferro vidro
Cildo Meireles_Antes 1977/2003
Estrutura e chapa de aço (piso, escada, patamar, guarda-corpo, cadeira e mesa)
Cildo Meireles_Arte física: 30km de cordões estendidos e recolhidos, 1969
Registros e resquícios de ação: caixa com mapa e linha de algodão

E2.2.C.1.2. Freedom as Rupture and Transgression:  a "startling unexpectedness" that creates a new beginning.

E2.2.C.1.2.a. A_Pieter Schoolwerth_No Body Get a Head_1991–2020

"De-coincidence" is a concept that is both genetic and logical. It indicates the rupture of order (of adequacy) in the mode of self-unfolding. It traces back to the beginnings of separation. At the same time, it makes us understand the internal reason for this deviation from oneself. From this deviation, a new possible "self" emerges. It is from within adequacy itself that a disengagement is introduced by stabilizing, sterilizing, adapting, and deactivating, which undoes normality and reopens the possibility of becoming. In this sense, de-coincidence is a concept that not only expresses the vocation of art, but also—and above all—of existence. To de-coincide is to step outside the adequacy of a 'self,' its adaptation to a world, and to do so alone. This is what it means to truly exist. If "to exist" literally means "to stand outside" (from the theological Latin ex-sistere), then it first means to stand outside the adequacy-adaptation that becomes obstructed by filling itself up and saturating itself to the point that it no longer allows anything to happen or be invented. While the thought of Being aims at immobilization in the stability of essence and the identical, and the thought of life risks limiting itself to mere metabolic renewal, the thought of existence highlights the de-coincidence that cracks the self's adequacy with itself and its adaptation to itself. This brings the self out of its paralysis, reopens an inner disengagement rather than a dissociation, and frees up initiative. Life promotes itself into existence, undoing any possibility of essence, by de-coinciding with itself—by opening a breach in its acquired normality, by daring a "deviation," in short—and becoming more vivid and qualified. [...]
Practicing decoincidence (of life, customs, and thought) is not aimed at manifesting independence or shocking people. Rather, it is the only way to bring existence to the forefront. If we do not disassociate from our environment, the group, and the herd—including the solidarity and conviviality that they offer, such as Sunday dinner—and if we do not distrust the implicit agreement that exists there, then we will have renounced this requirement. It is therefore through decoincidence that freedom unfolds. If we no longer believe that freedom is given to us from the outset as a metaphysical condition and if we no longer wish to remain stuck in the classic, disappointing contradiction between natural necessity and the freedom of the spirit, we will understand that effective freedom can only be achieved by breaking free from our adaptation to the world. To the extent that "I" open up a margin of maneuver or choice by shifting away from the world's normality and functionality and thus taking the initiative (promoting the "I" to the subject). In other words, only "man" can de-coincide from himself and his world. Only man can disadapt and introduce distance, or perspective, into the totalization and integration that make up the world. According to this formula, only man "exists.""
(François Jullien, De-coincidence, The origin of Art and Existence, 2017)

A_Pieter Schoolwerth_Diamond Residence (Rigged n3)_2021_(1) ; A_Pieter Schoolwerth_Diamond Residence (Rigged n3)_2021_(2) ; A_Pieter Schoolwerth_Diamond Residence (Rigged n3)_2021_(3)

"In the beginning was Decoincidence [...]

But in the beginning, there was that which could not yet be specified as a 'self' or defined as an essence. In the beginning, however, was Decoincidence.
Following Lucretius, we might ask, 'Where does a certain encounter first take place? Where do atoms collide at a given moment? Where does a fortuitous clash occur between them? Without which, nature would never have created anything: nil unquam natura creasset?' [...]

Must we not posit the possibility of an initial 'clinamen,' however small, that escapes our attention but is sufficient to cause a collision, instead of bodies falling eternally in parallel? From this collision, everything else follows. [...]
It is not a matter of introducing a little disorder or mystery so that an order becomes productive rather than vain. Rather, the question is how to transition from one to the other. How is it necessary to loosen the idea of coincidence as conformity? How can an order in which everything coincides with itself according to its legitimate norm—here, the verticality of the fall of bodies—be de-coincided so that a coincidence as an adventitious encounter can take place? By deviating from this norm, a possibility can emerge. Not only can something be generated in nature at the physical level, but also at the ethical level as a direct extension of this logic. Something like freedom—libera voluntas, as Lucretius emphatically states—can find a place and be exercised. [...]

Therefore, it is not a matter of forcibly linking the physical and moral orders, introducing a valve of indeterminacy for the sake of pleasure into the overwhelming determinism of things, or overturning it, at least momentarily. the principle of causality, nor is it a matter of escaping the necessary chain of events (the eimarmené of the early physicists) by reintroducing chance. In short, it is not a matter of reinjecting, after the fact and behind the scenes, a ferment of idealism that cracks the implacable materialism that constitutes the truth of science (as Nizan believed he had to denounce). However, it is important to understand that the same logic of decoherence runs through reality. This is why there is "reality" and why this logic liberates an uninterrupted possibility of improvisation and invention, from nature itself to art and existence. The introduction of decoherence, which unlocks the normality and compact regularity of things, is the only way to conceive of freedom that is inscribed in physics and is therefore not arbitrary or metaphysically granted.

Decoincidence describes a condition of original possibility without dictating an original staging or framing its coherence within a privileged vision. Thus, it dispenses with ideological embedding and remains as close as possible to effective processuality. [...]"
(François Jullien, De-coincidence, The origin of Art and Existence, 2017)

CONSCIOUSNESS COMES FROM DECOINCIDENCE.
Once again, we are inclined to believe that coincidence is the mode of consciousness's being; that consciousness is defined by coincidence; and that coincidence is the condition of consciousness. Is consciousness not the presence of the mind to itself—its "immediate being," or das unmittelbare Dasein des Geistes, as Hegel said? However, presence is not a possible object of coincidence. Presence never presents itself to consciousness in a strictly present, identifiable, and immovable way. Presence is always fringed. As Derrida says, it is always "differing," always temporized and spaced out, offering itself only in a "deferred" form. This is why presence can never coincide with consciousness, no matter how developed it is. Not only is presence not a possible object of coincidence for consciousness, but if we consider the coincidence of consciousness with itself, such as when its present and past states overlap—for example, when a dream becomes reality—we find that consciousness is not increased but obstructed. Thus, we understand that it is through an operation of decoincidence—of overflow and disagreement, of departure from the adequacy that the mind rightly requires—that we "become" conscious.
Nevertheless, it is necessary to distinguish and even oppose these two faculties: the mind and consciousness. The mind is capable of coincidence; this is its very purpose. The mind is the intellectual tool of coincidence. I direct my mind toward a phenomenon that occurs or a line of reasoning, fix my mind on it, and follow it. My mind applies itself, concentrates, and is attentive. However, consciousness is not instrumental; it does not fix or direct itself. It is not susceptible to attention, nor to adequacy. In other words, the proper function of the mind is to know, and knowledge is formed by conformity—the mind coinciding with the thing—which is the normative definition of truth. However, the activity of consciousness is not to know or represent, as the mind does instrumentally. Rather, it is to become conscious by actualizing its capacity to realize in the moment by bringing into its field of reflection. This Anglicism (why was it necessary to import this term?) puts it as "realizing." "To realize" (I realize—or I cannot realize that he is dead or that such a thing has happened) is to integrate this into one's thinking as part of the "real," despite my difficulty in admitting it. The issue is no longer grasping the "true" (through adequacy), but breaking in to the reality of what actually is.
Therefore, we must be careful not to allow this "becoming aware," with all that it implies in terms of separation and intrusion, to be concealed by the coincidental and conforming operation of the mind. After all, the vocation of the mind is coincidence, as evidenced by its fundamental requirement of "evidence," which Descartes identified as the starting point of thought in the cogito. What is evidence if not the perfect overlap between the thinking mind and the thought itself? However, would this be to the point of having "the thing present to consciousness," as Husserl suggests in order to describe the experience more precisely? This leads us to wonder whether, like all European intellectualism before him, Husserl misunderstood and buried the proper activity of consciousness—the capacity to become aware and to "realize"—by placing it under the sole control of the mind and annexing it to knowledge. If the vague truth with which we are usually content is only a rough coincidence, then strict truth is that in which coincidence is perfect and rigorous. This is the very truth that is the foundation of science, according to Husserl, when the mind is completely filled by the thing, resulting in "adequate coverage," stimmende Deckung. But can consciousness ever effectively "cover" what presents itself to it?
(François Jullien, De-coincidence, The origin of Art and Existence, 2017)

"Let us try, then, not to represent ourselves intellectually in an adequate way in our minds with ideas of this or that fact or truth. Let us not go over the 'eternal' experience worthy of a lesson, the cogito, once again. Instead, let us make ourselves present to what we are actually experiencing at this moment. Let us try to become precisely aware of this and, to do so, rely on what will most immediately bring us into contact with reality: our sensation of pleasure." [...]
Consciousness fails to integrate this reality "on the spot" (the term is apt, as if struck by a blow). This is not because it happens too quickly, as it seems at first—that argument is insufficient. Rather, it is because this immediacy of presence, precisely because it is immediate, cannot be brought into consciousness (as we say, 'in real time'). Initially, I give myself easy reasons because consciousness is stunned, offended, and disoriented by this group that emerges. Even in a sensation of pleasure, it cannot find anything that could make it an object of coincidence. Presence inevitably splits, fringes, and disintegrates when one tries to fix it. This is not due to a lack of attention or a deficiency of perception, but rather because presence cannot be presented, even in its representation on the stage. It only begins to become perceptible and experienceable retrospectively and through mediation. For example, at the end of the scene, I am disappointed but also regretful. Thus, this immediate presence can only be encountered paradoxically at a distance, nebulously, or as if through an aura, as Proust concludes. At the same time, there is always the risk of self-suggestion on the part of the subject. "...as I applauded, it seemed to me that La Berma had played better." [...]"
(François Jullien, De-coincidence, The origin of Art and Existence, 2017)

"If such a perfect coincidence were to occur between what I have dreamed of and its current fulfillment — with one completely overlapping the other according to the primary geometric meaning of coincidence — I could not become aware of my happiness. I would be forced to observe it from the outside but 'not possess it internally.' For me to become aware of this happiness today—for example, the fact that I can now see Gilberte when I thought it would always be forbidden to me—it would be necessary that, at the very moment I touch this much-desired reality, I not touch it: it must remain intangible in every respect, so a gap remains between the two, allowing me to measure the reversal that has taken place with my past within my present consciousness," says Proust. However, in these perfectly coincidental circumstances, when reality folds in on itself and aligns with what we have dreamed of for so long, it hides from us entirely by merging with it. It's as if two identical figures are superimposed on each other to form a single entity. The fact that such a coincidence between dream and reality "obstructs" the entrance to consciousness reveals that coincidence, by covering perfectly, assimilates and buries. Awareness can therefore only come about through de-coincidence and disruption.
What prevents my awareness if not my capacity for awareness? As long as it coincides with my mind, which aims to coincide by vocation, allowing itself to be governed by the mode of adequacy and adaptation required by the mind, it does not need to emerge on its own. My consciousness is content with the regularity arranged by the mind. It is satisfied with the conformity proposed as truth and does not need to "realize" anything else. It does not need to bring anything dissident into its consciousness. The faculty of consciousness, usually classified under knowledge, does not deviate from the mind's imposed norm. It presents to the mind only what the mind asks of it, according to its assigned function, and does not go beyond that. Our consciousness is usually in a state of semi-slumber, a state of low activity under the control of the mind. It only awakens and begins to work actively when forced to bring into its inner field something the mind did not expect or does not believe in according to its established logic. For example, when I receive a letter from Gilberte, although I can clearly see her signature at the bottom of the page, I cannot realize or become aware of my happiness because my mind has always believed—and still believes—that this happiness is impossible. This reality is very real, but I must force it into my consciousness. My mind, bound by its projected normality and logical division of the possible and impossible, cannot accept it. Proust did not shy away from describing the dizzying effect of this breach: "The sight of this long-awaited letter, 'unaccompanied by belief,' did not cause me joy." On the contrary, for a moment, it "only struck me as unreal." "With dizzying speed, this implausible signature danced around my bed, fireplace, and wall."
There is such a brutal discrepancy between what my consciousness suddenly becomes aware of when I perceive the signature and the normal framework of the mind—such a letter is impossible in principle—that this perceptual upheaval occurs reactively. Consciousness suddenly works against the mind to integrate what is unacceptable to the mind into reality instead of allowing its activity to be channeled by the mind as usual. However, the novelist needed this clever staging of the event to describe it. But philosophy traditionally distrusts any deviation between the mind and consciousness. Philosophy takes pleasure in opposing the senses and the mind. Then, at its leisure, it seeks whatever mediations it wants for this old dualism, such as imagination. Or, it separates understanding and reason (as in Kant). However, it certainly does not want this other possible conflict between faculties, which would insidiously threaten the mind's asserted sovereignty and undermine the empire of knowledge. Therefore, philosophy wants to see consciousness only as the immediate "being there" of the mind (Hegel), or it keeps the two coupled together in mutual collaboration, as in Husserl's phenomenology. Or does it make them operators of a recognition of the "self" in the continuous flow of perceptions (Locke's self) and use them to establish the subject's identity? However, it refrains from considering that consciousness might stray from the mind's rectitude, dissent with it, or, worse, be forced to do so. On the contrary, art—especially modern art—has worked within this gap and even sought to exploit it. Surrealism has made this its demand. It sought to break down the framework constructed by the mind—its regime of adequate and adapted coincidence—so consciousness could decouple itself from this apparatus and effectively become aware of the "real" or actual. This way, consciousness can integrate the real instead of accommodating it according to the mind's expectations. [...]
The mind constructs reality in a way that suits it, which is then officially called "reason." If the mind wishes to keep consciousness under its control so as not to be disturbed by reality that is not subject to its categories, then it is up to art to organize the conditions for such dissent and put them into action. This is difficult to do in practice since our language is inherently intellectual and has passed over to the side of the mind. Therefore, it is ill-equipped to express this activity specific to consciousness. This is also why modern art is the starting point for philosophy today. The French language is particularly poor in this respect, which goes hand in hand with its rationalism and calls for a surrealist revolt. It has little more than the trivial "prendre conscience" (to become aware), to which I always return, or "réaliser" (to realize), borrowed from English and long regarded with suspicion. English, with its concept of consciousness, may already be setting us on the right path. Above all, English consciousness points to the emergence of a consciousness breaking away from the mind's framing. [...]"
(François Jullien, De-coincidence, The origin of Art and Existence, 2017)

If "authentic as such" is suspected of being prepared as an object of the mind, then it can only be accessed by liberated consciousness through the confusion of the mind. Zen is a strategic approach that aims to confuse the mind to free us from its established way of thinking. Zen begins by systematically undermining the conditions of discourse that underpin this adequacy. Zen resolutely breaks the referential function of signs, abruptly dismantles the relationship of reference, and challenges the vocation of meaning itself. But it does so through speech." [...]

How is this decoincidence, to which Zen devotes itself, not a rejection of logic and rationality, relegating it to the mystical margins, as one might too easily believe in Europe? By undermining the positive apparatus of logic from within, Zen reveals a capacity specific to the negative and most general: denouncing the shift into positivity from within the heart of everything positive, a shift reinforced by cohesion and assurance. Is this virtue of the negative not precisely the ability to decouple from itself, to save itself from itself while preserving itself, in order to promote its capacity to exist once again?"
(François Jullien, De-coincidence, The origin of Art and Existence, 2017)

A_Max Pietschmann_Adam and Eve_1894

"For an ethics of decoincidence [...]
Disengagement and extrication are ethical strategies that call for decoincidence to free life from its confinement within its world. These strategies aim to wash away the positivity produced by normality, shake life out of its inertia, and restore its momentum, however uncertain it may be.
Because the logic of decoincidence is at the root of ethics, it applies to our relationships with others and with ourselves. In one's relationship with oneself, decoupling from oneself means decoupling from the relationship of adequacy and adaptation that leads to the formation of a self that stabilizes into what is known as one's "character." However, the existing subject's vocation is not to be reduced to this "self," this "ethical" self (which is no longer ethical), or this ego that makes up the self. Rather, the existing subject must regain its initiative vis-à-vis this self that is locked in its world and no longer emerges from the rut of a self that has become "equal" to itself. We now know with certainty how this self, adequate to itself, will behave. It is incapable of the slightest "protrusion" outside itself and is condemned to repetition. This is why what we call moral "evil," or "vice," stems from the self's inability to break free from its established self-image. Instead, it becomes entrenched and unable to attempt anything else. This "normalized" inner coincidence, which becomes blocked and cannot be broken, can be understood to the point of the monstrosity of ordinary camp guards. On the other hand, learning to "leave oneself" and dissociate from oneself — to chip away at the comfort and complacency one finds in the coincidence one maintains with oneself — and consequently maintain oneself in continuous transformation is the condition — and I believe the only one — for the advancement of the subject. This applies to the life of thought as well. Seeking to break away from the way we think and the way our thoughts have become attuned to themselves is the only way to keep our thoughts active and alert. [...]
This is not a freedom decreed or granted, but one gradually conquered in the decoupling from the world—along with the evolution that promoted it to 'man'—and one that it is existentially incumbent upon to activate." [...]
From evil (the tempting serpent)—leading to the cracking of this paradise—and, as a result, decoupling from it. In other words, the positive aspect of paradise, which is stable and coincides with itself, becomes negative because of its positivity. Therefore, it can only save itself through the positive, fertile, or "driving" aspects of the negative, defective will (Augustine's modus defectivus). This brings forth a subject that contradicts the positive order and unseals a way out. Was there any other possible way out ("salvation")? From this decoincidence comes the beginning of consciousness ("they see themselves naked"). Driven out of this adequate and adapted order and condemned to exile, the first parents are forced to remain outside of this world. They must raise themselves to "existence." This decoincidence with God's order has brought forth a freedom that gives them the desire to choose and qualify themselves. They are now promised a history and are promoted to subjects of it. [...]
Man is strictly immanent in the world; that is, he literally "dwells in" the immanent world. However, the decoincidence through exaptation that is already at work in the evolution of life has generically resulted in his promotion to man. Therefore, although he belongs to and depends on the world, he can create a breach in it, cracking its enclosure and integration. By valuing this decoupling as an ethical requirement, he can transcend his conditioning, assert a freedom that escapes his determination, and truly "exist." Man is this immanent-existent. [...]"
(François Jullien, De-coincidence, The origin of Art and Existence, 2017)

Athanasios Argianas_Hollowed Water, 2020- A Gesture, 24 Times, Digital video, 3mins, looped

ILLUSTRATION OF CLINAMEN
In this new film, a scenario is re-enacted 24 times, each with slight variations, each one unique. A bismuth crystal is dropped from a human hand, onto the skin of a drum, which falls from a bridge into a river where it is carried away by the current. The bismuth crystal has an ambiguous appearance - it naturally forms right-angled shapes and iridescent colours that seem synthetic or futuristic. The musical composition, played on a harpsichord, mimics the crystalline structure - a synaesthetic equivalent of its rhythmic pattern and shifting phases. The piece shifts tonality every five bars, in time with the progression of sequences in the film. These harmonic chains are typical of 1980s minimalist phasing techniques, systems music, as well as baroque fugue compositions.

Art :
- Athanasios Argianas_Hollowed Water, 2020- A Gesture, 24 Times, Digital video, 3mins, looped

E2.2.C.1.2.b. With word and deed we insert ourselves into the human world, and this insertion is like a second birth, in which we confirm and take upon ourselves the naked fact of our original physical appearance. This insertion is not forced upon us by necessity, like labor, and it is not prompted by utility, like work. It may be stimulated by the presence of others whose company we may wish to join, but it is never conditioned by them; its impulse springs from the beginning which came into the world when we were born and to which we respond by beginning something new on our own initiative. [...]
This beginning is not the same as the beginning of the world; it is not the beginning of something but of somebody, who is a beginner himself. With the creation of man, the principle of beginning came into the world itself, which, of course, is only another way of saying that the principle of freedom was created when man was created but not before.
It is in the nature of beginning that something new is started which cannot be expected from whatever may have happened before. This character of startling unexpectedness is inherent in all beginnings and in all origins. Thus, the origin of life from inorganic matter is an infinite improbability of inorganic processes, as is the coming into being of the earth viewed from the standpoint of processes in the universe, or the evolution of human out of animal life. The new always happens against the overwhelming odds of statistical laws and their probability, which for all practical, everyday purposes amounts to certainty; the new therefore always appears in the guise of a miracle. The fact that man is capable of action means that the unexpected can be expected from him, that he is able to perform what is infinitely improbable. And this again is possible only because each man is unique, so that with each birth something uniquely new comes into the world. With respect to this somebody who is unique it can be truly said that nobody was there before. If action as beginning corresponds to the fact of birth, if it is the actualization of the human condition of natality, then speech corresponds to the fact of distinctness and is the actualization of the human condition of plurality, that is, of living as a distinct and unique being among equals."
(Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition, 1958)

E2.2.C.1.2.c. "We, 
of flesh and words, 
in the obscure text 
of our cells 
enslaved. 
- We,
through speech 
enlarged. [...]

We, 
of flesh and words, 
pass on the torch:
in egg and sperm 
fidelity to the species,
in language and books
 
the power to betray
and the pittance of hunger. [...]

Syntax
that structures us,
sex
that compels us,
hand
that exceeds.
Their alliance
to embody the quest
and shape the voice. [...]"
(Michel Baglin, Of flesh and words, 2012)


"Nous, 
de chair et de mots, 
au texte obscur 
de nos cellules 
assujettis. 
- Nous,
par la parole 
élargis. [...]

Nous, 
de chair et de mots, 
passons le relais:
dans l’œuf et le sperme 
la fidélité à l’espèce,
dans la langue et les livres 
la force de trahir 
et le pécule des faims. [...]

Syntaxe 
qui nous vertèbre,
sexe 
qui nous oblige, 
main 
qui démesure. 
Leur alliance 
pour incarner la quête 
et charpenter la voix. [...]"
(Michel Baglin, De chair et de mots, 2012)

E2.2.C.1.2.d. In the last scene of the film The Truman show by Peter Weir (1998), 
Truman leaves his "role" through the exit door of the film set where he has been imprisoned since birth, entering real life.

Watch the scene on Youtube: https://youtu.be/-_zYn-HHcyA?si=Gnkz5IKdnAfwNwOn

What The Truman Show Teaches Us About Politics
(Film & art critic Nerdwriter: the Truman Show)

Watch it on YouTube: https://youtu.be/cLJAXu5OD-c?si=GDOYVQadXjSNF2EW

E2.2.C.1.2.e. TO BE OR NOT TO BE?
"In his great lucidity, mistaken by the other characters for madness, Hamlet dares to question the use of freedom, not only within the limits of life, but also including the option of suicide. To be or not to be? To live with full knowledge and the courage to face life's injustices or to choose death's rest. 
However, upon further reflection, Hamlet doubts that he will be free from his torments even in death. He ponders the dreams of the dead and fears his torments will follow him beyond the grave. The theme of torment after death also haunts his uncle, who knows that he will no longer be able to hide his theft from God, despite having hidden his usurpation during his lifetime. In his case, freedom ends with death."
(Pierre Schindler).

E1.5.E.1.2_REF4_PO.wE2.2.C.1.2. THE BEST ADVICE WE HAVE FOR ANYONE ELSE IS ALWAYS ADVICE TO OURSELVES

E2.2.C.1.3. Freedom as Integration and Adaptation: the opposite path - achieving freedom not by breaking constraints, but by understanding, accepting, and working within them.

E2.2.C.1.3.a. “I DON'T HAVE THE CHOICE TO BE FREE; I AM FREE TO THE EXTENT THAT I UNDERSTAND THE WORLD, LIKE A SWIMMER UNDERSTANDING THE WAVES: THROUGH INTUITIVE, NON-DISCURSIVE KNOWLEDGE AT A GLANCE, RATHER THAN THROUGH A PROCESS OF DEMONSTRATION.”
“Perhaps we are now in a better position to understand what Spinoza means when he writes that 'all things are animated in varying degrees' (II, 13, scholium). This universal life abounds on earth as in the universe, and we are to understand it in the sense that all things, From stone to man, are raised by the impulse of conatus — the life of God or the activity of the living God, who is existence itself — and in what sense this infinite, living necessity is not contradictory to the experience of freedom, but is its very object. The body and the mind are not limited to themselves, but are open to immensity and express their power to act all the more because of this openness. The body's sphere of action expands in an environment without which it could not live, and the mind thinks in an intellectual environment that nourishes and stimulates it. According to Spinoza, freedom does not consist of acts that oppose nature and seek to tame and subject it to our own interests through human effort. Rather, freedom consists in participating in the immanent dynamism that animates the universe, not through the will to transform it, but through the will to commune with the infinite life that permeates it. Therefore, freedom cannot consist in the negation of necessity; it is pure affirmation and contains nothing negative. Rather, it consists in affirming this necessity and joyfully and powerfully participating in the divine necessity that ceaselessly recreates the world. This serves no other purpose than expressing its infinite, eternal and gratuitous nature. [...]
As part of nature, man is nature itself, immersed in the vast universe. Freedom is the experience of necessity: an inner necessity that expresses itself through my ability to act to the best of my ability; and an outer necessity resulting from the pressure of events that compel me to act. Freedom does not consist of indifference to choice, but rather of the extreme determination of the act. I don't have the choice to be free; I am free to the extent that I understand the world, like a swimmer understanding the waves: through intuitive, non-discursive knowledge at a glance, rather than through a process of demonstration. The highest knowledge, reason, knows the part through the whole — the adjustment of each individual part to the symphony as a whole — and not the whole through the sequence of parts, which is the knowledge of understanding: the succession of propositions, but not the intuition of totality".
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the Fullness of this World, 4 – 'Desire is the very essence of man', 2017)

E2.2.C.1.3.b. A_Pablo Picasso_A dream_1932

Picasso said, "When I don't have blue, I use red."
This statement might seem like a facile form of resignation, but that's not the case. But that's not the case at all. It's not about replacing one color with another, but rather, accepting the need to rethink everything from scratch. Picasso knew that painting is about composing and discovering how to put things together that work well. We do this all the time in life because we have to make decisions based on a whole set of parameters. If we become discouraged and stop working just because we've run out of blue, then we've become rigid. We mistakenly believe that there is only one way out, and if that way is closed, then nothing is possible. In reality, this is never true. Remember Picasso: "When I don't have blue, I use red." You will find a way out that will surprise even you. The forgotten meaning of freedom is that it means being ready to deal with a situation. You are free because you have freed yourself from mechanical behaviors. You are free because you truly see your situation and are ready to deal with it.'
(Fabrice Midal, 3 minutes of philosophy to become human again, broadcast on France Culture on August 6, 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: 
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/3-minutes-de-philosophie-pour-redevenir-humain/picasso

Eric Rohmer, le Rayon vert, 1986
La discussion de Délphine et de son amie quand à accueillir l'imprévu - face à la nouvelle que Carole laisse tomber Délphine pour les vacances et que celle-ci se retrouve sans personne pour voyager 15 jours avant ses congés. [0 - 5'00"]
Tags: FILM: LE RAYON VERT

E2.2.C.1.3.c. "Is it possible to escape simple discipline without breaking the law or endangering our fellow citizens? Hegel suggests that it is possible to turn rules into freedom. According to him, when I respect the law, I participate in the ethical life of the state and become free.

To understand this better, recall that in the eyes of this great modern thinker, our moral principles always come up against the reality of a society's customs. Individual duty, even if it takes the form of good deeds and is not limited to intentions, is not enough.

In his Principles of the Philosophy of Law, the philosopher reminds us that individual emancipation only makes sense in a social context. Conversely, a viable society does more than enact abstract rules; it provides the opportunity to recognize oneself in common principles. Individuals truly achieve freedom and emancipate themselves by recognizing themselves in this "ethical life" and reconciling morality and law."
(Cédric Enjalbert, TimeToPhilo, March 26, 2020)


"The owl of Minerva only takes flight at dusk." The role of philosophy can never be prescriptive. While the philosopher's task is normative, it consists of formulating the immanent normativity that is not yet evident to his contemporaries. The philosopher's role is to grasp the spirit of a people so that this spirit can better come into being. "I am only the secretary of the world," said Hegel.
For Hegel, law guarantees freedom; freedom is a process. What allows us to access our subjectivity is sharing the objective spirit—the collective mentality and habits of a people. Hegel makes no distinction between the institutional and political character and freedom at the individual level.
"What the subject is is the sum of its actions," as opposed to Kant's morality of intention. Moral subjectivity can only exist if it is oriented toward a social and political normative network. But is law enough? The state defuses the contradictions of civil society by imposing the norm of living together, including among classes and other groups that divide us. The state is among us rather than above us. It exists within us as the will to live together."
(Jean-François Kervégan in the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on May 3, 2018)

Listen to the podcast in French:
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/quoi-hegel-quest-ce-quil-a-hegel-44-le-droit-cest-la-vie

E1.6.B.4.3.wE2.2.C.1.3. FEELING BESIEGED CAN ALSO SERVE AS A SOURCE OF PRIVILEGE AND CONNECTION TO OTHERS, RATHER THAN A BURDEN

E2.2.C.1.4. Concrete examples from art, biography, literature, and technology that show individuals "acting despite constraints" and "overcoming determinisms."

E2.2.C.1.4.a. Art: Evelyne Axell_Valentine, 1966 - Oil paint, zip-fastener and helmet on canvas
"In Valentine Axell combines an idealised feminine silhouette with a spacesuit helmet. It was made during the 1960s space race, when the United States and the Soviet Union competed for dominance in space exploration. The title refers to Soviet cosmonaut Valentina Tereshkova, the first woman in space. Axell presents her as both a feminist heroine and a sexualised figure. Axell's paintings have been described as a 'sexual revolution in art'. They combat gender discrimination, linking women's political and social freedom with female sexuality."
(Curatorship: Tate Modern, London)

Art: 
- Evelyne Axell_Valentine, 1966 - Oil paint, zip-fastener and helmet on canvas

E2.2.C.1.4.b. Iggy Pop walking across his audience’s hands and smear himself in peanut butter whilst singing, 1970

"Considering human imagination the last piece of wilderness, do you think AI will ever be able to write a good song?
PETER, LJUBLJANA, SLOVENIA

Dear Peter,
In Yuval Noah Harari’s brilliant new book 21 Lessons for the 21st Century, he writes that Artificial Intelligence, with its limitless potential and connectedness, will ultimately render many humans redundant in the work place. This sounds entirely feasible. However, he goes on to say that AI will be able to write better songs than humans can. He says, and excuse my simplistic summation, that we listen to songs to make us feel certain things and that in the future AI will simply be able to map the individual mind and create songs tailored exclusively to our own particular mental algorithms, that can make us feel, with far more intensity and precision, whatever it is we want to feel. If we are feeling sad and want to feel happy we simply listen to our bespoke AI happy song and the job will be done.

But, I am not sure that this is all songs do. Of course, we go to songs to make us feel something – happy, sad, sexy, homesick, excited or whatever – but this is not all a song does. What a great song makes us feel is a sense of awe. There is a reason for this. A sense of awe is almost exclusively predicated on our limitations as human beings. It is entirely to do with our audacity as humans to reach beyond our potential.

A sense of awe is almost exclusively predicated on our limitations as human beings.

It is perfectly conceivable that AI could produce a song as good as Nirvana’s Smells Like Teen Spirit, for example, and that it ticked all the boxes required to make us feel what a song like that should make us feel – in this case, excited and rebellious, let’s say. It is also feasible that AI could produce a song that makes us feel these same feelings, but more intensely than any human songwriter could do.

But, I don’t feel that when we listen to Smells Like Teen Spirit it is only the song that we are listening to. It feels to me, that what we are actually listening to is a withdrawn and alienated young man’s journey out of the small American town of Aberdeen – a young man who by any measure was a walking bundle of dysfunction and human limitation – a young man who had the temerity to howl his particular pain into a microphone and in doing so, by way of the heavens, reach into the hearts of a generation. We are also listening to Iggy Pop walk across his audience’s hands and smear himself in peanut butter whilst singing 1970. We are listening to Beethoven compose the Ninth Symphony while almost totally deaf. We are listening to Prince, that tiny cluster of purple atoms, singing in the pouring rain at the Super Bowl and blowing everyone’s minds. We are listening to Nina Simone stuff all her rage and disappointment into the most tender of love songs. We are listening to Paganini continue to play his Stradivarius as the strings snapped. We are listening to Jimi Hendrix kneel and set fire to his own instrument.

We are listening to Jimi Hendrix kneel and set fire to his own instrument.

What we are actually listening to is human limitation and the audacity to transcend it. Artificial Intelligence, for all its unlimited potential, simply doesn’t have this capacity. How could it? And this is the essence of transcendence. If we have limitless potential then what is there to transcend? And therefore what is the purpose of the imagination at all. Music has the ability to touch the celestial sphere with the tips of its fingers and the awe and wonder we feel is in the desperate temerity of the reach, not just the outcome. Where is the transcendent splendour in unlimited potential? So to answer your question, Peter, AI would have the capacity to write a good song, but not a great one. It lacks the nerve.

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #22 / JANUARY 2019)

Read it in the Red Hnd Files: https://www.theredhandfiles.com/considering-human-imagination-the-last-piece-of-wilderness-do-you-think-ai-will-ever-be-able-to-write-a-good-song/

Watch Iggy Pop on YouTube: https://youtu.be/scfxldv2a6Y

E2.2.C.1.4.c. CONQUERING OUR MOST FUNDAMENTAL, BIOLOGICAL CONSTRAINTS—OUR GENES, OUR PHYSIOLOGY AND OUR EMOTIONAL CAPACITIES.
“Of Mice and Men
Biological engineering is deliberate human intervention on the biological level (e.g. implanting a gene) aimed at modifying an organisms shape, capabilities, needs or desires, in order to realize some preconceived cultural idea […] Recent advances in our understanding of how organisms work, down to the cellular and nuclear levels, have opened up previously unimaginable possibilities. […]
Most of the organisms now being engineered are those with the weakest political lobbies – plants, fungi, bacteria and insects. […] Why not go back to God’s drawing board and design a better Sapiens? The abilities, needs and desires of Homo sapiens have a genetic basis, and the Sapiens genome is no more complex than that of voles and mice. (The mouse genome contains about 2.5 billion nucleobases, the Sapiens genome about 2.9 billion bases –meaning the latter is only 14 per cent larger.)
In the medium range – perhaps in a few decades – genetic engineering and other forms of biological engineering might enable us to make far-reaching alterations not only to our physiology, immune system and life expectancy, but also to our intellectual and emotional capacities. If genetic engineering can create genius mice, why not genius humans? If it can create monogamous voles, why not humans hard-wired to remain faithful to their partners?
The Cognitive Revolution that turned Homo sapiens from an insignificant ape into the master of the world did not require any noticeable change in physiology or even in the size and external shape of the Sapiens brain. It apparently involved no more than a few small changes to internal brain structure. Perhaps another small change would be enough to ignite a Second Cognitive Revolution, create a completely new type of consciousness, and transform Homo sapiens into something altogether different.
True, we still don’t have the acumen to achieve this, but there seems to be no insurmountable technical barrier preventing us from producing superhumans. The main obstacles are the ethical and political objections that have slowed down research on humans. And no matter how convincing the ethical arguments may be, it is hard to see how they can hold back the next step for long, especially if what is at stake is the possibility of prolonging human life indefinitely, conquering incurable diseases, and upgrading our cognitive and emotional abilities.

Bionic Life
There is another new technology which could change the laws of life: cyborg engineering. Cyborgs are beings which combine organic and inorganic parts, such as a human with bionic hands. In a sense, nearly all of us are bionic these days, since our natural senses and functions are supplemented by devices such as eyeglasses, pacemakers, orthotics, and even computers and mobile phones (which relieve our brains of some of their data storage and processing burdens). We stand poised on the brink of becoming true cyborgs, of having inorganic features that are inseparable from our bodies, features that modify our abilities, desires, personalities and identities. […]”
(Yuval Noah Harari, Sapiens, A Brief History of Humankind, 2011)

E2.2.C.1.4.d. DAVID DEUTSCH EXPLORES THE IDEA OF FREEDOM IN A HIGHLY MODERN, TECHNOLOGICAL CONTEXT. THE ULTIMATE FREEDOM WOULD BE THE ABILITY TO EXPERIENCE ANY LOGICALLY POSSIBLE REALITY.
“I want to consider virtual reality in as general a way as possible. What, if any, are its ultimate limits? What sorts of environment can in principle be artificially rendered, and with what accuracy? By ‘in principle’ I mean ignoring transient limitations of technology, but taking into account all  limitations that may be imposed by the principles of logic and physics.
The way I have defined it, a virtual-reality generator is a machine that gives the user experiences of some real or imagined environment (such as an aircraft) which is, or seems to be, outside the user’s mind. Let me call those external experiences. External experiences are to be contrasted with internal experiences such as one’s nervousness when making one’s first solo landing, or one’s surprise at the sudden appearance of a thunderstorm out of a clear blue sky. A virtual-reality generator indirectly causes the user to have internal experiences as well as external ones, but it cannot be programmed to render a specific internal experience. For example, a pilot who makes roughly the same flight twice in the simulator will have roughly the same external experiences on both occasions, but on the second occasion will probably be less surprised when the thunderstorm appears. Of course on the second occasion the pilot would probably also react differently to the appearance of the thunderstorm, and that would make the subsequent external experiences different too. But the point is that although one can program the machine to make a thunderstorm appear in the pilot’s field of view whenever one likes, one cannot program it to make the pilot think  whatever one likes in response.
One can conceive of a technology beyond virtual reality, which could also induce specified internal experiences. A few internal experiences, such as moods induced by certain drugs, can already be artificially rendered, and no doubt in future it will be possible to extend that repertoire. But a generator of specifiable internal experiences would in general have to be able to override the normal functioning of the user’s mind as well as the senses. In other words, it would be replacing the user by a different person. This puts such machines into a different category from virtual-reality generators. They will require quite different technology and will raise quite different philosophical issues, which is why I have excluded them from my definition of virtual  reality.
Another type of experience which certainly cannot be artificially rendered is a logically impossible one. I have said that a flight simulator can create the experience of a physically impossible flight through a mountain. But nothing can create the experience of factorizing the number 181, because that is logically impossible: 181 is a prime number. (Believing that one has factorized 181 is a logically possible experience, but an internal one, and so also outside the scope of virtual reality.) Another logically impossible experience is unconsciousness, for when one is unconscious one is by definition not experiencing anything. Not experiencing anything is quite different from experiencing a total lack of sensations — sensory isolation —  which is of course a physically possible environment.
Having excluded logically impossible experiences and internal experiences, we are left with the vast class of logically possible, external experiences —experiences of environments which are logically possible, but may or may not be physically possible (Table 5.1). Something is physically possible if it is not forbidden by the laws of physics. In this book I shall assume that the
‘laws of physics’ include an as yet unknown rule determining the initial state or other supplementary data necessary to give, in principle, a complete description of the multiverse (otherwise these data would be a set of intrinsically inexplicable facts). In that case, an environment is physically possible if and only if it actually exists somewhere in the multiverse (i.e. in some universe or universes). Something is physically impossible if it does  not happen anywhere in the multiverse.
I define the repertoire of a virtual-reality generator as the set of real or imaginary environments that the generator can be programmed to give the user the experience of. My question about the ultimate limits of virtual reality can be stated like this: what constraints, if any, do the laws of physics  impose on the repertoires of virtual-reality generators?
Virtual reality always involves the creation of artificial sense-impressions —image generation — so let us begin there. What constraints do the laws of physics impose on the ability of image generators to create artificial images, to render detail and to cover their respective sensory ranges? There are obvious ways in which the detail rendered by a present-day flight simulator could be improved, for example by using higher-definition televisions. But can a realistic aircraft and its surroundings be rendered, even in principle, with the ultimate level of detail — that is, with the greatest level of detail the pilot’s senses can resolve? For the sense of hearing, that ultimate level has almost been achieved in hi-fi systems, and for sight it is within reach. But what about the other senses? Is it obvious that it is physically possible to build a general-purpose chemical factory that can produce any specified combination of millions of different odoriferous chemicals at a moment’s notice? Or a machine which, when inserted into a gourmet’s mouth, can assume the taste and texture of any possible dish — to say nothing of creating the hunger and thirst that precede the meal and the physical satisfaction that follows it? (Hunger and thirst, and other sensations such as balance and muscle tension, are perceived as being internal to the body, but they are external to the mind and are therefore potentially within the scope of  virtual reality.)”
(David Deutsch, The Fabric of Reality, 1996)

E2.2.C.1.4.e. DEFOE CREATES CHARACTERS WHO ARE SYSTEMATICALLY STRIPPED OF ALL SOCIAL PROTECTION AND "REDUCE[D]... TO SUCH A STATE OF UNFRIENDED MISERY" THAT THEIR ENTIRE EXISTENCE IS DEFINED BY CONSTRAINTS.
"Defoe was an elderly man when he turned novelist, many years the predecessor of Richardson and Fielding, and one of the first indeed to shape the novel and launch it on its way. But it is unnecessary to labour the fact of his precedence, except that he came to his novel-writing with certain conceptions about the art which he derived partly from being himself one of the first to practise it. The novel had to justify its existence by telling a true story and preaching a sound moral. “This supplying a story by invention is certainly a most scandalous crime,” he wrote. “It is a sort of lying that makes a great hole in the heart, in which by degrees a habit of lying enters in.” 
Either in the preface or in the text of each of his works, therefore, he takes pains to insist that he has not used his invention at all but has depended upon facts, and that his purpose has been the highly moral desire to convert the vicious or to warn the innocent. Happily these were principles that tallied very well with his natural disposition and endowments. Facts had been drilled into him by sixty years of varying fortunes before he turned his experience to account in fiction. “I have some time ago summed up the Scenes of my life in this distich,” he wrote:   
No man has tasted differing fortunes more, And thirteen times I have been rich and poor.   
He had spent eighteen months in Newgate and talked with thieves, pirates, highwaymen, and coiners before he wrote the history of Moll Flanders. But to have facts thrust upon you by dint of living and accident is one thing; to swallow them voraciously and retain the imprint of them indelibly, is another. It is not merely that Defoe knew the stress of poverty and had talked with the victims of it, but that the unsheltered life, exposed to circumstances and forced to shift for itself, appealed to him imaginatively as the right matter for his art. In the first pages of each of his great novels he reduces his hero or heroine to such a state of unfriended misery that their existence must be a continued struggle, and their survival at all the result of luck and their own exertions. Moll Flanders was born in Newgate of a criminal mother; Captain Singleton was stolen as a child and sold to the gipsies; Colonel Jack, though “born a gentleman, was put ’prentice to a pickpocket”; Roxana starts under better auspices, but, having married at fifteen, she sees her husband go bankrupt and is left with five children in “a condition the most deplorable that words can express”.
(Virginia Woolf, The Common Reader, 1925)

E2.2.C.1.4.f. WOOLF DESCRIBES GEORGE ELIOT'S DRIVING FORCE AS A "DOGGED DETERMINATION" AND A "DEEP-SEATED AND NOBLE AMBITION."
"The first volume of her life is a singularly depressing record. In it we see her raising herself with groans and struggles from the intolerable boredom of petty provincial society (her father had risen in the world and become more middle class, but less picturesque) to be the assistant editor of a highly intellectual London review, and the esteemed companion of Herbert Spencer. The stages are painful as she reveals them in the sad soliloquy in which Mr. Cross condemned her to tell the story of her life. Marked in early youth as one “sure to get something up very soon in the way of a clothing club”, she proceeded to raise funds for restoring a church by making a chart of ecclesiastical history; and that was followed by a loss of faith which so disturbed her father that he refused to live with her. Next came the struggle with the translation of Strauss, which, dismal and “soul-stupefying” in itself, can scarcely have been made less so by the usual feminine tasks of ordering a household and nursing a dying father, and the distressing conviction, to one so dependent upon affection, that by becoming a blue-stocking she was forfeiting her brother’s respect. “I used to go about like an owl,” she said, “to the great disgust of my brother.” “Poor thing,” wrote a friend who saw her toiling through Strauss with a statue of the risen Christ in front of her, “I do pity her sometimes, with her pale sickly face and dreadful headaches, and anxiety, too, about her father.” Yet, though we cannot read the story without a strong desire that the stages of her pilgrimage might have been made, if not more easy, at least more beautiful, there is a dogged determination in her advance upon the citadel of culture which raises it above our pity. Her development was very slow and very awkward, but it had the irresistible impetus behind it of a deep-seated and noble ambition. Every obstacle at length was thrust from her path. She knew everyone. She read everything. Her astonishing intellectual vitality had triumphed. Youth was over, but youth had been full of suffering. Then, at the age of thirty-five, at the height of her powers, and in the fullness of her freedom, she made the decision which was of such profound moment to her and still matters even to us, and went to Weimar, alone with George Henry Lewes.”
(Virginia Woolf, The Common Reader, 1925)

E2.2.C.1.4.g. FOR DR. JONES, FREEDOM WAS NOT A GIVEN STATE BUT A DIFFICULT, LIFELONG PROJECT.
“Dr. Jones greeted me at the door. She was lovely, polite, brown. She appeared to be somewhere in that range between forty and seventy years, when it becomes difficult to precisely ascertain a black person’s precise age. She was well composed, given the subject of our conversation, and for most of the visit I struggled to separate how she actually felt from what I felt she must be feeling. What I felt, right then, was that she was smiling through pained eyes, that the reason for my visit had spread sadness like a dark quilt over the whole house. I seem to recall music—jazz or gospel—playing in the back, but conflicting with that I also remember a deep quiet overcoming everything. I thought that perhaps she had been crying. I could not tell for sure. She led me into her large living room. There was no one else in the house. It was early January. Her Christmas tree was still standing at the end of the room, and there were stockings bearing the name of her daughter and her lost son, and there was a framed picture of him—Prince Jones—on a display table. She brought me water in a heavy glass. She drank tea. She told me that she was born and raised outside of Opelousas, Louisiana, that her ancestors had been enslaved in that same region, and that as a consequence of that enslavement, a fear echoed down through the ages. “It first became clear when I was four,” she told me.
My mother and I were going into the city. We got on the Greyhound bus. I was behind my mother. She wasn’t holding my hand at the time and I plopped down in the first seat I found. A few minutes later my mother was looking for me and she took me to the back of the bus and explained why I couldn’t sit there. We were very poor, and most of the black people around us, who I knew were poor also, and the images I had of white America were from going into the city and seeing who was behind the counter in the stores and seeing who my mother worked for. It became clear there was a distance.
This chasm makes itself known to us in all kinds of ways. A little girl wanders home, at age seven, after being teased in school and asks her parents, “Are we niggers and what does this mean?” Sometimes it is subtle—the simple observation of who lives where and works what jobs and who does not. Sometimes it’s all of it at once. I have never asked how you became personally aware of the distance. Was it Mike Brown? I don’t think I want to know. But I know that it has happened to you already, that you have deduced that you are privileged and yet still different from other privileged children, because you are the bearer of a body more fragile than any other in this country. What I want you to know is that this is not your fault, even if it is ultimately your responsibility. It is your responsibility because you are surrounded by the Dreamers. It has nothing to do with how you wear your pants or how you style your hair. The breach is as intentional as policy, as intentional as the forgetting that follows. The breach allows for the efficient sorting of the plundered from the plunderers, the enslaved from the enslavers, sharecroppers from landholders, cannibals from food.
Dr. Jones was reserved. She was what people once referred to as “a lady,” and in that sense reminded me of my grandmother, who was a single mother in the projects but always spoke as though she had nice things. And when Dr. Jones described her motive for escaping the dearth that marked the sharecropper life of her father and all the others around her, when she remembered herself saying, “I’m not going to live like this,” I saw the iron in her eyes, and I remembered the iron in my grandmother’s eyes. You must barely remember her by now—you were six when she died. I remember her, of course, but by the time I knew her, her exploits—how, for instance, she scrubbed white people’s floors during the day and went to school at night—were legend. But I still could feel the power and rectitude that propelled her out of the projects and into homeownership.
It was the same power I felt in the presence of Dr. Jones. When she was in second grade, she and another girl made a pact that they would both become doctors, and she held up her end of the bargain. But first she integrated the high school in her town. At the beginning she fought the white children who insulted her. At the end they voted her class president. She ran track. It was “a great entrée,” she told me, but it only brought her so far into their world. At football games the other students would cheer the star black running back, and then when a black player on the other team got the ball, they’d yell, “Kill that nigger! Kill that nigger!” They would yell this sitting right next to her, as though she really were not there. She gave Bible recitations as a child and told me the story of her recruitment into this business. Her mother took her to audition for the junior choir. Afterward the choir director said, “Honey, I think you should talk.” She was laughing lightly now, not uproariously, still in control of her body. I felt that she was warming up. As she talked of the church, I thought of your grandfather, the one you know, and how his first intellectual adventures were found in the recitation of Bible passages. I thought of your mother, who did the same. And I thought of my own distance from an institution that has, so often, been the only support for our people. I often wonder if in that distance I’ve missed something, some notions of cosmic hope, some wisdom beyond my mean physical perception of the world, something beyond the body, that I might have transmitted to you. I wondered this, at that particular moment, because something beyond anything I have ever understood drove Mable Jones to an exceptional life.
She went to college on full scholarship. She went to med school at Louisiana State University. She served in the Navy. She took up radiology. She did not then know any other black radiologists. I assumed that this would have been hard on her, but she was insulted by the assumption. She could not acknowledge any discomfort, and she did not speak of herself as remarkable, because it conceded too much, because it sanctified tribal expectations when the only expectation that mattered should be rooted in an assessment of Mable Jones. And by those lights, there was nothing surprising in her success, because Mable Jones was always pedal to the floor, not over or around, but through, and if she was going to do it, it must be done to death. Her disposition toward life was that of an elite athlete who knows the opponent is dirty and the refs are on the take, but also knows the championship is one game away.
She called her son—Prince Jones—“Rocky” in honor of her grandfather, who went by “Rock.” I asked about his childhood, because the fact is that I had not known Prince all that well. He was among the people I would be happy to see at a party, whom I would describe to a friend as “a good brother,” though I could not really account for his comings and goings. So she sketched him for me so that I might better understand. She said that he once hammered a nail into an electrical socket and shorted out the entire house. She said that he once dressed himself in a suit and tie, got down on one knee, and sang “Three Times a Lady” to her. She said that he’d gone to private schools his entire life—schools filled with Dreamers—but he made friends wherever he went, in Louisiana and later in Texas. I asked her how his friends’ parents treated her. “By then I was the chief of radiology at the local hospital,” she said. “And so they treated me with respect.” She said this with no love in her eye, coldly, as though she were explaining a mathematical function.”
(Ta Nehisi Coates, Between the World and Me, 2015)


E2.2.C.2. The Role of Consciousness and Reflection: Emphasize how becoming aware of determinisms can be the first step toward a form of freedom. The ability to analyze the influences acting upon us allows for greater autonomy.

E2.2.C.2.1. The Prison of the Unconscious (Determinism Without Awareness) : the state before consciousness and reflection are applied.

E2.2.C.2.1.a. Michel Foucault was a prolific and original thinker. In this episode of the Philosophy Bites podcast Susan James discusses some of the ways in which he explored questions about knowledge in his writing. For Foucault as for Nietzsche, there is no essence of truth, but a genealogy of a truth for a specific subject. You have to understand the genealogy of a particular truth. It depends where and when you live. For example Foucault investigates how madness can be a precursor of truth in the case of prophets or in differentiating mad people from offenders and recognising them the right to be cared for for their sickness.
In "Discipline and punish", he studies how we become objects of knowledge in a society that has us conditioned to incorporate certain regimes of discipline - in prison, but also at school, work, and social interaction - and thus shapes our definition of truth - our knowledge makes us a certain way even transforming our body. In this model, the more we accumulate scientific knowledge, the more we become conditioned and the less space there is for individual freedom? Is the unavoidable accumulation of power through growing  knowledge bad? Foucault think it is a condition of our life - he is concerned about how it is distributed and how it circulates. 
To be a subject, you have to become conscious of determinations and control yourself. Foucault studies ancient Greece as a case study for the practices of the self in his later work.
Is the point of a genealogy of knowledge simply a sociology or does it incorporate an evaluation of ethics? Foucault says the point of the genealogy is to initiate a sort of critic  - not one that judges if our truths are right or wrong - but rather one that shows us there is something contingent about the standards we use.
(Susan James on Michel Foucault and Knowledge, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: http://philosophybites.com/2015/07/susan-james-on-michel-foucault-and-knowledge.html

Stanley Milgram a démontré dans ses expériences sur l'obéissance et la désobéissance à l'autorité que seulement 35% des sujets se refusent à être l’agent d’un processus de torture d’un homme inconnu et innocent. Son hypothèse est qu’avec la division du travail dans la société moderne nous sommes conditionnés à obéir à un système dans lequel notre contribution se limite à une toute petite partie du processus total, si bien que nous avons tendance à rejeter la responsabilité de nos actes sur le système (Agency theory). Une fois que nous avons accepté le rôle d’agent, il nous est extrêmement difficile de nous soustraire à l’autorité.

Scène sur le plateau de television dans laquelle Milgram explique le méchanisme de la théorie de l'agent
Tags: FILM: THE MILGRAM EXPERIMENT

Le film pose la question du risque pour les hommes d'une IA plus intelligente qu'eux et dottée de libre arbitre. Ce qui est préocuppant dans le film c'est que le libre arbitre n'est pas l'effet d'une programmation, mais la qualité qui naît par induction de l'intelligence - en d'autres termes, il sera peut-être impossible d'empêcher l'instinc de préservation des machines intelligentes.

E2.2.C.2.1.b. "We shall readily see the difference between a man, who is led solely by emotion or opinion, and a man, who is led by reason. The former, whether he will or no, performs actions whereof he is utterly ignorant ; the latter is his own master and only performs such actions, as he knows are of primary importance in life, and therefore chiefly desires ; wherefore I call the former a slave, and the latter a free man [...]"
(Baruch Spinoza, Éthics IV, PROPOSITION LXVI, NOTE)

Read the Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E2.2.C.2.1.c. Fabuleux Platon ! (4/4)
Le mythe d'Er le Pamphylien : sommes-nous responsables de notre destin ?
Er revient après la mort pour raconter aux vivants ce qui se passe après la mort. Après les 600 pages d'argumentation serrée de la République, Platon fini par un Mythe. Dans la République il présente ses arguments démontrant que la justice (ma vertu) me rend heureux à travers l'estime que j'ai de moi même, l'harmonie et l'amitié que je développe avec moi-même. Il y a aussi les rétributions que je reçois des autres humains pour être vertueux; c'est la justice sociale. Finalement, dans le mythe d'Er il ajoutera la rétribution des dieux après la mort. Le mythe est plus accessible que le raisonnement comme modalité de parole qui est plus persuasive et qui frappe son auditeur.

Avant de passer devant un jugement pour se réincarner, les âmes qui ont bien agit iront dans le ciel pour contempler des spectacles délicieux, celles qui ont mal agit iront sous terre pendant 1000 ans pour payer pour leurs fautes. La question de fond est de savoir en quoi la vertu détermine notre bonheur et quelle est la liberté des âmes une fois qu'elles ont a choisir, purgées de leurs fautes, le modèle de vie dans lequel se réincarner. Après un tirage au sort de l'ordre, chacun à son tour choisit un modèle de vie parmi tous les possibles (vies animales et toutes les vies humaines). Cette complexité du processus a pu être désiré par Platon pour illustrer l'entremêlement de la nécessité, du hasard et de la responsabilité humaine. Le plus important dans ce processus, c'est que la divinité n'est pas responsable - le choix du modèle de vie est celui de chaque âme. 
Ulysse par exemple, après une vie de héros sélectionne après avoir bien regardé, une vie de particulier. Les âmes choisissent le modèle de vie qu'elles croient correspondre à leur désir, mais toutes la question est celle de la connaissance vraie de ce qui est vraiment désirable. L'âme qui choisira le modèle de vie du tyran le fait en s'illusionnant parce qu'elle pense que le tyran est plus libre que les autres 1. Alors même qu'il en avait été averti par le proclamateur (qui anime le jugement), cette âme ne reconnaîtra pas sa responsabilité du mauvais choix, et quand elle le regrettera elle blâmera la nécessité, le hasard et les démons. Il était pourtant descendu du ciel après une vie bien ordonnée dans une cité où la constitution politique et sa naissance lui avait épargné d'exercer sa vertu "par la force de l'habitude, mais sans philosophie". Il avait donc été jugé vertueux par défaut sans l'être, et le moment du choix révéla sa vraie nature. La plupart de ceux qui venaient du ciel faisaient des choix similaires. Au contraire, ceux qui émergeaient de la terre parce qu'ils avaient souffert eux-même et vu les autres souffrir, choisissaient en majorité des vies bonnes. Il y avait donc permutation entre les vies bonnes et les vies mauvaises selon le passage au ciel ou dans la terre. Seul les philosophes choisissaient toujours une vie bonne, si toutefois les sorts attribués n'étaient pas les derniers. Même les âmes qui choisissent la vie bonne pour la seule raison qu'elles ont pâti sous terre, ne font pas un choix fondé. Elles pourront se trompé à nouveau lors d'une prochaine réincarnation.
Dans le Timée, Platon reviendra sur la responsabilité de la vertu pour conclure qu'elle appartient à ceux qui éduquent. Même si nul n'est méchant volontairement, car tous cherchent le bien, ce sont les maîtres qui nous enseignent comment ne pas se tromper.


1 La figure du tyran chez Platon commence souvent comme un "populiste" qui semble défendre les intérêts du peuple contre les puissants, pour ensuite annuler les libertés de tous. Le tyran est le réceptacle des fantasmes du toujours plus et de la puissance absolue. Le sage lui sait que le tyran est le plus seul des hommes car il n'a pas d'ami et vit dans la peur.

Illustration musicale: Tombé du ciel de Jacques Higelin
Tags: LES CHEMINS DE LA PHILOSOPHIE  par Adèle Van Reeth

E2.2.C.2.1.d. THE REAL DISEASE IS THAT THE MIND "USES YOU" AND THAT "YOU ARE UNCONSCIOUSLY IDENTIFIED WITH IT... ITS SLAVE."
“The mind is a superb instrument if used rightly.  Used wrongly, however, it becomes very destructive.  To put it more accurately, it is not so much that you use your mind wrongly - you usually don't use it at all.  It uses you.  This is the disease.  You believe that you are your mind.  This is the delusion.  The instrument has taken you over. 

I don't quite agree.  It is true that I do a lot of aimless thinking, like most people, but I can still choose to use my mind to get and accomplish things, and I do that all the time. 

Just because you can solve a crossword puzzle or build an atom bomb doesn't mean that you use your mind.  Just as dogs love to chew bones, the mind loves to get its teeth into problems.  That's why it does crossword puzzles and builds atom bombs.  You have no interest in either.  Let me ask you this: can you be free of your mind whenever you want to?  Have you found the \"off\" button? 

You mean stop thinking altogether?  No, I can't, except maybe for a moment or two. 

Then the mind is using you.  You are unconsciously identified with it, so you don't even know that you are its slave.  It's almost as if you were possessed without knowing it, and so you take the possessing entity to be yourself.  The beginning of freedom is the realization that you are not the possessing entity -- the thinker.  Knowing this enables you to observe the entity.  The moment you start watching the thinker, a higher level of consciousness becomes activated.
You then begin to realize that there is a vast realm of intelligence beyond thought, that thought is only a tiny aspect of that intelligence.  You also realize that all the things that truly matter - beauty, love, creativity, joy, inner peace -arise from beyond the mind.  You begin to awaken.”
(Eckhart Tolle, The Power Of Now, 1997)

EMOTION ARISES AT THE PLACE WHERE MIND AND BODY MEET.  IT IS THE BODY'S REACTION TO YOUR MIND - OR YOU MIGHT SAY, A REFLECTION OF YOUR MIND IN THE BODY. 
“Emotion: The Body's Reaction to Your Mind 

What about emotions?  I get caught up in my emotions more than I do in my mind. Mind, in the way I use the word, is not just thought.  

It includes your emotions as well as all unconscious mental-emotional reactive patterns.  Emotion arises at the place where mind and body meet.  It is the body's reaction to your mind - or you might say, a reflection of your mind in the body.  For example, an attack thought or a hostile thought will create a build-up of energy in the body that we call anger.  The body is getting ready to fight.  The thought that you are being threatened, physically or psychologically, causes the body to contract, and this is the physical side of what we call fear.  Research has shown that strong emotions even cause changes in the biochemistry of the body.  These biochemical changes represent the physical or material aspect of the emotion.  Of course, you are not usually conscious of all your thought patterns, and it is often only through watching your emotions that you can bring them into awareness. 
The more you are identified with your thinking, your likes and dislikes, judgments and interpretations, which is to say the less present you are as the watching consciousness, the stronger the emotional energy charge will be, whether you are aware of it or not.  If you cannot feel your emotions, if you are cut off from them, you will eventually experience them on a purely physical level, as a physical problem or symptom.  A great deal has been written about this in recent years, so we don't need to go into it here.  A strong unconscious emotional pattern may even manifest as an external event that appears to just happen to you.  For example, I have observed that people who carry a lot of anger inside without being aware of it and without expressing it are more likely to be attacked, verbally or even physically, by other angry people, and often for no apparent reason.  They have a strong emanation of anger that certain people pick up subliminally and that triggers their own latent anger.”
(Eckhart Tolle, The Power Of Now, 1997)

EMOTION ARISES AT THE PLACE WHERE MIND AND BODY MEET.  IT IS THE BODY'S REACTION TO YOUR MIND - OR YOU MIGHT SAY, A REFLECTION OF YOUR MIND IN THE BODY (Continued 1). 
“You say that an emotion is the mind's reflection in the body.  But sometimes there is a conflict between the two: the mind says "no" while the emotion says "yes," or the other way around.

If you really want to know your mind, the body will always give you a truthful reflection, so look at the emotion or rather feel it in your body.  If there is an apparent conflict between them, the thought will be the lie, the emotion will be the truth.  Not the ultimate truth of who you are, but the relative truth of your state of mind at that time.
Conflict between surface thoughts and unconscious mental processes is certainly common.  You may not yet be able to bring your unconscious mind activity into awareness as thoughts, but it will always be reflected in the body as an emotion, and of this you can become aware.  To watch an emotion in this way is basically the same as listening to or watching a thought, which I described earlier.  The only difference is that, while a thought is in your head, an emotion has a strong physical component and so is primarily felt in the body.  You can then allow the emotion to be there without being controlled by it.  You no longer are the emotion; you are the watcher, the observing presence.  If you practice this, all that is unconscious in you will be brought into the light of consciousness.

So observing our emotions is as important as observing our thoughts?

Yes.  Make it a habit to ask yourself: What's going on inside me at this moment? That question will point you in the right direction.  But don't analyze, just watch.  Focus your attention within.  Feel the energy of the emotion.  If there is no emotion present, take your attention more deeply into the inner energy field of your body.  It is the doorway into Being.

An emotion usually represents an amplified and energized thought pattern, and because of its often overpowering energetic charge, it is not easy initially to stay present enough to be able to watch it.  It wants to take you over, and it usually succeeds - unless there is enough presence in you.  If you are pulled into unconscious identification with the emotion through lack of presence, which is normal, the emotion temporarily becomes "you." Often a vicious circle builds up between your thinking and the emotion: they feed each other.  The thought pattern creates a magnified reflection of itself in the form of an emotion, and the vibrational frequency of the emotion keeps feeding the original thought pattern. 
By dwelling mentally on the situation, event, or person that is the perceived cause of the emotion, the thought feeds energy to the emotion, which in turn energizes the thought pattern, and so on.
Basically, all emotions are modifications of one primordial, undifferentiated emotion that has its origin in the loss of awareness of who you are beyond name and form.  Because of its undifferentiated nature, it is hard to find a name that precisely describes this emotion.  "Fear" comes close, but apart from a continuous sense of threat, it also includes a deep sense of abandonment and incompleteness.  It may be best to use a term that is as undifferentiated as that basic emotion and simply call it "pain." One of the main tasks of the mind is to fight or remove that emotional pain, which is one of the reasons for its incessant activity, but all it can ever achieve is to cover it up temporarily.  In fact, the harder the mind struggles to get rid of the pain, the greater the pain.  The mind can never find the solution, nor can it afford to allow you to find the solution, because it is itself an intrinsic part of the "problem." Imagine a chief of police trying to find an arsonist when the arsonist is the chief of police.  You will not be free of that pain until you cease to derive your sense of self from identification with the mind, which is to say from ego.  The mind is then toppled from its place of power and Being reveals itself as your true nature.”
(Eckhart Tolle, The Power Of Now, 1997)

EMOTION ARISES AT THE PLACE WHERE MIND AND BODY MEET.  IT IS THE BODY'S REACTION TO YOUR MIND - OR YOU MIGHT SAY, A REFLECTION OF YOUR MIND IN THE BODY  (Continued 2). 
“What about positive emotions such as love and joy?

They are inseparable from your natural state of inner connectedness with Being. Glimpses of love and joy or brief moments of deep peace are possible whenever a gap occurs in the stream of thought.  For most people, such gaps happen rarely and only accidentally, in moments when the mind is rendered "speechless," sometimes triggered by great beauty, extreme physical exertion, or even great danger.  Suddenly, there is inner stillness.  And within that stillness there is a subtle but intense joy, there is love, there is peace.

Usually, such moments are short-lived, as the mind quickly resumes its noise-making activity that we call thinking.  Love, joy, and peace cannot flourish until you have freed yourself from mind dominance.  But they are not what I would call emotions.  They lie beyond the emotions, on a much deeper level.  So you need to become fully conscious of your emotions and be able to feel them before you can feel that which lies beyond them.  Emotion literally means "disturbance." The word comes from the Latin emovere, meaning "to disturb."

Love, joy, and peace are deep states of Being or rather three aspects of the state of inner connectedness with Being.  As such, they have no opposite.  This is because they arise from beyond the mind.  Emotions, on the other hand, being part of the dualistic mind, are subject to the law of opposites.  This simply means that you cannot have good without bad.  So in the unenlightened, mind-identified condition, what is sometimes wrongly called joy is the usually short-lived pleasure side of the continuously alternating pain/pleasure cycle.  Pleasure is always derived from something outside you, whereas joy arises from within. The very thing that gives you pleasure today will give you pain tomorrow, or it will leave you, so its absence will give you pain.  And what is often referred to as love may be pleasurable and exciting for a while, but it is an addictive clinging, an extremely needy condition that can turn into its opposite at the flick of a switch.  Many "love" relationships, after the initial euphoria has passed, actually oscillate between "love" and hate, attraction and attack.”
(Eckhart Tolle, The Power Of Now, 1997)

E2.2.C.2.1.e.  RENÉ GIRARD ARGUES THAT WHILE MIMETIC CONTAGION IS OMNIPRESENT, TRUE INDIVIDUAL FREEDOM IS A RARE BUT REAL POSSIBILITY THAT STANDS IN SHARP CONTRAST TO THE "MIMETIC SUBMISSION" OF THOSE WHO, WITHOUT SELF-EXAMINATION, SIMPLY IMITATE PREVAILING CULTURAL TRENDS—EVEN MORALLY SUPERIOR, NON-VIOLENT ONES.
“The mimetic theory places emphasis on the universal tendency to follow, on people’s utter inability not to imitate the easiest and most popular examples, because that’s what predominates in every society. But it shouldn’t be concluded that it denies the existence of individual freedom. By situating true decisions in their real context, which is that of omnipresent mimetic contagion, the theory causes decisions that are not mechanical, yet that are in no way different on a formal level from those that are, to stand out in a way they do not in the work of thinkers who never stop talking about freedom and who, for this very reason, thinking that they’re extolling it, devalue it completely. If you glorify decisiveness without seeing what makes it so difficult, you never get out of the emptiest sort of metaphysics.
Even the renunciation of violent mimetic desire cannot spread without being transformed into a social mechanism, into blind imitation. There is a stoning in reverse that is symmetrical to actual stoning and it, too, is violent to some extent. That’s what our era’s travesties clearly demonstrate.

All the people who would have thrown stones if there had been someone to throw the first one are mimetically induced not to throw any. For most of them, the real reason for nonviolence isn’t stern self-examination or renunciation of violence: it’s mimetic desire, as usual. There is always mimetic escalation in one direction or another. Rushing pell-mell in the direction already chosen by their models, the ‘mimic men’ congratulate themselves on their decisive and independent frame of mind.
We mustn’t deceive ourselves. Though we live in a society that no longer stones adulterous women, a lot of people haven’t really changed. Violence has decreased, and it is better hidden, but it remains structurally identical to what it has always been.
Rather than an authentic exit from mimetic desire there is mimetic submission to a culture that advocates that exit. In any social venture, whatever its nature, the proportion of authentic individualism is necessarily minimal, but not nonexistent.
It must not be forgotten that the mimetic desire that spares victims is infinitely superior, objectively and morally speaking, to the mimetic desire that kills them by stoning. The game of false moral equivalencies should be left to Nietzsche and to decadent aestheticisms of all stripes.
The story of the adulterous woman helps us see that social behaviors that are identical in terms of form and even to some degree in terms of content, because they’re all mimetic, can nonetheless be infinitely different. The proportion of mechanicalness and freedom they contain is infinitely variable.
But this inexhaustible diversity does not prove that human behaviors are incomparable or unknowable. Everything we need to know in order to resist automatic social reflexes and runaway mimetic contagion is accessible to our understanding.”
(René Girard, All desire is a desire for being)

E2.2.C.2.2. The Reflective Path to Freedom (Analysis as Liberation): the very act of becoming conscious—of analyzing, understanding, and identifying the determinisms acting upon us—is the first and most crucial step toward autonomy.

E2.2.C.2.2.a. "SOCRATES: "TAKE CARE OF YOURSELF."
This is a perplexing question. Every society asks us to devote ourselves to it, sometimes to the point of sacrifice. Yet here is Socrates, asking us to take care of ourselves. The Athenians were so furious that they put Socrates to death because of it. Education must produce efficient workers who are immediately available for the labor market—not free thinkers.
Unfortunately, this idea has led to two misconceptions that have distorted its meaning entirely. The first misunderstanding is the idea that caring for oneself means cutting oneself off from the world and retreating into what the Stoics called "the inner fortress." What a contradiction! Socrates encourages us to engage more fully with the world, not flee from it. The other mistake is making self-care a form of controlling impulses and emotions. For Socrates, self-care does not aim to control anything, but rather to liberate through letting go. He does not seek to bring you into a state of wise and serene security but rather to shake up your position in existence from top to bottom. When he was in a quandary, Socrates would stand in the midst of his confusion for a moment, doing nothing and seeking no solution. To think philosophically is to place oneself in a state of not knowing, not to have answers to everything, but to be seized by the overwhelming demand to think about what matters here and now for oneself."
(Fabrice Midal, 3 minutes of Philosophy to become human again, broadcast on France Culture on August 2, 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/3-minutes-de-philosophie-pour-redevenir-humain/socrate-prends-souci-de-toi-meme

E2.2.C.2.2.b. We know we have it, but what is it for? Neuroscientist Chris Frith discusses the point of consciousness with Nigel Warburton.

Consciousness is the only mental activity that we can share with others.
The purpose of consciousness would be to reflect on our actions and thoughts:
1. We are not certain about the content of various conscious experiences; by discussing them with others we develop more accurate versions of what we perceived. So our conscious experiences are malleable constructions - stories that we elaborate after the facts.
2. Consciousness is necessary for freewill and regrets. Consciousness could be the key faculty that enabled us to evolve into a collaborative species thanks to freewill.
3. In experiments in which people are convinced that they do not have freewill a higher proportion behave as free riders, which proves that we a) either do possess freewill or b) at least that the belief we have in freewill is key to a collaborative society.
(Chris Frith on The Point of Consciousness, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: http://philosophybites.com/2017/02/chris-frith-on-what-is-the-point-of-consciousness-.html

E2.2.C.2.2.c.

E1.4.D.3.1.a_REF1_PH
"A l’inverse de la morale, qui dicte des devoirs à la libre volonté des hommes, l’Ethique entreprend seulement de démontrer comment les passions s’engendrent les unes les autres, sans qu’il soit besoin de dicter des devoirs à des volontés qui agissent par la nécessité de leur nature, quand elles sont libres, et souffrent passionnellement les forces qui les subjuguent, quand elles sont opprimées. La question qui se pose n’est plus alors celle que formulait Kant – « Que devons-nous faire ? » – mais plutôt celle qui nous enjoint de connaître la nécessité qui nous détermine à faire ce que nous faisons. Et le salut ne dépend plus d’un choix de vie qui n’existe que dans notre imagination, mais plutôt de la conscience plus ou moins claire, plus ou moins profonde, que nous prendrons des mobiles de nos actions. Ce pourquoi on a parfois cru reconnaître dans l’Ethique de Spinoza une leçon de quiétisme, ce qui est vrai dans la mesure où cette sagesse ne prétend pas changer le monde, mais ce qui est faux en ce sens qu’elle ne conduit nullement à la renonciation du vouloir, mais au contraire à l’affirmation joyeuse de l’essence de la volonté, en tant qu’elle n’obéit qu’à sa seule nécessité intrinsèque. Il ne s’agit donc pas pour Spinoza de rêver une autre vie, mais de comprendre notre vie présente et actuelle, pour que nous puissions nous reconnaître pleinement en elle, l’assumer et en jouir. Il n’est pas question de changer la vie, mais plutôt de reconnaître et d’adhérer à la perfection de la vie présente : « Par réalité et perfection, j’entends la même chose » (définition 6 de Ethique II). Il s’agit donc de nous réconcilier avec le réel. Ce pourquoi les passions des hommes peuvent être traitées, non sur le ton de la réprobation morale, mais avec la nécessité d’une démonstration géométrique : « Il paraîtra surprenant que j'entreprenne de traiter des vices des hommes et de leurs infirmités à la manière des Géomètres et que je veuille démontrer par un raisonnement rigoureux ce qu'ils ne cessent de proclamer contraire à la Raison, vain, absurde et digne d'horreur […] Je considérerai donc les actions et les appétits humains comme s'il était question de lignes, de surfaces et de solides » (préface de Eth. III). Toutefois, en suivant cette méthode de pure rationalité, le cheminement démonstratif ne conduit qu’à une éthique politique, celle du livre IV, qui définit les principes d’une société de raison, par le calcul des intérêts mutuels et la neutralisation réciproque des inimitiés. L’éthique de la simple raison est donc l’éthique purement négative de la sagesse politique. Au point où nous sommes alors parvenus, elle ne permet pas de nous élever à une éthique positive, qui nous apprenne à reconnaître le contenu effectif de la béatitude, et non simplement à lever les forces qui font obstacle à cette reconnaissance. Peut-être est-ce là la limite de la « manière des géomètres », qui ne connaît la « raison » que par la force productive des idées adéquates, qui s’enchaînent rigoureusement dans un entendement qui obéit à la nécessité intérieure qui s’exprime en lui, sans se laisser divertir par les aliénations passionnelles qui le dépossèdent de lui-même. Pourtant cette raison démonstrative et déductive, qui préside à l’écriture de l’Ethique elle-même et enchaîne propositions, démonstrations, scolies et corollaires, n’est pas, selon Spinoza, la plus haute faculté de connaissance qui nous soit accordée. Il existe un autre genre de connaissance qui lui est supérieur, et grâce auquel il est permis d’espérer que nous puissions accéder au contenu réel et positif de la sagesse, ou de la suprême béatitude, par delà le calcul d’une raison simplement géométrique des intérêts bien compris. [...]
Pour effectuer ce passage de la servitude aliénante des passions réciproques à l’affirmation souveraine de sa pleine nature, la raison ne suffit pas. Une autre connaissance, supérieure et supra-rationnelle, est nécessaire. Car la raison enchaîne des idées adéquates, engendrées par la seule logique productive, ou générative, de l’entendement, qu’elle pose comme autant de vérités objectives. Mais pour connaître la puissance intérieure qui nous donne l’existence et nous porte à l’action, source de notre vie la plus authentique, il ne nous faut pas connaître cette vérité comme une vérité objective, c'est-à-dire comme un objet que nous posons dans l’extériorité, et déterminons en l’exposant ainsi à nos observations – ce qui est le propre de la connaissance rationnelle. Il faut au contraire l’éprouver intérieurement, comme une vérité intrinsèque, indissociable de notre nature propre, intimement intuitionnée et non objectivement déterminée. Mais une telle connaissance, intuitive et non simplement déductive, dépasse les limites de la raison raisonnante, et exige le recours à une faculté supérieure apte à éprouver concrètement l’élan vital qui nous soulève dans l’existence et détermine nos orientations. Il ne s’agit plus d’enchaîner un discours démonstratif mais de sentir et d’éprouver le jaillissement de la vie au plus profond de moi-même. [...]"
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza et la plénitude de ce monde, 6- « Nous sentons et nous éprouvons que nous sommes éternels  », 2017)

E1.4.D.3.1.b_REF1_PH
"Il y a donc une intimité presque fusionnelle, semblable à celle du fœtus dans le ventre de la mère, entre l’âme et le corps auquel elle est unie, entre la substance individuelle, âme et corps, et le grand tout de la nature, et enfin entre la nature et Dieu. Par cette « étroite union », tout ce qui est, est aussi intimement lié à la vie infinie qui est en Dieu, que nous « connaissons », non par raison démonstrative, mais par un sentiment immédiat qui est aussi le sentiment de la vie qui jaillit au plus profond de nous-mêmes, par une intuition immédiate donc, et non par enchaînement déductif. Et cette connaissance est aussi « régénération » de nous-mêmes (notion qui se trouve au fondement même de la religion réformée) : « Quand nous percevons de tels effets, nous pouvons dire en vérité que nous naissons encore une fois ; car notre première naissance a eu lieu alors que nous nous sommes unis au corps, par où tels effets et mouvements des esprits animaux se sont produits ; mais cette autre et seconde naissance aura lieu quand nous percevrons en nous de tout autres effets de l’amour, grâce à la connaissance de cet objet immatériel ; effets qui différent des premiers autant que diffère le corporel de l’incorporel, l’esprit de la chair. Cela peut d’autant mieux être appelé une Régénération que de cet Amour et de cette Union seulement peut suivre une stabilité Éternelle et inaltérable » (derniers mots du chapitre 22 de Court traité, II). Et dans le chapitre 25 de cette même deuxième partie du Court traité, Spinoza revient sur l’excellence de la connaissance intuitive, supérieure à la rationalité objective, et par laquelle il nous est donné d’éprouver et de ressentir l’intime fusion de la vie qui est en Dieu, ou la Nature, et de celle qui brûle au plus profond de nous-mêmes, par une très étroite connexion qui fait naître, chez celui qui sait en prendre conscience, la plus haute béatitude : « Nous voyons enfin comment la connaissance par raisonnement n’est nullement en nous la principale, mais est seulement comme un degré par où nous nous élevons au but souhaité ; ou comme un bon esprit qui, sans fausseté ni tromperie, nous apporte un message du souverain bien pour nous exciter à le chercher lui-même et à nous unir à lui [Spinoza compare ici la connaissance du troisième genre, ou connaissance intuitive, à l’ange porteur de la Bonne Nouvelle, ou eu-aggelos, latin : euangelium] ; laquelle union est notre plus haut salut et notre félicité. » Ce qui est ainsi signifié, c’est tout le programme de l’œuvre à accomplir, telle qu’elle trouvera son expression complète et achevée dans l’Ethique. [...]
[Dans l'Ethique] A partir du scolie de V 23 (GF p. 325), « nous sentons et nous savons par expérience que nous sommes éternels », toute la suite jusqu’à la fin (la prop. 42) n’est qu’un long développement quasi hymnique sur la béatitude que nous procure la connaissance intuitive de la vie de Dieu en nous. Prop. 25 : « Le suprême effort (conatus) de l’âme et sa suprême vertu (virtus) est de connaître les choses par le troisième genre de connaissance » (GF 325). Nous comprenons qu’il ne s’agit plus de connaissance, mais de béatitude, de la proximité très intime de la vie de Dieu au cœur même de notre vie, comme un foyer d’éternité qui irradie tout notre être, tant du moins que nous nous maintenons vivants, tant que nous persévérons dans l’exister. Et c’est ainsi que l’Athée Spinoza vient à se situer dans la tradition de l’expérience mystique, le troisième genre de connaissance s’apparentant étrangement à la fruition unitive de l’âme qui s’unit amoureusement au Dieu qui la crée et la soulève dans l’existence, avec cette différence toutefois que ce n’est pas l’âme seule qui jouit de cette union (comme c’est le cas pour les mystiques : l’extase est ravissement, le corps est délaissé comme une défroque inerte et inutilement pesante), mais indifféremment – car l’un et l’autre sont deux expressions d’une seule et même substance – de l’esprit (Mens est créateur de concepts, producteur de sa propre rationalité, tandis qu’Anima se rend seulement disponible pour le don de la grâce, réceptive plutôt que productive) comme du corps, qui est élevé lui aussi à la vie bienheureuse, dans la Gloire et la grande Santé. Béatitude terrestre, qui ne nous élève pas au troisième ciel comme fut ravi Paul de Tarse (2 Cor. 12), mais qui nous met au contraire bien les pieds sur terre, affirmant et cultivant notre individualité incarnée, la volonté propre qui est la nôtre, la nature qui s’exprime en nous de façon singulière et unique. Ce pourquoi la béatitude spinoziste doit être distinguée de la déification spirituelle qui s’accomplit dans les âmes saintes qui ont su faire le vide en elles, se rendant capables d’accueillir la divinité au prix de leur propre anéantissement, selon l’enseignement d’Eckhart, si vivant dans les pays du nord, les pays de béguinage, et cela même si les mots de Spinoza semblent parfois se souvenir de cette sagesse, car la béatitude du cinquième livre de l’Ethique est celle de l’affirmation de soi, et non celle du renoncement, une exultation de s’éprouver vivant sur la terre des hommes, et non celle du détachement qui renonce à soi comme au monde et cède au ravissement dans l’au-delà."
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza et la plénitude de ce monde, 6- « Nous sentons et nous éprouvons que nous sommes éternels  », 2017)

E1.4.D.3.1.c_REF1_PH
"La lecture est un autre exemple de cette saisie synthétique du regard de l’intelligence : car la méthode globale nous a appris, qu’au regard de l’esprit, le tout précède la partie, qu’on n’apprend pas à lire en ajoutant une lettre à une autre, mais en saisissant le mot comme un ensemble indivisible, immédiatement et intuitivement reconnaissable par l’esprit. Ne commençons-nous pas à lire l’Ethique elle-même, proposition par proposition, comprenant peut-être la lettre de tel ou tel passage, mais incapables de saisir d’une vue la pensée directrice, la vue de l’esprit qui inspire la lettre ? Et pourtant, à force de lire et de relire ce texte, nous finissons par le lire comme un poème qui exprime et module de diverses façons une seule et même joie de vivre, qui l’inspire en toutes ses parties. C’est ainsi qu’à la première leçon de solfège, l’apprenti épelle péniblement les notes, tandis que le pianiste virtuose déchiffre d’une vue ce que ses doigts traduisent avec impétuosité sur le clavier : seul le second entend véritablement la musique, le premier ne fait que compter ce qu’il ne comprend pas. Et ce dernier exemple convient admirablement à la démonstration de Spinoza, car l’authentique pianiste, véritable automate à la fois manuel et spirituel, adhère au mouvement de la musique, à la nécessité de son développement, et par l’effet de la divine nécessité qui s’exprime en son jeu, fait l’expérience de la plus exaltante des libertés. 
            Il est donc bien vrai de dire que l’intuition, peut-être davantage que la déduction, est un mode de connaissance qui se cultive et s’approfondit. Et même si nous avons compris en quel sens l’esprit peut, par cette opération, traduire la suite temporelle dans le tout de l’éternité – qui est alors rassemblement du successif dans le simultané – toutefois, la raison pour laquelle, par ce troisième genre de connaissance, il nous est permis d’accéder à la béatitude même, par la plénitude de laquelle « nous sentons et nous éprouvons que nous sommes éternels – sentimus experimurque nos aeternos esse » (V, scolie de 23), n’est encore ni claire ni distincte. Cette expérience de l’éternité – qui n’est pas le privilège des bienheureux dans l’au-delà, mais qui est au contraire accessible dès cette vie – résulte en effet du troisième genre de connaissance. Aussi est-elle invoquée dans le scolie de la prop 23 qui prépare et annonce le dernier mouvement du livre V, consacré au troisième genre de connaissance (25 à 32 ; prop. 25 : « Le suprême effort de l’esprit et sa souveraine vertu, c’est de comprendre les choses par le troisième genre de connaissance »), qui engendre « l’amour intellectuel de Dieu » (prop. 33 à 37 ; prop. 33 : « L’amour intellectuel de Dieu, qui naît du troisième genre de connaissance, est éternel »), qui conduit à la béatitude (prop. 38 à la fin, soit à la prop. 42 ; prop. 38 : « D’autant plus de choses comprend l’esprit par le deuxième et le troisième genre de connaissance, d’autant moins il pâtit des sentiments qui sont mauvais, et moins il appréhende la mort »). Le thème énigmatique qui s’annonçait depuis les premiers écrits, celui d’une connaissance immédiate et intuitive, trouve donc son couronnement et son épanouissement spéculatif dans le dernier livre de l’Ethique : toute cette méditation ne tendait que vers cette fin ultime. Par béatitude, Spinoza, qui emprunte le mot au vocabulaire des théologiens qui désignent par là la parfaite jouissance des bienheureux reçus en paradis et abîmés dans la vision faciale de la Déité, désigne non une passion due à une cause extérieure, mais inversement l’épanouissement (gaudium) de notre nature propre appréhendée depuis la source qui nous donne la vie.  A l’inverse de la joie (laetitia) que nous procure la rencontre d’une cause extérieure qui contribue à augmenter notre puissance d’agir, la béatitude (beatitudo) prend sa source en nous-mêmes, et c’est en quelque sorte de nous-mêmes, en tant que nous nous éprouvons nous-mêmes comme existant, que nous puisons la force de nous élever à la béatitude. Et si Spinoza peut écrire que cette suprême jouissance provient de notre union avec Dieu, encore faut-il préciser que ce Dieu là est cause immanente, et non transitive, ni transcendante, intérieure et non extérieure (I, 18 : « Dieu est cause immanente mais non transitive de toutes choses »). Pour comprendre donc comment la béatitude peut nous conduire à l’expérience de l’éternité, il nous faut comprendre de quelle nature est notre union avec Dieu, et quelle intuition se trouve au principe de cette haute connaissance."
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza et la plénitude de ce monde, 6- « Nous sentons et nous éprouvons que nous sommes éternels  », 2017)

E1.4.D.3.1.d_REF1_PH
"La physique de Descartes est une statique, l’ontologie de Spinoza est une dynamique. Cette puissance, ou plutôt cet effort (conatus), est l’essence de toute existence – comme le laisse entendre le mot lui-même qui indique le mouvement de se porter au-delà de soi-même (ex-sistence), de se projeter au-devant de soi-même, selon la continuité de sa trajectoire ou l’accomplissement de son destin. Il s’agit donc d’un universel, puisque l’acte fondateur, initiateur, qui porte l’existence dans la continuité de son mouvement est également présent en toutes choses, en tout être, qu’il soit vivant ou inerte, inconscient ou conscient ; et il s’agit d’un universel concret, puisqu’il ne peut être appréhendé que subjectivement – par intuition donc et non par déduction, qui ne connaît qu’objectivement – l’existence, en tant qu’elle est douée de conscience, étant en mesure d’éprouver en elle l’activité de sa propre essence, le dynamisme d’une puissance divine parce qu’absolue et créatrice (donatrice de l’Exister), l’activité du Dieu vivant qui s’exprime et rayonne en toute chose dotée de la vertu qui la maintient dans l’Etre. Le conatus réussit le paradoxe d'être un universel singulier, puisqu'il est une notion qui est à la fois commune à tous et, dans l'intimité de chacun, infiniment unique et singulière.  [...]
Portons donc notre attention, non sur notre existence, mais sur son essence même, et efforçons-nous de mieux la connaître, par une connaissance intuitive, non déductive, connaissance du troisième genre qui se développe, selon l’ordre des raisons, dans le cinquième et dernier livre de l’Ethique. Cette vie de Dieu en nous, ce mouvement d’extase qui nous porte à toujours agir, à nous projeter au-devant de nous-mêmes, à ex-sister par la puissance d’une auto-création continue, nous l’intuitionnons comme source perpétuelle, constante inclination à vivre, et à vivre toujours davantage : « Le Désir est l'essence même de l'homme en tant qu'elle est conçue comme déterminée à faire quelque chose par une affection quelconque donnée en elle » (III, définition des affections, I). Ce n’est pourtant pas n’importe quel désir qui est essentiel – bien des désirs sont provoqués par l’imaginaire de la rencontre, et trouvent leur cause dans l’extériorité, et non dans l’essence même du sujet désirant – mais le désir de désirer, c'est-à-dire de toujours projeter son existence en vue de son intensification, de l’accroissement de la puissance d’agir qui la porte au-delà d’elle-même et la détermine à persévérer dans son élan. L’existence est ainsi le mouvement de l’Etre affecté par lui-même, c'est-à-dire par son essence, par l’énergie qui le porte et le soulève. C’est donc une seule et même chose de se saisir intuitivement comme existant et vivant, et de comprendre que cette puissance, qui est l’acte de la divinité – hélas, l’existence nous est donnée, nous n’en sommes que les locataires, non les propriétaires, nous la recevons de Dieu, qui en est la source perpétuelle – ne saurait avoir ni commencement ni fin, pur élan vital qui est  à l’origine de ce miracle : qu’il y a quelque chose et non pas plutôt rien, et que cette institution de l’Etre est déterminée, par son essence même, à persévérer dans les siècles des siècles, éternellement présente et vivante. Si donc il nous arrive de naître et de mourir, ce n’est pas par l’acte essentiel qui nous soutient et nous porte dans l’exister, mais par les mille passions que nous font souffrir les rencontres, les chocs que nous subissons en raison de notre assujettissement à des causes qui nous sont extérieures, car nous sommes parties de la nature, créatures provisoires dans le grouillement des créatures innombrables, toutes également vivantes (bien qu'à des degrés divers), qui sans cesse se transforment et se régénèrent dans les métamorphoses continues de la Nature tout entière, qui est le jeu de Dieu avec lui-même."
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza et la plénitude de ce monde, 6- « Nous sentons et nous éprouvons que nous sommes éternels  », 2017)

E1.7.D.6.30_REF1_PH 
"Dans ce drame immense – la sphère en expansion en laquelle s’actualise l’énergie qui se déploie dans la vie de la matière comme l’invention qui se multiplie dans la vie de l’esprit – un rôle nous est assigné, duquel il n’est pas en notre pouvoir de nous écarter. Mais il nous est donné en revanche de le vivre pleinement, ou de le renier et de passer dans la lumière de l’Etre sans jamais sonder l’infinie puissance qui nous donne la vie et l’existence, et nous fait persévérer en cette béatitude, qui est la jouissance du pur exister. La leçon de l’Ethique nous enseigne comment, non choisir notre destin – vaine prétention de l’imagination, qui rêve les yeux ouverts et ne connaît rien de la vie qui fait pourtant son essence – mais comment le vivre en plénitude, et jouir de nous connaître nous-mêmes, comme une expression parmi l’infinité des possibles, tous également destinés à une nécessaire réalisation, du dieu vivant  qui anime, à des degrés divers, toutes choses auxquelles a été accordé le don incompréhensible de l’existence. « Car ce que nous avons montré jusqu'ici est tout à fait commun et se rapporte également aux hommes et aux autres individus, lesquels sont tous animés, bien qu'à des degrés divers » (scolie de II, 13). La vie ne vaut pas par les choix que nous serions en mesure de faire, en raison d’une liberté imaginaire que nous ne nous attribuons que parce que nous ignorons les causes véritables qui nous déterminent, et la nécessité qui nous conduit comme par la main. La vie vaut en ce qu’elle nous offre l’expérience, il est vrai limitée dans le temps comme dans l’espace, de participer à la vie qui est en Dieu, de nous sentir ainsi et de nous éprouver, du fait même de l’essence qui nous donne l’Exister, éternels : « Nous sentons et nous éprouvons que nous sommes éternels […] Nous sentons que notre esprit, en tant qu’il enveloppe l’essence du corps sous l’aspect de l’éternité – sub aeternitatis specie – est éternel, et que cette sienne existence ne peut se définir par le temps, autrement dit s’expliquer par la durée » (V, scolie de 23). L’éternité n’est pas l’immortalité. La première porte l’Etre dans une dimension qui est au-delà du temps – définition il est vrai simplement négative, non encore affirmative ; la seconde prolonge au contraire indéfiniment le temps accordé à cette existence singulière. En fait de béatitude, les anciens Grecs ne connaissaient que la seconde, et il ne savaient rien de plus divin que le fait d’être immortel, au point de faire de cet attribut le nom même de la divinité, puisqu’ils disaient de leurs dieux qu’il étaient les Immortels. Mais le dieu juif se connaît comme infini, et non comme indéfini, et ce ne peut être assez pour lui de vivre indéfiniment dans le temps, il faut qu’il vive dans la gloire de l’éternité – qui triomphe du dissentiment et de la diaspora qui font la trame intime de la durée – et se rétablisse dans la parfaite adéquation à soi-même, dans la béatitude d’être et de se savoir pleinement soi-même, et de perpétuellement jouir de cette plénitude."
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza et la plénitude de ce monde, 6- « Nous sentons et nous éprouvons que nous sommes éternels  », 2017)

E1.6.A.1.1.c.ii_REF1_PH 
" Tous les hommes naissent et meurent. Mais il leur appartient, tant que leur sera accordé le don de l’Etre et de persévérer dans sa Gloire, de se réconcilier avec eux-mêmes, et de jouir de la flamme qui brûle en eux, de se désaltérer à la source de vie qui rayonne en eux et leur concède la puissance infinie de l’Exister. Et pour jouir de cette éternité, il n’est nullement nécessaire de prolonger indéfiniment la durée de notre existence. Bien au contraire, c’est dans le présent de l’ici-maintenant que cette béatitude nous est donnée, à condition toutefois que nous prenions conscience de cette puissance en nous qui donne la vie, et selon la profondeur que la pratique de la méditation saura donner à la connaissance intuitive de cette vie infinie dont nous sommes une expression singulière. Car l’infini est grandeur intensive, non extensive, et il n’y a pas de limite à l’intensité avec laquelle nous pouvons participer, par l’exercice de l’attention, par la pénétration de la conscience, à l’activité divine qui nous porte dans l’Exister, et continuellement persévère en cet élan. C’est en effet le propre de la connaissance intuitive, comme nous l’avons vu, que de pouvoir étendre par l’exercice le champ de son examen, le rayon de son horizon d’évidence. Cette connaissance, ou conscience, s’accompagne de la plus haute jouissance, puisqu’elle nous fait éprouver intérieurement l’acte de la causation divine, qui nous affecte non passionnellement, par l’effet d’une cause extérieure, mais nous comble intérieurement, par l’intuition de notre essence même. Seule la créature jouit de la puissance infinie de l’Exister, puisqu’elle la reçoit du dieu immanent qui lui donne vie, et non Dieu lui-même, qui donne l’existence par la nécessité de sa puissance infinie, et ne saurait donc éprouver cette puissance comme un don qui le comble, puisqu’elle est sa nature propre : « Nous concluons qu’une chose créée peut être dite jouir de l’existence parce qu’en effet l’existence n’est pas de son essence, mais Dieu ne peut être dit jouir de l’existence, car l’existence de Dieu est Dieu lui-même ; de même aussi que son essence ; d’où suit que les choses créées jouissent de la durée, mais que Dieu n’en jouit en aucune façon. » (Pensées métaphysiques, II, 1 ; GF I, 359). Ce qui laisse entendre que le statut de la créature est peut-être plus enviable que celui de Dieu, qui produit éternellement et de par sa propre nécessité, sans pouvoir en jouir ni même en prendre conscience, l’engendrement des corps dans la matière et la suite des idées dans les esprits. Le dieu de Spinoza n’est pas un dieu personnel, qui s’adresse à sa créature par son nom – Abraham, Isaac ou Jacob ; il est l’éternelle activité de l’universelle nécessité, toujours en travail de gésine et de création, de génération et de production. Il n’est d’autre sagesse que celle qui nous conduit à en prendre conscience et à jouir, autant qu’il est en notre pouvoir, de cette force qui nous irradie tant que dure notre existence dans le sein de la nature. Le dieu de Spinoza engendre et produit, il n’aime ni ne connaît (ou plutôt il n’aime que lui-même, en tant qu’il est cause de soi et s’affecte ainsi en se donnant à lui-même l’Exister). Mais il importe beaucoup à notre béatitude que nous le connaissions, d’une connaissance intuitive et non déductive, subjective et non objective, d’un amour tout intellectuel qui prend sa source au plus profond de nous-mêmes, et non dans l’empreinte, ou l’image, qui obnubile notre raison par le choc d’une rencontre aliénante. « L’amour intellectuel de Dieu », en lequel nous puisons la béatitude de nous sentir et de nous éprouver éternels, n’est pas l’amour-passion de l’imagination ; c’est un amour « intellectuel », né de la connaissance intuitive par l’esprit de son essence comme de l’essence du corps dont il est l’idée, connaissance du conatus qui soutient toute existence dans l’effort qu’elle dépense pour persévérer dans l’exister. A la différence de Tristan et d’Iseult, qui s’aiment passionnément par l’image fascinante, subjuguante, que l’un se fait de l’autre, se condamnant ainsi à la solitude du fantasme qui rend illusoire le rêve de l’étreinte, l’amour intellectuel de Dieu est celui des parents pour leurs enfants, qui se réjouissent de les voir s’épanouir pour eux-mêmes, et de voir la vie s’affirmer en eux, et triompher des obstacles qui l’oppriment ; ou l’amour du jardinier pour le bourgeon qu’il voit éclater et la fleur éclore, se réjouissant de l’universelle germination qui anime la nature, amour bienveillant et non jaloux, qui reconnaît à chacun la liberté d’être lui-même et de devenir ce qu’il est. Et ce peut être encore l'amour des amants (même s'il faut reconnaître que Spinoza est plus que discret sur ce point) quand, la suavité amoureuse aiguisée par l'intimité de l'étreinte, l'un et l'autre, par l'attention de l'intelligence intuitive, réussissent à s'approcher au plus près du secret qui palpite en l'autre et l'un – chacun se connaissant par la source de vie qui en l'autre pareillement s'épanche – et comme Abraham et Sarah, se sentent et s'éprouvent éternels. L’amour fou nous aliène à l’extériorité, et poursuit une impossible fusion avec un Autre qui se refusera toujours à n’être qu’un autre nous-mêmes. L'amour intellectuel de Dieu s'abreuve à la fontaine qui jaillit au plus profond de nous-mêmes, il jouit de la vie universelle qui anime toutes choses, bien qu'à des degrés divers. La béatitude qui naît en nous de l’amour intellectuel du Dieu qui nous donne la vie et la puissance de l’Exister – dont la densité est infinie et dont nous n’épuiserons jamais ni la richesse ni la profondeur – est une régénération et comme une déification de la créature, une authentique fusion, ou transfiguration de l’existence singulière dans l’activité infinie de la causation divine. Une telle béatitude fait le Sage semblable aux bienheureux qui sont en paradis, transportés en cet état que les théologiens nomment la « Gloire », qui est la jouissance infinie de l’âme ravie dans la contemplation faciale de la divinité (elle fut refusée en cette vie à Moïse lui-même), et du corps rédimée de son humiliation en raison du premier péché, rendu à sa splendeur première d’image de Dieu, rétabli dans l’éternité par la résurrection de la chair sans laquelle l’âme seule serait comme mutilée de cet autre, le corps, à laquelle elle a été unie par un lien divin : « Nous comprenons par là clairement en quoi consiste notre salut, ou béatitude, ou liberté, à savoir, dans un amour constant et éternel envers Dieu, ou de l’amour de Dieu envers les hommes. Et c’est cet amour, ou béatitude, qu’on appelle Gloire dans les livres sacrés, et non sans raison. Car, que cet amour se rapporte à Dieu ou à notre intelligence, c’est à bon droit qu’on peut l’appeler le contentement de l’esprit (acquiescentia animi), lequel en vérité ne se distingue pas de la Gloire. Car, en tant que cet amour se rapporte à Dieu, c’est une joie (s’il est encore permis d’user de ce vocable) qu’accompagne l’idée de soi-même (concomitante idea sui), et de la même façon en tant que cet amour se rapporte à l’intelligence. De plus, puisque que l’essence de notre intelligence consiste dans la seule connaissance, dont Dieu est principe et fondement, par là s’éclaire pour nous comment et de quelle façon notre intelligence suit de la nature divine, selon l’essence et selon l’existence, et dépend continuellement de Dieu » (scolie de V, prop. 36).
       C’est ainsi que la vie, selon Spinoza, n’a d’autre fin qu’elle-même, et que la connaissance intuitive de la puissance infinie qui la porte dans l’Exister. Elle n’a ni sens ni but, puisqu’elle est à elle-même son propre sens et son propre but. Aussi n’est-il besoin d’aucune récompense dans l’au-delà, car il n’est pas de don ni de récompense plus merveilleux que l’existence elle-même, et la béatitude qu’elle inspire à l’esprit qui sait se rendre attentif à sa continuelle activité. C’est assez de vivre et de pouvoir être conscient de l’infinité de ce don. Et il est vain d’espérer en un salut qui nous serait donné pour prix de ce don, qui est déjà par lui-même suprême et inestimable : « La béatitude n’est pas la récompense de la vertu, mais la vertu elle-même » (prop. 42, dernière proposition de l’Ethique). Cet extraordinaire ouvrage nous enseigne paradoxalement que nous vivons en paradis et jouissons présentement de l’éternité. Car il n’est besoin que de ce monde pour trouver l’éternité et la perfection que les hommes n’ont su imaginer qu’en un autre monde. Car, comme il est écrit dès la première page du livre I de l’Ethique : « J’entends par éternité l’existence elle-même, en tant qu’elle est conçue comme suivant nécessairement de la seule définition d’une chose éternelle » (I, déf. 8), c'est-à-dire en tant qu’elle est connue par son essence même, effet de la puissance infinie de la causation divine ; et réaffirmé d’une autre façon dès la première page du livre II : « Par réalité et par perfection, j’entends la même chose. » Ce monde est parfait. Tout est accompli."
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza et la plénitude de ce monde, 6- « Nous sentons et nous éprouvons que nous sommes éternels  », 2017)

[FR] Miguel Rio Branco, Boule de cristal, 2005
"Dans ce drame immense – la sphère en expansion en laquelle s’actualise l’énergie qui se déploie dans la vie de la matière comme l’invention qui se multiplie dans la vie de l’esprit – un rôle nous est assigné, duquel il n’est pas en notre pouvoir de nous écarter. Mais il nous est donné en revanche de le vivre pleinement, ou de le renier et de passer dans la lumière de l’Etre sans jamais sonder l’infinie puissance qui nous donne la vie et l’existence, et nous fait persévérer en cette béatitude, qui est la jouissance du pur exister. La leçon de l’Ethique nous enseigne comment, non choisir notre destin – vaine prétention de l’imagination, qui rêve les yeux ouverts et ne connaît rien de la vie qui fait pourtant son essence – mais comment le vivre en plénitude, et jouir de nous connaître nous-mêmes, comme une expression parmi l’infinité des possibles, tous également destinés à une nécessaire réalisation [...]
La vie ne vaut pas par les choix que nous serions en mesure de faire, en raison d’une liberté imaginaire que nous ne nous attribuons que parce que nous ignorons les causes véritables qui nous déterminent, et la nécessité qui nous conduit comme par la main. La vie vaut en ce qu’elle nous offre l’expérience, il est vrai limitée dans le temps comme dans l’espace, [...] de nous sentir et de nous éprouver [...] éternels : « Nous sentons et nous éprouvons que nous sommes éternels. […] Nous sentons que notre esprit, en tant qu’il enveloppe l’essence du corps sous l’aspect de l’éternité – sub aeternitatis specie – est éternel, et que cette sienne existence ne peut se définir par le temps, autrement dit s’expliquer par la durée » (Baruch Spinoza, Ethique V, scolie de 23)."
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza et la plénitude de ce monde, 6 - « Nous sentons et nous éprouvons que nous sommes éternels », 2017)

Photo:
- Miguel Rio Branco, Boule de cristal, 2005

[EN] Miguel Rio Branco, Crystal ball, 2005
"In this immense drama - in which energy unfolds in the life of matter like an expanding sphere and where invention multiplies in the life of the spirit - a role is assigned to us from which we can't turn way. But we have the choice to either live that role fully, or to deny it and to walk through the light of Being without ever fathoming the infinite power which gives us life and existence, and makes us persevere in that bliss, which is the enjoyment of simply existing. [Spinoza's] Ethic teaches us not how to choose our destiny - vain pretension of the imagination, which dreams with eyes opened and doesn't know anything of the real life which constitutes its essence - but how to live it in fullness, and to enjoy knowing ourselves, as an expression among the infinity of possibilities, all equally destined for necessary realization [...]
The value of our lives doesn't reside in the choices we would be able to make, because of an imaginary freedom that we attribute to ourselves only because we ignore the real causes that determine us as well as the necessity that lead us by the hand. The value of our lives reside in that it offers us the experience, although limited in time and in space, [...] to feel and experience ourselves eternal: « We feel and we experience that we are eternal. […] We feel that our spirit, insofar as it envelops the essence of the body under the aspect of eternity - sub aeternitatis specie - is eternal, and that its existence cannot be defined by time, in other words, be explained by duration » (Baruch Spinoza, Ethics V, scolie 23).”
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the plenitude of this world, 6 - “We feel and we experience that we are eternal”, 2017)

Photo:
- Miguel Rio Branco, Crystal ball, 2005

E2.2.C.2.2.d.

 E1.6.D.3.7.e_REF2_PH.wXXXX PHILOSOPHY IS A DEMYSTIFICATION ENTERPRISE THAT CREATES FREE MEN.

E2.2.C.2.2.e. A_Anselm Kiefer_Le ciel étoilé au-dessus de moi et la loi morale à l'intérieur de moi_circa 1969 ; A_Anselm Kiefer_Above us the starry sky_circa 1970

"Are we free to do good?"
Kant is an excellent thinker to help us think about things beyond us—things that are often sudden, such as metaphysics, the soul, and freedom. For Kant, any philosophical inquiry that concerns the conditions of possibility of knowledge rather than the nature of an object is transcendental. He was the great 'demolisher' of Platonic metaphysics, which holds that there are essences and ideals that humans can understand. Humans have no access to knowledge of what lies beyond the limits of experience.
The Critique of Pure Reason addresses the questions, 'What can I know?' and 'What are the conditions of possibility of knowledge?' The Critique of Practical Reason addresses the question, "What should I do?" or "What are the conditions of possibility of freedom?" For the first time with Kant, reason is defined not only as the faculty of knowledge but also as an authority that prescribes a law for moral action. According to Kant, the second question cannot be answered without answering the first because, in order to do good, one must know what good is. However, what good is cannot come from transcendental knowledge. Since Plato, good and evil have been a matter of knowledge ("No one is evil willingly" —Plato). Kant distinguishes between theoretical knowledge and morality. The principle that saves us from moral relativism is that of universal moral law. What comes first is not good and evil, but rather the moral law that enables us to distinguish between them through judgment.
It is the moral law that establishes freedom, illustrated by the passage about the man who is free to follow or not follow the imperative of the moral law imposed on him when he must either bear false witness against his friend or perish. And freedom and moral law appear clearly when we contrast this example with that of the man who will renounce lust without remorse if knowledge of it means death: in the second case, there is only a calculation between two desires (to enjoy and to survive) - morality and freedom are not about weighing up motives of varying intensity, but about choosing between the satisfaction of a desire and moral law and its categorical imperative. Freedom is the possibility for man to detach himself autonomously from all sensible motives in order to conform to universal law. On the other hand, there is no reason to renounce the satisfaction of a desire that does not conflict with moral law. Kant deepens the notion of autonomy that Rousseau reserved for politics: Freedom is not opposed to obedience, but is linked to the conformity of our actions to a law that does not come from outside (divine laws, etc.), but is dictated to us by the critical concept of autonomy, which allows us to discern the universal law of reason. A major difference between external law and the law of reason is that the latter has no content—it cannot be reduced to material prescriptions. The criterion is formal or logical. For example, lying is not universalizable behavior because if everyone lied, lying would no longer make sense. Universalization is contradictory because the liar relies on the belief in the truth of the person he is lying to. Those who lie exempt themselves from a law—one of the criteria is that they must hide from other people—from a law that they recognize. Evil is the figure of deceiving others and, to a certain extent, oneself, as when the liar allows himself one last little lie. Morality is prescriptive, even for Kant, but the norm does not come from God or society (Durkheim), but from two principles: universalization and non-contradiction. These two principles do not seem to depend on culturalism and thus resist moral relativism (even if differences in customs exist). On the one hand, there is a humiliation of our self-esteem by moral law, which may contradict our desires, but there is a greatness that transcends this humiliation in resisting temptation: this is freedom. What connects man to the world is not so much his sensory dimension, which always connects him to his finitude, but human dignity—a feeling of power."
(Michaël Foessel in the program Les chemins de la philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 10/08/2018)

Listen to the podcast in French: 
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/critique-de-la-raison-pratique-de-kant-14-sommes-nous-libres-de-faire-le-bien

"By making and keeping commitments, even small ones, we gradually build our integrity. This makes us aware of our ability to control our lives and gives us the courage and strength to accept responsibility for them. We allow our honor to influence our moods."
(Stephen Covey)

E2.2.C.2.2.f. "FREEDOM
 
To be free is to do what one wants. Depending on the action in question, three main meanings of the word arise: freedom of action (if doing is acting), freedom of will (if doing is wanting—we shall see that this meaning is subdivided into two), and freedom of the rational mind (when doing is thinking).
 
Freedom of action poses few theoretical problems. According to Hobbes, it is simply "the absence of all impediments that oppose some movement [...]
Freedom of will does not seem to pose many more problems. Can I want what I want? Yes, undoubtedly, since no one can prevent me from wanting, except through mental or neurological manipulation. Besides, how could I want what I don't want, or not want what I do want? In this sense, freedom of the will is less a problem than a pleonasm. To want is, by definition, to want what one wants (since the will cannot escape the principle of identity). This is what it means to be free. I call this the spontaneity of the will, which is the will in action. As Descartes recognized, "free, spontaneous, and voluntary are one and the same thing." [...]
This is sometimes called freedom in the metaphysical sense, or more often, free will. It is no longer spontaneity, but creation; no longer a being, but a nothingness, as Sartre says; no longer a subject that chooses, but rather, the choice of the subject itself. According to Descartes, Kant, and Sartre, this is freedom: the indeterminate power to determine oneself. In other words, it is the ability to choose or create oneself. Sartre says, "Every person is an absolute choice of oneself" and "Freedom and creation are one and the same." However, how is this possible if no one can choose themselves unless they already exist? This freedom is only possible as nothingness; it only exists on the condition of not being. [...]
The will is not an empire within an empire. "I want what I want"? Certainly, but not indeterminately! "There is no absolute or free will in the soul. Rather, the soul is determined to will this or that by a use which is also determined by another. This other, in turn, is determined by another, and so on ad infinitum" (Ethics, II, Prop. 48; see also I, Prop. 32, with its demonstration). We cannot escape reality. We cannot escape necessity. Does this mean that everyone remains a prisoner of who they are? No, because reason, which exists in everyone, belongs to no one. How could it obey us? "The mind must never obey," writes Alain. A geometric proof is enough to show this. If you believe it without question, you are a fool and betray the mind (Propos du 12 juillet 1930). This is why tyrants hate the truth. It does not obey. Nor does reason. They obey only themselves because they are free. It is not because it has a choice, if by that we mean it could think anything. Rather, it is because its very necessity guarantees its independence. Truth is not a matter of choice. It necessarily imposes itself on anyone who knows it, even partially. Therefore, knowing it is enough to be free, at least partially, from oneself (since truth is the same in every mind that perceives it. When a neurotic person does math, the truth of math does not become neurotic). This is what we can call freedom of the mind or reason. It is the free necessity of truth. According to Spinoza, Hegel, Marx, and Freud, this is freedom: freedom as an understanding of necessity. Truth obeys no one, not even the subject who perceives it. This is what makes truth free and liberating.
There are three meanings, the second of which is subdivided into two: freedom of action, which includes spontaneity and free will, and freedom of mind or reason. Only free will seems doubtful to me, and truthfully, it is unthinkable. [...]
It is not freedom that is "the foundation of truth," as Sartre said. If that were true, there would be no truth at all. It is truth that liberates. [...]
It must also be remembered that no one is entirely wise and that freedom is more of a process than a faculty. We are not born free. We become free, and we never finish becoming free. Free will does not exist, which is why we must always liberate ourselves. Because freedom is never absolute, liberation always remains possible, always incomplete, and always necessary."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013) 

"LIBERATION
The act of becoming free and the process that leads to it. It is freedom in action. It contrasts with free will, which is an original and absolute freedom—a freedom that is always already given, a freedom in potential and at rest. Men are [Ethics, II, 35, scholium], and this illusion is one of the main causes that prevent them from becoming free. Their singular mixture of consciousness and unconsciousness (they are conscious of their desires and actions but not the causes of their desires and will) makes them subjects, as Althusser would say. Their so-called freedom is merely an unaware causality. Conversely, free will's nonexistence allows for freedom, where all subjectivity is broken. Freedom includes necessity, or rather, an understanding of necessity (Spinoza, Hegel, Marx, and Freud). This does not mean that understanding escapes necessity—how could it, since it is part of it?—but rather that reason obeys only itself (Ethics, I, def. 7). Only knowledge is free and liberating. This is where ethics, which tends toward freedom, differs from morality, which presupposes it."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E2.2.C.2.2.g. The private world of instinctive interests is a small one, set in the midst of a great and powerful world which must sooner or later, lay our private world in ruins. Unless we can so enlarge our interests as to include the whole outer world, we remain like a garrison in a beleaguered fortress, knowing that the enemy prevents escape and that ultimate surrender is inevitable. In such a life there is no peace, but a constant strife between the insistence of desire and the powerlessness of will. In one way or another, if our life is to be great and free, we must escape this prison and this strife.
         One way of escape is by philosophic contemplation. Philosophic contemplation does not, in its widest survey, divide the universe into two hostile camps— friends and foes, helpful and hostile, good and bad— it views the whole impartially. Philosophic contemplation, when it is unalloyed, does not aim at proving that the rest of the universe is akin to man. All acquisition of knowledge is an enlargement of the Self, but this enlargement is best attained when it is not directly sought.
(Bertrand Russell, The Problems of Philosophy, 1912)

E2.2.C.2.2.h. A_Stephan Doitschinoff_2017_(1) ; A_Stephan Doitschinoff_2017_(2)

" [...] For instance, if a man sees that he is too keen in the pursuit of honour, let him think over its right use, the end for which it should be pursued, and the means whereby he may attain it. Let him not think of its misuse, and its emptiness, and the fickleness of mankind, and the like, whereof no man thinks except through a morbidness of disposition ; with thoughts like these do the most ambitious most torment themselves, when they despair of gaining the distinctions they hanker after, and in thus giving vent to their anger would fain appear wise. Wherefore it is certain that those, who cry out the loudest against the misuse of honour and the vanity of the world, are those who most greedily covet it. This is not peculiar to the ambitious, but is common to all who are ill-used by fortune, and who are infirm in spirit. For a poor man also, who is miserly, will talk incessantly of the misuse of wealth and of the vices of the rich ; whereby he merely torments himself, and shows the world that he is intolerant, not only of his own poverty, but also of other people's riches. So, again, those who have been ill received by a woman they love think of nothing but the inconstancy, treachery, and other stock faults of the fair sex ; all of which they consign to oblivion, directly they are again taken into favour by their sweetheart. Thus he who would govern his emotions and appetite solely by the love of freedom strives, as far as he can, to gain a knowledge of the virtues and their causes, and to fill his spirit with the joy which arises from the true knowledge of them : he will in no wise desire to dwell on men's faults, or to carp at his fellows, or to revel in a false show of freedom. [...]"
(Baruch Spinoza, Scolium of Proposition X, Ethics, V)

Read the Ethics online: http://app.ethica-spinoza.net/en/text

E2.2.C.2.2.i.  Hélio Oiticica_Grande Núcleo, 1960-66 ; Auguste Bartholdi, Statue of Liberty  - Liberty Enlightening the World, Liberty Island, New York City, USA, 1886 vs Eugène Delacroix, La Liberté guidant le peuple, 1830 by Davide Trabucco

"At first, this light may be almost nothing—think of humanity in its unhappy or alienated state, persecuted or uneducated—but it exists as light. That is, it is the first transcendence of the nocturnal opacity that defines animality. This original transcendence is what we call constituent practical reflexivity. [...]

Since we no longer understand how to desire or construct freedom—whether individual, political, or cultural—in a state of alienation, we are faced with a paradox: freedom is an ambivalent reality, presenting itself as both itself and its opposite. It is simultaneously the awareness of the determinisms that limit us and the power to transcend them. The paradox of freedom consists of the possibility of the impossible: the struggle for freedom by an alienated, determined, and powerless being." [...]

In reality, freedom can only be pursued by a conscious being who knows and feels it—that is, a free being. The concept of constitutive practical reflexivity accounts for this original freedom, which freely alienates and desires freedom in the same movement. Only freedom can pursue and desire freedom.
One might ask, however, if a being is already free, why would it pursue freedom?
This is precisely where the difference between reflexivity and reflection becomes apparent, as well as the function of this opposition between the two moments of self-consciousness in action. [...]


But how can we explain the desire for freedom in this context if reflexivity is unaware that it often creates its own limitations?
 
This is where reflection comes in: as a deepening of the initial reflexivity. Only reflection can desire a higher, more complete freedom because only reflection can question, challenge, and construct. However, this reflection is the doubling, extension, and deepening of practical reflexivity. In other words, it also has a sense of self as a constitutive power—that is, as freedom.
Thus, there is no paradox, but rather a doubling of the plane of freedom. This homogeneous doubling of self-consciousness—and the decision to strengthen its power through what it knows it is already capable of (information, criticism, judgment, and method)—accounts for the transition from "alienation" to "freedom." It is, in fact, the transition from one form of freedom to another—or, if you prefer, from one freedom to another—that is, from an original freedom to a second freedom. [...]

Conversely, we must privilege this experience of enjoyment when formulating any problematic of action. Only by constituting enjoyment as the fundamental fact of activity can we shed light on the transition from alienation to the desire for freedom.
Only enjoyment experienced through reflexivity can account for the transcendent movement towards freedom. [...]


Since reflexivity is constantly capable of constituting itself as reflection—that is, as a methodical and exploratory doubling of oneself—we can see that the transition from reflexivity to reflection occurs when the desire for fulfillment becomes aware of its current, albeit temporary, absence. [...]

The very structures of the subject lead to the notion of happiness. [...]"
(Robert Misrahi, The Acts of Joy, 1987)

E2.2.C.2.2.j. "There are always a few, better endowed than others, who feel the weight of the yoke and cannot restrain themselves from attempting to shake it off: these are the men who never become tamed under subjection and who always, like Ulysses on land and sea constantly seeking the smoke of his chimney, cannot prevent themselves from peering about for their natural privileges and from remembering their ancestors and their former ways. These are in fact the men who, possessed of clear minds and far-sighted spirit, are not satisfied, like the brutish mass, to see only what is at their feet, but rather look about them, behind and before, and even recall the things of the past in order to judge those of the future, and compare both with their present condition. These are the ones who, having good minds of their own, have further trained them by study and learning. Even if liberty had entirely perished from the earth, such men would invent it. For them slavery has no satisfactions, no matter how well disguised."
(La Boétie, The discourse of voluntary servitude, 1577)

E2.2.C.2.2.k. DEFINE WHAT STATE OF CONSCIOUSNESS YOU WANT TO EMBRACE, AND ACT ACCORDINGLY
"All For Consciousness
These practical actions that comprise our visible lives — work, school, art, play, eating, hobbies — whether or not we’re interested in philosophy or consciousness, are still acting on their behalf.
Our actions, large and small, carry the subliminal telos that they will somehow improve upon where we are now. They will contribute value to our experience of life. And that experience of life, as previously noted, is entirely mediated via our consciousness. Therefore, we’re always implicitly seeking to add value to our consciousness. Our lives are a process of cultivating consciousness — what Metzinger calls our “experiential space” — into a more habitable domain. Sam Harris puts it succinctly:
“Everything we do is for the purpose of altering consciousness…we struggle to direct the flow of sensation, emotion, and cognition towards states of consciousness that we value.”
~ Sam Harris, Waking Up
Bizarrely, we do this without first taking Metzinger’s prior question seriously: “what is a good state of consciousness?” Without studying consciousness — both the varietal we espouse and the potentialities it holds — we’re placed on a treadmill of pursuing an end, a purpose, that we don’t even acknowledge, and therefore cannot truly own. The question of how to live cannot be furthered if we do not broaden its scope to include these implicit and central forces.
As conventional notions of self come further unhinged with the oncoming advents of neuroscience, informed by the troves of philosophy and spirituality, determining states of consciousness that we value should emerge as a global discussion.
Looking forward, philosophy may receive new life as more and more people turn to it when confronted with the task of reconsidering who they are, and who they’d like to be. When the culturally engrained answers to that question, how to live, are uprooted by the dismantling of their premise, that the ego’s experience of consciousness is all there is, many may, fascinatingly, find support in words written some 2000 years ago."
(Oshan Jarow, All For Consciousness, www.musingmind.org)


E2.2.C.2.2.l."You begin to feel free when you recognize that you are conditioned."
(Goethe).

The more aware we are that we are not free—that we are acted upon and determined—and that we can influence these constraints to free ourselves, the freer we become. Freedom is more a matter of knowledge than of free will.

E2.2.C.2.2.m. BY STUDYING HISTORY, WE UNDERSTAND THAT OUR PRESENT SITUATION IS NEITHER NATURAL NOR INEVITABLE. WE REALIZE "THAT WE CONSEQUENTLY HAVE MANY MORE POSSIBILITIES BEFORE US THAN WE IMAGINE."
“Geographical, biological and economic forces create constraints. Yet these constraints leave ample room for surprising developments, which do not seem bound by any deterministic laws.
This conclusion disappoints many people, who prefer history to be
deterministic. Determinism is appealing because it implies that our world and our beliefs are a natural and inevitable product of history. It is natural and inevitable that we live in nation states, organise our economy along capitalist principles, and fervently believe in human rights. To acknowledge that history is not deterministic is to acknowledge that it is just a coincidence that most people today believe in nationalism, capitalism and human rights.
History cannot be explained deterministically and it cannot be predicted because it is chaotic. So many forces are at work and their interactions are so complex that extremely small variations in the strength of the forces and the way they interact produce huge differences in outcomes. Not only that, but history is what is called a ‘level two’ chaotic system. Chaotic systems come in two shapes.
Level one chaos is chaos that does not react to predictions about it. The weather, for example, is a level one chaotic system. Though it is influenced by myriad factors, we can build computer models that take more and more of them into consideration, and produce better and better weather forecasts.
Level two chaos is chaos that reacts to predictions about it, and therefore can never be predicted accurately. Markets, for example, are a level two chaotic system. What will happen if we develop a computer program that forecasts with 100 per cent accuracy the price of oil tomorrow? The price of oil will immediately react to the forecast, which would consequently fail to materialise. If the current price of oil is $90 a barrel, and the infallible computer program predicts that tomorrow it will be $100, traders will rush to buy oil so that they can pro t from the predicted price rise. As a result, the price will shoot up to $100 a barrel today rather than tomorrow. Then what will happen tomorrow? Nobody knows.
So why study history? Unlike physics or economics, history is not a means for making accurate predictions. We study history not to know the future but to widen our horizons, to understand that our present situation is neither natural nor inevitable, and that we consequently have many more possibilities before us than we imagine. For example, studying how Europeans came to dominate Africans enables us to realise that there is nothing natural or inevitable about the racial hierarchy, and that the world might well be arranged diﬀerently.”
(Yuval Noah Harari, Sapiens, A Brief History of Humankind, 2011)

E2.2.C.2.2.n. THE MOMENT THE CHANGED PORTRAIT OF DORIAN GRAY "MADE HIM CONSCIOUS HOW UNJUST, HOW CRUEL, HE HAD BEEN TO SIBYL VANE."
“At least he would be alone when he looked upon the mask of his shame. Then he drew the screen aside and saw himself face to face. It was perfectly true. The portrait had altered.
As he often remembered afterwards, and always with no small wonder, he found himself at first gazing at the portrait with a feeling of almost scientific interest. That such a change should have taken place was incredible to him. And yet it was a fact. Was there some subtle affinity between the chemical atoms that shaped themselves into form and colour on the canvas and the soul that was within him? Could it be that what that soul thought, they realized?—that what it dreamed, they made true? Or was there some other, more terrible reason? He shuddered, and felt afraid, and, going back to the couch, lay there, gazing at the picture in sickened horror.
One thing, however, he felt that it had done for him. It had made him conscious how unjust, how cruel, he had been to Sibyl Vane. It was not too late to make reparation for that. She could still be his wife. His unreal and selfish love would yield to some higher influence, would be transformed into some nobler passion, and the portrait that Basil Hallward had painted of him would be a guide to him through life, would be to him what holiness is to some, and conscience to others, and the fear of God to us all. There were opiates for remorse, drugs that could lull the moral sense to sleep. But here was a visible symbol of the degradation of sin. Here was an ever-present sign of the ruin men brought upon their souls.”
(Oscar Wilde, The Picture of Dorian Gray, 1890)

E2.2.C.2.2.o. THE DHARMA THAT GOTAMA REACHED DISCLOSED THE POSSIBILITY OF LEADING A HUMAN LIFE ACCORDING TO THE NORMS OF REASON RATHER THAN THOSE OF COMMON SENSE OR TRADITION.
“One of the meanings of dharma is “law.” Conditioned arising is a way of describing a lawful process of cause and effect. Tempting as it might be to conclude that the Buddha is making a metaphysical claim about causal principles that underpin the workings of the natural world, we need to bear in mind that Gotama’s primary concerns are pragmatic. When seeing the dharma you do not behold an abstract principle. You understand how previous choices, acts, and circumstances brought you to your current situation and which present choices and acts might lead to a less restricted and more flourishing future. In this way, Gotama provides the key to knowing past and future lives. The best way to know your past is to examine the quality of your present experience, and the most fruitful way to prepare for the future is to consider the quality of what you think, say, and do in response to situations here and now.

Awareness of conditionality discloses the existential horizons of our time-bound life on earth. To dwell in the present does not mean enclosing yourself in a punctual now, severed from past and future. It means settling in a lucid equanimity that is as open to your personal and communal history as it is open to the projects that can be actualized in whatever time remains before your death. There was one project the Buddha regarded as subsuming all other projects: namely, the project of a finite and temporal self embedded in a finite and temporal world. […]

The lawfulness of conditioned arising implies that a life led according to the dharma is a life based on reason. The phrase “when this is, that comes to be” is a claim that when certain conditions prevail in the world, then certain results will follow, but it is also a description of the logical operation “if p, then q.” The dharma that Gotama reached disclosed the possibility of leading a human life according to the norms of reason rather than those of common sense or tradition. The discourses are a showcase for Gotama’s skill in dialectical reasoning. His authority is not that of a guru who imposes his views on his followers because of their faith in his enlightenment. He consistently debates with and persuades his interlocutors through the use of reason. Because his concern is to change the way people live, his reason is practical rather than theoretical. He uses reason to help others decide how to think, speak, and act. He has no interest in pursuing an abstract argument to demonstrate a purely theoretical truth. His practical reason is ethical. […]

In seeing conditioned arising as a “ground,” Gotama implies that insight into conditionality provides “grounds” on which to act.”
(Stephen Batchelor, After Buddhism, rethinking the dharma for a secular age, 2016)

E2.2.C.2.2.p. RAND ADVOCATES FOR THE USE OF THE CONSCIOUS, RATIONAL MIND TO CHOOSE AND BUILD A COMPREHENSIVE PHILOSOPHY. THE GOAL IS FOR THE MIND TO BECOME THE "PROGRAMMER OF HIS EMOTIONAL COMPUTER." 
“A sense of life represents a man’s early value-integrations, which remain in a fluid, plastic, easily amendable state, while he gathers knowledge to reach full conceptual control and thus to drive his inner mechanism. A full conceptual control means a consciously directed process of cognitive integration, which means: a conscious philosophy of life.
By the time he reaches adolescence, a man’s knowledge is sufficient to deal with broad fundamentals; this is the period when he becomes aware of the need to translate his incoherent sense of life into conscious terms. This is the period when he gropes for such things as the meaning of life, for principles, ideals, values and, desperately, for self-assertion. And—since nothing is done, in our anti-rational culture, to assist a young mind in this crucial transition, and everything possible is done to hamper, cripple, stultify it—the result is the frantic, hysterical irrationality of most adolescents, particularly today. Theirs is the agony of the unborn—of minds going through a process of atrophy at the time set by nature for their growth.
The transition from guidance by a sense of life to guidance by a conscious philosophy takes many forms. For the rare exception, the fully rational child, it is a natural, absorbing, if difficult, process—the process of validating and, if necessary, correcting in conceptual terms what he had merely sensed about the nature of man’s existence, thus transforming a wordless feeling into clearly verbalized knowledge, and laying a firm foundation, an intellectual roadbed, for the course of his life. The result is a fully integrated personality, a man whose mind and emotions are in harmony, whose sense of life matches his conscious convictions.
Philosophy does not replace a man’s sense of life, which continues to function as the automatically integrated sum of his values. But philosophy sets the criteria of his emotional integrations according to a fully defined and consistent view of reality (if and to the extent that a philosophy is rational). Instead of deriving, subconsciously, an implicit metaphysics from his value-judgments, he now derives, conceptually, his value-judgments from an explicit metaphysics. His emotions proceed from his fully convinced judgments. The mind leads, the emotions follow.
For many men, the process of transition never takes place: they make no attempt to integrate their knowledge, to acquire any conscious convictions, and are left at the mercy of their inarticulate sense of life as their only guide.
For most men, the transition is a tortured and not fully successful process, leading to a fundamental inner conflict—a clash between a man’s conscious convictions and his repressed, unidentified (or only partially identified) sense of life. Very often, the transition is incomplete, as in the case of a man whose convictions are not part of a fully integrated philosophy, but are merely a collection of random, disconnected, often contradictory ideas, and, therefore, are unconvincing to his own mind against the power of his subconscious metaphysics. In some cases, a man’s sense of life is better (closer to the truth) than the kind of ideas he accepts. In other cases, his sense of life is much worse than the ideas he professes to accept but is unable fully to practice. Ironically enough, it is man’s emotions, in such cases, that act as the avengers of his neglected or betrayed intellect.
In order to live, man must act; in order to act, he must make choices; in order to make choices, he must define a code of values; in order to define a code of values, he must know what he is and where he is—i.e., he must know his own nature (including his means of knowledge) and the nature of the universe in which he acts—i.e., he needs metaphysics, epistemology, ethics, which means: philosophy. He cannot escape from this need; his only alternative is whether the philosophy guiding him is to be chosen by his mind or by chance.
If his mind does not provide him with a comprehensive view of existence, his sense of life will. If he succumbs to centuries of concerted assaults on the mind—to traditions offering vicious irrationality or unconscionable nonsense in the guise of philosophy—if he gives up, in lethargy or in bewilderment, evades fundamental issues and concerns himself only with the concretes of his day-by-day existence, his sense of life takes over: for good or evil (and, usually, for evil), he is left at the mercy of a subconscious philosophy which he does not know, has never checked, has never been aware of accepting.
Then, as his fear, anxiety and uncertainty mount year by year, he finds himself living with a sense of unknown, undefinable doom, as if in expectation of some approaching judgment day. What he does not know is that every day of his life is judgment day—the day of paying for the defaults, the lies, the contradictions, the blank-outs recorded by his subconscious on the scrolls of his sense of life. And on that kind of psychological record, the blank entries are the blackest sins.
A sense of life, once acquired, is not a closed issue. It can be changed and corrected—easily, in youth, while it is still fluid, or by a longer, harder effort in later years. Since it is an emotional sum, it cannot be changed by a direct act of will. It changes automatically, but only after a long process of psychological retraining, when and if a man changes his conscious philosophical premises.
Whether he corrects it or not, whether it is objectively consonant with reality or not, at any stage or state of its specific content, a sense of life always retains a profoundly personal quality; it reflects a man’s deepest values; it is experienced by him as a sense of his own identity.
A given person’s sense of life is hard to identify conceptually, because it is hard to isolate: it is involved in everything about that person, in his every thought, emotion, action, in his every response, in his every choice and value, in his every spontaneous gesture, in his manner of moving, talking, smiling, in the total of his personality. It is that which makes him a “personality.”
Introspectively, one’s own sense of life is experienced as an absolute and an irreducible primary—as that which one never questions, because the thought of questioning it never arises. Extrospectively, the sense of life of another person strikes one as an immediate, yet undefinable, impression—on very short acquaintance—an impression which often feels like certainty, yet is exasperatingly elusive, if one attempts to verify it.
This leads many people to regard a sense of life as the province of some sort of special intuition, as a matter perceivable only by some special, non-rational insight. The exact opposite is true: a sense of life is not an irreducible primary, but a very complex sum; it can be felt, but it cannot be understood, by an automatic reaction; to be understood, it has to be analyzed, identified and verified conceptually. That automatic impression—of oneself or of others—is only a lead; left untranslated, it can be a very deceptive lead. But if and when that intangible impression is supported by and unites with the conscious judgment of one’s mind, the result is the most exultant form of certainty one can ever experience: it is the integration of mind and values.
There are two aspects of man’s existence which are the special province and expression of his sense of life: love and art.
I am referring here to romantic love, in the serious meaning of that term—as distinguished from the superficial infatuations of those whose sense of life is devoid of any consistent values, i.e., of any lasting emotions other than fear. Love is a response to values. It is with a person’s sense of life that one falls in love—with that essential sum, that fundamental stand or way of facing existence, which is the essence of a personality. One falls in love with the embodiment of the values that formed a person’s character, which are reflected in his widest goals or smallest gestures, which create the style of his soul—the individual style of a unique, unrepeatable, irreplaceable consciousness. It is one’s own sense of life that acts as the selector, and responds to what it recognizes as one’s own basic values in the person of another. It is not a matter of professed convictions (though these are not irrelevant); it is a matter of much more profound, conscious and subconscious harmony.
Many errors and tragic disillusionments are possible in this process of emotional recognition, since a sense of life, by itself, is not a reliable cognitive guide. And if there are degrees of evil, then one of the most evil consequences of mysticism—in terms of human suffering—is the belief that love is a matter of “the heart,” not the mind, that love is an emotion independent of reason, that love is blind and impervious to the power of philosophy. Love is the expression of philosophy—of a subconscious philosophical sum—and, perhaps, no other aspect of human existence needs the conscious power of philosophy quite so desperately. When that power is called upon to verify and support an emotional appraisal, when love is a conscious integration of reason and emotion, of mind and values, then—and only then—it is the greatest reward of man’s life.
Art is a selective re-creation of reality according to an artist’s metaphysical value-judgments. It is the integrator and concretizer of man’s metaphysical abstractions. It is the voice of his sense of life. As such, art is subject to the same aura of mystery, the same dangers, the same tragedies—and, occasionally, the same glory—as romantic love.”
 (Ayn Rand, The romantic manifesto, 1969)

E2.2.C.2.2.q. WHY DO WE NEED CONSCIOUSNESS IF WE ALREADY HAVE AUTOMATIC, INNATE SURVIVAL MECHANISMS (I.E., NATURAL DETERMINISMS)? DAMASIO'S ANSWER IS THAT CONSCIOUSNESS "BUYS AN ENLARGED PROTECTION POLICY," WHICH IS ANOTHER WAY OF SAYING IT PROVIDES "GREATER AUTONOMY."
“Why complicate matters and bring consciousness into this process, if there is already a means to respond adaptively at an automated level? The answer is that consciousness buys an enlarged protection policy. Consider this: If you come to knaw that animal or object or situation X causes fear, you will have two ways of behaving toward X. The first way is innate; you do not control it. Moreover, it is not specific to X; a large number of creatures, objects, and circum­stances can cause the response. The second way is based on your own experience and is specific to X. Knowing about X allows you to think ahead and predict the probability of its being present in a given environment, so that you can avoid X, preemptively, rather than just have to react to its presence in an emergency. 
But there are other advantages of "feeling" your emotional reac­tions. You can generalize your knowledge, and decide, for example, to be cautious with anything that looks like X. (Of course, if you overgeneralize and behave overcautiously, you may become phobic-which is not so good.) Furthermore, you may have discov­ered, in the course of your first encounter with X, something peculiar and potentially vulnerable in X's behavior. You may want to exploit that vulnerability in your next encounter, and that is one more reason why you need to have knawn. In short, feeling your emotional states, which is to say being conscious of emotions, offers you flexibility of response based on the particular history of your interactions with the environment. Although you need innate devices to start the ball of knowledge rolling, feelings offer you something extra.”
(Antonio Damasio, Descartes Error, 1994)

E2.2.C.2.2.r. STOICISM CONFRONTS THE PROBLEM OF DETERMINISM BUT OFFERS A POWERFUL PATH OF CONSTRUCTION TO ACHIEVE A STATE OF PROFOUND INNER FREEDOM.
“According to the stoical philosophy, to a
wise man all the different conditions of life were equal. Nature, they
said, had recommended some objects to our choice, and others to our
disapprobation. Our primary appetites directed us to the pursuit of
health, strength, ease, and perfection, in all the qualities of mind and
body; and of whatever could promote or secure these, riches, power,
authority: and the same original principle taught us to avoid the
contrary. But in chusing or rejecting, in preferring or postponing,
those first objects of original appetite and aversion, Nature had
likewise taught us, that there was a certain order, propriety, and
grace, to be observed, of infinitely greater consequence to happiness
and perfection, than the attainment of those objects themselves. The
objects of our primary appetites or aversions were to be pursued or
avoided, chiefly because a regard to this grace and propriety required
such conduct. In directing all our actions according to these, consisted
the happiness and glory of human nature. In departing from those rules
which they prescribed to us, its greatest wretchedness and most complete
depravity. The outward appearance of this order and propriety was indeed
more easily maintained in some circumstances than in others. To a fool,
however, to one whose passions were subjected to no proper controul, to
act with real grace and propriety, was equally impossible in every
situation. Though the giddy multitude might admire him, though his
vanity might sometimes be elevated by their ignorant praises into
something that resembled self-approbation, yet still when he turned his
view to what passed within his own breast, he was secretly conscious to
himself of the absurdity and meanness of all his motives, and inwardly
blushed and trembled at the thoughts of the contempt which he knew he
deserved, and which mankind would certainly bestow upon him if they saw
his conduct in the light in which in his own heart he was obliged to
regard it. To a wise man, on the contrary, to one whose passions were
all brought under perfect subjection to the ruling principles of his
nature, to reason and the love of propriety, to act so as to deserve
approbation was equally easy upon all occasions. Was he in prosperity,
he returned thanks to Jupiter for having joined him with circumstances
which were easily mastered, and in which there was little temptation to
do wrong. Was he in adversity, he equally, returned thanks to the
director of this spectacle of human life, for having opposed to him a
vigorous athlete, over whom, though the contest was likely to be more
violent, the victory was more glorious, and equally certain. Can there
be any shame in that distress which is brought upon us without any fault
of our own, and in which we behave with perfect propriety? There can
therefore, be no evil, but, on the contrary, the greatest good and
advantage. A brave man exults in those dangers, in which, from no
rashness of his own, his fortune has involved him. They afford an
opportunity of exercising that heroic intrepidity, whose exertion gives
the exalted delight which flows from the consciousness of superior
propriety and deserved admiration. One who is master of all his
exercises has no aversion to measure his strength and activity with the
strongest. And in the same manner, one who is master of all his
passions, does not dread any circumstances in which the superintendant
of the universe may think proper to place him. The bounty of that Divine
Being has provided him with virtues which render him superior to every
situation. If it is pleasure, he has temperance to refrain from it; if
it is pain, he has constancy to bear it; if it is danger or death, he
has magnanimity and fortitude to despise it. He never complains of the
destiny of providence, nor thinks the universe in confusion when he is
out of order. He does not look upon himself, according to what self-love
would suggest, as a whole, separated and detached from every other part
of nature, to be taken care of by itself, and for itself. He regards
himself in the light in which he imagines the great Genius of human
nature, and of the world, regards him. He enters, if I may say so, into
the sentiments of that Divine Being, and considers himself as an atom, a
particle, of an immense and infinite system, which must, and ought to be
disposed of, according to the conveniency of the whole. Assured of the
wisdom which directs all the events of human life, whatever lot befalls
him, he accepts it with joy, satisfied that, if he had known all the
connexions and dependencies of the different parts of the universe, it
is the very lot which he himself would have wished for. If it is life,
he is contented to live: and if it is death, as Nature must have no
further occasion for his presence here, he willingly goes where he is
appointed. I accept, said a stoical philosopher, with equal joy and
satisfaction, whatever fortune can befal me. Riches or poverty, pleasure
or pain, health or sickness, all is alike: nor would I desire that the
gods should in any respect change my destination. If I was to ask of
them any thing, beyond what their bounty has already bestowed, it should
be that they would inform me beforehand what it was their pleasure
should be done with me, that I might of my own accord place myself in
this situation, and demonstrate the chearfulness with which I embraced
their allotment. If I am going to fail, says Epictetus, I chuse the best
ship, and the best pilot, and I wait for the fairest weather that my
circumstances and duty will allow. Prudence and propriety, the
principles which the gods have given me for the direction of my conduct,
require this of me; but they require no more: and if, notwithstanding, a
storm arises, which neither the strength of the vessel, nor the skill of
the pilot are likely to withstand, I give myself no trouble about the
consequence. All that I had to do, is done already. The directors of my
conduct never command me to be miserable, to be anxious, desponding, or
afraid. Whether we are to be drowned, or to come to a harbour, is the
business of Jupiter, not mine. I leave it entirely to his determination,
nor ever break my rest with considering which way he is likely to decide
it, but receive whatever comes with equal indifference and security.

Such was the philosophy of the stoics, a philosophy which affords the
noblest lessons of magnanimity, is the best school of heroes and
patriots, and to the greater part of whose precepts there can be no
objection, except that honourable one, that they teach us to aim at a
perfection altogether beyond the reach of human nature.”
(Adam Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments, 1777)

E2.2.C.2.2.s. AUDRE LORDE'S "PROJECT" OF RAISING HER SON IS AN ATTEMPT TO RAISE HIM TO BE AWARE OF THE DETERMINISTIC AND DESTRUCTIVE FORCES OF A "RACIST, SEXIST, SUICIDAL DRAGON" OF A SOCIETY. 
“Raising Black children — female and male — in the mouth of a racist, sexist, suicidal dragon is perilous and chancy. If they cannot love and resist at the same time, they will probably not survive. And in order to survive they must let go. This is what mothers teach — love, survival — that is self-definition and letting go. For each of these, the ability to feel strongly and to recognize those feelings is central: how to feel love, how to neither discount fear nor be overwhelmed by it, how to enjoy feeling deeply. wish to raise a Black man who will not be destroyed by, nor settle for, those corruptions called power by the white fathers who mean his destruction as surely as they mean mine. 
I wish to raise a Black man who will recognize that the legitimate objects of his hostility are not women, but the particulars of a structure that programs him to fear and despise women as well as his own Black self.
For me, this task begins with teaching my son that I do not exist to do his feeling for him. 
Men who are afraid to feel must keep women around to do their feeling for them while dismissing us for the same supposedly “inferior” capacity to feel deeply. But in this way also, men deny themselves their own essential humanity, becoming trapped in dependency and fear. 
As a Black woman committed to a livable future, and as a mother loving and raising a boy who will become a man, I must examine all my possibilities of being within such a destructive system.
Jonathan was three-and one-half when Frances, my lover, and I met; he was  even when we all began to live together permanently. From the start, Frances’ and my insistence that there be no secrets in our household about the fact thar we were lesbians has been the source of problems and strengths for both children. In the beginning, this insistence grew out of the knowledge, on both our parts, that whatever was hidden out of fear could always be used either against the children or ourselves — one imperfect but useful argument for honesty. The knowledge of fear can help make us free. 
for the embattled 
there is no place 
that cannot be 
home nor is. 
For survival, Black children in america must be raised to be warriors. For survival, they must also be raised to recognize the enemy's many faces. Black children of lesbian couples have an advantage because they learn, very early, that oppression comes in many different forms, none of which have anything to do with their own worth.
To help give me perspective, I remember that for years, in the name calling at school, boys shouted at Jonathan not “your mother’s a lesbian” — but rather — “your mother's a nigger.” 
When Jonathan was eight years old and in the third grade we moved, and he went to a new school where his life was hellish as a new boy on the block. He did not like to play rough games. He did not like to fight. He did not like to stone dogs. And all this marked him early on as an easy target. ‘When he came in crying one afternoon, I heard from Beth how the corner bullies were making Johathan wipe their shoes on the way home whenever Beth wasn’t there to fight them off, ‘And when I heard that the ringleader was a little boy in Jonathan's class his own size, an interesting and very disturbing ‘thing happened to me.
My fury at my own long-ago impotence, and my present pain at his suffering, made me start to forget all that I knew about violence and fear, and blaming the victim, I started to hiss at the weeping child. “The next time you come in here crying..." and I suddenly caught myself fin horror. 
This is the way we allow the destruction of our sons to begin — in the name of protection and to ease our own pain. My son get beaten up? I was about to demand that he buy that first lesson in the corruption of power, that might makes right. I could hear myself beginning to perpetuate the age-old distortions about what strength and bravery really are. 
And no, Jonathan didn't have to fight if he didn't want to, but somehow he did have to feel better about not fighting. An old horror rolled over me of being the fat kid who ran away, terrified of getting her glasses broken. 
About that time a very wise woman said to me, “Have you ever told Jonathan that once you used to be afraid, too!” The idea seemed far-out to me at the time, but the next time he came in crying and sweaty from having run away again, I could see that he felt shamed at having failed me, or some image he and I had created in his head of mother/woman. This image ‘of woman being able to handle it all was bolstered by the fact that he lived in a household with three strong women, his lesbian parents and his forthright older sister. At home, for Jonathan, power was clearly female.
And because our society teaches us to think in an either/or mode — kill or be killed, dominate or be dominated — this ‘meant that he must either surpass or be lacking. I could see the implications of this line of thought. Consider the two western classic myth/models of mother/son relationships: Jocasta/Oedipus, the son who fucks his mother, and Clycemnestra/Orestes, the son who kills his mother. 
It all felt connected to me. 
I sat down on the hallway steps and took Jonathan on my lap and wiped his tears. “Did I ever tell you about how I used to be afraid when I was your age?” 
I will never forget the look on that little boy's face as I told him the tale of my glasses and my afterschool fights. It was a look of relief and total disbelief, all rolled into one. 
It is as hard for our children to believe that we are not omnipotent as it is for us to know it, as parents, But that ‘knowledge is necessary as the first step in the reassessment of power as something other than might, age, privilege, or the lack of fear. Iris an important step for a boy, whose societal destruction begins when he is forced to believe that he can only be strong if he doesn't feel, or if he wins.
I thought about all this one year later when Beth and Jonathan, ten and nine, were asked by an interviewer how they thought they had been affected by being children of a feminist. 
Jonathan said that he didn't think there was too much in feminism for boys, although it certainly was good to be able to cry if he felt like it and not to have coplay football if he didn't want to. I think of this sometimes now when I see him practising, for his Brown Bele in Tae Kwon Do. 
The strongest lesson I can teach my son is the same lesson I reach my daughter: how to be who he wishes co be for himself, ‘And the best way I can do this is to be who I am and hope that he will learn from this not how to be me, which is not possible, but how to be himself. And this means how to move to that voice from within himself, rather than to those raucous, per-suasive, or threatening voices from outside, pressuring him to be what the world wants him to be, 
And that is hard enough. 
Jonathan is learning to find within himself some of the different faces of courage and strength, whatever he chooses to c all them. Two years ago, when Jonathan was twelve and in the seventh grade, one of his friends at school who had been to the house persisted in calling Frances the maid.” When Jonathan corrected him, the boy then referred to her as “the cleaning woman.” Finally Jonathan said, simply, “Frances is not the cleaning woman, she's  my mother ’s lover.” Interestingly enough, it is the teachers at this school who still have not recovered from his openness.”
(Audre Lorde, Sister outsider, 2007)

E2.2.C.2.2.t.


E1.6.D.3.7. THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN KNOWING AND UNDERSTANDING
The key is to understand, meaning to apply knowledge to transform one's life, rather than merely accumulating it.

E2.2.C.2.2.wE1.6.C.1.1.f_REF1_PH
SCHILLER ARGUES THAT WHILE THE AESTHETIC STATE YIELDS NO SINGLE, PRACTICAL RESULT FOR KNOWLEDGE OR MORALITY, ITS PROFOUND VALUE LIES IN FREEING HUMANITY FROM THE SPECIFIC LIMITATIONS OF BOTH REASON AND FEELING, THEREBY RESTORING US TO A STATE OF UNLIMITED POTENTIAL AND COMPLETE HUMAN FREEDOM.

E2.2.C.2.2.wE1.6.C.1.1.f_REF2_PH
SCHILLER ASSERTS THAT THE AESTHETIC STATE IS THE CRUCIAL AND MOST DIFFICULT TRANSITION FOR HUMANITY, BECAUSE ONLY BY FIRST SUBMITTING OUR SENSUOUS NATURE TO THE LAWS OF BEAUTY CAN WE DEVELOP THE INNER FREEDOM THAT IS THE NECESSARY FOUNDATION FOR A MORAL AND RATIONAL LIFE.

E2.2.C.2.2.wE1.6.C.1.1.f_REF3_PH
SCHILLER POSITS THAT THE CRUCIAL TRANSITION FROM A PURELY SENSUOUS EXISTENCE TO SELF-CONSCIOUS HUMANITY OCCURS IN THE AESTHETIC STATE, WHERE REFLECTIVE CONTEMPLATION CREATES A VITAL DISTANCE BETWEEN THE SELF AND THE WORLD, THUS GIVING RISE TO BOTH A DISTINCT PERSONALITY AND AN OBJECTIVE REALITY.

E2.2.C.2.3. The Practice of Awareness (Disciplines of Reflection):  It's not just about "thinking," but about practicing awareness through deliberate, often disciplined, techniques.

E2.2.C.2.3.a.


"E1.6.C.2.6. FOSTERING SELF-UNDERSTANDING
"A fugitive and elusive part of our own thinking, our own experience, is taken up, edited, and returned to us better than it was before, so that we feel, at last, that we know ourselves more clearly."
(Maria Popova´s review of Alain de Botton & John Armstrong's Art as Therapy)

E2.2.C.2.3.b. Los Carpinteros_150 People

Is religion ridiculous? Many atheists think that it is. Alain de Botton is an atheist, but he believes there is much that atheists can learn from religions, mainly organisational aspects: Rituals, communal, educational aspects:
Lessons for bringing more people to appreciate art: a. A better curator's job at suggesting how a conceptual art work can contribute to reflection, b. Completely changing the way we organize expositions in museums. Instead of a chronological disposition, why not group pieces of all epochs by moral messages such as: Eternal love, joy, sacrifice, anger, truth, etc.
(Alain de Botton on Atheism 2.0 on Philosophy Bites)

Listen to theepisode: http://philosophybites.com/2012/01/alain-de-botton-on-atheism-20-1.html

E2.2.C.2.3.c. "Experience has shown that if [...] a group continues to meet regularly, social conventions begin to wear thin, and the content of sub-cultural differences begins to assert itself, regardless of the topic du jour. This emergent friction between contrasting values is at the heart of dialogue, in that it allows the participants to notice the assumptions that are active in the group, including one's own personal assumptions. Recognizing the power of these assumptions and attending to their “virus-like” nature may lead to a new understanding of the fragmentary and self-destructive nature of many of our thought processes. [...]
Even then, the creative potential of the dialogue — its capacity to reveal the deeper structures of consciousness — depends upon sustained, serious application by the participants themselves. In the dialogue, a very considerable degree of attention is required to keep track of the subtle implications of one's own assumptive/reactive tendencies, while also sensing similar patterns in the group as a whole. [...]
The nurturing of such attention, often bypassed in more utilitarian versions of dialogue, is a central element in Bohm's approach to the process. [...]"
(Lee Nichol Jemez Springs, Foreword - 1995 - on David Bohm's On dialogue, 1996)

Britt-Ingrid Persson, Impasse dans le dialogue
"[I]t is easy for each one of us to see that other people are “blocked” about certain questions, so that without being aware of it, they are avoiding the confrontation of contradictions in certain ideas that may be extremely dear to them. The very nature of such a “block” is, however, that it is a kind of insensitivity or “anesthesia” about one's own contradictions. Evidently then, what is crucial is to be aware of the nature of one's own “blocks.” If one is alert and attentive, he can see for example that whenever certain questions arise, there are fleeting sensations of fear, which push him away from consideration of these questions, and of pleasure, which attract his thoughts and cause them to be occupied with other questions. So one is able to keep away from whatever it is that he thinks may disturb him. And as a result, he can be subtly defending his own ideas, when he supposes that he is really listening to what other people have to say. When we come together to talk, or otherwise to act in common, can each one of us be aware of the subtle fear and pleasure sensations that “block” his ability to listen freely? Without this awareness, the injunction to listen to the whole of what is said will have little meaning. But if each one of us can give full attention to what is actually “blocking” communication while he is also attending properly to the content of what is communicated, then we may be able to create something new between us, something of very great significance for bringing to an end the at present insoluble problems of the individual and of society."
(David Bohm, On dialogue, 1996)

Art :
- Britt-Ingrid Persson_Impasse dans le dialogue

Alexey Terenin_The way of thinking, 2018
"SUSPENDING ASSUMPTIONS 
We have been saying that people in any group will bring to it their assumptions, and as the group continues meeting, those assumptions will come up. Then what is called for is to suspend those assumptions, so that you neither carry them out nor suppress them. You don't believe them, nor do you disbelieve them; you don't judge them as good or bad. [...]
I hold it back, I reflect it back. You may also think of it as suspended in front of you so that you can look at it — sort of reflected back as if you were in front of a mirror. In this way I can see things that I wouldn't have seen if I had simply carried out that anger, or if I had suppressed it and said, “I'm not angry” or “I shouldn't be angry.” [...]
What's required then is that we notice the connection between the thoughts going on in the dialogue, the feelings in the body, and the emotions. [...]
Therefore, you simply see what the assumptions and reactions mean — not only your own, but the other people's as well. We are not trying to change anybody's opinion. When this meeting is over, somebody may or may not change his opinion. This is part of what I consider dialogue — for people to realize what is on each other's minds without coming to any conclusions or judgments. Assumptions will come up. And if you hear somebody else who has an assumption that seems outrageous to you, the natural response might be to get angry, or get excited, or to react in some other way. But suppose you suspend that activity. You may not even have known that you had an assumption. It was only because he came up with the opposite one that you find out that you have one. You may uncover other assumptions, but we are all suspending them and looking at them all, seeing what they mean."
(David Bohm, On dialogue, 1996)

Art:
- Alexey Terenin_The way of thinking, 2018
- Erika Zolli

"4 THE PROBLEM AND THE PARADOX 
We have been looking at the vast range of problems facing humanity. These go on proliferating indefinitely, eventually leading on toward disorders of world-wide scope. On contemplating this general situation, one may even sometimes have a sense of being confronted by difficulties beyond the possibility of resolution by human intelligence and co-operative endeavor. In this mass of contradiction and confusion, one finds a very curious common denominator: i.e., that everyone appears to agree that what is actually confronting us is a set of problems. Generally speaking, one does not find that people have considered the question of whether the word "problem," with all that it signifies, provides an adequate description of what is going wrong in human affairs. Yet, if one goes into the meaning of the word, one can see good reason to raise such a question, and to suspect that the attempt to treat our current difficulties as "problems" may be one of the more important factors preventing these difficulties from being properly brought to an end.
The root of "problem" is a Greek word whose meaning is "to put forward." Indeed, this is the essential significance of the word: i.e., to put forward for discussion or questioning an idea that is suggested toward the resolution of certain difficulties or inadequacies. Thus, if one needs to reach a certain destination, one may suggest taking a train, and one can discuss the problem of meeting the train on time, paying for the ticket, etc. Similarly, sailing ships were seen to be a slow and unreliable means of transport, and so men put forth the idea of driving ships by steam, thus giving rise to the problem of how to realize this idea technically and how to carry it out practically. More generally, it is clear that a large part of our practical and technical activities are centered on work aimed at solving a wide range of such problems. 

However, when one puts forth an idea in the form of a problem, there are certain largely tacit and implicit presuppositions which must be satisfied if the activity is to make sense. Among these is of course the assumption that the questions raised are rational and free of contradiction. Sometimes, without our noticing it, we accept absurd problems with false or self-contradictory presuppositions. In the practical and technical realm, however, we can usually sooner or later detect that our question is absurd, and we then drop the "problem" as meaningless. Thus, for a long time, people sought to invent a machine capable of perpetual motion, but with the development of scientific understanding it became clear that this would be in contradiction with the basic laws of physics, and so the search for such a machine has ceased.

All of this is fairly clear in the practical and technical domain. But now, what is to be done when one goes on to consider psychological problems and problems of human relationship? Does it make sense to formulate problems of such a kind? Or is this domain not one in which the presuppositions behind the questions put forth for discussion are false, self-contradictory, and absurd?

Consider, for example, a man who suddenly realized that he was very susceptible to flattery. He might well put forth the idea that he ought to be immune to flattery, and then he would of course have the problem of overcoming his tendency to “fall" for anyone who told him how wonderful a person he was. It takes only a little consideration, however, to see that this "problem" is based on absurd presuppositions. For example, the origin of the wish to be flattered is often a deep sense of being inadequate, which is so painful that awareness of its very existence is largely suppressed, except for certain moments in which criticisms or some other indications of a similar nature momentarily call attention to this very unpleasant feeling. As soon as someone comes along and tells such a person that, after all, he is good, capable, wise, beautiful, etc., then the deadening sense of suppressed pain disappears, to be replaced by a buoyant feeling of pleasure and well-being. Along with this goes a tendency to believe that he is being told the truth: for otherwise, of course, there would be no such release. In order to "defend" himself from the "danger" of discovering that it is not the truth, such a person is then ready to believe all that he is told by the other person, and thus, as is well known, he opens himself to the possibility of being taken advantage of in countless ways.
In essence, what goes wrong in flattery is a subtle kind of self-deception. If such a person were then to put forth "the problem" of how he can stop deceiving himself, the absurdity of this procedure would become self-evident. For it is clear that even if he tries hard and makes an effort to overcome his tendency to self-deception, this very effort will be infected with the wish for a pleasure able release from pain that is at the origin of the whole tendency in the first place. So he will almost certainly deceive himself about the question of whether he has overcome self-deception or not.
More generally, one can say that when something goes wrong psychologically, it is confusing to describe the resulting situation as a "problem." Rather, it would be better to say that one was confronted by a paradox. In the case of the man who is susceptible to flattery, the paradox is that he apparently knows and understands the absolute need to be honest with himself and yet he feels an even stronger "need" to deceive himself, when this helps to release him from an unbearable sense of inadequacy and to substitute instead a sense of inward rightness and wellbeing. What is called for in such a case is not some procedure that "solves his problem." Rather, it is to pause and to give attention to the fact that his thinking and feeling is dominated, through and through, by a set of self-contradictory demands or "needs" so that as long as such thinking and feeling prevail, there is no way to put things right. It takes a great deal of energy and seriousness to "stay with" an awareness of this fact, rather than to "escape" by allowing the mind to dart into some other subject, or otherwise lose awareness of the actual state of affairs. Such attention, going immensely beyond what is merely verbal or intellectual, can actually bring the root of the paradox into awareness, and thus the paradox dissolves when it's nullity and absurdity are clearly seen, felt, and understood.
It has to be emphasized, however, that as long as a paradox is treated as a problem, it can never be dissolved. On the contrary, the "problem" can do nothing but grow and proliferate in ever increasing confusion. For it is an essential feature of thought that once the mind accepts a problem, then it is appropriate for the brain to keep on working until it finds a solution. This feature is indeed necessary for proper rational thinking. Thus, if a person were confronted by a real problem (e.g., the need to obtain food) and dropped it before it was
adequately solved, the result could be disastrous. In any case, such a mode of operation would indicate an unhealthy flightiness or lack of seriousness. On the other hand, if the mind treats a paradox as if it were a real problem, then since the paradox has no "solution," the mind is caught in the paradox forever. Each apparent solution is found to be inadequate, and only leads on to new questions of a yet more muddled nature. Thus, a paradox which has taken root early in life (e.g., that arising out of a situation in which a child is made to feel a sense of inadequacy) may continue for the whole of a person's life, always changing in detail, growing more and more confused, but remaining the same in essence. And when the person becomes aware of the disorder in his mind, but describes this disorder as a problem, then this very step makes the activity around the paradox both more intense and more confused. Clearly, then, it is important to see the difference between a problem and a paradox, and to respond to each of these in a way that is appropriate to it. [...]

Ultimately, this very pervasive set of patterns may be seen to grow out of a certain "root" paradox. To help bring out what this root paradox is, one may first consider the fact that ordinarily, thought has some external object or state of affairs for its content. For example, one may think of a chair, a house, a tree, a storm, the Earth in its orbit, etc. All of these share the characteristic that they are essentially independent of the process of thought which goes on in our minds, while at the same time this process of thought is essentially independent of the content (i.e., our thoughts are free to take this content or to leave it, and instead to range over some other content, which observation may indicate to be relevant).
Evidently, such relative independence of the mode of activity of thought from its content is appropriate when one is engaged in thinking about practical and technical subjects. However, when one begins to think about himself, and especially about his own thoughts and feelings, then if one observes carefully, he will find that this approach leads to a paradoxical pattern of activity. The paradox is that whereas one is treating his own thinking and feeling as something separate from and independent of the thought that is thinking about them, it is evident that in fact there is, and can be, no such separation and independence. [...]"
(David Bohm, On dialogue, 1996)

Art:
Ismael Nery_2

E2.2.C.2.3.d. A_Lene Adler Petersen_At the desk_1976

"Procrastination helps us to be a student of our own reluctance, to understand the hidden darker side of the first enthusiastic idea, to learn what we are afraid of in the endeavour itself; to put an underbelly into the work itself so that it becomes a living, satisfying whole, not a surface trying to manipulate us in the moment.
Procrastination does not stop a project from coming to fruition; what stops us is giving up on an original idea because we have not got to the heart of the reason we are delaying, nor let the true form of our reluctance instruct us in the way ahead. To procrastinate is to be involved with larger entities than our own ideas, to refuse to settle for an early underachieving outcome and wrestle like Jacob with his angel, finding, as Rilke said, « Winning does not tempt that man. This is how he grows, by being defeated, decisively, by greater and greater beings. »"
(David Whyte, Consolations, The Solace, Nourishment and Underlying Meaning of Everyday Words, 2015)

A_Anny Lemos_Caminhando [Walking]_2020 ; A_Anny Lemos_Caminhos internos [Internal pathways]_2021_(1) ; A_Anny Lemos_Caminhos internos [Internal pathways]_2021_(2) ; A_Anny Lemos_Caminhos internos [Internal pathways]_2021_(3) ;  A_Lygia Clark_Caminhando [Wlaking]_1963_(1) ; A_Lygia Clark_Caminhando [Wlaking]_1963_(2)

"We travel paths through spaces. We are many; we are in the moment; and we are also a collection of those moments.
Lygia Clark's work, 'Walking,' lives in each person's particular experience. I am also a little bit of Lygia."
(Anny Lemos, 2020).
"Walking" is a Möbius strip that each participant cuts over and over again.
A Möbius strip is a folded piece of material with a half-spiral that gives it only one continuous surface. Lygia described 'Walking' as follows: 'As the strip is cut, it becomes thinner and is unfolded into intertwining strands. In the end, the path is so narrow that it can no longer be cut." The act is what produces Walking. Nothing exists before it, and nothing exists after it.”
What is beautiful about this piece is that you can think of it as a walk or an activated line. You can try making your own Walking."
(Curatorship, MoMA, NY)

E2.2.C.2.3.e. "ALONE

[...] It is a word that can be felt at the same time as an invitation to depth and as an imminent threat, as in 'all alone', with its returned echo of abandonment. [...]

Being alone is a difficult discipline: a beautiful and difficult sense of being solitary is always the ground from which we step into a contemplative intimacy with the unknown, but the first portal of aloneness is often experienced as a gateway to alienation, grief and abandonment. To find ourselves alone or to be left alone is an ever-present, fearful and abiding human potentiality of which we are often unconsciously, and deeply, afraid.

To be alone for any length of time is to shed an outer skin. The body is inhabited in a different way when we are alone than when we are with others. Alone, we live in our bodies as a question rather than a statement.

The permeability of being alone asks us to re imagine ourselves, to become impatient with ourselves, to tire of the same old story and then slowly, hour by hour, to start to tell the story in a different way, as other parallel ears, ones we were previously unaware of, begin to listen to us more carefully in the silence. For a solitary life to flourish, even if it is only for a few precious hours, aloneness asks us to make a friend of silence, and just as importantly to inhabit that silence in our own particular way, to find our very own way into our own particular, and even virtuoso, way of being alone. [...]

At the beginning of the twenty-first century, to feel alone or want to be alone is deeply unfashionable: to admit to feeling alone is to reject and betray others, as if they are not good company, and do not have entertaining, interesting lives of their own to distract us; and to actually seek to be alone is a radical act. To want to be alone is to refuse a certain kind of conversational hospitality and to turn to another door, and another kind of welcome, not necessarily defined by human vocabulary.

It may be that time away from a work, an idea of ourselves, or a committed partner is the very essence of appreciation for the other, for the work and for the life of another; to be able to let them alone as we let ourselves alone, to live something that feels like a choice again, to find ourselves alone as a looked-for achievement, not a state to which we have been condemned."
(David Whyte, Consolations, The Solace, Nourishment and Underlying Meaning of Everyday Words, 2015)


E2.2.C.2.3.f. MAKE IT A HABIT TO MONITOR YOUR MENTAL-EMOTIONAL STATE THROUGH SELF-OBSERVATION. 
"Am I at ease at this moment?" is a good question to ask yourself frequently.  Or you can ask: "What's going on inside me at this moment?" Be at least as interested in what goes on inside you as what happens outside.  If you get the inside right, the outside will fall into place.  Primary reality is within, secondary reality without.  But don't answer these questions immediately.  Direct your attention inward.  Have a look inside yourself.  What kind of thoughts is your mind producing?  What do you feel?  Direct your attention into the body.  Is there any tension?  Once you detect that there is a low level of unease, the background static, see in what way you are avoiding, resisting, or denying life --by denying the Now.  There are many ways in which people unconsciously resist the present moment.  I will give you a few examples.  With practice, your power of self-observation, of monitoring your inner state, will become sharpened.”
(Eckhart Tolle, The Power Of Now, 1997)


E2.2.C.2.3.g. SHANTIDEVA  VOWS TO RESIST HIS OWN NEGATIVE MENTAL STATES ("DISTURBING CONCEPTIONS").
“CONSCIENTIOUSNESS [...]
44
It would be better for me to be burned,
To have my head cut off and to be killed,
Rather than ever bowing down
To those ever-present disturbing conceptions.
45
Common enemies when expelled from one
country
Simply retire and settle down in another,
Though when their strength is recovered they
return,
But the way of this enemy, my disturbing
conceptions
is not similar in this respect.
46
Deluded disturbing conceptions! When
forsaken by the eye of wisdom
And dispelled from my mind, where will you
go?
Where will you dwell in order to be able to
injure me again?
But, weak-minded, I have been reduced to
making no effort.
47
If these disturbing conceptions do not exist
within the objects, the sense organs, between
the two
nor elsewhere,
Then where do they exist and how do they
harm the world?
They are like an illusion - thus I should
dispel within my heart and strive resolutely
for wisdom.
For no real reason, why should I suffer so
much in hell?
48
Therefore having thought about this well,
I should try to put these precepts into practice
just as they have been explained-
If the doctor’s instructions are ignored,
How will a patient in need of cure be healed
by his medicines? »
(Shantideva, A Guide to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life, translated by Stepahn Bachelor, 8th century AD)

“GUARDING ALERTNESS […]
16
The knower of reality has said
That even if recitation and physical hardships
Are practiced for long periods of time,
They will be meaningless if the mind is
distracted elsewhere.
17
Even those who wish to find happiness and
overcome misery
Will wander with no aim nor meaning
If they do not comprehend the secret of the
mind -
The paramount significance of Dharma.
18
This being so,
I shall hold and guard my mind well.
Without the discipline of guarding the mind,
What use are many other disciplines?
19
Just as I would be attentive and careful of a
wound
When amidst a bustling uncontrolled crowd,
So I should always guard the wound of my
mind
When dwelling among harmful people.
20
And if I am careful of a wound
Through fear of it being slightly hurt,
Then why do I not guard the wound of my
mind
Through fear of being crushed by the
mountains of hell?
21
Should I behave in such a way as this,
Then whether among harmful people
Or even in the midst of women,
The steady effort to control myself will not
decline.
22
It is better to be without wealth,
Honor, body and livelihood;
And it is better to let other virtues deteriorate,
Rather than ever to let the virtues of the mind
decline.
23
O you who wish to guard your minds,
I beseech you with folded hands;
Always exert yourself to guard
Mindfulness and alertness!
24
People who are disturbed by sickness
Have no strength to do anything useful,
Likewise those whose minds are disturbed by
confusion
Have no strength to do anything wholesome.
25
Whatever has been learnt, contemplated and
meditated upon
By those whose minds lack alertness,
Just like water in a leaking vase,
Will not be retained in their memory.
26
Even those who have much learning,
Faith and willing perseverance
Will become defiled by a moral fall
Due to the mistake of lacking alertness.
27
The thieves of unalertness,
In following upon the decline of mindfulness,
Will steal even the merits I have firmly
gathered
So that I shall then proceed to lower realms.
28
The host of thieves who are my own
disturbing conceptions
Will search for a good opportunity,
Having found it they will steal my virtue
And destroy the attainment of life in a happy
realm.
29
Therefore I shall never let mindfulness depart
From the doorway of my mind.
If it goes, I should recall the misery of the
lower realms
And firmly re-establish it there. [...]
39
Once having prepared for an action with the
thought,
"My body will remain in such a way,"
Then periodically I should look to see
How the body is being maintained.
40
With the utmost effort I should check
To see that the crazed elephant of my mind
Is not wandering off but is bound
To the great pillar of thinking about Dharma.
41
Those who strive by all means for
concentration
Should not wander off even for a moment;
By thinking, "How is my mind behaving?" -
They should closely analyze their mind.
42
But if I am unable to do this
When afraid or involved in celebrations, then
I should relax.
Likewise it has been taught that at times of
giving
One may be indifferent to certain aspects of
moral discipline.
43
I should undertake whatever deed I have
intended to do
And think of doing nothing other than it.
With my mind applied to that task,
I should set about for the time being to
accomplish it.”
(Shantideva, A Guide to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life, translated by Stepahn Bachelor, 8th century AD)


E2.2.C.2.3.h. AN INVENTED WORD TO ENCAPSULATE THE CONSCIOUS EFFORT TO IDENTIFY THE ROOT OF NEGATIVE EMOTIONS 
“nementia  n. the post-distraction effort to recall the reason why you're feeling particularly  anxious or angry or excited, in which you retrace your sequence of thoughts  like a kid wandering across the neighborhood gathering the string of a downed  kite, which was likely lost in a romantic storm or devoured by that huge  carnivorous tree that is Things Your Parents Have Said.”
(John Koenig, The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021)

E2.2.C.2.3.i. THE DRAMA BEGINS ONLY WHEN MAN VOLUNTARILY OPENS HIS EYES. OUTWARD BOUND, MAN IS AT LAST ABLE TO LOOK INWARD WITH GRACE AND CERTITUDE.
"Books which do not belong to great literature, books which do not command “the grand style,” often bring us closer to the mystery of life. They treat of the fundamental experience of man, of his “unalterable” human nature, in quite another way from that of the classical writers. They speak of this common fund which binds us not only to one another but to God. They speak of man as an integral part of the universe and not as a “sport of creation”. They speak of man as though to him alone it were given to discover the Creator. They link man’s destiny with the destiny of all creation; they do not make him a victim of fate or an “object of redemption.” In glorifying man they glorify the whole universe. They may not speak in the grand manner. As I have just said, they are less interested in language than in subject matter, more interested in ideas than in the thoughts which clothe them. As a consequence, they often appear to be poor writers, they lend themselves to ridicule and caricature. Nothing is easier to make sport of than the yearning for the sublime. Often, be it noted, this yearning is masked or concealed; often the author himself is not aware of what he seeks or what he states in veiled fashion. 
What is the subject matter of these oft despised books? Briefly, the web of life and death; the pursuit of identity through the drama of identification; the terrors of initiation; the lure of indescribable visions; the road to acceptance; the redemption of the creature world and the transformation of Nature; the final loss of memory, in God. Into the texture of such books is woven all that is symbolic and everlasting - not stars and planets but the deeps between them; not other worlds and their possibly fantastic inhabitants but the ladders that reach to them; not laws and principles but ever unfolding circles of creation and the hierarchies which constitute them.
As to the drama which informs these works, it has nothing to do with the individual versus society, nothing to do with the “conquest of bread,” nor has it even ultimately to do with the conflict between good and evil. It has to do with freedom. For not a line could have been written by the men I have in mind if man had ever known freedom or even what is meant by it. Here truth and freedom are synonymous. In these works the drama begins only when man voluntarily opens his eyes. This act, the sole one which may be said to have heroic significance, displaces all the sound and fury of historical substance. Outward bound, man is at last able to look inward with grace and certitude. No longer looking at life from the world plane, man ceases to be the victim of chance or circumstance: he “elects” to follow his vision. To become one with the imagination. From this moment on he begins to travel; all previous voyages were but circumnavigation."
(Henry Miller, The books in my life, 1969)

E2.2.C.2.4. The Paradox of Reflection (From Consciousness to Action): 
 only reflection is not enough and can even lead to paralysis. True freedom requires an act—a leap, a ritual, a commitment, or a "courage" that transcends mere analysis.

E2.2.C.2.4.a. "THE PRIVATE RITE [...] 
If we follow Baudelaire, it's a vicious circle and a tautology. I am free to take haschisch, but I cannot take haschisch unless I am first free. Concern prevents me from accessing the Neutral, yet I want the Neutral precisely to overcome concern. The problem must be externalized. What is problematic in Baudelaire's recommendation is that it reintroduces interiority into the ceremony. Yet, the more formal the ritual, the more pacifying its virtue. Don't try to fulfill rituals. Understand that ceremony introduces freedom rather than requiring it beforehand. A special case of a private ritual is the writer's secret ceremony for writing. A recent book by Rambures is an example of the amused irony of the small press (Pivot) at the writer's obsessions (pens, places, etc.). The idea is that it's crazy and not worth the effort. It's futile and derisive, but also affectionate and superior. These writers never do anything else. In response, Kafka and Janouch should be quoted: "My friend Ernest Lederer wrote poems with special light blue ink on beautiful handmade paper. I mentioned this to Kafka, who said, ‘He's right.’ Every magician has his ceremony. Haydn, for example, would not compose without first donning a solemnly powdered wig." Writing is indeed a way of evoking spirits.” [...]

A LITTLE SYMBOLISM
Why? For there to be freedom, there must be a little prohibition, the rule on which ceremony is based—ritual. Ceremony is a regulatory arrangement. In the emotional order, the purification of all ceremony is a kind of free wheel, a desert, or a storm (an emotional outburst).
We need a little symbolism in life. A good use of obsession is a little symbolism, which brings us back to the neutral. A lot of symbolism takes us away from it.
(Roland Barthes, The Neutral, Lectures at the Collège de France, 1977-1978)

E2.2.C.2.4.b. Introduction

[...]

This book tries to retain the ontological chance of each thing by considering each disposition of things as a direction of the circulation of being, justifiable so long as it is neither impossible nor makes itself impossible.

In order to clarify this idea, we represent possible distribution channels of being. The first model consists in conceiving of being as circulating from things which do not exist by themselves: predicates and accidents. Let us allow the quality of an entity to be represented by an arrow projecting being, which the quality has, onto the being of an entity that the quality describes. If I aim at the being of some redness, the texture of denim, and some cut or pattern in the form of an hourglass, I can imagine three arrows carrying the being of redness, the being of denim, and the being of the form of an hourglass towards a fourth arrow: a dress which is red, denim, and in the form of an hourglass. And yet the dress is not predicated on anything, while the redness, denim, or form of an hourglass are predicated on the dress. The dress directs the circulation of being into itself, into its self. At the end of its flight, the arrow of the dress aims at nothing other than itself. In this substantial model of the distribution of being, the being of some secondary entities flows towards the being of primary entities which flows in a closed channel. Being’s channel is blocked by the in-itself, which acts as a necessary buffer against its circulation. A thing, in the strict sense, is thus constituted by the distribution channel of a self-sustaining being, and of beings sustained by this primary being. These qualities are like tributaries of a river – substance – flowing towards its own ocean and its own source. In this essentially ancient and classical way of dividing things – from Plato and Aristotle to Kant and Hegel, and implicit in Confucianism and Samkhya – there is clearly a hierarchisation between what is carried towards something other than itself and this other thing which serves as its ontological support, supporting its proper being.

FIGURE 1: The substantial channel of being

The second model consists not in distributing being substantially, but vectorially. One thus conceives of trajectories of being, identified with events, facts, powers, intensities, or intentionality. These vectors of being are primary. They carry, support, and displace being, but without ever obtaining an end point or objective consistency. In such a representation, what is in the world is not identity but difference, trajectory, becoming, a continuous projection of being which never leads to a compact being, closed upon itself. There is no in-itself. Being is never like the flight of a boomerang. Nothing is self-contained or sealed. The ontological plane is open and extends through flows, forces, and becomings. To account for the apparent existence of things, of identifiable and re-identifiable stable entities, this model views the possibility of determining figures at the intersection of different trajectories. These figures are sealed, like the sides of a triangle made of plumes of transient smoke emitted from three aeroplanes scanning the sky. An observer may have the impression of perceiving a triangle in the sky, a determined figure inscribed in the conjunction of three different events or trajectories. In this essentially contemporary vectorial model (found in certain Nahua philosophies of Mexico, Nietzsche, Bergson, and evolutionary theory), things are considered as secondary effects, constructions, or illusions at the intersection of several events or vectors of being. 
Every epistemic domain – from cosmology to sociology (which divide spatiotemporal events or individuals into domains) and from biology to psychology (which define species within evolving processes or subjects among effects, actions, and reactions) – tends to secretly rely on models of the circulation of material, social, biological, or psychological being. But every epistemic domain must not and cannot have anything except substantial ontologies and vectorial ontologies.

FIGURE 2: The vectorial channel of being

Each division of things is accompanied by the development of some distribution channel of being. And if we want to divide things in a flat world in order to section off the accumulation of objects (which prevents us from being and from comprehending the world), we must find a non-substantial and non-vectorial way of allowing the being of things to circulate. Substantiality tends to compact being in the final stage of its process, over-determining self-saturated things or things in themselves. The pure eventuality of the vectors of being tends to dissolve and disseminate being, and transforms things into effects, illusions, or secondary realities. Our concept of a thing fits neither the first nor the second model. The first produces a thing which is too much of a thing, which is ‘compact’, while the second generates a thing which is not enough of a thing, which is only a construction or ephemeral projection. Our aim is the following: to conceive of a model that is neither too strong nor too weak, and to represent things that are really in the world without being in themselves. 
The only solution consists in constructing the following trajectory: being enters into a loop wherein being is not projected in itself, but cast outside itself. In our model, an arrow points inside to a circle – a thing – and then from this circle a second arrow points outside. 
Being comes inside a thing and being goes outside it. A thing is nothing other than the difference between being-inside [l’être entré] and being-outside [l’être sorti]. Accordingly, the channel of being is never blocked. Inside a thing, a thing is never itself. A thing is not in itself, but outside itself. Nonetheless, being is not eventually ‘pollinated’ by vectors, but has an objective end-point. Things correspond to the circle indicating the gap, difference, and inadequacy between the entering arrow and the exiting arrow, and are inscribed or imprinted in the world. 
To reinscribe things in the world is to situate them outside themselves (as substances) and outside us (as subjects). It is to arrange them outside themselves (their self and ourselves) in the world. The price to pay for this arrangement is a circulation of being that systematically distinguishes two senses [sens] of things: that which is in a thing and that in which a thing is, or that which it comprehends and that which comprehends it. 
Take, for example, a block of black slate, a random rectangular sample taken from a site of continental collision. Few people will deny that this block is a thing. One can of course point out that it

FIGURE 3: The thingly channel of being

is necessary to have an active subjectivity to divide or distinguish this block of matter lying on the ground of dusty soil, in order to perceive it as such. But this slice of black slate possesses certain qualities of cohesion and of solidity that allow one to dissociate it from its environment, handle it, transport it, and consider it quite simply as ‘something’. What is it composed of? It contains quartz, clay-like minerals, mica, some traces of feldspar. And all these components themselves have a certain atomic structure. But in a wider sense, they also enter into the constitution of the rock as ‘thing’: its rectangular form, the irregularities of its surface, the porphyroblasts coated with pyrite, its sombre color, its delicate texture, its weight, its fragility, and all the primary or secondary qualities by which we can recognise the black slate. 
We say that this is all that is in this thing, all paths of being that lead to the constitution of this black slate in my hand.
Yet, that in which this slate is can never be inferred from everything that is in this slate. From everything which composes it, I will not obtain the slate’s location in the world, the relations in which it inscribes itself, the fact that it is now in my hand, the function of a weapon that it can exercise if someone attacks me, its place in the landscape or in the series of slate pieces scattered alongside this valley. That which it is, this unique thing which exists in the world, and I hold in my hand, is outside itself. The slate can in fact enter into the composition of the side of a mountain, a roof, or a collection of rocks. As a whole, it then becomes a part of another thing, and it is no longer a question of that which is in the slate, but of that in which this slate is.
A number of things are in this black slate. The black slate on its own can enter into the composition of a number of other things. Therefore, the black slate is not in itself. It is not a substance on which various qualities are predicated – for example, its weight or its colour. No more is it an ephemeral entity, not existing in itself, constructed by my thought, senses, or action, from events or becomings (some variation in the matter’s density, some effects of geological transformation, a trajectory of luminous rays). No, the black slate is a relation, inscribed in the world, between the being that enters the world and the being that goes outside it, and that enters in turn into another thing (into the soil, landscape, classes of other objects, my perception, or the world in general). 
A thing is nothing other than the difference between that which is in this thing and that in which this thing is. Unless one guarantees this double sense, there are no thinkable things. Every reductionist who claims to deduce that which this or that thing is from that which composes this or that thing only succeeds in dissolving the very thing that they claim to account for. We attempt to accomplish the exact opposite of this: to guarantee things as invaluable differences embedded in the distribution channels of being of the world. To complete our task, we set out to discover the meaning which circulates among things, between that which composes them and that which they compose, inside or outside us, with or without us."
(Tristan Garcia, Form and Object, A Treatise on Things, 2011)


Illustrations:
- Circuit substantiel de l'être
- Circuit vectoriel de l'être
- Circuit chosal de l'être

Jiri Kolar, Autoportrait, 1971
Annelies Hofmeyr @wit_myt, Profile
René Magritte, The pilgrim, 1966
Veruschka & Holger Trulzsch, Mimicry Dress Art, 1970-73

"The self is not something. The self is a process through
which being and comprehension are mutually excluded, a process
whereby what is a thing is not confounded with what a thing is.
Therefore, there is no self-consciousness. There is only consciousness
of the world. The self is the shadow of a doubt of everything
that casts some light. The self is what prevents every relation
of self to self, and allows a relation to the world, to something
other than itself. The self is only closed to itself as a thing is in the
world.  [...]
So the tragedy is the realization of the inverse relationship between being and understanding: what I am, I will never understand, what I understand, I will never be. [...] If I think I understand myself, it is not myself that I understand; for I have already squared myself. If I am this or that, I don't understand it. Sometimes, with the passage of time, I switch from being to understanding: how did I not see that I was like that! But just then erupts nostalgia, our split relationship to time, the time when I was something without knowing it, when I was doing something without knowing what I was doing. [...]
What I am, I cannot understand precisely: as long as I am something and in the while I am that thing, it escapes me. Who understands it ? Someone else ? Society ? The community ? A God ? Space-time? The world ? All that I am not, comprises me. I am the only one who doesn’t understand what I am. Every human being is a complete idiot : everything except himself understands him, understands what he is, and so he lives on, sometimes - very seldom - being able to catch a glimpse in a false mirrors of what others and what the world understand of him. He will never but have an indirect idea of what he is, exiled as he is from himself."
(Tristan Garcia, Form and Object - a treatise on things, 2011)

Art: 
- Jiri Kolar, Autoportrait, 1971
- Annelies Hofmeyr @wit_myt, Profile
- René Magritte, The pilgrim, 1966
- Veruschka & Holger Trulzsch, - Mimicry Dress Art, 1970-73
- Tristan Garcia, The circuit of being of things, 2011


"Part III [...]

I. Being is Being Comprehended

1. Can one be without being something? Either one is something (a thing is another thing: a lamp is a source of light), or one is something other than something (a thing is the world: a lamp is (in) the world, a light is (in) the world). Either one is a thing, or one is the world. Being nothing is still being something (since nothing is something, even if it is only a word, a false concept, or the union between a before-thing, the negative contemporaneous with a thing, and the absence following the thing). Therefore, being is not one member of a pair such as being and nothingness, being and non-being, being and becoming, being and beings. Being is not opposed as a whole to another thing.
2. Being has no opposite, but it has an opposite sense: comprehending. Being this or being that is belonging to this or that, being in this or that. We say that this or that ‘comprehends’ that which is this or that.
The sense of ‘being’ is the opposite sense of ‘comprehending’. The sense of ‘comprehending’ is the opposite sense of ‘being’. Being can only be explained through comprehending, and vice versa. 
3. Being is being comprehended. Comprehending is being been [être été]. The active sense of one is the passive sense of the other. 
4. Being is a sense attributed to the relation between two things or between a thing and that which is not a thing.
5. Being is not primary, which means both that no being is in itself and that no being is before things. Being is secondary and the handmaiden of things, which means that being is the sense attributed to one thing in relation to another thing. If being is secondary and things are primary, how can one claim or know that there is something? To have something, must something not be?
6. To be something, the thing must be in something-other-thanitself; this is its only condition.
7. To be something, it is not first necessary that something be, but rather that both something and something-other-than-something be, so that one may be the other.
8. If there is only something, then there is not something.
9. Something is, if something has something other than itself to be, if something is not compact. 
10. Thing and world are in this way primary. Being and comprehension make a thing be the world and the world comprehend a thing. Being and comprehension are secondary.
11. Comprehending something is ‘being been’ by this thing. If I comprehend this, it is because this is in me. If that comprehends me, it is because I am in that.
12. Comprehending something is not the same as being this something. The whole comprehends the part, but the whole cannot be this part. If the whole were this part, it would then be necessary that the whole be in the part – in which case, this thing would be compact.
13. It is possible to be something if and only if this something does not comprehend this something. One does not comprehend what one is. One is not what one comprehends.
14. Comprehending is having something inside itself. Comprehending is also comprehending an element by being a set; comprehending one quality by being a substrata of qualities; comprehending someone by appreciating or paying attention to this someone; assimilating a way of thinking or an idea; having a part when one is a composite; or comprehending a temporal, historical, or evolutionary moment in a longer timespan.
15. Being is belonging to something. Being is also having a quality; being an organism; being in a situation, that is, being situated in some thing, and, more precisely, in a series of objects in each other, like Russian dolls but impossible to completely hierarchise; being a body; being a history; being a social function; being a community; being a language; being a consciousness; or being a sexual organism. But being is also being what is not something, namely, being the world.
Being the world and being in the world are equivalent.
16. Being is entering.
17. Being is not a mystery.
18. Being is a sense attributed to the relation between something and what contains this something, or between something and what this something contains. Insofar as no thing is as a whole, each thing enters and is entered. The direction from the entering to the entered, we call ‘being’. The direction from the entered to the entering, we call comprehension.
19. A thing is not a unit that one could arrange on a (material or thought) plane, so as to say: this thing is this or this thing is that, by identifying this thing with a name, idea, or something else as a whole. A thing always marks the difference between two senses or directions of being: that which enters into and that which goes out.
20. Being makes the difference between that which enters into a thing, and that into which the thing enters. But what is the thing really? Does the thing have any consistency, like a thin layer of being separating what is in this layer and what this layer is in? Things really manifest a solidity or a matter, since I can touch them or hold them in my hand. Things have a matter, which is everything which enters into these things. But things are not their matter, since things are not in their matter.
21. One never grasps something as a whole. One divides something and one can obtain it through one side of being or through another: through that which is the thing or through that which the thing is. But one will never reconcile the thing as a whole, as a very compact unit in my hand. For, if one made being a thing as a whole, without distinguishing that which is the thing and that which the thing is, one would situate the thing outside the world, and there would not be anything to be this thing.
22. The thing is primary, but it is dyadic. Being is simple, but it is secondary."
(Tristan Garcia, Form and Object, A Treatise on Things, 2011)

Être, du point de vue objectif, c’est avoir un rapport avec une chose, une seule, qui a ce même rapport avec d’autres. C’est un effet d’infériorité compensé par la chance, en comprenant moins que ce que l’on est, d’être quelque chose de plus. 

Dans [...]

Être, c’est non seulement être dans, mais entrer, ce qui signifie sinon un mouvement, du moins un sens : être, c’est un rapport orienté, c’est un des deux sens possibles du rapport entre deux choses ou entre une chose et autre chose qu’une chose. 

Être, c’est entrer en appartenance avec quelque chose qui nous comprend. [...]

Comprendre, c’est donc entretenir un rapport inégal : entrer en relation avec une chose et une autre chose au moins, sans que ces deux choses puissent avoir entre elles ce même rapport - comme aimer également deux personnes qui ne s’aiment pas. Comprendre le comportement de certaines personnes, c’est me rapporter à chacune d’entre elles d’une manière qu’elles n’entretiennent pas entre elles ou vis-à-vis de moi. [...]

Être, c’est entrer dans ; comprendre, c’est en sortir. Comprendre objectivement, c’est avoir un même rapport avec plusieurs choses qui ne peuvent avoir entre elles ce rapport (et c’est ne pouvoir entretenir avec soi ce même rapport) : comprendre, c’est faire à une pluralité de choses un effet identique qu’elles ne peuvent produire les unes sur les autres, et qu’on ne peut avoir sur soi. C’est un effet de supériorité compensé par l’impossibilité à être ce qu’on comprend. 

Être, du point de vue objectif, c’est avoir un rapport avec une chose, une seule, qui a ce même rapport avec d’autres. C’est un effet d’infériorité compensé par la chance, en comprenant moins que ce que l’on est, d’être quelque chose de plus. [...]

Entre 

Dans la mesure où l’être est un certain sens du rapport entre les choses, toute chose est prise dans un double rapport d’être : ce qui est cette chose, c’est-à-dire ce qui entre en elle ; ce que cette chose est, c’est-à-dire ce dans quoi elle-même entre. 

Formellement, « ce qui est une chose » correspond à sa matière, « ce qu’est une chose » à sa forme, c’est-à-dire au monde. Du point de vue formel, toutes les choses ont la même forme, puisqu’elles entrent toutes solitairement dans le monde. 

Objectivement, ce qui est une chose, ce sont des objets, c’est-à-dire des choses qui sont dans cette chose et qui la composent ; ce qu’est la chose, ce peut être la grosse chose dans laquelle elle entre parmi d’autres objets. 

Il y a ce qui est cette chaise, ce qui est l’idée de justice, ce qui est un homme, ce qui est rouge, ce qui est un superamas, d’une part, et il y a ce qu’est une chaise, ce qu’est la justice, ce qu’est un homme, ce qu’est le rouge, ce qu’est un superamas, d’autre part. Les concepts d’extension et de compréhension logique ne rendent qu’imparfaitement compte de ces deux bouts du sens de l’être. D’abord parce qu’il ne s’agit pas que d’un problème logique de concept (de son extension, de sa compréhension), mais du problème de l’être même des choses. Ensuite, parce qu’ils ne montrent pas à quel point ce qui est une chose et ce que cette chose est correspondent simplement au déplacement de la chose en question : dans ce qui est la chose, la chose est l’aboutissement du rapport d’être, dans ce que la chose est, elle marque le point de départ de ce rapport. Toute chose existe entre le fait d’être et le fait d’« être été ». 

Je peux demander ce que c’est qu’une chaise, je peux demander ce qui est une chaise : je ne peux demander d’un seul tenant, par une seule question quel est l’être d’une chaise. En demandant ce que c’est qu’une chaise, je laisse ouvert, par l’autre bout, une part de l’être de la chaise : l’« être été » de la chaise. 

Aucune question et aucune réponse ne referment l’être d’une chose : en portant sur ce qu’est la chose, elle ouvre la question de ce qui l’est, en portant sur ce qui est la chose, elle ouvre la question de ce qu’elle est. L’être d’une chose n’est jamais d’un seul tenant, parce que la chose n’a de sens qu’entre ce qui I’est et ce qu’elle est. « Chaise » désigne le point de rencontre et en même temps la disjonction de ce qui est, de ce qui entre dans une chaise, et de ce qu’une chaise est, de ce dans quoi elle entre. [...]

 

Or, ce qu’une chaise est dépend de ce dans quoi elle est : il y a ce que la chaise est dans cette pièce, dans cet espace ; il y a ce qu’elle est dans ma perception ; ce qu’elle est dans mon souvenir ; ce qu’elle est dans le langage ; ce qu’elle est dans notre culture ; ce qu’elle est dans l’ensemble des meubles ; il a ce qu’elle est, formellement, dans le monde. 

Dans le monde, la chaise n’est rien de plus et rien de moins qu’une chose. Dans un espace déterminé, dans un champ symbolique, dans un champ historique, culturel, dans et pour un sujet déterminé, elle est une chose déterminée, et différemment déterminée. 

La chose « chaise » change suivant ce dans quoi elle est chose ; ainsi, toute chose n’est pas une substance, assurée d’une identité en soi, mais quelque chose de changeant dont la forme varie avec les variations de sa matière, ce qu’elle est transformant ce qui l’est, et inversement. 

Pour autant, les choses ne sont pas des réalités éphémères : à partir de l’instant où une chose a commencé d’être possible, elle ne cesse jamais de l’être ; mais notre pensée, notre connaissance, notre perception n’arrêtent pas de passer d’une chose à l’autre en identifiant une chose à la suivante, de sorte que c’est l’activité d’un être sensible, en général, qui conduit à produire des choses changeantes. C’est moi qui identifie cette chaise, ici et maintenant, à la chaise qui était ici il y a quelques minutes, quelques secondes, c’est moi qui substantialise pour un moment la chaise, en identifiant diverses choses à un seul et même objet, puis en transformant le temps qui passe en un cadre au sein duquel ce que j’ai identifié comme étant la même chaise change légèrement, avec le passage du temps. [...]

E2.2.C.2.4.c.

E1.6.D.3.7.wXXXXX THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN KNOWING AND UNDERSTANDING
The key is to understand, meaning to apply knowledge to transform one's life, rather than merely accumulating it.

E2.2.C.2.4.d. A_Aaron Siskind_Pleasures and Terrors of Levitation # 99_1961 ;  A_Aaron Siskind_Pleasures and Terrors of Levitation #471_1954

"One of the things the story teaches us is this: Read yourself as a fiction as well as a fact.

When I was growing up poor in a poor place with a pair of Pentecostal parents who were waiting for Jesus to return and roll up time and space like a scroll, I never thought my life was narrow or my chances bleak. I thought I was Heathcliff, Huck Finn, Hotspur, Aladdin, the Big Bad Wolf. The Fish with a Golden Ring.

And later, when I had left home at sixteen and was living in a Mini, I had my favourite books stashed in the boot and whenever I could be in the library, I was there. This wasn’t a fantasy world or escapism — though it was an escape; it was the hidden door in the blank wall. Open it.

I opened the book and went through.

The escape into another story reminds us that we too are another story. Not caught, not confined, not predestined, not only one gender or passion. Learning to read yourself as a fiction as well as a fact is liberating — it is the difference between energy and mass. Mass is the beloved object — the world we can touch and feel — but mass is also the dead weight in ourselves and others.

Shifting the dead weight takes energy but at its atomic core the dead weight is energy. Transforming mass into energy, energy into mass is what creative work is about. An idea becomes embodied. A tragedy is released."
(Jeanette Winterson, Oranges Are Not the Only Fruit, 1985)

E2.2.C.2.4.e. "Once you stop expecting a response, you'll be able to give in a way that the other person will accept and rejoice in the gift." Above all, never seek consensus as a measure of duty or verification of the rightness of your commitment. He broke new ground simply because he had the courage to continue without wondering whether others would follow or understand him. He had no need for protection against ridicule, which others seek by sharing responsibility, because he had a faith that renounced proof."
(D. Hammarskjöld, Milestones, 1950 — quoted by Carlo Ossola in En pure perte, Le renoncement et le gratuit, 2011).
(1) At the same time: "Myth has always condemned those who 'looked back,' whatever paradise they had left behind. That is why this shadow follows you with every step you take away from your choice, Morgenlandfahrer ('Voyager to the Land of the Dawn')" 
(Hermann Hesse).

E2.2.C.2.4.f. "MATURITY

[...] Maturity is the breakdown of elemental frontiers, between different epochs of our life, between life and death, between the part of us that has been a fine, upstanding citizen and the darker, helpless parts of us that have caused harm and damage. Maturity is the time when these tidal forces meet and break apart our life, making one life out of our regrets, our self-compassion, and our forgiveness forged into a future made real by a radical change in our behaviour: real maturity can only be sustained by real silence, by a daily discipline of silence and an inhabitation of spaciousness, a foundational giving away. Maturity is the discipline of giving up and giving away, to see what is left and what is real. [...]

Our previous stage of immaturity always beckons, offering a false haven and false accounting, an ersatz safety in one state or the other: a hiding place and disappearance in the past, a false isolation of the present, or an unobtainable sure prediction of the future. But maturity beckons also, asking us to be larger, more fluid, more elemental, less cornered, less unilateral; a living, conversational intuition between the inherited story, the one we are privileged to inhabit, and the one if we are large enough and broad enough, moveable enough and, even, here enough - just, astonishingly, about to occur."
(David Whyte, Consolations, The Solace, Nourishment and Underlying Meaning of Everyday Words, 2015)

E2.2.C.2.25. "STORAGE
When I moved from one house to another 
there were many things I had no room 
for. What does one do? I rented a storage 
space. And filled it. Years passed. 
Occasionally I went there and looked in, 
but nothing happened, not a single 
twinge of the heart.
As I grew older the things I cared 
about grew fewer, but were more 
important. So one day I undid the lock 
and called the trash man. He took 
everything.
I felt like the little donkey when 
his burden is finally lifted. Things! 
Burn them, burn them! Make a beautiful 
fire! More room in your heart for love, 
for the trees! For the birds who own 
nothing-the reason they can fly."
(Mary Oliver, Felicity, 2015)

E2.2.C.2.26. "MATURATION (VS MODELING) [...]
I find it remarkable that the ancient Chinese art of war does not think in terms of modeling and application — that is, means to an end — but rather in terms of conditions and consequences, and consequently, processes and maturation. As we know, a good general is not one who draws up a plan in advance but one who, based on an 'assessment' of the encountered conditions (the ancient meaning of ji), detects advantageous factors and realizes this potential. Even this 'bringing' is too active and directive. It is better to say that he promotes the development of these favorable conditions by exploiting what constitutes a favorable 'terrain' [...]; or, as Laozi says, he helps what comes of its own accord. The art of strategy is to ensure the desired result comes from situational development. There is no "goal" to aim for, strictly speaking, but rather, a profit to be "reaped" (harvested, written li, the ear of corn and the sickle to cut it). As long as these conditions are not ripe, he does not intervene or "act." When he acts, he no longer has to "act"—the famous theme of "non-action," wu wei. This is not at all a renunciation or passivity; success comes to him like a ripe fruit ready to fall. This does not imply patience, a moral and psychological quality linked to the subject, but rather the ability to let the situation produce its own effects from the "seed" that has been sown, developing as it does on its own. I wait until the situation has matured before intervening, and even then, I intervene minimally. [...]
According to Mencius (II, A, 2), a farmer must refrain from "pulling on the shoots" to make them grow. In other words, he must not seek the effect "directly." Otherwise, he would force the ongoing process, and the plant would soon wither. By importing and imposing his plan, he would produce the opposite effect. Should he then stand passively at the edge of the field and watch it grow? Should he wait for it to grow? What should he "do"? Every farmer knows to hoe and weed at the base of the shoots at intervals from one day to the next to encourage growth. Neither pull on the shoots (activism) nor watch them grow (passivity); neither force the process nor ignore it. There is nothing brilliant or heroic about this ("there is nothing to praise in the great general..."). It is modest and discreet, yet effective. Growth can be initiated, stimulated, and assisted, but it happens by itself in its course.
This is true of all maturation, including that of the inner self. As Mencius tells us, it follows its own course, like the flow of water. Water only advances gradually. Let us understand this seemingly empty phrase: "Until it has filled the cavity in its path, water does not go any further" (VII, A, 24). Now, "penetrating" and "understanding" are also maturation processes: they involve accumulation and gradual progression, producing self-unfolding beyond our control. It is impossible to skip steps, leap over milestones, or force understanding. Conversely, each time water fills the cavity it encounters, it overflows of its own accord in order to move forward. It continues to progress unperturbed, carried by its own movement. The same is true of the mind. From what has begun to become clear within us through our efforts, the light we have gained spreads gradually, communicating from one thought to another and from one reason to the next without our knowledge. It spreads spontaneously through branching connections. This continues until, one day, we finally reap the fruit like a hard-won victory and suddenly believe that we "have an idea," "eureka," that we have "found" it."
(François Jullien, Chinese Thought vs. Philosophy, 2015)

E2.2.C.2.29. Sometimes, realization isn't rational.

"A minimum of unconsciousness is necessary if one wants to stay inside history. To act is one thing; to know one is acting is another. When lucidity invests the action, insinuates itself into it, action is undone and, with it, prejudice, whose function consists, precisely, in subordinating, in enslaving consciousness to action. The man who unmasks his fictions renounces his own resources and, in a sense, himself. "
(Emil Cioran, The Temptation to Exist, 1956)

Art:
- Erika Verzutti_Cisne com martelo

VLADIMIR JANKÉLÉVITCH DISCUSSES THE BLINDERS OF COURAGE AND ITS TRUE SOURCE, WHICH IS LOVE, NOT REASON.
"Reasonable, cautious prudence is therefore a negative virtue, a virtue of inaction and immobility. Such is the aptly named 'circumspection,' because it looks all around—to the right, to the left, and behind—instead of facing forward. It lacks, in its excessive foresight and concern, a little of that fruitful narrowness without which nothing can be begun or created. According to Boehme and Schelling, this narrowness is the condition of all revelation. It lacks the blinders of courage!" This beneficial ignorance is so vital to us that we create a kind of artificial forgetfulness through fiction or convention in order to breathe, dispel suspicions, and regain confidence. Courageous decisions are always made in the darkness of momentary blindness and with our eyes closed. Even when deliberate, they seem like an adventurous option and a coin toss at the last minute. On the verge of performing the somersault itself—and not just taking on its conceptual and Platonic responsibility—they utter that sharp, Gordian, inescapable fiat that allows them to cross the threshold of reality and the Rubicon of action effectively. Courage is a learned ignorance, a kind of sharpened and infinitely diminished science whose sharp point coincides with action." [...]
These prospects immobilize the will, causing it to hesitate and vacillate as it becomes bogged down in endless deliberations. Yet, things are not so simple. After all, reason is right, and the phronetic apprehensions of practical intelligence are the truth. The fact remains that the risk must be taken, despite reason showing us the chances it offers. Courage is neither a syllogism—in which two premises (called "major" and "minor") are given propositions assumed to be true, validating the conclusion—nor instantaneous reasoning. Reasoning tells us what to do if we must do it, but not that we must do it. It does not itself do what it says. Courage is not wisdom, but rather, to use the language of St. Paul, it is a folly that denies wisdom. The right to be blind must be earned through clear-sightedness. "If we want proof before we act, we will never get to the point of acting," declares Newman, who urges us to take responsibility for our faith. Nietzsche, for his part, insists on the irrational and violent nature of any decision in which the intellect proposes and the will disposes. The creator, for example, leaps across the vertiginous abyss that separates knowledge from power. The hero acts immediately through the radiant and converting power of his being and not the convincing force of his words. It is the heroic example itself that is the art of persuasion! Such is the courageous man: we do not sense in him that dampening stuff that in phlegmatic people stands between intention and decision and blocks the passage to action; the interval between saying and doing is reduced to a minimum, to an instant, to almost nothing. Without clarity, nothing begins, but with clarity alone, nothing is achieved, unless ideas are combined with a heterogeneous force, which alone is effective and capable of action. Intelligence takes us as far as possible along the path to decision, but there are things it cannot do in place of courage; it cannot replace the irreplaceable moment; it does not dispense us from that vertiginous fiat which is the sole sufficient and decisive cause of the act."
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, The Virtues and Love I, 1970)

"SINCERITY [...]
If sincerity is unconditionally good, then it must embody an instantaneous act of courage. It requires a violent and costly effort to decide to be oneself and effectively assume the truth. Does this not entail a victory over self-love and self-interest? Sincerity takes courage, but it leads to modesty and justice. Perhaps it is ultimately just a certain way of loving. In this way, all virtues are represented in it. Above all, sincerity mends the tear in the conscience of a divided person. Sincerity restores a kind of innocence—an innocence of conscious adults. It therefore lies halfway between false consciousness, which is an unhappy semi-consciousness, and complete consciousness, which is a regained unconsciousness. It is the passage from mixed to pure, from bad conscience to good conscience, and from falsehood to innocence."
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, The Virtues and Love I, 1970)


"We have shown how justice stems from revolutionary violence and how normativity merely consecrates initial effectiveness. Order is a disorder that has succeeded, and loyalty requires a threshold of courage to brave backward-looking superstition and misoneist panic (fear of novelty or change). Loyalty requires an initial unfaithful choice, perhaps a denial. A first choice, but not just any choice. A first disorder, but a brilliant one, a disorder of love. The Gospel says love is gentle, 'mitis'; in this respect, love would be more like violence. Halfway between destructive violence and conformist good nature, isn't creative violence the gushing source of values? Like insurrection, love overturns a certain justice to establish another that contradicts it. Therefore, in essence, it is both faithful and unfaithful, boldly setting a bad example of conversion."
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, The Virtues and Love I, 1970)

"Sometimes
Saying "fuck it"
Will give you the courage
To do exactly
What your heart
Is begging you to do."
(Michael Tavon)

E2.2.C.2.38. ERIK ERIKSON ARGUES FOR A HUMBLE, HUMANISTIC, AND DEMOCRATIC FREEDOM. TRUE FREEDOM AND PROGRESS COME NOT FROM A "FOOLPROOF SYSTEM" DESIGNED BY EXPERTS, BUT FROM A "CONTINUING INTERPLAY BETWEEN THAT WHICH WE, AS STUDENTS, ARE GRADUALLY LEARNING AND THAT WHICH WE GENERALLY BELIEVE IN, AS PEOPLE."
“We concluded that only a gradually accruing sense of identity, based on the experience of social health and cultural solidarity at the end of each major childhood crisis, promises that periodical balance in human life which-in integration of the ego stages-makes for a sense of humanity. But wherever this sense is lost, wherever integrity yields to despair and disgust, wherever generativity yields to stagnation, intimacy to isolation, and identity to diffusion, an array of associated infantile fears are apt to be-come mobilized: For the superego is the internalization of the external inequality of parent and child; and only an ego identity safely anchored in the "patrimony" of a cultural identity can balance the superego in order to produce a workable equilibrium.
In the last section of this book I have illustrated some of the problems which face the youth of the world of today. Industrial revolution, world-wide communication, standardization, centralization, and mechanization threaten the identities which man has inherited from primitive, agrarian, feudal, and patrician cultures.
What inner equilibrium these cultures had to offer is now endangered on a gigantic scale. As the fear of loss of identity dominates much of our irrational motivation, it calls upon the whole arsenal of fear which is left in each individual from the mere fact of his childhood. In this emergency masses of people become ready to seek salvation in some reactionary pseudo identity.
At this point I would not blame the reader for sympathizing with Socrates, who, as he drank the cup of poison, calmly watched the numbness creep upon him and asked his friends to give an offering to Asclepius, the god of medicine, since it was only in being poisoned that he expected to be cured. Matters do not im-prove by the insight (in the foregoing indicated only by a few suggestions) that the anxieties outlined reach into adult life, and this not only in the form of neurotic anxiety, which, after all, is kept in bounds by most and can be cured in some; but more terrifyingly in the form of collective panics and afflictions of the collective mind. In fact, the anxieties named in the preceding pages could be taken out of their context of childhood and serve as headings for a treatise on group panics and their propagandistic exploitation.
This then is one of our jobs: to perfect methods which, in given situations, facilitate the elucidation of such prejudices, apprehensions, and lapses of judgment as emanate from infantile rage and from the resulting rigidity of the adult's defenses against his own latent anxiety.
Assuming that our clinical experience has led us to detect meaningful connections in the relationship between the anxieties of infancy and the upheavals of society, what order of insight is this and what kind of power does it offer us? Will the utilization of this knowledge help us create synthetic child-training systems which will manufacture the desired kind of personality in our children? Can it help us to look through the infantile weaknesses of our enemies so that we may outsmart them? And should we harbor such hopes would insight thus applied really still be in-sight?
Our knowledge of these matters is based on the study of anxiety and therefore highlights primarily the ways in which anxiety is produced and exploited. We can (as I pointed out in the first chapter) make the origin of individual anxiety retroactively plausible by analysis: but we have only begun to study the combination of elements which, in a given case, would have resulted in an interesting variation of, rather than a neurotic deviation from, human functioning. We have studied variations less than we have studied deviations, and this for the reason that variations get along so well without us.
In psychoanalytic circles, we have witnessed a little private history of tentative child-training systems dedicated to instinct indulgence or to the avoidance of anxiety in our children. We know that not infrequently only a new system of superstitions has resulted. Obsessively comparing variations of childhoods to the childhood memories of adult deviants, some of us have inadvertently driven our children into an identification with our patients. At least, one little son of a psychiatrist recently expressed it in so many words: when this carefully and considerately brought up child was asked what he wanted to be when big and strong, he said, "A patient." He meant, of course, that he wanted to be the kind of being who seemed so absorbingly interesting to his parents. Since he has said it, there is hope that he will not need to do it, and that his parents will learn from him in time. But such experiences should show us that it is not easy to construct by mere scientific synthesis a foolproof system which will lead our children in a desired direction and avoid an undesirable one. Obviously, good can come only from a continuing interplay between that which we, as students, are gradually learning and that which we generally believe in, as people.
In the matter of societal processes, too, we begin to know some-thing about the place of anxiety, superstition, and unscrupulous propaganda in collective grumblings, upheavals, and transformations. But we do not know half so well in what way a new idea suddenly does the seemingly impossible and creates or maintains a variation of civilization in the midst of an apparent chaos of deviant contradictions.
The situation here is rather similar to that in the field of atomic research. There, physicists have, under the pressure of a danger to our civilization, striven in shortest order to perfect work of the highest theoretical and most far-reaching practical significance. The public, on the whole, is inclined to say "thank you" for an inconceivable weapon, leaving it to the scientists to find defense weapons equal to the offensive danger which they have created, and relying, for the rest, on the good old ways of professional diplomacy. The scientists have organized to enlighten the public, but they themselves cannot create and govern a new international organization which alone would meet the danger which they know so well. To build a super-cyclotron is one thing; to build a super-state another. The scientists have at their disposal only the voice of enlightenment, hope in mankind, and their own scientific ethics. They do not have an easy time of it, because (whatever their declared loyalties and unalterable commitments) there is a point where scientific ethos and armament races do not live well together in one identity, and on being forced together endanger the very spirit of inquiry.
In our field, too, we know some of the story, but not the whole story. We have seen spectacular evidences of the fact that psychoanalytic constructs serve to clarify unconscious dynamics. We have studied convincing cures and shocking reverses. We have offered surprising clarifications in the field of motivational forces, and we are firmly approaching the study of society. Yet emergencies prevail upon us to offer our judgment regarding societal and international events. Some of us respond by taking on as so many patients the problems of social organization. Others put their faith in what is called interdisciplinary teamwork, a kind of halt-and-blind co-operation, in which a social scientist with little psycho-logical vision carries in piggy-back fashion a psychologist who has not learned to move with ease in the larger events of this world, so that together they may grope their way through con-temporary history. But I think that our work must contribute more significantly to a new manner of man, one whose vision keeps up with his power of locomotion, and his action with his boundless thinking. Only in so far as our clinical way of work becomes part of a judicious way of life can we help to counteract and reintegrate the destructive forces which are being let loose by the split in modern man's archaic conscience.
Judiciousness in its widest sense is a frame of mind which is tolerant of differences, cautious and methodical in evaluation, just in judgment, circumspect in action, and in spite of all this apparent relativism-capable of faith and indignation. Its opposite is prejudice, an outlook characterized by prejudged values and dogmatic divisions; here everything seems to be clearly delineated and compartmentalized, and this by "nature," wherefore it must stay forever the way it always has been. By thus relying on pre-conceived notions the prejudiced frame of mind creates a rigidity which can become uncomfortable; but it has the advantage of per mitting the projection of everything that feels alien within one's own heart on some vague enemy outside a mechanism which makes for a certain limited stability and standardization, until a catastrophe endangers the whole brittle structure of preconceptions. The judicious outlook, in turn, permits a greater flexibility and variability, but it admittedly endangers the unbalanced and neurotic individual who may choose to pursue it. As he abandons all prejudice, he forfeits the mechanism of projection: his danger becomes introspection and "introjection," an over-concern with the evil in himself. One may say that he becomes prejudiced against himself. Some measure of this must be tolerated by men of good will. Men of good will must learn to fear accurately and to cope judiciously with the anxiety aroused by a renunciation of prejudice. Psychoanalysis has done the groundwork here; new forms of communication must cement the fundament; society must build the structure.”
(Erik Erikson, Childhood And Society, 1950)

E2.2.C.3. Engagement and Purpose: Develop the idea that freedom manifests in our capacity to set goals, engage in projects, and give meaning to our existence beyond mere determination.

E2.2.C.3.1. Freedom is not a passive state but an active project. It's the conscious "labor" of transforming the "work of necessity" (determinism) into a "work of free solution" (purpose).

E2.2.C.3.1.a.

E1.6.F.2.7.a_REF1_PH.wXXXXX UNLIKE REVENGE, WHICH PERPETUATES THE CONSEQUENCES OF WRONGDOING, FORGIVENESS FREES BOTH THE ONE WHO FORGIVES AND THE ONE WHO IS FORGIVEN, thus breaking the cycle of the relentless automatism of revenge.
(Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition, 1958)

E2.2.C.3.1.b. THERE IS A FREEDOM IN VERBALIZING THE ASSIGNMENT TO WHICH WOMEN ARE SUBJECTED.
"In the 1930s, Sartre and Beauvoir enjoyed life. In La force de l'âge, written after the liberation, Beauvoir abandoned the idea of solipsistic happiness. The war had made her realize that she shared the fate of everyone else. From then on, she asked herself what it meant to be me. To do so, she had to understand what it meant to be a woman for me, for other women, and for men. Bad faith is ignoring your situation. It was from her situation as a woman that she proposed reinventing freedom.
For Manon Garcia, being a woman — regardless of sex, gender, or trans status — means being among those discriminated against on sexist grounds in a patriarchal society. There is a freedom in verbalizing the the assignment to which women are subjected. Some accept it; others contest it. It is a personal question. The realization from which we must start is that submission is proposed as a destiny for women."
(Manon Garcia, feminist philosopher, Les Chemins de la Philosophie program, broadcast on France Culture on October 5, 2018)

Listen to the podcast in French:
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/profession-philosophe-manon-garcia

E2.2.C.3.1.c. WE CREATE A SAFE AND PREDICTABLE WORLD ("EXPLORED TERRITORY") NOT THROUGH PASSIVE HABITUATION, BUT THROUGH AN "ACTIVE... SUCCESSFUL CREATIVE EXPLORATION."
“Habitual and familiar actions are useful there, instead of the frightened, tentative or exploratory behaviors that serve where nothing is certain. Habits and familiar actions exist, as a general rule, because they have been successful, because their implementation suffices to transform what would otherwise be unexplored territory into a safe and fruitful haven. As we have been at pains  to demonstrate, the unknown does not lose its a priori motivational significance— promise and threat—because of the passive process of “habituation.” Adaptation is  active. “Habituation,” except in the most trivial of senses, is the consequence of  successful creative exploration, which means generation of behavioral patterns that turn  the indeterminate meaning of something newly encountered into something positive, at  best—neutral, at worst. Is fire dangerous, or beneficial? It depends on how it is  approached—which is to say, fire has context-dependent potential for harm and for  benefit. Which of its many “potentials” fire actually manifests depends on what  behavioral strategy is undertaken in its presence. Fire heats our homes. Now and then— when we are insufficiently cautious—it burns one of them down. What fire does—which  is to say, what it is, from the perspective of motivational significance—depends on how  we treat it.   We have lost our fear of fire, not because we have habituated to it, but because we  have learned how to control it. We have learned to specify and limit its “intrinsically”  ambivalent affective valence, through modification of our own behavior, in its presence.  Fire, insofar as we can control it, has been rendered predictable, nonthreatening—even  familiar and comforting. All things we can control (which means, can bend to our own  ends) have been likewise rendered predictable—by definition. The “territory” of  “explored territory” is defined, at least in general, by security. Secure territory is that  place where we know how to act. “Knowing how to act” means “being sure that our  current actions will produce the results desired in the future.” The affective significance  of the phenomena that comprise “explored territory” have been mapped. This map takes  the form of the story, which describes the valence of present occurrences, the form of the  desired future, and the means that might serve usefully to transform the former into the  latter. Any territories our stories serve to render beneficial constitute “home ground.”   Home ground—explored territory—is that place where unfamiliar things do not exist.  Many of the things we encounter, however, are other people. This means that “explored  territory” is also that place where unfamiliar behaviors are not encountered. On familiar  ground, we engage in those activities that are habitual, alongside others, who are doing  the same thing (who are pursuing the same goals, whose emotions can be understood,  whose beliefs are the same as ours, whose actions are predictable). Much of what we  know how to do is behavior matched to society—individual action matched to, adapted  to, modified by, the cumulative behavior of the others who surround us. “Explored”  necessarily means, therefore, “where human activity has been rendered predictable,” as  well as “where the course of ‘natural’ events can be accurately determined.” The maps  that make territory familiar consequently consist in large part of representations of  behavior—personal behavior, which we manifest, and the behavior of others, which we  constantly encounter, and to which we have adjusted our personal actions. So, we map  our own behaviors and those of others, because such behaviors constitute a large part of  the world. We do not always understand what we do, however—our actions cannot be  said to be explicitly comprehended. Our behavioral patterns are exceedingly complex,  and psychology is a young science. The scope of our behavioral wisdom exceeds the  breadth of our explicit interpretation. We act, even instruct, and yet do not understand.  How can we do what we cannot explain?
We have already seen that we can represent what we do not understand—that we derive knowledge about the nature of the unknown (about the fact that it is eternally frightening and promising), by watching how we behave in its presence. We do something similar with regard to the social world and the behaviors that compose it. We watch how others act—and imitate, and learn to act, in consequence. Furthermore, we learn to represent the social world—explored territory, in large part—by watching the actions that take place in it; by exploring the social world itself. These representations are first patterns of actions, then stories—once the nature of the behavioral patterns have been identified, and represented in a declarative manner. A good story portrays a behavioral pattern with a large “expanse” of valid territory. It follows, therefore, that the greatest of all stories portrays the pattern of behavior with the widest conceivable territory. ”
(Jordan Peterson, Maps of Meaning The Architecture of Belief, 1999)

E2.2.C.3.1.d. FOR SCHILLER, THE GRAND PROJECT OF HUMAN EXISTENCE IS TO MOVE FROM A "NATURAL CONDITION" GOVERNED BY "FORCES AND NOT TO LAWS" TO A "MORAL" CONDITION GOVERNED BY REASON. “
“LETTER III.
Man is not better treated by nature in his first start than her other works are; so long as he is unable to act for himself as an independent intelligence she acts for him. But the very fact that constitutes him a man is that he does not remain stationary, where nature has placed him, that he can pass with his reason, retracing the steps nature had made him anticipate, that he can convert the work of necessity into one of free solution, and elevate physical necessity into a moral law.

When man is raised from his slumber in the senses he feels that he is a man; he surveys his surroundings and finds that he is in a state. He was introduced into this state by the power of circumstances, before he could freely select his own position. But as a moral being he cannot possibly rest satisfied with a political condition forced upon him by necessity, and only calculated for that condition; and it would be unfortunate if this did satisfy him. In many cases man shakes off this blind law of necessity, by his free spontaneous action, of which among many others we have an instance, in his ennobling by beauty and suppressing by moral influence the powerful impulse implanted in him by nature in the passion of love. Thus, when arrived at maturity, he recovers his childhood by an artificial process, he founds a state of nature in his ideas, not given him by any experience, but established by the necessary laws and conditions of his reason, and he attributes to this ideal condition an object, an aim, of which he was not cognizant in the actual reality of nature. He gives himself a choice of which he was not capable before, and sets to work just as if he were beginning anew, and were exchanging his original state of bondage for one of complete independence, doing this with complete insight and of his free decision. He is justified in regarding this work of political thraldom as non-existing, though a wild and arbitrary caprice may have founded its work very artfully; though it may strive to maintain it with great arrogance and encompass it with a halo of veneration. For the work of blind powers possesses no authority before which freedom need bow, and all must be made to adapt itself to the highest end which reason has set up in his personality. It is in this wise that a people in a state of manhood is justified in exchanging a condition of thraldom for one of moral freedom.

Now the term natural condition can be applied to every political body which owes its establishment originally to forces and not to laws, and such a state contradicts the moral nature of man, because lawfulness can alone have authority over this. At the same time this natural condition is quite sufficient for the physical man, who only gives himself laws in order to get rid of brute force. Moreover, the physical man is a reality, and the moral man problematical. Therefore when the reason suppresses the natural condition, as she must if she wishes to substitute her own, she weighs the real physical man against the problematical moral man, she weighs the existence of society against a possible, though morally necessary, ideal of society. She takes from man something which he really possesses, and without which he possesses nothing, and refers him as a substitute to something that he ought to possess and might possess; and if reason had relied too exclusively on him she might, in order to secure him a state of humanity in which he is wanting and can want without injury to his life, have robbed him even of the means of animal existence, which is the first necessary condition of his being a man. Before he had opportunity to hold firm to the law with his will, reason would have withdrawn from his feet the ladder of nature.

The great point is, therefore, to reconcile these two considerations, to prevent physical society from ceasing for a moment in time, while the moral society is being formed in the idea; in other words, to prevent its existence from being placed in jeopardy for the sake of the moral dignity of man. When the mechanic has to mend a watch he lets the wheels run out; but the living watchworks of the state have to be repaired while they act, and a wheel has to be exchanged for another during its revolutions. Accordingly props must be sought for to support society and keep it going while it is made independent of the natural condition from which it is sought to emancipate it.

This prop is not found in the natural character of man, who, being selfish and violent, directs his energies rather to the destruction than to the preservation of society. Nor is it found in his moral character, which has to be formed, which can never be worked upon or calculated on by the lawgiver, because it is free and never appears. It would seem, therefore, that another measure must be adopted. It would seem that the physical character of the arbitrary must be separated from moral freedom; that it is incumbent to make the former harmonize with the laws and the latter dependent on impressions; it would be expedient to remove the former still farther from matter and to bring the latter somewhat more near to it; in short, to produce a third character related to both the others—the physical and the moral—paving the way to a transition from the sway of mere force to that of law, without preventing the proper development of the moral character, but serving rather as a pledge in the sensuous sphere of a morality in the unseen.

LETTER IV.
Thus much is certain. It is only when a third character, as previously suggested, has preponderance that a revolution in a state according to moral principles can be free from injurious consequences; nor can anything else secure its endurance. In proposing or setting up a moral state, the moral law is relied upon as a real power, and free-will is drawn into the realm of causes, where all hangs together mutually with stringent necessity and rigidity. But we know that the condition of the human will always remains contingent, and that only in the Absolute Being physical coexists with moral necessity. Accordingly, if it is wished to depend on the moral conduct of man as on natural results, this conduct must become nature, and he must be led by natural impulse to such a course of action as can only and invariably have moral results. But the will of man is perfectly free between inclination and duty, and no physical necessity ought to enter as a sharer in this magisterial personality. If, therefore, he is to retain this power of solution, and yet become a reliable link in the causal concatenation of forces, this can only be effected when the operations of both these impulses are presented quite equally in the world of appearances. It is only possible when, with every difference of form, the matter of man's volition remains the same, when all his impulses agreeing with his reason are sufficient to have the value of a universal legislation.

It may be urged that every individual man carries within himself, at least in his adaptation and destination, a purely ideal man. The great problem of his existence is to bring all the incessant changes of his outer life into conformity with the unchanging unity of this ideal. This pure ideal man, which makes itself known more or less clearly in every subject, is represented by the state, which is the objective, and, so to speak, canonical form in which the manifold differences of the subjects strive to unite. Now two ways present themselves to the thought in which the man of time can agree with the man of idea, and there are also two ways in which the state can maintain itself in individuals. One of these ways is when the pure ideal man subdues the empirical man, and the state suppresses the individual, or again when the individual becomes the state, and the man of time is ennobled to the man of idea.”
(Friedrich Schiller, The Aesthetical Essays, 1875)

E2.2.C.3.1.e.  FOR SCHILLER THE TWO FUNDAMENTAL AND OPPOSING DRIVES ("IMPULSIONS") OF HUMAN NATURE ARE the Sensuous Drive - The drive towards the material, changing world of feeling and existence – and the Formal Drive - The drive towards the eternal, unchanging world of reason, law, and personality. Schiller defines the grand project of human existence as the "twofold labor" of bringing these two contradictory drives into a harmonious balance.
“LETTER XII.
This twofold labor or task, which consists in making the necessary pass into reality in us and in making out of us reality subject to the law of necessity, is urged upon us as a duty by two opposing forces, which are justly styled impulsions or instincts, because they impel us to realize their object. The first of these impulsions, which I shall call the sensuous instinct, issues from the physical existence of man, or from sensuous nature; and it is this instinct which tends to enclose him in the limits of time, and to make of him a material being; I do not say to give him matter, for to do that a certain free activity of the personality would be necessary, which, receiving matter, distinguishes it from the Ego, or what is permanent. By matter I only understand in this place the change or reality that fills time. Consequently the instinct requires that there should be change, and that time should contain something. This simply filled state of time is named sensation, and it is only in this state that physical existence manifests itself.

As all that is in time is successive, it follows by that fact alone that something is: all the remainder is excluded. When one note on an instrument is touched, among all those that it virtually offers, this note alone is real. When man is actually modified, the infinite possibility of all his modifications is limited to this single mode of existence. Thus, then, the exclusive action of sensuous impulsion has for its necessary consequence the narrowest limitation. In this state man is only a unity of magnitude, a complete moment in time; or, to speak more correctly, he is not, for his personality is suppressed as long as sensation holds sway over him and carries time along with it.

This instinct extends its domains over the entire sphere of the finite in man, and as form is only revealed in matter, and the absolute by means of its limits, the total manifestation of human nature is connected on a close analysis with the sensuous instinct. But though it is only this instinct that awakens and develops what exists virtually in man, it is nevertheless this very instinct which renders his perfection impossible. It binds down to the world of sense by indestructible ties the spirit that tends higher, and it calls back to the limits of the present, abstraction which had its free development in the sphere of the infinite. No doubt, thought can escape it for a moment, and a firm will victoriously resist its exigencies: but soon compressed nature resumes her rights to give an imperious reality to our existence, to give it contents, substance, knowledge, and an aim for our activity.

The second impulsion, which may be named the formal instinct, issues from the absolute existence of man, or from his rational nature, and tends to set free, and bring harmony into the diversity of its manifestations, and to maintain personality notwithstanding all the changes of state. As this personality, being an absolute and indivisible unity, can never be in contradiction with itself, as we are ourselves forever, this impulsion, which tends to maintain personality, can never exact in one time anything but what it exacts and requires forever. It therefore decides for always what it decides now, and orders now what it orders forever. Hence it embraces the whole series of times, or what comes to the same thing, it suppresses time and change. It wishes the real to be necessary and eternal, and it wishes the eternal and the necessary to be real; in other terms, it tends to truth and justice.

If the sensuous instinct only produces accidents, the formal instinct gives laws, laws for every judgment when it is a question of knowledge, laws for every will when it is a question of action. Whether, therefore, we recognize an object or conceive an objective value to a state of the subject, whether we act in virtue of knowledge or make of the objective the determining principle of our state; in both cases we withdraw this state from the jurisdiction of time, and we attribute to it reality for all men and for all time, that is, universality and necessity. Feeling can only say: "That is true for this subject and at this moment," and there may come another moment, another subject, which withdraws the affirmation from the actual feeling. But when once thought pronounces and says: "That is," it decides forever and ever, and the validity of its decision is guaranteed by the personality itself, which defies all change. Inclination can only say: "That is good for your individuality and present necessity"; but the changing current of affairs will sweep them away, and what you ardently desire to-day will form the object of your aversion to-morrow. But when the moral feeling says: "That ought to be," it decides forever. If you confess the truth because it is the truth, and if you practise justice because it is justice, you have made of a particular case the law of all possible cases, and treated one moment of your life as eternity.

Accordingly, when the formal impulse holds sway and the pure object acts in us, the being attains its highest expansion, all barriers disappear, and from the unity of magnitude in which man was enclosed by a narrow sensuousness, he rises to the unity of idea, which embraces and keeps subject the entire sphere of phenomena. During this operation we are no longer in time, but time is in us with its infinite succession. We are no longer individuals but a species; the judgment of all spirits is expressed by our own, and the choice of all hearts is represented by our own act.”
(Friedrich Schiller, The Aesthetical Essays, 1875)

FOR SCHILLER THE TWO FUNDAMENTAL AND OPPOSING DRIVES ("IMPULSIONS") OF HUMAN NATURE ARE the Sensuous Drive - The drive towards the material, changing world of feeling and existence – and the Formal Drive - The drive towards the eternal, unchanging world of reason, law, and personality. Schiller defines the grand project of human existence as the "twofold labor" of bringing these two contradictory drives into a harmonious balance. (Continued)
"LETTER XIII.
On a first survey, nothing appears more opposed than these two impulsions; one having for its object change, the other immutability, and yet it is these two notions that exhaust the notion of humanity, and a third fundamental impulsion, holding a medium between them, is quite inconceivable. How then shall we re-establish the unity of human nature, a unity that appears completely destroyed by this primitive and radical opposition?

I admit these two tendencies are contradictory, but it should be noticed that they are not so in the same objects. But things that do not meet cannot come into collision. No doubt the sensuous impulsion desires change; but it does not wish that it should extend to personality and its field, nor that there should be a change of principles. The formal impulsion seeks unity and permanence, but it does not wish the condition to remain fixed with the person, that there should be identity of feeling. Therefore these two impulsions are not divided by nature, and if, nevertheless, they appear so, it is because they have become divided by transgressing nature freely, by ignoring themselves, and by confounding their spheres. The office of culture is to watch over them and to secure to each one its proper limits; therefore culture has to give equal justice to both, and to defend not only the rational impulsion against the sensuous, but also the latter against the former. Hence she has to act a twofold part: first, to protect sense against the attacks of freedom; secondly, to secure personality against the power of sensations. One of these ends is attained by the cultivation of the sensuous, the other by that of reason.

Since the world is developed in time, or change, the perfection of the faculty that places men in relation with the world will necessarily be the greatest possible mutability and extensiveness. Since personality is permanence in change, the perfection of this faculty, which must be opposed to change, will be the greatest possible freedom of action (autonomy) and intensity. The more the receptivity is developed under manifold aspects, the more it is movable and offers surfaces to phenomena, the larger is the part of the world seized upon by man, and the more virtualities he develops in himself. Again, in proportion as man gains strength and depth, and depth and reason gain in freedom, in that proportion man takes in a larger share of the world, and throws out forms outside himself. Therefore his culture will consist, first, in placing his receptivity in contact with the world in the greatest number of points possible, and in raising passivity, to the highest exponent on the side of feeling; secondly, in procuring for the determining faculty the greatest possible amount of independence, in relation to the receptive power, and in raising activity to the highest degree on the side of reason. By the union of these two qualities man will associate the highest degree of self-spontaneity (autonomy) and of freedom with the fullest plenitude of existence, and instead of abandoning himself to the world so as to get lost in it, he will rather absorb it in himself, with all the infinitude of its phenomena, and subject it to the unity of his reason.

But man can invert this relation, and thus fail in attaining his destination in two ways. He can hand over to the passive force the intensity demanded by the active force; he can encroach by material impulsion on the formal impulsion, and convert the receptive into the determining power. He can attribute to the active force the extensiveness belonging to the passive force, he can encroach by the formal impulsion on the material impulsion, and substitute the determining for the receptive power. In the former case, he will never be an Ego, a personality; in the second case, he will never be a Non-Ego, and hence in both cases he will be neither the one nor the other, consequently he will be nothing.

In fact, if the sensuous impulsion becomes determining, if the senses become lawgivers, and if the world stifles personality, he loses as object what he gains in force. It may be said of man that when he is only the contents of time, he is not and consequently he has no other contents. His condition is destroyed at the same time as his personality, because these are two correlative ideas, because change presupposes permanence, and a limited reality implies an infinite reality. If the formal impulsion becomes receptive, that is, if thought anticipates sensation, and the person substitutes itself in the place of the world, it loses as a subject and autonomous force what it gains as object, because immutability implies change, and that to manifest itself also absolute reality requires limits. As soon as man is only form, he has no form, and the personality vanishes with the condition. In a word, it is only inasmuch as he is spontaneous, autonomous, that there is reality out of him, that he is also receptive; and it is only inasmuch as he is receptive that there is reality in him, that he is a thinking force.

Consequently these two impulsions require limits, and looked upon as forces, they need tempering; the former that it may not encroach on the field of legislation, the latter that it may not invade the ground of feeling. But this tempering and moderating the sensuous impulsion ought not to be the effect of physical impotence or of a blunting of sensations, which is always a matter for contempt. It must be a free act, an activity of the person, which by its moral intensity moderates the sensuous intensity, and by the sway of impressions takes from them in depth what it gives them in surface or breadth. The character must place limits to temperament, for the senses have only the right to lose elements if it be to the advantage of the mind. In its turn, the tempering of the formal impulsion must not result from moral impotence, from a relaxation of thought and will, which would degrade humanity. It is necessary that the glorious source of this second tempering should be the fulness of sensations; it is necessary that sensuousness itself should defend its field with a victorious arm and resist the violence that the invading activity of the mind would do to it. In a word, it is necessary that the material impulsion should be contained in the limits of propriety by personality, and the formal impulsion by receptivity or nature."
(Friedrich Schiller, The Aesthetical Essays, 1875)

E2.2.C.3.1.f. “DOES THE WORLD HAPPEN TO YOU, OR DO YOU HAPPEN TO THE WORLD?

Most people wait for permission to solve problems. The subtle message they send is "I don't care enough to solve this on my own. Tell me what to do." The world happens to them.

High agency people are different. They care. And because they care, they solve problems without being told. They happen to the world.

High agency people act like owners. Owners see a problem and fix it. They don't wait. They don't need permission. They don't think this is someone else's job. They don't think this is hard. They don't think "I can't do this, I've never done it before." They don't think this is someone else's job.

Act like an owner before you are one. That's how you become one.”
(Shane Parrish, FS - Brain Food, November 2, 2025)

E2.2.C.3.2. Narrative examples of individuals whose freedom is manifested in a "capacity to set goals" and "engage in projects." These are case studies of lives defined by a self-chosen purpose.

E2.2.C.3.2.a. A_Georgia O'Keeffe_In the patio V_1948 ; A_Georgia O'Keefe_In the Patio IV_1948
"It was during her time there in the 1930s that she began to obsess over the wall with a door in it, located in the courtyard of a tumbledown farmstead in Abiquiú. First she bought the house, a process that took a full decade, and then she set about documenting its enigmatic presence on canvas, creating almost 20 versions. “I’m always trying to paint that door – I never quite get it,” she announced. “It’s a curse the way I feel – I must continually go on with that door.” 
The attraction was a mystery, and yet walls and doors figure large in the story of O’Keeffe’s singular life. How do you make the most of what’s inside you, your talents and desires, when they slam you up against a wall of prejudice, of limiting beliefs about what a woman must be and an artist can do? She didn’t kick the wall down – hardly her style – but instead set her considerable canniness and will at prising a new way through.
In terms of the radical things she did with paint, never mind the innovations she brought to bear on her private life, she forged a passage to a world of openness and freedom, as frightening as it was exhilarating. “I’ve always been absolutely terrified every single moment of my life,” she said, “and I’ve never let it stop me from doing a single thing I wanted to do.” [...]
At the age of 96, O’Keeffe was interviewed by Andy Warhol, another creator of a purely American vernacular. She told him about the landscape that was her most cherished home and subject, the wild expanses of New Mexico. “I have lived up there at the end of the world by myself a long time. You walk around with your thing out in the field and nobody cares. It’s nice.” [...]
New Mexico was nourishing, but part of its nourishment was the way everything was pared back to essentials, the flab cut away. O’Keeffe was getting down to the bones of things, loving the hard, stripped land and the tough, stringent way it forced her to live. Bones were beautiful, with their apertures and cavities, their bleached resilience."
(The wild beauty of Georgia O’Keeffe, published in The Guardian on July 1s, 2016)

Read it in The Guardian: https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/01/georgia-okeeffe-tate-modern-exhibition-wild-beauty

E2.2.C.3.2.b. RAND EXPLICITLY STATES, "THIS IS THE MOTIVE AND PURPOSE OF MY WRITING; THE PROJECTION OF AN IDEAL MAN." THIS IS A PERFECT EXAMPLE OF AN INDIVIDUAL USING THEIR FREEDOM TO DEFINE A LIFE-GUIDING GOAL.
“I have been asked whether I have changed in these past twenty-five years. No, I am the same--only more so. Have my ideas changed? No, my fundamental convictions, my view of life and of man, have never changed, from as far back as I can remember, but my knowledge of their applications has grown, in scope and in precision. What is my present evaluation of The Fountainhead? I am as proud of it as I was on the day when I finished writing it.
Was The Fountainhead written for the purpose of presenting my philosophy? Here, I shall quote from The Goal of My Writing, an address I gave at Lewis and Clark College, on October 1, 1963: "This is the motive and purpose of my writing; the projection of an ideal man. The portrayal of a moral ideal, as my ultimate literary goal, as an end in itself--to which any didactic, intellectual or philosophical values contained in a novel are only the means.
"Let me stress this: my purpose is not the philosophical enlightenment of my readers...My purpose, first cause and prime mover is the portrayal of Howard Roark [or the heroes of Atlas Shrugged} as an end in himself...
"I write--and read--for the sake of the story...My basic test for any story is: 'Would I want to meet these characters and observe these events in real life? Is this story an experience worth living through for its own sake? Is the pleasure of contemplating these characters an end in itself?'...
"Since my purpose is the presentation of an ideal man, I had to define and present the conditions which make him possible and which his existence requires. Since man's character is the product of his premises, I had to define and present the kinds of premises and values that create the character of an ideal man and motivate his actions; which means that I had to define and present a rational code of ethics. Since man acts among and deals with other men, I had to present the kind of social system that makes it possible for ideal men to exist and to function--a free, productive, rational system which demands and rewards the best in every man, and which is, obviously, laissez-faire capitalism.
"But neither politics nor ethics nor philosophy is an end in itself, neither in life nor in literature.
Only Man is an end in himself."
 (Ayn Rand, The fountainhead, Introduction to the Twenty-fifth Anniversary Edition, 1943)

E2.2.C.3.2.c. "BECAUSE I LOVE THIS EARTH... I DON'T LIKE THE SHAPE OF THINGS ON THIS EARTH. I WANT TO CHANGE THEM... FOR MYSELF."
"Because I love this earth. That's all I love. I don't like the shape of things on this earth. I want to change them."
"For whom?"
"For myself."
"How old are you?"
"Twenty-two."
"When did you hear all that?"
"I didn't."
"Men don't talk like that at twenty-two. You're abnormal."
"Probably."
"I didn't mean it as a compliment."
"I didn't either."
"Got any family?"
"No."
"Worked through school?"
"Yes."
"At what?"
"In the building trades."
"How much money have you got left?"
"Seventeen dollars and thirty cents."
"When did you come to New York?"
"Yesterday."
Cameron looked at the white pile under his fist.
"God damn you," said Cameron softly.
"God damn you!" roared Cameron suddenly, leaning forward. "I didn't ask you to come here! I don't need any draftsmen! There's nothing here to draft! I don't have enough work to keep myself and my men out of the Bowery Mission! I don't want any fool visionaries starving around here! I don't want the responsibility. I didn't ask for it. I never thought I'd see it again. I'm through with it. I was through with that many years ago. I'm perfectly happy with the drooling dolts I've got here, who never had anything and never will have and it makes no difference what becomes of them. That's all I want Why did you have to come here? You're setting out to ruin yourself, you know that, don't you? And I'll help you to do it. I don't want to see you. I don't like you. I don't like your face. You look like an insufferable egotist. You're impertinent. You're too sure of yourself. Twenty years ago I'd have punched your face with the greatest of pleasure. You're coming to work here tomorrow at nine o'clock sharp." 
(Ayn Rand, The fountainhead,1943)

E2.2.C.3.2.d. GAIL WYNAND'S ENTIRE LIFE HAS BEEN A SINGLE, ALL-CONSUMING PROJECT. The explanation for his yacht's name, "I Do," shows that his relentless pursuit of power and wealth has been a lifelong "answer" to the message of his childhood: "You don't run things around here."
THE SUN had set when they stepped out of the car. In the spread of sky and sea, a green sky over a sheet of mercury, tracings of fire remained at the edges of the clouds and in the brass fittings of the yacht. The yacht was like a white streak of motion, a sensitive body strained against the curb of stillness.
Dominique looked at the gold letters--I Do--on the delicate white bow.
"What does that name mean?" she asked.
"It's an answer," said Wynand, "to people long since dead. Though perhaps they are the only immortal ones. You see, the sentence I heard most often in my childhood was 'You don't run things around here.'" 
(Ayn Rand, The fountainhead,1943)

E2.2.C.3.2.e. CERVANTES PROVIDES A POWERFUL AND FAMOUS LITERARY EXAMPLE OF A CHARACTER WHO HAS GIVEN HIS LIFE A NEW, ALL-CONSUMING PURPOSE. DON QUIXOTE IS NO LONGER A BORED COUNTRY GENTLEMAN; HE IS ACTIVELY "ENGAGED" IN THE PROJECT OF BEING A KNIGHT-ERRANT.
“Meanwhile one of the carriers who were in the inn thought fit to water his team, and it was necessary to remove Don Quixote’s armour as it lay on the trough; but he seeing the other approach hailed him in a loud voice, “O thou, whoever thou art, rash knight that comest to lay hands on the armour of the most valorous errant that ever girt on sword, have a care what thou dost; touch it not unless thou wouldst lay down thy life as the penalty of thy rashness.” The carrier gave no heed to these words (and he would have done better to heed them if he had been heedful of his health), but seizing it by the straps flung the armour some distance from him. Seeing this, Don Quixote raised his eyes to heaven, and fixing his thoughts, apparently, upon his lady Dulcinea, exclaimed, “Aid me, lady mine, in this the first encounter that presents itself to this breast which thou holdest in subjection; let not thy favour and protection fail me in this first jeopardy;” and, with these words and others to the same purpose, dropping his buckler he lifted his lance with both hands and with it smote such a blow on the carrier’s head that he stretched him on the ground, so stunned that had he followed it up with a second there would have been no need of a surgeon to cure him. This done, he picked up his armour and returned to his beat with the same serenity as before.
Shortly after this, another, not knowing what had happened (for the carrier still lay senseless), came with the same object of giving water to his mules, and was proceeding to remove the armour in order to clear the trough, when Don Quixote, without uttering a word or imploring aid from anyone, once more dropped his buckler and once more lifted his lance, and without actually breaking the second carrier’s head into pieces, made more than three of it, for he laid it open in four. At the noise all the people of the inn ran to the spot, and among them the landlord. Seeing this, Don Quixote braced his buckler on his arm, and with his hand on his sword exclaimed, “O Lady of Beauty, strength and support of my faint heart, it is time for thee to turn the eyes of thy greatness on this thy captive knight on the brink of so mighty an adventure.” By this he felt himself so inspired that he would not have flinched if all the carriers in the world had assailed him. The comrades of the wounded perceiving the plight they were in began from a distance to shower stones on Don Quixote, who screened himself as best he could with his buckler, not daring to quit the trough and leave his armour unprotected. The landlord shouted to them to leave him alone, for he had already told them that he was mad, and as a madman he would not be accountable even if he killed them all. Still louder shouted Don Quixote, calling them knaves and traitors, and the lord of the castle, who allowed knights-errant to be treated in this fashion, a villain and a low-born knight whom, had he received the order of knighthood, he would call to account for his treachery. “But of you,” he cried, “base and vile rabble, I make no account; fling, strike, come on, do all ye can against me, ye shall see what the reward of your folly and insolence will be.” This he uttered with so much spirit and boldness that he filled his assailants with a terrible fear, and as much for this reason as at the persuasion of the landlord they left off stoning him, and he allowed them to carry off the wounded, and with the same calmness and composure as before resumed the watch over his armour.
But these freaks of his guest were not much to the liking of the landlord, so he determined to cut matters short and confer upon him at once the unlucky order of knighthood before any further misadventure could occur; so, going up to him, he apologised for the rudeness which, without his knowledge, had been offered to him by these low people, who, however, had been well punished for their audacity. As he had already told him, he said, there was no chapel in the castle, nor was it needed for what remained to be done, for, as he understood the ceremonial of the order, the whole point of being dubbed a knight lay in the accolade and in the slap on the shoulder, and that could be administered in the middle of a field; and that he had now done all that was needful as to watching the armour, for all requirements were satisfied by a watch of two hours only, while he had been more than four about it. Don Quixote believed it all, and told him he stood there ready to obey him, and to make an end of it with as much despatch as possible; for, if he were again attacked, and felt himself to be dubbed knight, he would not, he thought, leave a soul alive in the castle, except such as out of respect he might spare at his bidding.”
(Miguel de Cervantes, The History of Don Quixote, Vol 1, 1605)

IN THIS PHILOSOPHICAL MANIFESTO, DON QUIXOTE PROVIDES A DETAILED EXPLANATION OF THE PURPOSE HE HAS CHOSEN FOR HIMSELF—TO LIVE THE LIFE OF A KNIGHT-ERRANT ON THE "PATH OF VIRTUE"—AND THE WORLDVIEW THAT SUPPORTS THIS PURPOSE.
““There is a great deal of truth in what you say, niece,” returned Don Quixote, “and I could tell you somewhat about birth that would astonish you; but, not to mix up things human and divine, I refrain. Look you, my dears, all the lineages in the world (attend to what I am saying) can be reduced to four sorts, which are these: those that had humble beginnings, and went on spreading and extending themselves until they attained surpassing greatness; those that had great beginnings and maintained them, and still maintain and uphold the greatness of their origin; those, again, that from a great beginning have ended in a point like a pyramid, having reduced and lessened their original greatness till it has come to nought, like the point of a pyramid, which, relatively to its base or foundation, is nothing; and then there are those--and it is they that are the most numerous--that have had neither an illustrious beginning nor a remarkable mid-course, and so will have an end without a name, like an ordinary plebeian line. Of the first, those that had an humble origin and rose to the greatness they still preserve, the Ottoman house may serve as an example, which from an humble and lowly shepherd, its founder, has reached the height at which we now see it. For examples of the second sort of lineage, that began with greatness and maintains it still without adding to it, there are the many princes who have inherited the dignity, and maintain themselves in their inheritance, without increasing or diminishing it, keeping peacefully within the limits of their states. Of those that began great and ended in a point, there are thousands of examples, for all the Pharaohs and Ptolemies of Egypt, the Caesars of Rome, and the whole herd (if I may apply such a word to them) of countless princes, monarchs, lords, Medes, Assyrians, Persians, Greeks, and barbarians, all these lineages and lordships have ended in a point and come to nothing, they themselves as well as their founders, for it would be impossible now to find one of their descendants, and, even should we find one, it would be in some lowly and humble condition. Of plebeian lineages I have nothing to say, save that they merely serve to swell the number of those that live, without any eminence to entitle them to any fame or praise beyond this. From all I have said I would have you gather, my poor innocents, that great is the confusion among lineages, and that only those are seen to be great and illustrious that show themselves so by the virtue, wealth, and generosity of their possessors. I have said virtue, wealth, and generosity, because a great man who is vicious will be a great example of vice, and a rich man who is not generous will be merely a miserly beggar; for the possessor of wealth is not made happy by possessing it, but by spending it, and not by spending as he pleases, but by knowing how to spend it well. The poor gentleman has no way of showing that he is a gentleman but by virtue, by being affable, well-bred, courteous, gentle-mannered, and kindly, not haughty, arrogant, or censorious, but above all by being charitable; for by two maravedis given with a cheerful heart to the poor, he will show himself as generous as he who distributes alms with bell-ringing, and no one that perceives him to be endowed with the virtues I have named, even though he know him not, will fail to recognise and set him down as one of good blood; and it would be strange were it not so; praise has ever been the reward of virtue, and those who are virtuous cannot fail to receive commendation. There are two roads, my daughters, by which men may reach wealth and honours; one is that of letters, the other that of arms. I have more of arms than of letters in my composition, and, judging by my inclination to arms, was born under the influence of the planet Mars. I am, therefore, in a measure constrained to follow that road, and by it I must travel in spite of all the world, and it will be labour in vain for you to urge me to resist what heaven wills, fate ordains, reason requires, and, above all, my own inclination favours; for knowing as I do the countless toils that are the accompaniments of knight-errantry, I know, too, the infinite blessings that are attained by it; I know that the path of virtue is very narrow, and the road of vice broad and spacious; I know their ends and goals are different, for the broad and easy road of vice ends in death, and the narrow and toilsome one of virtue in life, and not transitory life, but in that which has no end; I know, as our great Castilian poet says, that--
It is by rugged paths like these they go
That scale the heights of immortality,
Unreached by those that falter here below.”
(Miguel de Cervantes, The History of Don Quixote, Vol 2, 1605)

E2.2.C.3.2.f. DOROTHEA BROOKE IS "ENAMOURED OF INTENSITY AND GREATNESS" AND SEEKS A "LOFTY CONCEPTION OF THE WORLD WHICH MIGHT FRANKLY INCLUDE... HER OWN RULE OF CONDUCT THERE." She explicitly rejects the meaningless "solicitudes of feminine fashion" that her society prescribes for her.
“Since I can do no good because a woman,
Reach constantly at something that is near it.
                    —_The Maid’s Tragedy:_ BEAUMONT AND FLETCHER.


Miss Brooke had that kind of beauty which seems to be thrown into
relief by poor dress. Her hand and wrist were so finely formed that she
could wear sleeves not less bare of style than those in which the
Blessed Virgin appeared to Italian painters; and her profile as well as
her stature and bearing seemed to gain the more dignity from her plain
garments, which by the side of provincial fashion gave her the
impressiveness of a fine quotation from the Bible,—or from one of our
elder poets,—in a paragraph of to-day’s newspaper. She was usually
spoken of as being remarkably clever, but with the addition that her
sister Celia had more common-sense. Nevertheless, Celia wore scarcely
more trimmings; and it was only to close observers that her dress
differed from her sister’s, and had a shade of coquetry in its
arrangements; for Miss Brooke’s plain dressing was due to mixed
conditions, in most of which her sister shared. The pride of being
ladies had something to do with it: the Brooke connections, though not
exactly aristocratic, were unquestionably “good:” if you inquired
backward for a generation or two, you would not find any yard-measuring
or parcel-tying forefathers—anything lower than an admiral or a
clergyman; and there was even an ancestor discernible as a Puritan
gentleman who served under Cromwell, but afterwards conformed, and
managed to come out of all political troubles as the proprietor of a
respectable family estate. Young women of such birth, living in a quiet
country-house, and attending a village church hardly larger than a
parlor, naturally regarded frippery as the ambition of a huckster’s
daughter. Then there was well-bred economy, which in those days made
show in dress the first item to be deducted from, when any margin was
required for expenses more distinctive of rank. Such reasons would have
been enough to account for plain dress, quite apart from religious
feeling; but in Miss Brooke’s case, religion alone would have
determined it; and Celia mildly acquiesced in all her sister’s
sentiments, only infusing them with that common-sense which is able to
accept momentous doctrines without any eccentric agitation. Dorothea
knew many passages of Pascal’s Pensees and of Jeremy Taylor by heart;
and to her the destinies of mankind, seen by the light of Christianity,
made the solicitudes of feminine fashion appear an occupation for
Bedlam. She could not reconcile the anxieties of a spiritual life
involving eternal consequences, with a keen interest in gimp and
artificial protrusions of drapery. Her mind was theoretic, and yearned
by its nature after some lofty conception of the world which might
frankly include the parish of Tipton and her own rule of conduct there;
she was enamoured of intensity and greatness, and rash in embracing
whatever seemed to her to have those aspects; likely to seek martyrdom,
to make retractations, and then to incur martyrdom after all in a
quarter where she had not sought it. Certainly such elements in the
character of a marriageable girl tended to interfere with her lot, and
hinder it from being decided according to custom, by good looks,
vanity, and merely canine affection. With all this, she, the elder of
the sisters, was not yet twenty, and they had both been educated, since
they were about twelve years old and had lost their parents, on plans
at once narrow and promiscuous, first in an English family and
afterwards in a Swiss family at Lausanne, their bachelor uncle and
guardian trying in this way to remedy the disadvantages of their
orphaned condition.

It was hardly a year since they had come to live at Tipton Grange with
their uncle, a man nearly sixty, of acquiescent temper, miscellaneous
opinions, and uncertain vote. He had travelled in his younger years,
and was held in this part of the county to have contracted a too
rambling habit of mind. Mr. Brooke’s conclusions were as difficult to
predict as the weather: it was only safe to say that he would act with
benevolent intentions, and that he would spend as little money as
possible in carrying them out. For the most glutinously indefinite
minds enclose some hard grains of habit; and a man has been seen lax
about all his own interests except the retention of his snuff-box,
concerning which he was watchful, suspicious, and greedy of clutch.

In Mr. Brooke the hereditary strain of Puritan energy was clearly in
abeyance; but in his niece Dorothea it glowed alike through faults and
virtues, turning sometimes into impatience of her uncle’s talk or his
way of “letting things be” on his estate, and making her long all the
more for the time when she would be of age and have some command of
money for generous schemes. She was regarded as an heiress; for not
only had the sisters seven hundred a-year each from their parents, but
if Dorothea married and had a son, that son would inherit Mr. Brooke’s
estate, presumably worth about three thousand a-year—a rental which
seemed wealth to provincial families, still discussing Mr. Peel’s late
conduct on the Catholic question, innocent of future gold-fields, and
of that gorgeous plutocracy which has so nobly exalted the necessities
of genteel life.

And how should Dorothea not marry?—a girl so handsome and with such
prospects? Nothing could hinder it but her love of extremes, and her
insistence on regulating life according to notions which might cause a
wary man to hesitate before he made her an offer, or even might lead
her at last to refuse all offers. A young lady of some birth and
fortune, who knelt suddenly down on a brick floor by the side of a sick
laborer and prayed fervidly as if she thought herself living in the
time of the Apostles—who had strange whims of fasting like a Papist,
and of sitting up at night to read old theological books! Such a wife
might awaken you some fine morning with a new scheme for the
application of her income which would interfere with political economy
and the keeping of saddle-horses: a man would naturally think twice
before he risked himself in such fellowship. Women were expected to
have weak opinions; but the great safeguard of society and of domestic
life was, that opinions were not acted on. Sane people did what their
neighbors did, so that if any lunatics were at large, one might know
and avoid them.”
(George Eliot, Middlemarch, 1871)

E2.2.C.3.3. The most fundamental "project" is the internal work of building the self. Freedom is achieved by cultivating the concepts, morals, and awareness that allow for "greater autonomy."

E2.2.C.3.3.a. "AUTONOMY
As Rousseau said, it is obeying the law that we have prescribed for ourselves, and that is what it means to be free.
 
In its philosophical usage, the word owes much to Kant. Autonomy is power over oneself, or freedom, but through the nomos, or moral law, that reason imposes on itself and on us. According to Kant, the will is autonomous when it submits only to its own legislation (as practical reason), independently of any sensible or affective determination. In other words, it is independent of the body, the self in its contingent particularity, and even a law. Therefore, it submits only to the universal one carries within oneself, which is oneself (which is why it is a matter of freedom), but it is also reasonable and legislating (which is why it is a matter of autonomy).
 
However, the concepts of autonomy and freedom do not entirely overlap. Those who act immorally certainly act freely, but without autonomy; they submit to the parts of themselves that are not free, such as their instincts, passions, weaknesses, interests, and fears. So, what is autonomy? Autonomy is freedom for the good. To be autonomous is to obey none of the objects of the faculty of desire, as Kant says. This is independent of the "dear self," or the particular individual that one is. This is why autonomy is the principle of morality, selfishness is the source of all evil, and reason, which has no ego, is entirely good. The only duty is to be free; this is what autonomy means: obeying the duty to govern oneself.
For non-Kantians, the term is primarily used as an ideal. It does not refer to a fact, but rather to a horizon, a process, or a task. The goal is to free ourselves from everything within us that is not free. According to Spinoza, Marx, and Freud, only reason allows this, which is why the idea of autonomy retains its meaning. Spinoza writes, "A free man is one who lives according to the sole dictates of reason..." Autonomy is never given; it must be achieved and constantly reaffirmed. There is no autonomy; only the process of becoming autonomous is real. We are not born free; we become free."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2013)

E2.2.C.3.3.b. LOGICALLY, AN INTEGRATED LIFE IS THE OUTCOME OF HAVING EMBRACED THE SUFFERING WORLD, LET GO OF REACTIVITY, AND BEHELD REACTIVITY’S CEASING. From this still and empty space one then responds with intuitions, thoughts, intentions, words, and acts that are not determined by reactivity.
“The path (magga) is to be cultivated (bhavana).

[…]  This path, which Gotama calls a “middle” or “centered” path, outlines a way of life that includes every aspect of a person’s humanity. Here is the classical definition:

And this is the path: the path with eight branches: complete
view, complete thought, complete speech, complete action,
complete livelihood, complete effort, complete mindfulness,
complete concentration.

[…] The goal of the fourfold task, I would argue, is to lead an integrated life. It is perhaps for this reason that cultivating the eightfold path is presented as the fourth facet of this task, even though it is already implicit in the other three. Logically, an integrated life is the outcome of having embraced the suffering world, let go of reactivity, and beheld reactivity’s ceasing. From this still and empty space one then responds with intuitions, thoughts, intentions, words, and acts that are not determined by reactivity. […]

As habitual users of language, we assume words to be accurate representations of reality. Complete understanding, however, no longer succumbs to the convenience of oppositional thought but is open to the immediacy and potential of what is happening from moment to moment. Training ourselves to pay intimate and embodied attention to the very pulse of life within and around us exposes the limitations of language. Bearing witness to the arising and unfolding of something renders absurd the notion that “it is not.” Similarly, contemplation of its fading away and disappearance undermines any notion that “it is.” To sustain such a “complete view” is a challenging task. It would require a great deal of discipline and effort to come to see the world and oneself in this way, which runs counter to how we are conditioned to think and speak. 

“By and large,” continues Gotama in his reply to Kaccana, “this world is bound to its prejudices and habits.” But, he says, someone who has achieved this view “does not get caught up in the habits, fixations, prejudices or biases of the mind. He is not fixated on ‘my self.’ He does not doubt that when something is occurring, it is occurring, and when it has come to an end, it has come to an end.
His knowledge is independent of others. In these respects his view is complete.”
Notice that the Buddha differentiates between something “occurring” (uppajjati ) or “coming to an end” (nirujjhati), on the one hand, and its “being” (atthi) or “not being” (natthi), on the other. He is comfortable with a language of process but rejects the language of ontology.”
(Stephen Batchelor, After Buddhism, rethinking the dharma for a secular age, 2016)

E2.2.C.3.3.c. IN A SITUATION WHERE THEIR PHYSICAL FREEDOM IS ALMOST NON-EXISTENT AND THEIR FUTURE IS DETERMINED, THE CHARACTERS' FINAL FREEDOM MANIFESTS IN THEIR CAPACITY TO QUESTION, TO SEEK ANSWERS, AND TO TRY TO CONSTRUCT A COHERENT MEANING FOR THEIR PAST. 
“Tommy said, "then why did you take all our art stuff away? Didn't the Gallery exist either?"
"The Gallery? Well, that rumour did have some truth to it. There was a gallery. And after a fashion, there still is. These days it's here, in this house. I had to prune it down, which I regret. But there wasn't room for all of it in here. But why did we take your work away? That's what you're asking, isn't it?"
"Not just that," I said quietly. "Why did we do all of that work in the first place? Why train us, encourage us, make us produce all of that? If we're just going to give donations anyway, then die, why all those lessons? Why all those books and discussions?"
"Why Hailsham at all?" Madame had said this from the hallway. She came past us again and back into the darkened section of the room. "It's a good question for you to ask."
Miss Emily's gaze followed her, and for a moment, remained fixed behind us. I felt like turning to see what looks were being exchanged, but it was almost like we were back at Hailsham, and we had to keep facing the front with complete attention. Then Miss Emily said:
"Yes, why Hailsham at all? Marie-Claude likes to ask that a lot these days. But not so long ago, before the Morningdale scandal, she wouldn't have dreamt of asking a question like that. It wouldn't have entered her head. You know that's right, don't look at me like that! There was only one person in those days who would ask a question like that, and that was me. Long before Morningdale, right from the very beginning, I asked that. And that made it easy for the rest of them, Marie-Claude, all the rest of them, they could all carry on without a care. All you students too. I did all the worrying and questioning for the lot of you. And as long as I was steadfast, then no doubts ever crossed your minds, any of you. But you asked your questions, dear boy. Let's answer the simplest one, and perhaps it will answer all the rest. Why did we take your artwork? Why did we do that? You said an interesting thing earlier, Tommy. When you were discussing this with Marie-Claude. You said it was because your art would reveal what you were like. What you were like inside. That's what you said, wasn't it? Well, you weren't far wrong about that. We took away your art because we thought it would reveal your souls. Or to put it more finely, we did it to prove you had souls at all."
She paused, and Tommy and I exchanged glances for the first time in ages. Then I asked:
"Why did you have to prove a thing like that, Miss Emily? Did someone think we didn't have souls?"
A thin smile appeared on her face. "It's touching, Kathy, to see you so taken aback. It demonstrates, in a way, that we did our job well. As you say, why would anyone doubt you had a soul? But I have to tell you, my dear, it wasn't something commonly held when we first set out all those years ago. And though we've come a long way since then, it's still not a notion universally held, even today. You Hailsham students, even after you've been out in the world like this, you still don't know the half of it. All around the country, at this very moment, there are students being reared in deplorable conditions, conditions you Hailsham students could hardly imagine. And now we're no more, things will only get worse."
She paused again, and for a moment she seemed to be inspecting us carefully through narrowed eyes. Finally she went on:
"Whatever else, we at least saw to it that all of you in our care, you grew up in wonderful surroundings. And we saw to it too, after you left us, you were kept away from the worst of those horrors. We were able to do that much for you at least. But this dream of yours, this dream of being able to defer. Such a thing would always have been beyond us to grant, even at the height of our influence. I'm sorry, I can see what I'm saying won't be welcome to you. But you mustn't be dejected. I hope you can appreciate how much we were able to secure for you. Look at you both now! You've had good lives, you're educated and cultured. I'm sorry we couldn't secure more for you than we did, but you must realise how much worse things once were. When Marie-Claude and I started out, there were no places like Hailsham in existence. We were the first, along with Glenmorgan House. Then a few years later came the Saunders Trust. Together, we became a small but very vocal movement, and we challenged the entire way the donations programme was being run. Most importantly, we demonstrated to the world that if students were reared in humane, cultivated environments, it was possible for them to grow to be as sensitive and intelligent as any ordinary human being. Before that, all clones-or students, as we preferred to call you-existed only to supply medical science. In the early days, after the war, that's largely all you were to most people. Shadowy objects in test tubes. Wouldn't you agree, Marie-Claude? She's being very quiet. Usually you can't get her to shut up on this subject. Your presence, my dears, appears to have tied her tongue. Very well. So to answer your question, Tommy. That was why we collected your art. We selected the best of it and put on special exhibitions. In the late seventies, at the height of our influence, we were organising large events all around the country. There'd be cabinet ministers, bishops, all sorts of famous people coming to attend. There were speeches, large funds pledged. 'There, look!' we could say. 'Look at this art! How dare you claim these children are anything less than fully human?' Oh yes, there was a lot of support for our movement back then, the tide was with us. [...]
"But what I don't understand," I said, "is why people would want students treated so badly in the first place."
"From your perspective today, Kathy, your bemusement is perfectly reasonable. But you must try and see it historically. After the war, in the early fifties, when the great breakthroughs in science followed one after the other so rapidly, there wasn't time to take stock, to ask the sensible questions. Suddenly there were all these new possibilities laid before us, all these ways to cure so many previously incurable conditions. This was what the world noticed the most, wanted the most. And for a long time, people preferred to believe these organs appeared from nowhere, or at most that they grew in a kind of vacuum. Yes, there were arguments. But by the time people became concerned about... about students, by the time they came to consider just how you were reared, whether you should have been brought into existence at all, well by then it was too late. There was no way to reverse the process. How can you ask a world that has come to regard cancer as curable, how can you ask such a world to put away that cure, to go back to the dark days? There was no going back. However uncomfortable people were about your existence, their overwhelming concern was that their own children, their spouses, their parents, their friends, did not die from cancer, motor neurone disease, heart disease. So for a long time you were kept in the shadows, and people did their best not to think about you. And if they did, they tried to convince themselves you weren't really like us. That you were less than human, so it didn't matter. And that was how things stood until our little movement came along. But do you see what we were up against? We were virtually attempting to square the circle. Here was the world, requiring students to donate. While that remained the case, there would always be a barrier against seeing you as properly human. Well, we fought that battle for many years, and what we won for you, at least, were many improvements, though of course, you were only a select few."
(Kazuo Ishiguro, Never Let Me Go, 2005)

E2.2.C.3.3.d. THE FRIAR CONFRONTS ROMEO'S PASSIVE DESPAIR AND REPLACES IT WITH A CONCRETE, STEP-BY-STEP PLAN. He transforms a situation of hopelessness into a project with a clear goal: to "blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends, / Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back / With twenty hundred thousand times more joy."
“ROMEO.
As if that name,
Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
Did murder her, as that name’s cursed hand
Murder’d her kinsman. O, tell me, Friar, tell me,
In what vile part of this anatomy
Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may sack
The hateful mansion.

 [_Drawing his sword._]

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Hold thy desperate hand.
Art thou a man? Thy form cries out thou art.
Thy tears are womanish, thy wild acts denote
The unreasonable fury of a beast.
Unseemly woman in a seeming man,
And ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
Thou hast amaz’d me. By my holy order,
I thought thy disposition better temper’d.
Hast thou slain Tybalt? Wilt thou slay thyself?
And slay thy lady, that in thy life lives,
By doing damned hate upon thyself?
Why rail’st thou on thy birth, the heaven and earth?
Since birth, and heaven and earth, all three do meet
In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.
Fie, fie, thou sham’st thy shape, thy love, thy wit,
Which, like a usurer, abound’st in all,
And usest none in that true use indeed
Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit.
Thy noble shape is but a form of wax,
Digressing from the valour of a man;
Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,
Killing that love which thou hast vow’d to cherish;
Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
Like powder in a skilless soldier’s flask,
Is set afire by thine own ignorance,
And thou dismember’d with thine own defence.
What, rouse thee, man. Thy Juliet is alive,
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead.
There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee,
But thou slew’st Tybalt; there art thou happy.
The law that threaten’d death becomes thy friend,
And turns it to exile; there art thou happy.
A pack of blessings light upon thy back;
Happiness courts thee in her best array;
But like a misshaped and sullen wench,
Thou putt’st up thy Fortune and thy love.
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
Go, get thee to thy love as was decreed,
Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her.
But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
For then thou canst not pass to Mantua;
Where thou shalt live till we can find a time
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
Than thou went’st forth in lamentation.
Go before, Nurse. Commend me to thy lady,
And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.
Romeo is coming.

NURSE.
O Lord, I could have stay’d here all the night
To hear good counsel. O, what learning is!
My lord, I’ll tell my lady you will come.

ROMEO.
Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.

NURSE.
Here sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir.
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.

 [_Exit._]

ROMEO.
How well my comfort is reviv’d by this.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Go hence, good night, and here stands all your state:
Either be gone before the watch be set,
Or by the break of day disguis’d from hence.
Sojourn in Mantua. I’ll find out your man,
And he shall signify from time to time
Every good hap to you that chances here.
Give me thy hand; ’tis late; farewell; good night.

ROMEO.
But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
It were a grief so brief to part with thee.
Farewell.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. A Room in Capulet’s House.

 Enter Capulet, Lady Capulet and Paris.

CAPULET.
Things have fallen out, sir, so unluckily
That we have had no time to move our daughter.
Look you, she lov’d her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
And so did I. Well, we were born to die.
’Tis very late; she’ll not come down tonight.
I promise you, but for your company,
I would have been abed an hour ago.

PARIS.
These times of woe afford no tune to woo.
Madam, good night. Commend me to your daughter.

LADY CAPULET.
I will, and know her mind early tomorrow;
Tonight she’s mew’d up to her heaviness.

CAPULET.
Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
Of my child’s love. I think she will be rul’d
In all respects by me; nay more, I doubt it not.
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed,
Acquaint her here of my son Paris’ love,
And bid her, mark you me, on Wednesday next,
But, soft, what day is this?

PARIS.
Monday, my lord.

CAPULET.
Monday! Ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon,
A Thursday let it be; a Thursday, tell her,
She shall be married to this noble earl.
Will you be ready? Do you like this haste?
We’ll keep no great ado,—a friend or two,
For, hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
Being our kinsman, if we revel much.
Therefore we’ll have some half a dozen friends,
And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?

PARIS.
My lord, I would that Thursday were tomorrow.

CAPULET.
Well, get you gone. A Thursday be it then.
Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed,
Prepare her, wife, against this wedding day.
Farewell, my lord.—Light to my chamber, ho!
Afore me, it is so very very late that we
May call it early by and by. Good night.”
(William Shakespeare, Romeo and Juliet, 1597)


E2.2.C.3.3.e. A DEBATE BETWEEN TWO OPPOSING CONCEPTIONS OF HOW TO ACHIEVE A LIFE OF PURPOSE. It stages a direct conflict between:
•	Mr. Casaubon's view: Freedom and achievement are the result of a disciplined project, requiring "steady application" and "patience." He sees any other approach as "self-indulgent taste."
•	Will Ladislaw's view: Freedom is a precondition for finding one's purpose. He believes "Genius is necessarily intolerant of fetters" and that one must live in an "attitude of receptivity towards all sublime chances," waiting for the "universe to beckon."
“Young Ladislaw did not pay that visit to which Mr. Brooke had invited
him, and only six days afterwards Mr. Casaubon mentioned that his young
relative had started for the Continent, seeming by this cold vagueness
to waive inquiry. Indeed, Will had declined to fix on any more precise
destination than the entire area of Europe. Genius, he held, is
necessarily intolerant of fetters: on the one hand it must have the
utmost play for its spontaneity; on the other, it may confidently await
those messages from the universe which summon it to its peculiar work,
only placing itself in an attitude of receptivity towards all sublime
chances. The attitudes of receptivity are various, and Will had
sincerely tried many of them. He was not excessively fond of wine, but
he had several times taken too much, simply as an experiment in that
form of ecstasy; he had fasted till he was faint, and then supped on
lobster; he had made himself ill with doses of opium. Nothing greatly
original had resulted from these measures; and the effects of the opium
had convinced him that there was an entire dissimilarity between his
constitution and De Quincey’s. The superadded circumstance which would
evolve the genius had not yet come; the universe had not yet beckoned.
Even Caesar’s fortune at one time was but a grand presentiment. We know
what a masquerade all development is, and what effective shapes may be
disguised in helpless embryos. In fact, the world is full of hopeful
analogies and handsome dubious eggs called possibilities. Will saw
clearly enough the pitiable instances of long incubation producing no
chick, and but for gratitude would have laughed at Casaubon, whose
plodding application, rows of note-books, and small taper of learned
theory exploring the tossed ruins of the world, seemed to enforce a
moral entirely encouraging to Will’s generous reliance on the
intentions of the universe with regard to himself. He held that
reliance to be a mark of genius; and certainly it is no mark to the
contrary; genius consisting neither in self-conceit nor in humility,
but in a power to make or do, not anything in general, but something in
particular. Let him start for the Continent, then, without our
pronouncing on his future. Among all forms of mistake, prophecy is the
most gratuitous.”
(George Eliot, Middlemarch, 1871)

E2.2.C.3.21. THE THEORY OF CONSTRUCTED EMOTION PRESENTS A NEW VIEW OF HUMAN NATURE IN WHICH WE ARE ARCHITECTS OF OUR OWN EXPERIENCE, A ROLE THAT EXTENDS PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY TO INCLUDE CULTIVATING THE VERY CONCEPTS THAT DRIVE OUR ACTIONS AND RECOGNIZING OUR PART IN WIRING THE BRAINS OF OTHERS.
“A New View of Human Nature 
The theory of constructed emotion is not just a modern explanation of how emotions are made. It’s also an ambassador for a radically different view of what it means to be a human being. This view is consistent with the latest research in neuroscience. It also gives you more control over your feelings and behavior than the classical view does, and it has deep implications for how to live your life. You are not a reactive animal, wired to respond to events in the world. When it comes to your experiences and perceptions, you are much more in the driver’s seat than you might think. You predict, construct, and act. You are an architect of your experience. Another compelling view of human nature comes from the classical view of emotion. It’s been around for thousands of years and is still embedded in law, medicine, and other critical elements of society. The two views have in fact been at war with each other throughout recorded history. In previous battles, the classical view of human nature has consistently come out on top for reasons we’ll see. But now, as we’re in the midst of a revolution of mind and brain, modern neuroscience has given us the tools to settle the conflict, and based on overwhelming evidence, the classical view has lost. In this chapter, I lay out the distinctive new view of human nature rep-resented by the theory of constructed emotion and compare it to the traditional ideas espoused by the classical view. I also introduce you to a shadowy culprit that has kept the classical view so prominent for so long, entrenched in science and culture, despite a steady stream of contrary evidence.
Most of us think of the outside world as physically separate from ourselves. Events happen “out there” in the world, and you react to them “in here” in your brain. In the theory of constructed emotion, however, the dividing line be-tween brain and world is permeable, perhaps nonexistent. Your brain’s core systems combine in various ways to construct your perceptions, memories, thoughts, feelings, and other mental states. […]. Your brain issues a storm of predictions, simulates their consequences as if they were present, and checks and corrects those predictions against actual sensory input. Along the way, your interoceptive predictions produce your feelings of affect, influence every action that you perform, and deter-mine which parts of the world you care about in the moment (your affective niche). Without interoception, you wouldn’t notice or care about your physical surroundings or anything else, and you’d be unlikely to survive for long. Interoception enables your brain to construct the environment in which you live. At the same time that your brain is modeling your world, the outside world helps to wire your brain. When you’re an infant, awash in sensory input, the outside world seeds your earliest concepts, as your brain hardwires itself to the realities of the physical world around you. That’s how babies’ brains become wired to recognize human faces. As your brain develops and you begin learning words, your brain hardwires itself to the social world, and you begin creating purely mental concepts like “Things That Can Protect You from Stinging Insects” and “Sadness.” These concepts from your culture appear to be in the outside world, but they are constructions of your conceptual system. In this view, culture is not some gauzy, amorphous vapor that surrounds you. It helped to wire your brain, and you behave in certain ways that wire the brains of the next generation. For example, if a culture dictates that people with certain skin colors are less worthwhile, this social reality has a physical effect on the group: they have lower salaries and their children have poorer nutrition and living conditions. These factors change the structure of their children’s brains for the worse, making school harder and increasing the odds that the children will earn lower salaries in the future.
Your constructions aren’t arbitrary — your brain (and the mind it creates) must keep in touch with the bits of reality that count in order to keep your body alive and healthy. Construction cannot make a solid wall un-solid (unless you have mutant superpowers), but you can redraw countries, redefine marriage, and decide who’s worthwhile and who isn’t. Your genes gave you a brain that can wire itself to its physical and social environment, and other members of your culture construct that environment with you. It takes more than one brain to create a mind. The theory of constructed emotion also leads to a whole new way of thinking about personal responsibility. Suppose you’re angry with your boss and lash out impulsively, slamming your fist on his desk and calling him an idiot. Where the classical view might attribute some blame to a hypothetical anger circuit, partially absolving you of responsibility, construction extends the notion of responsibility beyond the moment of harm. Your brain is predictive, not reactive. Its core systems are constantly trying to guess what’s coming next so you can survive. Therefore your actions, and the predictions that launched those actions, are shaped by all your past experiences (as concepts) that led up to that moment. You slam that desk because your brain predicted an instance of anger, using your concept of “Anger,” and your past experience (whether direct, or from movies or books, etc.) includes an action of slamming the desk in a similar situation. Your control network, you may recall, constantly shapes the course of your predictions and prediction error to help select among multiple actions, whether you experience yourself as in control or not. This network can only work with the concepts that you’ve got. So the question of responsibility becomes, Are you responsible for your concepts? Not all of them, certainly. When you’re a baby, you can’t choose the concepts that other people put into your head. But as an adult, you absolutely do have choices about what you expose yourself to and therefore what you learn, which creates the concepts that ultimately drive your actions, whether they feel willful or not. So “responsibility” means making deliberate choices to change your concepts. […] If you grow up in a society full of anger or hate, you can’t be blamed for having the associated concepts, but as an adult, you can choose to educate yourself and learn additional concepts. It’s certainly not an easy task, but it is doable. This is another basis for my frequent claim, “You are an architect of your experience.” You are indeed partly responsible for your actions, even so-called emotional reactions that you experience as out of your control. It is your responsibility to learn concepts that, through prediction, steer you away from harmful actions. You also bear some responsibility for others, because your actions shape other people’s concepts and behaviors, creating the environment that turns genes on and off to wire their brains, including the brains of the next generation. Social reality implies that we are all partly responsible for one another’s behavior, not in a fluffy, let’s-all-blame-society sort of way, but a very real brain-wiring way. […] On the whole, the theory of constructed emotion is a biologically informed, psychological explanation of who you are as a human being. It takes into account both evolution and culture. You are born with some brain wiring as determined by your genes, but the environment can turn some genes on and off, allowing your brain to wire itself to your experiences. Your brain is shaped by the realities of the world that you find yourself in, including the social world made by agreement among people. Your mind is a grand collaboration that you have no awareness of. Through construction, you perceive the world not in any objectively accurate sense but through the lens of your own needs, goals, and prior experience.”
(Lisa Feldman Barrett, How Emotions Are Made - The Secret Life of the Brain, 2017)



LISA FELDMAN BARRETT  ARGUES THAT THE CLASSICAL VIEW OF EMOTION IS ROOTED IN A FLAWED ESSENTIALISM—THE BELIEF THAT EACH EMOTION HAS A UNIVERSAL, INNATE FINGERPRINT—WHICH IS NOT ONLY CONTRADICTED BY SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE BUT IS ALSO PROFOUNDLY IRONIC, AS IT RELIES ON THE VERY THINKING THAT DARWIN'S OWN ANTI-ESSENTIALIST THEORY OF EVOLUTION OVERTHREW. 
“The theory of constructed emotion provides a very different outlook on human nature than the classical view does. Classical ideas about our evolutionary origins, our personal responsibility, and our relationship with the outside world have been dominant in Western culture for thousands of years. To understand this older view of human nature and why it’s been so entrenched for so long, it’s convenient to begin — as so many scientific stories do — with Charles Darwin. In 1872, Darwin published The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals, where he wrote that emotions were passed down to us, unchanging through the ages, from an early animal ancestor. Emotions in modern humans are therefore caused by ancient parts of our nervous system, ac-cording to Darwin, and each emotion has a specific, consistent fingerprint. To borrow a term from philosophy, Darwin was saying that each emotion has an essence. If instances of sadness occur with a pout and a slowed heart rate, then a fingerprint of “pout and slowed heart rate” may be the essence of sadness. Alternatively, the essence might be an underlying cause that makes all the instances of sadness the emotion they are, such as a set of neurons. (I’ll use the word “essence” to refer to both possibilities.) The belief in essences is called essentialism. It presupposes that certain categories — sadness and fear, dogs and cats, African and European Ameri-cans, men and women, good and evil — each have a true reality or nature. Within each category, the members are thought to share a deep, underlying property (an essence) that causes them to be similar, even if they have some superficial differences. There are many varieties of dog with differences in size, shape, color, gait, temperament, and so on, but these differences are considered superficial with regard to some essence that all dogs share. A dog is never a cat. Likewise, all varieties of the classical view consider emotions like sadness and fear to have distinct essences. The neuroscientist Jaak Panksepp, for ex-ample, writes that an emotion’s essence is a circuit in the subcortical regions of your brain. The evolutionary psychologist Steven Pinker writes that emotions are like mental organs, analogous to body organs for specialized functions, and that an emotion’s essence is a set of genes. The evolutionary psychologist Leda Cosmides and the psychologist Paul Ekman assume that each emotion has an innate, unobservable essence, which they refer to as a metaphorical “program.” Ekman’s version of the classical view, called basic emotion theory, assumes that essences for happiness, sadness, fear, surprise, anger, and disgust are triggered automatically by objects and events in the world. Another version, called classical appraisal theory, inserts an additional step in between you and the world, saying that your brain first judges (“appraises”) the situation and decides whether to trigger an emotion. All versions of the classical view agree that each emotion category has a distinct fingerprint; they just disagree on the nature of the essences.
Essentialism is the culprit that has made the classical view supremely difficult to set aside. It encourages people to believe that their senses reveal objective boundaries in nature. Happiness and sadness look and feel different, the argument goes, so they must have different essences in the brain. People are almost always unaware that they essentialize; they fail to see their own hands in motion as they carve dividing lines in the natural world. Darwin’s belief in emotion essences, as revealed in Expression, helped to launch the modern classical view of emotion to prominence. That same be-lief also made Darwin unwittingly look like a hypocrite. It is no small task to criticize — let alone contradict — the ideas of one of the greatest scientists in history. But let’s have a go, shall we? Darwin’s most famous book, On the Origin of Species, triggered a paradigm shift that transformed biology into a modern science. His greatest scientific achievement, so nicely summed up by the evolutionary biologist Ernst Mayr, was freeing biology from “the paralyzing grip of essentialism.” Regarding emotion, however, Darwin made an inexplicable about-face thirteen years later by writing Expression, a book riddled with essentialism.
In doing so, he abandoned his remarkable innovations and returned to essentialism’s paralyzing grip, at least where emotions are concerned. You see, before Darwin’s theory from Origin became popular in the nineteenth century, essentialism ruled the animal kingdom. Each species was assumed to have an ideal form, created by God, with defining properties (essences) that distinguished it from all other species (each with their own essences). Deviations from the ideal were said to be due to error or accident. […] Then along came Darwin, who argued that variations within a species, such as length of stride, are not errors. Instead, variations are expected and are meaningfully related to the species’ environment. […]
No features are necessary, sufficient, or even typical of every individual in the population. This observation, known as population thinking, is central to Darwin’s theory of evolution. Population thinking is based on variation, whereas essentialism is based on sameness. The two ideas are fundamentally incompatible. Origin is therefore a profoundly anti-essentialist book. So it is baffling that where emotion is concerned, Darwin reversed his greatest achievement by writing Expression. It is equally baffling, not to mention ironic, that the classical view of emotion is based on the very essentialism that Darwin is famous for vanquishing in biology. The classical view explicitly labels itself as “evolutionary” and assumes that emotions and their expressions are products of natural selection, yet natural selection is completely absent from Darwin’s thinking on emotion. Any essentialist view that wraps itself in the cloak of Darwin is demonstrating a profound misunderstanding of Darwin’s central ideas about evolution. […]
So why is essentialism so powerful that it can twist the words of great scientists and misdirect the path of scientific discovery? The simplest reason is that essentialism is intuitive. We experience our own emotions as automatic reactions, so it’s easy to believe that they spring forth from ancient, dedicated parts of the brain. We also see emotions in blinks, furrowed brows, and other muscle twitches, and we hear emotions in the pitch and lilt of voices, without any sense of effort or agency. Therefore, it’s also easy to believe that we’ve been engineered by nature to recognize emotional displays and programmed to act on them. […] Essentialism is also remarkably difficult to disprove. Since an essence can be an unobservable property, people are free to believe in essences even when they cannot be found. It’s easy to come up with reasons why an experiment did not detect an essence: “we haven’t looked everywhere yet,” or “it’s inside this complicated biological structure we can’t see into yet,” or “our tools today aren’t sufficiently powerful to find the essence, but one day they will be.” These hopeful thoughts are heartfelt but logically impossible to prove false. Essentialism inoculates itself against counterevidence. It also changes the way science is practiced. If scientists believe in a world of essences that are waiting to be discovered, then they devote themselves to finding those essences, a potentially endless quest.
Essentialism also appears to be an inherent part of our psychological makeup. Humans create categories by inventing purely mental similarities […] and we name those categories with words. That’s why a word like “pet” or “sadness” applies to a multitude of diverse instances. Words are an incredible achievement, but they are also a Faustian bargain for the human brain. On one hand, a word like “sadness,” when applied to a collection of varied perceptions, invites you to search for (or invent) some underlying sameness that transcends their noticeable differences. That is, the word “sadness” guides you to create an emotion concept, which is a good thing. But the word also invites you to believe in a reason for that sameness: some deep, unobservable, or even unknowable quality that is responsible for their equivalence, giving them their true identity. That is, words invite you to believe in an essence, and that process is conceivably the psychological origin of essentialism.”
(Lisa Feldman Barrett, How Emotions Are Made - The Secret Life of the Brain, 2017)

E2.2.C.3.4. A different kind of purpose is one that finds freedom not by asserting the individual ego and its goals, but by dissolving it into a larger project, a "common effort," or a state of being.

E2.2.C.3.4.a. "Art is listening to this inner voice." It brings us the buried whisper. It is the voice of a supernatural consciousness that resides within us on an inalienable and perpetual foundation. It brings us back to the primordial site of our being and to our place in the universe. Our insignificant piece of it takes on universal significance and grants us its authority. Triumphant over all the discontinuous themes that separate being and compose the individual, art is the sense of harmony that restores us to the gentle rhythm of the world and returns us to the infinity that calls us"
(M. Roupnel, Soloë — quoted by Gaston Bachelard in L'intuition de l'instant, 1931).

E2.2.C.3.4.b. "Chapter Four
II. The Divine Worker 

18 . – He who can see inaction in action, and who can see action continuing even in the cessation of works, he is among men the man of true reason and discernment; he is in yoga and he is the universal worker with many abilities (for the good of the world, for God in the world).

The answer is that there is no need to make external distinctions, to avoid any work necessary for the world, to place any limits or barriers around human activities. On the contrary, all actions must be performed, but by a soul in yoga with the Divine. Akarma, the cessation of action, is not the way; the man who has attained the inner vision of supreme reason perceives that such inaction is itself a constant action, a condition subject to the activity of nature and its modes.

Outwardly, the liberated man seems to undertake works of all kinds like other men, perhaps on a larger scale and with more force and impetus, because the power of the divine will acts in his active nature; but his works are all devoid of desire. He has abandoned all attachment to the fruits of his actions; but when one acts, not for the fruit, but solely as an impersonal instrument of the Master of works, desire has no place, not even the desire to serve successfully—for the fruit belongs to the Lord, is determined by Him and not by personal will and effort—nor the desire to serve meritoriously and to the satisfaction of the Master, for the real author is the Lord Himself, and all glory belongs to a form of His Shakti [force, energy; divine or cosmic energy (roughly synonymous with Prakriti)] on mission in nature, and not to the limited human personality. The result of this knowledge, this absence of desire and this impersonality is perfect equality in the soul and in nature. Equality is the fourth sign of the divine worker.

Basing one's actions on the impersonal is a means of overcoming the inherent egoism of the author, but the goal is to surrender all actions to the Supreme Lord, Sarva, who encompasses all beings and the five elements (earth, water, fire, air, and ether), which are part of the list of tattvas. "Identify your consciousness with the Self. Abandon all your actions to Me. Be freed from personal hopes and desires, from the thought of 'I' and 'mine,' and from the fever of the soul. Fight, act, and do My will in the world."
(The Bhagavad Gita, translation by Jean Herbert; commentary by Aurobindo).


E2.2.C.3.4.c. "Pour Nietzsche, l’air est la substance même de notre liberté, la substance de la joie surhumaine. L’air est une sorte de matière surmontée comme la joie nietzschéenne est une joie humaine surmontée. [...] 
L’air nietzschéen est alors une étrange substance : c’est la substance sans qualités substantielles. Elle peut donc caractériser l’être comme adéquat à une philosophie du total devenir. Dans le règne de l'imagination, l’air nous libère des rêveries substantielles, intimes, digestives. Il nous libère de notre attachement aux matières: il est donc la matière de notre liberté. À Nietzsche, l’air n’apporte rien. Il ne donne rien. Il est l’immense gloire d’un Rien. Mais ne rien donner n’est-il pas le plus grand des dons. Le grand donateur aux mains vides nous débarrasse des désirs de la main tendue. Il nous habitue à ne rien percevoir, donc à tout prendre. « N’est-ce pas au donateur, demande Nietzsche, de remercier celui qui a bien voulu prendre ? » [...]
Pour un vrai nietzschéen, le nez doit donner l’heureuse certitude d’un air sans parfum, le nez doit témoigner de l’immense bonheur, de la bienheureuse conscience de ne rien éprouver. Il est le garant du néant des odeurs. Le flair, dont Nietzsche s’est si souvent enorgueilli, n’est pas vertu d’attrait. Il est donné au surhomme pour qu’il s’écarte au moindre indice d’une impureté. Un nietzschéen ne peut se complaire dans une odeur. Baudelaire, la comtesse de Noailles — tous deux terrestres, ce qui, bien entendu, est un autre signe de puissance — rêvent et méditent sur les odeurs. Les parfums ont alors les résonances infinies; ils lient les souvenirs aux désirs, un énorme passé à un avenir immense et informulé. Au contraire, voici Nietzsche : 
Respirant l’air le plus pur, 
les narines gonflées comme des gobelets, 
sans avenir, sans souvenir…
L’air pur est conscience de l’instant libre, d’un instant qui ouvre un avenir. Rien de plus. Les odeurs sont des enchaînements sensibles; elles ont, dans leur corps même, une continuité. Il n’y a pas d’odeurs discontinues. L’air pur est, au contraire, une impression de jeunesse et de nouveauté (p. 260) : « De ses narines il absorbait l’air lentement et comme pour interroger, comme quelqu’un qui, dans les pays nouveaux, goûte de l’air nouveau. » Nous oserions dire: un vide nouveau et une liberté nouvelle, car il n’y a rien d’exotique, de capiteux, d’enivrant dans cet air nouveau. Le climat est fait d’un air pur, sec, froid et vide. 
- Je suis assis là, respirant le meilleur air, 
l’air du paradis, en vérité, 
l’air clair, léger et rayé d’or,
aussi bon qu’il en soit jamais 
tombé de la lune…
L’imagination nietzschéenne déserte les odeurs dans la mesure même où elle se détache du passé. Tout passéisme rêve des odeurs indestructibles. Prévoir est le contraire de sentir. [...]
Si l’air symbolise un instant de repos et de détente, il donne aussi conscience de l’action prochaine, d’une action qui nous délivre d’une volonté amassée. Aussi, dans la simple joie de respirer l’air pur, on trouve une promesse de puissance : 
l’air s’emplit de promesses; 
je sens passer sur moi l’haleine des lèvres inconnues 
— voici venir la grande fraîcheur… (p. 274) 
Comment mieux dire, en cette subite fraîcheur, que les lèvres inconnues ne sont pas des promesses d’ivresse ? 
Avec cette fraîcheur — cette grande fraîcheur qui va venir - s’introduit une valeur nietzschéenne qui, sous des aspects sensibles, désigne une réalité profonde. Elle est un type de ces métaphores directes et réelles qui constituent, pour une doctrine de l'imagination, des données immédiates et élémentaires. Au fond, pour Nietzsche, la véritable qualité tonique de l’air, la qualité qui fait la joie de respirer, la qualité qui dynamise l’air immobile — véritable dynamisation en profondeur qui est la vie même de l’imagination dynamique —, c’est cette fraîcheur. [...]"
(Gaston Bachelard, L’air et les songes - Essai sur l’imagination du mouvement, 1943)


E2.2.C.3.4.d. D.H. LAWRENCE ENVISIONS A "NEW HOPE" IN A LIFE WHERE THE STRUGGLE IS NOT FOR THE EMPTY GOALS OF THE CURRENT SOCIETY ("MONEY OR FOR POWER"), BUT FOR "INDIVIDUAL FREEDOM AND COMMON EFFORT TOWARDS GOOD." 
“I want you to form the nucleus of a new community which
shall start a new life amongst us—a life in which the only riches
is integrity of character So that each one may fulfil his own
nature and deep desires to the utmost, but wherein tho’, the
ultimate satisfaction and joy is m the completeness of us all as
one Let us be good all together, instead of just m the privacy
of our chambers, let us know that the intrinsic part of all of us
is the best part, the believing part, the passionate, generous
part We can all come croppers, but what does it matter? We
can laugh at each other, and dislike each other, but the good
remains and we know it And the new community shall be
established upon the known, eternal good part m us This
present community consists, as far as it is a framed thing, m a
myriad contrivances for preventing us from being let down by
the meanness m ourselves or in our neighbours. But it is like a
motor car that is so encumbered with non-skid, non-puncture,
non-burst, non-this and non-that contrivances, that it simply
can’t go any more I hold this the most sacred duty—^the
gathering together of a number of people who shall so agree to
live by the best they know, that they shall be free to live by the
best they know. The ideal, the religion, must now be lived,
practised We will have no more churches, "We will bring
church and house and shop together. I do believe that there are
enough decent people to make a start with. Let us get the
people. […]
This shall be the new hope that there shall be a life wherein the struggle 
shall not be for money or for power, but for individual freedom and 
common effort towards good That is surely the richest thing to
have now—the feeling that one is working, that one is part of a
great, good effort or of a great effort towards goodness. It is no
good plastering and tinkering with this community. Every
strong soul must put off its connection with this society, its
vanity and chiefly its fear, and go naked with its fellows,
weaponless armourless without shield or spear, but only with
naked hands and open eyes Not self-sacrifice, but fulfilment,
the flesh and the spirit in league together not in arms against one
another And each man shall know that he is part of the greater
body, each man shall submit that his own soul is not supreme
even to himself. ''To be or not to be" is no longer the question.
The question now is, how shall we fulfil our declaration, "God
is”? For all our life is now based on the assumption that God
IS not—or except on rare occasions
. . We must go very, very carefully at first. The great
serpent to destroy, is the will to Power, the desire for one man
to have some dominion over his fellow-men. Let us have no
personal influence, if possible—nor personal magnetism, as
they used to call it, nor persuasion—no 'Follow me’—but
only ' Behold ” And a man shall not come to save his own soul.
Let his soul go to hell He shall come because he knows that
his own soul IS not the be-all and the end-all, but that all souls
of all things do but compose the body of God, and that God
indeed shall Be.
I do hope that we shall all of us be able to agree, that we
have a common way, a common interest, not a private way and
a private interest only.
It is communism based, not on poverty but on riches, not
on humility but on pride, not on sacrifice but upon complete
fulfilment m the flesh of all strong desire, not m Heaven but
on earth. We will be Sons of God who walk here on earth,
not bent on getting and having, because we know we inherit all
things We will be aristocrats, and as wise as the serpent in
dealing with the mob For the mob shall not crush us nor
starve us nor cry us to death We will deal cunningly with the
mob, the greedy soul, we will gradually bring it to subjection.
We will found an order, and we will all be Princes, as the
angels are.
We must bring this thing about—at least set it into life,
bring It forth new-born on the earth, watched over by our old
cunning and guided by our ancient, mercenary-soldier habits.”
(D.H. Lawrence, Letter to Lady Ottolme Morrell, February 24, 1915)

D.H. LAWRENCE ENVISIONS A "NEW HOPE" IN A LIFE WHERE THE STRUGGLE IS NOT FOR THE EMPTY GOALS OF THE CURRENT SOCIETY ("MONEY OR FOR POWER"), BUT FOR "INDIVIDUAL FREEDOM AND COMMON EFFORT TOWARDS GOOD." (Continued)
"To live, we must all unite, and bRIng all the knowledge
into a coherent whole, we must all set to for the joining
together of the multifarious parts, we must knit all words
together into a great new utterance, we must cast all personalties
INto the meltINg pot, and give a new Humanity its birth
Remember, it is not anythINg personal we want any more
any of us It is not honour nor personal satisfaction, it is the
INcorporation in the great impulse whereby a great people shall
come into being, a free race as well as a race of free individuals
The individual is now more free than the race. His race hurts
him and cribs him in No one man can create a new race It
needs all of us So we must all uNIte for this purpose It makes
me qUIte glad to think how splendid it will be, when more and
more of us fasten our hands on the chains, and pull, and pull,
and break them apart.
One must always destroy the old Moloch of greediness and
love of property and love of power But think what a splendid
world we shall have, when each man shall seek joy and under
standing rather than getting and having
Don't think that I am important But this thing which is
of all of us is so important and splendid that the skies shiver
with deLIght when it is mentioned And don’t be sceptical
We are the young. And it is only the young who can know a
great cause."
(D.H. Lawrence, Letter to Lady Ottolme Morrell,  1915)

D.H. LAWRENCE ENVISIONS A "NEW HOPE" IN A LIFE WHERE THE STRUGGLE IS NOT FOR THE EMPTY GOALS OF THE CURRENT SOCIETY ("MONEY OR FOR POWER"), BUT FOR "INDIVIDUAL FREEDOM AND COMMON EFFORT TOWARDS GOOD." (Continued)
"The whole point of Dostoievsky lies in the fact of his fixed
will that the individual ego, the achieved I, the conscious
entity, shall be infinite, God-like, and absolved from all
relation, i.e free.
I like The Idiot best The Idiot is showing the last stage of
Christianity, of becoming purely self-less, of becoming disseminated out into a pure, absolved consciousness This is the Christian ecstasy, when I become so transcendently super conscious that I am bodiless, that the universe is my consciousness This is the little Idiot prince It is the ecstasy of being devoured in the body, like the Christian lamb, and of transcendence in the consciousness, the spirit.
Karamazov is concerned with the last stages—not nearly so
far gone—of sensuality, of unconscious experience purely
within the self I reach such a pitch of dark sensual ecstasy
that I seem to be, I myself, the universal night that has swallowed everything I become universal, the universal devouring darkness This is Dmitri Karamazov 
This was Dostoievsky's real desire, to obtain this sensual ecstasy of universality [...
The Christian ecstasy leads to imbecility {The Idiot), The
sensual ecstasy leads to universal murder for mind, the acme
of sensual ecstasy, hes in devouring the other, even in the
pleasures of love, it is a devouring, like a tiger drinking blood.
But the full sensual ecstasy is never reached except by Rogozhin
in murdering Nastasya It is nipped m the last stages by the
will, the social will When the police stripped Dmitri Karamazov
naked, they killed m him the quick of his being, his lust
for the sensual ecstasy
The men who represent the will, the pure mental, social,
rational, absolved will, Ivan Karamazov, and Pyotr Stepanovitch,
and Gavril, they represent the last stages of our social
development, the human being become mechanical, absolved
from all relation When Stepan talks with the devil, the devil
IS a decayed social gentleman—only that The mechanical
social forms and aspirations and ideals, I suppose, are the
devil."
(D.H. Lawrence, Letter to Lady Ottolme Morrell, February 17,  1915)

EE2.2.C.3.4.e.

1.7.C.2.4.a_REF1_PH.wXXXX
SPIRITUALITY IS THE QUEST FOR THE 'SELF' [âtman]- an essential concept in Indian philosophy - the very opposite of the 'ego' [ahamkara] which is the focus of personal development and a certain kind of psychoanalysis.

E1.7.A.4_REF1_PH.wXXXX
INDIANS ARE THE GREATEST GRAMMARIANS IN THE WORLD: they developed a school of rigor and rationality based on this discipline. And it is also from this discipline that they began to develop a certain number of philosophical reflections and discourses. 

E1.7.A.4.3.wXXXX
FOR INDIANS, WHAT MATTERS IS NOT THE QUESTION OF TRUTH, BUT THAT OF LIBERATION.

E2.2.C.4.wE1.7. THE PATH OF SPIRITUAL PRACTICE IS A TECHNIQUE OF THE SELF, founded on a relationship with life, the world, and others. It aims to instigate inner transformation in the person who partakes in it, towards liberation.

E2.2.C.5. When reality imposes itself on us uninvited: Intuition & Revelation.

E2.2.C.5.1. The "Uninvited" Moment of intuition and revelation is a pre-conscious, involuntary, and often mystical event—something that happens to us, rather than something we do.

E2.2.C.5.1.a. A_Henry Miller_Man and woodpecker

"Every man has in his life that moment of light, whether it comes from suffering or joy. It is the moment when he suddenly understands his own message. It is the moment when knowledge, illuminating passion, reveals both the rules and the monotony of destiny. It is the truly synthetic moment when decisive failure, by giving awareness of the irrational, becomes the success of thought. This is where the differential of knowledge lies: the Newtonian fluxion that allows us to appreciate how the mind emerges from ignorance and the inflection of human genius on the curve described by the progress of life. Intellectual courage means keeping this moment of nascent knowledge active and alive. It means making it the ever-springing source of our intuition and using the subjective history of our errors and mistakes to draw the objective model of a better, clearer life".
(Gaston Bachelard, Intuition of the Instant, 1931)

E2.2.C.5.1.b. IN PHILOSOPHY OF GESTURE, MICHEL GUÉRIN ARGUES THAT GESTURE IS THE INITIAL. UNLIKE THE BEGINNING, WHICH COMES BEFORE SOMETHING ELSE, THE INITIAL COMES BEFORE THE BEFORE.

- Gesture exists at the intersection of the body and the mind. It establishes a connection between a physical body and a conscious mind. It is an intention formed before consciousness.
- It is absolute singularity and presence. It cannot be reduced.
- Gesture is a threshold that recedes as we approach it. This can be frustrating because gestures are intangible and difficult to grasp. We can imagine a beginning that precedes the moment when they become perceptible.
- Gesture is a mixture of the initial and the immemorial, a link between the individual and the species—an archaic memory so ancient that we have forgotten it.
- Gesture is a "gesture in a posture" — something that presupposes its own prosthesis. Posture is a gesture that has degenerated into an attitude. Attitude (habit) is the opposite of action.

E2.2.C.5.1.c. "When Wittgenstein identifies "unspeakable" and "mystical," he is not referring to negative theology or ecstasy. Rather, he is referring to "feeling." I think what characterizes "the mystical" for him is precisely that it is a feeling, an emotion, or an affective experience (Erlebnis, not Erfahrung) that cannot be expressed because it is foreign to scientific descriptions of facts. It lies in the existential, ethical, or aesthetic order. Moreover, one might think that when Wittgenstein speaks of mysticism, he is referring to his own experience. Consider proposition (6.44) of the Tractatus: "The mystical is not the how (wie) of the world, but the fact of the world's existence (dass)," which is clarified by the confidence in the Lecture on Ethics, in which he speaks of his experience par excellence without using the word "mystical." "I think the best way to describe it is to say that when I have this experience, I am amazed at the existence of the world." In the same lecture, he describes an experience of "seeing the world as a miracle." We also see that, for Wittgenstein, the mystical experience is analogous to the aesthetic experience. In the Notebooks (October 20, 1916), we read: "The miracle, aesthetically speaking, is that there is a world."
(Pierre Hadot, Wittgenstein and the Limits of Language, 2004; excerpt from the 2014 preface).

"Truth is stranger than fiction because reality precedes and includes imagination. What constitutes reality is unlimited and undefinable. Men of little imagination name and classify; the great ones are content to forego this game. For the latter, vision and experience suffice. They do not even try to tell what they have seen and  felt, for their province is the ineffable.
The great visions which have come down to us in words are but the pale, jeweled reflections of indescribable happenings. 
Great events may be soul-stirring, but great visions transfix one. As a saint - that is to say as a wretched sinner straggling with his conscience - Augustine is magnify; as a theologian he is dull, overwhelmingly dull.”
(Henry Miller, The books in my life)

E2.2.C.5.1.d. THE TRUTH OF MYSTICISM IS ONE OF WONDER AND REVELATION THAT IMPOSES ITSELF.
"Has anyone at the close of the nineteenth century any clear idea of what the poets of more powerful epochs called inspiration? If not, then allow me to describe it. Whatever grain of superstition may still dwell in the mind, we should dismiss the idea that we are not the incarnation, the mouthpiece, the medium for higher forces. The notion of revelation, in the sense that suddenly, with indescribable certainty and indefinable subtlety, something becomes visible, audible, something that overwhelms and moves you at the very limits of your self, is a stark fact. We listen, we do not seek; we assume, we do not ask who gives; like lightening a thought lights you, with necessity in its wavering form – I had no choice. A rapture whose terrific tension is reduced by a flood of tears, where unconsciously the tread, sometimes speeds up and sometimes slows down, a state beyond oneself where one is so conscious of countless tense quiverings to the tips of the toes: a depth of happiness where the union of pain and darkness is not seen in contradiction but as conditional, deified, the primary colour at the heart of such an overflowing of light: an instinct for rhythmical relationships, the vast expanses of exaggerated forms – the length, the need for a comprehensive rhythm, virtually the gauge of inspirational power, which partially compensates for the pressure and tension inflicted… Everything takes place at the highest sphere of the involuntary, in a whirlpool of free feeling, indetermination, power, the divine… Most remarkable is the involuntary character of the image, of parables: we no longer have any idea what an image or parable is, all presents itself as the most immediate, the most right, the plainest expression, it really appears, recalling Zarathustra, that things come to offer themselves as a parable. ‘Here at your oration, all things come, caressing and flattering you: for they want to ride upon your wing. With each parable you fly towards a truth. Language and its shrine open to you; all being wants to be language, all being wants you to learn how to speak it…’ Such is my experience of inspiration [...]"
(Stefan Zweig, Nietzsche, 1930)

E2.2.C.5.1.e. LEVINAS OFFERS A DEEP AND POWERFUL PHENOMENOLOGICAL DESCRIPTION OF A SPECIFIC KIND OF REVELATION—THE ENCOUNTER WITH WHAT LEVINAS CALLS THE "IDEA OF THE INFINITE". Levinas's central argument is that this idea is unique because it is not generated by our own minds. Instead, it is "put into us." It "forces its way through the barrier and checkpoint, eluding the obligation to accept or adopt all that enters from the outside."
“The actuality of the cogito is […] interrupted by the unincludable, not thought but undergone in the form of the idea of the Infinite, bearing in a second moment of consciousness what in a first moment claimed to bear it. After the certainty of the cogito, present to itself in the second Meditation, after the "halt" which the last lines of this Meditation mark, the third Meditation announces that "in some way I have in me the notion of the infinite earlier than the finite - to wit, the notion of God before that of myself." The idea of the Infinite, Infinity in me, can only be a passivity of consciousness. Is it still consciousness? There is here a passivity which cannot be likened to receptivity. Receptivity is a collecting that takes place in a welcome, an assuming that takes place under the force of the blow received. The breakup of the actuality of thought in the "idea of God" is a passivity more passive still than any passivity, like the passivity of a trauma through which the idea of God would have been put into us. An "idea put into us" - does this stylistic turn suit the subjectivity of the cogito? Does it suit consciousness and its way of holding a content, which is to always leave some traces of its grasp on it? Does not consciousness, in its present, get its origin and its contents from itself? Can an idea be put into a thought and abjure its letters patent of Socratic nobility, its immanent birth in reminiscence, that is, its origin in the very presence of the thought that thinks it, or in the recuperation of this thought by memory? But in the idea of the Infinite there is described a passivity more passive still than any passivity befitting consciousness: there is the surprise or susception of the unassumable, more open still than any openness - wakefulness - but suggesting the passivity of someone created.7 The putting into us of an unincludable idea overturns that presence to self which consciousness is, forcing its way through the barrier and checkpoint, eluding the obligation to accept or adopt all that enters from the outside. It is then an idea signifying with a signifyingness prior to presence, to all presence, prior to every origin in consciousness and thus an-archical, accessible in its trace. It signifies with a signifyingness from the first older than its exhibition, not exhausting itself in exhibiting itself, not drawing its meaning from its manifestation, and thus breaking with the coinciding of being with appearance in which, for Western philosophy, meaning or rationality lie, breaking with synopsis. It is more ancient than the rememberable thought which representation retains in its presence. What can this signification more ancient than exhibition mean? Or, more exactly, what can the antiquity of a signification mean? In exhibition, can it enter into another time than that of the historical present, which already annuls the past and its dia-chrony by re-presenting it? What can this antiquity mean if not the trauma of awakening - as though the idea of the Infinite, the Infinite in us, awakened a consciousness which is not awakened enough? As though the idea of the Infinite in us were a demand, and a signification in the sense that an order is signified in a demand.”
(Emmanuel Levinas, Collected Philosophical Papers, 1987)

E2.2.C.5.2. Crisis and Pressure: the first major way "reality imposes itself uninvited", through negative, painful, or high-stakes events. This is revelation born from suffering, failure, or immediate danger.

E2.2.C.5.2.a.

E1.5.B.5.5.a.wXXXXXXXXX

"A breakdown is not merely a random piece of madness or malfunction; it is a very real — albeit very inarticulate — bid for health and self-knowledge. It is an attempt by one part of our mind to force the other into a process of growth, self-understanding and self-development that it has hitherto refused to undertake. If we can put it paradoxically, it is an attempt to jump-start a process of getting well — properly well — through a stage of falling very ill. […]
In the midst of a breakdown, we often wonder whether we have gone mad. We have not. We’re behaving oddly, no doubt, but beneath the agitation we are on a hidden yet logical search for health. We haven’t become ill; we were ill already. Our crisis, if we can get through it, is an attempt to dislodge us from a toxic status quo and constitutes an insistent call to rebuild our lives on a more authentic and sincere basis. It belongs, in the most acute and panicked way, to the search for self-knowledge"
(Alain de Botton, The School of Life: An Emotional Education)

E2.2.C.5.2.b. George Minne, Jacques Francquaert, 1901

"DISAPPOINTMENT

[...] What we call disappointment may be just the first stage of our emancipation into the next greater pattern of existence. To be disappointed is to reappraise not only reality itself but our foundational relationship to the pattern of events, places and people that surround us, and which, until we were properly disappointed, we had misinterpreted and misunderstood; disappointment is the first, fruitful foundation of genuine heartbreak from which we risk ourselves in a marriage, in a work, in a friendship, or with life itself.

The measure of our courage is the measure of our willingness to embrace disappointment, to turn towards it rather than away; the understanding that every real conversation of life involves having our hearts broken somewhere along the way and that there is no sincere path we can follow where we will not be fully and immeasurably let down and brought to earth, where what initially looks like a betrayal eventually puts real ground under our feet."
(David Whyte, Consolations, The Solace, Nourishment and Underlying Meaning of Everyday Words, 2015)

E2.2.C.5.2.c. REALITY IMPOSING ITSELF IN ITS MOST BRUTAL AND UNINVITED FORM: A GRAND MAL SEIZURE. 
“When it descended, the seizure felt less like a separate distinct health-crisis than simply the next exhibit in the corridor of horrors that was the Old Cold Bird. In actual fact the seizure — a kind of synaptic firefight in Poor Tony's desiccated temporal lobes — was caused entirely by Withdrawal not From Heroin but from plain old grain alcohol, which was Codinex Plus cough syrup's primary ingredient and balm. He'd consumed upwards of sixteen little Eighty-Proof bottles of Codinex per day for eight days, and so was cruising for a real neurochemical bruising when he just up and stopped. The first thing that didn't augur very well was a shower of spark-sized phosphenes from the ceiling of the swaying train, this plus the fiery violet aura around the heads of the respectables who'd quietly retreated as far as possible from the various puddles in which he sat. Their clean pink faces looked somehow stricken, each inside a hood of violet flame. Poor Tony didn't know that his silent whimpers had ceased to be silent, was why everyone in the car had gotten so terribly interested in the floor-tiles between their feet. He knew only that the sudden and incongruous smell of Old Spice Stick Deodorant, Classic Original Scent — unbidden and unexplainable, his late obstetric Poppa's brand, not smelled for years — and the tiny panicked twitters with which Withdrawal's ants skittered glossily up into his mouth and nose and disappeared (each of course taking its tiny pincered farewell bite as it went) augured some new and vivider exhibit on the corridor's horizon. He'd become, at puberty, violently allergic to the smell of Old Spice. As he soiled himself and the plastic seat and floor once again the Classic Scent of times past intensified. Then Poor Tony's body began to swell. He watched his limbs become airy white dirigibles and felt them deny his authority and detach from him and float sluggishly up snout-first into the steel-mill sparks the ceiling rained. He suddenly felt nothing, or rather Nothing, a pre-tornadic stillness of zero sensation, as if he were the very space he occupied. 
Then he had a seizure.103 The floor of the subway car became the ceiling of the subway car and he was on his arched back in a waterfall of light, gagging on Old Spice and watching his tumid limbs tear-ass around the car's interior like undone balloons. The booming Zuckung Zuckung Zuckung was his high heels' heels drumming on the soiled floor's tile. He heard a rushing train-roar that was no train on earth and felt a vascular roaring rushing that until the pain hit seemed like the gathering of a kind of orgasm of the head. His head inflated hugely and creaked as it stretched, inflating. Then the pain (seizures hurt, is what few civilians have occasion to know) was the sharp end of a hammer. There was a squeak and rush of release inside his skull and something shot from him into the air. He saw Bobby ('C') C's blood misting upward in the hot wind of the Copley blower. His father knelt beside him on the ceiling in a well-rended sleeveless tee-, extolling the Red Sox of Rice and Lynn. Tony wore summer taffeta. His body flopped around without OK from HQ. He didn't feel one bit like a puppet. He thought of gaffed fish. The gown had 'a thousand flounces and a saucy bodice of lace crochet.' Then he saw his father, green-gowned and rubber-gloved, leaning to read the headlines off the skin of a fish a newspaper had wrapped. That had never happened. The largest-print headline said PUSH. Poor Tony flopped and gasped and pushed down inside and the utter red of the blood that feeds sight bloomed behind his fluttering lids. Time wasn't passing so much as kneeling beside him in a torn tee-shirt disclosing the rodent-nosed tits of a man who disdains the care of his once-comely bod. Poor Tony convulsed and drummed and gasped and fluttered, a fountain of light all around him. He felt a piece of nourishing and possibly even intoxicating meat in the back of his throat but elected not to swallow it but swallowed it anyway, and was immediately sorry he did; and when his father's bloody-rubbered fingers folded his teeth back to retrieve the tongue he'd swallowed he refused absolutely to bite down ungratefully on the hand that was taking his food, then without authorization he pushed and bit down and took the gloved fingers clean off, so there was rubber-wrapped meat in his mouth again and his father's head exploded into needled antennae of color like an exploding star between his gown's raised green arms and a call for Zuckung while Tony's heels drummed and struggled against the widening stirrups of light they were hoisted into while a curtain of red was drawn wetly up over the floor he stared down at, Tony, and he heard someone yelling for someone to Give In, Err, with a hand on his lace belly as he bore down to PUSH and he saw the legs in the stirrups they held would keep spreading until they cracked him open and all the way inside-out on the ceiling and his last worry was that red-handed Poppa could see up his dress, what was hidden.”
(David Foster Wallace, Infinite Jest, 1996)

E2.2.C.5.2.d. NASSIM NICHOLAS TALEB REFERS TO A "SECOND BRAIN" MANIFESTING ITSELF WHEN "RISK [IS] ON THE LINE". IT IS A MOMENT WHERE A DEEPER, MORE INTUITIVE FORM OF UNDERSTANDING "SUDDENLY" BECOMES AVAILABLE UNDER THE PRESSURE OF A HIGH-STAKES SITUATION. 
“A confession. When I don’t have skin in the game, I am usually dumb. My knowledge of technical matters, such as risk and probability, did not initially come from books. It did not come from lofty philosophizing and scientific hunger. It did not even come from curiosity. It came from the thrills and hormonal flush one gets while taking risks in the markets. I never thought mathematics was something interesting to me until, when I was at Wharton, a friend told me about the financial options I described earlier (and their generalization, complex derivatives). I immediately decided to make a career in them. It was a combination of financial trading and complicated probability. The field was new and uncharted. I knew in my guts there were mistakes in the theories that used the conventional bell curve and ignored the impact of the tails (extreme events). I knew in my guts that academics had not the slightest clue about the risks. So, to find errors in the estimation of these probabilistic securities, I had to study probability, which mysteriously and instantly became fun, even gripping.
When there was risk on the line, suddenly a second brain in me manifested itself, and the probabilities of intricate sequences became suddenly effortless to analyze and map. When there is fire, you will run faster than in any competition. When you ski downhill some movements become effortless. Then I became dumb again when there was no real action. Furthermore, as traders the mathematics we used fit our problem like a glove, unlike academics with a theory looking for some application—in some cases we had to invent models out of thin air and could not afford the wrong equations. Applying math to practical problems was another business altogether; it meant a deep understanding of the problem before writing the equations.
But if you muster the strength to weight-lift a car to save a child, above your current abilities, the strength gained will stay after things calm down. So, unlike the drug addict who loses his resourcefulness, what you learn from the intensity and the focus you had when under the influence of risk stays with you. You may lose the sharpness, but nobody can take away what you’ve learned. This is the principal reason I am now fighting the conventional educational system, made by dweebs for dweebs. Many kids would learn to love mathematics if they had some investment in it, and, more crucially, they would build an instinct to spot its misapplications.”
(Nassim Nicholas Taleb, Skin in the game, 2017)

E2.2.C.5.3. Innocence and Encounter: 
The second major way "reality imposes itself" is through a sudden, "innocent" encounter with the world—through art, love, creation, or nature.

E2.2.C.5.3.a. A_Gustav Klimt_The kiss_1908-1909

Art experts seem to agree that it is a symbolic representation of the moment when Apollo kisses the nymph Daphne, who transforms herself into a laurel tree to escape the god, according to Ovid (Book I of Metamorphoses). This reminded us of this text by Roland Barthes:

LOVE AT FIRST SIGHT AS AN AWAKENING TO THE INNOCENCE OF THE OTHER
"Ravishment
ravissement / ravishment
The supposedly initial episode (though it may be reconstructed after the fact) during which the amorous subject is "ravished" (captured and enchanted) by the image of the loved object  (popular name: love at first sight; scholarly name: enamoration).

1. Language (vocabulary) bas long since posited the equivalence of love and war: in both cases, it is a matter of conquering, ravishing, capturing, etc. Each time a subject "falls" in love, he revives a fragment of the archaic time when men were supposed to carry off women (in order to ensure exogamy): every lover who falls in love at first sight has something of a Sabine Woman (or of some other celebrated victim of ravishment). [...]

6. When Werther "discovers" Charlotte (when the curtain parts and the scene appears), Charlotte is cutting bread-and-butter, What Hanold falls in love with is a woman walking (Gradiva: the one who comes toward him), and furthermore glimpsed within the frame of a bas-relief. What fascinates, what ravishes me is the image of a body in situation. What excites me is an outline in action, which pays no attention to me: the young servant, makes a powerful impression on the Wolf-man: she is on her knees, scrubbing the floor. For the posture of action, of labor. guarantees, in a way, the innocence of the image: the more the other grants me signs of his occupation, of his indifference,of my absence, the surer I am of surprising him, as if, in order 10 fall in love, I had to perform the ancestral formality of rape, i.e., surprise (I surprise the other and thereby he surprises me: I did not expect to surprise him),[...]

7, There is a deception in amorous time (this deception is called: the love story), I believe (along with everyone else) that the amorous phenomenon is an "episode" endowed with a beginning (love at first sight) and an end (suicide, abandonment, disaffection, withdrawal, monastery, travel, etc,). Yet the initial scene during which I was ravished is merely reconstituted: it is after the fact. I reconstruct a traumatic image which I experience in the present but which I conjugate (which I speak) in the past [...]
Love at first sight is always spoken in tbe past tense : it might be called an anterior immediacy. The image is perfectly adapted to this temporal deception: distinct, abrupt, framed, it is already (again, always) a memory (the nature of the photograph is not to represent but to memorialize) : when 1 " review" the scene of the rape, I retrospectively create a stroke of luck: this scene has all the magnificence of an accident : 1 cannot get over having had this good fortune : to meet what matches my desire; or to have taken this huge risk: instantly to submit to an unknown image (and the entire reconstructed scene functions like the sumptuous montage of an ignorance)."
(Roland Barthes, A lover´s discourse - Fragments, 1977)

E2.2.C.5.3.b. "One day, someone utters the creative word. In doing so, he retrospectively demonstrates that he had something to say. Yet, he utters this word innocently, and only in the future perfect tense will new evidence and style appear, for the creator can only create in perfect innocence.
 
One becomes a zither player by playing the zither, and one becomes a poet through the innocent movement of inspiration: the poet is he who follows the right path without looking at himself."
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, Somewhere in the Unfinished, 1978)

E2.2.C.5.3.c. A_The angel awakens the Magi, 12th-century capital, Saint-Lazare Cathedral, Autun_(1) ; A_The angel awakens the Magi, 12th-century capital, Saint-Lazare Cathedral, Autun_(2)

THE ANGEL'S FINGER
"This scene is depicted by Romanesque art in all its simplicity and freshness. The three wise men—Gaspar from Asia, Melchior from Persia, and Balthazar from Africa—meet in Jerusalem and ask, “Where is the king of the Jews who has just been born? For we saw his star in the East and have come to worship him."

The sculptor of Autun Cathedral wanted to depict the precise moment when the star appeared to them, taking some liberties with the Gospel account. His version is much simpler and more poetic. The three kings sleep in the same bed on the same pillow, wearing their crowns. They are covered with the most beautiful carved sheet I know, decorated with large semicircles of stone.

An angel comes to wake them and tell them that the star is calling them to set out for the Son of God. I love the innocent sensuality of the gesture with which the angel touches one of the kings' hands with his index finger; the king immediately opens his eyes. With his left hand, the angel points to the shining star a few millimeters above them. The other two kings remain asleep in their night of ignorance.

This awakening to truth and light is one of the most beautiful images of conversion that I know. The star's appearance will change the Magi's destiny; they will travel thousands of miles to bow down before a child and offer him gold, myrrh, and frankincense. Through them, the world will acknowledge the significance of the event that occurred in the Bethlehem stable and the spiritual supremacy of the Son of Man.

All this will come later. For now, let us be touched by the angel's finger. Let us remain in the serenity of this awakening scene, in the silence of a night of gentle revelation..."
(Michael Lonsdale)

E2.2.C.5.3.d. "Now I see the secret of the making of the best persons,
It is to grow in the open air and to eat and sleep with the earth.

Here a great personal deed has room,
(Such a deed seizes upon the hearts of the whole race of men,
Its effusion of strength and will overwhelms law and mocks all authority and all argument against it.)

Here is the test of wisdom,
Wisdom is not finally tested in schools,
Wisdom cannot be pass’d from one having it to another not having it,
Wisdom is of the soul, is not susceptible of proof, is its own proof,
Applies to all stages and objects and qualities and is content,
Is the certainty of the reality and immortality of things, and the excellence of things;
Something there is in the float of the sight of things that provokes it out of the soul.
Now I re-examine philosophies and religions,
They may prove well in lecture-rooms, yet not prove at all under the spacious clouds and along the landscape and flowing currents.

Here is realization,
Here is a man tallied — he realizes here what he has in him,
The past, the future, majesty, love — if they are vacant of you, you are vacant of them."
(Walt Whitman, Song of the Open Road,  Leaves of Grass, 1867)

E2.2.C.5.4. Revelation promotes a transformation into a new, more authentic state of "lucidity," "maturity," or "inner freedom."

E2.2.C.5.4.a. LUCIDITY IS NOT A DISCOVERY, BUT AN UNCOVERING.
"Lucidity comes from a process of becoming. We become lucid through experience. It is achieved gradually through detachment. Light comes from within, immanently, from everything we have experienced and gone through. Penetration and insight refer to the mind's operational capacity, while lucidity refers to a level of consciousness. While the former refers to overcoming an obstacle to thought, the latter refers to emerging from indistinctness, which deceives us. Thus, lucidity aptly refers to the capacity of a subject to enter a second life by signifying that we are emerging from the confusion of our past life.
 
Since lucidity cannot be acquired, strictly speaking, it is neither a matter of method nor of will. Can I desire to become lucid? Honestly, I would rather desire the opposite: to remain in a naïve indistinctness—a primitive confusion—that responds more immediately to my wishes without forcing me to see reality stripped of its illusions or "as it is." While we may desire to be more intelligent, possess more knowledge, or have a more perceptive or penetrating mind, would I not, on the contrary, fear greater lucidity? Wouldn't I rather protect myself from it? In any case, to understand lucidity and the second type of experience from which it proceeds, I must undo the passive-active opposition imposed by European languages. As a result, I must leave behind the realm of intention, free choice, and deliberation. Lucidity, for its part, is jointly resultative. I was led to it by the experiences I went through, and I contributed to it by taking them into account. Not everyone who has had negative experiences becomes lucid. There must be collaboration on the part of the subject, who must agree to let these experiences enter the field of their reflection. For me, lucidity comes from everything I have experienced that has dissolved and undone what obscured my consciousness. These representations of the mind interposed themselves without my knowledge, veiling reality from me. The "reality" then emerges from its nebulous ambiguity, signifying precisely what remains after this withdrawal. [...]
Lucidity is not a discovery, but a revelation. Like the refined outline of a watermark, lucidity arises from a stripping away that allows what obscured the mind to emerge, unembellished—neither coated, clouded, nor muddied. Mallarmé called it "lucid winter."
(François Jullien, A Second Life, 2017)

E2.2.C.5.4.b. "Because you are struggling, your question begins to deepen… What you will discover, always for the first time, always new, in the fleeting moment of wonder — before that moment is captured by the ambitions of personality. You, I, in that moment, will discover the need to serve the energy, uniquely human and also sacred, that starts as the pure awareness of one’s own existence. And even as this idea — this beginning idea — of what is human, even as this idea of what is man, begins to appear — even in that fleeting moment of the pure awareness of my existence given now by a great idea — in that moment in front of a living idea, an awakening idea, a glimpse appears of the uniquely human yearning to serve; the need appears, the need to obey that energy, the need to attend to it, to be nourished by it, to receive the help that comes then and only then, when you are objectively obliged to give, to serve, to manifest that energy in action and understanding. It is only that energy of conscious existence that gives you, a human being, real strength. The energy that is the total awareness of one’s own existence is — or can become, can be — the strongest energy in human life."
(Jacob Needleman, I Am Not I, 2016)

"Acknowledging the illusoriness of free will liberates us rather than tak[e] away our freedom. Pointing out how impossible it is to understand freedom without understanding the influences acting upon us, the laws of the universe, and the nature of reality, [Needleman] considers the source of real freedom"
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

"Ask yourself what is your understanding of the influences acting upon us — of the universal laws in nature? What are your thoughts about that? And the teachings of religion — the idea of faith, obedience to the higher, responsibility for others and oneself, the deceptions and revelations of sleep and dreaming, the very idea of man’s place in the living, breathing, sentient cosmos, our place on our planet, the demand for morality, the nature of animal instinct and intuition within us and around us, the function and the meaning of pain and pleasure, the idea and the experience of consciousness and conscience, the subtle nourishment in the air we breathe, the food we eat, the genuine and the fabricated needs and desires of the body, the powerful influences of symbols, the cosmic and intimate force of sex, the inevitability of death, the illusion and the reality of time. […]

Working like this, and maintaining the fundamental attitude of sincerity about yourself and your discoveries, you will become disillusioned not only with your certainties, but with the structure of your mind itself. You will realize that what you need is not new beliefs, new information, new theories, but an entirely new mind. [...]

Real ideas open the mind to the heart, to the heart of the mind, to another level of reality within ourselves… This is the taste, the beginning, of inner freedom. Only fools imagine that freedom means getting what one happens to desire. Real freedom begins with obedience to a higher influence — a higher, finer energy within oneself. […]

What is higher in yourself? That way of thinking about the question is the beginning of the answer — because it involves a real idea which has been handed down to humanity over thousands of years… At such a point you yourself will find the answer — not as a thought, but as an experience.

You will for a moment become the answer! You will not only have a taste of real freedom; you will for a moment be freedom."
(Jacob Needleman, I Am Not I, 2016)

E2.2.C.6. It is also characteristic of art to bring about liberating awareness.

“Only art penetrates … the seeming realities of this world. There is another reality, the genuine one, which we lose sight of. This other reality is always sending us hints, which without art, we can’t receive.” 
(Saul Bellow, Nobel Prize acceptance speech)

Vincent Lamouroux_Héliscopela Perspective inclinée, 2007


Will we be rewarded with an insight or a new perspective on thinking as we climb this slightly off-center staircase?

JACQUES DARRIULAT DOES NOT PIT KNOWLEDGE AGAINST INTUITION. HE REFLECTS ON HOW AESTHETICS IN ART CAN LIBERATE OUR THINKING: "Knowledge needs sensory stimulation, chance encounters, and happy coincidences."
"[Nicolas Rousseau]: "Do you think that, insofar as it gives us much to think about, aesthetics is the preferred route to thought?"
[Jacques Darriulat]:  "Yes, I believe so, but, to tell you the truth, I don't know. You would have to be a great philosopher to answer that with any certainty. Hegel makes thought an absolute, a dialectical substance that feeds itself infinitely through the engine of its contradictions. I tend to think that knowledge requires sensory stimulation, chance encounters, and good fortune. That's also why aesthetics—which Hegel didn't care much for; he preferred the philosophy of art—seem to me to be at the foundation of philosophy. I believe philosophers love to travel and that travel increases the likelihood of encounters. Sensible motives challenge us to formulate new ideas and enrich the mind, which would otherwise be exhausted by ruminating on the internal coherence of a single system. Deep down, I remain very attached to the eighteenth century. Beauty is one of the most powerful motives for awakening the mind from its torpor. It is always astonishing and, as Baudelaire aptly put it, "bizarre." Beauty attracts without giving itself away. Beauty is a temptress and a tease. You don't sleep with beauty, any more than Alcibiades slept with Socrates. However, beauty excels at sending us bolts of lightning. The ultimate tease, of course, is the torpedo. To grasp it is to let go. You can only touch its absence. The encounter is dazzling, but possession eludes you. Fortunately, "giving yourself" to someone does not mean "being possessed by them"! Like beauty, it gives itself entirely but belongs to no one. And that's just fine because there's nothing more boring than an owner.
[Nicolas Rousseau]: The torpedo is Socrates.
[Jacques Darriulat]: Yes. Meno puts forward this image, insinuating that Socrates is nothing but a sophist. He remarks that Socrates resembles a torpedo in both his brilliant irony and his physical appearance; the philosopher's snub nose reminds him of the fish's flattened shape. Socrates accepts the comparison but on one condition: "I don't mind being called a torpedo," he says, "but only if you specify that I am just as much a torpedo against myself as I am against others." Socrates is not the master of dialectics; he is merely the conductor of questioning. Socrates does not torpedo; God does. More precisely, it is what God reveals to us through the mediation of the demon—that is, the thoughts of love or death—that awakens the mind. These are great questions. I am well aware that the incitement to think sometimes comes from much more modest—even insignificant—motives, at least in appearance. For example, "the little patch of yellow wall" reveals to Bergotte, a few seconds before his death, how much his work lacks. Similarly, the unforgettable face of a passerby, caught for a moment in the swell of the crowd, inspires Baudelaire to write an unforgettable sonnet. Thus, the aesthetic sign emerges from the informal and challenges us to respond. In this sense, aesthetics is also a theory of knowledge. It is a science of love, a joyful knowledge motivated by sensory encounters."
(Jacques Darriulat, Interview with Nicolas Rousseau and Timothée Coyras, Part Two, 2010).

Read the entire interview in French.
http://www.jdarriulat.net/Essais/Entretien/Entretien2.html

[EN] Chiharu Shiota, In silence, 2008 - Burnt piano & chairs, black wool
"Not only is music one of the most amazing and mysterious phenomena of all the world’s miranda, the things that make us wonder (and, therefore, the formal subject of any philosopher…) [but] music may be nothing but a secret philosophizing of the soul… yet, with the soul entirely oblivious, that philosophy, in fact, is happening here… Beyond that, and above all, music prompts the philosopher’s continued interest because it is by its nature so close to the fundamentals of human existence. [...]
Music opens a path into the realm of silence. Music reveals the human soul in stark “nakedness,” as it were, without the customary linguistic draperies. [...]
Since music articulates the immediacy of man’s basic existential dynamism in an immediate way, the listener as well is addressed and challenged on that profound level where man’s self-realization takes place. In this existential depth of the listener, far below the level of expressible judgments, there echoes — in identical immediacy — the same vibration articulated in the audible music.
We now realize why and to what extent music plays a role in man’s formation and perfection… beyond any conscious efforts toward formation, teaching, or education."
(Josef Piper, Thoughts About Music, Only the Lover Sings: Art and Contemplation)

Art: 
- Chiharu Shiota, In silence, 2008 - Burnt piano & chairs, black wool

Aaron Siskind, Pleasures and Terrors of Levitation # 99,  1961 & #471, 1954: E=mc2

"One of the things the story teaches us is this: Read yourself as a fiction as well as a fact.

When I was growing up poor in a poor place with a pair of Pentecostal parents who were waiting for Jesus to return and roll up time and space like a scroll, I never thought my life was narrow or my chances bleak. I thought I was Heathcliff, Huck Finn, Hotspur, Aladdin, the Big Bad Wolf. The Fish with a Golden Ring.

And later, when I had left home at sixteen and was living in a Mini, I had my favourite books stashed in the boot and whenever I could be in the library, I was there. This wasn’t a fantasy world or escapism — though it was an escape; it was the hidden door in the blank wall. Open it.

I opened the book and went through.

The escape into another story reminds us that we too are another story. Not caught, not confined, not predestined, not only one gender or passion. Learning to read yourself as a fiction as well as a fact is liberating — it is the difference between energy and mass. Mass is the beloved object — the world we can touch and feel — but mass is also the dead weight in ourselves and others.

Shifting the dead weight takes energy but at its atomic core the dead weight is energy. Transforming mass into energy, energy into mass is what creative work is about. An idea becomes embodied. A tragedy is released."
(Jeanette Winterson, Oranges Are Not the Only Fruit, 1985)

Giovanni Anselmo, Invisible, 2007

"Things distinguish themselves as things, but each of their parts remain connected to the unity from which they proceed. [...] It is thus initially as illiterate geographers that we are invited to approach reality's unstable territory after believing that we had seized its meaning, as if having seen badly, we had to forget a knowledge that would  impair us thereon to find the use of words that are alive. Poetry thus has to face the crushing greatness of all that the tribe usually neglects to consider. [...]. It summons this greatness that the eyes of reason alone cannot see unless the heart and confusion make the first move. It is only by taking language out of the beaten tracks of common language that our glance can suddenly linger to consider the narrowness of perspective in which it settled by habit, negligence, or facility. [...]
Above all 
bag of thoughts 
your head 
throw away

flesh in the air 
scatter 

allow to come 
a little oblivion 

the horizon of concordance is behind 
invisible but there".
(Claude Margat, Morning of silence, 2010)

Avant tout 
sac à pensées 
ta tête 
jeter 

chair en l’air 
disperser 

laisser venir 
un peu d’oubli 

l’horizon de l’accord est derrière 
invisible mais là"
(Claude Margat, Matin de silence, 2010)

Francesco Arena_Cumulo
"In the end, the only thing that really counts is the dust you’ve accumulated on your soles, along your own path" 
(Cotard Island)

Art :
- Francesco Arena_Cumulo

LEVINAS DESCRIBES THE SPECIFIC AWARENESS THAT A STATUE REVEALS AS THAT OF FATE. IT SHOWS US A MOMENT WHERE "THE POWER OF FREEDOM CONGEALS INTO IMPOTENCE." THE STATUE EMBODIES THE "TRAGIC, SIMULTANEITY OF NECESSITY AND LIBERTY," REVEALING "A FREEDOM THAT DISCOVERS IT IS A PRISONER."
“A statue realizes the paradox of an instant that endures without a future. Its duration is not really an instant. It does not give itself out here as an infinitesimal element of duration, the instant of a flash; it has in its own way a quasi-eternal duration. We are not thinking just of the duration of an artwork itself as an object, of the permanence of writings in libraries and of statues in museums. Within the life, or rather the death, of a statue, an instant endures infinitely: eternally Laocoon will be caught up in the grip of serpents; the Mona Lisa will smile eternally. Eternally the future announced in the strained muscles of Laocoon will be unable to become present. Eternally, the smile of the Mona Lisa about to broaden will not broaden. An eternally suspended future floats around the congealed position of a statue like a future forever to come. The imminence of the future lasts before an instant stripped of the essential characteristic of the present, its evanescence. It will never have completed its task as a present, as though reality withdrew from its own reality and left it powerless. In this situation the present can assume nothing, can take on nothing, and thus is an impersonal and anonymous instant. 
The immobile instant of a statue owes its acuteness to its non-indifference to duration. It does not belong to eternity. But it is not as though the artist had not been able to give it life. It is just that the life of an artwork does not go beyond the limit of an instant. The artwork does not succeed, is bad, when it does not have that aspiration for life which moved Pygmalion. But it is only an aspiration. The artist has given the statue a lifeless life, a derisory life which is not master of itself, a caricature of life. Its presence does not cover over itself and overflows on all sides, does not hold in its own hands the strings of the puppet it is. We can attend to the puppet in the personages of a tragedy and laugh at the Comedie-Frangaise. Every image is already a caricature. But this caricature turns into something tragic. The same man is indeed a comic poet and a tragic poet, an ambiguity which constitutes the particular magic of poets like Gogol, Dickens, Tchekov - and Moliere, Cervantes, and above all, Shakespeare. 
This present, impotent to force the future, is fate itself, that fate refractory to the will of the pagan gods, stronger than the rational necessity of natural laws. Fate does not appear in universal necessity. It is a necessity in a free being, a reverting of freedom into necessity, their simultaneity, a freedom that discovers it is a prisoner. Fate has no place in life. The conflict between freedom and necessity in human action appears in reflection: when action is already sinking into the past, man discovers the motifs that necessitated it. But an antimony is not a tragedy. In the instant of a statue, in its eternally suspended future, the tragic, simultaneity of necessity and liberty, can come to pass: the power of freedom congeals into impotence. And here too we should compare art with dreams: the instant of a statue is a nightmare. Not that the artist represents beings crushed by fate - beings enter their fate because they are represented. They are enclosed in their fate but just this is the artwork, an event of darkening of being, parallel with its revelation, its truth. It is not that an artwork reproduced a time that has stopped: in the general economy of being, art is the falling movement on the hither side of time, into fate. A novel is not, as M. Pouillon thinks, a way of reproducing time; it has its own time, it is a unique way for time to temporalize.”
(Emmanuel Levinas, Collected Philosophical Papers, 1987)

